









HOME IS THE SAILOR




Home Is The Sailor
J. LESLIE
Author of Youth Builds a Monument
AXIS THALIA
N.S.W. BOOKSTALL COMPANY, LTD
CASTLEREAGH & MARKET STREETS, SYDNEY


SET UP, PRINTED AND BOUND
IN AUSTRALIA BY
HALSTEAD PRINTING COMPANY
LTD., ARNOLD PLACE, SYDNEY
REGISTERED AT THE GENERAL
POST OFFICE, SYDNEY, FOR
TRANSMISSION THROUGH THE
POST AS A BOOK


2 5. SEP. 1934
THE GOOD SHIPS BUILT ON OUR RIVERS, TO
THE STURDY MEN THAT SAILED THEM, TO
THE BRAVE, PATIENT WOMEN WHO HELPED
THEM MAKE AUSTRALIA




FOREWORD
Tales aplenty have been told of the grand impulsion of
love to daring deeds and adventure; about ships and
sailormen, and South Sea coral islands; yes, and about
pirates’ islands, too. And they have been written, many
of them, by far abler pens than mine; pens as great as
that of Robert Louis Stevenson. Ay, Stevenson, the
greatest of them all—the beloved story-teller of the
Samoans. And I would that Tusitala himself could have
written this story, as Nini Bo suggested to Dorothy that
night by the fire on Pinnacle Island. He, of a surety,
would have done it well. He would have done full jus-
tice to Captain John Hardy and Hurricane, the mate.
It was from them that I got the narrative; and, un-
worthy scribe though I be, I am bound to make record
of it, because it came from them. Because of that, and
because the Mary Ellen sailed not from Leith or Fal-
mouth or London Town ‘‘in the days of good King ,”
but from our own beloved Sydney, and in our own well-
remembered years.
As best I can then, out of the respect in which I—and
all who knew them—held those two fine Australians, I
herewith set it down.
J. L.
1924.




CONTENTS
CAPTAIN HARDY AND THE WHARF RAT - - - 1
THE SKIPPER’S HOME ON THE CLIFFS ... 14
TALL YARN PETE AND BILL THE WHALER - - 24
THE CAPTAIN’S PREMONITION 32
THE MARY ELLEN SAILS FOR PINNACLE ISLAND - 46
THE WHALER’S YARN 56
ROUGH SEAS AND SMOOTH 66
THE STORY OP THE SYDNEY LASS - - - - 81
IN THE HAUNTS OP BULLY HAYES 92
ADVENTURES IN FIJI 107
KAIVITI FROLICS ON THE BEACH 122
HURRICANE’S LOVE AFFAIR 132
IN THE FIJIAN VILLAGE 141
THE FINDING OP NINI BO 155
THE ISLAND OF THE TWO PEAKS - - - - 167
THE WRECK OP THE MARY ELLEN - - - 180
THE CAMP AT THE BLUE BAY 194
THE FINDING OP CAPTAIN BRENT 207
LOVE’S OLD SWEET SONG 222
A SHIP! A SHIP! 239
TWO HOMES UPON THE CLIFFS 252




CHAPTER I
CAPTAIN HARDY AND THE WHARF RAT
It was a bright December day in ninety-six; one of those
hot, steamy days that Sydney then knew, and still knows
so well. From the city, from the high land to the left
of the Quay, the harbour lay like a glimmering strip
that stretched—broken only by the quaint little rock fort
on Pinchgut Island, the thin, curving wake of a steam
pinnace—from the gunboat there in Woolloomooloo Bay,
and the symmetrical outline of a tall-masted barque lying
in the stream lower down—away to where the lighthouse
faintly marked the heads seven miles distant. The silver
gleam of the sun on the water changed to a gradually
deepening blue in a score of bays to right and left along
the edges, and around these rose the dark framing of
the wooded foreshores, in the distance partly veiled in
bluish haze; closer in relieved by a dotting of red roofs,
which grew more and more numerous and finally con-
densed into waterside suburbs as the eye’s range turned
back towards the city.
At the wharves, what faint freshness and movement
of air came inevitably from proximity to water was lost.
Except at Circular Quay itself, where noisy, floundering
paddle-wheel ferry-boats agitated both the water and the


atmosphere with their ostentatious comings and goings,
every berth along the wharves was filled. Ships of all
sorts were crowded there—steam and sail, large and
small. Pretentious steamers from overseas, neatly
warped up to mooring-posts ashore, touched fore and aft
with Island trading schooners, undignified by compari-
son and now dishevelled in half-reefed sails and woefully
cluttered decks. This line of ships formed a harrier to
shut out the view of the water, and overwhelmed its
fresh smell with their own odours of paint and tar and
smoke, mingled with those of the varied exotic cargoes
they carried.
As often happened, copra predominated among the
smells; and small wonder, this time. The offender was
near at hand in the person of the schooner Nancy, dis-
charging with unseemly speed and scant ceremony on
to the open wharf her full cargo of evil-smelling coconut
meat. Particularly strong was this lot: oily, fermented,
sweetish and nauseating. It was heated, and it was being
discharged to save trouble; only just in time to prevent
fire aboard from spontaneous combustion—a not unusual
thing on copra ships. And until the stuff was cooled off
and reloaded into a bigger ship for London, the odour
of copra, redolent of South Sea Island memories, would
continue to pervade the atmosphere.
Alongside the copra ship a small steamer was discharg-
ing bananas. She, too, was from the islands—from Fiji.
Hundreds of great bunches, quite green, she was landing
with her clattering deck winch, to be trundled into the
wharf shed and heaped there in a giant pile. From this,
on the other side, numerous carts loaded them and car-


ried them off, making a horrible rattle as they bumped
their way over the cobblestoned roadway. The old stone
bond stores fronting the wharves threw back the sound
intensified, thus adding their share to the racket as they
did to the smell.
What ripe bananas had during the voyage appeared in
the green bunches were pulled off lest they spoil the
others. They were quite useless to keep. Even the men
handling them at the slings—as is often the case with
those whose work it is to handle a particular article of
food—had become satiated with them and would not eat
them. So they were thrown aside and, as opportunity
offered, were swept with what other refuse accumulated,
into a small punt tied to the wharf alongside the steamer.
A small boy, ragged, dirty and ill-fed, was in the punt
busily raking over the bananas. He worked nervously,
as if quite aware he was partaking of forbidden fruit.
Each ripe and sound banana, as he found it, he rinsed in
the salt water by leaning over the side; then stripped it
and ate it ravenously. And as he searched and feasted
his dog, a little Irish terrier as ragged as he, dodged
around and between his legs and over the mess of crushed
fruit; as much in anxiety for his master’s welfare as to
find something suited to his own longing palate. Once
in a while the boy paused to offer a particularly soft,
tempting morsel to his pal.
“They’re good, Pat,” he assured him as the dog
sniffed dubiously at the proffered . food. “Better have
some, before the water police come. We’ll have to nick
when the copper sees us. . . . No; don’t like ’em? All
right then, you keep hookey while I have a feed, and I’ll


see what I can find for you after. I’ll get you a good
fat bone somewhere, with meat on it, too —I betcher.
You good little dog.”
He fell on his knees, seized the dog in his arms, and
gave him a passionate hug.
“Pat,” he confided, “you’re my pal, ain’t yer? You’re
the only one that sticks to me all the time. You an’
me’ll always stick, won’t we, pal?”
“Pat,” he confided, “you’re my pal, ain’t yer? You’re
He acknowledged his master’s friendship with a low,
chuckling whine. Then he reared himself up, and with
his paws on the kneeling boy’s shoulders, gave his dirty
face a vigorous licking.
Quite satisfied now with existing arrangements, both
returned to their interrupted work, the boy to feeding
himself, the dog to guarding him while he did so. But
not for long. The first discovered banana after resump-
tion had reached but half-way in its downward push,
when it was abruptly stopped and broken oflf by a gruff
demand from the wharf to “clear out.” It was a familiar
voice, and a terrifying one. The boy knew it without
looking up; knew that its owner wore the straw hat
and garb of a picture-book sailor, with brass buttons of
authority added. It was Sergeant Robert Saunders, of
the water police—Ginger Bob to him and his like.
Almost before that worthy had finished uttering his
peremptory demand, the boy was beating a lively retreat
from the punt in the direction he thought most difficult
to the pursuer—shinning up the mooring lines to the
steamer’s deck; while from the peak of the banana heap
the dog Pat stood growling savagely, to cover his retreat.


Ginger Bob was proceeding to speed the urchin on his
way with dire threats as to what he would do if he laid
hands on him, when he was interrupted as suddenly as
had been the boy’s search for bananas.
“Hey! Hold hard, there. Let the youngster have a
feed, can’t you? Looks as though he needs one badly
enough. What harm is he doing, anyway, Bob? There’ll
be all the less to tow out and dump, if nothing else. Leave
him to it, Bob.”
The speaker was a middle-aged, well-browned man,
obviously a seagoer. He had stopped on his way along
the wharves to watch the boy and the antics of his dog,
and standing back a little in the shade of the next vessel,
had already been an unnoticed but interested observer
of the little drama for some time when the policeman
came along. Hie latter started at the voice, then, recog-
nizing the speaker, he exclaimed;
“Why, blowed if it isn’t Cap’n John Hardy! How are
you doing, skipper? Hear the old boat’s going to lay up.
But why are you so interested in the wharf-rat, skipper?
Know the kid at all?”
“No, Bob. Just amusing myself watching him and
his dog. Never saw him in my life, so far as I know.
And yet—somehow, bless me, as I look at him there
Here, boy, come here! The policeman won’t hurt you.
Hey, come back here! I want you. Come on, now.”
The boy had paused in his flight on reaching the com-
parative safety of the steamer’s deck, and had heard
the conversation. Now, reassured by the genial face
and hearty voice of Captain Hardy, he clambered obedi-
ently back to the punt, where his faithful rearguard was


still showing vicious-looking teeth and snarling ominously.
“Come ’ere, Pat —lay down,” he commanded. . . .
“He won’t bite yer, mister—he likes kind folks,’’ he told
the stranger as he faced him, still separated by a four-
foot drop from the wharf and a treacherous looking
mess of refuse.
“What’s your name, boy?’’ the captain asked him.
“Jimmy Brent, mister,” came the prompt reply; “and
this is my dog. His name’s Pat, mister. He’s my pal.”
“Good pal he is, too,” muttered the captain; then aloud:
“Where do you live? Where’s your home?”
“I’ve got no home, mister. Used to live round in the
‘Rocks’—look (indicating the direction with a dirty
finger), round there through the Argyle Cut. Used to
live there till me mother died. Me mother died a year
ago—two years, p’r’aps.”
“And who keeps you? Have you any father?”
“Me father got drowned —drowned in a ship when I
was a little feller. I’m eleven now—l think—l dunno.
Me mother and me lived in a house round in the Rocks
till she died. Then I had no house. I live round the
wharves here. I sleep in the sheds, or anywhere—me
and Pat. The men on the ships, they give me things
to eat —some of them. Igo into the foc’s’le of some
boats and the sailors give me a feed. They tell me all
about the sea, too. Golly, I wisht I was a sailor! And
round at the Sailors’ Home they feed me sometimes,
when the super ain’t about. That’s the boss. Gentle
Willie, he lets me sleep there in the storeroom some-
times. He’s kind to me, Gentle Willie is. The Parson


they call him. Gives me things to eat. And then there’s
the banana boats, like this —”
“I see. All right, my boy,” Captain Hardy broke in ...
“Look here, Bob, I’ll take care of this youngster. You
leave him to me. . . . See here, my lad, you go along
to the Mary Ellen. She’s lying back there by the German
steamer. Tell Mr Smiles, the mate, that I sent you, and
he’ll feed you. Let you have a wash too, I shouldn’t
wonder. You wait aboard till I come back. . . . The
Parson, eh? — Gentle Willie. H’m, h’m! He’s kind to
me, eh? Yes, he would be; couldn’t help it, .. . That’s
a fellow, sergeant, I got to know in the Fijis. Young
chap used to work among the Kaiviti missionarying.
Studied for the ministry in the old country they tell me,
but failed to make good. Was a failure as a missionary
too; a bad one. The Kaiviti used to laugh at him and
treat him as a joke. They used to get every penny he
had too, where other missionaries would collect from
them. I brought him to Sydney, without a penny, and
got him a job at the Sailors’ Home. He’s still on deck,
evidently. There’s a reference as to character for you,
Bob, ‘He’s kind to me!’ Eh, Bob? Kind to the poor
homeless kid. ‘Out of the mouths of babes,’ you know,
Bob, as the Good Book says.
“But Jimmy Brent —Jimmy Brent? Somehow I seem
to —there’s something about that boy’s face, under the
dirt. . . . And Jimmy Brent? . . , Well, so long, Bob.
Look after yourself. Keep your eye on the wharf rats.
I’ll watch that one for a bit. Don’t be hard on them,
though, Bob. You never know.”
Captain Hardy resumed his journey to the agent’s


office, to hear what was to become of the Mary Ellen.
He climbed the stairs of the old building facing the
quay, where the office of the managing agent, Mr
Strachan, overlooked the harbour. The door was wide
open and Mr Strachan sat, feet on table, smoking medi-
tatively as he looked out of the window on the familiar
waterfront scene.
“Glad to see you, Captain Hardy,” he said cordially,
extending a hand. “Sit down there and enjoy the breeze
and the view through the window. Never get tired of
this scene, captain, though I’ve looked at it every day
almost for fifteen years. Have a cigar, cap’n; box there
—good weeds. Thank the Lord, we’ve always got to-
bacco left, no matter what our troubles may be.
“Well, captain, you’ve come to hear the verdict, I sup-
pose. You’d know it already, of course, as well as I do,
but you must hear it officially. Well, the Mary Ellen
is to lay up—indefinitely. That’s the order. What ‘in-
definitely’ means, I don’t know any more than you. But
I do know that the bottom is nearly out of the island
trade. The steamers and the trading companies have
about settled the sailing-ship business. The sugar com-
pany has its own fleet of steamers, and the copra is pretty
well all bought up by companies on the spot; collected
and shipped from central points in the islands by steamer.
Where a few years ago almost every ton of copra used
in Europe—and America for that matter —came here to
Sydney for transhipment, more and more is now carried
direct. Things have been going from bad to worse, until
now our firm has only one schooner in the island busi-
ness, two on the coast, and one trading to New Zealand.


I leave you to figure it out yourself, captain. You’re
due for a holiday; for how long, I can’t say. We may
put the Mary Ellen in commission again in a few
months’ time, or we may not. Perhaps she will lay up
permanently.
“Don’t be in a hurry to get off her, Captain Hardy,
The little boat’s your home as long as you and Hurricane
care to stay aboard. We’ll probably pull her out in the
stream in a day or two, but that will only mean fresher
air for you. I shall be able to tell you something more
definite perhaps in a few days’ time. Drop in for your
cheque, on Saturday, captain. Drop in any time, for that
matter, and have a yarn.”
Captain John Hardy sauntered slowly back along the
docks, thinking over many things. His emotions were
mixed. He was a little sad, for he felt that the Mary
Ellen, the ship he had come to regard as his pet and his
home, was finished sailing. Yet there were other things
that kept his mind so busy that he almost forgot that
matter. There was the incident of that morning, for in-
stance—the dirty-faced boy and his strange story. That
name, too; that puzzled him and strangely agitated him.
He must talk that over with Hurricane. By the way,
he had an appointment to keep. He had told Jimmy
Brent to wait for him on his ship. He hastened his
steps.
The Mary Ellen was a topsail schooner of one
hundred and eighty lons. Captain John Hardy had sailed
her for years for the Pacific Islands Company, of which
Mr Strachan was the Sydney manager.


“What news, skipper,” asked the mate, as the captain
went aboard. “Are we breaking up the happy home?”
“Yes, Sam, looks like parting company. Laid up in-
definitely. Mr Strachan says to stay here as long as it
suits us. I shan’t be here long, though. I’ve been think-
ing it over. If I have to take a spell it will be ashore.
I couldn’t rest aboard ship, except at sea. It would only
mean a busman’s holiday for me. But we’ll sleep on
that for a night or two. Where’s the boy I sent aboard,
Sam?”
“There he is aft there. I fed him up and made him
take a bath, and you’ll hardly know him. He’s like a
well-fed puppy now.”
“Good,” approved the skipper. “I suppose you’re
anxious to know about him. Come into the cabin and
I’ll tell you.” And there, while Hurricane coolly reclined
on the captain’s bunk and smoked his pipe, he related
the incident of the banana punt. “But what struck me,”
he said in conclusion, ‘was the youngster’s manner and his
speech, which were altogether better than one would
expect from a wharf rat; and, above all, his name—
Jimmy Brent. Does that suggest anything to you, Sam?”
Hurricane thought for a while, then slowly shook his
head.
“Listen,” said Captain Hardy. “Remember the Sydney
Lass that went down, or was supposed to have gone down,
somewhere north of the Fijis that time in the big blow?
All hands lost; nothing further heard of her! Well, her
skipper was Captain James Brent. You wouldn’t know
him as well as I did, perhaps, but you must remember
him, Sam, As good a seaman as ever sailed, and as fine


CAPTAIN HARDY AND THE WHARF RAT
a man. Well, this boy has the same name, and I’ll go
to glory if he hasn’t got the face. I saw it in spite of the
dirt. I’m thinking this is Captain Brent’s son, and the
boy’s story seems to confirm my notion. Hurricane, I m
going to keep that boy in my eye for the time being. Ive
got a theory about my old friend, Jim Brent; but that s
another story.
“Meantime, I’ll get the boy fixed up for shelter and
food. He can stay here for the present. I’ll go and see
the Parson, round at the Sailors’ Home. The boy says
he knows him; and no doubt I can arrange for him to
stay there and be kept out of mischief for the present.
In a few days I shall know my plans. So will you, no
doubt.”
Two weeks later Captain John Hardy and Sam Smiles
sat in the office of Mr Strachan. The company had a
week before notified their representative that there was
definitely no prospect of the Mary Ellen’s resuming in
the island trade. The three men sat silently smoking
cigars from Mr Strachan’s box on the table. The skip-
per had retold for the agent’s benefit the incident of the
boy and the dog, and the latter had agreed with him
that it looked as if the boy might indeed be the son of
Captain Brent, whom he had known so well.
“Captain Brent was thought by many to be a bachelor,
you know,” he said, breaking the silence. “Few knew
he was married, for his wife lived in Melbourne most
of the time. She was here in Sydney for a while, but
their circle of friends here was very limited. I shall be
glad if it proves to be as you say. And don’t forget,


captain, if T can do anything for the lad, I shall be very
glad to do it.
“And now, what do you propose to do, Captain Hardy ?
I hate to part with old friends like you and Sam; and I
know how you two will like being separated. A man
like Sam Smiles, holding his own master’s ticket, does
not of his own choice sail mate with another captain
because he hates him.”
Mr Smiles nodded a vigorous approval, and Captain
Hardy remarked:
“We get on well together, Mr Strachan. We’re good
friends. Sam’s as good a seaman as I could wish to
sail with. We agree; that is the secret. It’s better to
be mate with a skipper that likes you than captain of a
ship with a mate that doesn’t. We’ve had five years
together on the Mary Ellen, and before that we sailed
together in a good many ships, with sometimes Sam
skipper, and sometimes me; and I’m not quite sure which
arrangement I liked the best. If ever I went to sea
again, I should want to be in the same ship as Hurricane.”
A change in the mate’s usually hard, immobile face
showed that his friend’s appreciation inwardly moved
him; though it was taken as a matter of course by Mr
Strachan. That astute Scot, however, was quick to
catch the point in the skipper’s remark which Sam’s
emotion had caused him to miss.
“If ever you went to sea again!” he exclaimed. “What
do you mean by that, captain? You don’t suggest that there
is any possibility that you will not, do you? . . . My word,
I have it! Sam, he’s going to marry and settle down
to housekeeping.”


Hurricane joined in Mr Strachan’s laugh, and then
the pair fixed their eyes intently on the captain’s face,
hoping for some elucidation of his inscrutable remark.
“You are a good deal nearer the mark than you think,
Mr Strachan,” said the skipper. “In fact, you’ve hit the
nail on the head, except that there’s no woman in the
case. No, I’m not going to marry. I’m not that sort
of a man. I only had one love affair in my life, and
I failed that time. That’s by-gones. But I am going
to settle down, and have a home of my own. In fact, I
have already bought a little cottage out by the sea, and
in a few days will take up my abode there. lam done
forever with sea-going.”
Sam Smiles opened his mouth in wonderment, while
the agent leaned back in his chair and uttered a delibe-
rate, long-drawn, “Well —well—well!”


CHAPTER II
THE SKIPPER’S HOME ON THE CLIFFS
Captain John Hardy straightened up from his work
among the flowers, put down his watering-can, and walked
to the back gate of his garden to greet two visitors. He
was expecting them. They were his old friend Sam
Smiles and young Jimmy Brent.
“Ha, you found my castle all right, Hurricane,” he
said warmly, shaking him heartily by the hand. “Come
aboard, my hearties. Welcome! And you, Jimmy Boy,
how are you ? And here’s your little pal Pat. Good dog,
good dog.”
“Found it,” replied Hurricane, “yes, skipper; found it
after a darned tough tramp through the scrub. We must
have lost the track. You said it was a mile from South
Head lighthouse. I reckon it’s a mile from nowhere!
We must have walked a good two miles from where
the tram dropped us at the Tea Gardens. You’ve cer-
tainly carried out your threat and got away from the
noise and bustle, skipper. But then, it’s your place; and
as long as you like it, you landlubber ”
“Hold hard there,” the captain interrupted. “Make fast.
Wait till you’ve had a chance to see the place and you’ll
change your tune. Look at those flowers! Isn’t this a


lovely spot. Now, the old chap I bought this place from
was a sea captain like myself. He lived here for ten
years, and would have been here yet only his relatives
said he was getting too old to be alone and dragged him
off to city comforts. He’ll probably fret and die now.
They’ll kill him with their meddling kindness. It must
have suited the old man here for him to stay so long.
It suits me too, right down to the ground. But come and
have something to eat. You, Jimmy, especially, can do
with it after that walk. Then I’ll show you over the
ship.”
Captain Hardy’s cottage was built within a stone’s
throw of the cliffs looking out over the Pacific. It lay in
a little grassy declivity surrounded by small barren undu-
lations covered with harsh yet colourful scrub, which the
strong sea air kept perpetually stunted. Through this
scrub winding sandy tracks led to what few habitations,
like this one, braved the distance and the rather for-
bidding surroundings to glimpse that glorious sea view.
The scrub, and the fact that it lay in a depression,
protected the little home from the strong west and
southerly winds to which that high land was in general
exposed, while leaving the front open to the breezes and
unobstructed view to the east over the ocean. This pro-
tection, with the further aid of a closely-woven hedge of
shiny-leafed Japonnica, impervious alike to strong winds
and salt spray, also permitted the growing of flowers.
And here in this snug enclosure the skipper tended a
colourful oasis of plants, caring for them with that intense
native joy that comes peculiarly to those who condescend
to stoop and play with mother earth.


The cottage within was simply furnished, but lacked
no comfort. So far as practicable, it was fitted out in
ship fashion. Pictures of the sea and of ships the skipper
had known and sailed in decorated the walls of his room.
His bed was built in as a berth, and a handsome swinging
lamp depended from the centre of the ceiling. A well-
filled book shelf and a pipe rack added the last homey
touch to the den, and adjustable deck chairs, with taste-
fully chosen striped canvas, invited ease here as elsewhere
throughout the little home.
The front veranda looked out from almost the very
edge of the 150-foot cliffs, at the feet of which the rollers
continually boomed. Sliding glazed panels protected it in
rough weather, or opened to admit the full breeze and
sunshine in fine. Here, when the notion seized him, and
when not busy with his flowers, Captain Hardy paced
up and down and looked out on the sea he knew and
loved so well. From his clear lofty lookout he could see
the ships as they came and went from Sydney; could see
them, now a sailing ship, now a steamer leaving its smoke
smudge behind it —from overseas, from the Islands or
along the coast. The steamers —they were interesting;
but Captain Hardy liked them not. They were intruders,
interlopers. His love was for the sailing ships alone.
Once in a while he would reach for his glasses to scan
intently some well-lined coast-built craft scudding ele-
gantly along under bellying canvas, as though he would
spy out and recognize some old sea mate he well knew
was aboard of her; ay, perhaps to envy him just for the
moment the thrill he knew was his. It all passed before


him here in wonderful pageant —the sea he loved and the
ships he knew that rode it.
Captain John Hardy was happy here in his own little
home by the sea and among the flowers. Except to re-
turn a friendly call and yarn with one or other of his
scattered neighbours on that upland moor, he rarely left
the place. Once in a while he made the long journey to
the city to get provisions and visit friends. There was
Hurricane, of course, whom he had to see whenever he
was in port. Hurricane was in one of the “Pig and
Whistle” boats, sailing to the Northern Rivers. He had
to drop in occasionally on Mr Strachan, and on what
other skippers he knew when their ships were in. And
an eye had to be given to young Jimmy, whom he had
left at the Sailors’ Home under the care of Willie
Ormonde, the parson, who was keeping him out of mis-
chief by making him do odd jobs around the institution;
paying him for his work real money from a modest fund
provided by the genial skipper himself. The boy supple-
mented this by performing small tasks for the ships’
officers, wharf officials and others of the waterfront people
among whom he had now become favourably known.
Between times the Parson gave him lessons in reading
and writing, and generally brushed up his manners and
his letters.
In this castle of his, which he had taken over, flower
garden and all, as a going concern, Captain Hardy had
been established three months when Hurricane and Jimmy
Brent paid their initial visit. He received them into his
house with the air of a settled landed proprietor, rather
than of one accustomed to a life on the sea. While they


were eating the the meal he had himself so well prepared,
he questioned Jimmy closely about his doings, about the
Parson, and as to his progress under that gentle mentor’s
tutelage. The boy’s answers indicated the extent of the
good already accomplished, and his very speech showed
that contact with the Parson was fast bringing a return
of the refinement of which his urchin life around the
wharves had robbed him. The skipper’s final question
of the boy as to how he liked Mr Ormonde and whether
he was happy at the Sailors’ Home was scarcely neces-
sary, but his answer cleared away any shadow of doubt
that might have existed on that score.
“Captain Plardy,” he said, “I am happy now, because I
am with good people. I am clean, and no one calls me
‘Wharf Rat’ now. I don’t have to dodge Ginger Bob the
water policeman any more. And oh, captain, Mr Or-
monde —I do like him. He’s the only one that was
ever kind to me —except you, captain, and Mr Smiles —
since my mother. I like him as well as my mother—
nearly.”
“Well, well, I’m glad to hear that, my boy—glad to
hear it. Do what he tells you and try to learn what he
teaches you. But Mister Ormonde, eh? That’s an im-
provement on Gentle Willie, I must say. . . . Good sign,
eh, Hurricane?”
The meal over, the skipper acceded to the boy’s request
that he be allowed to go and explore the scrub and the
cliffs in the vicinity. To the amazement of the two men
it was then revealed that Jimmy had never before been
outside the city; had never seen the open country or the
scrub, which in his innocence he described as wild bush.


Nor, indeed, although he had lived all his short life
around the waterfront, had he ever before set eyes on
the open sea! In view of these revelations Captain Hardy
thought it fitting, while encouraging the boy to enjoy
the utmost freedom while the facilities availed, to warn
him to exercise great care not to go too near the cliffs
nor too far away in the scrub.
Having delivered his admonition and dismissed the
overjoyed youngster, he settled himself and his old ship-
mate comfortably in two easy chairs, with a decanter and
glasses between them and pipes going.
“Now we’re set, Hurricane, my boy,” he remarked.
“Fire away. There are so many things I’ve been saving
up to talk about that it’s hard to tell where to start.
Same with you, I suppose. If you’ll pardon my taking
the initiative, and until you can think of something better
to discuss, I should like to refer to a little matter which
has agitated my mind for some time, and which has a
bearing on something that was said during our last joint
interview in Strachan’s office.”
He paused as though awaiting his friend’s approval.
“Sounds interesting so far, captain,” Mr Smiles re-
marked dryly. “Go ahead.”
“Well, then,” went on Captain Hardy, “remember you
two had a little joke about my getting married, and my
reply that I had had only one love experience in my life?
I’m going to tell you a little secret now, Sam; but before
I do —especially as this is the first of several secrets I
am going to confide in you, which I particularly desire
to keep quiet for the time being—l must ask you to
pledge your word not to repeat it to any man.”


When Hurricane had given his word, Captain Hardy
poured out two nips of Scotch, and proceeded:
“It’s about Captain Brent, mostly. . . . Captain Brent,
although a close and very good friend of mine, was a good
many years my senior. I was one of the very few who
visited his home when he and his wife lived in Sydney.
During my visits I became acquainted with his daughter,
Dorothy, I fell in love with her, in fact. She was a girl
of eighteen. I was myself fairly young then —I am speak-
ing now of twelve years or more ago. Captain Brent was
very fond of his daughter, who was a handsome and
accomplished girl. He was jealous of her too. Much as
he liked me, he did not approve of my courting his
Dorothy. Perhaps I was too old for his liking; perhaps
he aimed higher than a sea captain for her. But I was
a little persistent, and Dorothy seemed to return my affec-
tion. Captain Brent warned me that I was steering a
course that would lead to a rupture of his friendship
with me, and begged me to discontinue my attentions. I
regretfully but firmly refused. The next thing I knew,
Mrs Brent and her daughter had left Sydney. Where
they went, no one knew, though it was thought by one or
two intimates that Captain Brent had shifted them to
New Zealand, where it was known that a suitor for his
daughter lived, one whom the father favoured.
“That was the last I ever saw of Dorothy or her
mother, or of Captain Brent, for that matter; for if he
ever came into Sydney again, it was during my absence.
Though I spared no effort to find out what had happened,
and made close inquiries whenever I touched Auckland
myself, I never got to the bottom of the affair. The
disappearance of the mother and daughter remained a


mystery. Yet things I have since heard leave not much
doubt that they were somewhere in New Zealand. They
certainly never came back to Sydney, so far as anyone
knows.”
He stopped to recharge his pipe, then went on:
“Now this brings us back to the incident of the banana
punt, of which I said I would sometime tell you more.
You remember I remarked on the coincidence that the
boy’s name was James Brent, and that, moreover, his
face bore a striking resemblance to the captain’s? Now
at the time I knew the Brents they had only one child —
that was Dorothy. They had no son, although (it all
comes back so clearly to me now), Captain Brent’s one
great desire was to have a son. To his few intimate
friends he made no secret of this. So far as I have ever
heard his wish was never gratified. And yet, here’s this
boy, who has both the name and the face of Captain Brent,
and whose father—so he tells me—was lost at sea. If
my surmise is correct, and he really is Captain Brent’s
son, he must have been born after Mrs Brent went to
New Zealand, or wherever it was, and been brought to
Sydney at some subsequent time—after the father was
drowned —by his mother. She, poor woman, now a widow
and reduced to poverty, evidently was forced to choose
the poorer quarters in the Rocks area to live. Pride,
perhaps, led her to keep her identity a secret, thus depriv-
ing the friends of her late husband of the privilege of
helping her.
“Of course, this would leave a big discrepancy between
the ages of the two children. It would make Dorothy
eighteen or twenty years older than her brother, whom,
very probably, she never saw. What became of her there


is no telling. Presumably she married her New Zealand
lover and settled over there. But even in that case there
is still this to account for —that the mother returned to
live a lonely life of poverty in Sydney. . . . What is your
opinion as to that, Sam ?”
“Well, I must say that’s a point that wants clearing
up,” said Hurricane. “For that matter, there are many
things I don’t understand yet. Your story is such a sur-
prise to me. Why, to think you had a love affair! But
there’s a lot more to tell, skipper; I can feel that. You
have not told me all of your yarn yet.”
“No, Hurricane, you have not heard it all yet. I’d like
to keep you here all night and talk to you, but there’s
the boy to think of. He must be back in good time, or
the Parson, the gentle soul, will be wondering what has
become of him; and you yourself have to be aboard bright
and early. Next time you come, arrange to stay the
night here —the pair of you. . . . Ah, here the lad is.
And I’ll bet he’s had a wonderful time. . . . Well, Jimmy,
you didn’t lose yourself in the scrub or fall over the
cliffs, eh? Come on and have something to eat, and then
off you go—you and Mr Smiles —before it gets dark.
Did you enjoy yourself, boy?”
“Oh, we had a great time, me and Pat. It’s wonderful
in the bush. There’s all sorts of things in the scrub,
flowers and little shiny lizards—quick as lightning they
are; Pat couldn’t catch them—and lots of birds, little
birds sucking at the flowers on the bushes, and darting
about, and squeaking at you when you come near them.
And 100k —nuts (he proudly exhibited his pockets stuffed
with the little corrugated seed cones of the scrub oak).
And, captain, up there on the cliffs you can see out over


the sea for miles and miles and miles. I never thought
there was so much water. And I saw some ships, with
all their sails up. They look like big birds when they’re
sailing out on the sea. And I saw a steamer, smoking
away like anything. It went right away out of sight.
Where do the ships go, Captain Hardy, when they get
to the edge?”
Both men laughed at that.
“There’s no edge, my boy,” the skipper said, “The
sea goes right on, though it seems to stop. Maybe you’ll
go in a ship one day. Then you’ll find there’s no edge
to the sea. You come out and see me again and I’ll
explain all that to you. I must tell you about the sea,
and take you down the cliffs fishing, if I can find a way.
Come and see me whenever you like. I’ll come and fetch
you from the bus. Mr Smiles will come when he can
too. And perhaps you could persuade the Parson to come
with you some time.
“Now, if you’ve had enough to eat I’ll see you off.
You’ll need to get through the scrub and past the swamp
before dark.”
He led them to the back garden gate, where the visi-
tors, especially Jimmy, seemed reluctant to leave him.
Captain Hardy patted the boy on the shoulder as he bade
him good-bye. Then, as though a fresh thought had come
to him, he looked him in the face and said:
“Jimmy Boy, did you ever have a sister?”
The boy started sharply.
“Yes, Captain Hardy,” he answered, “I think so;
mother used to tell me about my big sister; but I never
saw her; she went away.”


CHAPTER 111
TALL YARN PETE AND BILL THE WHALER
Jimmy Brent's visit to Captain Hardy's cottage on the
cliffs marked a red-letter day in his young life. It was
a tired, worn-out boy that Hurricane delivered safely
back to the Sailors’ Home that night; but a very happy
one, Jimmy was asleep before he could make any attempt
at recounting to the Parson his marvellous experiences of
the day, and he slept the sleep of the just and the weary.
But next day he fully made up for lost time. His first
adventure into the open spaces, and more so his first
glimpse of the actual ocean, had awakened in him a re-
alization that the world was wider and vaster than he had
ever dreamed. Moreover, there kindled in his bosom the
first real spark of that yearning that comes to every boy
to see beyond the confines of his present vision. He was
full to bursting with his new-found pleasure, and his head
was awhirl with dreams of what great things would come
of subsequent similar expeditions. He told the Parson
about it with a bubbling exuberance that lasted all that
day, and interfered not a little with the gentle one’s
duties.
“Golly,” he poured out, “it’s wonderful out there in
the bush, Mr Ormonde. Pat and me, we had a grand
time in the sand and among the bushes. Look, there’s


TALL YARN PETE AND BILL THE WHALER 25
animals there in the scrub! You can see their tracks.
And birds—they fly all round you and squeak at you.
And you can see right out over the sea to where it ends
—but Captain Hardy says it doesn’t end. And it booms
down at the bottom of the cliffs and you can feel all the
giound shake sometimes. And ships—and everything!
Captain Hardy’s going to take me down the cliffs fishing.
You’ll let me go out again, won’t you? I betcher there’s
plenty of fish there, in the ocean; big ones too. I saw
some fish from the top of the cliffs, big whoppers that
long—look—oh, longer than that. That long, I reckon.”
That evening, when the Parson was busy with what
social amenities pertained to his office, Jimmy again sought
him out and renewed the attack.
“You oughta come out, Mr Ormonde. You’d have
great fun. Captain Hardy told Mr Smiles and me to
try and get you to come. Will you come, Mr Ormonde?”
“If you hadn’t tired me so with your persistence, you
young rascal,” his mentor replied, “I really believe I
should have wanted to go. lam sure it must be a lovely
place, James. But no, I cannot very well go with you.
You may go again, but I am wanted here, especially in
the evenings. The superintendent relies a good deal on
my presence, and there are some things he leaves me
to handle entirely. For instance, when that awful man,
Crazy Bill the Whaler, is about. He always monopolizes
the smoke-room and turns the place into a bedlam.
“Whether he is really crazy I am not quite sure, but
undoubtedly he has a wild and most vivid imagination.
And so has his mate, the man they call Tall Yarn Pete.
They are an awful pair. When you see one of them, the


other is never far away. When they are in port, they in-
variably make for the Sailors’ Home—unfortunately. But
then, of course, all seafaring men are welcomed here. But
they do keep me on the alert when they are about. lam
always so fearful that they will start a riot among the
men in the smoke-room.
“Both splendid seamen, I understand, and very good
men afloat; but they are a great nuisance here. Both have
had a wide seagoing experience, and Tall Yarn Pete—
so I am informed—has sailed every sea known to ships.
Now they seem to have taken a liking to this Australian
coast, and they are often ashore here. Then they make
their presence felt.
“Ah well, James, they are God’s children like the rest
of us. It is my privilege to minister in a humble way to
them—to oflfer them those things that tend to make their
lives better and brighter. . . . There, you run along to bed
now, James, and I’ll go and see that all is well with those
men in there. To-night they seem to be unusually
quiet ”
A rollicking, roaring voice from the smoke-room cut
him short:
Rally round, you lubbers, and I’ll tell to you a tale
Of how I crossed the ocean in the belly of a whale I
The Parson stood still and held up his hands in a
gesture of utter hopelessness. “My gracious!’’ he said,
“they are here now. That is Crazy Bill himself, and
that is the awful song he always sings.”
Jimmy had started at the suddenness of the song, but
now, as its import came to him, it amused the youngster
immensely. He laughed heartily, and quite ignoring the


Parson’s manifestation of disapproval and pained dis-
gust, he listened intently for more. The merry company
within were obviously of the same mind.
“Go on, let her go”—“Give us the song”—“Good old
Bill the Whaler!” came in a series of loud demands from
iiiside; and then they heard Crazy Bill, encouraged by
his audience, continue his story in song —of how he had,
while whaling in the Tasman Sea, been accidentally swal-
lowed by a whale, and of the marvellous voyage he made
in its belly to the cost of California!
It was a weird, impossible song, and it brought a look
of intensified disgust and pity to the face of poor Mr Or-
monde, who quite evidently had heard it before. But
to Jimmy it brought a tremendous thrill, and his eyes
bulged more and more as he listened breathlessly to the
strange and somewhat gruesome details of the story. The
hubbub within had now subsided, and no interruption was
heard until the Whaler sang the finishing lines:
So there you are, you lubbers, and Eve told you a true tale.
Of how I crossed the ocean in the belly of a whale!
There was a riotous chorus of shouted approval. “Good
old Whaler!” “Can yer beat that?” “Same man sing
again,” came from the din; till someone called for silence.
“Ain’t a man in the crowd can tell a yarn like that ’un,”
he announced defiantly.
“No one but the Whaler’s mate,” someone ventured in
modification. “Tall Yarn Pete can do it.”
“No, Tall Yarn Pete can’t, neither. Not to put it into
poltry like Bill done, an’ sing it.”
“Cawn’t he?” came in a new voice, which the Parson


indicated was that of Tall Yarn Pete himself. “Not ’arf
’e cawn’t; an’ put it into poltry; an’ sing it.”
Fresh applause greeted this bold acceptance of the
challenge, and Pete forthwith launched into his song. In
an interminable string of short verses he sang of the
things he had done at sea, of the ports he’d visited, of the
booze he’d drunk and the fights he’d had, of the girls
he’d met in many lands, of endless adventures that had
been his. And after each verse came the rolling refrain:
I’ve been shipwrecked down in Patagonia,
Barcelonia, Eau-de-colognia
in which, as they caught the spirit of it, the company
joined so heartily that the last words were lost to Jimmy,
who from the outside strove hard to catch them.
The gentle Parson heard Tall Yarn’s song through pati-
ently, but when it was finished, he interrupted the men and
bade them be quiet, as the hour was growing late; an order
which they obeyed with surprising promptness. Then he
sent the boy off to bed.
“You’re long overdue, James,” he said, “and I am not
quite sure that I have acted wisely in allowing you to
hear this rowdy behaviour. If ever you go to sea and
become a sailor, James, I trust you will avoid rough com-
pany and the things that go with it—strong drink, coarse
language, and the like.”
“I’ll remember what you tell me, Mr Ormonde,” Jimmy
replied, “Thank you for all you are doing to help me.
I am going to be a sailor. Captain Hardy says so too.
. . . Mr Ormonde, is that all true, what those men were
singing about? Did Crazy Bill really ride in the belly


TALL YARN PETE AND BILL THE WHALER 29
of a whale? . . . When can I go and see Captain Hardy
again, Mr Ormonde?”
“As soon as I can make sure you will get there safely,
James. I must see the busman and make arrangements.
You may go on the bus or by the tram, as far as it goes
—whichever you prefer, James. Do you like the tram?”
Jimmy said he liked the tram all right, with the puffing
little engine that whistled every time it started and made
all the horses clear out of the way. He loved the smell
of the smoke too, and he liked the dinky little tickets
you had to buy to give to the man. But he thought he’d
like better to ride on the bus; to climb the stairs at the
back and sit on the top; or, best of all, could he ride
on the high seat in front beside the driver?”
The Parson thought that that could be managed, per-
haps. Later he spoke to Joe Bunyan, the driver of the
Waverley bus, about it. Joe saw nothing in the way.
“Course, sir, it’s fust come fust served, with the box
seat. But there’s nothing to stop the kid from bein’
here fust, is they? We start from Macquarie Place
here, me an’ Tom Arthur—two buses, runnin’ in turn.
. . . Thank you, sir; thank you. No, no, no, no, drink!
No. Drink! No. Bin teetotal all me life, sir. There’s
plenty of other ways of spending a good bob though,
sez you. Thank you, sir—thank you.”
Jimmy was very proud when he climbed that first
time to the high seat beside Joe Bunyan, the driver;
though he was a little frightened, and his hands behind
his back clutched nervously on the low guard-iron that
ran round the box seat. Thereafter, whenever he made
the journey to see Captain Hardy, that was his seat,


perched up in front, right over the sinuous team of three
straining horses weaving a way for themselves through
the long, crowded streets to the suburbs, under the guid-
ance of Joe's shouted commands and his long, cracking
whip. And as the two grew to know each other better,
the cracking whip was often folded and used to point
out places and buildings and persons about whose iden-
tity and history the voluble Joe always had stories for
the eager ear of his youthful passenger.
Often—as often as the Parson could spare him —
Jimmy rode thus to the end of the tram run at Waver-
ley, to wend his way down into the hollow and round
the swamp—Regan’s Swamp, it was —by the track the
skipper had shown him, and up the other side through
sand and scrub to the cottage on the plateau by the
cliffs. He and the captain rambled and hunted and
fished —for the skipper had found a way down the cliffs,
or rather had made it by connecting narrow ledges by
steps and ropes.
The Parson never came out, despite Jimmy’s persistent
requests to do so; and Hurricane, though he did man-
age a clear day ashore once in a long while, when he
came out really did more to spoil the visit than other-
wise, for he largely deprived Jimmy of the much-coveted
company of Captain Hardy, with whom most of the
time he spoke in private. Jimmy, though obedient to
the hint that his ear was not particularly desired, could
not but feel a little curious as to what the talking was
about, especially as in the course of the conversation he
occasionally heard his own name mentioned, and that of
a girl named Dorothy; for Dorothy was the name of


his sister —his big sister about whom his mother had
told him. It was clear that what Captain Hardy and
Hurricane were talking about was a matter of great con-
cern to them, and, perhaps it might prove, to him also.
But whatever it was, one thing was certain, and this
was the all-important thing to Jimmy, it was sufficient to
rob him more and more of the companionship of his
dear friend, Captain Hardy,
His fear developed into sad reality as he found from
now on that the Parson was increasingly loath to let
him go out and see the captain, while at the same time
he learned that Hurricane, now taking a spell ashore,
had, without telling him a word about it, paid one or
two lone visits to the house on the cliffs.


CHAPTER IV
THE CAPTAIN’S PREMONITION
Captain Hardy and his old shipmate, Sam Smiles,
sat yarning in the former’s beloved den at his home
in the scrub. It might almost seem on this occasion as
if they had been transported back to that day six months
ago when they had discussed young Jimmy Brent and
his sister (if, indeed, Dorothy was his sister), for room,
atmosphere and environment were identical, even to the
tobacco smoke, and the decanter of Scotch between them.
The topic of their conversation, too, was the same.
Since that day they had met as chance occasionally per-
mitted, usually in the city; and had spasmodically pursued
the theme that arose from the further secrets promised
by the skipper, which meantime he had revealed piece-
meal to Hurricane, Now, all alone at last with a full
free day at their disposal, the captain had rounded his
narrative off to finality.
“There,” he said, when he had concluded, “you’ve got
my story. Summed up, I think our boy is Captain
Brent’s son, and therefore Dorothy’s brother. I’m con-
vinced that Captain Brent was not drowned, and that
he is now living on Pinnacle Island. How much you are
impressed by my theories, or how much faith you have


in premonitions, I cannot say. There is my story, and
I firmly believe it will prove to be well-founded.
“But Lord, I’ve been talking now for hours. Won-
derful how much a man can say about a thing in which
he is greatly concerned. Now it’s your turn, Hurri-
cane. Pour me out two fingers and take a peg your-
self ; then tell me what you think about it.”
“Your story is certainly interesting, skipper,” said
Sam, after obeying the first order; “and quite feasible,
I should say. Yet one or two things want clearing a bit.
Pinnacle Island, now. I have heard of it, but that s
about all. On the map it is just a speck—one of the
thousand-and-one specks dusted over the Pacific. Just a
pin-point with a name underlined in red to show it’s
British. I’ve never seen it nor been near it, and I don t
know anyone who has —except you. But do you think
it possible for a person to live on an island for any
length of time without it becoming known? There are
very few unknown islands these days.”
“Yet here is one, I verily believe. Yes, I do think
it quite possible,” the skipper returned. “Pinnacle Is-
land lies away north of the Ellice group—a point or two
to the east, perhaps—just above the Line, due east of
the Gilberts. . . . Hand me the chart out of that drawer
there, Sam. , . . Ah, yes, here it is—right on the 180 th
meridian, east or west of Greenwich, whichever you like.
So you see it is well out of the beaten track. What is
more, there is no inducement for ships to visit the island.
It is little more than a bare rock, I understand, and pro-
duces nothing of value. Besides—and this is perhaps
the main reason why it is not visited—there is a reef


around it that absolutely defies entrance to ordinary
craft.
“Mind you, I have never been ashore, and what I am
telling you is mostly hearsay, chiefly based on the story
of Nini 80, the Islander I told you I found drifting in
a battered cutter two hundred miles or so south of Pin-
nacle. How he came to be there in mid-ocean I was
never able to draw from him. But that he had been
on the island, and that he could tell a great deal about
it if he chose, there is no doubt in my mind. Reading
between the lines, I could not think but that he had good
grounds for wishing to go back to the island. I think,
too, that he would accompany me if requested, out of
gratitude for my having saved his life. These islanders
do not forget a service, Hurricane.
“I myself did see the island —that’s all; and I should
never have even seen it but for friend Bully Hayes.
He was the cause of my being in that out of the way
quarter. Though it makes me boil to have to admit it,
I was running away from him at the time, and he was
making it pretty warm for me with that famous little
brass cannon of his. But that’s another story. I only
mention it to show you that I didn’t stop to take notes
about the island. All I remember definitely is a fairly
high two-pointed peak and a boiling coral reef.”
“Thanks. I think you have disposed of that point
fairly, skipper,” commented Sam. “I think now that
Captain Brent could be there all right. But suppose he
is? He’s likely to stay there till he dies, if he has not
already done so. Now that you’ve established in theory
the whereabouts of Captain Brent and —let us say—of


his son, Jimmy; and the possible whereabouts of his
daughter, Dorothy—what good is it all? I can under-
stand your being interested in all this, especially the girl
(no offence, captain), but there the thing seems to end.
What more is there to do about it? What can you do?
“Just this, Hurricane. If Jim Brent is on that island,
I’m going to bring him home!”
“You’re wha-a-at!”
“Going to bring him home. That’s what I said, Sam.
There, that’s the last of my secrets; now it’s no secret
at all. Listen, shipmate. I’ve been thinking this over
ever since I came to live in this cottage. I’ve had plenty
of time and quiet to do it too, and I’ve conned it well.
Hurricane, I love this little spot. It’s beautiful. But it
lacks something. A cottage isn’t a home without a
woman; I’ve found that out. It’s all right while a man’s
aboard his ship. His ship is his love. But in a cottage
ashore it’s different.
“Now, Sam, I’ve got another notion. Not only do I
think that Jim Brent is alive and on that island, but by
the same intuitive prompting I am led to think that
Dorothy is not only alive, but free. Where, I cannot say.
Yet something—something—tells me I shall find her.
Even if I do not, then to enlist in her; service to find her
father seems to be the next best thing. Now that I
have set my mind on it my feet are itching to tread the
deck of a ship. The sea is calling, Hurricane —calling
irresistibly.”
The astounded Sam rose from his chair, all excitement.
He commenced saying something reflecting on his friend’s


sanity, but Captain Hardy silenced him and pushed him
gently but firmly back into his seat.
“Hold hard, mate,” he said; “I haven’t finished yet.
The Mary Ellen is up for sale. You know that, of
course. She’ll go for a song, likely. I’ve already asked
Mr Strachan to give me first bid for her. I think I have
enough money to buy her. I plan to man her with a
picked crew and go in search of Captain Brent, and inci-
dentally, of his daughter. If I could succeed in bringing
that boy’s father back to him it would be reward enough:
if the good Lord should decree that I find his sister on
the way, that would be double reward. The crew would
receive no pay, but on the other hand any profit made on
the voyage would be theirs as much as mine. And I
think by this time I know the islands well enough to make
such a cruise pay for itself. There is only one thing I
am not sure of, and I must be assured of that before I
make my final arrangements. It is an essential condi-
tion to my starting.”
What is that?” asked the now mollified Mr Smiles
“Your co-operation, Sam. I want you along with me
Will you come?”
“Of course I’ll come, you old hypocrite. Did you
think you’d fool me with your yarn about being done
with the sea for ever? Skipper, I’ve had a berth or two
since the Mary Ellen, but I haven’t been comfortable in
them. I’ll welcome a return to the old girl. And look
here, Captain John Hardy, one thing you can be quite
sure of—you’ll never sail from this port of Sydney again
without Sam Smiles as mate!”
The captain jumped up from his chair. “Well spoken,
Hurricane,” he shouted, gripping him by the hand. “Then


that’s that! Now for the details. But first let’s have
something to eat, man. We’ve forgotten that very neces-
sary part of the business. Now I take time to think of it,
I’m starving.”
Their meal lasted well into the night, for they talked
as they ate, and now the venture had been decided on
there were a multitude of details to be discussed. Hurri-
cane was staying the night, so there was no great hurry.
Before the pair retired to bed the whole plan had been
gone over in the rough.
The next morning saw the commencement of what was
to be the busiest and perhaps the most interesting three
months the skipper had ever experienced. First of all,
the Mary Ellen had to be secured. Captain Hardy found
that not difficult, for, as he thought, there was not much
demand for a vessel of her type just then. Moreover,
Mr Strachan was very generous in his dealings; so that
for a sum that wrought no hardship on him, Captain
Hardy now became the proud owner of the Mary Ellen,
of which he had, for so long been the master.
The schooner was brought from her place of retire-
ment and moored in a position handy to the wharves and
the city, where refitting could be conveniently carried out.
The house at the seaside, with its furnishings and flower
garden, was left in the care of an old servitor of Mr
Strachan who, because of not very robust health and
indigent circumstances was most happy to undertake the
care of it in return for free occupation. This arrange-
ment was much to the liking of the skipper, for Mr
Strachan gave him his assurance that the house and


garden, of which he was jealous, would be admirably safe-
guarded and cared for.
The security of the little home thus assured, the cap-
tain took up his residence on the Mary Ellen, along with
Sam Smiles, who, as soon as the enterprise was decided
on had thrown up his coastal berth; and a negro named
Sammy Alexander, a ship’s cook. This Sammy Alex-
ander was well known to the skipper and the mate. He
had sailed with Captain Hardy on more than one voyage,
including a trip on the Mary Ellen herself. Although
not a seaman, the negro was a handy man aboard ship,
besides being a splendid cook. He was reputed to be
capable of making a dish out of sawdust at a pinch; but
apart from that he was invaluable because of his fun-
provoking comicalities. Sam hailed originally—it must
have been many years before—from the Mississippi and
old “Noo Orlens;” and his stories and songs about his
beloved Dixie were as much a part of his stock-in-trade
as was his skill in the galley. As much as anything else,
truth to tell, it was the memory of Sam’s inimitable
rendering of these ditties—with eyes rolling like white
spots in his coal black face, rift almost in two as his pro-
digious lips and gleaming white teeth parted to reveal that
cavernous mouth of his—that led the captain to engage
him. For although he was for the present needed only
to attend to the immediate wants of the two men, the skip-
per made it clear to him that he was being signed on for
an indefinite voyage to the islands when the ship was
ready.
“Oh yes, Cap’n Hardy, suh,” he assured the skipper.
“Ah quite unnerstan’s dat. Ah cooks fur de mate an’
you, Cap’n Hardy, wile you-all is wukkin on de Merry


Ellum, Den wen you is done heah an’ she goes to sea
Ah goes erlong wif her to cook fur you-all an’ de crew
too. Right you is, Cap’n Hardy—ye-es suh. An’
cookin’ am what Ah does know sumpin erbout. Gives
you me bully beef, Ah cooks bully beef; gives you me
tuttle, Ah makes green tuttle soup; tells you me dis ship’s
runned outen grub an previsions—Sam Alexander ain’t no
’count gwine let you down, not even den; no suh, cap’n
—not wile dey’s a empty flour sack an a ship’s cat erbout
on de Merry Ellum. You jes’ leab de cookin’ to dis chile,
cap’n suh.”
Thus accommodated with board and lodging on the
very spot, Captain Hardy and his associate set to work
with a will to refit the ship. There was much to be done.
Lying idle in the harbour for months had done nothing
to improve the Mary Ellen. Her decks wanted caulking
and her running gear required a good overhauling. Her
sails had been stowed away in the locker under the cap-
tain’s own supervision before he left her, and they were
in fairly good condition. Still they needed repairs and
replacements before they were fit for such an extended
voyage as this one promised to be. The woodwork looked
as if it had never seen paint. The ship-chandler’s bill
would be a big one, but Captain Hardy was determined
that nothing in the way of material and good work would
be spared. He was resolved that when she left her berth
the Mary Ellen should be a good job and a tight ship.
To this end he and Hurricane had at the start donned
overalls and fallen to lustily, setting an example for
energy and good workmanship to those men they em-
ployed on the job. These were, for the most part,
selected with a view to inclusion—if they proved suitable


—in the Mary Ellen’s crew, and to further this plan
Captain Hardy had appointed the Parson his representa-
tive and employment agent ashore. He, by virtue of his
office at the Sailor’s Home, which was the Mecca for
practically all the seamen that came ashore at Sydney,
was in a position to pick up those men whom the skipper
specially desired; or at least to find out their views
regarding such an enterprise as the proposed voyage.
As it was not intended that the Mary Ellen should carry
any cargo worth mentioning, some of the space that would
ordinarily have been devoted to cargo was utilized to
provide more room and comfort for the crew. The
crowded little foc’s’le was abandoned for roomier quar-
ters nearer amidships, and a good, big, airy messroom
was provided, which would also serve as a community
room wherein, if circumstances and inclination permitted
and weather prompted, all hands could foregather for rec-
reation and harmony.
“I intend,” the skipper told Sam Smiles, “that this
voyage shall be as enjoyable as possible for all of us—
more of a picnic excursion than anything else. With that
in view we shall allow the utmost freedom and equality—
consistent with decency and discipline of course. To all
intents and purposes, so long as things continue to run
smoothly, the cook or the ship’s boy will be as good as
the master —or the mate. As all will share the accom-
modation equally, and all will participate in what profits
come out of the voyage, the Mary Ellen’s company should
be a happy family. I am relying on your good nature
and known good sense to help in this too, Hurricane.”
Thus they talked, these two old sea mates, as their
work of preparation went on. Each night in the little


cabin they smoked and planned; each day they saw the
Mary Ellen advanced a step further towards trim sea-
worthiness. Each day, too, the Mary Ellen became more
and more an object of interest and curiosity to those who
passed her by. There was something of a mystery about
this schooner, dragged of a sudden from the obscurity
of retirement, now being dressed and painted up for the
sea once more. And with such meticulous thoroughness!
Shipping men made shrewd guesses as to the reason for
it all. Whenever he put his foot ashore, one or other
of the skipper’s numerous friends buttonholed him and
sought by jest and joviality to draw his secret from him;
but to no purpose. Passing seamen and wharf idlers
offered their suggestions to the world for what they were
worth; each suggestion going the rounds of gossip as a
toothsome, short-lived rumour.
Now the Mary Ellen was being fitted out as a private
cruising yacht for a wealthy New Zealander, for whom
Captain Hardy was acting as supervisor and to whom he
would deliver her. Now he himself had bought her to
go a-trading in the islands on his own account. Now she
was to leave for northern waters, ostensibly to be used in
the pearl shell and trepang business in the Arafura Sea.
But huh! that would never deceive them —the wise ones.
Blackbirding in the islands was where she was going;
recruiting kanakas for the Queensland sugar plantations.
And there were other suggestions, equally wise and
astute. Despite them all the object of Captain Hardy’s
enterprise remained a secret, due in part to the fact that
the schooner lay some distance from the wharf and was
thus not easily boarded.
Only one person knew what was afoot, outside of Cap-


tain Hardy himself and his mate. That was Mr Strachan,
and with that canny Scot the secret was as safe as if it
had been in a bank’s vault.
The speculation of the curious, till then merely unsat-
isfied, were utterly confounded by the culminating event
in the Mary Ellen’s refitting. That was the hoisting
aboard of perhaps the most extraordinary item ever in-
cluded in a trading schooner’s equipment—no less than a
steam pinnace; a trim little steam pinnace from the
Navy. She was Captain Hardy’s own idea, and her arrival
aboard was the fruition of much deep thinking and plan-
ning on his part.
From the moment when he first conceived his adven-
turous scheme Captain Hardy had seen how useful would
be a small self-propelled vessel capable of going among
the reefs and through coral-guarded coastal waters where
he well knew the like of the Mary Ellen could not go.
But to find a vessel that would meet these requirements,
and which yet could be carried on a schooner’s deck, was
no easy problem. Hurricane indeed—resourceful sea-
man though he was —had from the first scouted the idea
as impracticable.
“Can’t see how you could possibly do it, skipper,” he
said. “The smallest steam launch on the harbour would
take more than the Mary Ellen’s gear to hoist aboard.
And even if you got it aboard you’ve no room to stow
it. You’d have to have the thing amidships to trim ship,
and you’d have to shift a mast to do that. It would be
a case of the tail wagging the dog. The baby would be
bigger than its mother almost. Besides, you have no
one that could drive it. A steam engine and boiler re-
quire understanding.”


But Captain Hardy was not to be shifted from his
purpose. He foresaw circumstances that would arise
where such a boat might easily mean the success or failure
of the voyage. He went to his friend Mr Strachan about
it. The agent knew more about Sydney Harbour than
he did, and in addition he was representative of a well-
known firm with considerable influence. Mr Strachan
thought it over.
“The difficulty is,” he said, “to find anything small
enough. The smallest steam launch you could get would
be 25 feet or more long. That would be too large for
you to handle, besides being out of the question as to
price, I’m afraid. . . . Wait a minute though. I think I
have it. Leave it to me for a while, captain.”
The captain did. Straightway Mr Strachan got in
touch with the naval authorities at Garden Island, and
found that among the odds and ends awaiting the periodi-
cal sale held “by order of the Admiralty” to dispose of
such things were a couple of steam pinnaces. They were
quite good and sound, and had been discarded only in
order to allow of the installation of others a little more
modern and efficient. One of the two proved to be the
very thing needed. It was a tiny boat but 16 feet long,
yet replete in everything that made for efficiency. Its
little engine and boiler were in perfect order, having been
repaired and cleaned and polished up in true naval style
up to the day it was laid up. The matter of purchase
price was not difficult of solution. After a little unravell-
ing of official red tape, the sale of the pinnace—or cutter,
as the navy people specifically described her —to Mr
Strachan was completed.
As for the matter of hoisting her aboard, that difficulty


was overcome without much trouble or expense. From
the same store of naval odds and ends whence the cutter
herself had come, a fine, heavy metal-shod spar was
bought for a song. This was fitted to the Mary Ellen’s
mainmast in place of the existing boom, to serve not only
to carry the main-sail, but also as a derrick. With this,
and the aid of the deck winch—used in places where shore
gear was not available to take in cargo —the cutter could be
lifted from the water, swung inboard, and landed in the
chocks made for her to lie snugly fore and aft on the
hatch amidships. There, securely lashed down and pro-
tected from the weather by a strong canvas cover, she
would be well out of the way, while yet easily accessible
when required. Captain Hardy was greatly pleased when
he saw her at last in her place. He rubbed his hands
with childlike glee as he walked around her admiring
her immaculate trimness.
“There, Mr Smileshe said to Hurricane, “What
about it now? I told you it could be done; though I con-
fess I never for a moment dreamed I should be so well
suited. With all my love for sailing ships and my inborn
prejudice against steam, I must say she’s a little beauty
and worth double her price. As to driving her, Hurri-
cane, you must have forgotten all about Dick Patten.
He’ll be one of the crew you know, and he’s not only a
good hand aboard ship, but a first rate engineer, having
spent some years erecting plant here for the sugar com-
pany and working in their mill out there in the Fijis.
With a launch like that and a man like Patten to look
after her we have a wonderful combination, and I am
delighted. But what about a name for the little beauty?
Suggest one, Hurricane.”


“Call her the Dorothy ” was the lean one’s ready pro-
posal.
“Thank you for the compliment,” said the skipper.
“That’s a nice name, and one I love; yet it is a bit long
for a tiny boat. May I abbreviate it Sam?”
“Certainly, skipper. Call her the Dot.”
“Dot she is then. And that completes the job you
and I set out to do. The Mary Ellen is ready for sea,
our crew is selected and ready to come aboard, except
two to be picked up on the way. The refitting is finished,
Sam. The naming of the Dot marks its glorious consum-
mation. Come in the cabin.”
Sam joined him, and they drank solemnly to the christ-
ening of the Dot; then again to the success of the Mary
Ellen’s cruise.


CHAPTER V
THE MARY ELLEN SAILS FOR PINNACLE ISLAND
A feeling of subdued excitement pervaded the atmos-
phere of the Mary Ellen. Captain Hardy’s promise of a
good job and a tight ship had been amply fulfilled. Every-
thing about her was spick and span. Mr Strachan, the
only visitor allowed on the ship, had just bidden them
good-bye and gone ashore. He had left with Captain
Hardy a letter to his friend Mr McEachern, an Auckland
merchant, who had known the Brents well, and who, he
thought, could possibly tell the skipper something more of
them than he knew.
All hands were now aboard, and a noisy tug, after
what seemed a great deal of unnecessary fussing about,
had at last got a short tow-line board the schooner and
was setting off with her for the long slow journey down
harbour to the sea.
Never did ship put to sea under more auspicious con-
ditions. The sun was bright, the blue waters of the bay
sparkled, and a sweet fresh breeze met the ship as she
breasted the open channel. Everyone aboard, from Cap-
tain Hardy down, was light-hearted and happy. The
captain and the mate had spent a busy morning, but now
they could relax, for the tug had taken things temporarily
out of their hands. The skipper left a man at the wheel,


called the second mate to stand by, and turned to his
lieutenant.
“That’s about all we can do for a while, Hurricane,”
he said —“until the tug drops us outside. All looks well.
We have a good ship, well equipped and provisioned, and
above all I think we have a fine crew. Step inside and
let us look over the list. . . . Here we are. I’ll read the
names off in their order, adding such remarks on each
as one might consider appropriate if he were speaking
of them to a stranger, rather than to one so well-informed
on the matter as your own good self. Here they are then:
“John Hardy, Master; Australian born and bred.
Was master of the Mary Ellen prior to her laying up.
Has many years experience in the South Sea Islands
trade, and well knows the parts he is about to visit.
“Samuel Smiles, Mate; Another Australian-made sea-
man. Better known as Hurricane. Can handle a ship
or crew with any man. Has sailed often before with
Captain Hardy, to the satisfaction of both parties. Also
knows the islands well.
“David Williams, Second Mate; Served apprentice-
ship with Captain James Brent. Well-known on the Aus-
tralian coast as a good seaman, with a reputation for in-
dustry, honesty and modesty.
“William Ardous, A.8.; known universally among
seafaring men as Crazy Bill the Whaler. A fine seaman
of wide experience. Among other things did some whal-
ing in the Tasman Sea in his time. Famed for his elas-
tic and fanciful imagination, and claims to have had the
unique experience of crossing the Pacific Ocean in the
belly of a whale.


“Peter Hawkins, A.8.: Known only as Tall Yarn
Pete. A voluble Cockney. Inseparable companion of
the Whaler, A sailor with many startling adventures in
all parts of the world to his credit and a persistent habit
of relating them.
“Richard Patten, A.8.: Good sailor; also engineer of
experience. Has spent years in the Fijis with the sugar
company. He will have charge of the Dot. Also valu-
able for his local knowledge of the Fiji Islands and his
acquaintance with the ways of the Kaiviti.
“Michael Farley, A.8.: Ex-naval man, and member
of Captain Kane’s crew when H.M.S. Calliope made her
notable escape from Apia Harbour. A good rigger and
a very handy man. A genial Irishman and very good
company. Mick will join the ship at Auckland.
“Daniel Graham, A.8.: Ex-Queensland kangaroo
shooter, ex-blackbirder, ex nearly everything else a real
wanderluster could wish to be. A rough diamond, tough
as nails, and used to hard work.
“That’s five able seamen. Then there’s the cook,
“Samuel Alexander: Too well known to most of us
to need any introduction. We are fortunate to have
Black Sammy aboard. He will doubtless prove a valu-
able adjunct to the Mary Ellen.
“William Ormonde: Office or rank not defined. Will
act as a sort of purser and secretary probably. Also, on
account of his training for Holy Orders, he will natur-
ally act as spiritual adviser and guide to the ship’s com-
pany—insofar as his services are desired and permitted.
“James Brent, Ship’s Boy; Will nominally be in at-


tendance on the master and mate. In reality, a passen-
ger out for his first big adventure. Incidentally, largely
responsible for this somewhat remarkable enterprise.
“And, lastly,
“Nini Bo: Island native, probably Samoan. Known to
skipper for some years. Has close acquaintance with the
islands in general, their peoples and languages. Has
actually visited, some years ago, Pinnacle Island. Will be
taken on at Suva or where else located in the Fijis, to be
used as interpreter should we land on inhabited island.
“That is the lot, Hurricane. A round dozen, and on
the whole a very good one. A big enough crew too,
for a 180-ton topsail schooner, I should say. Now fetch
all hands aft by the wheel here, Mr Smiles. I want to
see them all together while we have a few minutes to
spare.”
Hurricane called the men aft. When they had assemb-
led Captain Hardy addressed them thus:
“Lads, we are starting out on what to most of you is,
I dare say, a novel voyage. Not one of you has any idea
when he is coming back. Not one of you knows whether
he will ever receive a penny reward for his services. Not
one of you even knows where he is going. Nor do I
intend that you shall know—for the present, and for
some time to come. The very secrecy of the voyage and
the atmosphere of adventure surrounding it have, I make
bold to say, been sufficient to make you want to partici-
pate in it. I have been telling the mate, Mr Smiles, that
we have a splendid company aboard. I firmly believe
that, and I want you to prove it. If you do, and help
to your utmost to make this venture a success, I shall


deeply appreciate it. And Captain John Hardy is not
one to allow gratitude to remain unexpressed.
“Now a word of advice to you. Keep away from the
booze. We shall call at one or two places en route and
we shall be ashore a good deal. lam not foolish enough
to think that you, or some of you, will not have a drink.
But do be sensible, and keep the ship’s name clean by
avoiding drunkenness. Then we shall have no fighting
and shall be a happy family. And now, before we are
split up into watches or even disperse to our several
duties, may I ask you to do a most unusual thing—to
bow your heads while Mr Ormonde here offers a word of
prayer?”
The last request of Captain Hardy came as a surprise
to all of the men, and some of them it made to feel de-
cidedly uncomfortable. The shifty, enquiring glances
that Crazy Bill cast towards his mate and the awkward
shuffling of Tall Yarn’s feet showed that that notorious
pair at least were ill at ease in the face of such an un-
usual proposal. Dick Patten coughed nervously, Dan
Graham was inclined to treat the matter as a joke, while
Sam Smiles blushed furiously and seemed to resent this
innovation of the captain’s, on which for once he had
not been consulted.
The little Parson himself was most embarrassed of all.
The captain had taken him completely by surprise. For
a moment he did not move, as though he did not quite
realize what it was he had thus suddenly been called on
to do. Then a new light came to his face as though it
was being borne in on him that here, indeed, was an
opportunity to do something very congenial to him, an
opportunity he ought to welcome and relish. He now


stepped forward, raised his hand as though in benedic-
tion over the bowed heads of his assembled shipmates,
and with an eloquence that clearly came from a source
outside his own poor, frail person, thanked God for His
bounteous goodness in thus preparing the Mary Ellen
and her company; then asked His guidance and blessing
on the voyage on which they were even then about to
embark, to the end that, whatever the aim of their beloved
captain in thus adventuring, it should by His goodness
and protection be accomplished, and the Mary Ellen and
her company be brought safely home.
It was a splendid, earnest and moving appeal to Deity
that the little Parson made, and in such circumstances it
was a brave thing for him to do. No one spoke a word.
The men stood silently in their places for a minute or
two, then slowly dispersed to begin the real work of the
voyage.
By now they were approaching the Heads, and the open
sea could be seen out beyond the entrance. A lazy green
roll was coming in, making the going a little harder for
the tug. The towline seemed to feel the strain for the
first time, and groaned complainingly where it chafed as
the Mary Ellen’s bow rose and fell to the new movement
of the water.
Men were now busy slacking off the sails, which, as
the binding gaskets were removed, expanded into loose
hanging masses of canvas, creased from long compression
like the wings of a moth newly emerged from the con-
finement of its cocoon. The captain, Jimmy Brent and
the Parson stood in the schooner’s stern, looking back at
the distant city and the beautiful bay they were leaving
behind. To the two men it was a charming enough


picture; to the boy, one too full of novelty and wonder
to admit of verbal expression, Jimmy could only clasp
the rail and marvel at this great new experience. The
south head slid slowly past, then with a slight turn at
the caprice of the tug the harbour was in a few minutes
entirely hidden from view.
Looking back now, only the rock-bound coast could
be seen, with the lighthouse tower on the southern cliff
standing like a pointer to the rock-guarded portals to
Sydney and home. The harbour, the great city, the sur-
rounding country, all were lost to sight. Jimmy beheld
his native land from an entirely new point of view. From
the cliffs by the skipper’s house he had often looked out
on this ocean and wondered at its vastness. Where he
had stood wcs then but a little spot, it seemed, from which
he looked out on the limitless sea, over which went the
tiny ships. Now he was on one of those ships, look-
ing out from a little self-contained world on not only
the sea, but Australia; for beyond that vast rock wall lay
all Jimmy knew of his country. Behind there was Port
Jackson, with its many ships, the big city and its crowds
and noise, and all the bush beyond the city. He was
looking back on it now. His view was reversed. He
could even see the scrub up there above the cliffs where
he had looked out. Yes, surely that was the very place
—that must be Captain Hardy’s house he could see. He
was looking back on it all now, from one of those little
specks of ships. And as he looked the longer, the more
he saw of it, for the coast grew longer and longer as
the ship slowly drew away from it.
The tug had lengthened her towline as soon as she got


her charge beyond the restriction of the harbour channel,
and, her load thus eased, had continued on out to sea for
three miles. There was little or no movement in the
air and a good offing was desirable. Now, as her escort
prepared to cast off, the Mary Ellen’s sails were set.
The tug tooted her whistle in recognition that this was
no ordinary voyage she had inaugurated, as, putting
about, she headed back for the port. Soon she was little
more than a lingering smudge of smoke over the water.
Ere she had passed from sight, almost, the faint pre-
vailing breeze of the day had shifted toward the south
and freshened with the cooling of the day.
The schooner’s canvas filled and bellied into graceful
curves. Her wings, so long folded, were spread. She
was a seabird once more. She heeled over gently and
scudded before the breeze. Captain Hardy braced him-
self to look aloft, and smiled. He inhaled a deep chestful
of that breeze and was happy. He was at sea again
on his Mary Ellen. He looked around for the boy.
Jimmy was at the rail. He, too, had heard the call
of the sea and felt its thrill; but he was not happy. The
Parson was supporting him, and in his gentlest manner
was trying to appease his nausea. Like “Rachel for her
children crying,” Jimmy would not be comforted. For
once the good Parson’s influence was of no avail.
“Leave him alone, Ormonde,” the skipper told him.
“ ‘First sick, first well’ holds with the kiddies as a rule.
He’ll soon get over it; but he’s got to go through with
it. No one else can be seasick for him. He’ll get his
head down somewhere presently, and be as right as rain
after a sleep. Leave him to it.”


Jimmy did get his head down —in the first sheltered
place he could find. He slept, as the captain had said,
though spasmodically. To lie down was a relief. It
mercifully rested his head and eased the gnawing sick-
ness. He heard the lap, lap of the water against the
Mary Ellen’s sides as she patted it each time her bows
fell. The ship’s motion and the murmur of wind and
water soothed him a little. His mind wandered in his
waking moments, and he dreamed when he slept. He
thought, vaguely, of many things he had heard about the
sea, of adventures he was now to have. Through it
all, fitfully he could hear the men talking; hear their
laughter as they went about their work this first even-
ing at sea. For could he but know it, the Mary Ellen’s
wings were pushing her nose merrily into the dusk with
a joy that was infectious. Those men were happy to be
at sea again. So would he be when he got well.
Thus he dozed and dreamed, and between times waked
vaguely to hear their jokes and catch their songs. “Blow
the man down, blow the man down,” he seemed to hear.
Funny thing that for them to sing! What man? Couldn’t
blow a man down, anyhow. He wondered. . . . Only a
dream. . . . The lap and swish of the water, the gentle
swing of the ship. ... He was glad to be lying down,
though. Was he asleep now, or awake? . . . “Down in
Patagonia—Barcelonia ” Could he hear someone
singing? There were voices, voices of the men. Mr
Smiles speaking . . . could just hear him in the wind.
Listen!
—an’ I’ll tell you a tale
Of how I crossed the ocean in the belly of a whale!


Why, that was Crazy Bill the Whaler, . . . Must go
out and hear him sing—hear the men, watch them work
—see the ship go. .. . Oh-00, so sick—his head! .. .
Stay here—lie still for a while. . . . Better with his
head down. Yes, better—to —lie—dow-
Jimmy at last was asleep, soundly—sleeping off his
first attack of sea-sickness. And the Mary Ellen was
rocking her boy as she sailed merrily eastward into the
night.


CHAPTER VI
THE WHALER’S YARN
Next morning Jimmy was on deck, little the worse for
his bout with mal-de-mer, though somewhat shaky. He
wanted little in the way of food, however, and all Sammy
Alexander’s kindly efforts to tempt him with tidbits
from the galley failed. It was a day or two before he
really got his sea legs, for though the weather, from a
seaman’s point of view, was ideal and nothing more than
a fresh breeze was encountered, the Mary Ellen behaved
rather too playfully to suit one who had never before
been to sea. She had nothing in her in the way of cargo,
and the few tons of ballast Captain Hardy had put into
her was not sufficient to prevent her from readily re-
sponding to every impulse of wind and sea. Neverthe-
less, the boy soon grew to enjoy the thrill and the ex-
hilaration that came of that silent, gentle gliding motion
of the ship as she sped mile after mile over the inter-
minable expanse of blue-grey water. He learned, too, to
accommodate himself to the inclination of the deck as
she heeled gently when the stiffening wind caught her
on the quarter, and to maintain the equilibrium of his
body on what to him—accustomed to nothing but his
solid native earth —was an ever-moving and rather un-
stable footing.


With this returning confidence vanished all memory
of his dreaded nausea. Even the peculiar feeling of
yearning loneliness he had experienced that first day out
when he discovered the ship was out of sight of land
and all alone on the great ocean—that now left him.
He grew interested in the doings of the men, of the work
they did about the ship; of the talk, the songs and the
games that made their time pass so pleasantly. He en-
joyed it more and more. He had thought at first —when
he was so sick—that he would never like the sea. But
pshaw! that was nothing after all. He had soon got over
that; now he was quite well. This being a sailor was
fine. The blue sky and blue water, the lovely fresh
wind, the spray in one’s face, the pleasant gliding and
rolling of the ship—all this was grand. It was good to
be at sea. He liked being a sailor now.
“She’s going well,” he heard Captain Hardy tell the
mate. The skipper seemed highly pleased. “Since the
tug cast off we’ve done nothing less than seven or eight
knots. Four days out from Sydney. Another three, if
this weather continues, should nearly see us in Auck-
land.”
“Should do,” acquiesced the mate. “We’re certainly
having things all our own way so far. Everyone seems
to be quite happy on it. One of those story book voy-
ages, with all blue sky and unruffled seas. Only needs
our sailors to be garbed in picture-book togs—white bell-
bottom pants, blue jumpers and jaunty caps with rib-
bon tails and Mary Ellen written on them—Hello,
Jimmy,” he broke off as the boy came up. “You’re
a lucky boy, you are, to have such a mild christening at


sea. Only one night sick; then a lovely stretch of fine
weather like this. Lucky boy! But of course you
mustn’t think it’s all like this. We have to take the
bad with the good at sea, boy.”
Jimmy dutifully listened and politely agreed. He was
soon to learn the truth of what Mr Smiles said; but for
the present his young heart refused to be cast down by
any such forebodings. To-day’s blessings were sufficient
for him. Let to-morrow’s cares be to-morrow’s.
Next day dawned just as bright. The same fresh
breeze was blowing, and the Mary Ellen still bowled
happily along. Jimmy was up early, and even as the
sun’s golden ball rose out of the sea ahead to the east,
he was with Bill Ardous at the wheel.
“Well, my ’earty,” the Whaler greeted him. “Are yer
learnin’ to be a good sailorman? Light the binnacle and
bang the ship’s bell. Tell ’em all the time o’ day. That’s
what every ship’s boy does fust. But they’s more to
learn ’n that. Come ’ere, now, an’ I’ll teach yer to box
the compass, lad.
“There, say ’em as they’re writ down there—round
the circle. Start from the north—that one with the
Prince-of-Wales feather on it. North’s always deco-
rated fancy-like, see? Now —north, north by east, nor’-
nor’-east, nor’-east by north, nor’-east—go on, right
round. Each one’s a point, see?”
Over and over again he read it with the boy, his hands
turning the wheel automatically as he did so. Then he
made Jimmy try repeating it from memory—one sec-
tion north to east, encouraging him by his reiterated


assurance that all four sections were essentially alike,
so that once he mastered one he mastered all.
Suddenly the lesson came to a stop. Looking up to
see the cause, Jimmy saw the Whaler was peering intent-
ly ahead, almost along the shining track of the newly-
risen sun, from which he shaded his eyes with his hand.
Jimmy could see he was intensely excited. The Whaler
opened his mouth wide.
“There they play,” he roared. “Blackskins ahead,
skipper! Four of ’em on the starb’d bow. . . . ‘Lower
away’ it is, cap’n. Ay, ay, sir. Inter the boats an’ at
’em!”
Jimmy was too startled at the Whaler’s strange behaviour
to speak. He was frankly puzzled; even a little scared.
Mr Smiles, just then coming aft, was equally surprised
and puzzled at the helmsman’s queer conduct. Turning,
he looked in the direction indicated by Crazy Bill’s
gesticulations. He took in the situation at a glance.
“Give me my glasses, Jimmy,” he ordered, and a
moment later he was scanning the sea ahead.
“Right you are, Bill,” he said. “Four of them sure
enough, on the starboard bow. Four beauties they are,
too. Haven’t seen a school of whales for a lone time
now. They’re thinned out a good deal since the old
days; and what are left are scared and have cleared out
farther south. But you haven’t lost your eye for whales,
Bill, You picked them out well.”
“Lost me eye?” protested the Whaler. “Not me, sir;
not after the years I put in chasin’ wiles ’ere in the
Tasman. An’ there’s another reason why I oughia see
this lot, Mr Smiles. ’Cause I’m lookin’ fer ’em. As


near as I can calkerlate, by a strange coin-cy-dence, this
is the very spot —latitood an’ longtitood—where I was
swallered by one of them same wiles, an’ started on me
famous cruise.”
By the time he had finished his brief but startling
speech the Whaler had an audience comprising almost the
whole ship’s company. His vociferous announcement of
whales ahead had brought the men on deck as smartly
as if he had announced an impending collision, and every
man who was not urgently busy elsewhere or asleep was
now present.
Meanwhile the ship’s lively pace and the whales’
leisurely progress towards her had brought them abreast,
and the four monsters were now within close and in-
teresting view on the starboard. Evidently they sensed
that the Mary Ellen was no whaler, for they gambolled
quite unconcernedly in their cumbersome way, giving a
novel display as their great bodies pushed up unexpect-
edly from the sea and then slowly sank again, usually with
a final curving wave of the flukes of the huge tail. As
the ship passed on they made their leisurely departure
southward.
The last portion of the whaler’s oration had been re-
ceived with wide-eyed wonder on the part of his hearers,
mingled here and there with a trace of pity. The general
impression on his audience was that either Crazy Bill the
Whaler was indeed daft, or else he was an habitual,
though perhaps unconscious, perverter of the truth.
Several remarks were made which clearly voiced this
view. Even Tall Yarn Pete, the Whaler’s own mate,
failed to support him.


“’Ere, cheese it, old bloke,” he advised him in an
audible undertone. “It’s orl right to sing abaht such
startlin’ adventures; but blim-e, w’en it comes to makin’
aht they’re bloomin’ well true, it’s time to call a ’alt.”
Jimmy Brent was keenly interested. He appealed to
the Parson, who had joined the party. The Parson was
his mentor in all things that called for serious decision.
“Mr Ormonde,” he asked him, “is it true, or is he
fooling? Was he really swallowed by a whale?”
Mr Ormonde wavered just a little. Clearly, he did
not believe the Whaler’s yarn; yet he did not wish to
offend him by openly denying it. But his duty was plain.
He must tell the boy the truth, at all costs.
“James,” he said, “I have heard but one authentic
account of a man having been swallowed by a whale.
That is the case of Jonah, whose story is told in the
Holy Bible, and is well known to all students of the Scrip-
tures. I for one cannot believe that our friend here
ever had the remarkable experience he speaks of. I
think, with all respect to him, that it is merely a figment
of his imagination.”
“Oh, ’e does, does ’e? Bless his gentle ’eart,” rejoined
the Whaler, somewhat warmly. “Well, look ’ere, me dear
little Parson, you’re mistook for once. Joner —or what-
ever yer call ’im—mighta bin swallered by a wile; but
’e wasn’t the only one, as I’m about to prove to yer. I’ll
just show yer where yer wrong—see?
Now rally round me hearties and I’ll tell to you a tale
Of how I crossed the ocean in the belly of a whale!
There were cries of dissent, and some laughter; but
Hurricane said, with a twinkle in his eye:


“Let him tell his story; then we’ll see who’s right,”
“Oh, by all means,” said the Parson, “let him tell it.”
So it was agreed, and after Mr Smiles had, for safety’s
sake, put another man at the wheel in his place, the Whaler
proceeded:
“It was back about eighty-two, in the whaler Southern
Seas, Captain Jim Bartlett. Just about here, as I was
sayin’, it was, we sighted our first wiles, six days out
from Twofold Bay. There was four of ’em in the school
—good big-uns, and we was all excitement. Before the
skipper could give the order we was in the boats and
after them. I was in number one boat—harpoon man.
We soon manoeuvres round beside the biggest wile.
Seemed she hadn’t heard us, she was lyin’ so still. I
was up in the nose of the boat, ready to give her the
pole. A good, easy catch, thinks I —an’ worth a barrel
of money.
“Then something happened. Another wile ris under
us or somethink. Any rate, our boat went up in the air
and we was all shot into the water. I tell yer, there was
a swirl. First thing I knew, I was bein’ swept in a
great rush of water down a big black hole. It was dark
in there, and I thought I was drownded. ‘Bill Ardous,’
thinks I, ‘you’re a gonner. You ain’t agoin’ ter see yer
old mother back there in Sydney no more!’ Then the
water leaves me and I’m high an’ dry. Soon’s me eyes
git a bit used to the dark, I takes a tumble to it all. A
wile ’ad swallered me, an’ I was in his belly! ‘Here’s
a pretty mess,’ I says.
“Well, I decides to make the best of a bad job. No
use settin’ down an’ cryin’! I thinks a bit, then feels


around to see what I’d got. There was me good sheath-
knife still in me belt —0.K.; an’ me matches, dry as a
bone in me tin box. ‘Thank God for that!’ says I. I
strikes one and finds where I was was like inside a ship.
Me bein’ inside his stummick musta upset that wile a
bit, for he was travellin’ at about ninety knots an hour
now. I could hear the water swishin’ and hummin’ along
his sides as he went shootin’ through it.
“‘Well,’ thinks I, ‘l’m travellin’. But where to? If
I’ve got to go somewhere, I might as well choose that
somewhere!’ So I decides to take the helm. But there
was no helm. . . . Yes, there was, though. This wile
steered hisself with his tail; that was his rudder —and
not far away. I takes my sheath-knife and digs in the
walls of him, and soon I has the port and starb’d lines
secure. Now I knew I was right. Pull one line an’ we
went to port; pull t’other an’ we went a-starb’d.
“Bein’ a sailor man all me life, with my sense of
direction, I knew we was travellin’ almost due east—
just a point or two north. An’ at the rate we was movin’
we musta already passed by the Three Kings an’ cleared
Noo Zealand. So I sets a course straight east by north,
to fetch to the coast of California. I picked on America
because it was the only place I couldn’t miss. Then I
gets to work to make things a bit more comfortable, for
who could tell how long my wile ’ud take to do the six
thousand mile to America?
“Well, I had me matches. I soon made a smudge
lamp, with a bit 0’ me jacket and fat from the linin’ of
the room, as you might say. It tickled the wile a bit to
cut it off, but that only made him crowd on more sail.


Then I needed a table and a seat, an’ I carved them out
of a solid block of blubber. It was lucky it was a wile I
was in, or I wouldn’t ’a’ ’ad that blubber. And there
I ’ad a table and a seat, and a smudge lamp for light
n’ cookin’. I couldn’t have a smoke, because me bacca
had bin spoilt by the sea; but there was plenty to eat.
There was meat and tidbits all round me. And there
I settled, steerin’ me ship and just waitin’ patient like fer
America.
“Five days out from startin’ the floor of that there
cabin er mine started heavin’, an’ things began to shake.
It was like a Noo Zealand earthquake, only I knew it
couldn’t be that—not inside a wile, I found out what
it was after a bit. That wile was gettin’ bilious, through
me bein’ inside of ’im. It was makin’ ’im sick on the
stummick. It upset me a bit, too. What if ’e vomited?
I’d be a gonner. I’d be just where I started then —in
the briny. So I acts very careful-like an’ didn’t move
about much, or disturb ’is innards any more ’n I could
help. Early next day there was a gratin’ sound, an’ I
knew we was groundin’. ‘Here’s were we stick on a
coral reef,’ says I; an’ waited to see the water come
pourin’ in. But, no. The gratin’ got more and more
severe, an’ I could feel her pullin’ up.
“Then the wile did git sick in earnest, and vomited
quite violent; an’ out I went, and laid still. . . . W’en
I got over the shock, and could stand the sun in me eyes,
I looks round an’ finds I’m on a sandy beach. Me poor
old wile ’ad backed off an’ was driftin’ away very sick
lookin’. I climbs a hill and sees a city not far off, and
makes for it. It was Frisco, an’ next day I was passin’


through the Golden Gate on a barque bound for New-
castle, New South Wales, for coal. . . . Now, was I ever
swallowed by a wile—or was I not ?
And there you are my hearties and I’ve told you a true tale,
Of how I crossed the ocean in the belly of a whale!
And so convincingly had the Whaler told his story,
and so heartily did he now sing the refrain to his song,
that all his hearers —Captain Hardy, Hurricane, the Par-
son, Jimmy Brent and all—took up the chorus, and sang
with right good Gilbertian zest—
So there you are my hearties and I’ve told you a true tale,
Of how I crossed the ocean in the belly of a whale!


CHAPTER VII
ROUGH SEAS AND SMOOTH
The excitement aroused by Crazy Bill’s astounding nar-
rative subsided, the singing ceased and the company dis-
persed. The ship was for the next hour or so very
quiet. So, indeed, had the sea become. The sou’-west
breeze that had so faithfully served the Mary Ellen day
in, day out till that very morning had meantime died
down, and a dead calm now possessed the atmosphere.
The glorious sunshine, too, had dulled, and with its
brilliance had vanished the blue of the sea, which had
now assumed a deepening leaden colour and a dead, oily
surface. A heavy and portentous calm rested upon the
ship. It was evident that a change was in store. The
skipper confirmed this.
“WeTe going to get it, Hurricane,” he told the mate.
“Be a solid blow, too, by the look of it. Get them busy,
or it’ll be here before we get the canvas off her. Batten
things down tight, and give a special eye to the Do,t
there. Make sure of her.” Then louder: “Down below
you, Jimmy, my lad, and take your dog with you; and
you too, please, Mr Ormonde.”
Jimmy and the Parson obeyed promptly; the former
much surprised at this new turn of events, the latter as
mildly unconcerned as ever.


Even as the two disappeared below the storm burst
with a suddenness none had expected. The smooth sea
sprang to life, and in a minute was a mass of flying
spray. Heavy clouds, apparently no higher than the
masts, were travelling at an incredible speed.
The Mary Ellen took the shock and heeled hard over
to port. The sudden hissing rush of water through her
lee scuppers indicated the dangerous speed at which she
was already travelling.
It was a time for quick thinking and lively action.
Above the noise the mate’s strident voice was heard as
he gave the orders to carry out Captain Hardy’s instruc-
tions. In a few moments halyards were thrown off their
pins; downhauls were manned, and the loosened sails
fought like demented things, banging like a battery of
guns, drowning the roar of wind and water. The strain
on the vessel thus eased, she came to a more even keel,
though still heeling badly.
For hours then the crew fought to furl canvas that
was as wood under the pressure of the wind, but inch
by inch the sails were beaten until at last the Mary
Ellen was snugged down to lower topsail and a jib.
The seas rose rapidly, and now seemed to threaten
the ship as one after another she took them over green.
The crew were huddled together under the lee of the
poop, each man watching with secret awe the tremendous
forces of nature. The mate faced the weather poop
anxiously watching the sails and the compass; encourag-
ing the men at the wheel, while yet well knowing that
nothing further could be done to insure safety. The
men could not talk or be heard. The wind shrieked


through the rigging, straining backstays creaked and
groaned, while the water on the main deck was picked
up by the wind and, in the form of incessant showers
of spray, almost blinded those on the poop.
Slowly the day dragged on. Hour after hour the
Mary Ellen met and conquered each fresh onslaught;
heaving, shuddering, seemingly helpless as she freed her-
self from one sea only to meet another. But she was
not to ride the storm unscathed. A larger and more
angry sea filled her decks. She could not rid herself
of the tons of water in time to meet the next deluge,
which came over forward with a roar, sweeping aft, and
the noise of crashing and splintering wood told those
on the poop that something had given.
It was the galley. The for’ard bulkhead had met
the full force of the sea, and stove in under the
awful pressure. Pots and pans came swirling along
the decks, adding—if such could be in those circum-
stances —an incongruously comical element to the din.
Suddenly there came the dreaded cry, “Man over-
board!” Fortunately, the alarm was a false one —for-
tunate because in such weather no attempt at rescue
could have been made. Actually those on the poop saw
that a man had been caught in the sea and was being
thrown helplessly back and forth from hatch to scupper
and scupper to hatch. Two men rushed down the poop
ladder regardless of the danger and grabbed him. It was
Dan Graham. With a superhuman strength born of dire
necessity, they hauled him back to the poop. A quick
examination showed that his buffeting had resulted in


nothing worse than broken ribs. At the first opportunity
he was taken below.
Cold, tired, hungry and drenched, the men remained
under the lee of the little chart-house, ever waiting and
watching for the slightest easing of the weather. All
through the night they waited, and it seemed it would
never come. Then as dawn broke the lulls between the
squalls grew longer, and gradually the seas lost their
anger. On deck, masses of ropes washed from their
pins swirled from side to side, and parts of the wrecked
galley still remained as evidence of the fury of the seas.
Meantime, below—whence the captain had ordered
Jimmy and his tutor —the gentle Parson, his own imper-
turbable calm now for once severely tested, had done the
utmost he could in the difficult circumstances to comfort
and reassure a much-terrified boy. Comparatively safe
as they were, at any rate from the direct effects of the
waves, their lot seemed even more irksome and unbear-
able there below than on deck, because of the added
awful suspense as to what was happening without. Only
the thundering of the seas on the deck and the inter-
mittent shrieking of the gale that came to them. Noth-
ing to be seen of it all but the dark green disks of swirl-
ing water at the portholes, yielding now and then to a
somewhat brighter light as the ship’s rolling and pitching
lifted the ports clear of the sea.
Whatever of furnishings or fittings was movable slid
uncannily back and forth about the place. The ship
assumed such acute angles that progress was possible
only by bracing oneself against whatever offered in the
way of benches or bulkheads. Even the dog Pat became


terrified at this unusual experience, and sought by fret-
ful whinnies and appealing-eyed gestures to win some
explanation of it all from his young master. Jimmy,
poor boy, was too preoccupied to notice him. Added to
his fear now came a return of sea-sickness, induced as
much by the stuffy atmosphere of the closed-up ship as
by its violent motion. He became very ill now—far
worse than he had been that first night out. So rough
was the ship’s motion that the bunk into which the Parson
had helped him could scarcely contain him.
What with the awful nausea and his dread fear that
the ship was going to sink, the boy was now in a terrible
state. In vain did the Parson try to calm him. In vain
did the inimitable Sammy Alexander, the only other per-
son below, seek by artifice and humour to divert his mind
from his troubles. His sickness and his fear grew worse
as slowly the day dragged on, with no abatement of the
awful din. Even his faith in those heroes of his, Captain
Hardy and the mate, began to wane. He had believed
those two great men capable of almost anything; yet
they seemed powerless in the face of the storm. And
j\fr Ormonde himself, so wise always, although so gentle
—could he do nothing now? Jimmy appealed to the
Parson.
“Can’t they do anything, Mr Ormonde? I’m so sick
and so frightened. Can’t Captain Hardy and Mr Smiles
do anything? Can’t they stop the ship?”
“No, James,” the Parson told him. “They can only be
patient ?nd do their best to guide her. They can do
nothing until the storm abates. They do not control the


wind and waves. God does that. He alone says to the
storm, ‘Be still.’ ”
“Why doesn’t He do it now, then, Mr Ormonde? I’m
so frightened—aren’t you? Will God let the ship sink,
do you think?”
“No, James, he will not, if we trust Him. No, lam
not afraid. And that is the great point, James. We
must not be afraid, for that is mistrusting God. We
must trust God and fear not. Then He will keep us
safe, and keep us well, too. We must look to God for
our protection and welfare, and never doubt His ability
and willingness to sustain us.”
“Well, Mr Ormonde, you ask God to help us and to
make me well. Ask Him to protect us from the storm.
Oh, I’m so sick.”
“Yes, James, I will. That is the first essential. You
have shown your willingness to have God help you. But
remember, words are not enough. Your desire must
come from the heart, and must be accompanied by a
faith so strong as to allow no shadow of doubt or fear
to come in. We must trust God implicitly as being all-
powerful, or else our prayer is vain. Now, do you do
that, James?”
“I—yes, I think I do, Mr Ormonde. I will do my best
to trust God, for I can see now that if He cannot stop
the storm, no one else can.”
Then the Parson prayed—prayed that peace might
come to this boy so dear to him; that he might know
all was well if left to God’s loving care.
A look of relief passed over the pale face of the sick
boy as the fervent words came from the lips of Gentle


Willie. He smiled up wanly into the Parson’s kindly
face; then closed his eyes. He was asleep. That was
the end of the storm so far as he was concerned. There,
tied in the reeling bunk by the Parson and Sammy Alex-
ander, he slept it through.
Ihe storm ended almost as suddenly as it had started.
The sun rose over a quickly subsiding sea, and long ere
it reached its zenith there was little to show that there
had ever been a storm; except, of course, on the ship,
where now the sun’s warmth was drawing the moisture
in a cloud of vapour from the saturated deck and rig-
ging. The schooner showed plentiful signs of rough
handling, but the only serious damage resulting from her
ordeal was the injury to Dan Graham, whose sturdy
physique would make little enough of a broken rib or
two; and the loss of the galley.
The latter, as has been said, had been swept with its
contents overboard, much to the chagrin of Sam Alex-
ander, the cook. The latter’s relief manifested itself in
a broad grin when he found that amongst the skipper’s
first considerations was the speedy erection of another
shelter for him and his culinary utensils. Nor, indeed,
was this movement unwelcome to the rest of the crew,
for the meagre “whacks” they had received from the
cook when they made their hurried dashes below during
the last twenty hours had been, of necessity, neither
palatable nor sustaining.
Sail was set again now, but both canvas and ropes
were harsh and heavy after their salty saturation, and
required much stretching and coaxing and taking up of


slack as they dried, before they fell into place in seemly
manner. Yet gradually the Mary Ellen found her old
shape and patiently started on her task of making up her
loss. For where yesterday morning she had been within
a day’s fair sailing of Auckland, so badly had she been
blown off her course that she was now nearly twice that.
The storm, it almost seemed, had come for the special
purpose of proving Hurricane’s words to Jimmy Brent—
that you have to take the bad with the good at sea. The
day, before it was many hours old, was as glorious as
had been those before the storm. The fresh sou’-west
breeze before which the Mary Ellen had bowled so
merrily along had now resumed duty, for all the world
as though it had, in a mischievous turn of mind, de-
cided to take a brief vacation. In short, there was
such a marvellous restoration of those former halcyon
days for the schooner and her crew that it was hard
to believe that there had ever been any interruption in
their harmonious way.
Once the washing had been hung out —as the Whaler
put it, referring to the setting of the wet, sails —and that
very essential department, the cook’s galley, had been
re-established on deck, most of the crew, who had seized
upon the cessation of the storm as an appropriate op-
portunity to take a long-deferred sleep, now assembled
aft by the wheel to bask in the sunshine and enjoy the
ease and luxury of well-earned leisure. Even the cook
felt the call of sun and fresh air and joined the party.
The outburst of jovial banter that greeted his arrival
left no doubt as to the popularity—especially at this time
—of the grinning Sammy, who, as a matter of course,


had for the last few hours been the hardest worked man
aboard.
“What yer got for dinner, Sambo?” “Corn beef an’
cabbige fer me.” “Fetch along a bucket o’ that mulli-
gatawny o’ yourn, Sam.” “When’s the bean-feast start,
cook?” —were hurled at him in a volley. Sam’s grin
widened as he squatted among the lounging group.
“Ah ain’t got no mulligatawny,” he said; “ain’t no
low-down co’n beef an’ cabbige, neither. De cook ob de
Merry Ellum am wukkin under grave disabilaments jes’
now, owin’ to shortige ob culnery necessities. I yearns
for dat travdlin’ meat shop Bill the Whaler done tol’ us
erbout. But, boys, Ah got the fines’ Fish stoo a-cookin’
you eber did see. Ain’t miffin’ wuff wile wot ain’t in dat
stoo—an’ all done Creole style. You-all is gwine git
you stummicks lined so’s dey’ll neber know dey eber had
hard tack in ’em no mo’. Dinnah am set for one-thirty
in de main dinin’-hall, an’ de survus will be table d’hote.
Dat jes’ gibs you gemmen ten minutes to dress for de
occasion.”
There was a wild cheer at this announcement from
the cook. They did not wait to dress for dinner. In-
stead, the party broke up suddenly, to reassemble forth-
with in the mess-room below. In what seemed an in-
credibly short time they all returned to the deck, their
“stummicks well lined” with Sam’s Irish stew, their
tongues loosened to song and anecdote by the good
humour and contentment it induced.
“It’s a ill wind,” remarked Crazy Bill, after the com-
pany had sung all the chanteys they could think of—had
rolled down to Rio, and blown the man down till he could


rise no more —“it’s a ill wind that blows nobody any
good, as the old proverb says. Biowed if I ain’t almost
glad we got that storm, I feel so comfortable like after it.
But she was a beauty while she lasted. The toughest
thing for her length I ever seen. Nearly settled the
A r aiy Ellen !”
Pete took the proffered bait readily. “Wot!” he ex-
claimed. “Call that a blow? Blim-e, you ain’t never
been in a storm, you ain’t. That one wouldn’t ruffle yer
bloomin’ ’air, to some I’ve bin in.”
“Down in Patagonia, Pete?” someone interjected.
“Yus, dahn in Patagonia —one of ’em. Orf the ’Orn
it wos, aboard the four-masted barque Storm Queen.
Blew fer a week, that un. Lost orl our bloomin’ boats
an’ four men. Me meself washed overboard four times
and washed back again four times. Then arter all, the
bloomin’ ship sunk an’ orl ’ands drahnded but me an’ the
mate.”
“What happened to you two?” Dick Patten asked.
“Washed ashore, we wus, on that in’ospitable coast;
an’ lived on bloomin’ seaweed an’ raw winkles fer a
month till we wus picked up.”
There was a suggestive silence for a moment.
“Eh, Pete, go easy,” the Whaler warned him. “That’s
a good yarn; but you can’t tell me yous two fellers
could stand a week of a storm like that, an’ swim ashore
on top of it, and then live!”
“Don’t yer believe me?” his mate demanded hotly,
“We ain’t orl ’ad a ride in a bloomin’ wile, or on one,
I know; an’ min’ yer I don’t daht the truth of yer story


fer one minnit. But others ’as ’ad hadventures besides
you, old bloke. W’y, I could tell yer ”
Dick Patten, Dan Graham, and one or two others
urged him to go on.
“Well,” continued the offended one, “as I was sayin’,
I could tell yer some hadventures as wouldn’t ’arf make
yer sit up and take notice. There wus the time I went
with that explorin’ party dahn to the Antarctic lookin’
for the South Pole. We travels abaht a thousand mile
overland an’ then builds a ice ’ouse to spend the winter
in. The commaunder sends me with a sledge party aht
from the ice ’ut w’ere we wus froze in to make a ’undred-
mile dash fer the pole. Sez ’e, T’m sendin’ you, ’Awkins,
because I know yer can do it!’ ‘Ay, ay, sir,’ sez I,
‘l’ll get that there pole or bust!’ We gits caught in a
blizzard, an’ wile we’re gropin’ abaht I slips dahn a great
ice crack. Me mates thinks Pm a gonner an’ goes
back to the ’ut fer ’elp. They comes an’ rescues me, after
I bin in the ice two days. Froze stiff as a bloomin’
poker, I was; ’ard as a rock. They carts me orf to the
’ut an’ soaks me fer abaht fifteen hours in boilin’ water
to thaw me aht. . . .
“An’ then there was the time I crossed the ’eart of
Africa with Dr Livingstone ”
The Parson gently interrupted him; “Oh, I say, really
you know, you could not possibly have been with Dr
Livingstone. Why, Livingstone made his memorable
journey into equatorial Africa long before ”
“Nah, look ’ere, me good Parson. Don’t you talk
abaht things yer don’t understand. Lor’ lumme, you
wasn’t even horn then. . . . As I wus sayin’, I wus


crossin’ Africa with Livingstone. Well, w’en we wus
in the middle of the Sahary Desert, I gets separated
from the party—me an’ two others. Blim-e, it wasn’t
’arf ’ot, neither. Well, we ’as no water, an’ after wan-
drin abaht fer three days, aht we goes to it. They found
us orlright; spread aht in the blazin’ sun on the sand,
our ’ands clasped in a larst partin’ grip. Shrivelled up
like three dried apples, we wus. They takes us along
to the caravan with ’em, an’ w’en they reaches the first
water, which was the Limpopo River, they shots us in
an’ lets us soak, moored to the bank. Three days, an’
we wus swelled aht to our natural bloomin’ size, an’ as
right as rain.”
All present had to admit after that that Tall Yarn
Pete had indeed had some remarkable experiences in
his time. At the same time there seemed to be a silent,
tacit understanding among them that he had contributed
enough to the programme for the present occasion. Sam
Smiles saw an easy way out, and took it.
‘What about you, Dan Graham,” he said. “I’ll bet
you have some good yarns up your sleeve. You couldn’t
help it, after your varied experience. And yet Tve
never heard you tell one.”
The implied invitation to Dan to tell a yarn received
general support, and thus encouraged, in spite of his
damaged ribs, he rather hesitatingly began:
“Well, I don’t know about yarns, as yarns go. Any-
thing I had to tell would be just a plain story of some
experience I’ve actually had; and as Mr Smiles has said,
I have, through no fault of mine, had a most varied
career—for a man still young. I started out from Dub-


lin as a youth before the mast, and by twenty I was an
A.B. Since then, between spells of sea-going, I have
followed occupations many and varied, and in almost
every part of the world where white men go. I’ve shot
kangaroos in Queensland, dug kauri gum in New Zea-
land, been gold fossicking in Western Australia, trapped
for furs in Canada, tried my hand at ranching on the
prairies, and did a year on a blackbirding ship here in
the South Seas, There have been many incidents that
1 think would make good stories. I will just tell you
one, which, it happens, is about someone else.
“Five or six years ago I left Vancouver, where I
had been wharf-labouring, and drifted up north to the
Skeena River. 1 got a job there in a salmon cannery,
tallying fish at one hundred dollars a month and board.
It was an interesting job, and 1 enjoyed the three months
I stayed there. Amongst other things, I liked talking to
the Indians who worked about the cannery—Siwashes,
they call them on the coast there. The Indians named
me Um-sh-wah, meaning a drifting log, because they
knew I was a wanderer. One young buck I got in touch
with had, unlike the majority, been to school down the
coast, and could talk good English. Often when there
was no fish running, I’d get him in a quiet corner of
the can loft and coax him to tell me about the Indians’
totems, their legends and their word-of-mouth story his-
tory. Here is one story he told me. You can take it
for what it is worth.
“ T am a Haida Indian,’ he said, ‘from the Queen
Charlotte Islands over there. My people were the
greatest warriors on this coast before white men came.


They went out in their war canoes and made battle with
all the coast tribes to the north and to the south. One
day, the chief’s war canoe, with the chief’s son and
many warriors in it, was caught in a storm and blown
far from land. One moon passed—then two —and the
canoe never came back. My people mourned for the
warriors, for they thought they were lost. Their story
was carved on the totem poles.
“‘Many, many moons passed; then one day—what
was that? A big canoe came out of the mist, with many
men in it. My people were much afraid. They thought
the men were spirits, and ran. When they saw them
come on land they came back to fight. Lo! it was the
long-lost war-canoe, with the chief’s son and the war-
riors all safe!’
“ ‘Where had they been ?’ I asked him.
“ ‘Listen,’ he said. ‘The storm blew the canoe far
away from the shore and they saw no land. Fog came
upon them. They were lost. They took their paddles
and went the way where they thought the land was. They
paddled through fog many days. They came to small
islands—then more, but all too small. More and more
they paddled. Only rocky islands they saw, barren
shores with no shelter. Then at last, when they were
near death, they came to a great country, with many
people—many as the stars. The warriors were weak;
they bowed their heads for the strange people to kill
them. But no, they treated them with kindness and car-
ried them from the canoe. The strange people had sing-
ing voices and long tails on their heads. When they
feasted, they sat round dead dogs, eating them with little


sticks! They were good to the warriors. They cared
for them and gave them much food. They made big
Potlatch.* When my people had grown strong and
wanted to come home they gave them dried fish for food
and showed them the way to go. , . . Bye and bye, after
many moons, they came back home as I have told you.
That story came down from my father’s father’s father.
What do you think, Um-sh-wah?’
“‘By Jove! You don’t suggest they actually reached
China?’ I asked him in amazement.
“ ‘What else would you think,’ he coolly replied.
‘Where else would they see Chinamen with pigtails eat-
ing rice but in China. There were no Chinamen in this
country then; not even white men. The first Chinamen
came since I remember, and this story is 150 years old!’
“So there you are mates. That is the story as the
Indian told me. May seem a bit far-fetched, I admit;
but before you pass an opinion go and glance at the
map —Do you mind if we look at your map, Captain
Hardy?—and follow those Aleutian Islands that string
out across the North Pacific from Alaska to Asia.
Darned if it doesn’t seem to me that those Haida Indians
made that trip!”
* A gathering of neighbouring tribes of coast Indians for feasting
and exchanging of gifts.—J. L.


CHAPTER VIII
THE STORY OF THE SYDNEY LASS
Two days more and the Three Kings hove in sight, and
yet another two and the Mary Ellen had passed between
them and North Cape and made her way south to Haur-
aki Gulf. She anchored sufficiently far out from the
waterfront at Auckland to prevent undue publicity.
Little work was to be done on the ship, for, the weather
having remained favourable, it had all been done already
—and that without effort on the part of the crew —with
a view to having their time in port free. To Willie
Ormonde and the cook, —as being custodian of the ship’s
purse and of the food department respectively—fell the
job of getting in what few requirements there were in
the way of fresh provisions and extra water. Apart
from that the men were given entire freedom, after
they had arranged among themselves for some of their
number to take turn about to remain aboard as watchman.
Captain Hardy gave the men free use of the Dot, and
bade them enjoy to the full the sights and pleasures of
the pretty town; reminding them, however, that any man
who returned drunk would not be allowed on board.
Then, smartly arrayed in his best shore clothes and
accompanied by Jimmy Brent and the indispensable Mr


Smiles, who looked pitiably uncomfortable in unfamiliar
collar and hard hat, he set out on his search for Mr
McEachern, to whom he would pay the respects of their
mutual friend Mr Strachan, and from whom he fondly
hoped he would hear something regarding the move-
ments of the Brents —especially of his dear one, Dorothy.
Although it incurred a long walk, no difficulty was
experienced in finding Mr McEachern’s home, for that
gentleman, it soon became manifest, was a well-known
and highly thought of citizen of Auckland. His home
was some distance out of the town, high up on the green
slopes of Mount Eden, and commanded a glorious view
not only of hill and vale, but of the two oceans —the
Tasman on one side, Hauraki Gulf and the main Pacific
on the other.
Like his friend, Mr Strachan, Mr McEachern was a
Scot, but unlike him, although his speech was cultured
and fine, he retained markedly the broad burr of his native
heather. This, it seemed —if that could be—added to the
warmth with which he greeted his visitors, bidding them
regard his house as their home as long as they found it
convenient and desirable to do so.
“And,” he added, “if your stay must necessarily be
brief, as you say, Captain Hardy, let’s mak’ the best of it.
Dinner is just now ready, and while we are eating it per-
haps you will be good enough to tell me all you can
aboot my friend, Mr Strachan, whom I dearly long to see,
and from whom the bearer of greetings is a rare visitor
and will aye be a welcome one.”
The meal was a sumptuous one for the visitors, as the
first shore meal usually is to the seagoing man. For the


host it was doubly so, because conversation pregnant with
deepest interest to him added a piquant sauce to the
victuals. All the while they ate he plied Captain Hardy
with questions about not only Mr Strachan, but numer-
ous other shipping identities of Sydney and other parts
of Australia, with all of whom apparently, merely be-
cause he came from Sydney, the skipper was expected
to have a full acquaintance. Captain Hardy did his best
to satisfy his host’s exacting inquiries, secretly longing
at the same time for an opportunity to introduce the sub-
ject so near his own heart.
Not until the protracted meal was over and the three
men had taken themselves to the veranda to smoke in
the cool of evening did it come. Then, suitable enter-
tainment elsewhere having been found for the boy, he
told Mr McEachern his story, already briefly outlined in
Mr Strachan’s letter, of his discovery of Jimmy Brent
and the subsequent developments that had prompted in
him a desire to ascertain the whereabouts —if they were
still living—of the lad’s father and sister.
Mr McEachern was deeply interested from the start.
He expressed his willingness to reveal to Captain Hardy
—commended as he was from Mr Strachan —anything he
knew regarding Captain Brent and his family; though,
he admitted, there was a possibility that some of the
details, through lapse of time, might not be as clear as
he would desire.
“Captain James Brent and I were great friends,” he
said. “From the time I first came out from Scotland
it was my privilege to be closely associated with him,
first in Sydney, out of which port he at that time sailed,


and afterwards here, when I removed my business head-
quarters to Auckland. Largely on account of our friend-
ship—and, I might add, our mutual interests in the Islands
trade—he then decided to make Auckland his home port,
and brought his wife and daughter to live here. From
then till his loss at sea—or shall we say, optimistically,
his reported loss—the Brents were frequent visitors here.
Both my wife and I —who, I grieve to say, by her sudden
passing soon after we heard the sad news, left me a lone
and broken man —regarded them with more than ordinary
affection. We were naturally much grieved to hear that
the Sydney Lass had gone down and did our best to
prove our friendship in a practical manner by helping
Mrs Brent in every possible way in her time of sorrow.
“I ought to mention here, perhaps, that just at the
time the Sydney Lass sailed on her last and fatal voyage,
the daughter, Dorothy, left home —for Wellington, we
understood, to visit friends there. Delicacy forbade our
making close inquiry, because it was known that Dorothy
had a suitor somewhere in New Zealand, and we thought
it probable she was visiting his folks.
“That was the last I ever saw of Dorothy. Later we
heard of the loss of her father’s ship. Mrs Brent shortly
afterwards left Auckland, taking her baby son with
her ”
“They had a baby son!” exclaimed Captain Hardy.
“Oh, yes, indeed they had a baby son; and the wee
laddie was the pride and joy of Captain Brent’s heart.
. . . As I was saying, Mrs Brent left Auckland with her
baby, and I have never to this day learned where she
went. I was at the time passing through my own dark


vale of sorrow, and on that ground alone can so close
a friend as myself be excused for not watching her move-
ments more closely. When later I did try to locate her,
my most diligent inquiries failed.
“It is scarcely necessary for me to add, Captain Hardy,
that I am deeply interested in, and thankful for, the
information you have now given me; and that I am
thoroughly convinced that yon laddie is Captain Brent’s
son. lam only sorry you did not find his wife, too. That
you will ever find Brent himself alive I take the liberty
of doubting gravely; but I do appreciate the honour you
have done me by disclosing the secret of your mission.
Despite my lack of optimism, I pray God that you
may succeed not only in finding Jim Brent, but also,
through some inscrutable way of his, in finding his daugh-
ter Dorothy also. If I can help you in any way, jf my
money—or my prayers —are of any avail to you, they are
yours. God bless the Mary Ellen and her company.”
Although Mr McEachern’s visitors spent the night at
his home, they did not avail themselves of his hospitality
to the extent that it was tendered. Captain Hardy’s heart
and mind were set on one thing only—that was, to find
out something of Dorothy. He had other acquaintances
in Auckland, some of whom at least must have known
Captain Brent, He was determined to leave no stone
unturned, and to take no risk of missing information
wherever it was available. The trouble was, it was so long
since he had visited Auckland, that he now knew but
vaguely or not at all the whereabouts of these friends.
As a consequence, the finding of them was a wearying
task. During the days that followed, the patience of the


faithful and long-suffering Hurricane was fully tested.
So, indeed, were his legs, for the skipper—sea-going man
though he was—now that he actually found himself on
the scene of his beloved’s last known activities and within
reach, as it were, of tangible evidence of her, seemed to
have become imbued with a supernatural propensity for
walking.
Hut nothing came of the search. Few of the friends they
succeeded in finding knew any more of the movements of
the Brent family than did the skipper himself; none as
much as did Mr McEachern. So that, having expended the
week he had planned to lie at Auckland and arrive the
day on which he had ordered the crew to be aboard, he
found himself ready to leave little wiser than he had come.
He and Hurricane, too, as a result of their walking, which
since the visit to Mr McEachern they had done without
the boy, were now thoroughly tired, and one of the two,
at any rate, was somewhat dejected as the result of the
discouragement they had encountered. Hurricane noticed
this, and was surprised and not at all pleased at this, the
first sign of weakness he ever remembered noticing in his
shipmate.
“Come on, skipper,” he said to him, rather sharply.
“It’s not like you to let a thing get you down and worry
you. I know what’s the matter. I can read you like a
book. All the time you’ve been walking the soles off my
hoots I’ve been watching you. It’s just this, that while
the matter was a distant and abstract consideration it
didn’t trouble yon at all; just a pleasant thing to think of.
But as soon as yon find yourself on the scent, as it were,
you allow yourself to become all heated up and excited,


like the kiddies playing hide-and-seek. (You know how
they prompt the seeker when he gets near to the hidden
one by calling to him, warm—warmer —hot! O-oh, he’s
nearly found him now.) ... In your game of chasings
you’ve failed for the time being. You find you’ve been
too optimistic, and the disappointment takes the wind out
of your sails. The sooner you’re under way, skipper, and
filling your lungs with good strong sea air, the sooner
you’ll get over it.
“It’s just a spasm of love-sickness; just a touch of an
old complaint, mate. You can’t afford to feel that way.
You’ve started out on a man’s job; you’ve signed on a
dozen good men and true, to help you through with it;
now it becomes you to get on with it. The sooner you’re
out of here, the sooner you’ll do that.
“The Dot is aboard and Patten is stowing her snug.
The men are all aboard but the cook. He went ashore
in the dinghy. He’ll be here any time now, for it will be
dark before long, and I’ll warrant that nigger won’t be
far away from the ship after dark. We were to pick up
Farley here. You particularly wanted him, too; but we
can’t wait for him. He should have been here on time.
The wind suits us and the tide is running out. We’ll sail
now, captain”
The lined face of the wiry mate had taken on an even
harder expression than usual as he spoke. He regarded
his shorter friend in a manner that showed clearly that for
the time being he was in command. Captain Hardy was
quick to see that his friend was right. Reason rather
than rank forced him to capitulate.
“You’re right, Hurricane,” he agreed. “Right as usual.


Thank you, old pal. Let her go then. Suva next port
for the Mary Ellen”
The acquiescence of the captain was scarcely necessary.
As though the mate had during the conversation secretly
touched a magic button, active steps had already been
taken to set sail. Without apparent orders, the capstan
had been manned and the anchor was clanking up. The
sails had mysteriously begun to take shape and the main
sail was being hauled up before his eyes. It now hung
half up, its bulge flapping prematurely in the impatient
breeze.
Somewhat abashed, the skipper muttered something
about not being master of his own ship, and was turning
to walk away when, right under his nose, a seaman’s bag
came tumbling over the side and rolled to his feet. Then
from the same quarter appeared a face, as symbolic of the
map of Ireland as a human face could well be; and it in
turn was closely followed by the black one of Sammy
Alexander.
“Dere’s Mistah Smiles, de mate, over dere,” he directed
when he and the new-comer had scrambled to the deck.
“You repo’ts to him an’ gits you med’cine. An’ ef you
ain’t too proud to take edvice f’um a cullud man, you
keep you tongue still w’en he sasses you. Dat same Mistah
Smiles am got a’ awful wollop w’en de ’casion neceverates
it.”
It was the belated Mick Farley. The mate did “sass”
him a little. He was just in the mood.
“You’re quite sure you want to sail in this ship, are
you?” he asked Mick sarcastically. “There’s no hurry at
all. Next week would do as well, old chap.” But lack


of opposition disarmed him. He continued in a quieter
tone, “Come aft to the skipper and sign on.”
Captain Hardy filled in a form, which Farley signed.
“Came very near missing us, Farley,” he said. “You’re
running late. We’re just getting under way.”
“So Oi see, Capthain Hardy, an glad Oi am ye didn’t
lave before Oi got here. It’s an awful shtruggle Oi’ve
had to do it. It’s a foine counthry, this Noo Zalend. It’s
so loike ould Oireland, wid its hills an’ dales an’ beautiful
lakes, an’ no shnakes at all, that wan gets so engrossed
an’ taken up wid its beauties that he forgets the call to
dooty an’ wurrk. But Oi wouldn’t have missed this voyage
wid you, Captain Hardy, for all the wurrld, aven though
Oi haven’t the sloightest oidea where ye’re goin’ or whin
you’re cornin’ back.”
Mick lugged his bag for’ard and made his way below
to find a berth for himself and stow his kit. By the time
he had got fixed up the ship was under way and heading
for the open sea. Coming on deck, he almost collided with
Dan Graham, still, by the mate’s orders, taking it easy for
the sake of his damaged ribs. Exclamations of surprise
signalized that the two had met before.
“Well,” ejaculated Dan, “blowed if it isn’t the Irish-
man. Remember me, mate —down on the gum diggings ?”
“Sure it’s the Oirishman, Danny me boy—Michael Far-
ley by name. . . . Remimber yez—Oi do that, though it’s
foive years ago it was. An’ why shouldn’t Oi, Danny
Graham, whin ye dug gum alongside me an’ slipt in the
nixt tint to me but wan, along wid the big Austrian. An’
you the same blood as me an’ hailin’ from the same ould
sod ”


Mick had waxed enthusiastic, and his handshaking
had become so vigorous that Dan’s sore ribs rebelled. He
was obliged to call a halt, and to give an explanation for so
doing.
“Funny thing,” he resumed, “there was always some-
thing familiar about the cut of you, Irish; and yet I never
guessed you were a sailor.”
“Sailor, indade! An’ Oi was wan before ye was borrn.
Mick Farley a sailor? An’ him an A.B. in Her Majesty’s
Royal Navy for twilve years. An’ him on H.M.S. Cal-
liope! Did ye ever hear of the Calliope, Danny boy?”
“Yes,” said Graham, “but I’ve heard more about the
coal that saved her. I worked mining it for a month
down there at Westport once when I was broke. Hard
graft it was. The New Zealanders call it “the coal that
saved the Calliope.”
“Coal that saved the Calliope !” Mick retorted with dis-
gust. “The coal she used, it was. But coal niver saved
her. ’Twas min that saved the Calliope —Captain Kane
an’ his min, Danny; an’ before ye stands wan of thim
same—Michael Farley, A.8., Royal Navy, retoired!”
After such a loud acclamation of himself, the ship’s
company needed no introduction to Mick Farley, Prior
to his arrival only two of them had known him—the skip-
per and, as now proved, Dan Graham. Quite undesignedly
—for although given to loud speaking he was by no means
a boaster —Mick had let it be fully known to all on board
that a new member of the crew had arrived; one, too,
who had at least one memorable incident of his life to
relate and be proud of. Yet in this he differed from
Crazy Bill the Whaler; for where the latter’s story, thrill-


ing though it was, seemed to lack certain essentials to
establish its authenticity, the incident with which Mick
desired to be identified was one which would stand the
test of investigation; one which, indeed, constituted an
epic, association with which would honour any man.
Henceforth it was to be as inseparable from his name as
was the whale yarn from that of Bill Ardous. Hence-
forth he was to be as undeniably Calliope Mick as that
noisy and erratic Australian was The Whaler,
Quite appropriately, the Mary Ellen was slowly making
her way into the very waters over which the terrible gale
of ’B9 had raged. Samoa itself was even now not so
far over there to the north-east. In such propitious cir-
cumstances it was inevitable that the fast-grown popularity
of Mick should culminate in the telling of his story to his
shipmates. Young Jimmy Brent, always alert for the new
yarn-spinner, brimful by now with the romance of these
wonderful and to him new-found seas, was largely respon-
sible for the Irishman’s formal debut on the schooner’s
stage. As usual, he worked through his friend and guide,
the Parson.
“Mr Ormonde,” he said excitedly, as soon as he could
gain his ear, “that’s the same story you told me, isn’t
it? The Calliope and Captain Kane. But I thought that
happened a long, long time ago—ever so many years. Oh,
do get him to tell his story.”
The Parson promised to try. Meantime Jimmy con-
tinued his efforts to interest the others in the matter.


CHAPTER IX
IN THE HAUNTS OF BULLY HAYES
Three days later, in the cool of a balmy evening—the
Mary Ellen scarcely moving with just enough breeze to
answer the skipper’s whistle and operate his dog-vane on
the rail near by—those of the ship’s company not other-
wise occupied gathered on the after-deck so that Pete,
who was at the wheel, could share; and Mick Farley told
his story:
“ ’Twas siven years ago —early in February eighty-noine
—we arroived in Apia Harbour, H.M.S, Calliope, Captain
Kane. The Germans had some throuble wit the Samoans,
an’ they had brought three warships along to settle the
matther. The Yankees had brought three of theirs to see
that the Deutchers didn’t take too big a sloice of the
oilands, an’ the Calliope had come to see that nayther of
them took too much.
“On March 17 —that was a Froiday—all siven ships
was moored head and stern facin’ the enthrance. ’Twas
wan of thim coral-reef harrbours that’s good whin ye don’t
want a harrbour an’ no good at all whin ye do. The air
was so shtill an’ thick you could feel it. The clouds was
banked up and black as ink, an’ the glass was failin’ fast.
Captain Kane, the good sayman, made ready. He had the


yards and top-masts struck. ’Twas no time at all for
canvas an’ shticks. ’Twas a job for shtame. That noight
at tin o’clock the big blow started; an’ holy shmoke! it
did blow. All hands was poiped on deck. All the ships
was shtrainin’ at their anchors, an’ runnin’ their engines
full shpade ahead at the same time, to keep off the reef.
“The Eber wint furrst—wan uv the Dutchmen; then
her mate, the Adler. They had their bottoms torrn out
on the reef an’ sank. ’Twas hell let loose that night,
Nixt morrnin’ saw foive vessels shtill battlin’ for loife.
The Calliope’s boats was all gone —smashed to shmither-
eens—an’ only wan anchor was holdin’. So Captain Kane
decided ’twas toime to get a move on. ’Twas now or
nivver. He ordered the anchor cut away and called for
every ounce of shtame the engine-room could give. They
gave it to him—those boys of ours wurrkin’ loike hell
down there in the stokehold. An’ drowned loike rats in
a trap they’d been if she’d gone down.
“Into the teeth of the gale she wint, an’ shlowly made
her way towards the intrance. Gradually, inch by inch,
she fought her way ahead, wit the seas shwapin’ her from
stem to stern. Just whin she looked loike gettin’ out the
Yankee flagship blocked the fairway. That was the
Trenton. She was tossin’ and tumblin’ in the say wid her
foires out an’ dead as a log. She reared up on top of a
big say an’ came shlidin’ down on top of us. ’Twas all
up wid the Calliope, thinks we. We’re bound for Davy
Jones’s to fade the crabs. But no; divil a bit of it. Cap-
tain Kane takes the Calliope under the Trenton’s lee, and
just as we passed her she rolls over on her soide, to the
might, thank God; an’ the Calliope rolls to the lift. We


just shcraped by. The Trenton sank thin, an’ the Calliope
shtruggled on an’ foinally made the open say.
“We shtayed out there an’ rode out the gale. All hands
from Captain Kane down was worrn out. We sploiced
the main-brace—sploiced it in siveral places. ’Twas badly
shattered. There was fashions of rum that day, an’ the
man that had the servin’ of it out kept his thumb out of
the measure, that he did.
“Whin we came back to the harrbour on the Tuesday
there was nivver a ship afloat. The three Germans was
poiled up on the reef, an’ the three Americans on the
shore. All batthered wrecks. The Calliope was the only
wan lift aloive of seven. How many good min wint down
in thim boats Oi don’t know. They was all brave min.
The British ship just did something the others didn’t do
—that’s all. Captain Kane made a name for himself an’
the Calliope that will never be forgotten.
“Whin we got back on our station at Sydney, they made
a great fuss about it all. The good paple couldn’t do
enough for us. We was the whoite-haired boys!”
The new-comer was the man of the hour for some time
to come. Mick’s thrilling experience on the Calliope was
the chief topic amongst the crew. In answer to questions
from them he supplied embellishments which further en-
hanced his narrative and his own glory. The Whaler and
Tall Yarn Pete, hitherto the chief entertainers, figuratively
took back seats for the time being; and they were not at
all pleased at having to do so. A close observer of their
demeanour could not fail to detect that they were jealous
of Calliope Mick,
“What beats me,” said Dan Graham, when one evening


several of the men were carrying on a spasmodic conver-
sation on the subject during a game of cards in the mess-
room—“what beats me is that I could work alongside Mick
here for a couple of months and never know he was a
sailor even, let alone a Calliope man. But then, it was
hardly the place to expect to find a sailorman. For me
it was different; Fm just a wanderer—always have been.
But a bluejacket from the Royal Navy, fresh from such
distinguished service as that—digging kauri gum in Maori-
land ”
“It’s a insult to sailorin’! It’s draggin’ the seaman’s
perfession in the mud!”
Dan looked up suddenly at the interruption. Mick
looked up too, surprised, wondering who had spoken. It
was Pete, and his accent should have betrayed him. But
for some inscrutable reason Mick seemed to think it was
the Parson who had made the remark. At any rate, he
flew into a sudden rage, and it was at the innocent Mr
Ormonde he directed his fiery retort.
“You snivellin’, psalm-singin’ skoi-poilot,” he snarled. “A
man ought to wring your miserable nick an’ throw ye
overboarrd, so he ought.”
All present were amazed at this outburst of bitterness
on Calliope’s part. It was the more surprising because it
was unlike him. It seemed almost as if he had seized
upon a flimsy pretext to give vent to some silently nutured
aversion of his to the Parson, or, more likely, to preachers
in general. The Parson, though taken aback for the
moment, was by no means withered as Mick apparently
had intended he should be. He quickly regained his com-
posure.


“It was not I who spoke, Mick,” he said calmly; “and
even if it had been, your remark would have done no harm.
That is, to me personally. But for the insult you have
gratuitously offered to the holy calling I so dearly espouse
I put myself humbly forward as its defender and cham-
pion, and now request that you withdraw your splenetic
remarks and make such apologies as you deem meet and
proper.”
This cool challenge from the Parson only added to the
fire of Mick’s anger. He turned on the gentle one a look
of withering scorn, as though he regarded him as too
insignificant to notice seriously; then burst out in loud,
sarcastic laughter.
“Very well, then,” continued the Parson, “let’s go on
deck. We’ll settle this in your way.”
He led the way up, followed readily enough by Calliope,
the others trailing behind, still bewildered. The mate,
seeing the procession emerge on deck, was quick to sense
that something was amiss. The Parson gave him details
in answer to his inevitable query.
“Well,” he said, “it’s a pity you couldn’t settle it peace-
ably. But if there’s no other way—well, get it over in
the good old-fashioned style. But wait a bit. The Par-
son’s hardly a match for you, Mick Farley. Why, it
would be like taking pie from a kiddie for you. Would
have been bigger on your part to give way to him. But
if you must fight, fight someone that will give you a fair
go. . . . You stand by, Mr Ormonde. I’ll fight Mick,”
“No, not arf you won’t,” broke in the Cockney. “It’s
orl my fault, Mr Smiles, an’ I ain’t agoin’ ter let any man


IN THE HAUNTS OF BULLY HAYES 97
fight my bloomin’ battles; an’ I ain’t no fightin’ man
neither.”
The Parson held up his hand in protest. “Please, please,
gentlemen,” he said. “Pm so thankful to you both for
wishing to intercede, but really, this is my little affair. I
beg you —let us settle it ourselves.”
Every man in the ship was now present, except the
man at the wheel. Even he was present in spirit, for he
was paying far more attention to the proceedings oh the
for’ard deck than to his steering. Captain Hardy had
come along, too, and with him young Jimmy, who, once
he realized what was about to happen, grew very fright-
ened and agitated. The boy had by this time come to
regard the rugged navy man as a hero at whose feet he
could worship; but now that this sudden challenge to
his loyalty had come, his deep affection for the Parson
won. Trembling with fear and half-crying, he clung to
his friend’s arm, while he looked appealingly, almost be-
seechingly, to Captain Hardy and the mate.
Hurricane was still inclined to stop the fight; but the
skipper touched him on the arm and winked knowingly.
“Don’t you worry about the Parson, Hurricane,” he
said in an undertone; “he can look after himself.”
So indeed it proved. The next ten minutes were brim-
ful of action, and at no single moment of that time did
the Parson appear to be uncomfortable or in any way at
a loss. Calliope Mick was thick-set and powerful. He
looked a formidable opponent. The Parson, on the other
hand, was all that the epithet Gentle Willie implied. Pain-
fully slight of figure, pale of face, he looked a hopelessly
inadequate match for the navy man. All present except


the captain at first felt sorry for him. To them his action
in challenging the Irishman was one of innocent fool-
hardiness—a suicidal step for him. But it only required
a moment or two to disillusion them —and Mick, too.
It was no longer Gentle Willie they beheld. Not that
he had lost his gentility. He still showed that. But it
was a gentility, a finish, born of science. The first round
showed plainly that what he lacked in weight and power
he more than made up for in speed and skill. He had
learned more than theology at college back there in old
England; that was evident. He was a finished boxer.
The broadsides hurled at him by his antagonist, any one
of which would have annihilated him had the shots landed,
were evaded by quickness and agility. He pranced around
Mick with the lightness of a cat, parrying his sledge-
hammer blows with annoying ease. Now and again he
tapped him lightly, aggravating him to more strenuous
effort. Not once did Mick reach him. Gradually the
Parson wore him out, till Mick was puffing and blowing
in obvious distress. Moreover, he lost his temper and his
head, and began to fight wildly. The Parson coolly watched
his opportunity, and at length, apparently feeling the game
had gone far enough, he sent a lightning left to Mick’s
face, bringing him almost to his knees. Before he could
recover, a right uppercut to the chin settled the matter,
and Mick went to the deck.
The fight was ended. The Irishman rose some seconds
later and looked around dazedly. Then he extended his
hand to the victor. The act met with the approval and
applause of all present.
“ ’Tis the spirit of the navy,” he said. “The bist man


won. I was mishtaken, Parson. Ye’re no snivellin’ skoi-
poilat. Ye’re a betther man than Oi am, that’s what ye
are, an’ ye have the apologies ye asked for.”
“Well said, Farley,” commended the captain. “The
Irish in you is satisfied, and you’re man enough to admit
defeat. Now let’s hope you’ll be good friends.
“While we are on the subject it might be as well for
me to remind you all that this is a peaceful mission, and
too important to allow of any fighting among ourselves.
On this ship we are all equal; no one man is of more
consequence than the other. The Parson, as you choose
to call him, the cook, the Whaler and the Calliope man
have exactly the same rights and pay, and must be equally
respected. In future let us have no disparaging remarks,
or someone will lose the number of his mess. . . . But I
do not think we have cause to fear any further trouble on
that score. We have left the cold water latitudes behind
us, and from now on our voyage lies through parts that
stand for full life. We shall be too busy to fight, I hope.
“Palm-trees, warm sun, romantic islands beckon us.
These very seas breathe of romance and stirring adven-
ture, They are the scene of big things and daring deeds.
They were the haunt of Bully Hayes and bold men like
him. The Mary Ellen is a free lance this time, and her
company is free to share in whatever comes her way.
We shall need good comradeship and co-operation. So
let us refrain from squabbles and join together in the
glorious life and spirit of the South Seas.”
The captain’s firm but conciliatory speech brushed away
any little traces of ill-feeling that still may have lurked,
and met with the full approval of all. Captain Hardy


was immensely popular with all hands. Calliope Mick’s
call for cheers for him won a rousing response. Then for
the most part the group dispersed.
Jimmy Brent had now the opportunity he had been
eagerly waiting for to draw the Parson aside and speak to
him alone. They walked off aft to where Bill Ardous
had just taken over the wheel. Captain Hardy and the
mate also sauntered that way.
“By cripes, Mr Ormonde,” Jimmy said admiringly,
“you surprised ’em all—and me, too. I thought he was
going to hurt you, and I was hoping the captain would
stop it. But you licked him, didn’t you? My word, I
never thought you could fight. Why don’t you teach me
to box, Mr Ormonde? Then I could look after myself
and deal it out when anyone insulted me —or you. Will
you teach me, Mr Ormonde?. . . . What did Captain
Hardy mean about all the things that happen on these
seas, Mr Ormonde? And Bully Hayes—who’s Bully
Hayes?”
“Bully Hayes was a pirate,” replied the Parson, “or so
it is said. I only know of him from hearsay, of course.
He was a sea captain who owned his own ship—a very
fast sailer she was reputed to be—and traded among the
Islands. Traded and did other things, I understand. From
what I can learn, James, he started as a legitimate trader;
but learning that there were easier and quicker ways of
amassing wealth, he developed into a sea robber. He
got a daredevil crew together, and soon became the terror
of the seas hereabout, pilfering barefacedly from the
islands, boarding and looting any vessel he could overtake
and master.


“With his very intimate knowledge of even the smaller
and little-known islands in the South Seas here and the
speed of his ship, it was easy for him to evade capture;
while he could waylay and overpower most of the small
trading craft with ease and plunder them with impunity.
It is some years since he roved the seas. I never heard
of his being captured, and I have no idea what became of
him. Probably when the navy took to sending an occa-
sional gun-boat from Sydney to cruise around the islands
he deemed it discreet to retire.
“Of course Bully Hayes was not a bloodthirsty, mur-
dering pirate like those we read about in books —Captain
Kidd and his kind. He didn’t sink ships and kill people
“Eh, don’t you believe it, Mr Parson,” broke in the
Whaler, who had been taking it all in from where he stood
at the wheel. “They’s heaps of things Bully Hayes done
that ain’t writ in books. If you’d ’a’ bin with us on the
Sydney Lass that time he overhauled us with that brass
cannon of his’n, an’ seen what he done to Captain ”
“Port your helm there, Ardous,” suddenly exclaimed
Captain Hardy, springing forward and laying a restrain-
ing hand on the Whaler’s shoulder, “What’s that ahead?
. . . Here, Jimmy boy, run and get my glasses from the
cabin. See if you can find my pipe while you’re there. . . .
What ship did you say you were on, Ardous?”
“The Sydney Lass, sir.”
“Who was her skipper?”
“Captain James Brent, sir.”
“Captain Brent! My God! Keep that name quiet, do


you hear, and the name of the vessel, too. Never men-
tion the name of Brent again on this ship.”
Captain Hardy moved a few paces away with the mate.
“Do you hear that, Hurricane?” he asked in an excited
undertone. “This man knows something. Now, to my
certain knowledge Captain Brent did have a brush or two
with Bully Hayes; though he was never one to talk about
such things. As a matter of fact, no man was more hated
by the pirate than was Captain Brent. But let’s hear
what the Whaler has to say. His yarn might well be a
true one this time.”
Just at that moment Jimmy returned from a fruitless
search for the skipper’s pipe. The Parson was quietly
laughing over something. It slowly dawned on the boy
that Captain Hardy was calmly puffing away at the very
pipe he had been sent to fetch.
“There,” he said, tapping the tobacco down in the heaped
bowl with a discriminating forefinger, “I always like to
smoke while I listen. Now, Bill, tell us about Bully Hayes
and Captain—er—Britts was it you said?”
“Yes, sir, Cap’n Britts, schooner Solomon Islander.
We was on the way from the Gilberts to the Fijis when
the pirate hove in sight. Cap’n Britts knew him as soon
as he saw him. You couldn’t miss him anyhow. His
craft was the only thing of her kind in the Islands that
I know of. A smallish brig, she was, with very tall sticks.
Sat high up in the water and carried a lot of canvas. Bully
had spotted us a few times before, and seemed perticler
anxious to meet Cap’n Britts, because he was in the habit
of doin’ special tradin’, and generally had some valiable
cargo aboard —gathered up for that there merchant at


Auckland. An’ often as not a few pearls an’ things like
that in his cabin. We generally managed to get out of
the way, for the Solomon Islander was a pretty smart
packet herself. But this time we was too late, and before
we could get away he was droppin’ a shot or two around
us from that gun of his’n. So Captain Britts he heaves to.
“Bully sends a boat alongside with orders for Cap’n
Britts an’ two men to come aboard. He takes me an’
another cove and goes on to the pirate. ‘So,’ says Cap’n
Hayes, when we gits on deck, T’ve got yer at last, Cap’n
Britts, an’ now I’ve got yer I’m goin’ ter keep yer. When
I’m done with the Solomon Islander she won’t have much
left in her, an’ she won’t be much good neither, ’cause
I’m goin’ to sink her; an’ as fer you, Cap’n, you knows a
darn side too much about me for my likin’, an’ you walks
the plank. That’s what I brung yer aboard here for;
an’ yer two men’s just here ter see the fun. Now if
you’d be good enough to peel off your clo’es all but shirt
an’ trousers, it’d help matters and save a heap o’ trouble!’
His men was already busy gettin’ a plank out over the side.
“Cap’n Britts strips off, cool as you like, an’ stands
ready. ‘Look ’ere, Hayes,’ sez he. ‘What way’s this to
treat a man? You’re got me in your power, I admit. But
w’y not treat me like a man and give me a chance ? Stand
up and fight me —knives or pistols, whichever you like,
or fists fer that matter —an’ see who’s best man!’ But
no, Bully wouldn’t do that. Nor I don’t blame him
neither. Captain Britts had a bit of a repertation hisself.
He was a fine big man, too. But it musta hurt Bully’s
conscience a bit, all the same. His men was all lookin’
on, see. ‘Look ’ere, Cap’n Britts,’ sez he, ‘You’re a brave


man, an’ I never ’card no one say different. You deserve
a fightin’ chance, an’ yer goin’ ter git it. Now look ’ere!’
“He leans over the rail an’ points to the water. ‘See
that shark?’ says ’e; ‘an’ that one? There’s three or four
or half a dozen of ’em. All good an’ hungry, too. Now
I prepose to give you your knife back and let yer take
yer chance with them beauties. If you wins, you goes
free, Cap’n Britts; if they wins, you don’t. Are you on?’
“ ‘lt’s not much you’re offerin’, Hayes,’ says Cap’n
Britts, ‘but at least it gives me a fight fer me life. I
accepts the terms.’
“The sharks seems to know what’s cornin’, for they
gathers in and circles round under the ship’s rail. You
could see the triangle fin cuttin’ the water as each one
moved round. Now an’, agen one rolls over a bit till yer
could see his mangy belly an’ see him open an’ snap ’is
awful mouth, just like he was practisin’. It was a terrible
thing to face, but our skipper never turned a hair. He
stood there just as calm as if he was goin’ fer ’is mornin’
dip. I was burstin’ to do something, but of course they
was only three of us there, an’ only ten all told in our
crew. Bully had enough of a crew to eat us, an’ all armed
at that. No, they ’ad the best of us, an’ Bully knew it.
Still, fer all that, you could see ’e couldn’t help admirin’
the pluck of Cap’n Britts. Give ’im ’is doos, if he was
a ruffian, he was a brave man hisself, that same Bully
Hayes.
“Well, Cap’n Britts calmly climbs on to the rail, balances
hisself with his leg against a stay, takes a hitch at ’is belt,
an’ puts his sheath-knife between his teeth. We knows
’e meant business then. Bully cocks ’is pistol and stands


by, as if he expected some trick. Cap’n Britts never let
on to notice him, but stands there quite still, watchin’ the
water below ’im. After a few minutes the sharks moves
off a bit as if they was tired of waitin’, and leaves the
water clear. In he goes then, head first —like a shot.
“Soon’s he hits the water them sharks made a bee-line
back for the spot like lightnin’. Then the water was tinged
with red. All over now, we thinks. But no; it wasn’t
the captain’s blood at all. He’d ripped the belly of the
first shark open, and then the next, from underneath.
Before you could say so, the other three or four man-
eaters was tearin’ their two wounded mates ter pieces.
There was shark meat everywhere, an’ the sea was red.
Then they grabs the biggest pieces of the carcasses an’
heads off, fightin’ like mad as they went. Cap’n Britts
wasn’t ter be seen. Drownded, of course, we thought.
But next thing we knows he comes swimmin’ out from
under the ship’s hull somewhere, large as life, with his
knife still in ’is teeth, an ’is face Weedin’ bad from where
a shark had scraped along it.
“ ‘Throw ’im a rope, lads,’ says Bully Hayes; an’ we
hauls him up. Cap’n Britts was all in when we got him
aboard. He could hardly stand on the deck, an’ me an’
me mate ’ad to hold him for a bit. But his eyes still
flashed at Bully, as much as to say, ‘There, damn you, I
done it an’ I’ve beat yer after all!’ Bully orders a man
to fetch ’im a pannikin o’ rum. He stands and looks at
’im wonderin’ like—and admirin’, too. You could see
that.
“ ‘Cap’n Britts,’ says ’e, ‘you win. You’re a brave man;
as good a man as I am, or ever was. Cap’n, there’s my


’and on it. Yer free to go back to yer ship, an’ I won’t
touch her nor her cargo. No, an’ I won’t molest you no
more, so long’s you don’t interfere with me. ’Course I’m
aware you’re a discreet trader. You know where the
good things is, and how to pick ’em up. Only you do it
straight an’ I don’t. But don’t you touch my preserves—
see; an’ remember this: keep away from the island with
the double peak! She’s taboo !’
“I didn’t know what Bully Hayes meant by that.
Didn’t care much either. We shoves off for the Solomon
Islander before he could change his mind, and soon we
was under way for Suva. Cap’n Britts made us all
promise to keep it quiet about Bully Hayes, an’ we done
it. But Cap’n Britts is dead now, these years; an’ it
don’t hurt no one to talk about a brave man —dead or
alive.”


CHAPTER X
ADVENTURES IN FIJI
There was silence for a while after the Whaler had
finished his story. Then Captain Hardy said:
“Thank you, Ardous. That was a most interesting and
exciting adventure. More like an incident of the old
buccaneering days than a modern episode. Yes, he was
a brave man, Captain Britts . . . Britts —Britts? I don’t
think I ever ran across a skipper of that name. Never
even heard of him, as far as I remember. Rather strange,
that.”
He turned away then with the mate. “What do you
think of it, skipper,” the latter asked him. “Captain
Brent was something of a character, wasn’t he?”
“Yes, Hurricane,” the skipper replied. “Something of
a character, as you say. A great character. . . . There
are some things about this I don’t quite see. The refer-
ence to the island of the double peak, for example. That
can only mean Pinnacle Island, of course. The story we
have just heard from the Whaler might yet prove to have
an important bearing on the disappearance of Captain
Brent, and consequently on this voyage of ours. There
are wheels within wheels, it seems to me, Hurricane.
While the feeling grows stronger and stronger with me


that our venture will not be fruitless, the farther I go
into the matter the more confused I seem to get.
“I am hoping to clear up a good many things while we
are in the Fijis. If favourable weather continues we
shall be in Suva soon. I propose to lie there for two
weeks or so. You will approve of that, I am sure, old
man. We shall both relish re-visiting old island friends,
and we shall have the better opportunity of doing so
because this trip we are not tied down to time or plans.
Then, too, we have the Dot to take us wherever we wish
to go; inside the reef, of course —and outside too, at a
pinch. The Mary Ellen will have to stay at Suva for
want of a better port; and Suva is not Fiji. There are
many people I want to see, not all of whom are at Suva.
I hope to follow up some of the threads I have got hold
of, and somehow I feel we shall leave the Fijis knowing
more than we do now.
“Nini 80, in particular, who, I am informed, has
stopped his roving for a while and is loafing around in
the vicinity of Ba, should prove a source of valuable
information. That is, if the beggar doesn’t change his
mind and refuse to come with us after all—which I do
not think is likely. Our remarkable meeting that time I
picked him up in mid-ocean was, I feel quite sure, only
the final act in an episode of which very much yet
remains to be told.
“But quite apart from the matter of gathering infor-
mation, I like Fiji. I don’t know what it is exactly, Sam,
but no other island group in the South Seas appeals so
strongly to me. You, too, have a sneaking regard for


the place, I know. Is it the Kaiviti you like, shipmate,
or his lovely brown-skinned Marama?
“To me, there is something so nice and unspoiled
about the Fiji islands. Trade has always seemed cleaner
there than at other places. There is not even the stigma
of blackbirding attaching to Fiji. Not now, I mean.
There was of course at one time. Back in the seventies,
you know, old King Cakabau* used to sell his surplus
subjects to the highest bidders in beads and trinkets, and
I dare say firewater as well. Then he was invited to
Sydney, feasted and feted, and later induced to sign an
agreement which gave Britain sovereignty over his group
of a hundred and fifty odd islands. That was a good
move, for the Americans had longing eyes on Cakabau’s
island kingdom at the time, and undoubtedly would soon
have taken steps towards annexing it. It was good for
the Kaiviti as well, for under British rule recruiting of
natives (or slave trading, for it was nothing else) stopped
as far as Fiji was concerned.
“Among the many novelties King Cakabau and his
suite brought back with them from Sydney was an epi-
demic of measles, which killed off 40,000 natives, whose
insatiable love of the water proved fatal to those who
caught the complaint. That too, I dare say, helped the
king to solve his excess labour problem. ... I can’t
quite understand the recruiting of Fijians. They were
never the best of workers. At any rate, the sugar com-
pany, which has since become the controlling factor in
the Fijis, has found it necessary, or expedient, to import
Indian coolies to do their plantation and mill work. I
* Cakabau —pronounced Thackambow.


feel a bit jealous about these chaps coming here. It
seems to me a pity, a presumption, to impose a foreign
coloured race among these fine clean natives. Before
long there will be a race problem to solve in Fiji as acute
as that of Natal.”
Two days later the Mary Ellen made the passage into
Suva and anchored in the open roadstead that does duty
there as a harbour. Captain Hardy chose an anchorage
as close under the lee of the land as possible. He knew
from experience that Suva, like most other island har-
bours, offered little or no protection when the blows
came, and that the blows might be expected at any time
from October to March. He knew this, though he had
never actually struck a storm at Suva. He had both
anchors dropped for’ard, and a spare kellick astern, to
handle which a special gear had to be rigged.
That, he told Mr Smiles, was the best they could do.
She should hold there like that for a couple of weeks,
even if it did come a storm. The only other thing they
could do was to be ready to up-anchor at the first sign
of trouble and clear out for the open. That would mean
keeping all the crew aboard all the time, which, of course,
would not suit the captain’s plans at all.
“Oh, I think she’ll be all right,” he told the port
officer who had come aboard. “I’ve been here a good
many times, but never once have I had to run for it.”
“Never know your luck, though,” commented Hur-
ricane.
“You’ve been fortunate, Captain Hardy—that’s all,”
said the officer. “Since you were here last—only six


months ago, in fact —we had a gale that cleaned up the
whole place; not only the harbour and waterfront, but
most of the land as well. As a matter of fact, the storm
always seems more terrible ashore than it does afloat.
That, I suppose, is because you actually see and hear
more of the damage being done.
“This one smashed things up beautifully. Spoilt most
of the copra crop and bananas, and ruined a lot of the
standing cane. Trees and houses blown down wholesale
—some of the houses lifted bodily and carried away for
a distance. What few ships were in here left early for
the outside, and rode the gale out where there was
nothing hard to bump on. One steamer stayed in, but
she used up so much coal helping her anchors to hold
her that it would have paid her to go outside. Anything
else that remained in here was demolished. All the
small craft belonging to the natives—banana rafts, canoes
and cutters—were either sunk or smashed up and piled
in heaps among the broken-down trees.
“I was in Lautoka a short while after, and I saw
there —just to give you an idea of the force of the wind
—a five-ton cutter lying two hundred and fifty yards
from the beach in what had been a garden. Between
her and the water was a grove of fairish-sized trees and
a couple of houses—or rather their remains. A five-ton
cutter, about twenty-five feet long, and she’d weigh—let’s
see—a ton and a half easily, wouldn’t she? The strange
thing about it was, she was not damaged a bit. Even
her mast and rigging were all in order. What sort of
a wind it is that wrecks ships, houses and forests, and
yet delivers a five-ton cutter to an inland destination by


registered packet post, I don’t know. And of course I’m
not claiming this incident as unique. Such things do
happen in these island storms. I am merely quoting a
recent and personally-known case to show that it can
blow here, captain.”
“I know what you say is true,” the skipper agreed.
“For, though I have never had such an experience here
at Suva, you must remember I’ve been trading in the
Islands a good many years. Were it not for that, perhaps
I should be inclined to doubt what you say; and, looking
around me here, I think you could hardly blame me for
that. The scene before and around us is one of such
calm beauty and peace as to prohibit even one’s thinking
in terms of storms and destruction. And I should be
sorry to see Suva in any other light or mood than that in
which I always mentally picture the Pijis.
“To me, Suva represents a direct and definite step from
the cooler and more prosaic latitudes into the tropical
seas. Coming from Sydney or Auckland —the usual way
of approach—it means entrance into another world, a
world of romance. At Suva one sees his first coral reef.
The very name of that carries one back to the story-
books of boyhood. Here for the first time he encounters
primitively-clothed natives, and palm-trees—such a de-
cided change from the gum-trees and kauris of Austral-
asia ; even the fern-trees that farewelled him at Auckland.
He sees coconuts and bananas growing for the first time,
and makes the acquaintance of that universal and typical
Polynesian aid to transport, the catamaran —the queer
outrigger canoe.
“Yes, Suva to me is the first page of a new book; the


portal that invites entrance to an entirely different clime
and scene—to the warmth, colour, life and romance of
the South Sea Islands. . . . But there, I’m waxing poeti-
cal.”
The port official laughed good-naturedly. He had, as
a matter of fact, been listening with amused interest to
the captain’s reverie, unusual as it was, coming thus from
an old salt. He had, indeed, begun to wonder how long
the skipper would continue his rapturous eulogy. No
doubt with him, grown blase through long years in the
environment, novelty and charm had faded to common-
place. To the majority of the Mary Ellen’s crew, too,
Suva was familiar enough. Most of them had been there
before—some often; and while they relished this return
to island beauty, they lacked that love of the aesthetic
which made it, to Captain Hardy, a source of perpetual
joy.
Only two people aboard were there for the first time
—Dan Graham and young Brent. Dan, widely-travelled
as he was, had never visited the Fijis, though he had a
fair experience of the South Seas in general, part of his
time having been spent blackbirding in the Solomons and
the New Hebrides. Jimmy, of course, had never seen
the Fiji Islands or any other islands; so that the spice of
novelty was added to the exuberance he shared with the
genial skipper.
The Parson was standing quietly by, evidently busy
with his own thoughts. He was oblivious to what was
going on about him. Perhaps he was thinking of the
natives he would soon revisit, amongst whom a few years
ago he had expended so much patient and seemingly


fruitless effort. Jimmy wakened him from his silence with
his eager questions, and he set himself to it as to a duty
—to explain to his pupil as much of Suva and its sur-
roundings as could well be demonstrated from the none
too adequate vantage-point of the schooner’s deck.
“Yes, it is all so beautiful, James,” he said, “And
what memories it brings back to me. Once one has lived
in the Islands one always has a longing—now, James, you
must be patient and not get excited. . . .Yes, that is the
reef. , . . Well, let me show you. . . . See where we came
in? That is the channel through the reef—the coral
reef common to all the Pacific islands in the warmer
latitudes. It is high tide now and see, the water breaks
on the reef and makes a line of snow-white foam. It
stretches as far as you can see along the coast. Outside,
the sea is a deep, beautiful blue. Inside the white surf
it is a lighter blue, and merges to green as it approaches
the yellow sand over there.
“Look, it is so calm and clear inside here that you can
see almost to the bottom. Look down at our anchor
chains there; see the fish playing about them? Aren’t
they beautiful? Over there at the jetty is a Union Com-
pany’s steamer, perhaps from Sydney too. You can see
her picture reflected in the shining water —dark green
hull, red funnel and black top. Oh, dear, the picture is
spoilt now. It has all gone shivery. See, a native is
swimming there. He is diving for coins thrown from the
steamer’s deck. Wonderful divers these natives are. We
shall go and see them after. Around the steamer, too,
you see several canoes—catamarans —funny, aren’t they?
That float, joined to the body by two long arms—the


outrigger we call it —is to steady the canoe and keep it
from capsizing. It is a wonderful device.
“The natives — Kaiviti, the Fijians are called —they can
do wonders in their canoes. See how they handle them.
Some of them have fruit and shells for sale. That one
has been fishing. See, he has a canoe full of fish and
his wife with him. . . . Yes, the men’s hair stands bolt
upright; some of the women’s, too. No, it is not natural;
they train it that way. Some have red hair, caused by
treating it with mud and lime. What for? For cleanli-
ness, James. They use a banana leaf for a bandeau to
train their hair upright. . . . The men wear only that
little kilt—like a towel wrapped round them; no other
clothes, no hats, no boots. And what lovely, light-brown
bodies they have!
“Beyond the steamer, on the wharf, all is bustle. There
are plenty more natives. Some of them are police, bare-
footed and hatless like the rest. Just a petticoat and a
shock of hair and a club. That is their uniform. . . .
There are the business places behind that, and to the
right you can see the natives’ houses on the long green
stretch. Beyond is the thick bush, more like a jungle.
It is all very beautiful, James —don’t you think? We
shall see ever so many wonderful things when we get
ashore and round the coast.”
While the Parson had been expatiating to young Jimmy,
the crew, under the direction of Mr Smiles, had been
busy making the Mary Ellen snug. She was now close
reefed and tidy. Dick Patten, at last in his own element,
had lost no time in preparing the Dot, which now lay
under the shore side of the Mary Ellen, not unlike a


glorified cygnet snuggling against the mother swan. A
light gangway rigged over the side gave easy access to
her, and her little boiler was sizzling in readiness for
business.
“To-morrow or the next day,” said the skipper, “we
shall be off, either to Ba or Rewa. But I have to pay
a few visits up town and make some inquiries before I
know definitely. To-day we’ll go ashore and see Suva.
You men can amuse yourselves in your own wav. Mr
Williams will stay aboard for the present, with Farley
and Patten, who will, of course, need to stand by the
Dot. The rest of you can choose your own entertain-
ment ashore.”
Dick Patten quickly had them landed. As soon as the
Dot had tied up, the skipper and Hurricane set off on
business up town, quite ignoring the many items of in-
terest that usually engage the visitor’s attention on land-
ing, and which provided for the others no lack of pleasant
pastime.
Young Jimmy seemed quite content to go no farther
than the wharf. Those divers—they were a marvel to
him. He settled himself on the edge of the pier, his
legs dangling over the water, and prepared to watch them
indefinitely. There were two of them diving now. They
swam round in the water without either effort or any
apparent movement, drifting with the gentle back and for-
ward motion of the water, while they patiently watched
for someone above them on the ship to drop a coin in.
Then an inverted flash of the lithe brown body, which
next moment was seen swimming downward through the
clear pale green water, chasing the scintillating coin as


it hurried on a zigzag course towards the bottom and
oblivion. Just as it was about to disappear, from that
bronze swimming form, now so grotesquely distorted by
refraction and optical delusion, a tremulous, spectral
hand would dart out to grasp it. A second later the
diver was at the surface, shaking his eyes and his fuzzy
hair free of water with a vigorous flick of the head,
while he held the captured coin triumphantly aloft for
a moment’s exhibition before imprisoning it in his mouth
in readiness for another dive.*
Jimmy would have watched the divers all day; but the
Parson’s supply of threepenny-bits at length ran out, and
he reluctantly called a halt.
“I cannot spend any more money just now, James,”
he said. “I have no more small silver, and pennies
are of no use. They do not shine in the water and the
divers will not attempt to follow them. But there are
still the policemen to see, and they cost nothing to look
at, as long as one behaves. They are one of the novel-
ties to the new-comer here.”
So, indeed, they proved to Jimmy. Policemen with
no boots and socks on, and no hats, were surely a novelty.
Nothing but a little petticoat! How would Ginger Bob
of the water police look dressed like that? He wouldn’t
be half so terrible without his number tens. What would
he think of this kind of policeman? But, my! thought
young Jimmy, they looked fine.
And still finer were the soldiers they saw drilling in
the green park in front of the governor’s house. They
♦ The divers remain in the water for hours, and a loincloth has
no pockets.—J. L.


sat in the shade of a big, bright-flowered tree at the edge
of that sacred preserve and watched them. Big, straight,
clean-limbed men they were—still with no boots and hats
on; and the same little kilt or sulu, except that it had a
coloured stripe woven in it to show it was a military
uniform. In addition, the soldiers had rifles; and hair!
—hair not merely like the ordinary frizzy mops, but
standing stiffly upward and outward for a foot!
The Parson and Jimmy bought a bag of cakes and
bananas and meandered out into the countryside. To
the boy, it was all new and strange —almost unreal. The
road led through thick jungle, where festoons of pink and
blue-flowered convolvulus hung from palm to palm above
the dense green bush. Here and there the land was
cleared in patches for farming, and they mingled, as much
as they were permitted, with the natives along the way.
It was like a hurried tour of fairyland to Jimmy. The
day passed all too quickly for him. Still, there would
be other days, the Parson told him; and as evening was
drawing nigh, they must not wander too far afield.
As they turned to go back, the sound of voices reached
their ears. Then singing. They listened. The voices
were familiar. Yes, surely they had heard them before.
“Why, that’s the Whaler!” exclaimed Jimmy.
“And Peter Hawkins, I declare!” added the Parson
excitedly. “Listen, James!”
Down in Pat-a-gonia, . .
An’ I’ll tell to you a tale
Barcelonia, Eau-de-colonia
’Ow I crossed the ocean in the belly of a whale!


There was no doubt about it. It was the inseparable
pair, their songs mingled up in a ridiculous, hopeless
medley. But where was the singing coming from? What
on earth would the Whaler and Pete be doing around
there? The Parson and Jimmy scanned the surround-
ings. It was growing dusk now.
‘There they are!” Jimmy suddenly exclaimed, point-
ing towards the village they had just passed. The Parson
followed the direction indicated, to behold an amazing
sight. There was the Whaler, closely followed by Tall
Yarn Pete, the two of them crawling on their bellies
through the long grass towards the road. The pair
looked as though their legs had been broken; yet they
both sang lustily as they crawled. Each time they tried
to rise and walk their legs shook violently and then col-
lapsed, the effect being at once pitiful and most ludicrous.
Yet it was evident that the men’s faculties were unim-
paired. They were drunk in the legs, but not in the
head.
The Parson took in the situation at a glance. “They
have been drinking, James,” he said sadly. “Oh dear,
oh dear; they have been visiting the natives and taking
kava. That is the effect of the native liquor—to rob
the legs of their use while leaving the head unaffected.”
Gentle Willie spoke to the two delinquents. They saw
their mistake and scarcely needed reminding that Captain
Hardy would never allow them aboard in that state.
The Parson sought out the headman of the village. He
knew the ways of the Kaiviti. He arranged with the
headman to have the two bedded at his place till morn-
ing, warning him that they must on no account get any


more drink, and that he, the buli,* would meet trouble
if they were not sober and aboard the ship bright and
early in the morning.
When he and Jimmy returned to the Mary Ellen, the
Parson explained that Hawkins and Ardous were being
entertained for the night and desired to be excused.
The captain took no serious objection to that, though
the knowing look he gave the Parson left no doubt that
he smelt a rat.
Dick Patten overheard what the Parson had told the
captain, and questioned him further about the matter.
“I guessed as much,” he said when the narrative had
been re-told. “It’s just what those two beer-chewers
would do. They got a skinful of kava all right. Just as
well the skipper didn’t see them. Kava always has that
effect. It’s funny .... Mr Ormonde, did you ever, in
all your travels hereabouts among the Kaiviti, hear the
story about the discovery of their queer booze?”
The Parson confessed his ignorance, and Dick told the
legend to him;
“Two natives awaiting punishment for some offence
they had committed once escaped from their village, and
to evade their pursuers they took refuge in a cave. While
they were hiding there they noticed a pair of rats be-
having in a very peculiar way. Watching closely, they
saw that the rats were nibbling at the roots of a plant
growing in the cracks of the rocks, and that this was
having the extraordinary effect of making them groggy
in the legs. Their legs finally doubled up and refused
* Headman of village; pronounced bully.


to carry them, though the rats appeared to be otherwise
well and quite happy.
“Now, when the fugitives were afterwards captured
and brought before the chief, they reported their strange
experience. The chief had the matter looked into, and
found that the root could be distilled to yield a liquor
which had the same effect on humans as on the rats. The
drink was welcomed as a wonderful discovery, and as a
reward the two men were set free. Ever since that, kava
has been a favourite native drink.
“It is smoky yellow in colour, and tastes for all the
world like soapsuds. But you soon get a taste and a
liking for it, if you’re fool enough to start drinking it.
The Fijians drink it at all their shivoos and gatherings.
At big feasts there is always a great bowl of it. The
bowl is the shell of a sea turtle polished up, and the kava
is ceremoniously served out in coconut-shell cups.*
* The correct Fijian name for the drink is yaconcL —pronounced
yangonna.


CHAPTER XI
KAIVITI FROLICS ON THE BEACH
It was well that Captain Hardy had, when forecasting
the morrow’s programme, stipulated that it would be in
a measure subject to what he and Mr Smiles should
hear in town. It happened, as a result of what they did
hear, that they went to neither Ba nor the Rewa. Now
the captain had had many things in mind when he paid
that visit to Suva’s little business centre. There were,
naturally, old acquaintances he would want to meet and
yarn with; there were a few old-settled identities he
wished to sound with a view to getting, if possible, fur-
ther particulars regarding Captain Brent and the Sydney
Lass; he desired to learn something more definite about
Nini Bo from a certain storekeeper who, he had learned
from correspondence, was in the habit of advancing that
gentleman supplies on credit, and who therefore could
be trusted to know his whereabouts; and last, but by
no means least important, he was anxious to hear of any
little trading venture he might undertake to help to pay
the expenses of the voyage.
While Captain Hardy’s friends were, in the main,
Hurricane’s friends too, and the inquiries to be made
concerned him almost as vitally as they concerned the
skipper, the lean one’s time was by no means restricted


to these things. The errand which the captain had so
lightly referred to as one merely to make a few inquiries
had, for Hurricane, developed into a full and eventful
day, pregnant with weighty matters and, as time was to
prove, weighty consequences. And all this came about
through an innocent remark from Jacob Schmidt, the
old German shopkeeper from over at Gevuka, whom he
met at the post office.
“Vot iss you doink in Soofa, Sam? I dit hear you
vos quit der sea. Haf you come back to look up your
Alice, vot?”
The amazed Mr Smiles, embarrassed at this unexpected
and somewhat indelicate reference to a matter he had
long regarded as a closed episode, at first forcefully for-
bade any further mention of it. It was only after his
new-found acquaintance had decoyed him aside to the
shade of a tree round the corner and added a few fur-
ther remarks in an undertone that he condescended to
give patient heed to what he was saying. As he listened,
there came to him thoughts from a time years gone by.
They were like a picture or a fragrance long forgotten,
and now revived in memory.
When the German had finished, Sam made further
quiet and discreet inquiries. By the time he was ready
to return with the skipper to the Mary Ellen he had
accumulated a sufficient fund of information to warrant
his taking a very definite and determined course of
action.
“Skipper,” he said, when once again they were in the
privacy of the cuddy, “you intended to go to Ba to-
morrow, didn’t you?”


“Yes,” said the captain. “Why, Sam?”
“Because I want you to go to Levuka instead,” was the
surprising reply. “Listen, skipper. You have told me a
good many secrets in your time, and have freely re-
vealed your inner feelings to me. Now I’m going to tell
you my little secret, if you’ll let me.”
“Go ahead, shipmate,” the skipper bade him; adding,
with a twinkle in his eyes, “I hope yours is not an affair
of the heart, too, Hurricane.”
“That’s just what it is,” said the mate. “I know you’ll
be a bit surprised—but let me tell my story.
“You remember old Tom Dayton, skipper, that used
to live about these parts? Kept a bit of a store round
on the Navua and dealt in copra and shell and all sorts
of things. Well, old Tom’s wife was a full-blooded
Fijian woman. They had a daughter. She used to
travel about the coast here a good bit with her father in
the course of his business. When we were trading here
I got to know her—no, never mind how. Alice was her
name, and she was as pretty as a picture, if she was a
half-caste. At any rate, she suited me, and as she liked
me (she was the first and only woman that ever showed
signs that way) I had made up my mind that some day
I’d marry her. She seemed to understand that, too,
though I never asked her.
“Well, just as I was making, as I thought, good pro-
gress, old Tom died. That was about six years ago, .. .
Yes, we were running here in the Mary Ellen then.
After her father’s death her mother went back to her
people—back to their way of living. Alice, who was
then only about eighteen, went with her. It must have


been rather distasteful to her to go and live with the
Kaiviti, but of course she had to follow her mother.
They went to live at Levuka, and from then on I saw
very little of her, as we didn’t call at Levuka very often
—did we? I felt a bit disgusted and disappointed. I
took it for granted she’d forget all about me once she’d
gone over there. That hurt my feelings a good deal —
or my pride, perhaps—for I thought some bright young
Kaiviti would get her. Anyway, I just quit and let it go
at that.
“Now, to-day, whom should I meet but old Jacob
Schmidt, the storekeeper from Levuka. He has lived
there since the place started, and knows everything about
everyone, of course. Always did, the old gossip. He
tells me the mother died a year or so ago, and that since
that time Alice (or Lalooe, as he tells me they call her)
has had a bad time of it. You know how it is, skipper.
Being a half-caste, she’s nobody’s child. Without her
mother, who had Tom Dayton’s name and reputation to
stand to her, she’s not welcome, and they let her see it,
too. She’d be just the same among the whites. They
wouldn’t accept her as an equal either; and to a girl
educated as she is, it must hurt a lot.
“I feel really sorry for her. And what’s more, old
Schmidt tells me—he’s a great scandal-monger—he tells
me that he knows she is still thinking about me. In
fact, he reckons she is waiting for me to come back
to her.
“Skipper, I’ve got a strong feeling that I want to
go to her. I want you to go over there to-morrow. . . .
Yes, I know we could call there on the way out, when


we leave for the north—perhaps. I also know that once
you find Nini Bo and get primed up with the facts about
Pinnacle Island, there’ll be no holding you. No, sir; the
Mary Ellen will have a bone in her teeth from the word
go, and you’ll be in such a darned hurry you won’t even
see Levuka, let alone put in there. No, I want you to
come over to-morrow.”
“And suppose I say I won’t go, Hurricane?”
“Well, you ship another mate, if you can; or let Mr
Williams carry on. For I’ll be leaving the Mary Ellen .”
“Oh, Sam, don’t talk like that, man!” exclaimed the
captain. “You wouldn’t do that—you couldn’t. . . .
There, I knew you didn’t mean it. Why, of course.
Forgive me, Hurricane. Of course, of course—you
feel the same as I do about it, shipmate. It’s just a
touch of an old complaint, as you yourself once so wisely
put it, eh, Sam? Right. We’ll go to-morrow. Tell
Dick Patten I want him.”
In a few minutes Dick came aft. “Patten,” Captain
Hardy asked him, “is the Dot fit for Levuka?”
“Certainly, sir, with decent weather, and not over-
loaded. I would not suggest taking the whole lot. Oh,
yes, she’s right as a bank.”
“All right, then; but I haven’t much faith in these
steam things, you know—in the open sea. I’d rather
trust myself in a sailing cutter any day when it comes
to going outside that reef. Have her ready for an early
start, Patten, and we’ll take Mr Ormonde and the boy,
in addition to the three of us here.”
Dick Patten was not well pleased that the skipper
should so underestimate the sea-going qualities of the


Dot. He had by this time grown to have an almost
parental pride and love for the little vessel, and with
lengthened acquaintance his confidence in her capabili-
ties had expanded until it was well-nigh unlimited. He
found himself almost wishing for rough weather and sea,
just to show the skipper how mistaken he was.
But the day was as beautiful and the sea as calm as it
could well be. Outside the reef, beyond the long line
of snow-white surf, the water was as smooth as it was
within. There was no difference, except for the deeper
blue which replaced the picturesque colours of ultra-
marine, peagreen and eau-de-nil in the harbour. The
day and the colourful setting were indeed ideal for such
a jaunt. The temptation to dawdle was great, and even
Hurricane, for whom the trip had a specific and urgent
objective, was captured by the prevailing holiday spirit.
Proceeding along to where he knew an opening in
the barrier lent itself to their nearest route to Levuka,
Dick kept the Dot in as close proximity to the reef as
was safe in order that they might enjoy the beauties of
the coral growth. The tide was almost at its lowest,
exposing the teeth of the reef above water, seemingly
growing there like a myriad cactus plants, beautiful to
look on, but ominous in their silent defiance to bare
feet or boat bottoms. And between the outcroppings
of coral, in the thousand and one interstices of the inner
edge of the reef, were marvellous marine gardens, gor-
geously adorned with waving sea plants, quaint molluscs,
and brilliantly coloured fishes; the whole clearly visible
from the slow-moving bow of the boat, but hidden or
startled away by the following agitation of the propeller.


At a part of the reef where sand and 'soil had, by
concretion, converted the coral barrier for a distance into
comparatively solid ground, exposed or awash according
to the stage of the tide, a party of natives had chosen
an enclosed pool, safely proofed from sharks by the
surrounding coral, for a swim. Acceding to the request
of Jimmy, the skipper bade Dick tie the Dot up—a job
that called for the baptism of her nice new manila fenders
to prevent scratching her sleek sides—and they made
their way gingerly over the vicious coral tips to watch
the fun.
The Fijians were quite naked. Following their usual
custom, each had removed his sulu as he reached waist
depth in the water and thrown it to the side. At the close
approach of the white men they hastened to recover
their simple garments and twist them quickly into effec-
tive yet unimpeding loinclothes. Then, encouraged by
the interest of the visitors, they indulged in a series of
laughable pranks and some very clever aquatic feats.
Young Jimmy was charmed by the whole procedure.
It was evident from the look on his face that he yearned
to share in the delight of swimming in that beautiful,
limpid coral pool.
“By cripes, Mr Ormonde,” he whispered—quite
audibly—in the Parson’s ear. “I’d like to be in there.
Could I go in, do you think, Mr Ormonde? It looks
like a fairy bath, doesn’t it? Could I have a swim, Mr
Ormonde?”
The Parson frowned on the proposal. He was sur-
prised at James for suggesting it. Swim with the
natives! The idea! He wouldn’t hear of such a thing.


But fortunately for Jimmy, Captain Hardy had been
watching, though he could not actually hear what was
said. He came to the rescue.
“Why not, Mr Ormonde?” he asked good-naturedly,
“It’s a wonderful opportunity to do something he has
perhaps often dreamed about. There’s no real reason
why he shouldn’t have a swim, is there? If someone
doesn’t hold me pretty tight and I can find a moocha of
some sort to hide my nakedness, blest if I’ll not be in
there myself before long—it looks so tempting!”
The Parson had to succumb then, of course. In one
brief minute Jimmy was stripped and in the water, be-
girdled for modesty’s sake (and poor Mr Ormonde’s)
with a great red bandanna handkerchief from Dick Pat-
ten’s neck. The Kaiviti, rather contrary to their wont,
but probably won by his youth and exuberance, welcomed
him into their frolics.
One young man, to all appearances a splendid bronze
Apollo, especially interested himself in the boy. It was
noticed when this man climbed out on the bank to dive
that his beautiful form was marred by an old wound
in the thigh, where apparently, from the look of the
puckered skin, a large piece had at some time been torn
out. Jimmy quite ingenuously pointed to the spot and
asked what had caused it.
The native replied tersely, “O^a,” and then, obviously
not pleased that his disfigurement had been noticed,
dived into the water. Thereafter he kept his body sub-
merged.
“He didn’t like you noticing it, Jimmy,” reproved Dick
Patten. “You want to be careful. These chaps are


sensitive on things like that. He’s been bitten by an
oqa* There’s lots of them bear the mark. They are
so daring in the water, you see. They tempt the sharks,
and worse still, the oqas. They are more frightened of
them than the sharks. They are fiercer, and I am told
they will come into places and through broken water where
a shark would be scared to come. I’ve heard of an oqa,
after being caught, springing the length of the boat to
attack the man who caught it. That came from a half-
caste though, and half-castes don't always tell the truth.
You’ll hear some awful yarns about oqas. I’ve never
actually seen one myself. . . .
“You’d better get dressed now, Jimmy. We’ll have
to be moving. Anyhow these fellows are going fishing.
They are only swimming to kill time while the tide is
running out,”
Dick was right. The tide was now dead low. The
swimming party betook themselves to a long spit, now
uncovered and disclosing many pools of varying size.
The reef here had attained to a nature approximating
terra firma, so that the receding water left the pools full.
The Kaiviti waded into these in turn, vigorously stirring
up the mud from the bottom, until the water was thick
and turbid. Then, behold! an abundance of fish, blinded
and sickened by the vitiated water, so that the fishermen
could bail them unceremoniously out on to the banks.
The method was novel, and simplicity itself. To those
natives, needing fish, it was a practical, easy and very
efficient method. But to the visitor, come to see rea-
lized his cherished mental picture of statuesque brown
* Oqa, pronounced onga.


Islanders, the embodiment of poise and dexterity in the
art of spearing and angling fish, it was unpicturesque and
rather disappointing.
The journey was continued now, and by noon the Dot
was at Levuka. Old Jacob Schmidt saw them coming
afar oflf from the open door of his store facing the jetty,
and knew at once, from the nature of their craft, that
they could only be from the Mary Ellen. He came down
and welcomed them ashore as though they were his own
guests, gesticulating and talking while the boat was tying
up in a manner calculated to advertise the arrival to
the whole community.
Mr Smiles sprang ashore and grabbed the voluble
German by the shoulders. “Shut up, you old baboon,”
he said roughly. “Go back to your shop, for heaven’s
sake, and keep quiet. .. . Listen here, now. If you want
to do me a service—and you won’t lose by it—get word
to Lalooe to come to your store. She can be shopping,
or anything at all. Keep her there till I come. Under-
stand? Then give me a chance to speak to her alone.
Your wife is in the house, eh? Don’t have anyone else
about, and don’t tell anyone else. Keep your tongue
still. Good. I’ll be there in half an hour.”
At Hurricane’s suggestion the skipper and party went
for a cruise round the coast, leaving him to carry out his
plan in his own way.


CHAPTER XII
HURRICANE’S LOVE AFFAIR
Jacob Schmidt did his part well. When Hurricane
entered his store half an hour later he was very busy
discussing with Alice Dayton the gossip of the village
and the merits of certain of his wares. After the sur-
prise of their meeting had died down somewhat and con-
versation between the two had settled into a regular
channel, the old German discreetly removed to his coun-
ter, leaving them to discourse privately in the obscure
end of the store to which he had contrived during his
chatter to lead them.
Left thus alone with Alice, Mr Smiles found himself
peculiarly ill at ease. Heretofore each one of his perio-
dical meetings with the girl at this or that village or place
of call had been in the nature of —to him—a mildly dar-
ing adventure. He then had had to support him the
prestige of a ship’s officer within the precincts of his own
ship, and the freedom that belongs to any man to flirt
with a pretty girl who is willing to flirt with him. But
those conditions did not obtain here. Now he was faced
with something more concrete and serious. His purpose
in thus coming here—now that he thought of it—was a
bold one. It was, to have a definite understanding with
the girl. It was a proposal, no less, A proposal more-


over that must carry with it the clear implication that
he took the result more or less for granted. This all
came to him now for the first time, and he floundered
lamely as he tried to answer Alice’s quick succession of
questions.
“Yes, Alice, we did give up the sea; that is, the skipper
did, and the Mary Ellen —she was laid up. Then we
just came over to —it’s just a pleasure trip, you see; no,
not that exactly—er, we’re going to—oh, it’s a secret.
Yes, it’s a secret. But in Suva I met Jacob Schmidt,
and he was telling me—er —he told me you were ”
“Oh, but Mr Schmidt said you didn’t know I was
here!”
“No, neither I did Alice—that is, not till I heard —
well, you see, I thought it would be a pity, seeing this
will probably be my last visit to the Islands, if I er —
didn’t see all the old friends I could while I was at it.
So I that is, old Jacob Schmidt ”
“I see, Sam,” Alice interrupted. “Well, it was nice
of you to think of me. lam so glad you came. I have
often wondered where you were, Sam, and wished you
would come back to see me.”
This rather startling admission gave Mr Smiles cour-
age to go on.
“Have you, Alice?” he said rather eagerly. “Really
—you mean it? Well, so have I. You see, I thought
when you went away from Navua you wouldn’t bother
about me any more. Why should you anyhow. All the
girls talk to the skipper and mate of a ship, but it’s the
ship that does it. That’s usually the attraction. I thought
it was like that with you. . . . I’m no man with women,


Alice. Never was. Never did any good with ’em. No
looks nor taking ways, you see. . . . About as handsome
as a stringybark tree, if you know what that is. Just as
lean and withered too. . . . Funny, isn’t it. You’re the
only girl that ever made me feel like—feel I wanted to
come back and see her. Alice, are you really pleased to
see me?”
“Of course I am, Sam. Don’t you believe me? I
would like to have you near me. Are you going to stay
here and trade in the Islands, Sam?”
“No, we are not staying. We’ve got a job to <io—
a very important job to do. I shall be away some months,
I don’t know how long. After that—l don’t know what.
I could—would you like—Alice, if I came back here,
would you marry me? Would you want me to do that?”
“Yes, Sam, I would marry you, for I love you. I
would be proud to marry you, you good, strong man.
But I do not want to stay here. I want to go away,
and I need a friend like you to take me. I am in hell
here. Oh, don’t you see, my friend? Sam, I am of
mixed blood—the stigma, it is always with me. ... Yes,
yes, I know I am pretty, but what is that? ... I am
neither one thing nor the other. No one owns me. The
Europeans—though I have their education and accom-
plishments, they disown me, or at most put up with me
in a patronizing way. They turn their noses up when
I am not looking. I am tainted. And the Kaiviti will
not own me now that mother is gone. To them I am
only Lalooe, the half-caste. Oh, what a word! What a
name to bear.
“Sam, I want to go away. I am nobody here. A


white man made me nothing: only a white man can make
me something. If yon make me your wife, Sam, I shall
be white. I have your speech and your sentiment. Come
back to me, friend, and take me away. I shall wait for
yon to come.”
Poor Hurricane was quite lost for words. His visit,
despite his early fears, had been successful beyond all
hopes. Alice herself had helped him in his difficulty.
The questions his heart had yearned to ask, but which
his halting tongue had refused to frame, she had answer-
ed. He knew now what he had wanted to know. He
had confirmed his fondly cherished suspicion that this
girl really loved his rough, plain self. That was enough.
He was satisfied to be silent now —just to be with her.
He did not speak for a time. Neither did Alice. They
both understood and were content.
“You mean all that, Alice?” he asked her huskily, after
a long pause.
“Every word, Sam. Indeed I doand she held up
her face to him.
Sam hesitated just for a moment. It seemed the right
thing to kiss her. It was something a little out of his
line, yet he did it. It was pleasing to him. It gave him
a warm, new thrill. He took her in his arms and kissed
her again.
“Thank you, Alice,” he said, releasing her, and glanc-
ing guiltily in the direction of old Jacob. “I'll come back
here for you. I can’t say when. My duty is to Captain
Hardy first; I must see him through. . . . No, don’t ask
me that; I can’t tell you where. We are going away—a
long way, and I can’t say how long we’ll be. But I’ll


come back to you as soon as I can and take you away.
Take you to Sydney, where there will be no question of
colour. You’ll just be Mrs Samuel Smiles, and we’ll be
happy—you and I. Won’t we?
“I’ll see you again before we sail, Alice, and we must
make some arrangement for you to leave the native vil-
lage and live with white people, as from now on you are
to be Kai Valaga* No more Lalooe; Alice Dayton now,
and by and by—pretty soon I hope—Alice Smiles.
“Here is the Dot back again, and I must be going. . . .
Yes, the Dot —that’s her name. Short for Dorothy, you
know. There’s a story about her, a love story. I’ll
tell you all about it some day. . . . Come and meet Cap-
tain Hardy and my friends. . . . No, not now? All right,
when we call on the way out. Good-bye, Alice. You’ve
made me very happy—you dear girl. God bless you!”
The old storekeeper escorted Sam back to the jetty
where the launch was waiting. On the way he talked
volubly about nothing in particular, ably sustaining the
impression that Mr Smiles had been his visitor and noth-
ing more. Sam paid him a flattering compliment on his
shrewdness, and thanked him for his services, pressing
a sovereign into his hand as he shook it. Next minute,
Dick Patten had shoved off. With a heart happy and a
face agleam with unwonted but appropriate smiles, Sam
seated himself apart in the stern with Captain Hardy.
The skipper was eyeing him closely. Mr Smiles read his
look. “All’s well, skipper,” he said, briefly.
“Good! lam glad to hear it, Hurricane,” his chief
remarked heartily. “I can see it has gone the way you
* Kai Valaga —white people; pronounced Valanga.


wanted it. You fixed things up satisfactorily, eh? I
must admit I was a little anxious about you. These
affairs do need to be straightened out. lam glad. Your
mind will be easy now. It seems to be in the air, this
sort of thing, Sam. I hope no more of the Mary Ellen’s
company become affected by the complaint. I want to
get down to business. To-morrow we shall get away
round the coast and take them all along—all that want to
go and are prepared to shift for themselves wherever we
go. The Dot will only carry them; she will not board
them. We are attracting too much attention here for my
liking. I don’t want publicity. This trim little steam-
boat of ours flitting about gives something of the impres-
sion of a visit from the admiral or a royal progress.
“We shall get away with her to-morrow morning, and
leave the Mary Ellen with just two or three men and the
dinghy. That will give her an ordinary look and allay
any suspicion about us. We’ll leave them the cook, and
they can do as they please. .. . Oh, wait. By Jove, Sam,
better put some of them scraping and painting. The
hull, you know. This will be our last chance to touch
her up. There will be plenty of time to paint the rest
of her. We may even be glad of something to keep them
busy before we’re done. But to-morrow we shall head
for Ba.”
Sam objected that Ba was a mighty long way off,
and that possibly the captain had misunderstood his in-
formant.
“Sure it was not Bau where he said you’d find Nini
Bo,” he asked. “The two names are not unlike—Bah and
Bow. And the way they’re spelt makes it more con-


fusing—Ba and Bau, especially when they are pro-
nounced Mha and Mbau. Very puzzling, these native
names. Look at Beqa, off the coast there a bit, pro-
nounced Banga. . . . Bau is close at hand, round to the
east there. We could go there and back easily in two
days. But Ba—that is right away on the opposite
side of the island. It will take a week, by the time we’ve
dawdled around a bit on the way.”
“No, there’s no mistake, Hurricane,” the skipper re-
assured him. “I got my information from Cunningham,
at the store. I was busy with him and some other old-
timers while you were letting Jacob Schmidt tickle your
heart-strings there by the post office. Cunningham knows
what he’s talking about. Leave him alone. Shrewd man,
Cunningham. They tell me no one knows the coast of
Viti Levu, or the people around it, as Cunningham does.
He has a customer or two at every settlement around the
island, and as many of them move about a lot, he has to
be alert to keep in touch with them. He seems to com-
municate with people by some sort of magic telepathy. At
any rate, he knows where they are; and he says Nini Bo
is on the Ba River.
“But apart from that, I have reasons for going round
ihe west coast. For one thing, I met a man in Suva who
is anxious to get a quantity of seze shell to fill an urgent
London order, Seze is hard to get now, and he made me
the tempting offer of three pounds a hundredweight for
as much first-grade as I could get, up to two tons; provided
I let him have it quickly, and, above all, quietly. Or-
monde, who was around that way and knows the natives


fairly well, tells me he thinks he can put me on the track
of some in the vicinity of Navua.
“Patten says the Kaiviti frequently know of good beds
of it. The stuff is generally in fairly deep water though,
and they lack the initiative and energy to market it. At
the same time, they take fine care that no one else does,
by keeping its whereabouts a secret.
“And there are other projects I have in view, not all as
yet clearly defined. But we have to take it in easy stages,
and see what we shall see. As you say, Hurricane, we
shall take a week —probably more. Better tell Patten to
put as much coal on the Dot as he can. We are not likely
to find coal stocks waiting for us at west coast native
villages.”
Dick Patten had everything in order on the launch,
including a crammed coal bunker, ready for an early start.
Besides Captain Hardy and her engineer, her passenger
list included the Parson, Jimmy Brent, and Dave Williams,
the quiet little second mate who, up till now, had never
shared in an outing of any sort. In addition, Pat, Jimmy’s
dog, went along.
There had been a little trouble about Pat’s inclusion.
The Parson himself had at first objected that he might
cause trouble and jealousy among the natives they would
visit, who had dogs of their own and usually were averse
to strange ones. The captain listened to the advice of the
gentle one and ordered that Pat should stay behind; at
which Jimmy, hardened sailor though he now was, showed
signs of an emotional breakdown, and confided to Mr
Ormonde that if his pal could not come, he would like
to stay behind, too, though he would not like to miss so


wonderful a trip. The captain thereupon relented, over-
ruling all objections. Jimmy’s face at once turned to
smiles. Pat, who had been cringing at the skipper’s feet
on the last round of the gangway, sensing the change in
the atmosphere, now leapt aboard, and, jumping wildly
round his young master, signified his delight at the re-
union in a curious eulogy of coughs, sniffs and whines.
The first stage of the journey was a short one. It
took them to the Navua River, a logical and convenient
stopping-place, for the native village at the mouth not only
offered shelter during their stay, but formed a centre
from which the several points it was desired to visit could
be reached, either in the launch or afoot.
It so happened that a missionary Mr Ormonde had
known when he was in the field was working in the dis-
trict, and was at the moment in this native village. This
fortuitous circumstance was turned to good account by the
Parson, with the result that Captain Hardy and his party
were not only given the use of one of the little grass and
thatch houses that surrounded the green central space of
the village, with plenty of food in the way of fish, bread-
fruit and bananas, but were offered by the buli all the
assistance he could afford them in whatever they wished
to do.


CHAPTER XIII
IN THE FIJIAN VILLAGE
The Parson’s inquiries among the Fijians revealed that
some of them knew a place a mile or two along the coast
where there was some seze; though how much was there
or whether it was accessible was another matter. As
the big tides were on, it would perhaps be possible to
find out. Unknown to Captain Hardy, a deputation from
the village visited the place at the night low tide, and
reported next morning that there was a good quantity of
the shellfish, and that, given sufficient inducement, they
were prepared to supply Captain Hardy with what he
desired. Five shillings a sack was offered and was readily
accepted as a price that would well repay the work.
When next the tide was out, uncovering the shellfish,
or at least making it easily available by diving, a strong
party of workers were on hand, some bringing the shells
ashore, the rest spreading them out on the rocks and, as
the smothering heat of the sun caused the fish to extrude
their bodies, plucking them from the shells. By evening
the men had returned, bringing with them three sacks of
cleaned shell. Captain Hardy directed that this should
be hidden and kept, with as much more as could be ob-
tained in the interim, until the return of the Dot from Ba


a few days later, when, he assured them, a settlement
pleasing to both sides would be made.
“That is very good for a start,” he remarked as he and
the second mate and the Parson contemplated the result
of the day’s business. “We shall make a handsome profit
on this deal, and an honest one. This is mainly due to
you, Mr Ormonde, and I congratulate you, the more so
because you will share equally with me in what we make.
Can you think of anything else along the same lines?”
Scarcely had the question left the captain’s lips when
Dick Patten approached. “Captain Hardy,” he said,
“could you spare a minute ? There is something here that
I think may interest you.” And with the skipper and
the Parson following, he led the way to the edge of the
jungle behind their own hut. A young Kaiviti was wait-
ing there. He wore only the usual sulu, but round his
waist, forming as it were an elaborate sash to that simple
garment, was wound a long strip of the same material.
“Show Captain Hardy your wound,” Dick directed him.
“The captain understands these things.”
“The captain will not speak to the buli or the mis-
sionary?” the native stipulated, somewhat timidly.
“He wanlts you to promise to keep it quiet, sir,”
prompted Dick.
Captain Hardy gave his assurance. The man then
proceeded carefully to remove his bandage. Coil after
coil he unrolled it, letting it fall, as he did so, in a heap
beside him. When at last the end was reached, a tiny
package was revealed. Opening this very carefully, he
held it out for the captain’s inspection.
Captain Hardy could scarcely conceal his surprise. The


package contained a beautiful black pearl. The skipper
examined it minutely, without saying a word. Then he
withdrew a few yards with his two companions.
‘That pearl is worth a hundred pounds in Sydney,” he
said. “That is, if it is as good as it looks. You have to
take risks, you know. How much money have you with
you, Mr Purser?”
“I have fifty pounds in notes,” the Parson replied, hand-
ing his wallet over to the captain. “The Mary Ellen has
another fifty pounds in the bank at Suva. That represents
our wealth. But I venture to advise caution, Captain
Hardy. Why should this man be afraid, if he has come
honestly by the pearl. Although he is a mission boy, his
action is suspicious.”
“Oh, that’s all right,” put in Patten. “Don’t be afraid
of that. These chaps often get hold of good pearls, both
yellow ones and black. The black ones are the most
valuable, of course. They get a lot that are of no value.
Diving for them in their way is pretty hard, and risky.
There’s a lot of skill required, too. You’ve got to know
how —even the right way to pick up a shell. If you don’t
lift the oyster a certain way he throws the pearl out. So
you see, when they do get a good pearl, they earn it. My
humble opinion about this chap is that he’s afraid if once
it was known he had this pearl he’d have to part up to
the missionary. I may be wrong. You ought to know
more about that, Mr Ormonde. But there you are, cap-
tain. There’s a good pearl, if I’m any judge of fruit.”
Captain Hardy beckoned the man towards a sawed-oflf
tree-stump. He examined the pearl again, and laid the
packet on the improvised table.


“What do you want for it?” he asked. The owner
shook his head.
“I will give you five pounds,” the captain said, placing
a five-pound note on the stump. Again the man shook
his head.
“Ten,” said the captain, laying down another. Still no
response.
“Fifteen.” Another inane shake of the head, but no
word.
Captain Hardy added crisp green-backs to the little pile
until it had reached twenty-five pounds. The native looked
dubious. It was a great lot of money, and for a while he
wavered. Yet it was obvious he still thought something
was wrong.
“Let it stand until the morning,” Dick Patten sug-
gested. “It’ll keep;” and he contrived to make the skipper
understand that he had a suggestion to offer in private.
“All right,” said Captain Hardy, “come and see me in
the morning. That is all I can offer just now.” And the
interview ended.
Shortly afterwards Dick quietly boarded the Dot, stirred
up her fire, and left for Navua settlement, two miles up the
river, taking the wallet of notes with him. He sought out
the storekeeper, who was also banker for the community,
and paid him good five-pound notes and a liberal com-
mission for his entire stock of silver coin.
Next morning he and Captain Hardy again interviewed
the owner of the pearl. Dick carried a small but heavy
canvas bag.
“How much will you take for the pearl?” the captain
asked. The man did not speak.


Dick Patten put the bag on the ground, untied the
fastening, and spilled the silver contents out on the grass.
“There you are!” he said; “take the lot, bag and all, and
give us the pearl.”
It was too tempting. Here was real money; not paper,
but good silver money, and heaps of it. Still uttering no
word the Kaiviti handed over his treasure; then, kneeling
down, he calmly proceeded to scoop the silver back into
the sack-
“How much was there, Patten?” Captain Hardy asked
as they walked away.
“Twenty pounds ten, exactly,” Dick said.
“Good. You are something of a psychologist, Patten;
at any rate, when it comes to dealing with these people.
Well, we haven’t done so badly for a start, and we have
plenty of scope for operations yet. By the way, we had
better be moving. After all, Nini Bo is the pearl I desire
most to get hold of, and like the boy in the soap advertise-
ment, I won’t be happy till I get it. Is Mr Ormonde com-
ing? He did speak of going up-river with his missionary
friend.”
The Parson approached just then, with Mr Price, the
missionary, who expressed a desire to take Mr Ormonde
and Jimmy Brent back with him to Bimba, the native town
up the river where he had his headquarters.
“If you approve of it, Captain Hardy,” he said, “and
can manage as well without them, it would give me great
pleasure to have them come along, and it would be a rare
experience for them, particularly the boy. If you can
spare them, I promise to take care of them and return the
precious lad, together with his two good friends, Mr Or-


monde and Pat, in time to meet you returning from the
west coast.”
Captain Hardy agreed, though not without signs of
regret at parting with young Jimmy, for whom—although
little of his time and less of his conversation were spent
on him—he had a deep and jealous affection. Having
thanked the buli for his kindly help and accommodation,
and having bidden him good-bye, the captain’s party of
three resumed their journey to Ba, while the Parson and
Jimmy went with Mr Price to his boat, which his two
native boys were getting ready for the trip home.
The boat was fitted to carry a sail where such was of
use, yet was sufficiently light to be handled with ease by
the two brawny young oarsmen.,
It was still early morning when they left, and Mr
Price said it would take almost till evening to complete
the journey—rather a long one, though he felt sure they
would find it a pleasant one.
Such, indeed, it certainly proved. Once past the
straggling little settlement of Navua, the last trace of
white civilization seemed to have gone. While the river
was still salt and subject to tide for some miles up, it
quickly narrowed down to form and dimensions more
appropriate to the name, and lost all aspect and tang of
the sea. Now the boat made its way through a fertile
valley, surrounded by distant hills, which showed pictur-
esque and round-topped wherever the vegetation permitted
the view. From these hills to the water’s edge extended
thick, tangled jungle, except where a patch was cleared
for cultivation or at the occasional villages, each of which


had its ring or semi-circle of curious thatch houses sur-
rounding a lawn-like green space.
Now and again they passed, in twos and threes, pecu-
liar rudely-made bamboo rafts, laden with piled bunches
of green bananas, being poled or sailed down to the sea.
“I s’pose they’re going to Sydney,” Jimmy ruminated.
“They’ll be unloaded round there by Circular Quay.”
“Perhaps,” answered the missionary, missing the signi-
ficance of the boy’s remark. “The banana rafts are a
good idea, don’t you think? See, they are just a shell
of bamboo stems, which are hollow and, of course, very
buoyant. The raft is only used once. It carries the
bananas down to the sea —and further if necessary, as
long as it is in sheltered water —to be sold to a collector
or loaded on to the steamer. Then the raft is broken up.
There’s plenty more bamboo up the river. All the natives
gather a few bananas and cultivate a bit of copra.”
“How do they get the copra?” Jimmy asked him. “How
do they get the coconuts off those high palm-trees?”
“Climb for them,” Mr Price said. “Wait a moment
till we get round this bend, . . . There you are; that’s how
they do it. And see, that’s how they prepare the copra.”
The boat had of a sudden come on a comparatively
open space, with little but coconut-palms on it. A native
was at that very moment climbing the tall, straight stem
of one of them; not as Jimmy would have done it, by
hugging it and shinning his way laboriously up; but, with
hands hooked loosely round the stem and feet planted
flat-soled on it, running up it like a monkey. Reaching
the canopy of leaves at the top, he quickly broke up the
cluster of nuts and sent them clattering down.


He went from tree to tree doing this, while his com-
panions gathered the coconuts into a big heap. Beside
the heap a couple of boys were squatted, dexterously re-
moving the husks by thumping each nut down on a
sharpened stake fixed in the ground in front of them.
Peeled nuts went to one side of them, the fibre was
thrown in a heap on the other.
“They still have to be split,” Mr Price volunteered.
“That is done by nicking them with a cane knife (such
as they cut the sugar-cane crop with) and then bursting
the shell in two. These halves are allowed to lie in the
sun until the kernel or meat curls off the inside of the
shell and falls out. A little more sun treatment and it is
ready to ship; the same copra you have often seen, my
boy—and smelt, no doubt —round the wharves at Sydney.
Bananas and copra —they are the two main things here.
But there’s the town ahead. We’ll soon be home. This
is Bimba.”
If Jimmy Brent’s first sight of the islands had been to
him a wonderful glimpse into boyhood’s picture-book,
then verily this visit to a native town transformed him
into an actual character in it. This was indeed another
world. Had it not been for the presence of Mr Ormonde
and the other white man, he would assuredly have re-
garded it all as a marvellous dream, from which rude
disillusionment would come with the inevitable waking.
There at Suva, and later, he had already seen the
brown islanders —had seen them paddle their canoes, and
swim, and fish, and do their wonderful diving. But all
that had been in a setting and atmosphere partly Euro-


pean; spoiled in a measure because of the presence of
mere white folks. Here, if there were any white people,
or if there ever had been (and of course there had) he
saw no signs of it. All here was real Fiji.
It was a pretty big place—Bimba; surprisingly so for
a native settlement. The houses were all the quaint,
thatched huts of the Kaiviti, except a big one for the
chief built mainly of bamboo and carved wood, and the
mission house at the end.
In the nearest hut to this latter Mr Price lived; and
here he took his two guests, allotting them one half of
his hut, divided off by a partition hung with draperies of
fine tapa cloth. The room contained two cosy-looking
raised berths built of bamboo, with neat coverlets of the
same tapa, though here decorated with bright-coloured
designs.
Jimmy afterwards saw the women making this tapa
cloth from the bark of certain trees; wetting, pounding,
then drying it into thin papery sheets. A skilful old man
marked the patterns on the cloth and coloured them
brown, red and yellow with crude pigments. That was
evidently a separate trade, and it seemed that it was
known to but a few.
As at the coast village, Mr Price’s prestige was here
sufficient to assure to the visitors the best hospitality of
the people. Food they had in abundance. Strange food
it was, to them, but all good and wholesome, and quite
satisfying; fish, cooked breadfruit, and tropical fruits,
especially bananas. Bananas seemed to be the favourite
article of diet among these people. They boiled them,
baked them, and ate them raw; and as though that were


not enough, they had uses for the other parts of the
plant besides the fruit. Thus, the thin membranous skin
behind the leaf was used as cigarette paper, the leaves
themselves to serve food on or as head bandages when
training the hair into the brush-like mop, and the fruit
pulp dried and ground to powder made very effective
insecticide.
For these people kept their premises and themselves
clean. They paid as much attention to keeping their
bodies clean as to feeding them. They had good healthy
bodies and fine physique. Here, both men and women
wore the simple sulu, with no encroachment by singlet
or other white-man garment; though the women’s drap-
ing was lengthened so that it covered the breast when
the ends were thrown over the shoulders. The skin, sub-
ject as it was to frequent immersion in water and almost
perpetually exposed to the sun, was a beautiful golden
brown; improved in texture, no doubt, by constant an-
nointing with coconut oil, obtained for this purpose by
sweating the copra.
The second day after the arrival of the Parson and
Jimmy, a meke * or meeting was held at the mission
house. Mr Price’s visit to the coast had been partly in
connection with this, and quite possibly it was intended
to serve as a tidbit in the entertainment of the visitors,
or at least of the Parson, to whom such things would
naturally appeal.
Scarcely had the missionary himself returned home
when visitors began to arrive in the town for this func-
tion. Natives came from far and near in the interior,
* Mek6-mek6, shortened to mefcd. Pronounced meekia.


their numbers taxing the housing of the place to its ut-
most. And not a few white people were in the congrega-
tion when the hour of the meke arrived. Where they
came from or how they got there was not easily apparent.
Nor did anyone seem to mind, except Jimmy, to whom
their presence was not only puzzling, but a little dis-
illusioning. The place was not so untamed after all!
Special seats were provided for these white visitors,
behind the missionary man’s table out on the level green
lawn before the mission house. The Fijians gathered in
a vast squared circle, within which a group of beautiful
native maidens, bedecked with flowers, performed grace-
ful dances. They sang, too—sweet hymn tunes taught
them by the missionaries, in English and in Bau.*
When the musical portion of the entertainment was
over, Mr Price made an appeal for funds, in response to
which individuals from the audience stepped forward in
turn and laid money on the table. Whites and natives
alike contributed, each according to his possessions, and
each donation was received by the missionary’s two aides
and raked into the common pile on the table.
Each contribution too, was received with a hearty
acknowledgment in the native tongue that sounded to
Jimmy like “Banaka!” and quite evidently it meant
“Very good” or “Thank you.” Pieces of silver the gifts
mostly were, and the bigger the piece, Jimmy noticed,
the more and louder the “ Banakas He mentioned this
to Mr Ormonde, who silenced him with a warning “s-sh”
and raised his eyebrows forbiddingly. Still, he couldn’t
help noticing it. The threepenny-bit from the wizened
* The Fijians have many dialects. Bau is the official language
used by the government and the missions.


old native beside him—Jimmy noticed him particularly
because he had no mop, but long grey hair—it earned one
“Banaka” The half-crown from the fat white planter
behind the table was greeted with a smile and “Banaka,
Banaka !”
“What does it mean, Mr Ormonde,” Jimmy persisted.
“They are saying, ‘Vanaka, vanaka!’ James, and it
means, ‘Thank you, well done!’ ”
“I see,” replied his charge. “It’s like when the Salva-
tion Army say, ‘Hallelujah,’ or like I would say, ‘Good
on yer!’ ”
“Yes, James, something like that,” the Parson agreed.
Then he quietly slipped something into the boy’s hand.
“James,” he said, ”1 think it is but meet that we should
express our gratitude in some way, and the present seems
an appropriate time. Take that and hand it to the mis-
sionary for you and me.”
James obediently threaded his way through the seated
audience, holding the coin tightly in his hand. A shilling,
he thought. Mr Price smiled encouragingly as he shyly
approached and laid it down. He saw then that it was
a sovereign! So did Mr Price and his two assistants. As
their glance fell on the gold coin they stared in wide-
eyed surprise; then clapped their hands in glee and, with
a vim that sent the startled Jimmy back in a hurry to
his seat on the grass beside the Parson, they shouted,
Vanaka, vanaka f sahnla vanaka!”
There were so many things to see and do at Bimba that
the three days the Parson and Jimmy spent there were not
nearly enough. For the boy it was one round of eager


inquiry and wondering discovery. Many things he
learned from Mr Price, from the Kaiviti, and from the
Parson himself—things on which the Parson could easily
enough have enlightened him before had he been asked.
Here, on every hand, was the prompting to ask such
questions; and Jimmy learned many things.
For instance, he learned that the copra coconuts had
no milk in them because it was all absorbed into the meat
as the nut ripened; but that he had only to get the half-
ripened ones to fill himself to glorious fullness with that
delectable fluid. He learned that pineapples did not
grow on trees after all, but on reed-like plants close to
the ground; that the top of a pineapple planted, or even
thrown down at random, in that warm, moist climate
would grow into a plant and produce fruit itself. So
would a coconut if you let it ripen until the middle all
filled up with spongy kernel. And those mussels, the kai
the natives were so fond of, and of which he could see
no trace about the water —he discovered they came from
the very bottom of the river, and that to obtain them the
women sank themselves with baskets and remained at
the bottom for an unbelievably long time.
Many things too, about the natives, though they dis-
couraged it, he found out; how they fixed their hair;
that the girls wore curls at their temples which they cut
off when they were married; that they rubbed themselves
with coconut oil; and all about their home life—what
they ate and how they played and danced and sang.
When the missionary’s two stalwarts delivered the
visitors back at the coast village, the captain and his


party were already there. They had been there for some
time, in fact, and were spending the waiting period
catching whitebait, a visitation of those delicious little
fish having just come to the river. With but the rudest
of improvised nets they were catching large quantities,
for the tiny fish were so thick that there appeared to be
more whitebait than water around the boat. One more
surprise was here for Jimmy Brent.
“Are they whitebait?” he asked. “I thought whitebait
was a kind of worm. What we had in Auckland, cooked
in balls of batter, were like worms.”
“Well,” said Dick Patten, “you live to learn. Now you
know that whitebait are fish, and that when they come
they come in big numbers. And I can tell you, sonny,
this is nowhere near as big a swarm as I’ve seen. I’ve
been up this same river when the whitebait was running
so thick that you could stand a stick upright in them and
it would travel along upright for two or three yards
before it fell. Pm not pulling your leg either, son.
That’s as true as I’m sitting in this boat. The strangest
part is, how such a thick mass of fish can move so quickly.
One day the river’s clear, the next it’s swarming alive
with whitebait; and they clear out just as lively as they
come.


CHAPTER XIV
THE FINDING OF NINI BO
It was well that this diversion occurred just at the time
of the Dot’s arrival. It served to soothe the skipper.
For Captain John Hardy was angry—violently angry—
when he arrived. And even at that, according to Dick
Patten and Mr Williams, he had been a darned sight
angrier when he left the Ba River. Small wonder.
After all the pains he had taken to make sure of Nini
Bo’s whereabouts, and after the long, tedious trip he had
made half-way round the island to find him, he learned
on reaching the mouth of the Ba that the Samoan had
only two days before left for the east coast, right past
where the captain’s party had come from; and that as-
suredly the Dot had passed him on the way. Yes, the
informants supplemented, Nini Bo had gone over to join
his sweetheart, who had herself left a month ago to join
her own people on the Rewa River —or was it at Mbau?
No, it was the Rewa, they were sure. There were to be
celebrations there, and fire-walking and such things. And
Nini 80, they had heard it said by all, would probably
marry his beloved Isa Loe while he was there.
Then had Captain Hardy given vent to his feelings.
He had permitted himself to be worked up into an un-


becoming and most unwonted passion, and had stamped
his foot violently on the shaky jetty where the Dot had
tied up and vehemently uttered several damns. Then
he had ordered Dick to turn round and get back to
Suva as fast as he could, even at the expense of bursting
his tea kettle of a boiler and burning up all the Dot’s
woodwork for fuel. By the time they reached the Navua
he had cooled down somewhat, but not altogether, so
that it was fortunate the whitebait was there. Whitebait
was a weakness of Captain Hardy’s. And then there was
the added solace of a ton and a half of seze shell, ready
bagged and planted for him.
Now that the Parson and Jimmy had arrived, whitebait
fishing forthwith ceased. The shell was loaded into a
cutter hired from one of the natives, who was to accom-
pany it and bring it back, and the Dot set out to tow the
load to Suva. That was no great task, and did not mate-
rially delay the arrival. In any case, such delay was
easily compensated by the prompt payment of a substan-
tial sum of money for the shell, and a good feast of
whitebait prepared in inimitable fashion by Sammy Alex-
ander, cook of the good ship Mary Ellen, and relished
not only by the skipper but by the whole company.
Mr Smiles reported that he had revisited Levuka and
made final arrangements regarding Alice, who would be
cared for by Jacob Schmidt and his good wife until he
came to claim her. All had gone smoothly on the Mary
Ellen. The crew had worked well and played well.
There was nothing therefore to worry about. He him-
self would see that the money and the pearl were lodged
in the bank. So that the Dot might as well resume her


journey without delay. And resume she did (Dick hav-
ing replenished her bunker overnight) early next morn-
ing; with the same complement, the same speed, the
same end in view.
The skipper knew that if it was Nini Bo’s intention
to marry, he must catch him before he did so; for he
would never get him after. He found himself roundly
condemning in his mind those who allowed themselves
to fall victims to this foolish practice of marrying, or
even to indulge in such puerile things as love affairs.
He took the matter up quite seriously. He ruminated at
great length on it and mumbled a good deal to himself
about it.
“I might have known,” he soliloquized self-pityingly;
“I might have known that something like this would
happen to spoil my plans. Why didn’t I give the Fijis
a wide berth? There’s Hurricane, my right hand man,
who I thought was sound and solid through and through
— he’s gone off. There’s Nini 80, on whom I pinned so
much faith, he’s chasing round after a woman. And
there’s ” He came to a sudden stop, thought quietly
for a while, and then, embarrassed a little even before
himself, he continued: “Although, I suppose, h’m h’m—
I’ve really got nothing against—that is, er—mind you, I
don’t exactly blame them. Why, bless my soul, I dare
say I’d do the same thing myself!”
There was no doubt now as to the place the elusive
Samoan had been making for. Those informative Kaiviti
on the pier at Ba River should have known. All roads
led to Rewa, it appeared: certainly all boats were head-
ing in that direction. A celebration out of the usual


was afoot; that was evident. The crowded natives
gathered there included every celebrity on Viti Levu.
Dick Patten pointed out a few of the more prominent
figures. He knew them all, by sight, at any rate.
“See that old man over there?” he asked—“the one
with the long hair, I mean. Well, that’s Cannibal Tom.
He’s an old identity round the island. Notice his hair—
matted and down to his waist. Doesn’t believe in the
mop. He always comes to Suva to see the steamer come
in, and then, as soon as she’s gone—back he goes to
the hills.
“That other old chap is Patu Ambrose. He took part
in the big massacre of missionaries some years ago. On
this river it was, just about here. He helped to kill the
missionaries. Helped to eat them, too, so they say.
They were cannibals in those days. He’s since been
made a patu by the British Government. That’s about
the same as making him a ‘sir.’ ”
It was not hard to trace Nini 80. He had come here
for the dual purpose of taking part in the festivities and
of being near his beloved: probably more for the latter
than for the former. It was only as expected there-
fore, that when the astute Dick Patten, being more
versed in Fijian ways than the rest, found him, he was
in the bosom of the girl’s family, imbibing deep draughts
of happiness from her sweet presence. Nor did he seem
at all disposed to leave it.
He recognized Captain Hardy, when he identified him-
self, with a disappointing lack of enthusiasm, and when
reminded that he had tentatively agreed through an inter-
mediary to accompany the skipper on his venture, at first


denied it and flatly refused to go. Subtle threats from
Dick Patten, which ordinarily would have had the desired
effect on a native, were here of no avail. It was not
until Captain Hardy appealed to the better qualities
of the man, reminding him that, but for his timely rescue,
he would not now be here, and that therefore he at least
owed him a debt of gratitude, did Nini Bo show any
signs of relenting. Even when he had acknowledged
that it was his duty to go, there still remained the ques-
tion of his allegiance to his girl. What could he do about
that? He and Isa Loe were to be married, and how
could he put that off? Would Captain Hardy interview
his girl and her mother and give them his assurance that
Nini would be back to claim his bride? Furthermore,
would the captain, to console that sweet young lady fur-
ther, and as a guarantee that she would not in the mean-
time give her hand to some other suitor—would he give
Nini Bo his word of honour that of any treasure revealed
to the party by him, he should receive one-fourth part?
The captain agreed to these rather exacting demands,
and straightway was taken to the home of Isa Loe. The
young lady, aided and abetted, it must be said, by her
mother, at first would not hear of letting her handsome
lover go; but a shrewd proviso proposed by the elder lady,
that in the event of the non-return of Nini Bo the
daughter should receive the aforementioned share of
treasure, and that the captain should leave with them
a promise under his hand to that effect, led at last to
an amicable settlement. Nini Bo would be ready to bid
farewell to his friends and accompany Captain Hardy
on the day after the morrow. On the morrow was to be


held the chief event of the festival, the feast of the
firewalkers, and he could not think of leaving without
seeing that rare spectacle.
The captain resigned himself to wait another two days.
“We’ll make the best of it by seeing the firewalkers our-
selves,” he told the rest of the party. “It should be
interesting, at least.”
“That it will be, sir,” Dick Patten said. “You’ll not
be sorry you were delayed, captain, I’ll bet. It’s only
at rare intervals and on special occasions they stage this
fire-walking business, and it is well worth seeing. Mbengga
is the home of the firewalkers. Fire-walking is a kind
of trade secret. Only the father and the eldest son in a
family know how to do it. When the father dies the sec-
ret is passed on to the next son, and so on. Only two are
allowed to know it, and it is kept a close family concern.
The firewalkers retire to the hills in Mbengga two weeks
before the day appointed for the performance, to prepare;
and during that period they are never seen. Nobody
knows what they do there —whether they put anything
on their bodies or not—and nobody ever will. But wait
and see the show to-morrow, captain, and judge for your-
self.”
The “show” was all that Dick had claimed for it. In
a little cleared space between the hills, surrounded by
bush and boulders, which latter provided good vantage
points for the onlookers, a rough bed of stones had been
laid. On this bed a roaring fire was burning, and had
been burning since the early morning. As the fire died
down, leaving the stones red-hot, the firewalkers, twelve
in number, naked but for a garland of some green vine


about the loins, walked boldly on to the stones, carrying
pork, turtle, breadfruit, yams and other dishes, which
they laid about on the hot rocks to cook. At intervals
thereafter they went forth to attend to the cooking food,
taking not the slightest notice of the heat, in which the
viands sizzled merrily. A mixture of savoury smells now
pervaded the air, and in an hour or something better the
food was ready. The firewalkers then approached once
more, and, taking up the smoking dishes, bore them tri-
umphantly to the waiting guests, to whom the food was
served out on fresh green banana leaves. While all pre-
sent, natives and whites, partook heartily of the bounteous
free feast, the firewalkers, for their further entertainment,
once more invaded the heated arena and walked and
danced on the hot rocks for the space of nearly another
hour.
The captain, Jimmy Brent, and others who were wit-
nessing this marvellous performance for the first time,
sat spellbound and silent till the end. The skipper in-
stinctively rubbed his eyes.
“Well/’ he said, “that’s a very wonderful thing! I
wonder if there’s any catch about it—any magic or mes-
merism.”
“Not on your life, sir,” Dick assured him. “Lend me
your handkerchief, Captain Hardy, if you’ve got a good
one about you.”
Captain Hardy handed over his handkerchief quite in-
nocently. Dick picked up a stone, fist size, and wrapped
the handkerchief around it. Approaching to within a
few feet of the hot bed of stones, he hurled the missile
sc that it shot horizontally over them at a height of about


three feet. Before it had travelled more than three parts
of the distance across, the handkerchief was afire!
The day of the firewalking over, Captain Hardy secured
his prize and made for Suva without further loss of
time. On the way he talked much to Nini Bo in order to
get the completed story of which he had as yet heard
only an alluring, fragmentary outline. The Samoan, he
found, was extremely reticent. Not deliberately, either;
but from very obvious fear.
He knew about the Island of the Two Peaks —yes. He
had been on the island—yes. That is where he had been
when the captain picked him and his boat up that time.
But what he had seen on the island, what he knew of
its secrets, he could not tell. The pirate would kill him
if he did. He had said so, Nini Bo was afraid of Bully
Hayes. Bully Hayes had many men. He found out
everything. No, he must not tell; he dare not.
The Dot went straight back. She did not call any-
where on the way round, nor touch at the wharf at Suva.
There was always the possibility that Nini Bo might yet
change his mind. The skipper therefore went direct to
the Mary Ellen.
When the party had eaten, and the captain had con-
ferred with Mr Smiles, he ordered the Parson to look
into Sammy Alexander’s arrangements and see to it that
sufficient supplies were aboard for what might prove a
protracted voyage. This and other necessary things put
in hand, he retired with Hurricane and Nini Bo to the
sanctuary of the cuddy.
“Now,” said the skipper, when they were seated, “I


want your story, Nini 80. I want you to tell us all about
the island and what you saw on the island. You need
not be afraid. I saved your life once, remember, and I
am not likely to hurt you now. Bully Hayes is gone;
he no longer sails the seas. You have nothing to fear
from him. You are on the Mary Ellen. The Mary
Ellen is bound for the Island of the Two Peaks. You
are going on her, whether you like it or not. So there
you are, my man. Will you tell us what you know, or
shall we have to find out? Do you want your share of
what we get, or do you want to go for nothing?”
“I would tell the captain all,” Nini answered, ‘Tut I
am afraid. Bully Hayes—can the captain promise me
I am safe from him?”
“You are as safe as the bank. Bully Hayes, I tell
you, will never trouble anyone,” said the skipper; and
then, suddenly losing his patience, he demanded, “Tell
me, for God’s sake, tell me—was there a man on the
island ?”
“Yes, captain, there was one —two men.”
“Anyone else? Tell me!”
“Captain, there was a mamma; a white lady was
there.”
“A mammal ” ejaculated Captain Hardy; “a mammal
Thank God! Hurricane, I said so. I said so all along.
She’s there! I knew it; I knew it. Something—l don’t
know what it was—something told me so. , . . We’ll get
under way as soon as it’s light enough to get out of this
coral cage, Mr Smiles. Have the Dot hoisted aboard
and stowed. Tell Patten. He’ll wrap her up. See that
all hands are aboard to-night. Leave the dinghy in the


water. , . . Everything all right? Good. Now we can
have the rest of the story. Come on, my man, tell us
all about it.”
Nini 80, now satisfied that he was safe, and encour-
aged by the joyful effect his preliminary bits of infor-
mation had already produced, composed himself to his
task. He told of how he had been led by a series of
circumstances to believe that Bully Hayes had a secret
island haunt somewhere up north, and how he had used
his own extensive knowledge of the islands and of island
peoples to find out where it was. How he had made
his way first to the Ellice group, thence to the Gilberts,
where he bought a small cutter and ventured alone on a
perilous voyage to find the pirates’ island. How, after
he had found it, made a landing, searched the pirates’
camp and discovered a plant of enough money and pearls
to make him ten times a rich man for life, the pirates
had suddenly returned, caught him red-handed, and sailed
off with him south towards the Fijis. How, after ill-
treating him for a week, Bully Hayes had set him adrift
in his own boat, after cutting the mast out of her and
promising him, with many terrible oaths, that if ever he
breathed a word to anyone about the Island of the Two
Peaks, he would cut his throat and feed him to the sharks.
And how, left in mid-ocean to do the best he could with
a jar of water, a few coconuts, and a pair of hopelessly
inadequate oars, he would certainly have died had not
the Captain Hardy himself rescued him.
“But the white men and the marama? What about
them?” queried the captain anxiously. “You have not


mentioned them. How do you know they were there?”
“I saw them, captain.”
“Then why didn’t Bully Hayes see them?” put in the
mate. “If he could find you, he could find them, and
he would have treated them the same way,”
“Ah, yes. I will tell the captain and Mr Smiles why.
. , . When I landed I hid my boat. Then I searched
around where the pirates had been and found their tracks
to the caves. I searched more and found the money
and pearls. I left them there till I was rested and ready
to go. I would stay a while and see what was on the
island, and gather coconuts and food to take me home. I
wandered through the thick forest to the foot of the
mountain—the mountain of the two peaks. I heard
voices in the forest. I was afraid. I hid. I saw two
men, then a woman. I followed them, hiding behind
trees. They were ragged. They went into the thick
bush, and up to the mountain that cuts the island in
halves. It was steep and had great cliffs. I did not
follow; I would not be trapped. I went back to prepare
food and get away. The pirates came then and caught
me.”
“Well,” said Captain Hardy, when Nini Bo had
finished, “that seems to round the story off logically.
What do you think of it, Hurricane?”
“It sounds all right,” the mate replied. “It’s encourag-
ing, at any rate. There’s no doubt there were people
on the island. The Brents may or may not have been
among them. But suppose they were. That’s a few years
ago, and the question is: are they still alive ?”
“God grant they are,” said the skipper fervently. “They


are in His hands, Sam. So, indeed, are we. I let it
rest at that. Good night. . . . Oh, Mr Smiles, tell some-
one off to row me ashore in half an hour’s time.”
The skipper retired to his cabin, and wrote a letter
to Mr Strachan, which, after Calliope Mick had rowed
him ashore, he placed in the box at the post office with
his own hands. Here is what the skipper wrote:
Suva, Fiji Islands.
My Friend Highly Esteemed, —
The Mary Ellen leaves here to-morrow on what I feel con-
fident will be a successful venture. I have heard enough by
now to give me good hopes that Captain Brent is on Pinnacle
Island, and that, moreover, my beloved is with him. I am
confident we shall return, bringing them with us, in the course
of a few months.
Ui d ICW 1 ilwil Lild.
Now, my trusted and very good friend, I ask you to add
one more to the many services you have so generously ren-
dered me. You have my papers, my authority and power of
attorney. Please proceed at once with the erection of a cot-
tage on the cliffs at Waverley, in every way similar to mine
and close to it. Have it furnished and a flower garden made,
and have it and mine ready for occupation say six, nine, or
twelve months from now.
You will I know, do me the honour of regarding this re
quest and the information I have given you as strictly con
fidential. My very kindest regards and thanks.
Believe me, your devoted friend,
John Hardy,


CHAPTER XV
THE ISLAND OF THE TWO PEAKS
The prognostication of the unpolished but astute Sam
Smiles was amply justified. Captain Hardy, now that
his course was definitely and clearly marked out, waited
only till he had got his ship out through the channel in
the reef—a job which brooked no haste —to prove the
truth of the mate’s words. From then on, the Mary
Ellen did verily take the bone in her teeth,* as Hurricane
had put it, and Captain Hardy looked neither to right
nor left. Every stitch of canvas, every wisp of air, was
availed of, as she made her way northward through the
maze of islands big and little, coral reefs and passages
that characterize the vicinity of the Fiji group. Fortu-
nately, Captain Hardy knew these seas like a book. Each
one of the hundred and one palm-plumed dots that in
turn appeared over the horizon on port or starboard bow
meant to him not merely that, but definitely a named
milestone —a mark of location and of noted progress to
the north.
Then, clear of the Fijis, with their swarm of island
minutiae, into the more and more open seas; seas blue
as cobalt always, save where now and then a smudge
♦ The line of white foam made by the cleaving bows of a fast-
moving ship.—J. L,


on the sea’s edge developed with close approach to green
palmy spot, with its necklace of white-foamed coral. Like
that it was for days, for a week, for two —blue, sparkling
seas through which the Mary Ellen made her merry way;
running, gambolling along like a big fluffy dog, with that
bone of hers always in her teeth, the foam-flecks from
her watering chops flying behind in a long white parted
line on the blue.
Lovely days, and peaceful, these were for the com-
pany on board. What more, indeed, could human hearts
desire? Rest, and beauty all around. Nothing to dis-
turb the quiet thought. Captain Hardy looked out over
the smiling ocean each day and whistled. The mate said
not a word. Behind that mask of his, sweet thoughts
were passing, doubtless of the days when this same blue
sea and fair breeze would have borne him back to his
love —and happiness. The Parson and Jimmy Brent talked
and laughed as they hung over the topgallant rail, dis-
cussing things past and to come; wondering at the mar-
vellous speed of those escorting porpoises, the crisp,
rustling flying-fish that rose now and again from the
warm sea in swarms, often to leave one of their number
gasping on the deck, a subject for curious investigation
by Jimmy.
Of work there was little or none. The canvas scarcely
needed touching. There were, as Captain Hardy had more
than once said, “enough hands to eat the ship.” Each
little job was disposed of in quick time by many workers.
Then they played, these men. Sam Alexander fed them
well. He was a good cook and a good shipmate. When
he was done in his galley he came on deck and crooned


to his banjo about his loved Ole Man Ribber and Dixie
Land. Bill Ardous and Pete Hawkins, talking their
trick at the wheel in turn with Mick Farley, Patten and
Dan Graham, took a willing cue from the merry Sam, and,
warming to their own favourite melodies of shipwreck in
sundry places and voyages in whales, formed a nucleus
for the inevitable gathering on the after deck for merri-
ment and music.
“What Oi want to know,” said Calliope Mick one day
in the midst of the conviviality, “What Oi want to know
is, is this a stage panthomime we’re perforrmin’? Blue
skoi, blue wather, broight sun, gintle ziphers of wind, no
wurrk at all an’ plinty of toime to do it in, banjos
shtrummin’ and coloured minstrels singin’ to us, an’ the
divil a thing to worry us but atin’ our males; —is this a
voyage or a panthomime?”
“Call it what you like, Mick; it’ll do me,” said Dan
Graham. “Do you know that this reminds me of the
blackbirding days. Those voyages we made for a cargo
of Islanders were like this—no stops anywhere, no load-
ing cargo —just a straight run to where we were going;
weather just as sweet as this very often; then, when we
had a ship full—straight back to Queensland.”
“Och, Oi wouldn’t have too much to say about thim
days,” said Mick. “If ye’ll parrdon me sayin’ it, Danny
me boy, it’s nothin’ to be proud of to have bane a black-
birder.”
“No, Mick,” Dan replied, “I agree with you there;
and except that we’re just here by ourselves I wouldn’t
talk about it. It’s one of the chapters in my life I’d like
to blot out, between you and me. When a man signs on


a recruiting ship he doesn’t know what he’s taking on.
Once he’s in the swim he has to do many things he
doesn’t want to do—things that hurt him to do, unless
he’s stayed long enough at the game to get hardened. We
did many things like that. See, hoys, we often act first,
on the spur of the moment; and aftenvards we think.
Then we find we’ve done a silly thing.
“Now when 1 look back 1 often think of how we’d
anchor at the mouth of some hit of an island river, and
a boatload of us would go up the river to the natives’
village. They’d all come round, the poor devils, rings
in their ears and noses, sometimes naked as they were
born, curious to see what we had in the way of trinkets.
That is, provided they’d never had a visit before. If
they had, they were shyer and harder to get near. Well,
our chap would get round the chief, bribe him a bit, and
finish up by taking a boatload of his men away in tow.
They’d cut up a bit when they saw what the joke was;
but those who jibhed at the boat we shoved in. They
sometimes made an attack on us when it was too late—
sent a shower of spears after us, or even a shot or two
from old muskets. Once on the ship they were safe.
They were as helpless as sheep. . . .
“Of course they signed on. Oh yes; they put their
mark to a paper agreeing to work on a plantation for so
long. They had no more idea what they were marking
than the man in the moon. But that mark made the dif-
ference between recruiting and slave-raiding.
“At the end of their three years or whatever it was,
they were supposed to be returned to the islands—to the
Solomons, New Hebrides or the Gilberts, usually. So


they were —some of them, and in a way. I saw a shipload
of them leave the Herbert River in—l think it was in
ninety-three. There were over four hundred of them,
poor ignorant things, still with the rings in their ears
and noses, but with calico shirts on now—pants too, some
of them —and decorated with beads and geegaws. They
were going back home —to homes that were no longer
there for them, likely enough. . . .
“The ship piled up on the Barrier Reef and went to
pieces. About a quarter of them escaped. The sea and
the sharks got the rest. . . . That was just one incident
in the blackbirding business.”
It was not to be expected, of course, that such ideal sail-
ing conditions would continue indefinitely. Captain
Hardy certainly did not expect it. He knew too well that
in those tropical seas drastic and sudden weather changes
were the rule rather than the exception, and no one had
been more surprised than he at the prolonged good spell
they had enjoyed; albeit it greatly pleased him. It
seemed now, with the approach to the Equator, that good
King Neptune, who rules the destiny of the sea and con-
trols its emotions and moods, had thought it meet—as a
preliminary to boarding them and displaying his kingly
authority at their crossing of the line—to show these
people, lest they take his domain too cheaply, that he was
there to be reckoned with.
Perhaps it was Dan Graham’s talk of calm, sunny,
workless voyages, crowning the continued merrymaking
on the after-deck there, that nettled him. But be that as
it may, Dan Graham’s story ended the even tenor of the


Mary Ellen’s cheerful way. From then, the weather and
the sea showed them every other phase and temper.
First, that fair breeze that had bowled the Mary Ellen
along so merrily ceased, and a dead calm fell over all.
The schooner’s sails hung as limp and were as useless as
would have been bare masts. The sea assumed a smooth,
unrippled surface, broadly furrowed by a long, lazy
swell. The shiny, oily appearance thus produced, together
with the sluggish wallowing of the lifeless schooner, was
almost nauseating. Moreover, the equatorial sun, now
unmodified by air movement of any sort, beat down piti-
lessly, making the decks so hot that the pitch from the
seams spewed out in globuled lines. With the exception
of Sammy Alexander, whose duties, it seemed, continued
no matter what came or went, the chief occupation of
those on board now was trying to keep cool. It was by
no means easy. The best that could be done was to rig
an awning over the after-deck, the customed meeting-
place, and throw innumerable buckets of water, hauled up
over the side, on the hot planking.
Captain Hardy paced up and down beside the wheel
most of the time, glancing frequently at his little dog-
vane on the rail; while he whistled idly, inanely to him-
self —or for the wind. For yes, Captain John Hardy,
sound, sane, eminently sensible man that he was known
to be, still did that! —whistled for the wind, as his super-
stitious forbears a hundred years before him had done.
It was dreary, this existence, for those on board. They
were doing nothing; they were getting nowhere. A year
of this and they would be no nearer their island. Five
days of it brought a feeling of indolence, impatience—


almost of despondency—to all on the ship. In the dol-
drums verily they were—the Mary Ellen and her crew.
Then came a change, with that suddenness the equa-
torial regions know. Vanished was the oily calm, and
the Mary Ellen was roused from her dreams to plunge
once more into a fight for her life. Genial Captain
Hardy, robbed of his old self somewhat by petulance and
impatience during the trying becalmment, now threw that
old self completely aside and revealed the seaman. He
was now the Old Man. Mr Smiles likewise, done with
his thoughts of love, and later too, his impatient sulki-
ness, was once again Hurricane, the mate —man of the
sea. His lean face took on again its old, hard lines as
he roared to his men to take in sail and prepare for the
fight. They welcomed the opportunity to be at it again
—to be doing something.
A fight it was, like the one they had had before in
the Tasman Sea, Not quite so fierce, but bad enough.
It kept all hands alert and busy; and it lasted for three
days, this blow. Moreover, the storm was from the south-
ward. It drove the ship north, in the direction she was
going. Captain Hardy was glad of that. The storm
merely put life into the thing. What matter if it was
rough? He was getting there.
“Take full advantage of it,” he told the mate. “Put
on the sail whenever she’ll stand it. Our course is clear
Mr Smiles; follow the 180 th due north.”
Hurricane did that, as far as he was able. With only
rare and fleeting glimpses of the sun it was not so easy
for him—or the skipper—to stick strictly to a course.
But between them they saw to it that none of that good


wind was wasted. Rough and rude though it was, it was
useful. Most of the time the Mary Ellen drove along
fast enough under almost bare poles. But at each slacken-
ing of the wind sail was crowded on.
“Get it out,” Hurricane would bawl. “She’ll stand it.
Make up for the holiday, lads.”
The Mary Ellen did make up for lost time. How far
she travelled during those three days of storm was hard
to tell. It was hard to tell, too, just where she had got
to. Northward, as a general thing, to be sure. And in a
hurry. That was as much as anyone could know.
The fourth day the sun shone, and the skipper got his
bearings. He was south-east of Pinnacle Island, by his
reckoning; missing it by but a hundred miles ! The storm
had done wonders; had trundled him along to his destina-
tion more quickly than all his fine sailing could ever have
done.
Next day, towards evening, something appeared over
the edge of the sea. Just a smudge, but Nini Bo’s quick
eye, now alert, caught it. He sidled up to the skipper and
Hurricane.
“Captain,” he said, with rather timid excitement, “Cap-
tain, that is the island of the two peaks!”
Hurriedly the pair got their glasses on to it. Neither
spoke. Fervently they hoped the Samoan was right.
Gradually the spot resolved itself into a double pointed
peak, then a faint outline of palm-trees, then a strip of
white in front. There was no doubt about it. Before
them was their long-sought objective.
“He’s right, Mr Smiles,” said the skipper, with ill-
concealed emotion. “Great eyesight, eh? It can be no


other. He’s right. There’s only one island like that in
the South Seas; that’s Pinnacle Island!”
“Will the captain stand off till to-morrow?” the
Islander asked. “The reef is bad, and the light fails soon.
To-morrow I can show the captain the channel.”
“Yes, my man, I think you are right,” said the skipper.
“I shall stand well off till morning. But we have the
launch you know. . . . Mr Smiles, have the Dot stripped.
Let Patten get her ready. We’ll drop her over shortly
and you can take Nini Bo and let hirp show you the way
in. We’ll stay out here to-night and give the island a
good offing. If you report favourably, I’ll go in with her
to-morrow, for I dislike these uncharted seas.”
Once again, to the joy and pride of Dick Patten, the
Dot came into her own. Once again she proved her merit.
Before nightfall she had returned, having splendidly
accomplished her task. The mate reported that the en-
trance was safe, though, as Nini Bo had previously pointed
out, a little tricky; and that inside the reef was a safe,
cosy anchorage, with deep water and plenty of room for
the Mary Ellen to move round and choose her position.
She would be quite safe in there, he thought, with any-
thing but the roughest of weather. Mr Smiles also in-
dicated to the captain a few points he had noted to serve
as leads in making the channel.
“Very well, then,” said Captain Hardy, “I’ll take her
in to-morrow. We’ll wait for good light and high water.
From what you say, the channel will have to be taken
carefully. We must watch, too, and not be caught in
there. To come out of a strange anchorage in a hurry
is no easy thing. Nor is it wise. Meantime we shall


stand off a little for the night. These coral reefs are in
a measure gregarious. Wherever you find one, there are
usually more about. Daylight is the only time to be any-
where near them.”
The captain thereupon put his ship about and
manoeuvred to the south until any risk of a lee shore
was avoided. Thus under shortened canvas he spent the
night in safe water.
Next day, as soon as the tide was in full ebb, the vessel
was headed for the channel. The wind being a point
abaft the beam, everything was favourable for an en-
trance. The skipper, however, realizing that the mate
had gained useful local knowledge, wisely allowed him to
pilot her in. Under close-reefed mainsail, jibs and stay-
sail the ship behaved well. As a precaution, men were
stationed at the main halyards and jib downhauls, and
both anchors were in the chains ready to drop at the
word.
The wisdom of allowing the mate to pilot the vessel
in became obvious as the channel narrowed. The bearing
of a tree, the colour of the water, the position of yonder
bluff, were points of importance the knowledge of which
could only have been gained by prior observation. With
the unassuming but indispensable prompting of Hurri-
cane, the skipper made the difficult passage with as little
outward concern as if he had been entering Port Jackson.
Once inside, he swung her boldly round in one grand
sweep till she faced about to the open sea. The breeze
had meantime freshened, and the mainsail and outer jib
were lowered to reduce her way. As she came to the
desired anchorage the mate ordered: “Let go your fore-


jib halyards! Let go your starboard anchor! Give her
thirty fathoms.” The jib clattered down and the chain
rattled out.
“Thirrty fathoms it is, sorr!” came from Mick Farley.
“Hold her at that,” rejoined the mate.
Within a very short time of entering the channel, the
Mary Ellen was riding peacefully inside the barrier,
nearly a mile from the beach that bordered the blue bay
with a half-moon of yellow.
That beach, and the palm-plumed forest beyond, cul-
minating in the curious double peak, were alluring. To
Captain Hardy they were the goal that he had travelled
nearly four thousand miles to reach. Behind that beach,
within that dark forest somewhere, was the secret he
would learn. He was impatient to be ashore. He could
not wait. He hurriedly gave orders to Mr Smiles to make
the ship snug, and to have the Dot put over and got ready.
Then, dropping into the dinghy alongside Nini 80, he bade
that worthy get him ashore quickly.
The Samoan soon covered the distance to the beach,
and pulling their boat up, the two eagerly yet cautiously
entered the bush. A glance around was sufficient to show
that no human had been there for a long time; though
Nini Bo unerringly led the way to where the pirates’ hut
had been; and indeed still was—what was left of it. But
no track, no sound of voices, no boat, nor any indication
of present habitation was discernible. The two pene-
trated the forest for a distance. It was deserted and
silent, save for the chatter of such wild creatures—
monkeys, parrots and the like —as resented the intrusion
of their domain.


“If there is any person on this island,” said the captain—
and his tone betrayed something of disappointment—“that
person does not frequent this portion of it, but rather
is hidden in that black forest somewhere—perhaps behind
the mountain. It behoves us, I think, to run no risks, but
to wait at least till we have more company. As our pre-
liminary inspection yields no discovery, except to bear
out thus far what you have told me, Nini 80, our sensible
course will be to establish ourselves ashore and set about
a thorough and systematic examination of the place.”
The Samoan, not at all eager himself to proceed further
into the unknown, readily fell in with the captain’s views,
and they lost no time in retracing their way to the beach
and returning to the ship. Captain Hardy ordered the
second mate, Mr Williams, to remain on board the Mary
Ellen, with Dan Graham and Hawkins, and the rest of
the company to go ashore.
Dick Patten landed them all in two loadings, together
with such implements as were necessary to establish a
camp. Later, he brought over a supply of provisions
ample to sustain them for a few days. After the skipper
had set men to keep guard at one or two points of van-
tage, the silence of the island was for a while disturbed
by the sound of hammer and axe and the shouts of the
men. That night they would sleep ashore, deserting their
sea-rocked bunks for couches of fragrant boughs laid on
mother earth. The crew, wearied by their unusual exer-
cise and lulled to drowsiness by the warm, sweet breath
of the woods, early retired to rest. Captain Hardy and the
mate remained to talk things over.
“This is all very novel and interesting,” Hurricane told


the skipper; “but I can’t quite see your object in bringing
all hands ashore—let alone the wisdom of it. Do you
think you’re wise to leave the Mary Ellen out there like
that?”
“Yes and no, Hurricane,” the captain replied. “Of
course, it is taking a risk, in a harbour like this. Yet if
I left the crew aboard her she would be no safer, and the
hands, perhaps, not quite so safe. The alternative would
be to leave her cruising outside; and as she would have to
be manned to do that, I would have at most two or three
men with me to investigate the island. I think you will
agree that that would not be wise. If this island is in-
habited, or should it be visited, I need some men by me.
In any case it will not take long to find out all there is
to find out, and I hope to be finished and out of here in
a few days. Meantime, by the way, I must arrange for
Mr Williams and his two men to have a day ashore. I
think my apparent indiscretion can be justified by ex-
pediency.
“Another aspect, Hurricane, and one not unimportant,
is this: To all of the ship’s company except you, Nini Bo
and myself, the aim of this venture is still a secret. Now,
a voyage without pay, without objective or incentive, re-
quires something to compensate. Here we have that
something in the form of a novel adventure. A visit to a
virgin tropical island is far from being a commonplace
event, and apart from the hope of achieving our object
our stay here should prove a most pleasurable experience.
But let us now get some sleep, Sam, for to-morrow we
are in for a busy day.”


CHAPTER XVI
THE WRECK OF THE MARY ELLEN
Bully Hayes, the pirate, when he selected this secret
resort of his, had shown not only astuteness, but down-
right good taste. Pinnacle Island, besides being out of
the way and very little known, provided as beautiful and
desirable a setting for a camp as could well be found.
The island was shaped roughly like a kidney, with a
length of about three and a half miles and a breadth
of probably half that. The concave side of the kidney,
with the encircling barrier of coral, which here bulged
off-shore for a mile or more, formed the harbour in which
the ship lay. The double-pointed mountain which gave
the island its distinction and its name ran the entire
length, forming what appeared to be an insuperable bar-
rier. On the bay side of the island, that is to say, the
south, the forest on the edge of which the camp had been
made ran from the beach to the base of the mountain and
partially up its steep sides, leaving two-thirds of its
eight hundred odd feet a sheer peak of bare rock, divided
into two sharp points by a defile, the narrow bottom of
which was lost in the thick jungle.
What lay on the northern side of the mountain was a
matter only of conjecture. Only one of the present visitors


had even seen it. He had merely passed around it on his
former visit, looking for a landing. The reef, he had
found at that time, made the island unapproachable from
the north. In any case, from what he remembered of it,
the shore was rocky and rose almost sheer out of the
water, so that a landing there was out of the question.
It thus appeared to Captain Hardy that the only portion
of Pinnacle Island that was habitable, or even accessible,
was the south side —the part on which his party was
camped. How far this habitable portion extended he
could not say, except that it certainly seemed that the
mountain definitely marked its limit.
As he and Nini Bo had already penetrated almost to
the foot of the hill without seeing any recent trace of
human beings, Captain Hardy could only deduce that his
chance of finding any on the island were remote. Though
outwardly he maintained a cheery, optimistic attitude,
the joyous hope within him that had reached its culminat-
ing point when he found himself at last at anchor off his
long-sought island had now almost completely vanished.
After all, he ruminated, his premonition had misled him.
Or was it that it had come to him—or been obeyed—too
late? Were all his hopes, his endeavours, to end in
nothing? Surely not. He deserved better than that.
But if that was to be his fate, he would have the consola-
tion of knowing that he had tried, and tried hard.
At worst, there would be some compensations. He
would not altogether have lost by the venture. Nor would
his faithful men for that matter. They would all be the
richer for it, both in experience and in a more material
sense. . . . But after all, he was only jumping to con-


elusions. They had not explored the island yet. Who
could tell what they would find when they did. Certainly
they would find romance and adventure aplenty in a
place like this.
So indeed it proved. If the rest of the men knew aught
of what had brought Captain Hardy here, they did not
betray it, but behaved as though they regarded the whole
thing as a picnic, pure and simple. They were in holiday
spirit, and all the requisites for indulging their mood
were at hand.
Released now from the confines of the ship, they
gulped in the sweet, exhilarating air of the woods, swam
in the pellucid waters of the blue bay, and romped and
rambled like children let out of school. Sam Alexander,
if he had brought but the smallest part of his galley
equipment ashore, had brought all of his culinary cunning.
Under his temporary shelter of canvas and poles he con-
cocted savoury dishes to satiate their ravenously healthy
appetites.
Nini Bo here demonstrated that, although he possessed
initiative and other traits that raised him above even the
high average standard of Polynesian, he yet retained in
full measure that native propensity for procuring food
that is so outstanding in all the Islanders. The first day
had not passed before he added to the delighted Sammy’s
larder not only delicious fish—caught in some way known
only to himself—but coconuts (for which he climbed the
palms like a monkey) breadfruit and yams. The latter
cost him more effort to obtain, but evidently to him they
were worth it, for he appeared to regard them as his staple
diet, much as a European would regard his bread. The


yams and the breadfruit he had to cook himself, they
being outside the ken of Sammy; but so delicately and
deferentially was the intrusion on the latter’s domain
made, that the cook of the Mary Ellen took no great
exception to it, but rather welcomed the proffered assist-
ance.
“You doan need to ’polojise, Nini, mah boy,” the
negro told him. “Ah ain’t above sha’in mah dommersile
wif anudder cullud gemman, no matter if dat said gemman
ain’t quite so cullud as de f’mentioned Sam Alexander.
Half-baked nigger though you is, you’s welcome to come
an’ cook you noo-fangled tunnups an’ tree dumplins to
you own taste —s’long’s you-all doan come de bounce on
dis chile an’ fergit who am de chef heah. So lon’s dey’s
a crew to the Merry Ellum, Ah anms to be de cook of
dat ship, afloat or asho’; so doan you asseverate no
authority in dis heah kitchen.”
But Sammy’s misgivings were soon dispelled. Other
things were to occupy the Samoan’s time from now on,
things far more important even than cooking his beloved
yams. For Captain Hardy, having quickly recognized
that his own store of land-craft was quite inadequate for
his purpose of discovery, would require Nini’s services.
With no hint of former habitation but the decrepit pirates’’
hut and a few rusted odds and ends scattered about it;
with the paths they must have used long since washed
out or overgrown by bush, it needed eyes and a native
cunning like the Samoan’s to accomplish anything. The
Islander, too, had the added advantage of having visited
the place before, and thus possessed a fairly accurate


idea of the lay of the land—where those places and points
most of interest to the skipper were located.
Chief of these were the pirates’ cave, which apparently
had been intended to serve as a last defence in case of a
surprise attack, and the treasure hole further along
amongst the jungle-coVered rocks, where the pirates’
hoard of money and pearls had been hidden. Nini 80, on
his former visit, must have drawn an indelible mental
picture of these, for, despite the lapse of years and the
ravages of weather and time, he made his way to them
with little trouble through the tangled vines and almost
impassable rocks; and with a speed that made it very
difficult for the others to follow him.
The pirates’ cave was in much the same state as he had
seen it before; naturally guarded and hidden from
approach by land, yet open to the sea and commanding a
good view of the entrance and landing. As before, a few
old papers and magazines were stuck in interstices of the
rock face, remarkably well preserved for their age. The
same crude drawings and mottoes adorned the walls, and
even an old tobacco pipe lay on the sandy floor, from
which latter, however, all trace of footmarks had now
disappeared.
Nini scarcely noticed these things. Nor did Captain
Hardy. The pirates had been there, that was evident;
but no further significance attached to the circumstances.
Past the cave they hurried on then, hot on the trail of
the nimble Samoan, to where he knew the smaller treasure
cave was. Would the treasure still be there, was the
question uppermost in his mind. The same thought was
hammering away at Captain Hardy and the mate. Had


the pirates taken it away? Or had Bully Hayes been
driven or retired from the sea before he had the chance
to do so. That was what they wanted to know. Nini
travelled faster as he drew nearer the place, heedless of
the vines that scratched his bare brown skin, regardless of
the risks he ran as he hopped from rock to rock along the
steep side of the bluff.
At last he arrived. Ere the others had come up, he
had wormed his way through the narrow slit in the rock
that gave access to the cave and, groping in the dim light
to the far corner, had removed the innocent-looking rock
slab which he remembered had covered the hoard. Then,
on his knees, he felt downward.
Only an empty hole! The two small sacks of gold and
the earthern jar of pearls—they were gone! Gone! The
bags of money he had held that day in his own hands; the
jar of pearls he had fondled; the shining gems he had
taken to the light and run through his fingers. Gone the
glory that was to have been his and his beloved Isa Loe’s.
Gone the fourth share he had bargained for. Gone all
hope of being rich!
Captain Hardy, following puffing after him, peered in
at the narrow opening in time to see him rise to his feet.
There was no need to ask questions. The Samoan’s face
told his‘‘story of disappointment and humiliation. The
skipper turned to the mate.
“That’s that, Hurricane, old man,” he said with philo-
sophical resignation. “The beggars made no mistake.
Wherever Bully Hayes disappeared to, he would at least
be sure of a comfortable living for the rest of his days.
Well, good luck to him. We miss the pearls, Sam, but


we still have our main quest to pursue. There is still
hope of our finding something on the island which means—
to me at any rate —more than all the pearls in the Pacific.
“Now for a real, systematic search of the island. First
we return to camp, get some food, and then with the aid
of friend Nini here, we shall find out just how far this
habitable area extends.” And back to camp they went.
Nini Bo led the party, comprising all but the cook and
Jimmy Brent, up the bed of the little stream that emptied
into the bay beside the camp. By this he avoided much
of the thick jungle growth, and besides, had something
to guide him to the defile between the peaks, where most
probably the stream had its source. At his suggestion,
the party was divided into three when the base of the hill
was reached, in order to cover more ground. Mick Farley,
who since he joined the ship had acted as a kind of un-
appointed bos’n, took Crazy Bill with him and worked to
the west. The mate, with Dick Patten, formed the east
wing. Captain Hardy, Nini Bo and the parson continued
straight ahead, with a view to finding, if such there was,
a pass between the two peaks to the other side.
The little stream had by now mysteriously disappeared.
Its rocky bed was dry. Only boulders remained,,hemmed
in by forest and almost impenetrable undergrowth. Over
and over again, choosing each time a new direction, they
forced their way through this, only to find themselves
stopped by steep, unscalable cliffs. At length, as the day
showed signs of closing in, convinced that no opening
through the mountain existed, Captain Hardy halloed for


THE WRECK OF THE MARY ELLEN 187
the others to rejoin them as arranged, and returned to
camp.
When the searchers had partaken heartily of the meal
Sam Alexander had so nobly prepared for them, and sat
about, satisfied and contented in the fitful light of the
fire under the trees, Captain Hardy frankly revealed to
them, or those who did not already know—what it was
that had brought him to the island. He said it was only
fair to them, having worked so willingly as they had, that
they should no longer be kept in ignorance of the facts.
Furthermore, the captain announced that, having failed
to make any headway in their frontal attack on the moun-
tain, they would the following day attack it at both ends
of the island and try to get round it rather than through
it. At the same time, while the land parties were work-
ing thus, Mr Smiles, Patten and he would take the launch
round to the north side and, if the reef permitted, would
examine that side of the island with a view to ascertaining
whether it was at any point assailable. If this combined
effort yielded nothing more than was at present known,
the captain said, then there was no use in remaining
longer on the island, and they might as well sail for home.
Early next morning, as soon as Sammy could feed
them, Dick Patten took all hands on the Dot and paid
a brief visit to the Mary Ellen. They found all well
there, and Captain Hardy told Mr Williams that he and
his men would be relieved for a spell ashore next day;
at which all three were greatly pleased.
“Thank you, Captain ’Ardy,” called down Tall Yarn
Pete, “Blow me if I ain’t jest dyin’ to get ashore wiv


me ’ard-faced mate there. Me an’ the W’aler’s awful
fond o’ bird’s-nestin’, captain.”
“Right. To-morrow is your day ashore, Hawkins,”
the skipper replied, laughing.
Having dropped one land party at the western end
of the beach, as near to the rocky horn of the island as
they could land, and the other half at the eastern end,
the Dot proceeded round the point of the latter and made
her way between the reef and the shore to the north side.
The reef here was not clearly defined, but rather the coral
comprised many ramifications which broke the water up
into tortuous and dangerous passages.
No wonder there was no landing from the north! It
took skilful handling on the part of Dick Patten and the
mate for even the Dot to nose her way through the maze.
Captain Hardy left the navigation entirely to them.
He was concerned in minutely examining the shore.
For three hours they patiently threaded their way along,
but nowhere did they discern any sign of a landing place.
Always the rocks rose sheer from the water for fifty
feet or more. Above that they could see nothing.
“Well,” said Captain Hardy at last, “No one ever
landed from this side; that is certain. We may as well
go back. I hope the land parties will be more successful.”
The skipper here paused, as though contemplating a
sudden new theme. He sniffed investigatingly. “Notice
anything, Mr Smiles?” he asked.
“Yes, now you mention it, I do,” the mate responded.
“We’re in for a change. I’ll bet the glass would be fall-
ing—if we had one here.”
“Put her about, Patten,” the skipper ordered abruptly.


Dick put the launch astern, with a view to turning.
Hardly had she got way on when the mate shouted,
“Hold her!” But he was too late. Small though she was,
the Dot was just too heavy for quick handling in that
confined and broken water. There was a grinding bump
astern. Her screw had hit a submerged spur from the
coral ridge.
Dick instantly shut ofif steam, and next instant was
standing ankle deep on the reef warding the boat off
from further damage.
“Watch her ahead there, Mr Smiles,” he called out.
“There’s a boat-hook there. Keep her steady till I
get a look at her. . . , H’m, thought as much. She’s
knocked a blade ofif, sir. Can’t quite see what else.
Probably strained the tailshaft a bit. Soon see when I
turn the engine over.”
He clambered aboard again and gave her a little steam.
The engine responded but poorly. “She’s in bad shape,
captain,” he said.
“Can we do nothing in the way of repairs,” the skip-
per asked.
“Not a thing, sir,” Dick replied. “She has a spare
propeller aboard, and tools to put it on, but she’d have
to be beached to do it. That’s out of the question here.
The best we’ll do is half speed. Even at that the shaft
will probably heat up.”
“Let’s go then; and God help us if we can’t do better
than that. Get clear of this Patten, and make a run for
the harbour, even if you burn your tailshaft ofif. It’s the
Mary Ellen I’m thinking of. Damn it man, we’ve got


to get her out before the storm comes, or she’s lost!
Do you realize what that means?”
The two others realized it just as clearly as did the
skipper. But what could be done? Progress was now
tantalizingly slow—what with reduced speed and the com-
plexity of the channel, which the now failing light did
not make any easier to negotiate. The storm was com-
ing up from the south. Though here on this side they
were as yet sheltered, they could see the clouds scudding
across the sky and the sea, beyond the lee of the island,
growing more disturbed. The wind moaned as it eddied
round the mountain overhead. As they slowly neared
the horn of the island they could see the waves whipping
past it and smashing on the reef. They could never pass
that point. Even where they were it was rough enough
now. The storm increased in fury as night fell, and the
Dot was herself in danger.
Captain Hardy decided to land. Anchoring the Dot
in what little shelter offered, the party scrambled ashore,
with the idea of perhaps making their way overland to
camp. The utter impossibility of this was soon apparent.
In the darkness, amongst those breakneck rocks, with
that raging wind threatening to tear them off the ridge
and carry them, along with the flying branches of trees,
into the sea —it was suicidal to attempt it. They crept
for shelter under an overhanging rock and waited miser-
ably for daylight.
With the abatement of the storm next morning, they
returned to the launch. Dick revived the fire, and they
made their slow way towards the point, fearful of what
they would find when they made it; hoping against hope.


Would the Mary Ellen be there? Had her anchors held?
Had the crew by any chance got aboard her? Had the
second managed to get her out before the blow came?
These thoughts ran through their anxious minds. These
and a score more questions they asked one another: futile
questions none could answer.
A fairly heavy sea was still running as they rounded
the horn of the island and came into intermittent view
of the anchorage. There was no sign of the ship. It
appeared that their worst fears were realized. The Mary
Ellen was gone! All three looked anxiously about at
each rise to the crest of a sea. Plainly they read one
another’s thoughts. Suddenly Dick pointed to the left.
A groan escaped the skipper as he looked —almost a sob.
There was the Mary Ellen —or all that was left of her.
She was on the reef, battered and sunk. Only one mast
and part of her stern were visible. Tears were in Cap-
tain Hardy’s eyes now. Tears streamed down the mate’s
hard face. But it was no time for weeping.
“There’s someone ashore there!” the skipper suddenly
exclaimed. “There, among the rocks. Can you land
there, Patten?”
In that rough sea a landing seemed perilous; but Dick
found a patch of sand running in between the rocks and
ran her aground. The captain and Hurricane leaped
ashore.
It was Dan Graham, half dead himself from exhaus-
tion, trying to drag his mate, Tall Yarn Pete, from where
he lay in a bed of foam and broken kelp. Pete was alive;
not much more. He was delirious, and in a weak, wan-
dering voice was singing a mad song, a song about ship-


wrecks. Over and over he sang it to himself, as though
he was seeking a lost line —
I been shipwrecked down in
Barcel-onia - - - Eau-de-Colofirnia,
I been shipwrecked tum-te tum-te tum-te turn,
Wrecked on the pirates’ I-land.
“Poor chap,” said the skipper. “How true, if you only
knew it. But you don’t know what you’re saying. . . .
There, Graham, you sit down. We’ll attend to him. See
anything of Mr Williams, Graham?”
“Drowned, sir. Died like a little man. Did his best,
captain. He tried to take her out when you didn’t come.
. . . We couldn’t do it. Not enough men. We dropped
her anchors again. Hell, how it blew! She dragged
them like corks and smashed on the reef. Poor Mr
Williams, I never saw him after. He’s gone, sir.”
A hail came to their ears then, and men appeared over
the bluff. They were searchers from the camp. With
no boat, they could only scramble along the rocky coast,
and thus had but now arrived. They, too, as Mick Farley
said afterwards, had “got out of their depth in their
explorations” —which, by the way, had been fruitless—
and had arrived back at the camp after dark. Even had
anyone among them possessed the authority to order it,
they could not have got to the schooner, for they had no
boat.
All were relieved beyond measure to find the captain
and his associates safe, and while their joy was tempered
by the knowledge that the second mate had been drowned,
they were gratified indeed to find that Graham and Pete
had been saved. Bill Ardous had eyes and ears for


nothing but his pal. He ran forward when he saw him,
fell on his knees beside him, and held him in his arms.
“Well, ol’ shipmate,” he said, as tears ran down his
cheeks, “you’ve come ashore, ’aven’t yer, like they told
me yer was —to go bird’s-nestin’ with me. But this wasn’t
the place we was to meet. Never mind, matey. Stop yer
singin’ and come ’ome. You’re shipwrecked on the
pirates’ island all right. An’ yer shipwrecked fer the last
time, I’m thinkin’. You an’ me’s goin’ to be good land-
lubbers fer a while now, mate.”
The big Whaler picked him up bodily and waded
through the surf to the Dot with him. All hands boarded
the launch then, and before long they were back in camp,
where the two shipwrecked men were cared for and
where Sammy, despite the havoc the storm had wrought
in his kitchen, had a hot meal waiting for them.


CHAPTER XVII
THE CAMP AT THE BLUE BAY
In the morning they were all thoroughly recuperated
from the effects of their strenuous and trying experi-
ences. That is, all except Pete Hawkins, who was still
sick and rambling in his mind, though there was no doubt
that he would soon recover. As for Dan, his comrade
in distress, a few scratches and bruises and badly torn
clothing were all he had to show for his buffeting on
the reef.
When they had finished breakfast, Captain Hardy in-
vited them to direct their attention to the new position
that had arisen. A council of war, he called it. Their
efforts to penetrate to the other side of the island had
failed, he pointed out, and they could now only conclude
that the island was uninhabited, except for themselves.
That, however, mattered little, since they had lost their
ship. Even if there were anyone marooned on the island
they could render them no help. Rather did they them-
selves need to be rescued. Moreover, they must realize
that their chances of being picked up were not bright—
no brighter indeed than had been those of Captain Brent
and his companions. They would have to be content
to remain indefinitely where they were, providing what


shelter they could for themselves and subsisting on what
food the place naturally provided.
“But,” he added more hopefully, “we shall make the
best of it. We have a good company here, an agreeable
lot; and after all, we have much to be thankful for.
We all sadly regret the loss of a good shipmate in Mr
Williams, but on the other hand, we can thank our lucky
stars that all the rest of us are here safe and sound. Of
food there should be no shortage, with nature so boun-
teous round about us, and two such experts as Nini Bo
and Sam Alexander to lead us in the getting and prepar-
ing of it. With the same co-operation as we had on
the Mary Ellen we should be a happy enough family.
One thing, men, I need hardly tell you —it seems so ob-
vious : our mission is ended. All hope of accomplishing
what we set out to do is, of course, gone.”
The captain evidently considered that portion of his
discourse sufficiently and completely dealt with, and was
proceeding to another phase of it, when he was inter-
rupted—deferentially enough—by the Parson.
“Captain Hardy,” said the gentle one, “I cannot let
that pass. I for one will not accept that. Such, a con-
clusion, captain, is wholly unworthy of a man like you.”
The captain was rather amazed at this, “Why, Mr
Ormonde,” he said, “do you think I am wrong? How
do you view it, then? It seems clear enough to me that
our venture has come to a definite and certain end.”
“Then, captain, you distrust God after all. Do you
remember, sir, that when we were starting out we asked
God’s guidance and protection in our enterprise? It was
at your own suggestion, too, sir. And has not God been


our guide and protection all along? Did He not see us
safely through the storm in the Tasman? Did He not
lead you to wise counsel in Auckland? Did He not pro-
vide sustenance and funds in Fiji? Did He not —1 trust
I am not indelicate —satisfy the long yearning in Mr
Smiles’s heart? Did He not find you an invaluable
guide in Nini Bo? Did He not bring you safely through
uncharted seas to your island? Did He not mother the
Dot and you on the lee side of the land during the storm?
Was it not His hand that saved all of us gathered here
from shipwreck? Has He not thus far done whatsoever
we have asked?”
“That may be all very true,” put in the mate, “but this
is different. How can we rescue anyone when they’re
not here to rescue? And how can we get away from here
without a ship?”
The Parson turned to the new speaker. “Mr Smiles,”
he said quietly, “God’s bounties do not grow on trees,
nor depend on ships. He works in wondrous, secret
ways. What methods Pie shall choose is not for us to
say. Who are we to decree that He shall use a ship?
Enough for us to leave it to Him to know that He can,
and will, do it. Remember, it is written if we have faith
enough, we can have that mountain not merely made
accessible, but thrown into the sea. I do not doubt for
one minute that our voyage will end successfully!”
Silence followed this last amazing statement. Captain
Hardy was thinking. The mate looked at the Parson
with a very puzzled expression. The same little man
had proved right in the face of adverse evidence more


than once before. Both remembered that. Still, this
was rather much for them.
“Well, Mr Ormonde,” the skipper said at last, “I re-
spect your views, but I can’t quite follow you. Still, I
hope you’re right. With all my heart I do. Time will
tell. At any rate, here we are, as I was saying.
“The next question to consider, men, is this: As we
no longer have a ship, I am no longer master. I was
in command of the Mary Ellen because I owned her. I
appointed the officers. But I do not own this island,
and here I have no more authority than any one of you.
I am merely one of the party. It is for us to elect a
leader now. We need a leader. When you have chosen one,
I am prepared—and I am sure Mr Smiles is—to obey
that leader. I leave it in your hands.”
The men fidgeted for a while; then exchanged glances
which seemed to say, one to the other: “I am at a loss
what to say; you speak.”
Mick Farley accepted the challenge thus thrown down
to all. “Capthin Harrdy,” he said, “Nivver in me whole
career have Oi iver bane short uv respect for me superior
officer; but it’s sorely timpted Oi am at this moment to
roise up in a body an’ trow ye overboarrd for the damned
rot ye’re talkin’. A happy family we’ve bane, and are—
ye’ve said the same yourself. How long wud the happy
family last, think ye, widout yourself to kape it in orrder ?
. . . Bhoys, quoite disregardin’ the unsamely affront of
Mister Harrdy, Oi hereby move that he be re-appointed
masther, an’ Mr Smoiles mate, an’ Mr Williams (an a
foine quiet little man he was—God rest his soul) Mr
Williams second mate, of the Mary Ellen. If yez all agree


to that, say nothin’; if anny man does not that same, let
him shpake now!”
A laugh and a cheer confirmed the appointment.
Captain Hardy smiled. He was not one to be moved a
great deal by flattery. Still his face showed that he was
pleased at this demonstration of the men’s confidence in
him and his trusty right-hand man. “Thank you, men,”
he said, a little embarrassed; while Mr Smiles rose and,
much more embarrassed, bowed without a word.
“If that is your wish then,” continued the captain, “so
be it. The same skipper, the same mate —what about the
cook? That is a most important office. Sammy, are you
prepared to carry on?”
“Oh, Cap’n Hahdy, yes suh. I sho’ is perpared to ca’y
on, s’long’s dey’s a crew ob de Merry Ellum. Ye-es, suh!”
“Good. Then we are all right. Now, the same condi-
tions, as far as possible, will obtain here as on the ship.
Every man shall have the same rights and standing. We
shall all be equal, so far as is consistent with discipline.
And now we shall get down to work and make ourselves
comfortable. We need more than temporary shelter now.
We need a systematic way of getting food; and of con-
serving it too, for we may be here a long time. There is
plenty of work for all for a few days, and plenty of time
for leisure after that.
“Patten, you take a man with you—Farley should be the
best, being a navy man—and beach the Dot and repair her.
We shall need her now and again; though she will have to
learn to eat wood instead of coal here. You, Nini 80,
I want to help me to make a kind of survey of our do-
minion—‘an inventory of all we have’ as it were. The


rest of you, under the direction of Mr Smiles, will get
material together and build huts . . . Along there under
the shelter of yonder blufif, Mr Smiles, seems to be the
logical place. Build two living huts and a smaller one for
a cookhouse. The details I leave to your own judgment.”
The next few days were days of activity. A week saw
a comfortable camp established—a cleared level space with
three substantial and very creditably-built huts, sheltered
from the worst of the wind, yet handy to the beach and
the little stream of fresh water. By that time Captain
Hardy had covered, or viewed, most of the available terri-
tory, and had a fair idea of the lay of the land. The
Samoan, too, had used his native instincts to good advan-
tage, and by now had mentally marshalled the food re-
sources of the place so that a constant and economical
supply was assured.
Those turtles they had seen bobbing about in the bay,
for instance. Nini had made a nocturnal appointment
with them and found the spots along the beach which they
favoured with their patronage; had watched them leave
the water each night and crawl in disordered, shuffling
procession up the sand to right above high-water mark—
almost to the timber line; watched them while they scraped
holes in the sand and laid their eggs, covering them so
nicely with their flippers and smoothing the sand so that
the place could not be detected. As they left, he had
marked a sufficient number of the caches with sticks, so
that at any time he could come and get a supply of eggs
for the kitchen.
With these Sammy supplemented the “tuttle” itself,
also captured during its amphibious promenade by the


resourceful Nini 80, and converted into delicious entree
and more delicious soup by the equally resourceful—in his
own sphere—Sammy Alexander, Though, truth to tell,
that “cullud gemman” would have been sore put to it for
vessels in which to prepare and serve the dishes but for
Mini’s ingenuity in fashioning them from turtle shells,
coconuts, and the like.
A great man was Nini Bo —now that he was in his own
element. As the captain had been on the Mary Ellen, as
Dick Patten had been when the Dot was called into ser-
vice, as the parson had been when it came to missionaries
and the ways of Kaiviti; so here on this island Nini Bo
was the man. He fished, he caught turtles and dressed
them, he found their eggs, he climbed the palms for coco-
nuts, he knew where to get breadfruit, the great value of
it, and how to prepare it—as well as yams and other wild
products—and he knew all about the birds and things that
inhabited the jungle. Even the little green-grey, long-
tailed monkeys that chattered and cheeked at them from
the trees as they sat round eating their meals.
But great as was Nini, and indispensable to the little
community, to one of the number he shortly became im-
measurably greater; and through those same little mon-
keys—or rather, through one of them. For, wonder of
wonders! this most versatile marvel contrived to outrival
the strategy of the little tree men themselves sufficiently
to coax one of them out of his elevated leafy element;
then caught him, won his at first reluctant friendship with
tidbits and trinkets from the camp, and presented him to
Jimmy Brent for his very own, A real live monkey from
the treetops—his own pet and plaything!


If, amidst all that glory of sunshine and beauty and
freedom and pleasure there had lurked in the breasts of
those men just a faint sadness at being perhaps for ever
separated from the rest of their kind, that feeling had
been least in evidence in the youthful breast of Jimmy
Brent. Now, with the crowning joy of this gift from
his brown-skinned hero, it vanished completely. With
“Jacko,” as he had named him, on his shoulder as he sat
or walked about the camp, coughing and squeaking in
pretended rage at the approach of the suddenly super-
seded and rightfully jealous Pat, the Irish terrier; with
Jacko bounding off with marvellous four-handed agility to
swing among his friends and establish unheard-of com-
munication between the treetops and the camp; with
Jacko climbing the palms at Nini Bo’s secretly given com-
mand to wangle off a coconut or two and send them
crashing down in front of an unsuspecting wayfarer—
the boy’s paradise was now complete. To him, who had
known so little of even civilized comfort and joy, Pinnacle
Island was, and ever would be, heaven.
The Samoan took the men swimming—to where it was
safe; for Captain Hardy laid it down that, apart from
pleasure, cleanliness demanded in that warm climate at
least one daily bath all round. Blue as was the bay and
soft and yellow the sand, they had early found that these
were not to be regarded familiarly, for sharks infested
the bay. So Nini showed them where to swim in the pro-
tected enclosures of the coral. Moreover, at the behest
of wise Captain Hardy—who foresaw the possible happy
day when they would need something more than palm-
leaves in which to depart from their island home—Nini


initiated the men into the unorthodox, but in that tropical
climate not unpleasant custom of wearing, like him,
nature’s clothing with but the addition of a loincloth.
A few burnt backs, a few scratched and insect-bitten
bodies, were a prelude to long weeks of pleasure derived
from this innovation. Ere long it was hard, by appear-
ances only, to tell one from the other. Except for
Sammy Alexander, whose ebony skin never changed come
sun, come rain, they were one and all good brown-skinned
Islanders.
Thus the days went on —the weeks. Happy days they
were too, for those Islanders, on the whole. Captain
Hardy, adhering to his stated policy of “all equal, con-
sistent with discipline, of course,” saw to it that every
man worked, and worked an equitable share, each day;
and that every man shared as equitably the food and the
recreation. The latter provision almost followed, indeed,
as a matter of course. The cutting of wood, the carrying
of water —what work there was to be done, was so light
when distributed among them all, and moreover was car-
ried out in such agreeable circumstances, that it was hard
to tell where work ended and play began.
When the cook announced that his fuel pile needed re-
plenishing, all hands went into the bush to collect and
break up firewood. There was plenty of dead timber
admirably suited for cooking purposes. On these occa-
sions the monkeys would come to see what all the com-
motion was about, and would add their raucous chatter
to the noise. Jacko invariably seized upon such oppor-
tunities to rejoin his folks temporarily. Evidently en-
couraged and prompted by their sophisticated, half-


domesticated relative, the little tree-men would indulge
in most amusing antics, such as swinging by their tails
while they pulled the unkempt hair of an unsuspecting
worker, or scratched his bare back. Then they would fly
like a flash back to the higher branches to bark and grim-
ace defiance at the offended one.
Turtle meat, destined like the wood for Sammy’s kit-
chen, and easy enough to procure, was made the excuse
for a rather thrilling adventure on the blue bay in the
cockle-shell canoes the ingenious Nini Bo had contrived
out of nothing in particular, to match human wits against
those of bobbing turtles. Or better still, for the Parson
and young Jimmy at any rate, a game ashore on the sand
trying to head the creatures off from returning to the
water.
Jimmy taught the dog to jump on the backs of the
turtles, and after a time Pat would of his own volition
hop on, and, balancing himself in an erect sitting posi-
tion, ride the turtle right into the water, only leaving
when it submerged. Jacko the monkey, though he openly
disapproved of the performance at first, was led at last
by pique and jealousy to emulate the dog. He did it very
well —much more easily than Pat, in fact—but he always
took care to leave his mount before it reached the water.
Jimmy himself would have very much liked to ride the
turtles, and more than once tried to balance himself on
the slippery domed carapace of one of them. He never
succeeded; but his failures was due to lack of heart rather
than lack of agility; for the curious snake-like head of
the creature, twisting backward to see what ailed it, put
a great fear into the ambitious youth.


Then Nini Bo’s fishing excursions, while providing
food good and plentiful, also provided entertainment
novel and varied. There was always a swim in one of
the lovely coral enclosures, and explorations of wonderful
marine gardens, in the discovery of whose rarities Nini
appeared to be a master. Not content with viewing
them at a depth through the clear water, they soon learned
to follow the Samoan and examine them at close hand,
for Nini taught them the art and secret of remaining
under water for long periods. After he had prospected
the transparent depths to ensure that there lurked no
shark, stingray or “debil-fish,” as he called the octopus,
and had pointed out to them the giant clam whose open
bivalve lay ready to nip off or cripple the unwary foot,
they would pay prolonged visits to these submarine fairy-
lands, mingling with goggle-eyed and many-hued fishes
in their admiration of the multi-coloured animal and plant
life; fingering this, caressing that, bringing to the sur-
face some treasure of shell or coral growth.
Strangely enough the captain, and perhaps it might be
said Hurricane too, preferred to find their entertainment
on the dry land rather than about the water, even though
the latter was their natural, or at least adopted element.
The forest, with its thick, luxurious vegetation, its tropi-
cal blooms and gorgeous birds; the rocky bluffs which
buttressed the mountain and armoured the two salients
of the island, from which such fine views of reef and
blue ocean could be obtained; the pirates’ cave and others
like it amongst the difficult rocks—these all enchanted
them and gave them material for endless contemplation
and inquiry.


All the time there was present with the skipper the
vague but persisting hope that somehow, some time, he
assuredly would find out more about those people who, he
felt certain, had once lived on the island.
Though he did not always say so, nor even indicate by
act or word that these things were uppermost in his mind,
not a step did he take through that forest, not a cave
nor an inscription on its rocks did he ever examine, not
a look from an eminence out over the sea; but he evalu-
ated it according to the bearing it had on that one upper-
most idea of his—Where were they? How were they?—
James Brent and his daughter Dorothy.
Perhaps that would in a measure explain why, in these
tireless ramblings—ramblings in which he gradually
learned almost every accessible yard of the island —Sam
Smiles was always with him. No one knew John Hardy
as Sam did. No one could read his thoughts, no one
could or dared check his over-eagerness or spur him on
in his dull, pessimistic moments as could Sam. No man in
all the world except Hurricane —much less in this little
new world of theirs—could come to him and, seeing right
into a heart as brave and genuine as his own, share his
inmost feelings and emotions, his joys and his sorrows.
Perhaps too, that explained why he took little active
part in the doings of the rest of the party.
“Let them have their fling, Sam,” he told the mate
more than once. “So long as we all do our little bit in
keeping the camp clean and provided for, let them be
free to do as they wish,”
They had their swims, their turtle hunts, their reef and
Submarine adventures; even excursions in the Dot ground


the island —all without the skipper’s active participation.
Only at night after supper, sitting round in that firelight
group, would he share their company. Then, thrusting
his own thoughts out of the way, he was invariably the
jolliest of the company, joining in the jokes, the yarns
and the songs with a zest which was, by virtue of its
very ingenuousness, a stimulant to them all. But the
days, every one of them, with Sam for his companion,
and occasionally Nini 80, or the Parson and the boy, he
spent exploring his domain.


CHAPTER XVIII
THE FINDING OF CAPTAIN BRENT
One morning after breakfast, about two months after
the wreck of the Mary Ellen, the men proposed a pearl-
hunting trip in the Dot. Nini 80, amongst a hundred
things, was an expert pearl diver, and some of the other
members of the crew had, under his tutelage, become
fairly proficient in finding and retrieving the big pearl-
producing molluscs. As a result, the community already
possessed a goodly number of pearls which, quite useless
here, would nearer civilization have added monetary re-
compense to their sport.
“By all means go,” said Captain Hardy, “so long as
Patten is willing to go with you. The Dot is his baby, . , .
No thanks; I shan’t come with you, Mr Smiles and I are
going up the creek to the mountain to commune with
nature, or the spirits up there, or —who knows? You
go and enjoy yourselves, men, and don’t forget to come
back for supper. Nothing ofifends a cook more than to
find his efforts are unappreciated.”
To the surprise of Captain Hardy and the mate, Nini
Bo asked permission to come with them. The men could
get along at pearl-diving without him now, he said, and if


208 HOME IS THE SAILOR
rho oonfom on/'l i\ /l Ltnil no r\ I M Z~v4- vim 4- « lam n 1—
the captain and Mr Smiles did not want to be alone he
would like to come.
“Certainly, come along, my man/' the skipper said
heartily. “Glad to have you. But what is your idea? The
novelty must be worn off the stream and the hill for you
by now, surely.”
“Surely, as the captain says,” replied the Samoan,
“nearly do I know every stone and tree on the island,
Captain Hardy. But it is the river—the little river. It
puzzles me. Where is the water that starts so suddenly?
Where is the water that once ran among the stones up
at the beginning?”
“It comes from a spring, of course,” said the skipper.
“When we lose track of the stream, that is where the
spring is. It starts there.”
“Not so. The captain knows about ships and the sea,
but about streams —no. I have thought much about our
river. Those stones in the bed above your spring, cap-
tain? They are worn smooth by water. They have sand
between them. Water ran there once. Where is it
now r
“Blest if I know,” said the captain with a laugh. “Do
you take me for a prophet?—or a water diviner? I am
quite willing to go and help you find out though. Only
too glad to have something to keep us profitably occupied.”
Jimmy Brent had been listening to the conversation,
and sensing something in the way of new discovery, he
now asked the skipper if he might come. The captain saw
no objection, and Jimmy, with Pat at his heels and Jacko
the monkey on his shoulder, followed in the rear of the
trio,


After an hour of steady climbing they reached the
point where the stream vanished.
“There,” Captain Hardy said. “That is a spring, plainly
enough. Anyone could see that; even a sailor. The
stream starts here.”
“Not so, I think, captain,” said Nini, with unfailing
deference. “The spring would be at the foot of the rocks
there.” He pointed to the cliffs a hundred paces further
up. “This water comes under the ground. It comes
through the mountain, maybe.”
The two men looked at him and laughed. The stream
bed above the supposed spring—if indeed it was, or ever
had been, a stream-bed—was as dry as a bone, and the
jungle evidently had been in possession of it for many
years. Still, they had agreed to investigate it with the
Islander, and they must do so. Obediently then, they
followed his lead as he forced a way through the tangled
vines to the rock face. The growth was so dense there
that the cliff could scarcely be discerned. Lack of sun-
shine had caused it to become dark, moist and moss-
covered.
They followed the base of the cliff along to either side,
tearing a way through the growth, examining every
fault or seam in the rock, vainly peering up and along it
for any sign that would lend colour to Nini Bo’s sug-
gestion. But there was none. Two or three hours they
searched, but to no avail. The mountain was solid
enough at the base. They could only see a dozen feet up
for the thick growth. Any opening there was, must be
above that height; that is, too high to be of any use or
significance.


“Well,” said the mate, turning to Nini 80, “are you
satisfied? The river doesn’t come through there, that’s
very evident.”
Nini stood silent. The evidence against his theory
seemed irrefutable. Yet his face showed that he was
not nearly so satisfied as the mate seemed to think he
should be. He was about to say something when a sharp
bark from the terrier interrupted him. The bark came
from somewhere to the left of them, seemingly along the
base of the cliff. It was followed by a cry as though
the dog was in trouble.
“What’s the matter with Pat?” asked Jimmy. “He’s
got stuck somewhere, I think, Captain Hardy,”
The monkey, following easily through the tangle of
branches, appeared to gather from his young master’s
tone that something was amiss. He bounded away like a
shot in the direction whence the sound had come. In a
minute he returned, much agitated, and by coughs and
scoldings, accompanied by weird grimaces and much wav-
ing of his little boy-like hands, he conveyed to them that
their aid was urgently needed. As they made to obey his
summons, he moved ahead of them, turning impatiently
every few feet to urge them to swifter progress.
Presently he disappeared into an indentation in the
rocks, over which the vines grew so thickly as to hide it
entirely. From behind this thick curtain came the sound
of Pat’s intermittent yelps. He seemed from his cries
to be in sore distress, and this was confirmed by the
monkey’s anxiety that the men should follow him in.
They obeyed with great difficulty, hacking and pulling at
the matted vines and branches to make a way.


Once behind the veil of vegetation they could discern,
in the half light, a vertical slit in the rock, scarce a foot
wide. This, as their eyes became inured to the semi-
darkness, revealed beyond what appeared to be a chamber
or cave ten feet in width. The bottom of this chamber
was mainly occupied by a dark-looking, rectangular well,
in which poor Pat was swimming. They could just make
him out, vainly trying to climb the sides that rose from
the water, sheer, and slimy with moss, which clearly had
been the immediate cause of his slipping in. Over the
top, forming as it were a canopy or roof, bent the thickly
foliaged branches of trees.
The light was so bad within this dark chamber that
they could but vaguely note the poor dog’s predicament,
let alone see to help him out of it. He was now crying
in piteous, short-breathed desperation. Jacko was cough-
ing and agitatedly running to and fro, doing everything
but speak to provoke them to action. At last, when it
seemed the dog must drown, and he could stand it no
longer, he did a courageous and very wonderful thing.
Ere they could make out his intention, he had swung
into the branches above, and made his way to where they
overhung the water, till by his weight they bent and
lowered him almost to its surface. Then, taking a secure
hold with his long prehensible tail, he hung head and
hands downward, lifted the half-drowned dog from the
water, and working himself into a pendulum-like swing,
flung him clear of the slippery sides to the feet of Cap-
tain Hardy.
Young Jimmy screamed with delight at this wonder-


ful achievement by his pet. The others were amazed
almost beyond speaking.
“Well!” exclaimed the skipper, when he had fully
realized what had happened, “That’s the best thing I ever
saw. Wonderful! That little creature has as much sense
as a human being. Why, before we could even notice
The mate interrupted.
“There’s a lot we haven’t even noticed yet, skipper.
Things are just beginning to dawn on us —on me, at any
rate.” He grabbed the captain’s arm and pointed up-
ward. “Look above you,” he said excitedly. “See the
sky—through the trees? This is the pass through the
mountain! That water is part of the river: Nini Bo’s
lost river. Nothing surer! She comes through here.
. . . You’re right, after all, Nini, old man. You knew
better than we did.”
Nini Bo stood by smiling complacently. “This is the
lost water,” he said; “and this is the way through. See,
Captain Hardy, it opens out wider. See the sunlight
through the ”
Suddenly he stopped. His face took on a scared look,
and he mutely pointed ahead to where in the distance
the passage opened into daylight. All followed his gaze.
There, clearly delineated against the background of dis-
tant sunlight, was the figure of a man —a grotesque,
bearded wild man—peering into the gloom of the passage.
Doubtless he had heard the sound of their voices, though
it was improbable he could see them where they were in
that deeply shaded place. On the other hand, they, look-
ing out from the gloom, could see him clearly. He was


naked but for a girdle of some leafy covering, his hair
and beard were long and wild, and in his hand he car-
ried a heavy, vicious-looking staff.
The captain seized his revolver. He and Hurricane
had retained their pistols when they discarded their
clothes, and had worn them ever since attached to a fibre
belt and stuck in the loin cloth. Cocking his weapon, the
skipper, closely followed by Sam, and at a safer dis-
tance by the others, made his way past the waterhole,
and by a now fairly well-defined path through the ever-
widening and lightening pass to its entrance. That is,
if such a gradually converging enclosure could be said to
have an entrance.
The wild man stood his ground, and showed not the
slightest concern about the revolver the captain levelled
at him. Rather was he interested in young Jimmy and
his unusual companions; the monkey in particular caus-
ing him considerable amusement.
“Pirates!” he said, with a silly giggle. “No, no pirates.
Can’t stand pirates, me. Naked pirates, eh? Not dan-
gerous. He, he, he! Where ye from? Who are ye,
mates? Joe Winters —that’s me. He, he, he! Live
back here a bit. We own all this, me an’ the cap’n and
missy. Cap’n Brent, he ”
“Captain Brent! Is he here?” demanded the skipper.
“No, we are not pirates; we are friends. Where —take
us to Captain Brent at once, my man.”
The idiot—for it was evident the man was mentally
deranged—obeyed without hesitation. Thumping the
ground with his heavy stick as he went, he led the way
out on to what appeared to be a small, timbered, fertile


tableland, comprised within the V formed by the division
of the mountain and, on the third or open side, by a
rough rocky bulwark. Beyond this in places the ocean
could be seen in the distance, indicating that the little plain
was high above sea-level. The bush for the most part
was thick, and, though less of a jungle, even more lux-
urious than on the other side of the island; but a well-
beaten path winding through it made progress compara-
tively easy.
A few minutes walk brought them to a small opening
at one side of the plateau, where, well-sheltered from the
ocean winds, stood two primitive huts, built of nondes-
cript materials from the bush. One of them, curiously
enough, was surrounded by growing flowers —obviously
domesticated from the jungle—which gave it a delight-
ful homeliness.
“Stay here,” ordered the guide curtly. “I’ll fetch the
boss. Captain Brent, he’s the boss.”
The party halted just within the ring of trees, while
he hobbled towards the larger of the huts, uttering a
peculiar hallooing sound as he approached it, evidently a
mutually understood signal to those within. There im-
mediately appeared a middle-aged man, semi-naked like
his companion, with the same weather-darkened skin, long
hair and beard. The beard, however, in his case, was
quite grey. He walked with the aid of a stick. One leg
had a decided limp, and his face, drawn and pallid beneath
the outer tan, showed that he was by no means a hale
man. As he came slowly but boldly towards the visitors,
Captain Hardy and Sam Smiles stepped out to meet him.
“Welcome, friends,” he greeted them, in a voice


strangely refined for the circumstances. “Who are you?
White men like us obviously you are—or shall I say were ?
In similar case, too, I venture. I was unaware we had
neighbours. But please tell me whom I have the honour
of addressing.”
“John Hardy, sir, lately master of the schooner Mary
Ellen ” responded the skipper. “This is Mr Smiles, till
recently mate of her. One time I had the honour to be
—and still am, I hope—a good friend of one Captain
fames Brent, and also of his daughter Dorothy.”
“John Hardy!” exclaimed the older man. “Jack! I
thought there was something about your face —or your
voice—despite your picturesque disguise. . . . But to
meet you here, and under such circumstances! Of all
men, and of all places! How did you —what on earth
brought you here, man? Shipwrecked?”
“No, sir,” replied the skipper; “though ’tis true I’ve
lost my ship. I and my company came here for no
other purpose than to find Captain James Brent and
any who might be with him, and take them back home
to Sydney, But our plans miscarried. We lost our
ship, and are now, like your own good self, marooned
here. How we managed to live here for so long with-
out hearing from you is rather peculiar. We live on
the other side of the island.
“By the way, I must let my men know where we are.
Assuming we may stay here the night, I had better send
a man back. . . . Hey, Nini Bo! Can you make camp
before dark, think you?” Nini said he could. “Then
off you go, and tell them where we are. Take the boy
with you; the Parson will want to have him. We shall


return to-morrow or the next day. Tell them the good
news and say we are all right.”
“My man can go with him,” said Captain Brent. “Now
that you people are here we can spare him for a while.
Your messenger is liable to meet trouble without a guide,
in finding his way through the secret pass. That water
hole is a dangerous trap until you know how to get round
it. Stay by all means Jack. We shall need hours, even
to become re-introduced. And Dorothy, I am sure, will
have a great deal to say to you.”
“Dorothy! Don’t tell me—is she here, Captain Brent?”
“Yes, she is here; and thereto hangs a tale, of which
more in good time. She’s over in the bush amongst her
birds and flowers. I told Joe to call her before he went.
Ah, here she comes now.”
A woman emerged from behind the smaller hut and
came towards them. She was, apparently, still on the
sunny side of thirty. She was tall and graceful, and
her carriage and mien were those of a Maori girl. In-
deed, while her features were rather too refined for that,
the olive colour of her skin, her long wavy black hair,
and above all her dress, made a combination that made
her strangely like a handsome Maori girl. The dress in
particular was strikingly appropriate. It was a simple
frock extending from the shoulders to the knees, leaving
the arms and legs bare. It was composed of fine grass
fibre and small grey feathers cunningly interwoven, such
as a belle would wear on festive occasions in a Maori pah.
Rather diffidently the young woman approached the
group to within a few feet. She stopped and looked at
the new-comers. Her gaze centred on the skipper. As


his identity slowly dawned on her she turned pale, and
stood as though rigidly fixed to the spot.
“Jack!” she gasped. “Jack, is it you?” Then sud-
denly she bethought herself. Some inherent womanly
instinct rebelled at this meeting of friends mutually half
clad. She looked embarrassed, and made as though she
would retire. Her father, reading her thought, held up
a restraining hand.
“Dot, my dear, don’t mind that,” he said, encourag-
ingly. “After all the things we have had to do here
which we would not have done in civilization, we must
not let a little dress—or lack of it—stand between us and
friends. At least we are all in the same boat, and if
anything, you have a decided advantage over us. I would
go further, my dear, even risking the charge of paternal
partiality, and aver that, although not quite orthodox,
your dress is very becoming, and in it you look as charm-
ing as you ever did in an evening frock.”
Somewhat composed by her father’s flattering assur-
ance, Dorothy now advanced and, bowing to the group,
held out her hand to her former lover. He seized it
eagerly, and the other with it. Clasping them together in
his, he said, fervently but in a low voice, “Dorothy!
Thank God I have found you.”
That evening after supper, with the four of them sit-
ting round the fire, Captain Hardy told his story. He left
out no detail. Wherever there existed a doubt, he refer-
red to Hurricane for verification. He told them of the
incident of the banana punt—suppressing the name of the
boy for the moment —and of the premonition that had
so compellingly led him to action. He told of his pur-


chase of the Mary Ellen, of his visit to Mr McEachern,
of what Mini Bo had told him, and of the long voyage
that had ended in their being left stranded on the island
through the loss of their schooner. He related how, since
their landing, in spite of their disappointment at the
failure of the expedition, they had so far been quite
happy; and how, after so many attempts, they had at
last succeeded—through the combined sagacity of the
Samoan and the monkey—in discovering a way through
the mountain, which had led to the present happy meet-
ing.
“How wonderful!” Dorothy cried, when the story was
finished. “Daddy dear, did you ever hear of such a
splendid thing? Fancy Captain Hardy and Mr Smiles
and their brave men doing all that to save us. I can
scarcely believe lam awake. It seems all like a marvel-
lous dream,”
“Yes, my dear,” her father replied. “It is a wonder-
ful thing. There is no dream about it. It is but one
more of those splendid incidents that make one proud
of the men of his race. Before one more word is spoken
I desire to voice our admiration of and sincere gratitude
for what you, Captain Hardy, and your brave company
have done.”
“I have merely tried to do what I conceived to be the
right thing, Captain Brent,” said the skipper modestly.
“Mr Smiles and my men have most nobly helped me.”
“Yes,” supplemented Sam, “we’ve tried to do our duty,
no more. That being so, we look for neither praise nor
thanks. What I want to hear, Cap’n Brent —and I think
the skipper here’s of the same mind —is your story.”


The skipper concurred, and settling himself to his
task, Captain Brent said:
“My object in moving to Auckland was, as you might
have surmised, not altogether a matter of business, but
partly to get Dorothy away from you, Captain Hardy.
I had set my mind on her marrying a wealthy young man
in Wellington, and I wished to give him every opportunity
I could to advance his suit. lam speaking frankly now,
and in the knowledge that Mr Smiles enjoys your con-
fidence. I know it was hard on you—and on Dorothy
too, perhaps. However, I shall try to palliate my offence
by telling you at the outset that I have for long thought
differently on the matter, and have been very sorry for
what I did.
“While living in Auckland, the great wish of my life
was gratified. A son was born to us. While he was
still a baby in arms I sailed in the Sydney Lass on what
was to prove her last voyage—and mine. Just prior to
my leaving we arranged for Dorothy to visit the home
of her suitor’s folks in Wellington, where she was to
make a prolonged stay. Something took possession of
the girl’s mind just then, and she became obsessed with
the idea that something dire was going to happen to me.
She felt that I would never come back. So strong did
the foreboding become, that she begged of me either to
take her with me or not to sail at all. The latter was
out of the question, but under pressure I yielded to her
first proposal. No one knew of this but her mother, who
secretly, I think, was rather pleased, for she did not
wholly favour my plans for Dorothy’s future. By every-


one else, I have no doubt, Dorothy was believed to have
gone to Wellington.
‘‘Well, the Sydney Lass was lost, as most people appear
quite naturally to have concluded. She went down in a
terrific storm somewhere north-west of the Phoenix
Islands. Not far from this island, as a matter of fact.
Perhaps I may as well tell you I was at the time intend-
ing to visit Pinnacle Island; but never mind that for the
present. The Sydney Lass went down. The men abso-
lutely forced me to take my daughter on the only thing
that was left to float—a cranky raft. We were, as fai
as I know, the only survivors, except a sailor I managed
to pull on the raft afterwards.
“We finished up, by the irony of fate, on Pinnacle
Island. The raft was driven on the reef, and after a ter-
rible battering we were thrown ashore. I had a broken
leg and other injuries, while the sailor, Joe Winters, had
received an injury to the head which left him unsound
in mind. He has been daft ever since. But he did won-
derful work in spite of his hurt. Had it not been for him
I should never have got ashore, nor would Dorothy, in
all probability. Since then Joe has been invaluable to
us; a wonderful help and friend. But for him, what
with my broken leg, Dorothy and I should have fared
badly in the way of food and shelter.
“When I was sufficiently well and able to walk; a little.
Joe moved us away from the bay side of the island, be-
cause the pirates were likely to call there at any time.
He removed also two bags of gold coin and a jar of
pearls worth a good many thousands, which by some
mysterious instinct he discovered in a small cave where


the pirates had hidden them. He still hoards them in
a hiding place of his own, though of course they are of
no value whatever—here.
“Though quite insane in a general way, Joe is very
smart in some respects. By the same uncanny cunning
he found this tableland. The secret passage you came
through was his discovery. He brought us through there.
He has not been through it for years now. There has not
been much need to go. Besides, fear of the pirates and
a curious superstition about the waterhole in there have
kept him out. That, incidentally, is part of the stream
which runs into the blue bay, which before taking its
strange semi-subterranean way, rises in yonder spring
where we get our water.
“We found that here we were immune from attack
either from sea or land, for the place is not only inacces-
sible, but invisible. As the jungle yields many edible
fruits and roots, some of which, you see, Dorothy has
domesticated, we have managed to live very well; though
we have, through lack of facilities for hunting and fish-
ing, to be content with a purely vegetarian diet. Dorothy
does the cooking mostly. The fire we have kept perpetu-
ally burning—or Joe has —ever since the day we arrived,
when we lit it by friction. We have been here a long
time now—how many years is it, my dear? —and on the
whole we have much to be thankful for.
“There, I think that is about all there is to tell. The
hour is late and you are weary. You are retiring,
Dorothy? Good night, my girl. Come, the two of you,
and share my humble hut. Accept what shelter we can
offer, and rest. We can talk more to-morrow.”


CHAPTER XIX
LOVE’S OLD SWEET SONG
Next morning, when the four sat down to eat their
frugal breakfast, the first word spoken, after a strangely
unaccustomed good morning all round, was the eager
question from Captain Brent to the skipper; “Jack, that
boy you found in the banana punt? What became of him?
You seem to have let him drop out of the picture alto-
gether after he had served to stimulate you along a cer-
tain line of action.”
“Yes,” echoed Dorothy, “what became of the boy,
Jack? I’m dying to hear more about him. Do tell us.”
“Why, what can I tell you about him?” parried the
skipper.
“Who was he?” asked Captain Brent. “You never
even told us his name. Yet you seemed to infer in a
way —though you did not say so —that you had an idea
he might possibly be my son. Did you learn any more
about him, or did he fade out of the plot?”
“Perhaps he did,” came the unsatisfying, tantalizing
reply. “What of it? What does it matter who he was,
or what became of him? Suppose he had turned out to
be your son, Captain Brent, that would not do you much
good. Yet I suppose you would like even to know that


he was alive. Of course, to have him with you—if that
could possibly be —you’d give a great deal, I know.”
“All I have in the world, Jack,” he conceded readily,
“That does not include much, it is true—except Dorothy
here, who is a priceless treasure to me,”
“You wouldn’t give her, then, even if you had the op-
portunity to do so?”
Dorothy here started suddenly, and looked intently at
the speaker. She seemed to detect something in his words
which his face did not in any way betray. Whatever it
was, it passed quite unnoticed by her father.
“You must not put it that way, Jack,” the latter said.
“That seems like an odious comparison. My son was the
short-lived fulfilment of my life’s dearest hope. Dorothy
on the other hand, has always been a good daughter and
a great joy to me. Here, for all these years, she has
proved her inestimable value. I could never choose be-
tween them, even if seriously asked to do so. But I would
say this: If by some miraculous happening my boy were
brought to me here, and at the same time I could see
Dorothy in the hands of a friend with whom separation
from me would mean no great hardship to her —if that
position ever arose, I think I would say, ‘Go, Dorothy,
and God bless you. I shall be happy to know that you are
happy: You, James, my long-lost boy, my pride and
hope—come to my arms!’
“But that is all by the way. Tell us about that boy,
Jack.”
“I shall,” agreed Captain Hardy. “Now that you have
been so enlightening you deserve a little consideration.
To be very brief and to the point, Captain Brent—the


boy did not fade out of the picture, nor did I fail to
follow up my clue. Nor have I forgotten to tell you
about him. As a matter of fact, my failure to do so was
partly deliberate, and partly because you and I and Doro-
thy have been so much taken up with one another as to
shut out everything else for the time being. The plain
truth is, the boy is on the island at this moment, for that
was he who came with us yesterday. Moreover, cap-
tain, his name is James Brent! He is your son!’
Captain Brent could not speak for a time. Conflicting
emotions robbed him of speech. Dorothy however, was
not affected so. ‘T knew it,” she cried excitedly. “Oh,
Jack, I knew it when you put that question to daddy.”
Her enthusiastic outburst seemed to bring her father
back to composure. “Thank God, Jack,” he said, as
calmly as he could. “My son! My son! I have seen him
with my own eyes and did not know him. He is here—
for me. I shall hold him! Bring him —Jack, bring him
to me. Bring him !”
“No, Captain Brent, I shall not. The boy is my charge;
I am his guardian. Before I relinquish possession of
him, I must exact my price. You have already inti-
mated that you would, in certain circumstances, give
Dorothy for him. From that I assume that you with-
draw all objection to my suit, and that, given the oppor-
tunity, 1 am free to marry your daughter. To that I
must now add this condition: that you and Dorothy re-
move from here at the earliest moment possible to the
south side of the island, and take up your residence with
my company at the blue bay camp. That is the price you


must pay for your son Jimmy, Captain Brent. Do you
agree? And you, Dorothy?”
Both agreed to the terms, and readily enough.
“You are not very exacting, Captain Hardy,” said the
father. “Although it looks rather hopeless, I pray that
the opportunity will come for your hopes to materialize,
as mine have at last done. Make arrangements for the
transfer as soon as you like. You will need to get some
of your men up to help us, especially me.
“We shall not leave here without a pang, Jack. But
then, the joy of being among friends, and the knowledge
that we are now safe from attack, apart altogether from
the fact that we are to have James with us, more than
compensates for leaving our happy little land. When my
faithful Joe returns, he will unearth his treasure. That
goes with the bargain too, Captain Hardy, and will be
placed in your custody as commander on the island. One
condition only: Should we, by Divine Providence, ever
be rescued, Joe Winters shall be taken to the port of his
choice, within reason, and shall be given sufficient of that
treasure to keep him in comfort for life,”
Joe returned soon after. As soon as he had rested
and eaten, Captain Brent bade him retrace his steps with
Captain Hardy’s message to the blue bay camp and
bring back some men to effect the transfer. That was
duly carried out next day, though not without some diffi-
culty, especially in the carriage of Captain Brent, for
whom a litter of bamboo canes had been made. He in-
sisted on leaving this towards the end of the journey,
where the going was less difficult, feeling that it would
be more dignified to walk into camp.


Hurricane gave him his arm to help him along. As
he did so, he said, confidentially: “There’s one little thing
I’d like to mention to you, Captain Brent, while we are
quiet here. You have been practically king of your own
little country up there. You have naturally held on to
the authority you had aboard your ship. ‘Captain Brent/
you know. Understand me? ‘Go, and he goeth’ and that
sort of thing. Now, here at the blue bay camp Captain
Hardy is in charge—by our consent and wish, I thought
perhaps you, being an older man than him both in years
and experience, might feel just a bit ”
“Say no more, Mr Smiles,’’ broke in the other. “I see
your point. In fact, I have already thought it over.
Have no fear. This experience has taught me many
things; among them humility. Though nominally in
charge up there in my little domain, I have actually been
dependent for my every need on my daughter and poor
half-wit Joe Winters—God bless him. Surely I can be
content then, to take a second place to Captain Hardy, to
whom I am so deeply indebted. No, I have no pride
now —or even dignity, lam afraid. lam merely one of
the crew, and I shall regard Captain Hardy’s every wish
as a command. And by the way, Sam—if I may call you
that—l should be glad if you would from the outset drop
the ‘captain’ and let me be known as plain Mister Brent.”
Hurricane said not a word as to that. He felt though,
and, indeed, the others later concurred, that nothing short
of the title of captain would ever fit the name of James
Brent.
It was well that the litter had been abandoned, for long
before camp was reached the party was met by young


Jimmy. He was all out of breath, and greatly excited
at the news just imparted to him that it was his father
and sister who were on the way to see him. He stopped
when he came up to them, and seemed awkwardly at a
loss. The skipper beckoned him over to him.
“Jimmy, my boy,” he whispered to him. “These are
the two people I came all the way from Sydney to find.
They are your father and your sister Dorothy. Don’t
be frightened; they won’t hurt you. They are longing
to see you. Go to them, Boy.”
He motioned to the others then to walk ahead. “Let’s
leave the three of them to get acquainted, lads,” he said.
“They will feel better alone. They will want to say and
do things that are not for the ears and eyes of others.
Jimmy can pilot them to the camp when they’ve done
with their greetings.”
It was a happy trio that straggled into camp an hour
later. At the instance of Calliope Mick the men had
gathered to give them a rousing welcome. They had
gladly given up their huts for whatever use Dorothy and
her invalid father desired to make of them, pending the
building of more; which work, indeed, had already been
planned and started. Sammy Alexander had a good meal
ready, including some dishes of turtle and fish which
would be a welcome novelty to the new arrivals after their
long restriction to vegetable foods.
The meal was made the occasion for introducing the
newcomers to the company. Only one of those present,
outside of Captain Hardy, Dorothy, and perhaps Hurri-
cane, had ever known Captain Brent, except by reputa-
tion. That one was Crazy Bill, and he, as he stepped for-


ward in his turn to shake hands, reminded them all of that.
“Boys,” he loudly told them, “ ’Member my yarn about
Bully Hayes an’ Cap’n Britts ? An’ how half of yez didn’t
believe it? Well, this is Cap’n Britts—or, to use his right
name, which Cap’n Hardy wouldn’t let me do at the time,
Cap’n Brent. Now listen, yous coves. . . . Cap’n Brent,
do you remember that day Bully Hayes overhauled the
Sydney Lass, an’ ordered you an’ two men to come aboard
his ship?”
“Why, yes—l remember. But why—what—” He
stopped and looked the Whaler’s browned form over.
Then he scanned his face closely. “Bless my soul,” he
said, “it’s Ardous! How are you, Ardous! Pleased to
see one of my old men. My, that’s some years ago now,
my lad, ... Yes, of course I remember. You and Jones
came aboard with me. Walked to the scaffold with me,
so to speak, eh, Ardous?”
“An’ what ’appened when you went aboard, Cap’n
Brent? Tell ’em, would yer?” prompted the Whaler.
“Well, first I was to walk the plank; but at my request
I was allowed the alternative of trying conclusions with
the sharks. And then ”
But here he was interrupted by handclapping and ex-
clamations of approval.
“Thank you, Capthain Brint,” said Calliope Mick, speak-
ing for the others. “That’ll do, Cap’n; we’re satisfoid.
We thought Bill was the father of a loiar. We didn’t
belave his yarrn at all. But ye’ve proved him roight.
He told the truth afther all, an’ it’s half incloined we’ll be
to belave his outlandish whale yarrn now.”
Quite innocently the Whaler had at one stroke added


to his own prestige and done much to refurbish the faded
laurels of Captain Brent, for which all were pleased.
The whole party was in happy mood now, and after
Sammy’s good viands had been disposed of, the skipper
called for songs all round. Like the good mate he was,
Hurricane saw to it that the captain’s orders were car-
ried out. “All hands to sing, dance, or spin a yarn,’’
he said —“or be ducked in the bay.”
Much to the entertainment of the visitors the Whaler
was persuaded—or permitted—to sing of his wonderful
trans-Pacific voyage.
“Why,” commented Captain Brent, “that beats our
adventure with Bully Hayes all to pieces, Ardous.”
The Whaler’s mate would never be outdone after that.
He sang of shipwrecks near and far, this time finishing
off his song with a verse describing the loss of the Mary
Ellen and his experience thereafter, which evidently he
had managed to complete since his delirium on that fate-
ful day.
Dan Graham, to use the words of Dick Patten, came
right out of his shell for the occasion, and raked up some
great yarns. Dorothy was particularly interested in Dan.
“What a wonderful, varied experience you have had,
Mr Graham,” she remarked. “Your life has been full
of adventure. But one day you will tell a story—spin
a yarn, as you sailor-men put it—which will eclipse any
one that has been related to-day. It will be the story
of stories. Do you know what story I mean? . . . The
one we are living here this minute.” With which, when
they had taken time to think, all present fully agreed.
Nini Bo spoke up. “Missy,” he said. “It is a good


story, and it will be told some day, as the Missy says.
Tusitala* will tell it.”
“No, Nini Bo,” the Parson gently reminded him, “Tusi-
tala is dead.”
After Mick Farley had entertained them with tidbits
from his never-failing store of wit and humour, the cook
wiped his hands and reached down his banjo. It was
evident that he too regarded this as a very special occas-
ion. Taking his favourite seat on the log by the cook-
house door, he faced the ring of firelit faces, and after a
preliminary twang or two, swung into a merry, tantalizing
song about his beloved sunny South, the Ole Man Ribber
that “jes’ rolled erlong,” and rollicking days on the plan-
tation. He went from song to song, his rolling eyes re-
vealing the intense pleasure they gave him—pleasure that
was contagious and moved his audience to laughter and
applause. And as he warmed to his singing he cake-
walked back and forth in the firelight in true Negro
style, and danced—danced the long-shoe breakdowns that
only “cullud gemmen” from the South like him know;
the absence of shoes—and clothing too —adding a comical
incongruity to the performance.
All the lively Darktown songs Sam sang; he danced
all the breaks he knew. Then slowly, he subsided to a
quieter strain, as though he would withdraw from the
public ear and gaze. Bending caressingly over his banjo
now he sang—very softly—the old sad, sweet melodies of
his childhood on the River; of the old black mammy who
fed him ’lasses candy; of old Uncle Sambo’s cabin where
they went to play the banjo and sing on the log; of old
massa who was so kind, who sleeps down in the corn-
♦R. L. Stevenson: The Samoans’ “Teller of Tales.’’ —J. L.


field; of all those things in Dixie Land he yearned to
see again. He forgot the company now. His mind
and his heart were far from Pinnacle Island. His eyes,
too, glistening just a little, looked beyond them, away
from the camp-fire and the lighted faces, far out through
the dark —to the place he sang about, where “dis poor
darkey’s heart am long to go.”
His song died away. His battered old banjo fell rat-
tling at his side, and a sob came to his listener’s ears.
Dorothy sprang forward and knelt at the darkey’s side.
“Why, he’s crying!” she said. “What’s the matter
Sam? You dear old thing. So happy and jolly a minute
ago; now so sad. Don’t cry Sammy dear. Tell me what
it is.”
“Dey ain’t nuffin’ ails me, Missy. I’se jes soft like
you Missy, an’ all de res’—inside; dat’s all, jes’ de same
heart, jes’ de same semplements, jes’ de same feelin’s.
Ah done yearn fo’ de same things you-all yearns fo’—
home an’ frien’s an’ de folks we lub.
“Five yeahs Ah bin erway f’um de ole mammy an’ mah
’Ginia. Den Ah saves mah money. Ah ’lows ter go
home an’ see dem all dis yeah; mebbe may mah ’Ginia.
Den erlong comes Cap’n Hahdy wiv dis trip. Would
Sam Alexander cook fo’ de Merry Ellum ? Would a nig-
ger boy eat ’lasses cookies? Ye-es suh, Ah ses, Ah’ll go;
den w’en Ah comes back, ofi£ Ah goes ter see mah ’Ginia
an’ ole mammy, ’fo’ she done die. ... Now Missy, heah
we is, on dis heah islan’, an’ we ain’t goin’ see our ole
folks no’ mo’. We-all feels de same way erbout it; an’
we keeps quiet an’ brave erbout it. But Missy—w’en


Ah sings clem ole songs, it kinda makes me fergit an’ go
soft. Yes, Missy, Ah jes’ goes soft,”
Dorothy took the darkey’s face in her hands. “I under-
stand,” she said tenderly, “We all understand. We all
feel the same, yearn for the same things. But be of good
heart, Sam. Some day God in his goodness will take
you back to see your old mammy and marry your dear
Virginia—take us all back to home and loved ones; and,
as you were singing a while ago—there we’ll be happy
and we’ll never part no more.”
All eyes were wet now. No one had anything to say
for a while. Black Sam, abetted by Dorothy, had ex-
pressed the feelings of all —their dearest, most inward
feelings. The welcoming festivities were over. It was
time for bed in any case. That was fortunate. Captain
Hardy mentioned the fact at last.
“I think it’s time we dispersed,” he said. “We’ve had
a splendid little party. You’ve all joined heartily to make
it a pleasant one. Our thanks are due to Sammy for
the fine feast he prepared in honour of the captain and
Miss Brent. Then, after feeding us up and making us
jolly he turns round and makes us cry!
“Well, I don’t know that that will hurt us. A cry once
in a while gives us a chance to let go something we find
hard to hold in. The secret is out now, good people.
We all yearn for home and mammy, as Sam says. But
let’s try and forget it, and be as philosophical as we can,
and thankful for the good fortune we have.
“Now all to sleep. Up betimes to-morrow, men, and
on with the hut-building. Pleasant dreams, Captain
Brent. I hope you will be comfortable in your new


quarters. Good night Dor ” He stopped himself.
“Oh, allow me. The firelight has dazzled your eyes,”
He took her arm and guided her a few steps to her hut.
“There; good night, my darling,” he said, and pressed
her hands. She held her faces up to him.
“God bless you, Jack,” she said as he kissed her. “It
is so wonderful to have you near me, after all these years.”
With all this added company, the greater variety of food,
and the more extended area to rove in, Dorothy and her
father here virtually commenced life afresh. While most
of the pastimes of the crew were of necessity closed to
them, particularly their frolics on the reef, they never-
theless found many and varied ways of enjoying the life.
Mindful of Captain Brent’s disability, Dick Patten was
ever ready to forego his own pleasure to entertain him.
The Dot, albeit now a “miserable wood-burner,” as he
himself once disparagingly designated her, was always
at the disposal of the Brents, and many a delightful trip
they had around the island and among the beautiful chan-
nels of the coral.
The skipper rarely went with them, leaving the three
to their own family secrets. But in the cool of evening,
or as other occasion offered, he and Dorothy would leave
the boy and his father alone and stroll along the beach,
to sit on the rocks at either point and gaze out over the
sea. There they would talk together of days that were
long gone, the days when cruel fate had separated them;
and of the time they hoped would come—though they
knew not how—when they would go back to Australia, to
dear old Sydney, and live in a cottage all their own.


“You know, Dorothy,” the skipper said more than
once, “our little Parson says this enterprise will surely
end successfully. He is quite positive about it. I must
admit he says much in support of his own contention that
is logical and convincing. He has unbounded faith. He
trusts God implicitly. He-is a great little man.”
“Wouldn’t it be splendid,” the skipper went on, “if he
proved right? If some fine day a ship should happen
along and take us all back home ? It is not likely, I know.
Ships do not come this way; there is nothing to bring
them. No one knows that better than I do. Yet, of
course, as the years go by, each little corner of the ocean
is being searched out.”
“And you forget, Jack,” said Dorothy, “at least two
ships have been here —three, including Bully Hayes’s.”
“That is so, Dorothy. You are right there. Thank
you for your gentle rebuke. You mean that I must not
be a pessimist?”
In less than a week from the Brents’ arrival, two new
huts had been made ready—one for Dorothy and one
for her father and Jimmy, whom the father desired to
have with him. This arrangement did not altogether
suit the Parson, who was exceedingly fond of the boy,
and who had by this time come to regard himself as his
rightful guardian. The gentle one, it was quite obvious,
was jealous of the boy’s attachment. The father was
quick to notice it.
“Mr Ormonde,” he said to the Parson, “I confess I
feel more or less like an interloper. But do not think
for a moment I would wish to take my boy from your
company. I am well aware of what you have done for


him, and be assured I am grateful beyond words for the
care and tuition you have given him. May I ask that
you continue to be his guide and mentor? I could wish
for nothing more. Now bear with me a little, lam not
young, Mr Ormonde. I am content to have him with
me, and to know that, even thus late in life, the great
wish of that life has been satisfied.”
It was not long before the refining traces of a feminine
hand began to appear about the blue bay camp. Dorothy,
with the aid of Nini 80, found many a beautiful
flower in the jungle, and soon had her hut surrounded
by bright flowering borders. Nor did she forget the
others. Ere long the dingy patchwork sides of the huts
were for the most part covered with blossoming vines.
As though the coming of a woman to the camp had
added some precious jewel to his charge, Captain Hardy
now thought it advisable to keep a lookout for possible
passing ships, a thing he had not before thought worth
while. The men now took turns to watch the seas, two
of them at a time, one on either horn at the end of the
beach. There, at the best accessible point of vantage,
a little shelter shed was provided, together with a heap
of dry brush ready to light if and when a smoke signal
should be necessary.
It almost seemed, as time went on, that there was just
a trace of inconsistency, even of insincerity, about this
gesture of the captain’s. Not that Captain Hardy could
ever be deceitful, or even do or say anything he did not
mean. He was too solid, too genuine for that. But
there was so much in his present environment that was
satisfying, that apparently —quite involuntarily—he was


coming to be more and more content where he was; and
in that proportion his burning desire to leave the island
was diminishing. There were indications, at any rate
that such was the case. Once in a while he would even
say something very much to that effect. To Mr Smiles,
his confidant, that would be, of course.
In Hurricane, usually so imperturbable and hard to
ruffle by such things, these little reminders bred signs of
irritability and mild rebellion.
“Look here,” he said, when the skipper remarked for
the third time in a week what a lovely place Pinnacle
Island would be in which to end one’s days, “Look here;
that’s all very well for you. You’ve found your man,
you’ve restored his son to him, you’ve found your sweet-
heart, and everything is sunny for you. But ease up on
that tack, skipper. What about the rest of us? What
about Nini Bo and his girl and his share of the treasure.
If he did miss his quarter share, he’s earned something.
What about poor old Sammy Alexander and his black
Virginia? What about me, and Alice waiting there at
Levuka for me to come back and marry her in six months ?
“You and your fairy island! You should write a book
about it. . . . All right, you stay here if it’s so lovely for
you. But for God’s sake keep that lookout going, and
let the rest of us get away on the first ship that comes
along, if one ever does come.”
The skipper was all apologies then. He assured Sam
he had meant no harm. He had, in his own happiness,
been just a little thoughtless for others. He really had
not meant what he said.
“Then what did you say it for?” demanded the irate


Hurricane. “I could understand young Jimmy thinking
and talking like that; but not you, skipper. The young-
ster has all to gain and nothing to lose by staying here,
as far as I can see.”
So, come to think of it, it certainly appeared: and to
no one more clearly than to Jimmy himself. He, with
boyish directness and promptness, had made quick esti-
mate of the position, and, quite oblivious or indifferent
to the likes and dislikes of others on the matter, was con-
tent now to live for ever on Pinnacle Island. And why
not?
Indeed, why? Back in Sydney he had known nothing
but hard life and hard knocks—a life so miserable that
the few kind words and kindlier deeds of the Gentle One
had shone through it like rays of golden light through
the darkness. But here—sunlight, freedom, and good
food aplenty: everything his young heart could ever de-
sire. He had a father now; a father who called him his
boy, and who moreover was a sea-captain who could tell
wonderful stories —real true stories about pirates and
adventures when he was at sea.
A sister, too, he had —a big sister of his own to fuss
about him and love him and kiss him. That was won-
derful. And Nini 80, who showed him all the things of
the sea and the bush. And all these men to look after
him —not hurt him; all big, hard sailors. And the Par-
son still with him all the same, to help him and teach him
■his dear, kind friend the Parson. It was all great!
Then of course he had Pat. He could never do with-
out Pat. They had been pals ever since before he knew
the Parson or anybody. Pat was his first pal, and always


he would be that. Not even the Parson could come be-
fore Pat; no, nor Captain Hardy, nor his sister, nor his
—aw, well, Pat was a great friend, anyhow.
Yes, and he had Jacko, the monkey. He was nearly
as good as Pat and the Parson. He was a wonderful
mate to have, was Jacko —one he could never have had
back home. They didn’t have monkeys in Sydney. Lots
of things he had here they didn’t have in Sydney. Look
at turtles. Fancy riding turtles into the water at Circu-
lar Quay—you and a monkey and a dog racing on turtles!
There were no turtles there, and Ginger Bob would soon
nab you anyhow. And a monkey throwing coconuts down
on you in Sydney Park! You couldn’t do that.
No, Jimmy did not want to leave Pinnacle Island. And
if Captain Hardy did, he never said much about it now.
As for the others, they never said anything either way,
but kept their thoughts to themselves. The secret had
come out once before: the skipper had mentioned that.
If their inner thoughts were still the same —if they still
yearned for home and friends they loved—they now the
better kept their secret.


CHAPTER XX
A SHIP! A SHIP!
One fine morning, just as the company were assembling
in obedience to Sammy’s tin-pan summons to breakfast,
lively commotion suddenly displaced the even calm of
the blue bay camp, Nini 80, who had been giving Dick
a hand to prepare the Dot for a reef expedition, came
running along the beach, shouting wildly. The would-
be breakfasters turned to hear him, forgetting Sam’s
good food, which —fate had decided —would never be
eaten, unless by the monkeys.
“Captain Hardy! Captain Hardy!” the Samoan yelled.
“Does the captain see the smoke ? A ship comes—a ship!
A ship! Look there, captain!”
All eyes now turned out over the sea to the south. A
faint black smudge showed in the distance. Even as they
saw it, a column of smoke nearer at hand on the eastern
horn showed that the Whaler, on watch there, had now
detected what the keener eyes of Nini had seen before
him.
“A ship it is; nothing surer —and a steamer at that,”
said Captain Hardy, trying vainly to conceal his excite-
ment. “Ha, Ardous sees her. There’s his smoke.”
“Yes, and there’s Pete’s, at the other point,” echoed
the mate. “She can’t miss those signals, surely.”


Dang! A distant reverberating crack came over the
water, and echoed hack from their mountain.
“Warship!” snapped the skipper; “and that’s a sign
that she sees us. How’s the Dot, Patten ?”
“All right, sir. Got steam up,”
“ f you, Mr Smiles, go with her to the channel
entrance—quick as you like. By the time you reach it
there should be a boat there to pilot in. Keep quiet, the
rest of you. Don’t get excited. May as well eat your
breakfast,”
But no one cared to eat; the skipper no more than the
rest. All were too excited for that. “A ship! A ship!”
they shouted to one another, racing madly about from
vantage point to vantage point. Even the dog and the
monkey joined in the excitement, though they had no
idea what it was all about. Pat raced around barking, as
though to aid and abet the noise-makers; while Jacko,
coughing and blinking and making woeful facial contor-
tions, performed aerial evolutions in the trees over their
heads. Dorothy’s emotions were displayed in somewhat
hysterical weeping, which her now greatly agitated father
was vainly trying to quiet.
Only one among all those people was calm—the Parson,
Undisturbed amid all the clamour, the Gentle One paced
quietly up and down the beach, his eyes half closed, his
face tranquil. To him, clearly, this was no miracle. It
was the fulfilment of a promise—a fulfilment calmly, un-
doubtingly expected.
Quickly the ship drew nearer. Her black outline con-
firmed now the hint her shot had given. She was a war-


ship. Half an hour and she was hove to a little beyond
the reef, and a cutter manned by eight British blue-
jackets was heading towards the waiting launch. As she
drew nearer an officer in her stern stood up and hailed
the Dot.
“That’s a familiar-looking craft,” he called; “what are
you —naval ratings?”
“No, sir,” answered the mate. “Marooned sailors.
Fourteen of us, including a woman. Will you follow us
in?”
The Dot led the way through the channel and to the
beach. Mr Smiles did not offer a tow. The bluejackets,
pushing the cutter along with their regular, swinging
strokes, almost kept abreast of the Dot] sure indication
of the latter’s degeneracy. A dapper young officer
sprang ashore from the cutter’s bow as she grounded in
the surf. Captain Hardy met him with a hearty hand-
shake. “Thank God for sending you, sir,” he said.
“How do you do,” replied the officer; then, more for-
mally, “Warrant-officer Smythe, sir, Lieutenant-Com-
mander Ponsonby, of Her Majesty’s gunboat Penguin,
has sent me to investigate the smoke signal and to see
if he can render any help.”
Captain Hardy warmly welcomed and thanked the offi-
cer, expressing the pleasure of all at seeing fresh faces
and the prospect of release at last from their confinement.
“It is scarcely necessary for me to say,” he added,
“that we should appreciate being taken to the nearest
port.”
“That was the intention of the Lieutenant-Commander,
I presume,” replied Warrant-officer Smythe, “though I


fancy he thought it would be merely a matter of picking
up a castaway or two and clearing out. I am sure he
was not prepared for a number like this. In the circum-
stances I had better get in touch with my ship for further
orders. It may not be his plan to make port just now.
He may leave you to be called for later, after finding you
are all right. However, I shall find out. Fortunately,
we brought a signaller along.”
Forthwith he and the signaller sought out a convenient,
exposed elevation, from which communication was estab-
lished with the gunboat, and proceeded to report by
semaphore to his commanding officer.
As soon as he had gone Captain Hardy ordered all
hands to prepare to leave the island. There was no doubt,
he said, as to what the commander would do. The cloth-
ing that had so wisely been put away months before was
now brought out, and quickly loincloths were discarded
for more seemly apparel. That is, by all except Captain
Brent, Dorothy and Joe Winters, who had years ago bid-
den farewell to their last stitch of textile clothing. Nothing
could be done for Dorothy, of course. She must needs
depart in her Maori frock of grass and feathers, which,
although in good taste and not at all inelegant, was
scarcely what she would voluntarily wear in good com-
pany, or for that matter in any company save that at a
fancy ball; and only then if amplified by the addition of
shoes and stockings.
As for her father, several of the crew offered him
their clothes, saying that the loinclothes would do them
until they got aboard, when the bluejackets would surely


find them something to wear. But to their surprise Cap-
tain Brent thankfully declined all offers.
“Thank you all,” he said, “don’t mind me. I shall not
need them,”
While all present looked wonderingly at him, puzzled at
this strange attitude, he continued: “Captain Hardy,
would you please come here; and you, Mr Smiles, and
Dorothy, and James.” He drew them apart from the
company towards his cabin.
“I have words for your ears,” he said, “which I did
not think it would ever be necessary to speak. But again
the unexpected has happened. Now that this miraculous
rescue has come, I must tell you that / am not going with
you. . . . No; hear me out, please. Here we part —for
ever. My decision, long ago come to, is to end my days
here. I have more than once hinted this to Dorothy,
but not to you, Captain Hardy. You see, I have noth-
ing to go home for now. I could not go back like this,
a broken man—l who have always been a man of energy
and action. lam not young now, and in any case lam
nearer the end than perhaps appearances would indicate.
Better to spend the rest of my closing life here in peace
with my good faithful friend Joe Winters, who will look
after me and, as he has assured me, never leave me.
Remember, a share of the treasure stays with him, cap-
tain, I want none. Dorothy is free to go with you.
Jimmy—he is free to go or stay. I will not ask him to
choose. Much as I love him I would not wish to limit
him. He has his life before him. For myself, I will
stay here on Pinnacle Island.”
This startling ultimatum brought consternation to the


four listeners. In turn they protested, and begged the
old man not to adhere to such a foolhardy decision. But
he was not to be moved.
“Say no more, please,” he said. “That is my last
word—except this; and I must be quick with it. Here
comes the naval man with orders from his ship. You
will be going now. . . Jack and Dorothy, listen. One
thing I should dearly love to see before you leave. I
should like to see you two married, so that I could give
you my blessing. Could it be managed? You are both
willing. There is nothing in the way. Could Mr Or-
monde marry you?”
Dorothy and Captain Hardy were both agreeable to
accede to Captain Brent’s wish, though, they pointed out,
they did not think Mr Ormonde had the authority to
perform the ceremony. The skipper called the Parson.
“Mr Ormonde,” he said, “Captain Brent is not com-
ing home, and he desires to see us married before we
leave him. Could you marry us?”
“I am very sorry,” said the Parson. “That is a duty
which would be a great pleasure to me. I have my
prayer-book, with the marriage service, and I know how
to conduct it; but lam not ordained. Celebrated by me,
the marriage would not be in accord with the law, though
in the sight of God it would be sacred and binding. No,
I could not do it.
“But what of the warship? It is unlikely that she car-
ries a chaplain; but the commander of one of Her Ma-
jesty’s ships may, I think, act as clergyman. That would
solve the problem. Let us ask the officer.”
Warrant-officer Smythe reported that he had been


ordered to bring the company aboard, using the cutter
and the steam launch to carry them. Lieutenant-Com-
mander Ponsonby, he said, would take them to Suva.
When the matter of the marriage was put to him he
smiled.
“This is a rather unusual thing,” he said. “But we are
used to dealing with strange problems in the Navy. I
shouldn’t wonder but what Lieutenant-Commander Pon-
sonby will manage the job. I must ask for further
orders.”
Once again the signaller exchanged wig-wags with the
ship, and once more Warrant-officer Smythe reported
back.
“Lieutenant-Commander Ponsonby says the matter can
be arranged, provided no further time is lost in coming
aboard. Get any valuables you have together and let us
embark.”
There was not much to collect. All the party possessed
was on their backs —except the treasure. Captain Hardy
and Hurricane saw to the loading and safeguarding of
that on the Dot. Then, taking Captain Brent and Joe
Winters with them for the wedding function, the Mary
Ellen’s company bade farewell to the blue bay camp and
set out for the gunboat. Once under way, the skipper
turned to Captain Brent.
“This is a sad thing, Captain Brent,” he said, “this
parting with you. It robs me of a great part of the
reward of my venture, for the primary object of that
venture was to find you and bring you home. Still, I
am thankful for what I have been able to do, and above


all”—he glanced at Dorothy—“for the great prize you
have given me. With that in mind, I bow to your wish.
“After the marriage and the farewells—which latter
I frankly dread—we shall embark you and your faithful
servitor in the Dot, together with what amount of the
treasure you choose to take, and Dick Patten will put
you ashore.”
“And me, too, Captain Hardy,” supplemented Jimmy.
“You, Jimmy!” they cried in chorus.
“Yes, Captain Hardy,” said the boy. “You see, cap-
tain, Dad gave me my choice, and I have made it. I love
you all very much—you, Captain Hardy, and sister
Dorothy, and Mr Ormonde —all of you. You’ve been
so good and kind. But see, you are all going away to be
happy. Dad is staying here alone. He hasn’t had me
long, and I’m the boy he waited so many years for; I
heard him say so. So I’m going back with him and
Pat and Jacko to live on Pinnacle Island and help old
Joe Winters to look after Dad.”
Jimmy’s announcement saddened them all. They all
loved the boy, and were loth to leave him behind. Still,
that was his decision, and no one of them could do less
than his father, who had left him free to choose.
When the boats reached the warship’s side, Captain
Hardy and Hurricane assisted Dorothy up the somewhat
difficult gangway. The bluejackets, foreseeing that Cap-
tain Brent would have trouble, boldly picked him up and
passed him deftly aboard. Lieutenant-Commander Pon-
sonby greeted them warmly on the deck, and, scarcely
waiting to be introduced, mitigated Dorothy’s embarrass-
ment by showing her to a cabin in his quarters.


“Not very fine,” he said courteously, “but the best my
ship offers. At least it will afford you privacy. Please
accept what comfort it provides. And now, if I may be
so bold, Miss Brent, I think I can find something in the
way of a frock a little more suitable for your wedding:
which, by the way, must take place as soon as you can be
ready. The dress is one which was used at our last
fancy ball in Sydney Harbour, and by a stroke of good
fortune has been preserved as a memento of the occasion.
If you will accept it, I shall send it by my steward, who
will also bring you anything else you need—provided we
have it.”
Dorothy gladly accepted the offer, and in a few
minutes the steward brought along a very passable even-
ing frock, and with it —joy of joys—shoes and stockings
to match it and an ornament for her hair. Obedient to
orders, she lost no time in making the change. Primi-
tive living had not robbed her of grace and beauty, nor
had she in the lapse of years lost the cunning to enhance
those feminine attributes. With the few articles of ap-
parel now at her disposal, her deft, unaided fingers quickly
wrought a change in her appearance as striking and com-
plete as that of a butterfly emerging from the chrysalis
state to a full-winged glory. When the steward called
half an hour later, it was a handsome bride he led forth
to join her prospective husband on the quarter deck. Cap-
tain Hardy looked upon her with glowing pride. He had
contrived in the brief interim, with the aid of the same
useful steward, to rid his face of its wild beard and trim
himself up a little.
At the wish of the bride and bridegroom, not only the


Mary Ellen's people, but all naval ratings who so desired,
were present to witness the marriage. Captain Brent
gave his daughter away, and Captain Hardy was sup-
ported on this, as on many a less important occasion, by
the indispensable Mr Smiles.
“This is an unusual occasion—very,” Lieutenant-Com-
mander Ponsonby said. “I am called upon to do some-
thing rarely, if ever, done before on one of Her Majesty’s
ships. lam glad, however, to be of service. Her Ma-
jesty’s navy is ever ready to be that.
“I shall invite Mr Ormonde to assist in the ceremony.
I myself shall merely conduct the formal part of it, thus,
by virtue of my rank solely, giving the union authority
and legality; and stand for as short a time as possible
between you and what lam sure you all desire —a few
words from one more accustomed and better fitted to
such things.”
Thereupon the Lieutenant-Commander read the mar-
riage service from the prayer-book. When he had de-
clared the pair man and wife and had, as the Whaler was
heard to whisper audibly, “made a good sailor-man’s
splice of it,” the Parson stepped forward, and in a few
earnest words changed to a warm, sociable function what
must otherwise have been a cold, formal ceremony. When
he finished, warm felicitations were showered on Captain
Hardy and his wife.
“And now that the wedding is over,” spoke up Captain
Brent, as the Penguin's company left the quarter deck,
“I must bid you good-bye, my friends. Lieutenant-Com-
mander Ponsonby has been more than kind in acceding to
my unusual request. He has displayed a chivalry that


is so characteristic of the naval officer. I heartily thank
him, and I must not further tax his patience nor infringe
on his generosity—even if he would permit it.
“For you, Dorothy and Jack, now happily wed after
all your years of waiting, my wish is that you may long
live contentedly together in the fair homeland to which
you are returning. My fondest wishes and a father’s
love go with you, and may God bless you.
“Good-bye all. Patten will put us ashore now. I shall
spend what more of this fading life God permits on the
island that has for so long been my home. When the call
comes, my good and faithful friend Joe, if he is still
here, will consign me to the sea, as becomes an old sailor.”
He paused, as though his breath would not come; then
with weakened voice he went on:
“Ten miles due south of here lies my old ship—the
Sydney Lass. I would that I could sleep with her. Per-
haps—perhaps Joe will bury me there But he’ll have
no boat. I forget. I seem to—no, he’ll have—no—
boat.”
His voice died away to nothing. The stick he had
leaned on clattered to the deck. He raised his hands as
though in mute benediction; then staggered, and would
have fallen but for the ready arms of Hurricane. Gentle
hands lowered him to the deck. Dorothy, kneeling, held
his head in her lap.
“Daddy, dear Daddy,” she said with ill-controlled an-
guish, “speak to me, Daddy.”
Her father’s hand sought her face. “Dorothy,” he
said, “Dorothy, come closer.” She bent her face down
to his and kissed him tearfully.


“My time has come,” he said. “Dot, —be his mother to
him. Jimmy—Jack—are you here? Good-bye, my chil-
dren. . . Jack, in your good hands I ”
His eyes closed. He was dead.
They bore him to the cabin. The Mary Ellen's men
stood silently around, stunned by this sudden blow. There
were signs that the Penguin would be getting under way.
She had her work to do. Dick; Patten went to the cabin
door and beckoned to Captain Hardy. “Sorry to intrude,
sir,” he said, in a hushed voice, “but the Dot] what about
her, Captain Hardy?”
“We shall not need her now,” the skipper said sadly.
“The boy and Joe Winters will come with us. The Com-
mander will be clearing out now. You attend to her,
Patten, You’ve been a good custodian of her. You’ve
loved her, Dick, as I have loved her namesake. She is in
your hands.”
Swiftly Dick Patten went over the side and boarded the
Dot.
“Little Beauty,” he said to her caressingly, “you’ll
never live to be a derelict. I’ll spare you that disgrace.”
He opened her sea-cock, and as the water rushed in he
climbed the gangway, casting off the Dot's line as he did
so. Even as he came aboard, the Penguin was moving
off. She left a sweeping white curve on the sea as she
headed into the south. Marking the starting point of
that trail was the little Dot, and looking back over the
fast-stretching distance, Dick saw his loved one gently
settling to her watery grave.
Ten miles to the south the Penguin's engines stopped
and she lay hove to. The sun’s golden ball was just dip-


ping into the sea away to the west. Certain orders known
only to Navy men had been piped. The ship was unusu-
ally quiet. Lieutenant-Commander Ponsonby stood at
the ship’s side, book in hand. Only the skipper, Dorothy,
the Parson, Jimmy, Joe and Hurricane were with him.
Before them, shrouded in a seaman’s hammock, was the
body of Captain Brent. Beneath them, in a hundred
fathoms, lay the wreck of the Sydney Lass.
The Commander read again from the same prayer-
book. But not the same service did he read. This time
it was the burial service. Then they said a prayer. The
body slipped quietly into the fast darkening water. The
engines resumed their rumble, and the Penguin went on
her way. Captain James Brent had gone to join his ship
—as became an old sailor.


CHAPTER XXI
TWO HOMES UPON THE CLIFFS
The Penguin travelled fast. She was at Suva in eight
days. A steamer left for Sydney two weeks later and
took with her Captain Hardy and his party. The interim
had been crowded. Events had come thick and fast into
that two weeks: too fast and too intermixed to permit of
logical recording.
First there had been the clamorous desire of the resi-
dents to adulate the Penguin and her commander, as hav-
ing formed a link with Captain Brent, long since named
by them on the South Seas scroll of fame; and having
in turn succoured his gallant would-be rescuer and
brought him and his brave company safely home. His
bride too, mark it! But Lieutenant-Commander Ponsonby
had thankfully declined it all. He said he had merely
found a job to do and had done it—as was the way of the
Navy. Then he had cleared out, to find more jobs to
do, perhaps.
Mr Smiles had run off with almost indecent haste to
Levuka and returned with his Alice, together with Jacob
Schmidt and his fussy, fat frau, who refused to relin-
quish their joint chaperonship until the marriage had
been duly solemnized. And Sam, being quite unschooled


in such things, had permitted it. What did he know, for-
sooth, about preparing for a wedding, let alone dressing
a bride? They had done the job well for him, and he and
Alice had been happily wed, not on a warship, but in a
church, with all the company present, and most of the
people of Suva too, either inside or outside.
Between the clamourings of the people and the excite-
ment of Hurricane’s wedding, Captain Hardy had man-
aged to find a quiet interval to remove the treasure to the
bank uptown, where had reposed so long the lone black
pearl from Navua and what capital had belonged to the
Mary Ellen. He was attended by the Parson, still the
purser of the nominal Mary Ellen, and escorted by the
whole of her crew except the Whaler and Tall Yarn
Pete.
That beautiful pair had thought it fitting and right to
celebrate the mate’s wedding, their own safe return, and
their sudden acquisition to wealth in a real good drink.
Much to the disgust and chagrin of the Gentle One, this
was; when he had fondly thought them well weaned by
enforced abstinence—and his persistent admonition —
from anything stronger than coconut milk.
The treasure, gold coin and pearls, the little bank man-
ager and his clerk first gazed on google-eyed, then exam-
ined and fondled lovingly—especially the black and gol-
den pearls. After that they had made an inventory,
sealed it all up, and put it in the safe for transfer to
Sydney, where it would be evaluated and converted into
cash.
“Conservatively, I should say there’s £IOO,OOO worth
there, Captain Hardy,” the manager had said. “Draw


on us for your local requirements,” he added patroniz-
ingly. ‘‘Our services are at your command, sir.”
After Dorothy, who had on arrival set about renewing
her wardrobe, and, unrestricted by lack of cash, had
indulged to the full her inherent though long dormant
feminine love for shopping, Nini Bo was the first of the
company to make demand on the funds. He would be
off, as though to emulate Captain Hardy and the Mister
Smiles —to find his beloved Isa Loe and marry her as he
had arranged. Opulent now—in anticipation at any rate
—he would brook no delay. He was a man of means,
and would go with swelling chest and make his sweet-
heart great. Henceforth she would be Adi* and the
village people would address him Sayadra Tauraga.'f
“Guess you is goin’ to be de wealthenest man in dis
’ere Fij is, Nini,” Sammy Alexander had told him. “Well,
good luck to you-all, f’um one cullud gemmen to ’nudder.
Ah aims to foiler you ’lustrous example jes’ as soon’s
Ah can git er boat fer Noo Orlens.”
Captain Hardy had had a thousand pounds transferred
to Nini Bo’s credit, pending a final appraisement in
Sydney.
“You’ll get your full share, my man,” he assured the
Samoan, “and well you have earned it. Take with you
my best thanks for all you have done for me, and the
best wishes of all your shipmates for a happy future for
you and your wife.”
Then Joe Winters—he had refused to come on to
Sydney, where the skipper had hoped to place him in
* Lady—pronounced Andi.
t Pronounced Satandra Tauranga —r“Good day, Sir.”


good hands, but insisted on staying in Suva, where, he
said, he could keep an eye on Captain Brent. He was
not going any farther away from his old master, he said.
Some day he’d buy a boat and go and see him again.
Poor Joe. Faithful to the end he was—and after. The best
the skipper could do was to arrange with Jacob Schmidt
and his good wife to look after Joe, and for the banker
to make such judicious advances for the purpose as from
time to time he saw fit; until some satisfactory perman-
ent arrangement could be made.
All these things, and more, had occurred —all in a
hurly-burly of confusion and hurry and excitement, dur-
ing that fortnight in Suva. Then the captain and his
wife, and the mate and his wife, and the remaining mem-
bers of the Mary Ellen's crew embarked on the steamer
Aroha for Sydney. And in the little Aroha's strong-
room, safely shipped by the bank manager, were the gold
coin and the pearls that had been Bully Hayes’s treasure
on Pinnacle Island.
Nine days later all the Mary Ellen's folks turned out
of their berths before dawn to greet the distant flash of
South Head Light. With brightening day came the outline
of those welcoming cliffs, along the skyline of which, to
his sister’s delight, Jimmy Brent pointed out the skipper’s
cottage.
“But look! Oh, Captain Hardy,” he exclaimed, “there’s
another house there! Someone has built one alongside
yours. See, there’s two!”
“So there are,” said Hurricane, scanning the cliffs


with his glasses. “By jove, skipper, they’ve invaded
your sacred preserve.”
“I am not surprised,” the skipper answered calmly,
“You see, I sent word back from Suva before we left
there, asking Mr Strachan to build another one for me,
in case it was needed. That’s for you and Alice, Sam.
If your new-found wealth has not spoiled you, you two
will live there. That is my wedding gift to you.”
Alice embraced him there and then. “You dear old
thing!” she said.
Then in through the heads the Aroha went, revealing
to their eager eyes and swelling hearts Sydney—and
home 1
Mr Strachan was at the wharf to meet them. With
him, come to welcome the wanderers home, were all
the old friends, including Mr McEachern. He had come
all the way from Auckland for that very purpose. For
everyone knew about their return now. H.M.S. Penguin
had arrived a week ahead of them. She had called at
Auckland on the way; and the navy men had spread the
good news.
“I have taken the liberty of arranging a banquet for
to-night,” Mr Strachan announced to Captain Hardy. “I
thought that would be the most fitting way to let your
many well-wishers greet you. I hope you will agree,
Captain Hardy—you and your good wife, Mr and Mrs
Smiles, Mr Ormonde, and Jimmy, eh?”
“And the rest of my good comrades,” added the
captain.
“What, the crew?” asked Mr Strachan and Mr Mc-
Eachern together in surprise.


“Certainly,” said the skipper. “You see, gentlemen,
this was a co-operative enterprise. These men all threw
in their lot with me. They asked no pay, but under-
took to share my losses and disappointments and dangers
with me. I, in return, undertook that each would share
equitably in the spoils, be they treasure or pearls—or
honours. So that anything accruing from the voyage is
theirs as much as mine.”
“Fine!” ejaculated Mr Strachan; “and just like Cap-
tain John Hardy.”
And thus it fell out that all the company of the Mary
Ellen (“God rest her soul,” said Mick Farley) except
Dave Williams, the second mate (“a foine quoiet little
man he was,” said Mick; “an’ doid in the execution of
his dooty”)—all the company sat round the central table
at Mr Strachan’s welcome-home party. There they all
were, for the assembled well-wishers to see: —
John Hardy: Master.
Samuel Smiles: Mate,
William Ardous, A.B
Whaler.
Known as Crazy Bill the
Peter Hawkins, A.B.
Richard Patten, A.B.
Known as Tall Yarn Pete.
Sailor and good engineer.
Michael Farley, A.B.
Hope Mick.
R.N. retired; known as Cal-
Daniel Graham, A.8.;
ventures.
Man of many parts and ad-
Samuel Alexander: Cook, of “Noo Odens” and the
Sunny South.
William Ormonde: Purser and Spiritual Adviser.
James Brent: Ship’s Boy.


The same list of names, with one exception, that Cap-
tain Hardy had read to Sam Smiles, the mate, that morn-
ing a year ago in the Mary Ellen’s cabin as they were
being towed down the harbour. Then, they had been
faring forth they knew not whither. Nor what for,
most of them. To seek adventure and fortune some-
where—in some vague way. That was all they then
knew.
Many things had happened since then. Much water
had flowed under the bridge, as Mr Ormonde would have
it; and now, here they were back home, satiated with
adventure, well suited as to fortune, and full of honours.
Their friends were welcoming them and acclaiming them
as heroes. They had “thrown their feet under the
table,” as the Whaler expressively though inelegantly
put it to Pete, to do justice to the good things that re-
posed thereon.
“Yus, an’ it ain’t ’arf a spread, neither,” the Cockney
commented. “Blim-e, none o’ yer banana-leaf plates an’
cokernut-shell basins ’ere.”
“You-all done get plenty to eat on Pimmickle Islan’,”
interrupted Sammy Alexander sharply. “Ain’t no cause
fo’ you to cast asperiments.”
“No, there ain’t,” agreed the Whaler. “Sammy’s right
there. You never ’ad better tucker in yer life. Now
shut up that big mouth o’ yourn. Yer always puttin’
yer foot in it. An’ look ’ere, Pete—mind yer manners
’ere amongst these people. Try an’ remember w’ere
y’are, an’ don’t go tellin’ them shipwreck yarns o’ yourn,
see.”


“An’ don’t you come aht wiv that bloomin’ wile song,
neither,” retorted his mate.
So a tacit and mutual agreement on the point was
come to. Neither would offend; that was understood.
But as it happened they both did; for the occasion
proved to be one when every man had to be heard from.
When all had eaten to the full, Mr Strachan proposed
the toast of the guests. After he and Mr McEachern
had expressed the great pleasure, and, quite frankly, the
joyous surprise the return the Mary Ellen’s company
had given them all, Captain Hardy, to the entertainment
of all present, reviewed their doings since their depar-
ture. He told of the finding of the island, of how the
Mary Ellen had been lost, of life in camp at the blue
bay, and how at last, through the cunning and sagacity
of Nini Bo and the little monkey, Captain Brent and
his daughter had so miraculously been found.
At this choice morsel in the narrative, the tense silence
that had attended it was broken by an involuntary cheer.
Mr Strachan, standing up and raising his glass, bade
them all rise. “Gentlemen,” he said, “Nini Bo and the
monkey!”
Jacko, seated on a chair behind young Jimmy, coughed
and capered as though he understood the compliment,
as the company with one accord stood up and echoed
heartily Mr Strachan’s salutation —“Nini Bo and the
monk!”
So through the different phases of the skipper’s story
the varied sentiments of his hearers manifested them-
selves. Mention of the Penguin’s dramatic arrival
brought a spontaneous cheer for her and her commander;


of the captain’s marriage on the gunboat, a complimen-
tary demonstration towards Dorothy; of the tragic end
of her father immediately after it, tears to the eyes of
all in his audience.
“Ah, well,” said Mr Strachan, as though to turn from
a painful thought, “it was the end of a fine career. Since
that end was at some time inevitable, it could not have
come at a more appropriate or happier time than at the
culmination of Captain Brent’s own dearest desires, nor
in an environment more desirable to the grand old sailor
himself.
“And now, as this function, besides being a welcome
home to our friends here, is in a measure also a farewell,
marking the separation and dispersal of most of the noble
company, let us hear from each one of them, in turn —
a song, a dance, a yarn —and let him tell us where he
is going, that we may wish him luck. We shall start
with Bill Ardous, the Whaler. Mrs Hardy has been
telling me about his unique experience.”
All eyes turned to Bill. A thrill passed through the
Whaler at being so signally honoured. He looked hope-
fully at his colleague. “Can I, Pete?” he asked.
“Aw, go on,” said Pete in disgust. “I knoo yer
couldn’t keep aht of it. You couldn’t keep yer bloomin’
mahf shut.”
So Crazy Bill sang his song. Thus he scored a victory
over Tall Yarn Pete. For so taken were they all with
his adventure that ere he finished they were all (staid
Mr McEachern, the ladies and everyone else) joining
lustily with him in the refrain: —


So there you are me hearties, and I’ve told you a true tale,
Of how I crossed the ocean in the belly of a whale.
Each of the others in turn gave an item and told
where he was going. The Parson would resume duties
at the Sailors’ Home. He felt his work was there among
the seamen. Dan Graham would be off for new adven-
tures. A few thousand pounds would never keep him
from that. Mick Farley was taking the first boat back
to “Noo Zayland,” where he had some secret attraction.
Dick Patten would go to the Islands again and invest
his money in a plantation. He’d have a steam launch,
too—a little beauty like the Dot. The Whaler would
settle down to a quiet life at Twofold Bay, the place
where he was born. That is, if Tall Yarn Pete failed
to persuade him to accompany him on a long-deferred
visit to his old home in Poplar, Jimmy Brent was to
live with his sister and the skipper. He would go to
sea soon and learn to be a sailor. Only Sammy Alex-
ander remained.
“Play and sing for us, Sam,” Dorothy requested. “It
will be a fitting finish. But do not make us cry this
time, Sam.”
Sammy strummed his banjo and grinned. “Ye-es,
Mis’ Hahdy,” he said. “Ah’ll sing for you-all; an Ah
sho’ won’t make no one cry. Sees you Nini Bo cry
w’en he goes off’n to his Isa Loe wiv all dat money?
Sees you Mistah Smiles cry w’en he done git his wife?
An’ Ah doan see Cap’n Hahdy cryin’ ’case he’s got
you, Mis’ Dor’thy. No, suh, an’ Ah doan figger on
cryin’, Ah’m goin’ back to mah ’Ginia an’ make her
an’ mah ol’ mammy rich. An’ Ah’m goin’ be happy.


Yes, Mis’ Hahdy an’ Mis’ Hurricum Smiles an' all you
gemmen, Sam’s heart am goin’ he happy all de time.”
Captain John Hardy looked up from his flowers. He
put down his watering-can and walked to the gate at
the back of that cosy garden of his, enclosed by high-
grown, square-clipped hedge of shiny-leaf. Two visitors
were at the gate. He had been expecting them. They
were Sam Smiles and his wife. They had come from
their own cottage in the next declivity, not two hundred
yards away in the scrub. It, too, was hemmed around
with a hedge of shiny-leaf, thick-grown and square-
clipped. It, too, had a back garden sheltered from the
south and west winds. Its glass-panelled front veranda,
like the skipper’s, looked out from the Waverlcy cliffs
over the same ocean. Well had faithful Mr Strachan
obeyed the wish and carried out the instructions in the
skipper’s letter from Suva.
Captain Hardy greeted his visitors warmly.
‘‘Come aboard, shipmates,” he said. ‘‘That is, if I
may put it that way. Things have changed a little in
this craft, Hurricane. There’s a new mate aboard. But
come in. This is the day I’ve longed for. Here’s
Dorothy. She’s just as excited as I am; and Jimmy-
lie says it reminds him of the day he first came with you,
Sam, through the scrub to see my new home; the day
we sent him to chase lizards while we talked. Mr Or-
monde will be here any minute now. He’s coming to
see us in our new homes —and give Jimmy a lesson.
He's never let up on the lessons, right through all our


trials and tribulations. Grand little man, the Parson.
The gentle one, eh, Sam?”
“Yes, the gentle one, God bless him,” echoed Sam.
“Ah, here he is,” he added as the Parson suddenly
emerged from the scrub and entered the garden gate.
“Come on; you’re just in time to join us in this first
official visit to the Hardys.”
“And greatly honoured I am, to be included in such
a select party,” the Parson rejoined. “Hello, James!
How are you, my boy? Here’s Pat, too. Good, faith-
ful friend, Pat. And—l declare—Jacko!” The little
monkey, recognizing the kindly voice, scrambled to the
gentle one’s shoulder and stroked his face caressingly.
“You’ll never forget Pinnacle Island, James —so long as
you have Jacko. . . . Join the procession to the dinner
table? Very good. Lead on, young sir. Remember,
James, eat, drink, and be merry; for it’s lessons after-
wards. You must push on with your study if you are to
go to sea next year as Captain Hardy intends. Study
up, James, and by and by—Captain Brent the Second,
eh?”
“Do you remember the first time you came here, Sam ?”
the skipper asked as they took their seats around the
table. “How I invited you—just like this —to a meal
I had prepared myself? Well, I didn’t cook this one.
I’ve been superseded. Yes, pushed right out of the way.
There’s a new mate on the ship, and like the old one did
once or twice, she’s taken command. But just as I knew
you were doing it for my own good, so I now humbly—
and gladly—make way and let Dorothy carry on.
“Now, my friends, this is a great occasion. At least


I think so. This is the thing I dreamed of a year ago—
you remember, Sam?—when you laughed at my hair-
brained idea and thought I was mad. I’ll never forget
that look of pity on your face.”
“Well, what if I did?” Hurricane answered, with as-
sumed sullenness. “Mad or no mad, I humoured your
silly whims and abetted your scheme.”
“Yes, Sam, and saw me through it, too. Held my
hands up while the walls of Jericho shook, so to speak.
And to think I am here celebrating the culmination of
my dreams with Dorothy; who, although to find her
father was the aim of my venture, must all the time
have been the lodestone that guided me to initiate it and
carry it through. Yes, to think that Dorothy and I are
at last together here in the cottage on the cliffs.”
“And to think that Alice and I are at last together
in another cottage on the cliffs,” supplemented Sam.
“And to think,” added his wife, that but for the skip-
per’s wild and fanciful dreams we two should never even
have met again, much less be living in a lovely cottage
here, and—how wonderful, Sam —built for us in antici-
pation of our return. Captain, you must have had great
faith in yourself to do that.”
“No, strange to say, Alice, I had not. But I had great
faith in those who helped me. Your good man, Sam,
there, first and most. And Nini 80, whose knowledge
was so indispensable; and Mr Ormonde here, whose
faith never wavered for a minute. To them I give the
honour and the thanks,”
“No, no!” corrected the Parson. “Give God the praise
and the thanks. Captain Hardy, so many times has the


impossible happened during our adventures; so persis-
tently have things come right when all seemed hopeless,
that you can attribute the successful culmination of your
expedition only to Divine Providence.”
“I accept the correction, Mr Ormonde. No doubt
you are right,” the skipper answered humbly. “Come
out on the veranda now. My lookout, I call it. .. . Isn’t
that a fine view, Alice—Dorothy? What more could
heart desire—especially an old sailor’s? Sea and ships.
This is where I got my inspiration, I think, Sam. At
the banana punt, and here. Dirty-faced Jimmy Brent
started me; my love for Dorothy and for the sea here
developed the idea.
“The same old sea, Sam; the same ships. They’re
changing though. More steamers are coming. But
though the ships change, the sea never does. It is the
same old sea. And what secrets it holds; what stories
it could tell. Just think of it —this very ocean we are
looking over has been the scene of all our voyaging—
all our adventures —yours and mine, Hurricane. On
this same sea Bully Hayes, the pirate, roved. Sammy
Alexander is at this moment on his way across it to
home and happiness in America. Across it, too, Nini Bo
has already found his. Beneath it lie the Mary Ellen
and the Sydney Lass —and with her Captain Brent, her
master. On its bosom, far over there, lies Pinnacle
Island, scene of our great adventure. And across this
same ocean, if we can believe his story, Crazy Bill the
Whaler made his memorable voyage to Frisco. Yes, and
hundreds of other things, other incidents, other memories,
are inseparably linked with the great blue sheet of water


whose waves are at this moment lapping the shores of
Alaska, China and Chili—and the rocks beneath our
feet. The same old sea, Sam; the same wonderful old
sea. It never changes. Only the ships are changing.
The steamers are coming; the white wings are going.
“And yet —do you know, Sam, I don’t think I dislike
steamers so much now. There was the Dot. She was
steam, you know. She served us well, shipmate. And
there was the Penguin. Can we ever forget what she
and her commander did for us? Anyway, times have
to change, haven’t they? Still, if ever I went to sea
again, I should like it to be under sail—in a schooner of
my own.”
“And what would you call her?” Alice asked.
“I’d call her the Mary Ellen.”
“And would you sail to a pirate’s island, captain?”
“Yes, if it was to search for Dorothy there; and if
Hurricane would come as mate.”
“You bet I would, with the same inducement,” an-
swered Sam.
“Well, there;” summed up the skipper. “We’d both
go to sea again for the same rewards. But we already
have them. You’ve got your Alice and I’ve got my
Dorothy. Both anchors are out, Sam; and this time
they’re holding fast. So we’ll leave the ships and the
sea to those that want them, and the treasure islands
to Bully Hayes and his ilk. ‘Home is the sailor, home
from the sea; and the hunter home from the hill.’ I,
at any rate, am content to let it rest at that. Are you
all of the same mind?”
“Ay, ay, sir,” they answered in chorus.


“Good,” said the skipper. “Then that’s that. Now,
Mr Ormonde, to you, as more than once before, belongs
the last word. I know you’ll choose it well,”
“Thank you, sir,” the Parson said. “It is this: God
bless you all and keep you. And may yours be the
peace that passeth understanding.”


Halstead Printing Company, Limited,
Arnold Place, Sydney










I




