

■ — ■ ■


Iffj J'ERGUSON COLL E CTI \ W
||| Rational Library jjjj


greatness of a nation is the measure pf the extent to which
I!® §lll k as P r °fi te( i by past experiences.
§g p||f Three hundred thousand of its sons and daughters homing
1111 iHi rom the four corners of the earth at the close of the world
war is an experience for Australia, which will leave an indelible
mark upon our future as a nation.
Because we believe that those of us who sailed from England in
September, 1919, on board H.M.A.T. "Port Sydney," were truly representa-
tive of the returning army, in ability, spirit and ideals, we put forward this
volume as a record of the hopes and emotions inseparably associated with
the great HOME-COMING. ,
Five hundred students in education classes; a crowded programme which
included in its range lectures on Inlernational Relationships, Workers'
Education, The Co-operative Movement, Geology, Federal Government and
Adventures Abroad; a bi-weekly "Diggers'" Parliament; sports, concerts,
-dances, mock-trials, and "stunts" indicate the virility of the citizens of
to-morrow who made this memorable trip.
The work embodied in this volume is entirely original, gathered only
from the men on board, and evidences the varied talent existing in our
five millions of population.
HOME-COMING has excited this putting forth of energy, indicative
of the bright enthusiasm now fast superseding the grey experiences of the
past five years, and this modest effort is an attempt to epitomise the spirit
of the Diggers' Homing!
—The Editor.


— ' WEkCOMS M9MB
n HNVmTZ 3 »
I - I - mu i I J JUr fj i *m
regg. |:f|j j [j JIh [ i
WW
f if r Jjf 'rlW
nCWJC. f " i . c«£SC .
fu. t|j. J'ir n J - rir J 1
fif. If 1
ni i. ij ' p f —= ' — {
| 9 • w r&)\ cr «</«; 9'
/-v » it* o* /•>" -~p 2 -VST5«1 ®^Tv
If Ji; r Ir J Ir r Iff r Jf, J|J y lr 1
j iJ \i J ii j PTpj j
* 4 ' H * 3 i'^i
*4 _ 3 « » _gl 3
I /) , - / Msr vsxse. ortt-f m s —-v ~ ~
J J f n r I f T- Hr ir _j_r ir^
j ji i ii 1 1 > r GaOir i
llppllpppfllllp
1-S- ? * 2


I Through the faint soft dawn is gleaming ~IT —r
The mirage is beckoning, dreaming
O'er the billows, buoyant ringing, ~ J*|
#spp§r J|y? T====r *
We can hear your voices singing, j jj\ T-
And your thoughts to us are winging, | > " a «-
They but rest until the morning, '
And awakening with the dawning, irofcrt 1 ''
Hate and strife and bloodshed scorning,
And the breeze to you is bringing
Golden wattles send a greeting,
Which the tall gums are repeating, ■
Hands and hearts and lips are meeting
u—-
Welcome Home ■(
Through the faint soft dawn is gleaming
Gold and grey.
The mirage is beckoning, dreaming
Far away.
O'er the billows, buoyant ringing, P
We can hear your voices singing.
And your thoughts to us are winging.
Day by day. ij
For the brave hearts that are sleeping
Do not mourn. /
Heroes in the Maker's keeping
Homeward borne.
They but rest until the morning.
And awakening with the dawning, f
Hate and strife and bloodshed scorning,
Hail the morn
Soon you'll hear our song birds singing |
O'er the foam, j
And the breeze to you is bringing <
Thoughts that roam. =
Golden wattles send a greeting, ~
Which the tall gums are repeating, M
Hands and hearts and lips are meeting-
Welcome Home.
E. J. Cornish ■


.. I •- 1 -
, - i '■■ ~ '' '
■■■■■■■■■
HOUSEY! HOUSEY!
(Being the vernacular of the only gambling game legalised by the military authorities.)
"|_| OUSEY ! Housey!" hear the cry
Between the hatches, passing by,
"Legs Eieven (u), Kelly's Eye (x),
Everything is dinky die!" (alright)
"Clickety-click (66) and Doc's De-
light (No. 9),"
r Tis the cry from morn till night.
"House correct. Your house is
right;
Here's yer dollar and don't get
tight!"
"A card! A card! A buckshee
(free) card;
Come on, Dig., and don't be hard.
I'm yer pal and I'm yer pard,
You won the last —by half a yard!"
TWISTED PROVERBS.
A rolling private gathers no stripes.
It was a long Blighty turning that
had no "Jacks" in it.
A meal in the stomach is worth two in
the sea.
A bird in the bush is worth a dozen in
the clink.
Marry in London —repent in Aussie.
Absence makes a fond heart wander.
Half a loaf's better than no bread,
but no bread at all is better than the
ship's plum duff.
Still waters run deep, but distilled
waters run deeper.
Familiarity breeds co-respondents.
"Righto, boys, away she goes,
We're your friends and not your
foes.
Watch your cards and watch your
rows,
Skin yer eyes, and pick your toes!"
"Top o' the House (99) and number
nine,
The Devil's Own (13) —that num-
ber's mine,
Don't forget —it's single line,
We'll finish the game before \ve
dine."
"Housey! Housey! I have it here!
Chance yer cash and earn yer beer,
House correct and never fear,-
After dinner we'll be here."
—D. Little,
"STRUTH! THEM HOUSSY COVES HAVE BEEN
HERE AGAIN."


r $ " ASfS>Kf
« IHg®J
I— *■ /
u -> y
I • '■•• J " *Z> rA 1
T . * v ) -
Ik? Saera«l /. m
, ' ■■■ '- , IS 1ZZS yi~ p- I: f-gl
! w m


AN HOUR OF PEACE.
SUNDAY morning; the promenade deck; softened hymn-
music of the band; the swell of voices singing; sea; sky:
a wave of faces, and the padre telling us of ALL religion,
of ONE BIG PULPIT.
An hour of Peace. Respite from the trivialities of life, and a
quickening of our appreciation of wide spaces and of human sorrows.
A pang suffered, as the chords of memory are touched by the
preacher; a flashing vision of the tragedy of past days, and then
an overpulsing of the blood as the future is visioned by him. Sea:
sky: and a wave of faces!
and subconscious analysis of his words
"not too submerged in drink and immorality, padre! Man's ex-
tremity is God's opportunity." Yes, but out there with the drought
and the bush loneliness, the Devil holds a flush hand of cards.
We've conceded him a few points—an occasional "shikker" and
a "spree" are his share—but we are holding on to the things that
matter. Henry Lawson, hard case though he is, voices Australian
sentiment in
"Though the Devil may stand behind my back,
I'll not see his shadow fall,
But read the signs in the morning stars
Of a good world, after all."
Somewhere and at sometime in the future, when faces and
places are blurred in our memories, we shall feel the padre's
epigrams creeping to our tongue-tips —
"No man can truly be a Devil in his own home life, and yet be
a God in public."
"Judas and Jesus are incompatibles in politics."
"Holman Hunt's picture, 'The Light of the World,' shows Christ
as a true gentleman, waiting for you to lift the latch of the door to
let HIM enter."
"The League of Nations has been born amongst dreadful agony;
may it be reared in peace."
As we quietly move away, we are better men because of that
hour of Peace—and the sea—and sky!
—T. E. S.


THINGS WE LOVE.
RUPERT BROOKE, Englishman and master-poet, was a victim of
the war upon the Gallipoli Peninsula. One of his poems, "The
Lover," sets out in words many actions, objects and emotions that
made the poet's life worth living.
He loved great machines, and dear names; the blue bitter smoke of
wood; firm sands; moist black earthen mould; the strong crust of friendly
bread, and a thousand things else.
So do we all, but stronger than those which he mentions are other
things more full of life's tragedy and comedy, and more particularly human
to us.
We love the man who says, "Go on, Dig.," to a faltering concert artist,
and says it with sympathetic help and without satire; we also love the
words of one who adds satire to his remarks. Some of us wander from
the narrow track of righteousness, and whoever gives humour or just con-
demnation at the only right moment —he is the whole world to us. We
love the glint of polished brass; we also love the man who refuses to polish
brass for a living. We hate inefficiency, but automatic efficiency leaves us
cold. Learning to seek praise for our collective selves, we are mostly past
personal 'vanity. We warm to the devil in a man, seeing the strength of
revolt against the conventional under the surface weakness. In such a
way we are revolutionists! There was happiness for us in playing "two-
up" with Death; Speed and Variety are our gods. We love the man who
marries a woman to save her from falling; and we love him who marries
a fallen woman to give her a chance in life. Our ideal democrat is the one
who says, "For every man who would steal your purse, there are a dozen
who would give you one!"
Rupert Brooke held that he would have to leave behind at death ail
the things which he loved. We believe that we shall find ours on the other
side, that they are part of our true selves—else we should not love them
so dearly.
—'T. E. S.
AN OPINION.
He was an inveterate "bot," never buying a meal if he could possibly cadge it. The
cove in charge of the Y.M. hut knew him of old. "And yer won't give me a feed, then?"
lamented the 'bot." "By cripes, you call yerself a Christian! Why, if you was filled
with gunpowder and needed a spark of Christianity to explode you—you'd be a DUD!"


HOMERS' HYMERICKS.
VA/HAT happened on board? To com-
mence,
Many sick Diggers rushed for the fence.
As they hung o'er the side,
They'd have willingly died,
And for sailing cursed their uncommon
sense!
Educational fiends in the masses
Quickly organised thirty-two classes,
And Walters, indeed,
Was strong in the lead,
As was proved by the number of passes.
Throughout the whole time we've been
speeding,
We've had comforts and plenty of read-
ing;
For the Y.M.C.A.
Was "stunting" each day—
Wally Hancock, Loo'tenant, was leading.
Political friction was growing,
So we soon had a parliament going;
With lectures a score,
And probably more,
We've the small seeds of knowledge been
sowing.
Though of "weather" we've had a full
measure,
The trip we've enjoyed at our leisure;
For a real "dinkum" Colonel,
And an up-to-date journal
Have helped to make Homing a pleasure.
• —Joe Wilcox.
The Editor's lecture we found
To be rich on "Co-op." facts, and sound;
And Atkinson showed
The W.E.A. road,
Where the treasures of learning abound.
Hall, 8.A., spoke of the relations
International, and the Great League of
Nations;
And nothing was finer
Than Currie on "China,"
Or Newton on Aussie's "formations."
With music our souls have been lifted,
Any cares that we had quickly shifted
By the excellent band
'Neath the masterful hand
Of Crane, who with Harmony's gifted.
The "House" fiends were ever appearing,
And a very fine income were clearing;
The first "House" was free,
Then finish "buckshee,"
The remainder was pure profiteering.
HAVE YOU SEEN THE DIGS Go BY ON THEIR MORNING ,WAEK ?


" DUNSTERFORCE."
[From the Notebook of Sergt. T. Tait, A.1.F., H.M.A.T. "Port Sydney")
DUNSTERFORCE!
To the many soldiers and civilians the name is empty ot
meaning: to the few it is full of the magic of Adventure. The
complete history of Dunsterforce has yet to be written; its bare
outline is a glimpse into one of the ''thrills" of the war.
Dunsterforce was a band of daredevils, picked from the armies of the
Empire, and commanded by an almost recklessly fearless man Major
General R. C. Dunsterville, C.8.,.fr0m whose name the title of the force
was adapted.
Nineteen Australian officers and twenty N.C.O.'s, with about the same
number of Canadians and New Zealanders, a score of South Africans, and
representatives of almost every British regiment were included in this little
force.
When they were first mustered in January, 1918, their destination was
unknown to them. They had volunteered for work which was described
to them as being full of all dangers and of every variety. The description
was not exaggerated. Billeted at first at the Tower of Rondon, they were
there issued with fur-lined coats and caps, and with fur-lined knee-boots.
Slowly news of their task leaked through to them! Partly as a secret
service force, diplomatic in character, and as an organising arm, ready for
all emergencies, they were to operate in the cold regions of the Caucasus,
forming the thousands of peripatetic Cossacks and Armenians in Southern
Russia into an army. The idea was to create a line of troops from Trebizond
on the Black Sea to Alexandretta, and thereby relieve British troops in
Mesopotamia for service in France.
This plan had to be abandoned, as the advent of the Bolshevists into
power in Russia greatly altered both the political and the strategical situation.
Revolutionary ideas were fast spreading south towards India. The cold-
weather clothing was taken from the force and it embarked for Basrah, 011,
the Persian Gulf, its field of operations now being transferred to Persia.
Some small groups of officers were sent to operate in scattered districts,
while the main body pushed its way through past Kut-el-Amara and Bagdad,
left the Mesopotamian railhead at Ruez, and continued the journey in small
Ford cars. Crossing the 13,000 feet high Hamadan Pass, operations were
commenced in the districts around Kermanshah and Hamadan.
It was summer time, the thermometer registered daily from 105 to no
degrees of heat, and the bad roads made a car journey of seventeen miles
in a day something of an accomplishment. From Kermanshah to Hamadan


was covered on foot, and the whole journey from Basrah —over 450 miles —
took a month for its performance.
Dunsterforce found the country alive with disturbing elements. Austrians,
Bolshevists and German secret service agents were in strong evidence, and
their missions and propaganda had to be circumvented, and prisoners escorted
to the coast. The last part of the journey from Bagdad to Kermanshah had
been made over a rough track, fit only for pedestrians and pack-horses,
and Dunsterforce immediately superintended the construction of a lorry road.
Within four months the one hundred miles' stretch had been completed.
To carry out such work, and to efficiently administer the country, a large
amount of labor was needed, and over four thousand Persian natives were
enlisted and trained for the tasks, while many of them were issued with
rifles and uniforms and organised as fighting troops.
The greatest task which Dunsterforce had to tackle was to fight the
famine which was decimating Persia. To add to the local distress, forty
to fifty thousand Syrians and Armenians, fleeing from the advancing Turks,
were flocking to Hamadan. These were fed, enlisted in the armed levies,
or sent through to the coast. Besides organising food kitchens in the
villages and towns, Dunsterforce also supervised the removal and burial of
the many dead which littered every street, and were fast spreading the
dreaded cholera throughout the country.
It says much for the diplomatic manner in which Dunsterforce was
handled, in that, towards the end of August, 'lB, when the force was handed
over to the Mesopotamian Army, the natives all along the line lamented
its withdrawal, and called for the blessings of Allah upon its members.
The cordial relations which ensued between the British and Persian Govern-
ments was made possible by the temperate action of the force, and the floating-
of a big Persian loan in England recently may be in great part credited
to the faith in British administration created by Dunsterforce.
The general work of the force was liberally intermingled with fighting,
and Mirza Kuchik Khan, the leader of the Gilanis, with whom it fought in
July, 'lB, at Resht, has widely praised its qualities. They have the honor
of being the first troops to operate in Kurdistan during this past war, and
the first decoration given in Persia was awarded to an Australian-Dunster—
Sgt. B. Murphy, of the 28th Battalion, who gained a bar to his D.C.M.
Dunster tales will be told round many a log fire in the future, and the
flames will be alive with strange figures and incidents as the youngsters
drink in the "thrills" recounted by their big Dunster brothers and fathers.
A POLITICAL PRIVILEGE.
The Book-worm: "Are you a Socialist, Dig?"
The Other: "No!"
The Book-worm: "Then get out of a man's light!"


INVICTUS
THE O.C. and the Ship's "Old
Man,"
While walking neck to neck,
Wept like children when they saw —
Men gambling on the deck.
"The time has come," the O.C. said,
As he gave the Cap. a squeeze,
"To stop these blighters at their
games;
Can't you suggest a wheeze?"
"Oh, Colonel dear," the Captain
cried,
"You've really got me beat.
We've got our work cut out, I fear,
Ere 'two-up' we defeat 1"
"And 'crown and anchor," 'house,'
as well,
I'm sure have come to stay;
To prosecute a dag or two,
It is the only way!"
The O.C. in the ship's O.R.
Then sat in solemn state;
Before him stood, with anxious
mien,
The dags —to learn their fate.
The culprits quaked, the Colonel
spoke—
"Although it grieves me sore,
I'll reprimand you, just this once.
Go thou! and sin no more!"
Again the " Heads" walked round
the deck,
We heard the O.C.—PRAY ;
We saw the Captain weep, because—
The gamblers still were there!
_ , —J- F. Turner.
"PAU LATIN" (The Motto of the A.A.M.C.)
(The Bearers of a Great Load.)
W RAMPING along o'er the broken
' land
With the men o' the gun and
steel,
They have felt the fighting passions
thrall —
The passions that all men feel—
When the guns have belched and the
men rush by,
And Victory thrills the air;
They have kept their step and held their
hands,
It's part of the load they bear.
Searching the ways of the smoking land,
When the battle wave has passed,
Looking for those that the steel has
found —
Those from the maelstrom cast;
They find the men who have made us
proud,
Now shattered beyond repair.
Revenge looms red, but they fight it
down —
It's part of the load they bear.
Tending the wounds at the dressing
shed,
Deeming the task well done
When they ease the pain and cleanse
the wound*
Of the man who fed the gun.
Tho' oft it means that their own must
wait
The turn of a prisoner there—
They work to heal —they must not hate,
It's part of the load they bear.
Longing the while for the open sky,
To roam o'er land and sea,
They hear the sound of the battle cry
In the throbbing world to be.
They tend the needs of the wrecks o'
men,
The ruthless plague they dare;
The shadow of death lies o'er the ward,
It's part of the load they bear.
—"lronbark."


\/ s V / y
THE
DIGGER'S
DREAM.
THE DREAM.
'T" HIS is the dream of a homing "Dig,"
He strolled down Flinders Street;
He looked about,
And was asked to shout
By a pal he chanced to meet.
He took the first suburban train
To the Home, Sweet Home, he'd
known;
But was sadly shocked,
For the door was locked,
And his heartless wife had flown.
He went down town, his job to seek,
His one-time boss to greet;
In "seemore" hose,
And powd'ring her nose,
A flapper he found in his seat.
Then to the bank he turned his steps,
At the doorway stopped .and cussed,
As he rubbed his eyes
At another surprise—
The d old bank had bust.
But worst of all, his old grey mare
Had turned up her toes and died.
For the drought was bad,
And her end was sad;
And stones at the crows he shied.
The world was drear and cold to him,
Of cash he was stoney-broke;
Not a soul to cheer,
Or to shout a beer
F'or a friendless, outcast bloke.
THE REALITY.
D UT this was the real home-coming
lie had,
As he stepped upon the shore—
An outstretched hand,
And a greeting grand
From a dear old cobber of yore.
His wife was there, and his youngster,
too;
Fond hearts that always yearn,
With smiling faces,
And long em-braces,
To bid him a glad return.
After a short and well-earned rest,
For his job he went to seek.
In his pre-war place,
With a cheerful face,
He's now drawing a tenner a week.
The old Town Hall was crowded out.
As he stood by the table round;
And the Lord Mayor grand
Dumped into his hand
War bonds for a thousand pounds.
To have for his own a racehorse fine,
He had craved with his heart and soul;
And now it may seem
Not to endjn a dream,
For his mare's got a beautiful foal.
The Digger's world is a good old place,
Now his fears have turned to joy;
With his dear little wife,
Who's the pride of his life,
And their own little blue-eyed boy.
—"Corny."


STUDY HUMANITY.
STUDY HUMANITY—and you study all things.
Human nature is both the mainspring and the stumbling-block of
human progress.
He who puts his trust in Humanity is an honest man, and has been
used to honest men's company.
If a man is unwilling to put his trust in man, how can theologians expect
him to put his trust in God?
When man really loves man, then we.shall reach Utopia.
To my simple mind, the civilised world is made up of three classes of men
—Hovers of Wisdom, Hovers of Honour, and Hovers of Art. The uncivilised
world of Hovers of Gain—and others.
A wise ruler distributes justice—and preserves it.
There is nothing more fair than a beautiful soul in a beautiful form.
Philosophy tells us that friendship and love bind Heaven and Earth
together.
Philosophers not only prove their own theories, but disprove others.
Great poets coin words, but do not counterfeit them.
Education is the common link that binds man to man, irrespective of
class or standing.
Democracy demands the right to govern itself —even if it governs badly.
The two great conflicting views of politics are the Authoritarian and
Eibertarian, expounded by Henry Maine and John Stuart Mill respectively.
If W. M. Hughes is RIGHT, then G. D. PI. Cole, the famous English
exponent of Guild Socialism, is HEFT.
State patriotism is the great danger to a successful federation. How will
the Eeague of Nations be affected thereby?
When a man is always occupied with the cravings of desire and ambition,
and is eagerly striving to satisfy them, all his thoughts are naturally personal,
and—mortal!
The Intellect is to Opinion what Science is to Belief!
Anyone who is able to advance even a little ought to be cheerful. So
should nations.
Great power is a benefit to a man if his actions benefit the community.
Governments vary, as the dispositions of men vary, and there should be
as many of the one as there are of the other.
By the unitiated we mean the people who believe in nothing they
cannot measure with a rule.
The State in which the rulers are most reluctant to rule is always the
most wisely governed!
—J. Wilcox.


" MORALE."
By Thos. E. Shonk.
FOUR years of War; three devout Christians —constantly devout
Christians; a little Roman Catholic chapel of devotion —a chapel
that is being used as a billet, a billet that holds the three constantly
devout worshippers —and a fourth soldier, one who was not devout, but
who feared to lose his "morale."
Loss of morale is a form of cowardice, is of various types, and in an
army is due to various causes, Sometimes an attack breaks down because
a few men shout in fear. This is the least despicable form of loss of morale
—it is a spontaneous loss of nerve!
There are other forms, unqualified in their meanness. When soldiers
deliberately feign sickness to escape their burden of work, when they cheat
their captains and are sent to hospital, and the priceless pearls of nurses'
smiles are scattered before them, these smiles are sullied by their sneak-
acceptance, and such soldiers are of the damned —are Pillow Pigs!
Other men, with judgment, knowledge and craft, pull the strings and
prepare soft berths for themselves. At them let no carping critic hurl a
phrase; their jobs are their judges and their juries—and their punishment 1
He who was with the three devout ones was not of these. Accomplish-
ment was his joy, and Failure his fear. Living always at high nervous
tension, he harmonised with the big quick movements and danger of battle
action, but back in this billet, with its peaceful atmosphere made torpid by
the tone of the sanctimonious three, he began to surge with inward revolt
at his menial work and surroundings.
To revolt meant a loss of morale!
In the old civilian days he had "hung on" when the drought had withered
his stock and his bank account. He held on, though his eyes had swam
with the miasma of Failure, and the air stank with the odor of rotting
sheep. In other days the tangy sun had shone upon him through morning
windows, enticing in its camaraderie, torturing his fibres and emotions to
revolt and loathing against the text-books which he studied—and he held
to the books, though it meant the closing of shutters and the lighting of
lamps.
He could not lose morale—his make-up left no room for its substitutes.
Four years of War, with its ugliness, its broken language, breath of
boors, annihilation of ego and its complementary attrition of aesthetic sense
were culminating into this feeling of "being at breaking point"—and he could
not break!


The three pious mumblers had a safety-valve and consolation in their
communal hand-clasping; for him there was —an idea took shape in his brain.
He would have a shrine to worship at!
Why should not he not do honor to HIS gods ?
*****
By the sweat of his brow he labored.
Offerings had to be prepared, the altar arranged and the occasion duly
considered. His meagre stock of money was insufficient to purchase candles
for the altar, so that he perforce had to lay in wait and steal. Some he
secured by exchange for his teaching of idiomatic "patois" and irregular
verbs. There were no bounds to his determination to acquire worthy
offerings. Wheaten cakes, blackmailed from a fearing estaminet "madam,"
who had been guilty of purveying wine in forbidden hours; honey that should
have fed the stirring larvae, and paid for with stung and poisoned flesh and
guilty conscience; dull red glinting Bordeaux wine, the reward of a midnight
prowl and a crowbar's leverage, all graced his collection.
It was well!
The offerings were ready, and because of the travail entailed in the
gathering of them, were worthy.
* * * * *
A drowsy langourous evening of vanishing Spring. A crescent moon,
and the close of a day of dismal service.
To the chapel! To the altar! Close the door! Extinguish the lights!
All is ready.
Naked he stands in the fantastically carpeted aisle. Naked, glorying
in the beauty-sense of firm proportioned limbs and glowing flesh—and the
three constantly devout ones stared at him, and dully wondered.
"Stand aside, you aborted souls," he commanded, "mumble your phrases
another time. Get away with your namby-pamby, and leave me to my
worship."
("What's he up to, Donald? I say, you're going a bit too far, aren't
you ?")
"Stand aside, I say, you imbeciles of understanding."
Slowly he paced towards the highly tinselled altar. A big cast of the
rising sun, of gilded wood and plaster, towered above him. Dirty-white
chalk cherubims peered down through the evening gloom, and strips of
loosened paper on the walls moved restlessly in the erratic breeze.
Making offering of the gifts, he addressed himself to an old and cracked
Roman vase, of beautiful design, which occupied the centre of the table.
"I, humble devotee, make obeisance to the Trinity of Boundless Liberty
--ART, LITERATURE and PHILOSOPHY. Here, where THY glories
are manifested to but a finite degree. I renew my allegiance—keep your hands
off my flesh, you worrying dogs!"


HE LAY DOWN AND CONTINUED TO GAZE DREAMILY AT THE RESPLENDENT ALTAR
(Eugh! he's got them bad, Donald. Go to bed, old man, and take a
tumble to yourself.")
He heeded them not, but advanced a step further, holding in his hand
the hard-won candles.
"Masters! accept these tokens of THY servant's adoration. Grant that
during their all too fleeting span of life, the fellowship of THY spirit of
genius shall rest upon me."
Eighting a candle, he fitted it into an altar sconce, then, falling upon
the carpet, head resting upon elbowed arms, he gazed intently into the light.
Frank Craig—master in the expression of human passions, Nature's High
Priest of Color—BE WITH ME!"
Another candle.
"Tintoretto, illuminator of the World's Great Hope, and Curse and
Salvation —BE WITH ME!"
He rose and lit another candle.
"Verestchaguine, realist reformer—BE WITH ME!"
The fourth candle.
"Watts—wizard of the brush, revealing man's heights. Lister-Lister—
artist-imperialist. Thou who proclaimest the wind and the wave and the


ALMOST MAD ? NEARLY MAD —MAD ! HE YELLED, AND FLUNG HARD
THE FIGURE INTO THE MIDST OF HIS TORMENTORS.
forest free our only bounds—BE WITH THY SERVANT! —Damn your
text-bound souls! Get off those steps! Supper time. Clockwork beasts —
go and chew grass! I hold the board to-night. Oh! I appeal to your so-
called Eove and Grace and Pity. Reave me alone —Hell! but you've got
no souls to appeal to."
A fresh tier of candles, and another light burns up.
"Carlyle—Master of the sorcery of Word-Construction—Superman—■
THY servant hails THEE! Shakespeare—Leader in lofty dialogue and


true mirror of Mankind —Let THY spirit descend! V oltaire Arch alchemist
of the purifying acids of Satire and Scorn —Homage to THEE! Jean
Jacques Rousseau —Rationalist Revolutionist —the brain and spirit of France
—Counsel me!"
Another candle.
"Leo Tolstoy —Universal Brother—Be with me!— You're after bread,
you starveling. May it force your soul from your bile-duct and make it
live in your eyes. Ugh! you are blind, you mole. Go away —I shall weep
—or tear you to pieces. Ruskin—Life's great Architect—THY humble
follower calls THEE! HEAR ME, O MASTERS!
He takes nine candles, binds them together, lights them, and placing
them in the topmost sconce, completes the brilliant pyramid.
Again he makes obeisance. Then, head thrown back, and with reverence
in his voice, continued: "O THOU GREAT SERVANI SOF ARI, LI T ERA-
TURE and PHILOSOPHY, YE at whose fountains of wealth I have NOT
YET DRUNK, and YE who have passed unheralded in the world, GRANT
ME OF THY SPIRIT, so that in my minute measure I may uphold and
continue in THY faith."
He lay down and continued to gaze dreamily at the resplendent altar.
Suddenly, springing to his feet, galvanised by inspiration, he took a dusty
censer from its hook behind the altar. Snatching coals from the dying fire,
to his pack for a sandal-wood chip—souvenir of the west —wild carrot and
thyme from the garden; tobacco-dust —symbolic of M'lady Nicotine's service
to THOUGHT —and the fumes arose!
The three devout Christians, constantly devout Christians, wept
bucketsful of platitudes of fright and petty grievance.
"Phew! we can't breathe. You'll rouse the Orderly Sergeant. Look
here, this is sacrilege, it's not right. Go somewhere else if you want to mock.
And look at the candles you're using—it's a shame to waste them. Get
dressed, you fool. You're nearly mad. Don't "
He swung round, gripped hold of a hollow plaster cast of St. Bernard,
grotesquely disfigured by time and accident, horribly revolting in its material
and jesthetic antithesis of Art.
"Almost MAD? Nearly MAD —MAD!" he yelled, and flung hard the
figure into the midst of his tormentors.
"Still MAD, am I?" he queried, as he threateningly fondled the girdle
of an equally repulsive St. Joseph.
The devout ones cringed back. He swung the censer round and round,
then, halting, darted upon a piece of rag, then a rubber gas-mask part—
then to the rubbish box and gloated over a foul sock, as thorough in his
vengeance as in his reverence.


a \
|llj!
ir |
l|l|, %*r" '\
He swung the censer afresh, and the fuel broke into flames. The pungent
fumes and his menacing attitude cleared the chapel of the devout three.
» » «
They came back again later, those three devout Christians, constantly
devout Christians.
He was curled up in his blankets, with a gas-mask by his side. The
fumes had almost cleared.
Of course he was temporarily MAD —they said so.
They did not understand that his outburst was the PRICE PAID FOR
HIS MORALE!
A polite way of calling a man a perverter of the truth —"You may be right, but I
don't think so!"
SOMETHING HOT!
Lofty: "Albatrosses ean't sit or stand on the
land, Bo!"
Titch: "What do they do about nesting,
then?"
Lofty: "Oh, well, you see, the old woman
albatross flies into the tropics, goes up pretty
high, and lets drop the egg. It's pretty hot
in the tropics, and the egg hatches on the way
down, and by the time the young albo. reaches
the water he's ready ," etc., etc.
LOVE'S COMMAND.
Hurry on, ye moments,
Hast'n the minutes by,
Speed the dreary hours along,
Cause the days to fly.
Till again I meet my love,
Then from that happy day,
Cease thy haste, bid Father Time
To linger by the way.
—J. E. Briggs.
YE MESS ORDERLY.


'"<? g^J-^L
CA '' *
A LOW COURT OF INJUSTICE.


A LOW COURT OF INJUSTICE.
LADY LIBELLED BY LITERARY LEADERS.
BOUND, gagged and jagged, the Editor of "The Homeward Bounder"
stood his trial on a charge of having, in his scurrilous rag, falsely
addicted the following spasm to the gifted Port Sydney Nursing Sister
poetess: —
O gentle sea-gull on the sea, For we should love them, one and all,
Take this piece of bread from me; These gentle creatures, great and small;
O take this piece of bread from me, These gentle creatures, great and small,
O gentle sea-gull on the sea. Yes, we should love them, one and all.
The details of the trial were harrowing—the verdict, guilty.
The punishment of slow sufifocation by castor-oil, administered by the
Sister, was duly carried out.
GETHSEMANE.
The happy moments of our lives
Go hastening by on speedy wing;
They come and go, and we scarce taste
The joy they bring.
But, ah, those hours with sadness filled,
With wearied feet pass slowly by,
And we must drink their bitter cup
Of sorrow—dry!
—J. E. B.


MALLEE JIM.
(With Apologies to Rudyard Kipling.)
YER may talk o' steel and guns,
When yer miles away from
Huns,
And yer winnin' all yer medals at
the base;
But when it comes ter fightin',
And the Bosches start a Blightin',
Yer'll bless the cuss that searches
fer yer case.
Now under Flanders' spongy sky,
Where we used ter live —and die,
A tryin' ter make the Bosches' eye-
balls dim;
Of all the coves I struck,
None could touch our country buck,
The Regimental Bearer —Mallee Jim.
It was Jim ! Jim ! Jim !
Yer gumleaf! 'elp ter git this
Blighter in;
Git a move on! 'old yer jaw;
It's men as fight'll win the war,
Yer carcase-lumpin' hayseed—Mallee
Jim!
The tunic that 'e wore,
Never touched 'im, aft or fore,
And 'is breeches couldn't boast a
decent stitch;
Puttees made o' gunny bags,
Rubbed on boots stuffed out wi'
rags,
And 'is tile would make a lubra's
carcase itch.
When the mob of us was beat,
Tryin' ter use our swollen feet,
And the frost would make yer
bloomin' eyelids stick;
Then we let the langwidge flow,
And cursed him, 'igh and low,
'Cos the stew 'e carried up was not
too thick.
It was Jim! Jim! Jim!
Yer dopey quack's off-sider, Mallee
Jim!
Lug me over to the boozer,
Or yer Ma'll be the loser,
Yer rabbit eatin' jumbuck Mallee
Jim!


'E would carry night and day,
Till the boys were all away,
And barrages never made 'im lose a
yard;
If we took a mile o' mud,
'E'd be with us staunchin' blood,
'Elpin' some poor cuss as found 'is
dyin' 'ard.
With a cobber 'e would come,
Ere the fight 'ad 'arf begun,
And stick 'is body-snatchin' all the
night;
But for all 'is clumsy way,
'E will do me, any day,
If a bullet makes me Imshee from
the fight.
It was Jim! Jim! Jim!
While the noise and smell'd make
yer senses swim;
When a front trench went sky-'igh,
Yer could 'ear the cusses cry—•
Reinstoushments! quick! and—
Mallee Jim!
Till I die I'll ne'er forget,
When I jumped the parapet,
And the Bosches' barbed wire trap-
ped me lower limb;
I was ripped from 'ead ter toe,
When a bullet got me low,
And shrapnel raked me —then
I spotted Mallee Jim.
'E dragged me to a 'ole,
Fixed me leg up with a pole,
And give me rum as should
'ave bin fer 'im ;
Fer a shell 'ad drawn 'is blood.
And 'arf blinded 'im with mud,
But 'e smiled and blurted out—
I'm Mallee Jim I"
It was Jim! Jim! Jim!
Fer Gawd's sake, cobber, take me
after 'im;
I'd crawl as far as Hell,
But they've got me leg as well,
An' there's a 'ole right through me
body, Mallee Jim !
'E lumped me all the way
To the aid post in the bay,
When an 'igh ixplosive filled 'is guts
with tin;
'E got me to the quack,
And dyin' on the track,
"Don't ferget the other boys!" said
Mallee Jim.
I'll hail old Jim once more,
When I see the golden shore,
Where it's Blighty when yer wake
and when yer dream ;
He'll be tryin' night and day,
Fer ter get the coves away,
That are moanin' out in Hell for
Mallee Jim.
Yes, Jim! Jim! Jim!
Tho' we chivvied yer and cursed yer,
By the grand old dame as nursed
yer,
Yer've fought a better fight than I
'ave,
Mallee Jim!
—Thos. E. Shonk.


THE FOURTH FACTOR
THE psychology of the Twentieth Century Jew is singularly compatible with
the chequered history of his race. Project a hundred Jewish personalities
before your mind's eye, and admit that their many characteristics centre around
the following four factors: —
Firstly, the Jew is national in personal service, but cosmopolitan in sympathetic
thought.
Secondly, he is successfully industrious in avoiding hard labor; he is a stranger to
pick and shovel.
Thirdly, "honestly dishonest," or rather say "barely law-abiding," is his world-wide
reputation; and fourthly—but let me illustrate this Fourth Factor with an episode from
David Narodny's life.
An International Socialist, Narodny was super, to Shaw in his rebellion against
convention's edicts; his affections were centred around his adopted country of
Australia, and a woman —already married.
The fourteenth of August, 1914, found David Narodny in prison at D , errone-
ously held as being a certain "undesirable." He cleared his character and was released,
but the woman's faith in him during this trying period, and the oft projected vision of
her face, framed contrastingly by the steel grating of his cell door, when she daringly
visited him at the goal, increased his love and mental unrest. Her husband's act of
enlisting in the Australian Forces annihilated Narodny's plans for the flight with the
woman to America. She would scorn public opinion, he knew, but now it meant much
more—the taking of a most mean advantage, and intuitively recognising the "impasse"
to which events had led, both ceased mention of their project.
A Socialist, of international breadth of mind and ideals, Narodny saw the futility
of wars, but he claimed Australia as his own land, and was no coward. As the only
path which offered activity and a solution to the eternal triangular problem—he donned
khaki also.
Narodny did not believe in meekly awaiting Fate's caprices. A night in the winter
of 'l6, when his battalion was in the reserve lines, 'gave him a long-waited-for
opportunity, and he crawled into the husband's dug-out with his cards of tactics well
arranged. They had been battalion friends for some weeks, and the Jew was now
ready to face the personal climax..
"Wondering whether evening dress 'or marching order will be 'au fait' at dinner
to-night, old son?" he queried.
"When I strike the home trail, Narodny, it'll be comfort that I shall bow down
to, and full dress for dinner won't matter much to this child!"
Both settled down to a yarn, and waxed satirical and serious in turn over the pro-
ductions and the promise of futurist artists; delved into the highways and byways of
telepathic transmission of thought and the affinity of souls; recounted many examples
of the smashing of idols of custom that war had brought about.
Always it was Narodny who gave the lead into the fresh channels of thought, the
other man generaly assenting to the Jew's dictums with occasional weakly punctuated
variation of opinion.
"In view of what history shows us," Narodny said quietly, "can we say definitely
that any of the existing institutions of the State will not be looked upon as being
obsolete and unjust in the world's to-morrow —the marriage laws, for instance?" The
other man started, and looked enquiringly at the Jew.
Narodny smiled patronisingly. "It is only logical to hypothesise such a revolution,
isn't it, and you must admit its possibility, after having agreed with me upon so
many complementary themes this evening," he added.


X x /v '^"
Ye Port 3y<doe»-y OHartie - Ye G>abblir?c) Brook.
"Do you know that "
"Yes, Ido know! It is a personal matter for us two, as well!" Narodny completed.
"I warn you fairly that I am an iconoclast, and that I am the man who loves your
wife!"
Narodny knew well the type of man he was confronting, and foresaw his weakness
of action.
"My God, you're the man! You—you—look, get out of this dug-out before I kill
you! . . . Why do you tell me? Eh? What's your reason? —but "
The Jew quietly said "Good night," and leisurely turned and crawled out into the
trench. He did not fear the man, and was quite satisfied with the first round of the
contest.
The raid was over! Narodny was having a nice Blighty wound dressed. The con-
versation in the R.A.P. was of the men and the night's exploit.
A regimental bearer broke the news gently to him. "Your pal died before we
could get him back, old man. It's damned hard luck. He was one of the best!"
The Jew listened, and made no reply, but "to think that I wasted an hour trying to
convert him to the ethics of free-love," he murmured to himself, as he was carried away. It
was the Fourth Factor ! A Jew values all things, from Time to a greasy rag !
. —"Ferguson."
PORT SYDNEY CHARACTERS


SHIP'S OFFICERS AND MILITARY OFFICERS. WEST' AUSTRALIANS.
VICTORIANS. PORT SYDNEY GROUPS. VICTORIANS.
Photos by H. Turner.


QUEENSDANDERS AND TASMANIANS. NEW SOUTH WADES MEN
I • .•,... . ... _
'"* .V"~ —r~ : -—- . j . \^
QUEENSDANDERS. PORT SYDNEY GROUPS. NEW SOUTH WADES MEN.
Photos by Turner and Gumley.


Such
Life.
TO-DAY—FRONTING THE BARS !
TO-MORROW —BEHIND THE BARS !


A REAL LIVE ROMANCE.
THE SHADOW and the SUNSHINE of War!
Tasmanians are to have amongst them a boy who has suffered
the SHADOW to a degree which has seldom been paralleled.
His share of the sunshine is the friendship and care which he has received
since coming into contact with the Australians.
This boy is twelve -year-old Albert Dusserq, who, before the war, lived
with his four sisters and his mother in the peaceful village of Dinant, in
Belgium. His father having died in IC)O9> the mother and daughters were com-
pelled to work hard to gain a living.
Then came the dark days of autumn, I9 1 41 the grey masses of German
soldiery poured over and past Albert's homeland, and in the melee of battle
and retreat he was separated from his people. For more than three years he
was virtually a prisoner in the hands of the Germans, suffering from lack of
proper nourishment, and tasting the bitterness of life in the midst of his
country's enemies. Brought up in a good home > this long period of contact
with vulgarity, privation and hatred indelibly seared his mind with hatred
of his country's oppressors.
At last, in 1918, the great tide of war turned, the grey masses of German
soldiery were forced back, and Albert Dusserq passed over No Man's Land
and found himself with the Allied army. Amid the tremendous activity of
our triumphant forces Albert was allowed to go uncared for, and he
wandered, hungry, friendless and ill-kempt through the wide-sweeping lines
of troops. At the village of Destieres, near Charleroi, he came to Aus-
tralians, and Private George Leahy, of the 26th Battalion, proved to be the
friend in need. Food, clean khaki clothes, a hot bath, a long sleep, and the
interest and protection of the "Diggers," made a new world for Albert
Dusserq.
But he could not rest contented!
Within forty-eight hours, well provided with food, he set off to go to his
native village, hoping to rejoin his relatives.
He came back to Leahy, sobbing, worn out with the fatigue and tragedy
of the journey. He had found his village a heap of ruins, learnt that his
four sisters had died of privation while in the Germans' hands, and saw the
grave of his mother, who had been killed by the invaders.
The Digger was his only friend, and ever since that day the two have
been inseparable. To Albert Dusserq his protector is "Fader," and "Fader"
Leahy told Albert, at Charleroi, that he would take him back with him to
far-off Australia.
He has kept his word!
The Armistice signed, Leahy's turn came for repatriation. The journey
to the coast with his"garson" was successfully accomplished, for the red


tape amongst the men in and near the line was weak; to get a boat passage
across to "Blighty" proved, however, to be more difficult. The brilliant idea
of taking the boy on board in a kit-bag occurred to Leahy, and the operation
was eventually carried out at Boulogne.
Suspecting that the boy had been taken on board, the Transport Officer
communicated with the Captain of the ship, and a search was made —but it
was futile! Just before the ship was timed to sail, one of the officers heard
a digger say: "The garson is aboard." Within five minutes a crowd of
gendarmes, officers, officials and others recommenced the search, and again it
was unsuccessful.
The boat had just moved away from the wharf, when Albert, afraid of
losing his "fader," rushed up on deck. A shout from the excited officials
on the quay—but it was too late ; the boy went on to England!
Arrived at Southampton, he was again secreted in the kit-bag, and with
the aid of a naval officer, the officials were once more bluffed.
Journeying together to the Australian camp at Sutton Veny, the friend-
ship between the two became still more firmly cemented, and Leahy applied
for permission to take Albert back to Tasmania with him. It was refused!
The Continental officials soon began to demand that the boy should be
sent back to them. Albert refused to go, fearing to part from his only true
friend, but eventually he was forced to leave Leahy, and was taken to the
Australian Provost Headquarters at Warwick Square, London.
» The two friends were parted !
It was not for long, however. Before two days had elapsed, Leahy had
obtained permission to go up to London. The Belgian Consul would not
move to help him, Senator Pearce could not see his way clear, a General at
A.I.F. Headquarters shook his head, and Leahy went disconsolately to War-
wick Square.
Albert had escaped!
Running through London's streets, he had found the road to Salisbury,
and after walking eighteen miles, he boarded a train for Sutton Veny—and his
"fader!" Leahy arrived next morning, and to crown the pleasure of their
re-union, a letter arrived the following day from the Australian Provost
Marshal, stating that permission had been obtained by General Monash for
Albert to accompany Leahy to Tasmania.
The Australian troops were fast being hurried back on the transports,
and the two soon had their names included on No. 69 Quota roll.
On September 22nd, 1919, still fearing that something might happen at
the last moment to separate them, or to prevent their making the journey
together, they boarded the T.S.S. "Port Sydney."
Beloved of the Diggers on board, and their proclaimed "mascot," Albert
proved himself to be a keen, intelligent youngster, fond of study and sports,
and with no little ability as an artist.


His experiences and pluck entitle him to the full privileges of a "dinkum"
Australian, and back at Lynda Farm, at Hobart, he will be taken on to the
Leahy family roll as such.
He has lost four years of schooling; he comes to a country of new cus-
toms, methods and language; he is handicapped in his start in life. Fully
realising this, and desirous of obliterating by kindness the awful memory
which still torments the boy's mind, the troops on board the "Port Sydney"
subscribed nearly £5O to a fund for his future education. Prominent Tas-
manians are active in further enlarging this amount of money, which will be
Australia's "solid" welcome to the plucky "garson."
"CERISY," FRANCE.
/"\ H, Cerisy, "petit village,"
With your houses built of clay,
Where the women "travaille beaucoup"
all day long;
I wonder what you think of us,
Now that we're far away—
Do you talk of all the things we did
you wrong?
Yes, we shook your wood and "pommes-
de-terre"
While you were fast asleep,
And we often lost your buckets down
the well;
There were many things the Diggers did
That must have made you weep,
"Comprenez-vous un promenade avec
une demoiselle?"
Your "s'il vous plait, une cigarette"
Made many a Digger swear;
At this your "petits garcons" took the
bun.
When the road came up to meet us,
You said, "Mais c'est la guerre!"
To see us zigzag caused you lots of
fun.
And yet I think you loved us,
In your Froggy kind of way,
Though you always had our eyes upon
our francs;
"Cela ne fait rien," you said,,
Still we always had to pay,
And a "merci, beaucoup, M'sieur," was
your thanks.
And now we've had to leave you,
All the Digs are going back
To the bright Australian sunshine far
away;
But whether we're in city,
Or away out on the track,
We shan't forget your little homes of
clay.
And there's one thing that we've
"savvied"
In your land of toil and blood,
That repays the weeks of sailing o'er
the foam.
When we saw the way the old and young
Worked in your village mud,
Well—we thank our stars that Aussie
is our home!
—'W. J. Palmer.
THE BEST MEDICINE FOR DIGGERS.


The Co - operative Movement
is the voluntary association in industry of all classes for
the common welfare. It embodies everything for which
we fought.
CO-OPERATIVE Creameries, Cheese and Bacon Factories, Egg,
Poultry, Fruit and Bee-keeping Societies, Produce Marketing Socie-
ties ARE REVOLUTIONISING LIFE for the farmers.
Is YOUR DISTRICT CO-OPERATIVELY ORGANISED ?
Send to The Secretary, The Coastal Farmers Co-operative Society,
Valentine Street, Sydney, and learn how to form a society. The C.F.S.
has been formed to assist you. Since its commencement in 1900 it has
handled over twenty million pounds worth of farmers' produce. It is
a Farmer's Wholesale Society, controlled by Farmers, for Farmers, and
membership is open to all producers.
Co-operative Stores
are REVOLUTIONISING LIFE for the CONSUMERS.
IN ENGLAND members of co-operative stores represent ONE"
THIRD of the population. CO-OPERATORS are defeating the profiteers.
They are managing their own shops, factories, and warehouses,
eliminating unnecessary middlemen, ensuring honesty in trade, and
demonstrating that Christianity in commerce is practicable.
Is THERE A CO-OPERATIVE STORE.! IN YOUR CITY, TOWN OR DISTRICT?
Write to MR. HART, The Co-operative Union of N. S. W.,
"Hadora," Miller Street, Hurstville, N.S.W., for information.
Read "CO-OPERATION AND CO-PARTNERSHIP,"
by F. E. PULSFORD. A.C.P.A.
Obtainable at above address. Price, Is. post free.
QO YOU REMEMBER the W.E.A. Lectures on board?
Follow up the information gained and write to
THE SECRETARY,
WORKERS' EDUCATIONAL ASSOCIATION,
EDUCATION BUILDINGS, LOFTUS STREET, SYDNEY,
for particulars of classes and other activities.
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by John Sands Ltd., Sydney.




Further copies of " Homing" can be obtained by sending
Postal Notes to the Editor:
THOS. E. SHONK,
" Niata," Lees Avenue,
Westend Park,
Enfield, N.S.W.
Price 1/6 per copy, post free
WHOLLY SET UP AND PRINTED IN AUSTRALIA BY
JOHN SANDS LIMITED SYDNEY
