





Hon* W* J* Trickett, M*LC
■?£ •$£
...RESIGNATION <m Chairman <?/...
Committees of the Legislative Council of
New South Wales.
Affinal Report.
BY AUTHORITY ;
W. A. GULLICK, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.




SJ Extract from Minutes of the
Proceedings of the Legislative
Council Wednesday , July 24,
J 91 - % % % %
***********
RESIGNATION OF THE CHAIRMAN OF
COMMITTEES (HONORABLE WILLIAM JOSEPH
TRICKETT) : —THE PRESIDENT READ THE FOL-
LOWING LETTER FROM MR. TRICKETT :
23 July, 1912.
I have the honor to resign my position as
Chairman of Committees of the whole House, and
ask you to he good enough to notify same to the
Council.
I deeply regret having to take this step, and, in
doing so, desire to express my deep appreciation
of the uniform kindness, courtesy, and assistance
that I have, on all occasions, received at the hands
of Honorable Members and the Officers of the
Council, during my twelve years of office.
I remain,
Your obedient servant.
W. J. TRICKETT.
The Honorable The President,
Legislative Council.




I| Extracts from “ Hansard,”
Wednesday, July 24, and
Thursday, July 25, 1912.
#********-¥■
U The Hon. F. FLOWERS : I should like to
explain, with very much regret, that the hon.
member, Mr. Trickett, acting under instructions
from his medical adviser has thought fit to
decline re-nomination as Chairman of Com-
mittees.
H I desire, therefore, to take this opportunity
to place on record not only my own appreciation
but the appreciation of the whole Council of the
very valuable services rendered by the hon.
gentleman for so many years past as Chairman
of Committees of this House. The services
rendered during that long period were, as I
have said, of the most valuable kind. The
hon. member has displayed uniform courtesy
to every hon. member, and by the exhibition
of rare tact and judgment on his own part has
conduced to harmony and has been the means
of advancing the business of the House. During
the time I have been a member of the Council
and whilst the hon. member, Mr. Trickett, has
been its Chairman of Committees, our pro-


ceedings have been marked by orderliness and
conducted with smoothness. It is indeed a
great loss to this House that we should no
longer have the services in the chair of such
an able parliamentarian, and one so well
acquainted with parliamentary forms and pro-
cedure, and so well able to guide, control, and
advise hon. members as to the proper line of
conduct in proceedings and debate. It is like
losing an old friend, and one whom I look
upon as a personal friend, that we should no
longer have the hon. member, Mr. Trickett,
with us in the capacity of Chairman of Com-
mittees; but I trust that the hon. member
will long be spared to be a useful member of
this House, and that his health will permit him
to take part in our deliberations, and use those
gifts of knowledge and experience which have
been so helpful to us in the past. I cannot
say more in eulogy of the splendid services
performed by the hon. member, Mr. Trickett,
and I am sure that what I have said will meet
with the endorsement of every hon. member
of this House,
f The Hon. J. GARLAND : I should like to
say that I cordially endorse every word that
has fallen from the Vice-President of the
Executive Council as to the great loss that
6


this House sustains in the fact that through
failing health the hon. member, Mr. Trickett,
cannot consent to resubmit his name for the
position of Chairman of Committees. I feel
that I am voicing the opinion of every member
of this House when I say that in the hon.
member, Mr. Trickett, this House had an
officer who discharged with conspicuous ability
the high duties of his office. His uniform
courtesy, his strict impartiality, and his intimate
knowledge of parliamentary law enabled him to
discharge duties which were often onerous with
very great and with very marked success. We
feel that in losing him from the office of Chair-
man of Committees we lose a parliamentary
friend and adviser.
H The Hon. A. W. MEEKS: The words
uttered by the Vice-President of the Executive
Council will be endorsed by every hon. member
who has had the privilege of sitting here during
the time the hon. member, Mr. Trickett,
occupied the position of Chairman of Commit-
tees. I remember twelve years ago, when I
first came here, the hon. member, Mr. Trickett,
was one of those men to whom I went at all
times for information -regarding the forms and
usages of Parliament, and he proved himself a
most valuable friend to every new member
7


requiring guidance. He conducted his duties
in a most impartial manner and with such
ability that he commanded the respect and
confidence of every member of this House. I
feel it is only right, as one brought into close
association with him during the past twelve
years, to express my deep regret that failing
health has compelled his retirement from a
post he has so worthily filled for so long. At
the same time I sincerely hope that though
he vacates the chair he will not be removed
from our working list, but will still be able to
come amongst us and give the House the
benefit of his knowledge and his experience.
U The President : I do not think any hon.
member has a higher appreciation of Mr.
Trickett’s excellent work than I have. We all
acknowledge the great zeal and energy he
displayed in the performance of his duties, and
certainly one leading characteristic was the
great courtesy he showed to every hon. member
while at the same time displaying the firmness
absolutely necessary to the orderly conduct of
debate. For myself I would say that I always
found the hon. member, Mr. Trickett, of great
assistance to me in dealing with those various
matters which came before us in our respective
positions in this House. Hon. members natur-
8


ally regret that we lose his service as Chairman,
but I do not think it is likely that we will lose
altogether the benefit of his presence in this
House. We all hope that he will be restored
in a short time to good health, and at any rate
I can assure hon. members that we are likely
to see him here. I got into communication
with him to-day by telephone, and he was good
enough to say he would be quite willing to
accept a position as one of the Temporary
Chairmen of Committees. It is my intention
to nominate him as one of the Temporary
Chairmen.
IT The Hon. Sir NORMAND MacLAURIN :
I may be permitted to add my tribute of
respect to the excellent character and great
services of my hon. friend, Mr. Trickett, who,
because of ill-health, has been obliged to resign
the office of Chairman of Committees, a position
he has occupied for about twelve years to the
great satisfaction of every member of this
House. The chief characteristics of a Chairman
of Committees are, first of all courtesy, and
secondly a thorough knowledge of parliamen-
tary law and precedent. Mr. Trickett possessed
both of these qualifications in a marked degree,
Every one of us has had occasion from time to
time to benefit by his thorough knowledge of
9


parliamentary precedent, and to thank him for
the unvarying kindness with which if, at any
time, one of us has fallen into error, he has
invariably put us to rights. I regret, with
every member of this House, the cause which
has led to his retirement from office. I trust
that the health of my hon. friend will soon be
restored, and that he will yet enjoy many
years of rest from his labours, which have
been so valuable, both to this House and to
the Assembly when he was a member of that
body. I thought it my duty to express my
great sense of regret that Mr. Trickett should
have occasion to resign his office in this House.
U The Hon. J. HUGHES: As one who repre-
sented the Government in this House before
my hon. friend, the present Vice-President, I
should like to say that we owe a great deal to
the hon. gentleman, Mr. Trickett, whom I had
the honor of nominating to the position of
Chairman of Committees a good many times in
the last few years. We were particularly
fortunate in the services of that hon. gentleman,
inasmuch as during the time he was a member
of the Legislative Assembly, from 1880 to 1889,
before he came into this House, he occupied
oublic positions, both as Chairman of Com-
mittees and as a member of other Governments:


He was Postmaster-General and Minister for
Public Instruction. He came to us, therefore,
with a large and varied experience, and that
experience was very shortly, owing to the
death or retirement of Mr. Jacob, the then
Chairman of Committees, placed at our disposal.
We have had advantage of it for twelve years
past. Personally I have known the hon.
gentleman a good deal longer than that, long
before, in fact, I had anything to do with this
House, and I may speak of him perhaps in his
professional relations outside. I have known
Mr. Trickett since before I belonged to the
profession to which we both belong now, and
ail I can say is that his character and reputation
as a private citizen were exactly his character
and reputation in this House. He was always
courteous and considerate to everyone with
whom he had occasion to have any dealings,
and he was always ready to place his abilities
at the disposal of other people. We owe a
great deal to the hon. gentleman, and we should
recognise it, as I think we do recognise it.
U The Hon. H. C. DANGAR ; Mr. Trickett
was a very old friend of mine. I have known
him for a great many years, and I would like
to say that if there was one quality more than
another that I admired in him it was his
11


invariable courtesy, not to say anything of his
wide parliamentary knowledge. I think hon.
members of this House appreciated the unfailing
courtesy that we received from him more than
anything else. I cannot help adding to this an
expression of my opinion that the discharge of
the duties of Chairman of Committees often
tries a man’s courtesy to a considerable degree,
but never in all my parliamentary experiences
do I remember any occasion when the equa-
nimity of our worthy friend had been disturbed.
I am sorry indeed to have lost his services.
I sincerely hope that the House and the country
will not altogether lose the benefit of the hon.
member, Mr. Trickett’s, services. I hope that
for many years to come the hon. member will
be able to give us the benefit of his profound
parliamentary experience and knowledge of
parliamentary procedure, and also of that grasp
of things in general, 'in which he never failed to
take a very sensible and able view, I gladly
avail myself of this opportunity of expressing
appreciation of my old friend’s work, and also
of. expressing a sincere hope that for many years
to come he may be spared to give us the benefit
of his long experience.




■
