







HONG KONG
RADIO REVIEW
01. II. —No. 12
25th January, 1941
SPECIAL CENTENARY
ISSUE
SPECIAL CENTENARY TALKS
IN FULL
FATHER RYAN ON G. B. SHAW
WIRELESS NOTES & NEWS
DOWN ON THE SHORT WAVES
PRICE TEN CENTS


BROADWAY ENTERTAINMENT!
NEWS FROM WORLD CAPITALS!
. . . . tuned more easily than Local Stations
HEAR THE NEW
1941
RCA VICTOR
BROADWAY MODELS
WITH S-P-R-E-A-D B-A-N-D TUNING
RCA VICTOR
“BROADWAY” MODEL
Q 22
m
mm '
■
The first low-priced six tubes spread-band receiver on
the market with 5-band coverage. The important
short-wave stations on the 31,25 pr 19 metre bands have
been spread so far apart on the “Broadway” dial that’s
there’s never any uncertainty about what station you
are tuning. Short-wave transmitting points are named
and located on the dial for instant selection !
FREE DEMONSTRATION AT:—
CHINA EMPORIUM, LTD.
CHUEN YEE HONG
CHUNG YUEN ELEC. CO.
HOLTS RADIO & ELEC. LAB.
PETER MUSIC CO.
RADIO & ELECTRIC SERVICE
S. MOUTRIE & CO., LTD.
TSANC FOOK PIANO CO.
VICTORIA RADIO SHOPPE
WING ON CO., LTD.


2
£ # Z. E. K. -# fS


3
4r n n f? Z. E. K. £ € & & #


[?]
4
£ € m Jt # z. e. k. 4- fa i*


[?]
Z. E. K.
4* n n m. &
$ & 4£ %
fj —f\ jz. 9 -tf* — '^r —' /L ■ —
i
j| A ©2p & i?L %ea J
it. ® • JL ?& #. /


HONG KONG
RADIO REVIEW
Vol. lI.—No. 12
ISSUED WEEKLY
January 25th, 1941
Edited by E. O’Neil Shaw
Advertising rates on application to:
The Managing Editor, P. 0. Box 200, Hong Kong.
CONTENTS
Notes & Comments 1
Magnanimity “ De Luxe” 3
Weekly Miscellany 5
A Hundred Years’ Growth 6
One Hundred Years of Communications - 7
Commercial History of Hong Kong - 8
Anglo-Chinese Co-operation 11
Portuguese Pioneering 14
” Upon this Rock ...” 17
Communications 20
Law and Justice in Hong Kong 21
An Octogenarian Remembers 23
Reminiscences of Hong Kong 25
A Foot-slogging Journey 26
Hong Kong Amateur Dramatic Club 28
Sport Among the Chinese 31
History of Yachting in Hong Kong 34
Racing in Hong Kong 37
Father Ryan on G.B. Shaw 39
Wireless Notes and News 41
The Centenary of Hong Kong 42
Down on the Short Waves 44
History in the Making 47
Advance Wireless Programmes 51
8.8. C. Transmissions 57
Short-wave Broadcasting Stations of the World - 58
Contributions will he considered only if they are
accompanied by a stamped addressed envelope.
Letters should hear the writer’s name and address, and must
be kept as brief as possible. The Editor reserves
the right to publish letters only in part.
Subscription rate: H.K.$5 per year
Postage extra for subscribers outside Hong Kong: —
China and Macao: he. per week.
Other destinations: 10c. per week.
NOTES & COMMENTS
THIS issue of the Hong Kong Radio Review
serves principally to record, in permanent
fashion, the main features of the very meagre
Centenary celebrations which Hong Kong per-
mitted itself in order to mark the end of a
hundred years of its British history. Indeed,
the use of the word ‘ ‘ celebrations ' ’ is perhaps
inopportune, since it was decided, very wisely,
by the Powers-that-be that, in fact, no official
celebrations of the occasion should take place
in such anxious times as these. No one will
quarrel with the wisdom of this decision since
it would obviously have been out of place, to
say the least, for one tiny cog of the Empire
to celebrate anything—even a Centenary —
while the rest of it is engaged in a struggle of
first-class import to its very future existence.
Nevertheless, it was eminently desirable that
the occasion should not pass entirely unnoticed;
and it was to serve the purpose of com-
memorating an important date in our local
history that the special Centenary programme
of broadcasts was arranged by Z.B.W.
We endeavoured to secure as representative
a list of speakers as possible. It was headed,
of course, by His Excellency the Acting Gover-
nor, while the occasion was also taken for the
Postmaster-General and Chairman of Broad-
casting, Mr. E. I. Wynne-Jones, and Mr. R. P.
Morris, Senior Wireless Engineer, to contribute
to the series. The Chinese community was
adequately covered by the presence in the Studio
of the Hon. Sir Robert Kotewall, Hon. Mr.
M. K. Lo, Sir Robert Ho Tung and Sir Shou-
son Chow; Mr. J, P. Braga represented the
Portuguese community; and in addition w 7 e
invited the Rev. K. Mackenzie Dow 7 and Messrs.


A. L. Shields, P. S. Cassidy, C. B. Brown,
Cyril Champkin, H. C. Macnamara and R. B.
Hancock to contribute talks on specific subjects
fit for history, reminiscence and anecdote. All
these talks are reproduced in this issue, begin-
ning from page 6, and other than to place His
Excellency’s first, we have made no attempt to
reproduce them in any specific order of seniority
or with any particular reference to their im-
portance or readibility. Our only concern
has been the mundane business of fitting them
into the space at our disposal. Some of the
‘ ‘ official ’ ’ talks have already been reproduced
in the local daily press, but the others are here
in permanent form for the first time.
* # * *
Altogether they provide a thoroughly in-
teresting and informative record, not only of a
special occasion in the history of the Colony,
but also of its development and growth in the
last hundred years. There is scope for much
philosophy in the contemplation of that period,
and we propose to add but little to what the
various speakers have already said. But one
fact of considerable importance and significance
is surely obvious, when the history of the last
100 years of Hong Kong is contemplated. It
is that the growth of this Colony has been
continuous and regular, with its corollary that
British influences, British ideals and British
security have not only made it possible but have
nurtured it in every way. This was a point
perforce stressed by all those speakers who were
dealing with the bare history of the growth of
Hong Kong. One or two speakers remarked
on yet another corollary necessary to accom-
plish this growth, and that is the requirement
that the different nationalities who live in Hong
Kong not only need to co-operate with each
other in business and social dealings, but
they must also bring to any effective co-opera-
tion that essential fellow-feeling and goodwill
without which no co-operation is possible.
Hong Kong is indeed fortunate in this respect.
We have a heterogeneous population, made up
of many races, languages and creeds. They
live together in perfect harmony —each main-
taining, no doubt, its special character and
characteristics; but together contributing to a
certain civic sense and social awareness which
is invaluable for the good government of this
Colony.
Let it be emphasised that there is no scope
for complacency. Though much has been
accomplished, there is a great deal yet to be
done before we can fold our hands and sit back,
satisfied with things as they are rather than
concerned about things as they might be. Our
social services, for instance, are as yet pain-
fully inadequate; but this immense problem has
been tackled and is being tackled with a certain
courage and vigour, albeit with caution. We
lack many civic amenities which are considered
barely commonplace elsewhere among civilised
communities, especially amenities concerned
with cultural activities and pursuits. We
have no adequate public library, no facilities
for the proper fostering of the arts, not even a
Town Hall which could fulfil the proper func-
tions of a civic and communal meeting-place.
We depend on the churches and missions for
most of our charitable activities. W 7 hat music
and drama there is in Hong Kong is carried on
almost solely by the devoted labour!ngs of a
few enthusiasts who devote considerable time
and trouble to them.
* * * *
But it would be untrue to say that these
things have either been completely ignored or
forgotten. They have not. The real answer
is that Hong Kong in particular and the Empire
at large are engaged at the moment in far more
vital and urgent tasks —among the most im-
portant of them the very preservation of our
national ideals and ways of living at all. If
the British Empire were cast down defeated,
the past hundred years of Hong Kong’s history
would not be worth the snapping of a finger.
At one move it would be rendered meaningless
and futile. All that has been so laboriously
built up in that time, everything which the
security and peace and —with reservations —
plenty of Hong Kong means to close on 2,000,000
people would disappear into nothingness, to
give place to oppression, ardour and rigours
beyond imagining. This is no exaggeration.
Just as all personal, communal and civic liberty
has been obliterated in the greater part of
Europe, so would they be wiped out from the
consciousness of Hong Kong if the Fascist
2
The Hong Kong Radio Review


To
The Managing Editor, “ H.K. Radio Review,”
P. 0. Box 200, Hong Kong.
Please send me “The HONG KONG RADIO REVIEW”
for £aif year, beginning with the issue, for which I enclose
r H.K.55.00 . (China and Macao — 4 cents per week
remittance ot h.K.52.60 adding postage. } Other Destinations— lo „ ,»
Name...
(Block letters please)
Full Address
Date Signature
77 ie Hung Kong Radio Review


dictators had their way with us. If the
measure of liberty and freedom which we have
achieved in the last hundred years is worth
maintaining, it is worth fostering with all the
strength at our command; and it is the duty
of all the communities, individually and to-
gether, who share them here to come to their
defence when they are threatened, as they now
are, by forces of evil. Only thus can the
promise of the past be fulfilled and the hopes
of the future come to pass.
M, M. -V- W-
TV* TV' Tv* TV*
Our Centenary commemorations from
Z.B.W. were enhanced by the willing services
of a number of local artistes who contributed
to the musical programmes run in conjunction
with the talks. It is fitting that the names of
those who took part should also be placed on
record. Here they are. On the evening of
January 18, Capt. Thomson (Bass) and Dr. H.
Talbot (Baritone) both sang a number of songs;
Hdl Lorenzo and “ Lancs,” both well-known to
Z.B.W. audiences, contributed piano solos as
well as two-piano jazz numbers; and A. T. Lay
accompanied throughout. On the following
evening we had Father O’Mara (Baritone) in a
number of songs with A. T. Lay at the piano;
a programme of choral and organ music by the
Choir and organist of St. Joseph’s Church; and
a number of two-piano classical offerings by
Harry Ore and J. R. M. Smith. Among Mr.
Ore’s items were several of his own composi-
tions, with original piano settings of Chinese
melodies.
Monday night’s programmes were con-
tributed by Y. K. Sze (Bass), a very talented
and welcome Chinese newcomer to our pro-
grammes, who sang, among others, a Chinese
song; A. E. Nobbins (Baritone), an occasional
contributor to our regular programmes; and
solos by Elvie Yuen (Soprano) and Gaston
d’Aquino (Tenor) both frequent and popular
broadcasters from Z.B.W. The accompani-
ments throughout were provided by E. O’Neil
Shaw. Two vocal duets given during the
course of the evening were noteworthy : one by
Elvie Yuen and Y. Iv. Sze, and the other by
the last-named and Gaston d’Aquino.
We missed many old friends who would
undoubtedly have rallied round had they been
here to do so. Among them perhaps we may
mention Helen Lockhart (Contralto), now in
Sydney, and Luba Shaftain, whose beautiful
piano-playing was for many years a feature of
our Studio offerings from Z.8.W., also
evacuated to Australia.
We express our grateful thanks to all those
artistes who actually took part in the com-
memoratory broadcasts, and hope that they will
long continue to contribute to our musical
programmes.
'Tv' 'Tv* TV'
This is a special edition of the Hong Kong Radio
Review, and we do not pretend that it is really repre-
sentative of the fare we offer to readers every week for
10 cents. But it contains our usual features—Notes and
Comments, Readers’ Forum, “Down on the Short Waves,”
the Weekly Miscellany, etc.—and these features and talks
given from the Studio are regularly reprinted as available.
In addition, we publish the reviews of new books which are
regularly broadcast on Sunday evenings under the title
“ Z.B.W. Bookshelf”—a feature missing from this issue
because of the special programmes last Sunday. If you
have enjoyed this special number, please enter a regular
subscription on the form enclosed in the body of the
magazine. We would welcome your regular support.—Ed.
MAGNANIMITY “DE LUXE”
THERE is something almost pathetic —and
certainly supremely comic—about the
efforts of the dictator and Fascist countries to
justify their politics before world opinion. Is
it purely “ wishful thinking,” just plain blarney
or really honest self-deception that makes them
continue reiterating, over and over again,
without the slightest regard for commonsense,
equity or truth, the specious avowals, excuses
and pleadings regularly trotted out and as
regularly exposed as so much claptrap, when it
is not deliberate lying? They all talk of hav-
ing their motives, which are as pure as the
driven snow, consistently misunderstood by a
harshly-judging world. They are, look you,
all for peace, prosperity and plenty, with the
millenium just around the corner if only those
stupid democracies would play, according to
their rules. If only they were left to organise
and carry out their aggressions in peace, with-
out interference from the stupid and very fierce
animals which incontinently defend themselves
when attacked, with a “Hey, Presto! ” they
would soon have a very Eden here on earth,
and all men (except a few inferior and decadent
races, of course) would bask in everlasting
sunshine. They have no acquisitive territorial
3
The Hong Kong Radio Review


designs against anybody; the tiny fact that
some dozen or so independent countries in
Europe and Asia have been overrun, devastated
by fire and sword and reduced to degrading
servitude, and that in one case at least (that of
China) the process of accomplishing these
desirable ends is still being prosecuted with all
the strength at one aggressor’s command, is
purely incidental, and really doesn’t mean a
thing. Sweetness and light for all is the shin-
ing goal; the “ New Order ” (Hoch, aye !) will
establish it —but only a “ New Order ” on their
model, of course, not anybody else’s.
These protestations and hypocrisies are
enough to make one sick. They are so utterly
unconscionable and unscrupulous, and so com-
pletely divorced from any reasonable scheme of
human or international relationships. It is
kinder to think that the politicians and spokes-
men who propound them do so in a state of
genuine' self-delusion rather than in any con-
scious effort to misrepresent motives; but even
this excuse can be stretched to breaking-point.
So far as independent opinion is concerned,
only one conclusion is possible : and that is that
they must be taken at their face value, which
is precisely nil.
We doubt whether Mr. Matsuoka’s speech
at the reopening of the Diet is really worth
detailed analysis, since, in the main, it only
repeats the hoary half-truths, misstatements
and misrepresentations of its predecessors.
Mr. Matsuoka opened by declaring that the aim
of Japan’s foreign policy “ is that of enabling
all nations of the world each to take its own
proper place in accordance with the spirit of
Hakkoichiu, the very ideal which inspired the
foundation of our Empire.” We do not know
what the spirit of Hakkoichiu represents; but
China can hardly be enabled to take “ its own
proper place ’ ’ in the comity of nations while
it is being subjected to the sort of pressure that
Japan would exercise upon its destinies —the
pressure of the bombing aeroplane employed
against defenceless cities, the pressure of armed
occupation of large tracts of its territory, the
pressure of the sponsoring, by an alien power,
of a puppet administration set up in direct
opposition to the expressed and avowed wish of
its peoples and only precariously propped up
by foreign bayonets. Great play is made in
Japanese propaganda of the “semi-colonial”
status which China is supposed to occupy
vis-d-vis the Western nations; but Japan’s
apologists are discreetly silent when it comes
to defining the status which .China would
occupy should Japan’s full will against her be
accomplished. With astonishing magnanimity
Mr. Matsuoka declared that “ not only does
Japan demand no territorial cession and no
indemnities, but she has willingly pledged to
China the policy of abolishing extraterritoriality
and also of restoring the ‘ Concessions ’ to
China.” Here is magnanimity de luxe and
in excelsis. Even after the wanton crime of
having the guts to defend herself against un-
provoked attack, China, if only she will cease
the nefarious activity, will be patted on the
head and freely forgiven, and she will not have
to concede an inch of territory (except, of course
that occupied by Japan) and she will be let off
having to pay anything at all to her gallant
rescuers (with the exception of the trifling
provision that an army of occupation will be
necessary for an unspecified number of years —
to keep order—and that China will foot the bill,
of course).
We could write for hours pointing out the
false premises, pathetically bemused arguments
and deliberate distortions which Mr. Matsuoka’s
speech contained, but it is really not worth the
effort. He said nothing new; he made out
not the slightest justification for the grandiose
and suicidal policy which his country has
assumed and proposes in the near future to
assume. He talked at one stage of the fact
that ‘ ‘ the establishment of a sphere of common
prosperity throughout Greater East Asia is
truly a matter of vital concern to Japan.” So
far as we can remember offhand not a single
soul in the whole wide world has even attempted
to deny so patent a truth. What many have
pointed out, however, is that they cannot sub-
scribe to the Japanese doctrine that, in the
process of establishing such a “ sphere of com-
mon prosperity ” throughout Greater East Asia
or anywhere else, the rights and privileges of
others (and of China herself) shall be dissipated
into thin air.
Here is another piece of prize sophistry,*
this time from Prince Konoye’s speech to the
House of Peers. Referring to ihe conclusion
4
The Hong Kong Radio Review


of the Three-Power Pact, he said that Japan
sought thereby “ to attain the lofty objective of
securing world peace and achieving the stability
of East Asia.” Nobody will argue with the
loftiness of the aim, but there are better ways
of securing world peace than by allying oneself
with two nations which have shown a degree
of aggression unparalleled in world history and
are already engaged in a war designed to extend
it to the whole world. Need one also add that
Japan can establish peace in Greater East Asia
to-morrow if she really wishes to do so by the
simple expedients of withdrawing from the
China ‘ Incident” (what a witch-word!) and
undertaking to deal, in the future, only with
the properly constituted Government of China,
that of Chiang Kai-shek, on a basis of absolute
equality. What is wanted is not so much
stupidly bombastic talk, and a little more
strictly realistic action of the right kind.
WEEKLY MISCELLANY
An excellent series of discussions upon literature
lias recently been broadcast in the Home ser-
vice of the 8.8. C. under the title “The Writer
in the Witness-Box.” It has taken the form of
arguments between Desmond Hawkins and a number
of well-known English literary figures on all aspects
of the writer’s craft. Desmond MacCarthy was
one of them, and his chief contribution to the
discussions was an examination of that elusive
literary quality called “ style.” Here is an extract
from the Hawkins-MacCarthy exchange of views:
Hawkins : A good many people think of style as
the manipulation of sentences and the choice of words
for the aesthetic pleasure they give and they are apt
to be impatient of that as a kind of dandified and
precious cult.
MacCaethy : Yes, it is often a kind of literary
foppery, but the demand for simplicity is, I’m afraid,
often the reverse of what it seems. It is a demand
for the ordinary, which is by no means always simple
and direct. The commonest faults of ordinary writ-
ing are complexity, vagueness, with perhaps a little
bombast thrown in to elevate the feelings without
committing the author to definite judgments. The
commonest fault of all writers is insincerity, and
that is why masters of the art of writing insist so
much on restraint. They know it is when an author
“lets himself go’’ that he is most apt to write in
order to be admired, or to become a mere slave to
his audience.
Whenever we put pen to paper we give ourselves
away and in that sense we all possess a style. Do
you remember the influenza epidemic after the last
war? It was frightful-—almost a plague. I was
shown a copy of a letter written by a young gardener
to a relative while that scourge was raging. It
certainly does not lack sincerity and it certainly
shows the personality of the writer.
Dear So-and-So,
Your letter came. Glad you bought a Ford-
Jean is sick. Has the Flu—she will die, I think.
Edna died to-night she had the Flu too. We are
guarenteened. Four of the Drown family have it.
My wife is sick. She’s got Pneumonia. If things
gets much worse we may have to get a doctor. The
dahlias are doing fine. Everything 0-K. here.
Callous ? Well—certainly not the letter of a
sensitive man, but first of all utterly unself conscious.
I think the “ 0.K.” which makes such a ludicrous
impression at the end simply refers to his work. But
this is the point: style is not merely the revelation
of personality though that inevitably accompanies it.
Otherwise that letter would be a masterpiece of style.
I reproduce the extract because it has some
bearing on the reaction of a number of people to
my last week’s note on James Joyce. At least four
people have disagreed most violently with what I
wrote, and a personal discussion which took place
between them and me came almost to blows. One
argument was that superficial acquaintance with
but two of Joyce’s works was not enough to form
an opinion upon. All four thought I had grossly
exceeded tl>e bounds of good taste by a criticism
which was immoderate, biassed and bigoted. Any-
way, I was obviously an ignorant nincompoop with
no soul.
Well, let ’em all come. I stand absolutely
pat by what I wrote. I may be an ignorant puppy,
but I repeat my opinion that whatever else the
writings of Joyce may be, they are neither great
literature nor great art. They represent but a
phase which will sooner or later be outmoded, dis-
credited and forgotten, just as their counterpart
in the worlds of painting and sculpture are already
beginning to be. I cannot bring myself to believe
that literature as a whole will be any the poorer
for having no more Joyce, and I sincerely hope
that, with his passing, we shall see the end of the
so-called literary surrealist school. lam quite
sure that it has nothing permanent to add to the
world’s literary and artistic wealth.
Fabie Up-to-date
James Thurber, whose magnificent comic draw-
ings are such a feature of the New Yorker and other
American journals, has just published a book, of
which both the text and the illustrations are by
him. It includes a fable called “ The Little Girl
and the Wolf,” which ends thus:
“She had approached no nearer than 25 feet
from the bed when she saw that it was not her
grandmother, but the wolf. So the little girl took
an automatic out of her basket and shot the wolf
dead. Moral: It is not so easy to fool little girls
nowadays as it used to be.”
Tailpiece
Wh en Italy entered the war last June,
Mussolini solemnly promised that Greece need have
nothing to fear from him. We begin to suspect
that 11 Duce had something there. —The New
Y other.
“ Eeyoke,”
5
The Hong Kong Radio Review


A HUNDRED YEARS'
GROWTH
THE DEVELOPMENT OF
HONG KONG
By Bis Ea "cellency the Acting Governor,
Lt.-Gen. E. F. Norton, C. 8., D. 5.0., M.C.
TN reviewing the progress of Hong Kong during
the last hundred years I like to think of Hong
Kong as it was a century ago, and in so doing, I
conjure up a picture not unlike that of Lantau
to-day.
I know second-hand something of what it had
begun to look like twenty-five years later after a
quarter of a century of surprising progress. Need
I emphasize the contrast once more after another
seventy-five years with the Hong Kong of to-day,
with its harbours, its dockyards, its hospitals and
social services, its university and schools, its
industrial and banking organisations, its great
shipping concerns, and that latest and newest
development to be seen in the mass of factories and
businesses so strikingly represented in the recent
Chinese Trades Exhibition? Think again of the
Happy Valley of to-day with its Race Course and
playing grounds, of the swimming clubs, and of
all the facilities for these games and sports at
which the young Chinese of Hong Kong to-day
take on us British who have taught them to beat
us at our own games.
Perhaps the most striking thing about the
hundred years’ growth of Hong Kong is the
astonishing pace at which it is still growing and
expanding, and its comparative prosperity in a
stricken world; that, in short, it is still a live,
vigorous and growing organisation. To what is
this vigour due?
In discussing the industrial pre-eminence of
London to-day it is often said by the geographers
and economists that this pre-eminence is due to
the geographical position of the Port of London,
with its great facilities set squarely on the trade
routes connecting Western Europe with the rest
of the world, and particularly with the Western
Hemisphere. But I have been told that there is
perhaps another reason for the fact that London
is the financial and trading capital of the world,
and this is that an Englishman’s word is as good
as his bond, and that we are though a martial,
albeit non-military race, first and foremost a nation
of shopkeepers.
Analogy with Hong Kong
Can we not trace an analogy with Hong Kong?
Here we have the same magnificent harbour
facilities admirably situated at a junction point
of sea communications between China and the rest
of the world, particularly with the West. But
here again there is perhaps a similar alternative
explanation. In building up the prosperity of
Hong Kong two great nations, the British and the
Chinese, have closely co-operated; may not'some-
thing of the same qualities that have made London
—qualities shared by those two races —have made
Hong Kong as well?
I know that seventy-five years ago the British
merchants of Hong Kong could always do, and
liked doing, business with the Chinese, in whom
they foTind much the same straight dealing in trade
which they themselves believed in. In my own
experience there is a greater affinity in matters of
social and business intercourse and less hidden
reservations between British and Chinese than we
British can trace in our dealings with most other
nations, even though these may be apparently much
more nearly racially akin and members of the same
Aryan-speaking stock.
I suggest then that the Hong Kong of to-day
owes much of its greatness to a happy combination
between the people of these two great nations, both
of whom hate war (though both are prepared to
fight stubbornly when they have to) and both of
whom are traders by instinct, sharing certain
common qualities which make for confidence and
success in trade.
When our present troubles are over-past I am
no believer that the golden age will set in, or that
the nations of the world will eschew war. I am
reluctantly compelled to believe that “ dogs delight
to bark and bite for ’tis their nature to,” and that
men are the same. We shall never abolish war.
But at least I feel sure of one thing, and that is
that, whatever their inclinations none of the
participants in the present war will be in a position
to make war again on a serious scale for many
years to come, and I believe that we must inevitably
be in for a prolonged period of peace and of the
arts of peace.
Looking Forward
If this proves to be the case, what may not
be the Hong Kong of a hundred years hence? We
all know what happened in England, when after
the Napoleonic wars Europe settled down to a long
peace and the industrial revolution began with its
astonishing influences on the development of the
Empire. There seems to be signs of something
like the beginnings of an industrial revolution in
Hong Kong, the reflection of all those new in-
fluences which are making themselves felt in young
China of to-day. A Hong Kong which is no less
an entrepot than London and, in addition, achieves
something of London’s industrial pre-eminence
6
The Bong Kong Radio Review


might present to ns as startling" a contrast a
hundred years hence with the Hong Kong of to-day
as does the latter with that almost uninhabited
island, the Hong Kong of a hundred years ago.
Here I should like in parenthesis to say a word
to the Indian troops and the Indian community in
Hongkong. They are in a sense fellow-countrymen
of mine—for I have spent nearly half my service
as a soldier in India, much of that period in the
North, though I know every province of the Coun-
try. I have thus come to regard India as my
second home and, having a wife and family in that
country, I have a fellow feeling with all Indians
in Hongkong and particularly with those wdiose
families are left behind in India.
I have watched with pride shared, I know, by
all Indians in Hopgkong, the achievements of the
Indian troops in Libya: I have watched the great
efforts India is making to expand her share in every
department of the Empire’s war effort, and it has
been a great pleasure to me to find Indians playing
so large and so important a role in the defence of
and in the civil administration of Hongkong. I
feel sure that Indians in Hongkong realise no less
than the vast majority of Indians in India, that
i he cause for which the British Empire is fighting
is no less the cause of India, and that anything
short of the victory we are determined to achieve
would be no less a disaster for India than for
England.
But before indulging in Utopian dreams we
have first to win this war in which we have so far
fought but the first round. To omit any mention
of our hopes and fears in this war to-day is to
neglect the one great subject which is inevitably
uppermost in all our thoughts. Well, let me give
you a quotation :
England lias always had the armament which she
needed. " She has always fought with those weapons which
were necessary for success . . . Tenacity in her Govern-
ment as well as in the spirit of the broad masses, enables
her to carry through to victory any struggle that she once
enters upon, no matter how long such a struggle may last
or how great the sacrifices that may be necessary, or what
the means that have to be employed; and all this even
though the actual military equipment at hand may be
utterly inadequate when compared with that of other
nations.
I wonder how many of my listeners to-night
can place the origin of this quotation? . . . These
words were written by Adolf Hitler in “ Mein
Kampf.” I hope that he will yet learn how true
a prophet he has proved in this respect at least.
To this end Hong Kong has helped, and is
helping, but we cannot say that we are doing our
full duty until we have thrown 100% of our
resources of men, money and industry into the
battle. ' Great strides are being made to achieve
this, and if we out here feel ourselves sadly out of
the picture, as many of us do (well I know it), we
can only console ourselves with the thought that
this war is being fought no less in the workshops
and on the ocean trade routes than on the battle-
fields on land and in the air. For the moment
we can do two things only. We can do the job
that lies immediately at our hand, and do it with
all our might, and we can prepare to defend our-
selves against all comers should the need arise.
Let us, then, close our ranks, forget our own
troubles, disappointments and grievances; let us
make our maximum contribution to the Empire
war effort, even if it is not a spectacular one. So
when the day of victory comes we can look back
on our part in the war with just pride, and we can
start Hong Kong worthily on its next hundred
years of prosperity and greatness.
ONE HUNDRED YEARS
OF COMMUNICATIONS
FACILITIES IN HONG KONG
By.E. I. Wynne-Jones, Postmaster-General and
Chairman of Broadcasting.
A LTHOUGH for obvious reasons we are not
celebrating our Centenary this year, we may
at least take the opportunity of commemorating
that day 100 years ago when the Union Jack was
first run up to the masthead at Possession Point.
In the capacity of Postmaster-General and
Chairman of Broadcasting in Hong Kong I am
naturally interested chiefly in communications, and
I would like to remind you of the tremendous
difference which exists between communication
to-day and 100 years ago. I suppose the means
of communication which I am now using, that is
broadcasting, will be considered the most striking
advance made in that period. Jo-day it is a
commonplace matter to switch on your wireless and
get the latest news straight from London; to those
of us whose loved ones are at home during these
perilous times the wireless and telegraph are a
boon beyond price. But there are other sides of
communication which have made vast strides; I
need only remind you of the All-Up Empire Air
Mail and the institution of a Wireless Telephone
Service to Manila just before the outbreak of war
for you to realize what tremendous advantages had
been prepared and placed at your disposal. Then
came the war, and many of these had to be
temporarily suspended: but communications still
go on, although, of course, with certain difficulty,
but you do get letters ultimately and still reason-
ably cheaply although they have to be carried great
distances at the risk of men’s lives.
When I went home on leave in the Spring of
last year my arrival coincided with the opening of
the Centenary Postal Stamp Exhibition com-
memorating the institution in 1840 of the Penny
Post. Speaking of stamps, I regret to say I did
not bring the Centenary issue with me, and I am
still unable to tell you when they are likely to
arrive. The Penny Post has gone like the All-Up
Empire Air Mail, but it will come again, although
7
The Hong Kong Radio Review


perhaps not in my time, and the Post Office at
home still carries on through bombs and fires in
the most magnificient way. It is true that at the
beginning 1 of the blitz there was some dislocation
of traffic, but the same amazing courage which
inspires the whole of London is not lacking in the
Post Office, and they very soon got on with the
job. You can imagine that sorting under the
usual glass roof and in the black-out was not very
easy, but the necessary arrangements were quickly
made and by the time I left England in November
there was little or no delay. Such delay as
inevitably occured was very cheerfully accepted by
all as part of the price of war.
Courage and Cheerfulness
It is not necessary for me to tell you more of
that amazing courage and cheerfulness of which
you have already heard and read so much; it is
something which transcends description. I refer
to it only because it justifies the legitimate pride
which we Britishers in Hongkong can feel in our
race and our achievements here in Hongkong.
The people at home are prepared to accept any
danger, discomfort or disappointment on their way
to final victory. Relying then oh that justifiable
pride, I feel I can confidently call upon you to
bear cheerfully and patiently the inevitable sus-
pense and delays which have arisen and will arise
in our communications during war time. I promise
you that we all, in the services concerned, are
doing and will do our utmost to give you the best
possible service, and I can also promise you that
when peace comes again we will strain every nerve
not only to restart the services as they were in
1939 but to give you something even better, some-
thing which will make the services of 1939 seem
as primitive as the old sailing-ship services of 1841.
In broadcasting, for example, I think we can
confidently look forward to the institution of tele-
vision throughout the Empire, and, of course, the
war itself leads to daily technical advances in
wireless engineering, the results of which will be
at your disposal. What other advances will take
place in the next century I leave it to you to guess;
the progress of the last century has been so
stupendous that one is almost frightened at the
possibilities that lie ahead.
I am sure that you will all wish me to thank
His Excellency the Acting Governor for coming
here and speaking to-night. As Chairman of the
Broadcasting Committee I am most grateful, too,
to those friends who have so kindly volunteered to
help us in placing this Centenary Programme be-
fore you. A lot of hard work has gone to the
preparation of this programme, for which we have
to thank our able Secretaries. I know you will
enjoy the talks you are going to hear given by
eminent gentlemen of the Colony. I may perhaps
remind you that they will be recorded in permanent
form in the pages of our Radio Review, which
will appear next Saturday.
COMMERCIAL HISTORY
OF HONG KONG
A CENTURY OF TRADE
By P. S. Cassidy.
Colony of Hongkong was founded to provide
-L British merchants with a base from which they
could trade with the Chinese according to British
law and under the protection of the British flag.
There is no need for me to give the history of
British trade relations with China for the century
and a half previous to the cession of Hongkong.
That has been dealt with by many authorities on
China. 1 would, however, mention that the com-
mercial history of Hongkong is a sequel to the
East India Company’s monopoly of British trade
in China which came to an end in 1834, and that
the pioneers of the commercial development of
Hongkong were British merchants who had former-
ly carried on business in the factories of Canton.
There they had been subject to the authority of
the Superintendents of Trade, who had been com-
missioned by the British Government to supervise
trade affairs after the dissolution of the Select
Committee of the East India Company, and they
were still subject to that authority when they
transferred themselves to Hongkong. The first
four Governors of Hongkong also held the appoint-
ment of Superintendent of Trade and it was not
until 1859 that the two offices were separated.
Those who have studied the badge of the Colonv
will recollect that beneath the Royal Arms is
depicted a sailing ship and a junk lying peacefully
ai anchor in the harbour while in the foreground,
amongst some innocent looking packing-cases, a
sable-garbed British Merchant, with top hat ram-
pant, carries on a business deal with two Chinese,
one of whom is no doubt a broker. This symbolizes
Hongkong as the meeting ground of British and
Chinese traders, but to-dav Hongkong is more
than that, and when the device comes to die revised
room will have to be found for a symbol of the
Colony as a bond of union for Eastern and Western
culture. But the object of this talk is to concen-
trate upon Hongkong as the junction of British
and Chinese trade.
The early days of the Colony were troublesome,
for which the unhealthy climatic conditions were
partly responsible. There was constant friction
between the business community and the Govern-
ment and between the latter and the Chinese
officials in Canton. Twelve British mercantile
houses and six Parsee firms had cast in their lot
with the new Colony, but none of them seemed
to have much confidence in its future. Some of
the British firms have survived to this day and it
is amusing to read that a partner in one of these
firms confessed that if he and his colleagues had
not sunk so much money in buildings they would
have packed up and left the Colony. This was
8
The Hong Kong Radio Review


Sir Alexander Matheson of Jardine, Matheson &
Co., who told a Parliamentary Committee in 1847
that in his opinion what was left of trade in Hofig-
kong would be crushed by the burden of a Crown
Colony. Although Sir Alexander might appear
pessimistic I have no doubt that his first-hand
information of conditions in Hongkong enlightened
the Parliamentary Committee for the ultimate
benefit of the Colony. At any rate the young
Colony struggled on, and as the town of Victoria
began to take shape and buildings went up business
expanded with the demand for overseas require-
ments to supplement the meagre supplies of local
material. As early as 1849 (when the Gold Rush
started) Hongkong had become the embarkation
point for emigrants from the Southern Provinces
seeking a living overseas and, according to Mrs.
Winifred Wood’s recently published “ Brief His-
tory of Hongkong,” no less than 44 ships left
Hongkong for California in 1851. The outbreak
of the Taiping Rebellion a year or two later led
to the first of the many invasions of Hongkong
by refugees from China and this led to a further
growth in the emigration traffic, not only with
California but also with Australia, the Straits
Settlements and the West Indies. The scattering
of Chinese in so many parts of the world Avas
ultimately of great value to Hongkong for by their
industry most of these emigrants acquired consi-
derable means which allowed them to remit funds
in ever-increasing volume to their relatives in
South China. Thus Avas built up an invisible
export which has formed an important part of the
economic structure of the Colony.
The “Troubles”
Political differences with Canton and the
seizure of the Lorcha Arrow in 1856 led to an
outbreak of hostilities which Avas temporarily
terminated by the Treaty of Tientsin only to break
out again tAA’o years later. It was about this time
that The Times came out with its denunciation of
Hongkong as a “ noisy, bustling, quarrelsome and
discontented little Island.” But although relations
between the mercantile community and Government
officials were lacking in harmony, prosperity was
round the corner. It is true that the merchants
felt, as they have felt so many times since, that
they had practically reached the end of all things.
They were particularly incensed at the interruption
of native shipping, Avhich AA'as the direct result of
the organization of the Chinese Imperial Maritime
Customs under Mr. H. A. Lay, and they decided
that the time had come to form a Chamber of
Commerce. The idea was that representations to
the Governor and the British Minister could be
made more effectively by a corporate body than
by the feAV leading merchants Avho had hitherto
sent joint protests from time to time. At any
rate the first act of the new Chamber, of Avhich
the Chairman Avas Mr. Alexander Percival of
Jardine, Matheson & Co., Avas to send to the Home
Government a Memorial on the working of the
system of the Inspectorate of Customs in China.
An indication of the prosperity of the Sixties
was the raising of a fund to assist Lancashire
Cotton operatives and the spate of public and
semi-public buildings which, according to G. R.
Sayer, “ marks the climax of the munificence of
the great mercantile houses.” All these memorials
of the past mentioned by Sayer are now no more —
the Clock Tower, the City Hall, the City Hall
fountains, and the Sailors’ Home at West Point.
But one memorial of the decade, although not
exactly public property, still stands. That is the
Hongkong & Shanghai Banking Corporation, which
was founded in 1865 by a number of the leading
merchants who were not satisfied with the service
rendered by the branches of banking institutions
with headquarters far away from Hongkong. It
was a bold decision but one which has been
thoroughly justified, despite the Bank’s somewhat
chequered beginning. The merchants of the
sixties not only had wealth and courage but they
had a generous champion in Sir Hercules Robinson,
the then Governor. At a farewell banquet Sir
Hercules told the company that before he set out
for Hongkong he had been warned that the mer-
chants were all smugglers and the officials either
pirates or something worse. After five years’
experience he was able to state, according to
Sayer’s book, that “ the mercantile community
are proverbial not only for commercial integrity
but for their boundless liberality and hospitality.”
Business Slump
Unfortunately the departure of Sir Hercules
Bobinson was followed by a serious business slump
and the ambitious programme of public works in
course of execution landed the Colony in an
alarming deficit. This necessitated raising fresh
revenue and the Stamp Ordinance introduced by
the new Governor, Sir Richard MacUonnell, in-
curred the fierce opposition of the Chamber of
Commerce. The trade depression seems to have
affected the temper of the mercantile community,
for not only was it aggrieved with the Hongkong
Government but it came to the conclusion that the
British Minister in Peking “ appeared to show
great want of sympathy with the British merchants
whose interests it was his duty to defend.” A
year later the Chamber of Commerce proceedings
mention a discussion in Parliament on China
affairs and reference is made to the “retrogressive
policy towards China adopted by the British
Government.” At this point I can’t refrain from
mentioning that in recording this in a review of
the Chamber’s history on the occasion of its jubilee
in 1911 the then Chairman, the late Mr. E. A.
Hewett, commented: “After 40 years these state-
ments unfortunately still hold good to an alarming
extent.”
By 1870 the Colony seems to have been on the
road to recovery after the slump and it is probable
9
The Hong Kong Radio Review


that the opening- of the Suez Canal had already
begun to have its effect. The currency question
was exercising- the minds of business people, as
there was a serious shortage of Mexican dollars
and trade was handicapped by the number of
heavily chopped dollars in circulation necessitating-
the weighing of all coin passing from hand to
hand. The Chamber advocated the re-opening of
the Mint, which had had a brief career during the
sixties, but the Government declined to accept the
proposal and bade the merchants await the arrival
of the new British Trade Dollar, which did not
appear until some seventeen or eighteen years later.
Period of Development
Unfortunately the historical records of Hong-
kong dry up by the time we come to the ’Bos.
There is no four-volumed “ Chronicles ” such as
H. B. Morse compiled in connection with the East
India Company’s trade in China, and G. 11, Saver’s
scholarly “ Hongkong ” reaches an abrupt con-
clusion in 1865. The records of the Chamber of
Commerce are meagre in the extreme and no one
seems to have written the equivalent of Hunter’s
“ Fan Kwae in Canton.” But we know that
during the ’Bos there was considerable building
development going on and that Sir Paul Chafer
was proclaming his faith in the future of the
Colony. Many of the Colony’s public companies
were being formed and the question of registration
of Chinese partnerships was ventilated for the first
but by no means the last time.
Bi-metalism is a subject which nowadays is as
dead as the dodo, but in the late ’Bos and early
’9os it was very much alive. Whether the argu-
ments of the merchants of those days were more
sound than those of their successors in the 1930 s
cannot be discovered, but the drop in the value of
the Hongkong dollar from 3/5 to 1/11 between
1891 and 1894 was serious enough to provoke
discussion of the silver question from all angles.
In 1892 the Chamber of Commerce passed a resolu-
tion to the effect that “ H.M. Government be
urged to take such steps as may be possible in
conjunction with other Governments to lessen if
not remove the serious uncertainty which existed
in exchange between silver and gold.” The
resolution was telegraphed to the London Chamber
of Commerce but there is no trace of the reply,
if there was one. As we know nature was allowed
to take its course until we reached the age of
managed currencies.
Towards the end of the nineties the Home
Government, inspired no doubt by Joseph Cham-
berlain, the first great Colonial Secretary, began
to pay serious attention to the progress being
made by foreign nationals in developing trade with
China. For many years past German merchants
had played a prominent part in the trade of
Hongkong and were associated with many local
banking and commercial enterprises. By 1897
Japan, fresh from its successful war with China,
was beginning to look to the China market to
absorb its surplus manufactures. In that year
Lancashire showed concern about its piece-goods
market in the Far East and a mission, sponsored
by the Blackburn Chamber of Commerce, arrived
to investigate. This mission, which made a
hazardous journey from the Yangtze provinces
overland to Wuchow and thence to Canton, collected
some valuable information about markets in the
interior and rendered a comprehensive survey which
was brought to light again when the British
Economic Mission of 1930/1 visited the Far East.
The records of the Chamber of Commerce mention
a Commercial Mission headed by Lord Charles
Beresford, M.P., who addressed a crowded meeting
in the City Hall in 1899 and according to contem-
porary reports ‘ ‘ preached the gospel of the open
door, a fair field and no favour for all.”
The New Century
The first decade of the new Century included
the Boxer Rising, the Russo-Japanese War and
the events which led up to the Revolution of 1911,
all of which had their effect on Hongkong. The
proceedings of the Chamber were mainly concerned
with the revision of the Chinese Customs Tariff
and the Mackay Commercial Treaty of 1903, but
the period was one which held out promise of a
vast expansion of foreign trade through the deve-
lopment of railway systems then in course of
construction or at the concession stage. China
with its potential mineral wealth and natural
resources seemed a likely field for capital invest-
ment on the one hand and on the other appeared
to offer limitless opportunities for the machinery
and surplus manufactures of the West. By this
time the trade of the Colony had been transformed
from the simple exchange basis of the forties, when
silk and tea were traded for Jlpium and Brummagem
ware. It was not until Avell on into the latter
half of the 19th century that Britain made big-
strides with its export industries, but by the time
the 20th century was reached Hongkong had
become an entrepot not only for the simple needs
of the Chinese consumer, but also for many luxuries
or semi-luxuries which were demanded by Chinese
who had come under the influence of a •Western
standard of living. China as a market called for
new methods of approach, and between 1910 and
1920 Hongkong had become the base of a number
of British and foreign concerns which did not
require the aid of merchants and dealers but built
up their own sales and distributing organisations
in the interior. Oil, Soap, Tobacco, Chemicals
and Canned Milk were among the commodities
which for many years had been handled by mer-
chants but were now being turned over to the
manufacturers’ own personnel.
The four years of the Great War was a period
during which the trade of the Colony rose to the
crest of a boom. Local merchants were given the
10
The Hong Kong Radio Review


privilege of liquidating the business of their Ger-
man rivals and many of them acquired a valuable
addition to their normal turnover. Then the
demand for China produce for the Allied countries
increased enormously and towards the end of the
war the Colony derived much profit from the
transhipment trade in rice, sugar and other com-
modities. Between 1916 and early 1920 exchange
rose from 1/11 to 6/2 and the volume of import
trade reached a very high sterling figure. As was
to be expected, this was too good to last and the
world-wide post-war slump hit Hongkong severely.
After a year or two of stagnation trade showed
signs of recovery when the Strike-boycott of 1925
administered another disastrous blow to the Colony,
the effects of which were felt for many years
afterwards.
Industrialization
Of recent years the industrialization of the
Colony has proceeded apace. The older industries,
such as ship-building and repairing, rope-making,
cement manufacture and sugar refining, had all
been established under British management at
various times during the latter half of the 19th
century. Since the last war of 1914/18 Chinese
enterprise, aided in many cases by British capital,
has developed important industries in knitted-wear,
torch-cases and batteries, rubber footwear, felt
hats and numerous other articles. This expansion
of the commerce of the Colony has compensated
for the considerable decline in the import trade
and has placed Hongkong in a position to con-
tribute to the production of war supplies required
by the Empire east of Suez.
Towards the end of the last world war the
then Governor brought down upon himself the
wrath of the Unofficial Members because of a
reference to “Giants of the Past,” implying that
they, the then Unofficials, were but puny folk. At
the risk of making invidious distinctions amongst
the business community of the past century, and
present company always excepted, I should like
to conclude my talk by referring to three indivi-
duals who loomed large in the business life of the
Colony. Mr. William Keswick was the taipan of
•Tardine, Matheson & Co. for many years, and was
easily the outstanding man of his day, which
ranged from 1862 to 1886. He was Chairman of
the Chamber of Commerce for a total period of
eight years and his name is associated with many
charitable and social movements to which the
maturing Colony gave birth. Sir Thomas Jackson
was Chief Manager of the Hongkong & Shanghai
Banking Corporation from 1876 to 1902, with a
break in the early ’9os. He was the first repre-
sentative of the Chamber of Commerce on the
Legislative Council and he was foremost in guiding
the destiny not only of the Bank but of the Colony.
I can testify to his loveable character from my
personal experience in a very humble capacity, but
I could also quote the opinion of some of his
contemporaries for his stout heart and shrewd
commonsense during one of the blackest periods of
the Colony’s history. The third and last of the
trio was Sir Paul Chater, who served Hongkong
publicly and privately for more than 50 years and
whose yision and unbounded faith was responsible
among other things for the development of the Kow-
loon Wharf Company and the growth of the ship-
building industry. These three men, at any rate,
deserve our gratitude for what Hongkong is to-day.
ANGLO-CHINESE
CO-OPERATION
PAST, PRESENT AND FUTURE
By Hon. Sir Robert H. Kotewall, Kt.,
C.M.G., LL.D.
CNNE hundred years ago, Hong Kong was a bare
island, with a few fishing villages scattered
around its base. To-day it is a great seaport, a
commercial city of world-wide scope, a busy
entrepot, and a place of unsurpassed scenic beauty.
If some Kip Van Winkle of the island, fallen asleep
a century ago, were now to emerge from his long
hibernation,” he would be unable to recognise
the place as he last saw it. Then, if was a barren
island, with scant vegetation and a tiny popula-
tion. Now, it is a city of imposing structures;
of great shipyards and wharves; of wide roads
along which traffic ceaselessly pours; of cars, buses,
trams and ferries; of teeming human concourse;
of a great habitation set amid wooded hillsides and
fronting on a harbour on whose waters lie ships
from tlie seven seas.
A magical transformation it would appear to
our Kip Van Winkle. But when we, witli the
knowledge denied to him, inquire how this wonder-
fid change has been wrought, we see it as an
achievement made possible by a hundred years of
co-operation between the British and the Chinese.
The British, with their enterprise, foresight and
initiative, and the Chinese, with their capacity for
hard work, patience and adaptability, have created
the Hong Kong of to-day. Above all, these two
peoples display in common the qualities of integrity
and fair dealing. The old truism that “the word
of a Chinese is his bond ” is equally applicable to
the Englishman.
Within the space of a short talk, it is not
possible to set forth in detail all the manifold
aspects of this century of co-operative efforts. I
shall therefore restrict myself to a brief mention
of certain departments of the communal activity
which has made Hong Kong what it is.
In trade and commerce, Hong Kong ranks
second only to Shanghai among the great cities of
the East. In shipping it is one of the greatest
ports of the world. Through it have passed the
11
The 'Hong Kong Radio Review


products of South China, in transit to the four
quarters of the earth; through it have passed, in
their turn, commodities of all kinds, coming* from
the outer world to the markets of China. In the
counting houses and business offices of Hong Kong,
British merchants and Chinese men of business
have gone about the daily task of administering
and enlarging this ceaseless traffic of merchandise.
Initiative and resource have been forthcoming from
both; and it is not too much to say that the com-
mercial wisdom upon which Hong Kong has been
able to draw has been of a quality seldom surpassed
elsewhere.
The same co-operation has been apparent in
the financial, banking and insurance activities
which are the necessary accompaniments of trading
on the large scale. The stately and imposing
headquarters of the premier bank of the East, a
house wffiose transactions are world-wide in their
range, stands, as a symbol of British financial
strength, alongside the offices of other powerful
British banking institutions. Their Chinese fel-
lows, not slow to emulate the British bankers, have
set up on western models their own banking in-
stitutions, and have taken their due place in the
sphere of finance. The many Chinese banks, run
on traditional Chinese lines, have also played and
are playing an important part.
An Industrial Centre
Hong Kong is not merely a trading and
financial city: it is also an industrial centre. The
two commercial dockyards, of which the Colony is
justly proud, are capable of building ocean-going
vessels and ships of war. There are other large-
scale industrial enterprises, such as sugar-refining,
cement-manufacture and rope-making. To-day
the Colony possesses over a thousand manufacturing
concerns, large and small; and it is the Chinese
who have been principally responsible for the
striking development which has led to the export
of huge quantities of rubber shoes, electric torches
and many other commodities to all parts of the
world. The great variety of Hong Kong’s manu-
factures must have come as a surprise to many
who visited the recent Trade Exhibition. Steel
helmets, bicycles, even machinery, are among the
many items which are now included in local pro-
duction. It is my view that Hong Kong’s industry
is still in its infancy, and that there exists here
the potentiality of immense expansion.
While the co-partnership, if I may so call it,
of British and Chinese has prevailed in the business
world, it has been even more striking and more
close-knit in the public and social life of the com-
munity. One of the most gratifying features of
the Colony’s history is the spirit of mutual help
always shown by British and Chinese in social and
charitable work. There has never been a cause
affecting the one which has not called forth from
the other the most profound sympathy and support.
In public life and in the professions, Chinese
and British have displayed a spirit of healthy and
friendly rivalry. Side by side with their British
associates, Chinese hold prominent positions as
barristers and solicitors, as engineers and architects,
as doctors and educators, all contributing their
quota to the well-being of the community. Even
in the churches Chinese clergymen, in common
with their brethren from overseas, minister to the
spiritual needs of the Colony, and one of them
holds to-day the high office of an Assistant Bishop.
Education
In the sphere of education, Sino-British col-
laboration has been notable. Foremost among our
educational institutions is our University, which
was founded by the vision of a Governor, the
munificence of a Parsee, and the generosity of
British and Chinese in Hong Kong and elsewhere,
with the object of bringing together within its
four walls the learning of the West and the
culture of the East. In educational advancement,
whether at the University or in colleges and schools,
Chinese and British colleagues have worked to-
gether, each giving of his special knowledge, for
the common good. The system of education that
lias been in vogue in Hong Kong has been a distinct
boon to both China and Britain. Students from
our University and schools have held, and are
holding, prominent positions in the service of the
Government of China, and in various professions
in all parts of the world.
In the realm of sport, the Colony’s playing-
fields are eloquent witness to the degree in which
athletic and recreational pursuits have become a
common interest of the two peoples. The great
crowds of spectators who flock to watch the spirited
contest in a football match are proof of the lively
interest which sport now arouses among the Chinese.
This development has promoted physical fitness
and the spirit of team-work and fair play. Sport
has, indeed, done much to bring the two races
together.
But it is not in sport alone that a closer social
relationship lias been developed. On the social
side, much has been achieved in the strengthening
of British and Chinese friendship and the pro-
motion of understanding, especially in the last two
decades. Social intercourse between the two
peoples has been much more frequent than in days
past; and, as they meet each other more, so they
understand each other better.
In all the activities and developments of which
I have spoken, the Press has had an important role
to play. These organs of public opinion, Chinese
or English, have never failed to lend help to a
good cause, and the influence they have exercised
has been wholesome. To their restraint and
moderate attitude has been due, in no small measure,
the good behaviour of the people here during these
four trying and troubled years. The Press here
12
The Ilong Kong Radio Review


is, indeed, worthy of the great traditions of a
responsible profession.
Thus far I have spoken of the co-operation of
the two peoples—British and Chinese. No less
productive of good has been the relationship be-
tween Government and people. In this matter,
one all-important factor has been the principle of
giving to the Chinese community a voice in govern-
ment through representation on the Executive and
Legislative Councils. In 1925 the Executive
Council was enlarged to include a member repre-
sentative of the Chinese community; while on the
Legislative Council, there are three Chinese mem-
bers. In the Urban Council, adequate representa-
tion for the Chinese lias also been provided. These
provisions in the Colony’s constitution are im-
portant; but still more important is the practice
followed of consulting responsible Chinese opinion
before a decision is made.
Good Citizenship
It is this spirit of co-operation and mutual
confidence that has more than anything else won
from the Chinese people of Hong Kong their loyal
support and willing service. The Chinese have
consistently displayed their understanding of what
is involved in good citizenship. They have always
been law-abiding, and faithful to their civic
obligations. They have never failed to rise to the
occasion when their services and their monetary
contributions were needed. In the Great War,
large numbers of them served as Special Constables,
Street Guards, Cable and Mail Censors, and in
many other departments of emergency service.
They also gave liberally to the war funds of those
days. In the present war, in addition to con-
tributing the greater part of the revenue, both
ordinary and special, they have come out in large
numbers to serve in the A.E.P. Department, the
Auxiliary Fire Service, the Police Reserve, and
St. John’s Ambulance Brigade. Even more than
in the last war, leading members of the Chinese
community are serving on many committees en-
trusted with responsible and important tasks con-
nected with local defence.
On the other side, the Authorities have, in
full measure, repaid the loyal and faithful service
of the people with the blessing of good government
and stability. The effect of such beneficent rule
is seen daily. The enumeration of specific items
would be a long one; but I may refer to one
instance of Government’s solicitude in time of
great need. I speak of the time of economic stress
which accompanied the general strike and boycott
of 1925, when substantial financial assistance from
the Government was needed to prevent a business
debacle. The Government, after having heard
representations from the Chinese business com-
munity, immediately cabled the Secretary of State
for the Colonies recommending the grant of a
loan of $30,000,000. In the space of sixteen
hours, approval was received, and the situation was
saved. The Chinese have never to this day ceased
to remember this timely and magnificent gesture.
The traditional and long-standing policy of
Hong Kong to give sanctuary to those seeking it
lias been a powerful factor in cementing the friend-
ship between the British and the Chinese, not only
in the Colony but also in China. The Immigration
Ordinance, which has just come into operation, does
not involve any abandonment of this policy. The
principle still obtains; only the method of its
application has been modified.
This, then, is a brief recounting of the story
of Sino-British co-operation during a century of
Hong Kong’s history. It demonstrates what will-
ing and active co-operation can achieve. It also
bears out the truth of the English proverb, “ Many
hands make light work,” and of the Chinese saying,
“Two hearts united can sever metal.”
Hopes for the Future
Now, let us cast our eyes towards the future.
To my mind, co-operation between the two peoples
is to-day more abundantly called for than ever
before. To what activities, it may be asked, can
such co-operation be primarily directed? From
the social point of view, I believe that there is
yet much to be done in the clearing of slums, in
the improvement of the health and fitness of the
community, and in the betterment of the condi-
tions of life of the people.
On the business side, the development of in-
dustry seems to me to be the most important of
all future co-operative enterprises. It is possible
that few of my hearers may have realised to the
full how many and how great are the special
advantages available to Hong Kong as an industrial
centre; but the time allotted to me permits the
mention of only a few of these. The geographical
position of Hong Kong affords ready access to large
and growing markets. Banking and financial
organisation, built on solid foundations, and ripe
in experience and knowledge, are at our service.
Moreover, there is always here an inexhaustible
supply of efficient and low-priced labour, which
is an asset of the greatest value. Above all, Hong
Kong is free from recurrent political, and con-
sequential economic, disturbances, and enjoys the
benefits of a stable government which affords to
all peace and security.
It would be neither possible nor appropriate,
in this brief and general talk, to consider the steps
which could be taken to inaugurate such an ex-
pansion. Suffice it for me to say this; the natural
advantages are there, the money is there, the
workers are there, and the spirit of enterprise is
as strong as ever. The Government, I know, are
prepared to give to industry every facility and
encouragement. It remains for the enterprising
to go ahead.
In this task, the co-operation of other sections
of the community will, of course, be necessary as
13
The Hong Kong Radio Review


it has been in the past; but the British and the
Chinese will naturally play the major and deter-
mining role. Fortified by the knowledge of what
has been achieved by these two peoples in the
hundred years that have passed, I look to their
future co-operation in the years to come with high
hope and abiding confidence.
PORTUGUESE
PIONEERING
A HUNDRED YEARS
OF HONG KONG
By J. P. Bray a.
OK this historic occasion the question suggests
itself: Is there any evidence of a direct link
between the Colony of the past and that of the
present? The answer is forthcoming in the fact
that to the Portuguese community must be assigned
the honour of a lineage created by four generations
in the Colony, commencing a century ago on the
transfer of the Superintendency of British Trade
from Macao to Hong Kong.
When the “Hong” merchants retired from
Canton they went to Macao. Their stay was not
of long duration, however. Relations with the
southern provincial capital became more strained,
and a second move reflected the British policy soon
after. It was on the 27th February, 1841, that
Sir Henry Pottinger changed over from Macao to
Hong Kong the whole of the staff of the Superin-
tendency of Trade. To this change must be
attributed in large measure the evolution of events
that altered completely the intercourse of foreign
relations with China. The Trade Superintendency
not only saw the wisdom of the transfer of the
administrative body, but they also decided to bring
along with them the personnel for the machinery
to continue the trade that within the next century
witnessed such gigantic strides and unpredictable
achievements, from which the Chinese stood so
largely to gain. Thus it was that a minimum
numerical staff accompanied the British pioneers
to Hong Kong in the persons, among others, of
Portuguese young men eminently qualified as
interpreters in three different languages and for
essential appointments. On the 16th April, 1850,
the Government advertised for a person competent
to interpret in the Malayan, Hindustani, and
Portuguese languages. The teaching of these
languages was provided at that time by the learned
educationists of the Society of Jesus in Macao.
It is a pleasing fact, singularly happy to record
in retrospect, that a petition to the Holy Father
from the Portuguese community of Hong Kong
for the Jesuits to start their good work in Hong
Kong was forwarded through the late Bishop
Pozzoni in 1919 to the Sacred Congregation of the
Propaganda Fide in Rome. The humble prayers
of the petitioners were granted. In due course
Hong Kong was fortunate to welcome the Jesuits,
who later founded the Ricci Hall hostel as a
valuable adjunct to the University of Hong Kong.
Earliest Portuguese Residents
Two families of Portuguese residents can be
traced for four generations back with root and
branch in Hong Kong. The senior member of
the first family entered the service of the Crown
in 1836 in the office of the Superintendency of
British Trade in China, and from May, 1847, until
his death in 1875 was Clerk of the Councils and
first clerk in the office of the Colonial Secretary.
After his death his high qualifications were placed
on record in the Legislative Council, which ex-
pressed its appreciation of the private worth of the
deceased and offered its condolence to his widow
and family, for whom a pension was voted. He
was at the time the oldest public servant in the
Colony, his official career being one of thirty-four
years.
A daughter of this pioneer resident entered
the novitiate of the Canossian Sisters of Charity
and took the veil in 1878, assuming the name in
religion of Sister Anita; she died here at the
advanced age of ninety on the 3rd January, 1938.
A younger brother of the oldest civil servant
was also in the employ of the Hong Kong Govern-
ment. The honourable association so early formed
reached its culminating point upon the appointment
of a grandson as the second among the Portuguese
to be honoured with membership in the Legislative
Council in 1937; he began his second term of
office last Friday. In private life he occupies a
position of prominence as a member of the v ßar in
the Supreme Court of Hong Kong.
The head of the second Portuguese family to
land on the hospitable shores of Hong Kong-
exercised his activities in a different direction.
Like the first family, the fourth generation of his
descendants to-day claim continuous residence.
The founder of this family also had doings with
the Government. Also from Macao, he left that
colony in the early ’4o’s of the last century with
his small printing-plant and set up business in
Hong Kong. The printer colonial settler early
found his reward when he was appointed printer
to the Government and later printer and publisher
of the Hong Kong Government Gazette. To this
day the firm name perpetuates that of the founder,
and with unfailing regularity week after week the
official publication appears bearing the firm’s
imprint. It was during the administration of Sir
Richard Graves Macdonnell that the Governor
gave expression to his appreciation of the firm in
stating that so long as the firm should continue
to give satisfaction they would remain the printers
to the Government in perpetuam.
14
The Hong Kong Radio Review


Member of the Legislative Council
When the constitution of the Colony was
changed early in 1929 and four additional members
were appointed to the Council, of the two unofficial
members the Governor’s choice fell on one Portu-
guese. After the new member had been sworn
in, Sir Cecil dementi, speaking of the Government
appointee, said: “ I welcome the first representative
of the Portuguese community to sit in this Council.
We all of us appreciate the value of the Portuguese
community here resident and it is a pleasure to
us that the new member (who was mentioned by
name), who in a very literal sense is a son of Hong
Kong, should inaugurate the representation of that
community in the Legislative Council.” Before
the retirement of the first Portuguese member
from the Legislative Council in 1937, at the con-
clusion of his second term of office, the honour of
the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire
was conferred on him. An earlier conferment of
Honorary Membership of the same Order was to
another Portuguese who distinguished himself on
the occasion of a piratical attack on a coastal
steamer in which he served as an engineer.
Urban Council
On the Sanitary Board, now reconstituted into
the Urban Council, Portuguese members have held
their seats since the 18th February, 1916, succes-
sively on election, Government nomination, and
again on unopposed candidature. The last election
in 1940 was keenly contested as a trial of strength
between two Portuguese candidates, the new mem-
ber opposing the elder’s re-election. A large
number of Portuguese electors went to the polls,
and the successful candidate, who is a medical
graduate of the University of Hong Kong, was
elected by a comfortable majority.
Convent of the Ganossian Sisters
For a nominal consideration a leading Portu-
guese resident in the 1870’s assigned a piece of
land on Caine Road to the Canossian Order of
Kuns and so enabled them to establish their first
footing on the Island in a building of their own.
This ground was subsequently enlarged by the gift
of another Portuguese gentleman—a brother of the
first donor—of a large tract of land for the large
school and orphanage so widely known to-day as
a home of Christian charity, teaching and service.
“ Soccorros Mutuos”
Self-help is not an unknown quality among
the Portuguese. A society for mutual aid is
maintained by small monthly contributions from
members for strictly limited assistance to fellow-
members in need during their life-time and to their
widows and children at death. Provision is also
made for the education of deceased members’
children. As a result of the generosity of the
wife of an original member an endowment was
made for two scholarships tenable in the University
of Hong Kong. This endowment has borne good
fruit.
The Society of St. Vincent de Paul claims
amongst its founder-members persons of Portuguese
nationality, who carry out much useful charitable
work among the very poor, irrespective of class,
race or creed.
Portuguese in China
With the march of time the Portuguese of
Hong Kong became a community apart; but they,
nevertheless, steadfastly adhered to their religious
faith, loyalty to the sovereignty of their govern-
ment and obedience to the laws and discipline of
the local administration. In later years their
numbers have remained more or less constant. In
his hook on “Affairs of China” (p. 79) Sir Eric
Teichmann writes that “ there are still considerable
communities of worthy Portuguese at Shanghai
and other Treaty ports of China.” It is in Hong
Kong, however, that they have established their
homes in the largest numbers, being engaged
mostly in clerical posts and forming an essential
part of the banking, commercial, industrial and
shipping life of this Colony. Because of inadequate
remuneration and unattractive service conditions
the Portuguese have abandoned official for more
lucrative unofficial employment.
Alien Competition
The entry into Hong Kong of alien immigrants
in increasing numbers during recent years has
intensified the struggle for existence. This is
evident in all fields of labour, technical as well
as clerical. The existence must be supposed of
an unwritten law which aims at equitable distribu-
tion of employment. This unwritten law should
be made to operate in such a way that those
domiciled in Hong Kong, including Portuguese
residents, should not be deprived of their means
of livelihood by newcomers to the Colony.
Belilios Terrace
The enterprise of the Portuguese led to the
opening up of new districts on the Island dnrinn
the first quarter of the present century. Until
the late Mr. E. R. Belilios acquired the whole
eastern hill on Robinson Road, on which the Jewish
millionaire built several terraces of small four-
roomed semi-detached houses ostensibly for lease
to the families of salaried Portuguese clerks, they
took un residence in the district common!v known
as “Mato Moiro ” —“ Mahomedan Hill” —which
derived its name from the presence of the Mosque
on Shelly St. Ko vestige of Belilios Terrace
exists to-day.
In Pokfulam the premises of the Dairv Farm
Co.’s dairy and offices were first owned by a
Portuguese merchant.
In the western district of Saiyingpun the head
of a Portuguese family noted for their taste in
15
The Hong Kong Radio Review


flower and vegetable gardening found room for the
development of his hobby on land on which he
erected a bungalow for his family residence near
the present King’s College on Bonham Road. A
son of the same gentleman was one of those who
interested a syndicate of his nationals in a scheme
for the development of Homuntin. An avenue in
this district bears his family name.
Kowloon Settlement
Soon after the cession of Kowloon a few enter-
prising Portuguese individuals of adventurous
spirit set out to try their fortunes across the
harbour. On the foreshore of Yaumati were
planted the first efforts to colonise the mainland.
The Portuguese were thus the pioneers of the
Kowloon settlement.
In those early years of the British occupation
of Kowloon there was a fine sandy beach in place
of the present boulevard on Chatham Road. The
speaker well remembers the days when he and his
boyhood friends went swimming together from the
white beach at Kowloon Bay. A long avenue of
banana trees stretched from the bottom of the
pathway to the Water Police Station down to the
present site of the Peninsula Hotel Garage, along
the shore of the bay, since reclaimed, on which
the Peninsula Hotel, Holt’s Wharf, and the Railway
Station stand to-day.
During the last quarter of the XlXth century,
Portuguese Crown lessees figured largely in the
rent roll of the Land Office as owners of garden
lots (since converted into building lots) scattered
throughout the Tsimshatsui and Kowloon Point
areas. The majority were content to retain their
garden-lot holdings, but one with firm faith in the
future prosperity of Kowloon under British rule
built his family’s private residence in the first of
a row of small terraced houses known as “ Rose
Terrace.” He continued in occupation until his
death and the whole property was disposed of only
after his widow had died. Demolition of this
block of houses on Nathan Road opposite the
Peninsula Hotel commenced on the first day of this
year.
Kowloon Tong
Kowloon Tong was the district next thought
of to provide housing accommodation for the
middle-class Portuguese. An ambitious building
project was started during the hectic days of the
short-lived land boom in 1922, which was followed
by the collapse resulting from the strike and boy-
cott on the 22nd June, 1925. That was a disastrous
year for the Portuguese in Hong’ Kong. Many
savings of a life-time vanished into thin air on that
fateful afternoon in mid-June. "V aliant efforts at
recouping lost fortunes are being put forth, with
some hope that they might be recovered in course
of time.
“Garden Estate”
The first idea of a Garden Estate in the
heart of the European residential area of Kowloon
belongs to an elder member of the Portuguese
community. A younger member of his family
designed the engineering part of the project. The
ground, or rather the lofty hills in their virgin
state selected for the extensive building project,
struck one as being forbidding and unsuitable.
The scheme had its beginnings during the world-
wide economic depression from which Hong Kong
did not escape. It is undeniable that the Garden
Estate” scheme was an ambitious one; but with
substantial financial backing its success was assured
from the beginning.
Police Reserve and Volunteer Corps
Men of the Portuguese community shewed
their loyalty to the Colony by serving as Police
Reservists in the Great War of 1914-1918, and
several hundreds have enrolled for service in the
local volunteer defence force. They undergo
training in g’ood spirit, and are noted for theii
keenness in the various activities in which they
are engaged. Young women are serving in the
St. John Ambulance Brigade. At air-raid precau-
tions work and other essential defence services the
Portuguese are also well represented.
In social life the Portuguese maintain their
own Club in a building that is their property.
The Club Lusitano is an -old-time institution and
is the meeting place on all national and ceremonial
occasions. In the field of sport the Portuguese
perform well at many outdoor and indoor games,
notably football, lawn bowls, aquatics, cricket,
baseball, tennis, badminton, and billiards. In
open contests they win their laurels modestly and
accept defeat in the spirit of true sportsmen.
Through the kindness of the Government they hold
under permit extensive grounds for a large, fine
club-house in King’s Park fittingly named the
Club de Recreio. The park is a statutory reser-
vation for recreative purposes only. The Club has
a mixed membership which is limited to the
Portuguese community.
In Arts
In fine arts the Portuguese excel at music,
drawing and painting. A senior member of the
Portuguese Section of the Hong Kong Volunteer
Defence Corps is well known for the excellence
of his drawing’s that adorn the stag’e and walls
on every occasion of a Volunteer reunion. This
Portuguese artist has followed in the footsteps of
16
The Hong Kong Radio Review


his father, the latter being- a worthy successor of
his talented grandfather, who was a pupil in
Macao of Chinnery, the distinguished British por-
trait and landscape painter. Until his death the
grandfather was responsible for the periodic re-
decoration of the dome of the Theatre Royal of
the old City Hall. He it was who painted much
of the stage scenery for the pantomime “Ali Baba
and the Forty Thieves,” presented with tremendous
success by the Amateur Dramatic Club. The
father of the present popular Colonel of the Hong
Kong Volunteer Defence Corps and a military
friend were the joint producers of the pantomime
fifty years ago.
Portuguese Language
It is matter for regret that the Portuguese
language suffers from neglected usage among the
local community. In this British colony English
is the language heard almost exclusively at school,
on the playing field, and in the office, and little
incentive is offered to the boys and girls of Portu-
guese families for the study of their mother tongue.
The language of Portugal is rich in beauty of
expression and in epic literature, and it is much
to be hoped that an earnest effort will be made
to restore it to general use among Portuguese
nationals in Hong Kong.
In business the Portuguese obtain positions
and remain in employment by virtue of attentive
devotion to duty. In the liberal professions, with
the founding of the Hong Kong University the
door was opened for them to the medical, engineer-
ing and legal professions. The University has
provided opportunities which were hitherto denied
them and available only to those fortunate few in
a -position to meet the cost of higher education
abroad. Above all, on St. Joseph’s College and
the Convent schools of the Canossian Institute the
community has successfully depended for the
elementary and secondary education that has
formed the basis of their moral, physical and
mental upbringing. To the Brothers of the
Christian Schools and the Sisters of the Canossian
Convents the Portuguese community owes a deep
debt of gratitude.
Conclusion
The leavening influence of higher education
among the Portuguese is making itself felt. There
is perceptible a broader outlook which induces
tolerance, sympathy and co-operation with com-
munities of other nationals in the Colony, divergent
in religious belief and practices, and in interests
and habits of thought. This influence must con-
tinue to work unhindered, so that a healthy and
happy frame of mind may develop to the betterment
of the Portuguese community, whose lives are
bound up in this Colony which they and their
fathers have had a share in building these past one
hundred years.
“UPON THIS ROCK . .
HISTORY OF THE
UNION CHURCH
By Rev. K. Mackenzie Dow.
THE earliest reference to the Church in Christian
literature is to be found, naturally enough,
within the covers of the New Testament itself.
And from the references we find there an interesting
fact impresses itself upon our minds, namely, that
the Church, in its infant days, was a house, or
household, institution. The first Christians were
accustomed to meet in the home of one of their
number, and there to hear the story of Jesus, and
to have His teaching declared to them. For
example, Paul, writing to the little Christian com-
munity in Colosse, closes his epistle with these
words, “ Salute . . . Nymphas, and the church
which is in his house.” Many years had yet to
pass before the followers of Christ were numerous
enough (or rich enough for that matter !) to justify
the raising of a building which could be set aside
solely for religious worship.
Bearing this point in mind it is interesting to
recall that the oldest church of our Colony had an
exactly similar beginning. When the first colonists
set foot on the island there was no church ready
built against their arrival, and no Minister esta-
blished and waiting to welcome them. For many
years previously, however, there had been Christian
missionaries in Canton, Macao, and the surround-
ing areas. Of these missionaries there was one,
James Eegge, a native of Huntly in Aberdeenshire,
who in later years was to become first Professor
of Chinese Language and Literature at the Univer-
sity of Oxford. Legge’s name is familiar to every
student of Chinese as the author of “ The Chinese
Classics,” “The Religions of China,” and many
other works. He was undoubtedly one of the most
outstanding figures of early Hongkong, not only
in matters missionary and ecclesiastical, but in
every matter that concerned the good relations be-
tween Hongkong and the local Chinese Government.
He knew the people intimately, he knew their
language and their customs, and what was more
important, he was one whom they respected and
trusted. The University of Oxford conferred a
Doctorate of Letters upon Legge for his scholar-
ship, but so far his labours on behalf of the Colony
have gone unrecognised and unrewarded. It was
Dr. I jegge who was the founder of Union Church,
and also its first Minister. But let Legge himself
tell in his own words the story of the church’s first
beginnings. Speaking of his arrival here, he tells
of how, “each Sunday morning about a dozen or
so people used to meet in my house, more as a
Bible Class than as an assembly for public wor-
ship.” From such humble origin did Union
Church take its rise, though it was not actually
until the year 1844 that these “ dozen or so people,”
by then no doubt strengthened by an increase in
17
The Hong Kong Radio Review


numbers, felt themselves to be in a position which
justified the building of a church.
All-Inclusive Congregation
In a community so small as Hongkong must
have been in those far-off days, it would have been
impossible for a church which was not all-inclusive
in its appeal to have existed. Differences of sect
and denomination simply had to be forgotten, and
they were. The name “Union” Church is no
misnomer, for then, as now, its congregations have
always been a united body of people . . . British,
Chinese, American, and Europeans of all nation-
alities, who meet to worship God together, irrespec-
tive of class or colour and the traditional form
of religion in which they may have been brought
up. This unity, for which the Churches are still
striving to-day, was something which the peculiar-
ities of their situation forced upon the Christians
of Hongkong a hundred years ago. But in addition
—and this must never be forgotten—it is also part
of the inheritance received from the London Mis-
sionary Society, whose servants are recruited from
every Church, but whose missionary policy has
ever been to preach a Christianity which is inde-
pendent of denomination and sect. Without this
Missionary Society’s support, financially and in
personnel, the Hongkong Union Church could never
have survived the fluctuations of fortune to which
it has been so often subjected in ninety odd years
of existence. We have already mentioned the
name of Dr. Legge as the founder of Union Church
and as a Sinologue of the first rank. Dr. Legge
was a servant of the London Missionary Society,
as was also Dr. Chalmers, of equal fame in Chinese
scholarship, and well known for his Dictionary and
Lis translations of the New Testament into Chinese.
Indeed, surveying the names of those who guided
the church through its infant days, one cannot
help but exclaim, “ There were giants in those
days ! ” for in addition to Drs. Legge and Chalmers,
Dr. Eitel was another who gave freely of his time
and labour. A trio of scholars such as these will
be hard to come by again. It was Dr. Eitel, who,
when financial difficulties beset the Church and
the handful of members were doubtful of their
ability to meet current expenses, offered to preach,
“without placing those attending under any
financial obligation whatsoever.” Remembering
how small the population of Hongkong must have
been in those days as compared with now, we can
appreciate the anxiety which the financial strain
of supporting a Minister must have caused. And
this despite the fact that salaries were small then
as compared with to-day. In 1847, for example,
the Committee of Management approved a proposal
that “A Minister be engaged from home, at a
salary of 1150 per month.”
From the first the preaching and pastoral work
of the church had been carried out by the mission-
aries of the London Missionary Society when they
were in a position to do so. But obviously such
an arrangement could not be carried on indefinitely,
and a time came when what was almost inevitably
bound to happen actually did happen. On one
occassion the following grave notice had to be read
to the congregation: “The Rev. Dr. Chalmers has
kindly consented to preach on Sunday, the 22nd
inst., but after that date the Managers have very
slight hopes of being able to obtain further sup-
plies for the pulpit. Faith in God and the
loyalty of a people can do much, however, and
even this threat of extinction was survived.
The Union Church
In its ninety odd years of existence the Union
Church has occupied 'three different sites, the first
being in Hollywood Road, where the original
church, as already mentioned, was erected in 1844.
Part of the cost of this building was defrayed by
generous donations received from Amoy, Singapore
and Penang, London also contributing its quota.
Twenty years later this site was given up, one of
the reasons stated being that owing to the increase
of people in the area, the noise had become so great
that services could not fittingly be conducted.
What noises were there then, we wonder, which
could compare in volume or compete with the
modern tramcars, buses, and the hooting of the
now übiquitous motor-car? It is the French who
declare that, “ the more things change the more
they are the same.” The face of Hongkong must
have changed out of all recognition since 18(50, but
noise, and the objectors to noise, are with us still.
Perhaps the unsavoury reputation which Hollywood
Road was by then acquiring was, however, an equal
reason for the transfer. The new church was built
on Staunton Street, on a site which had been
previously been occupied by St. Andrew s School,
and here the Union Chapel, as it was then called,
remained until 1890, when once again it removed,
this time to its present situation in Kennedy Road.
An old photograph taken of the Church and manse
as they were when first built shows the church
nestling among trees, with the thickly wooded
slopes of the Peak rising steeply behind it. Not
another house or building is to be seen, and no
doubt the slight pathway which can be dimly dis-
cerned is the present busy Kennedy Road. The
Peak Tramway is there, however, and to those of
you who travel up and down in it now, it may be
of interest to remark, in passing, that when Kennedy
Road Tram Station was first built, Union Church
contributed half the initial cost, as the station
mainly supplied the convenience of worshippers
coming down from the Peak. The noise of the
passing trams did not disturb the worshippers of
forty years ago, however, for even in the more
easy-going atmosphere of Hongkong a certain
amount of respect for the tradition of the Sabbath
day was observed. . . . The trams stopped
running during the hours of worship !
Rut if the face of Hongkong is changing wifh
the passing years human nature still seems to re-
main very much the same. A mournful note is
sounded (if under the circumstances a note of any
18
The Hong Kong Radio Review


kind can be sounded) by the fact that on one
occasion the Management Committee had to report
with regret to the congregation that the organ pipes
had been stolen ! But as to how the congregation
sang on that Sunday following the theft the records
are perhaps discreetly silent. Another extract
from those records of earlier days is slightly
ambiguous, if indeed not actually a libel on the
Minister. In reporting the introduction of gas-
lighting to the church, the notice continues,
“ Incandescent burners have also been fitted to the
gasaliers and these have rendered the Evening
Services much more bright and cheerful.” _ Is it
possible that the modern demand for “ Brighter
Services” is not so new a thing after all?
interesting Records
But perhaps it is from the Register of Baptisms
and Marriages that the enquiring mind can learn
most —especially if it brings a little imagination
to bear on the dry bones of the actual records. In
crabbed handwriting that has gone brown with age,
and on pages that are turning yellow with the
passing of the years, one can speculate on what
manner of children those were who were born here
ninety years ago. A\ hat happened to them in
after-life? And have they descendants here still
who follow in the way of their parents, the first
hard and hardy settlers of Hongkong? Is there
anyone alive here to-day, for example, who knows
aught of one Edward Thomas Henry Frederick
Patterson, son of Lieut. Patterson, who was baptised
at the old Union Ghapel, Hollywood Road, on
September 13th, 1846? And here is a Thomas
Morrison, with an asterisk after his name, and an
apologetic footnote at the bottom of the page,
written no doubt by the penitent pastor and objectly
confessing that in the actual naming of the child
he had inadvertently called him John! Did the
parents protest there and then, we wonder, or did
they wait till they had entered the vestry after the
service before pointing out the gravity of the
offence against an innocent child? And was John,
alias Thomas, silent while this outrage was being
perpetrated, or like so many children who have
less cause for grievance on such an occasion, did
he inform the world in baby fashion of the in-
justice? And what is the full story behind one
Baptismal entry which has this note; “So-and-So,
having adopted this child, and having promised to
educate her in the Christian faith, I have baptised
her.” The names of the adopting parents are
given, but in the space intended for the actual
parents there are two blanks. Not an orphan
surely, or otherwise there would have been no need
to omit the names of the real parents, but if not,
what then .... ? A waif with a tragic story
behind her? Who call tell now?
A cursory glance through the list of Marriages
reveals the same features of interest that turn one’s
thoughts back to the old-timers who were before
us. And perhaps it is here that we can see most
clearly the cosmopolitan nature of the Union
Church. Britons, Americans, Chinese, Germans,
Scandinavians, all have their place here, and again
there occur occasionally those strange footnotes
which arouse speculation among the curious.
What, for example, does this mean, coming as it
does after one entry, “This was a remarriage,
having no legal value. It was performed under
special circumstances? ” Well, judging from the
date, it is highly improbable that the contracting
parties can be alive to-day to tell us. But why
a “Remarriage”? . . . the sentimental celebra-
tion of a Silver Wedding perhaps? Or a parted
couple coming together again after a long separation ?
Here is jumping-off ground for the imaginatively-
minded, and no harm done. How democratic a
document is a Marriage Register! Here Europe
and Asia with all their different nationalities
mingle together on common ground, and plain
John Smith rubs shoulders with lordly Ludwig von
Zeppelin Obermuller. In its own way the Register
of Marriages in Hongkong Union Church is a
valuable book, for its records date much further
back in the Colony’s history than do the files which
are kept with the Registrar of Marriages in the
Supreme Court Building. Occasionally still, re-
quest comes from various parts of the world asking
for confirmation of marriages which took place here
nearly one hundred years ago.
Perhaps those of you who are listening feel
that this brief sketch contains very little of actual
history and speaks even less of the purpose for
which the Church stands. I hope this is not really
so. The leaven which the Church has brought to
the lump, small as it may be, has been of inestimable
value in the shaping of the Colony’s history and
in influencing its character. We are not dismayed
by the small amount we have accomplished here.
God can afford to be patient, for He is eternal
and a thousand years in His sight are but as
yesterday when it is gone. W 7 hat, then, of a
hundred years? We know too that the real power
of a people is in their faith, and we recall with
confidence the words of Thomas Carlyle, when he
delivered his Rectorial Address at the University
of Edinburgh: “I believe you will find in all
histories that religion has been at the head and
foundation-stone of them all, and that no nation
that did not contemplate this wonderful universe
with an awe-stricken feeling of reverence that there
was a great unknown Being superintending all
men in it . . . . no nation ever came to very
much, nor did any men either who forgot that.”
It was to remind the men and women of Hongkong
of this truth that the Union Church came into
being a hundred years ago, and it is for the same
purpose that it, and the other churches, still exist
to-day.
19
The Kong Kong Radio Review


COMMUNICATIONS
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE
LAST CENTURY
By R. P . Morris , M.lnst.R.E.
AVEEY cynical person has said that human
beings are endowed with the faculty of speech
for the purpose of disguising their thoughts. That
may be, but it is the ability to communicate
intelligence through either the spoken or written
word that fundamentally distinguishes mankind
from the rest of the animal world. And from the
earliest glimmerings of civilisation, right up to
the present day, communications have been the
life-blood of progress.
Early mankind was never content merely to
be articulate. His natural inquisitiveness, and
the needs of life, led to more material forms of
communications almost as old as speech itself.
He travelled in dug-out canoes, or sent messages
by the smoke of fires and the noise of drums. A r et
for thousands of years little improvement was made
in these methods. Ships became larger and faster,
and roads and coaches were built; but it was not
until we actually reach the century which we are
now commemorating that science and discovery
gave us the early forms of our present systems of
communications.
When this Colony was founded, the older
methods were still in use, and those leisurely times
gave little hint of the amazing changes which were
to revolutionise life and commerce. It then took
up to five months or more to reach Hong Kong
from Europe, or to send a letter. There were no
quicker methods—there were no such things as
telegraphs or cables.
Science Knocking at the Door
But this comfortable isolation was not to last
much longer. In the words of Michael Faraday;
“ Science was knocking at the door. In the
AVestern World scientists were playing with the
wonderful new electric telegraph, and it was not
long before they conceived the idea of extending
it to remote corners of the earth by means of sub-
marine cables. At first slow, progress later became
rapid, and by the time the Colony of Hong Kong
was twenty years old, 12,000 miles of submarine
cable had been laid in various parts of the world
(although it must be confessed that only a quarter
of it worked). Difficulties were great, but engi-
neers and financiers stuck to it, and the next ten
years brought their reward.
The first successful trans-Atlantic cable was
laid in 1866, and by 1870 telegraphic communica-
tion with Europe had reached Hong Kong.
Australia followed two years later.
But this was not actually Hong Kong’s very
first acquaintance with telegraphs, for earlier the
same year, that is, nearly three-quarters of a
century ago, a telegraph line had been erected
from Victoria to Aberdeen, Deep Water Bay, and
Stanley, for police purposes. In 1874 a new line
was built to Cape d’Aguilar for the lighthouse
which had just been completed. That line has
long since dissolved into the past, and the light-
house, proud in its day, is now a ruin.
The first telegraph line into China was opened
in 1882, from Kowloon to Canton; but it was not
until two years later that it was connected right
through to Victoria. During the intervening-
period it remained terminated at Shamshuipo,
which was then on the Chinese border. The charge
for telegrams was said to be the lowest in the world
at five cents a word, plus a temporary surcharge
of one cent a word to cover the cross-harbour
journey by steam launch.
Increased Reliability
During the half century which followed these
first electric communications there were no spec-
tacular changes. Improvements were slow but
steady, and they took the form of increased re-
liability and higher speeds of signalling. In the
early years cable messages were sent and received
laboriously by hand, at a speed of ten words a
minute. To-day they are sent and received by
high-speed automatic apparatus at one hundred
and twenty words a minute.
Parallel with this, there has been the develop-
ment of the Colony’s telephone system. This
commenced over half a century ago, for the first
telephones were installed in 1885 by the predecessors
of the present Company. A system of fifty work-
ing lines was then established. In 1925 the
present Company was formed, and by 1980 they
had installed a complete automatic system. To-day,
the original fifty telephones has grown to 25,000.
In 1931 a trunk cable was laid between Hong Kong
and Canton to give a service which functioned
excellently until after the outbreak of hostilities
in China.
In the material line of communications, the
Colony’s century has seen the slow and uncom-
fortable sailing ship replaced by large and fast
luxury steamers, so often called “ floating palaces.”
And, as if this were not enough, the close of the
same century sees at Hong Kong some of the
world’s most beautiful aircraft, ready to take one
half way round the world in a week.
And then, still within this same century, we
have seen develop that most fascinating of all
systems of communications' —wireless, or radio.
From this the public will perhaps immediately
think of broadcasting; but broadcasting is one of
the youngest members of the radio family.
Soma Difficulties
Some of the Far Eastern countries present
considerable difficulties to the construction and
maintenance of ordinary telegraph routes, and the
20
The Hong Kong Radio Review


Administration of this Colony at least was not slow
in recognising the advantages of wireless to solve
many of these problems. As long as thirty years
ago the first steps were taken to make use of wireless
in Hong Kong and to-day it probably has moie
wireless services for its size than any other country
in the world.
Wireless telephone services with neighbouring
countries were developed and a very useful service
was in operation between this Colony and Manila
and Chungking, but it was suspended on the out-
break of the war.
One of the most valuable sequels of these radio
developments is the reduction in the loss of life
and property arising from typhoons. In the great
typhoon of 1906 some 10,000 lives were lost.
Nowadays the loss of life has been almost com-
pletely removed, and this has been brought about
mainly by information and advice which is handled
by wireless. More recently, attempts are being
made to extend these services right to the fishing
junks which may be at sea and so exposed to grave
danger.
The public is unaware of the existence of many
of these radio services, but there is one outstanding
exception in broadcasting—the youngest and most
precocious of the family. It is little more than
ten years old, but in that time it has advanced so
remarkably that its place in most homes is now
quite taken for granted. It is a worthy descendant
of one hundred years of communications in the
Colony.
Speed Essential
Speed is of vital importance in communica-
tions, and it will be of interest, in passing, to
compare again the present with that of one hundred
years ago. It then took some five months of hard
and dangerous travelling for news to reach Hong
Kong from Kurope. Now we receive it almost as
it happens —the actual time it takes to get here
by wireless is less than one-tenth of a second.
But like all high spirited children, it is at times
unruly. No doubt many of you have recently felt
irritated when Daventry’s news has not come in
clearly. The speech has often been marked by a
distinct echo which makes it difficult to understand.
This is because it sometimes has bursts of excessive
vitalityj when it not only skips lightly from
Daventry to Hong Kong, but it overshoots the mark
and makes another complete trip right round the
world,* arriving here for the second time a fraction
of a second after the first. It may even do this
several times, which is annoying, but on the whole
it behaves very well and we would not be without
it.
It is amusing to recollect one of the first at-
tempts, made one hundred and fifty years ago, to
find out how fast electricity travelled. An early
French experimenter borrowed a battalion of
soldiers and formed them up on a large parade
ground, in a circle, all holding hands. He then
broke the circle at one point, connected in an
electric machine, and sent an electric shock right
round the circle from hand to hand through all
the battalion. He thought that if he noted the
time that each soldier jumped, one after another,
as the current passed, he could easily tell how fast
the current travelled round the circle. He was
amazed to find that all the soldiers jumped at the
same time. He did not know, as we do now, that
electricity travels at 200,000 miles a second.
And now, what of the future? Faster ships,
bigger and better aeroplanes, no doubt. Our cables
and telegrams will probably be sent from one end
of the earth to the other in a few seconds, and then
delivered in our own hand-writing. Pictures will
be sent as easily as words, even, perhaps, direct
from our own drawing rooms or offices. Television
is a little nearer, but in the present state of the
art it cannot be made to travel over hills and round
corners, and that would not do for Hong Kong.
It will come no doubt, but not yet.
LAW AND JUSTICE IN
HONG KONG
THE COLONY’S RECORD
By H. C. Macnamara.
IT is impossible in the short time set apart for
this talk to give even a short account of the
administration of the law in Hongkong during the
last hundred years. If, however, there is anyone
really interested in the subject 1 can thoroughly
recommend “ The History of the Laws and Courts
of Hongkong,” by Norton-Kyshe, a former [Registrar
of the Court. It is a curious book, compiled after
the fashion of a brief, including copies of all
relevant documents. The learned author seldom
states the effect of a document, but sets it out in
full, complete with headings, addresses, etc. In
one place he sets out in full the Supreme Court
Library rules.
It is, all the same, a lively and amusing book,
as it tells us about the early Judges, Attorneys-
(xeneral and other law officers of the past. Some
of these gentlemen were distinctly quarrelsome,
and their various disputes make interesting read-
ing. The Index is carefully compiled, but the
author’s rather naive style may be illustrated by
such entries as “Attorneys, Necessary Evils,” and
another which reads simply: “Ear-snatching, See
Adams, "VV. H.” The book was published as long
ago as 1898, but I notice that the list of the Hong-
kong barristers and solicitors at that date contains
the names of a barrister and two solicitors who are
still amongst us.
So much, then, for Norton-Kyshe. I shall
now proceed to notice a few of the outstanding
facts relative to the administration of law since
21
The Hong Kong Radio Reviev)


1841, some being taken from the book to which I
have just alluded.
Though ceded to the Crown in 1841 the Colony
did not enjoy the advantages of the present Supreme
Court till October Ist, 1844. Until then justice
had been administered by a Chief Magistrate, sub-
ject to trial, in serious cases, before the Governor
and a jury, in what was called the Criminal and
Admiralty Court, which had been transferred from
Canton and was later transferred to Shanghai.
On the date I have just mentioned the Supreme
Court held its first sessions.
A Delicate Matter
The introduction into this Colony of the laws
of England was, naturally, a very delicate matter.
Many of you will recollect Macaulay’s vivid
description, in his essay on Warren Hastings, of
the evils attending the introduction of English law
into Bengal. Though his account is almost cer-
tainly exaggerated, it serves as a warning. No
doubt in consequence of this, the Legislature was
careful to abate, if not to avoid, some of the worst
technicalities of our law as it then existed. For
example, the law as regards land was in 1841 a
mass of technicality. Tenure was divided into
Freehold, Copyhold and Leasehold, the two former
tenures being again sub-divided into numerous
others. In Hongkong the Government from the
start, with great boldness and prevision, scrapped
both Freehold and Copyhold tenures and decreed
that Leasehold, with a few unimportant exceptions,
should be the only way in which land could be held.
This measure, and another I am about to describe,
must have, together, worked incalculable good.
It did away at one sweep with the difference in
English law between Real and Personal property,
a difference which has probably caused more
litigation in England than any other single clause.
All property in Hongkong became personal pro-
perty Leaseholds themselves being personal. The
leases granted by the Crown are of different dura-
tion. The longest are for 999 years. You have
probably heard of the Scotsman whose solicitor was
trying to explain to him that a lease for 999 years
was, practically, equivalent to the fee simple.
“Nay, nay,” said the Scot; “999 years soon .slip
away.” Be this as it may, nobody can contend
that a lease for 75 or 99 years is entirely satis-
factory from the lessee’s point of view, as many
actual lessees are now beginning to realise owing
to some of the earlier leases falling in.
Another great beneficial measure was Ordinance
No. 3 of 1844, now No. 1 of the same year, which
provides for the registration of deeds and other
documents affecting land. Its provisions are
stringent and to the effect that registration confers
priority, and that unregistered documents are void.
Such a system of registration is of the greatest
practical value, as it clears away another mass of
technical rules.
A Good Foundation
Subject to certain necessary additions, at a
later date, it may be said that the earlier lawyers
to consider the laws of the Colony laid a good
foundation for the land laws, for which we should
be duly thankful and proud. You may think
both the measures to which I refer were obviously
necessary, but in legal matters reforms are seldom
effected merely because they are obviously necessary.
In one very important department of law the
Legislature has not intruded but has left the
Chinese to follow their own law and customs. I
refer to what may be sufficiently designated as
“Family Law r .” This term is generally under-
stood to govern the laws relating to domestic rela-
tions, the descent of property on death, and matters
of a like nature. It is clear that any interference
in such matters would be most undesirable. For
example, English law recognises a monogamous
marriage only, whereas Chinese law, or custom,
recognises a plurality of wives, and though each
wife does not have the same rights, the children
of each are entitled to share in the inheritance.
These and similar institutions are respected by the
laws of Hongkong. On the other hand, penal law
is practically entirely of English origin. In
actual practice these distinctions between English
and Chinese law are maintained with little or no
difficulty, but it would be difficult to say, in theory,
exactly where the line should be drawn. This is
one of those things which it is easier to do in
practice than to describe on a purely rational basis.
I shall now revert for a few minutes to Norton-
Kyshe’s History. One of the most sensational of
the early lawyers was a Mr. T. C. Anstey. Before
his arrival in Hongkong in 1856 Mr. Anstey had
been Member of Parliament for Youghal. Irish
M.P.s have never been noted for docility, and Mr.
Anstey, during the three years he held the office
of Attorney-General of Hongkong, displayed a
virulent pugnacity quite in keeping with the
popular conception of an Irish M.P. That he
was able, hard-working and incorruptible is un-
doubted. That he found, or made, many enemies
in Hongkong is equally certain. The justification
for such a violent commotion is that at that time
some of the officials of the Government were guilty,
or at all events suspected, of corruption. Sir John
Bowring, the Governor, in a despatch to the home
Government, reports plaintively: “I cannot, how-
ever, refrain from mentioning that since Mr.
Anstey’s arrival in the Colony (with the exception
of the periods of his absence therefrom) there has
been little peace.” For further information on
the career of this interesting gentleman I must
refer you to Norton-Kyshe,
The Two Branches
I mentioned just now lists of Barristers and
Solicitors in the Norton-Kyshe History. This
distinction between the two branches of the pro-
22
The Kong Kong Radio Review


fession is almost as ancient as our law. In modern
times the question as to whether this distinction
should be maintained or whether it would not be
better to join, or amalgamate, as it is called, the
two into one, is often discussed. In many jurisdic-
tions amalgamation has been effected, notably in
America, some of the British Dominions and in
many British Colonies. The distinction is main-
tained in England, Scotland and Ireland, both in
the Free State and in Northern Ireland. The
arguments for and against the amalgamation are
both numerous and cogent. Here in Hongkong,
after attempted amalgamation in the 1860’s, the
old system has been maintained. Considering the
small number of Barristers and Solicitors involved
the decision to maintain the two separate legal
professions is probably unique in legal history.
Before I terminate these remarks I would like
to mention those courts which are sometimes re-
ferred to, rather rudely, I think, as Inferior Courts.
There is no doubt but that public attention is apt
to centre on the superior Courts, with their more
dignified and stately appearance and procedure and
greatly extended powers. None the less the
Magistrates’ or Police Courts, whichever you like
to call them, affect the community in a way which
the higher Courts do not. They are the Courts
where the vast majority of cases begin and end.
They are in the unique position of being able to
help a number of poor and ignorant people. They
protect society from all but the most serious crimes.
They have an extensive jurisdiction in civil cases
of a relatively trivial kind. They examine serious
accusations to see if a case can be made out before
committing the accused for trial in the higher
Courts. With all these functions to perform these
Courts are of great and increasing importance.
It is pleasant, therefore, to note that in Hongkong
in recent years a number of improvements in these
Courts have been effected. For example, a
Magistracy has been established in Kowloon, where
it now occupies an almost palatial Courthouse.
Secondly, greater facilities for appeal to the
Supreme Court have been provided. These appeals
can now be carried through with a minimum of
delay and expense. Lastly, the policy of appoint-
ing trained lawyers as Magistrates has begun.
Taking one thing with another and considering
all the difficulties which in 1841 confronted the
legal pioneers of the time, we need not be ashamed
of the efforts that have been made to administer
justice in Hongkong. With a large and increasing
population, which includes a number of diverse
races and religions, the task is not an easy one.
A contemplation of the past, in spite of its occasional
errors, gives to all of us the encouragement to
persevere for the future.
AN OCTOGENARIAN
REMEMBERS
HONGKONG’ PROGRESS
AND PROSPERITY
By Sir Shou-son Chow.
Sir Shou-son Chow said:
To me, Hongkong is especially dear, for I was
born here, in Aberdeen, 81 years ago. According
to my family record, my ancestors for seven con-
secutive generations had lived in various parts of
the New Territories and Kowloon City. Even
before 1841, some of my forefathers had lived on
this Island, as I have been told that one of them
assisted in posting up at Aberdeen the proclamation
issued by Captain Elliot, the first Governor of
Hongkong, on February 2nd of that year. It is
therefore not unfitting that, in view of the progress
made by Hongkong during the last hundred years,
I, as one of the oldest residents, should take this
opportunity to offer my warmest felicitations to the
Government of Hongkong and people, and to wish
the Colony continued success and prosperity. Let
us hope that the present hostilities, which have
caused such immense sufferings to mankind, may
soon end, so that we may soon see “ Peace on earth
and goodwill towards men.”
I have had my talk for this special occasion
prepared for a long time but I regret that I am
unable to give you the whole of it myself, as my
eyes do not allow me to read for more than a few
minutes at a time. I hope that you will forgive
me if my son reads my talk for me.
Sir Shou-son’s talk was then read as follows :
On the 26th day of the present month, January,
1941, Hongkong will be attaining her one hundredth
birthday. It was exactly one hundred years ago
that the Island became a British Colony. Little
did people dream then that in the space of a hun-
dred years this barren little island, covering an
area of less than 400 square miles, was to play such
an important role in assisting the development of
China, and that she herself was to become one of
the most important ports in this part of the world.
At the present time the world is witnessing a
life-and-death struggle between the forces of right
and those of might, between liberty-loving people
and power-made aggressors. On account of this
world tragedy, Hongkong will not be celebrating
her Centenary with festivities and public rejoicings
as she would have done under happier world condi-
tions. However, celebration or no celebration, our
thoughts at this time must dwell on what we and
those before us have achieved for Hongkong, on
our position to-day, and what the future has in
store for us. Of the future we are certain : Hong-
kong will continue to grow in importance, and we
look ahead with hope and confidence.
23
The Hong Kong Radio Review


Sir Robert Kotewall has given us a talk on
“Anglo-Chinese Co-operation, Past, Present and
Future; ” and we have heard -Sir Robert Ho Tung
speak on “Early Reminiscences of Hongkong.”
They have covered most of the. more interesting
events of Hongkong’s development and history.
I will, therefore, touch on a few points of special
interest which occur to me.
I have before me the official reports on the
first census of Hongkong, taken on the 15th of
May, 1841, showing the total population of the
Island at about 7,500 among about 20 villages.
The largest of these villages was Chek Chu, now
called Stanley, with about 2,000 inhabitants.
Then there was Hongkonsr Wai, near Aberdeen,
with a populace of about 200; Wonsmeichung 300;
Shaukiwan 1.000; and so on. There were also
about 300 labourers from Chinese Kowloon City
who came over to do various works; and there was.
of course, the floating population consisting of
about 2,000 souls.
As I have just said, the largest settlement was
at Chek Chu or Stanley. It was, however, not a
healthy place, and malaria was rather rampant.
To-day it is one of our finest suburbs with manv
country houses and modern buildings: among them
are St. Stenhen’s Colleare and what is, to some, a
most attractive and comfortable Government prison.
Steady Growth
From a humble beginning Hongkong has grown
steadily through the years. And we now have a
imputation in the vicinity of 2,000,000! In the
last official census of 1931 the figure was only
1.050.000, but since then, many refugees from
China have come to Hongkong as a result of the
Sino-Japanese hostilities.
Our trade for the year of 1939 amounted to
$1,127 millions and the number of ships calling
at this port for the same year was 74,600 odd
vessels, with an aggregate tonnage close to
31.000.
Side by side with Hongkong’s development in
trade and commerce is the growth of her trans-
portation facilities. The Colony is famed for her
fine motor roads; and from sedan chairs, rickshaws,
ox-carts and trucks drawn by coolies we have now
turned to fine motor-cars and motor-trucks and an
efficient bus and tramway service. I have it from
the Traffic Office that during the year 1939 there
were about 4,400 private motor-cars, 360 motor-
cycles, 385 public cars and taxis, and 1,200 com-
mercial motor-lorries. The Hongkong Tramways
Company owns 109 cars, and during the year 1940
the distance run was 4J million car miles, and the
total number of passengers carried was about 74
million.
Hongkong to-day is one of the largest shipping
ports in the Far East, an entrepot of first-rate
importance for trade with South China. In recent
years she has also forged ahead as an industrial
centre. We have here such old established under-
taking's as Taikoo Dock, Hongkong & Whampoa
Dock, Bailey’s Shipyard, the Green Island Cement
Factory, Taikoo Sugar Refinery, and others.
During' the past few years, a number of weaving l
and knitting’ factories have moved to Hongkong
from China. All these works and factories afford
employment to thousands and thousands of our
workers, both skilled and unskilled, and through
their earnings a large number of people, including
their dependents, are supported.
Now we may ask ourselves why Hong'kong has
prospered so. Is it because of her geographical
position? Partly so, but not entirely, for a
favourable geographical position alone does not
make for prosperity. Hongkong’s development
and g’rowth may be attributed in a large measure
to her sound and just administration and to the
peace and security which she offers to trade, invest-
ment and industry.
There are some people who think that the
prosperity of Hongkong is not due to and shared
by the Chinese, but in my opinion this point of
view is not altogether correct. If we look around
we shall see a large proportion of trade in Chinese
hands. There are also Chinese banking institu-
tions, Chinese industrial undertakings, shipping,
and real estate investments. We therefore must
agree that the Chinese have contributed to and
received a fair share from Hongkong’s prosperity.
Not only in the sphere of trade and commerce
has this benefit been mutual, but also in education.
Here in Hongkong we have numerous vernacular
schools, many of them receiving grants-in-aid from
the Government. We have also schools giving
English and Chinese education besides our Univer-
sity, to which students not only from China but
from all parts of the Far East come for higher
learning. It may be of interest to know that the
grand total of Government aided and unaided
institutions on 31st December, 1939 was 1,297, and
pupils enrolled were 80,823 boys and 37,370 girls.
Therefore, we ought to be proud that after one
hundred years of perseverance we have attained
our present position and prosperity. It is a hard-
won heritage which we should treasure.
It is customary in all the hig hospitals to notify
the staff when an interesting post-mortem is to
take place. It would he too blatant to have some-
one shout “ Post-mortem■! Post-mortem! ” through
the public-address system, and the usual solution
is to pass the word along from doctor to doctor.
At one hospital ice know of, however, they have
found a way to announce it over the loud-speakers.
“Calling Dr. Post,” the loud-speaker says when-
ever something interesting is afoot 'in the autopsy
room. “Calling Dr. Mortimer Post.” —The New
Yorker.
24
The Hong Kong Radio Review


REMINISCENCES OF
HONG KONG
A PERSONAL MEMORY
By Sir Robert Ho Tung
XXAYING been privileged to see some 79 of the
last hundred years of Hongkong’s history,
I may perhaps be qualified to give you an outline
of some of the changes which have taken place
since the days of my youth. It was sixty-one
years ago that I first joined Jardine’s, and became
their Compradore in 1890.
Let me begin by describing what Hongkong
looked like in or about the year 1885. The Peak
could boast of hardly more than a few houses.
The Peak Tramway was not even thought of.
The mid-levels were then struggling to attract
residents, May Hoad being but a footpath, and
Caine Road considered fairly high up. It was
there that stood the luxurious houses of the Hon.
Mr. E. R. Belilios, Sir Hormusjee Mody and Sir
Paul Chater. These houses were surrounded by
spacious gardens, and were the scenes of lavish
entertainments.
Turning to the city of Victoria, few buildings
had more than two stories. Jardine’s used to
occupy the plot of land stretching from the present
Banque de I’lndo-Chine to the old praya, the
waterfront then being Des Yoeux Road, and their
back door, to which came towboats to deposit their
cargoes, was where the present Bank of Canton
stands. All the part covering the Post Office,
Connaught and Chater Roads only came into being
later by process of reclamation. Queen’s Road
was the leading street in those days, and the centre
of the City had a clock tower which served also
as a watch tower from which fire alarms were
given. Wellington, Shelley, and H’Aguilar Streets
formed the busy city area, decked with residential
bungalows, which also served as offices. The
present Central Market was the site of the P. & 0.
Office, the King’s Theatre that of the old Hongkong
Club-house, while the China Building stands on
the site of the former Supreme Court.
Old Central School
In those days there was no seat of higher
learning, and the present University area was a
maze of footpaths among trees. The leading
educational institution was the Central School,
now Queen’s College. I used to attend this,
having to be at school by six in the morning in
summer, and half-past six in winter. When I
was there, Dr. Frederick Stewart was the Head-
master, a man who has left an indelible mark not
only on several generations of Hongkong’s leading
Chinese, but on the Colony as a whole. He rose
to be Colonial Secretary and Officer Administering
the Government, and died as he lived, modestly
and quietly, in 1889,
There were few public works of importance
in those early days. The Tytam reservoir had
yet to be built, and Hongkong drew its water
supply from a small reservoir near the Pokfulam
Police Station. Near this spot stood the “Douglas
Castle,” then popular as the resort for honeymoon
couples.
As for Kowloon, none would have dreamt that
it could be what it is to-day. There was no such
thing as Nathan Road, and Kowloon City was
still part of the Chinese Empire with a Mandarin
actively in control. Shamsuipo was a modest
village with many thatched cottages to identify
its existence. The railway only came many years
later. Indeed, there were no motor-cars or rick-
shaws when I was young, the latter only arriving
in about the year 1879. The most popular means
of transportation were the sedan chair and the
horse carriage. I still recollect vividly the very
impressive manner in which Mr. William Keswick,
one of Jardine’s taipans, used to arrive at his office
everv morning punctually at 9.30 a.m. in his horse
carriage driven by two uniformed Indians.
In those days the only industrial undertakings
of note were the Hongkong & Whampoa Dock
Co., the China Sugar Refinery, and the Hongkong
& China Gas Co., and later on the Taikoo Docks
and Sugar Co. and the Green Island Cement Co.
Hon orkong was much more so than now a centre
for the passage of goods rather than their manu-
facture.
Young China
One of the most marked changes in the course
of the last two generations has, of course, been
Young Miss China, while all the. men of my young
days wore pigtails. I well remember how awkward
it seemed to be without this feminine adornment
when we had our hair “ bobbed ” for the first time
some thirty years ago.
I feel I must say a few words about the
administration of the Colony. In those pioneer
days the problem of government was a very great
one. Communication by sea with England took
almost three months, there was no electricity (a
sideline on this being the historic white punkahs
everywhere used in the hot weather), no telenhones,
no typewriters even, to oil the machinery of Govern-
ment. Misunderstandings were naturally frequent
between Government officials and the merchant
community on such questions as land tenure, over-
crowding, sanitation, etc., and the Government
was itself divided on many points. But time
ironed out these difficulties to bring to fruit the
efficient administration of to-day.
During these last hundred years, brilliant
cadets and Governors, men such as Lord Lugard,
engineers like Sir Mathew Nathan, road-builders
such as Sir Francis May, have spent the best part
of their life in creating out «f this barren rock a
city which has become one of the largest and
25
The Hong Kong Radio Review


busiest in the world. And to the present pros-
perity the Chinese citizens have also played a great
part, both in public service and in contribution to
the Colony’s revenue. The Chinese form 97% of
the Colony’s population. Some of the noteworthy
names are Dr. Wu Ting Fan, the first Chinese
member of the Council, and his successor, Mr.
Wong Shin, who was followed by Dr. (later Sir)
Kai Ho Kai and Sir Bosan Wei Yuk. Sir Kai
had the distinction of being both a Doctor of
Medicine and a practising Barrister-at-law. Of
the later Chinese representatives I need not make
mention, as they are well known to this generation.
With the short time at my disposal I must
have omitted many noteworthy names and events
in the life of this island, but if the ghosts of
Captain Elliot or even Sir Henry Blake were here
to-night to look ro\ind this Colony, they would be
at a loss for words to express their surprise at the
progress which Hongkong has made. lam sure,
were I permitted to return to Hongkong in a
hundred years’ time, I could not find, comparative-
ly speaking,' more changes on the face of this
island than during the last two generations.
May this island prosper, and contribute to the
wealth and happiness of all who live and trade in
it.
A FOOT-SLOGGING
JOURNEY
A CANTON TO HONG KONG
WALKING TRIP
By R. H. Hancock.
SITTING in the Canton Club one evening in
January 1902, with B. Twyman, lI.M. Vice-
Consul, and F. ITayley-Bell, who was then an
assistant in the Chinese Customs, the conversation
turned to “hiking,” and as the Chinese New Year
holidays were approaching, this was considered a
good opportunity to take a walking 1 holiday. In
those far-off days there was no work done for almost
a week at this time of the year, as the Chinese
merchants—“machin” as they were called—never-
visited the Shameen, retiring to their homes either
on Honam or in the City proper, and employing
their time in festivities of one kind and another.
AVh en we suggested to our friends that we thought
of walking down to Hongkong for the holidays,
we were met with a good deal of opposition, being
told that at that time of the year it was rather a
dangerous thing too, as there were always a lot of
pirates about, and we might get into trouble in
some of the outlying villages en route , especially
at night time. However, we were all young and
full of enterprise and very dubious of the warnings
handed out to us, so we decided to make prepara-
tions forthwith for our journey. Previous to
starting, the British Consulate had used its.influence
with tlie Chinese authorities to such good purpose
that the aged Viceroy placed an escort of three
responsible armed soldiers at our disposal. We
engaged, in addition, three bearers to carry the
necessary impedimenta for such a trip in the form
of a change of clothes, wraps, &0,, a couple of tins
of biscuits and some sticks of chocolate. We took
no other provisions with us, as we anticipated no
difficulty in getting all we wanted en route. We
had no guide to start with, but a good map of the
country, and armed with this and a compass we
hoped to find our way all right. All arrangements
being completed, we left Shameen at about 6 o’clock
in the morning of the 6th February, 1902, in the
“ Keechong ” gig to take us down the River to the
outskirts of the City, where we.started our walk.
There were no roads throughout the journey and
we were compelled, on account of the narrowness
of the tracks, to travel nearly all the way in single
file, which made the journey at times a trifle
monotonous. To offset this, however, we were
rewarded by the beauty of the large tracts of coun-
try traversed. The valleys were extensive and
richly fertile and there was an endless variety of
blossom. At one place en route the valley extended
between six and seven miles, and it was one mass
of peach and pear trees in all the glory of full
bloom. Some extensive tobacco plantations were
also passed through, and the mulberry was also in
evidence.
From Canton to Tungkoon the country was
marshy and travelling unpleasant at intervals, but
from there on to Hongkong the walking was
delightful. The highest point reached in the
course of the whole journey was about 500 feet
above sea level. The country at that time had
been surveyed for the purposes of a railway, which
was later on built as the Canton-Hongkong railway.
Unmolested Travel
The difficulties of travelling in this strange
country were greatly counteracted by the fact that
both Mr. Twyman and Mr. Hayley-Bell were good
Chinese scholars. It is interesting to point out
here that at no part of the whole journey were we
in any way molested by the inhabitants —a contrast
to Canton itself, where in those days wherever you
went you were accustomed to being followed by a
mob of not always friendly natives. In fact, we
were all, after our experiences in Canton, greatly
impressed by the respect and courtesy which we
were shown generally. At Sam Chun alone was
there any display of hostile feeling. The people
of the town would have nothing to do with us,
either in the way of furnishing provisions or
directing us on our way. However, it was here
that our Chinese escort came to the rescue. They
visited a camp in the immediate neighbourhood,
and after a short interval our wants were supplied
with promptness and goodwill.
26
The Hong Kong Radio Review


Sam Chun, as all of you know, is on the border
of the New Territory, and it may not be out of
place to state here a little of its history. In those
days it was a town noted as the resort of ruffians
who periodically swooped down on poor Chinese
and robbed them of their goods and chattels. It
was the seat of trouble in 1899, and again in the
anxious time of 1900, and opposite were encamped
a special force of police under the personal direc-
tion of Captain Superintendent of Police F. H.
May, who afterwards became Governor of this
Colony. The Colonial Secretary, J. 11. Stewart-
Lockhart, strongly recommended at the time the
New Territory was taken over that Sam Chun
should come under British jurisdiction, and it is
a great pity his recommendation was not adopted.
As mentioned earlier, we did not encumber
ourselves with a supply of provisions, but relied
solely on obtaining “chow” as we went along.
On reaching a village the Elder was waited on,
and he instantly did everything in his power to
make the brief stay of his visitors as comfortable
and pleasant as possible. The “chow” on the
journey consisted mainly of rice, eggs, chicken and
fruit, and the cooking was left entirely to the care
of the villagers, and very well they carried out
their task.
Hospitable Welcome
A mission at Tungkoon gave us a very hospitable
welcome our first night out. It was situated north
of Sun On and was the only mission station met
with on the way. Up to this point we had guided
ourselves by means of a compass, and the river.
At Tungkoon, however, our missionary friends in-
sisted on supplying us with a guide, who turned
out to be quite useless, as we hadn’t proceeded
more than a mile when he himself began asking
the way! The alleged guide was accordingly
dismissed. At Ng Shek Shun, however, about 12
miles from Tungkoon, we were lucky in securing
the services of a really good fellow, who stuck to
us all the way to Sam Chun. After this it was
easy. The Sikh Constables stationed on the border
showed us the way to Taipo. Here the utmost
hospitality was shown us —we were then very,
travel-stained and foot-sore—at the District Officer’s
bungalow by the staff of Mr. Hallifax, who was
at that time District Officer and who unfortunately
was away on a shooting trip to Swatow. However,
he had been warned of our visit, and had given
instructions to his satellites to do everything they
could for our comfort. We revelled in a good hot
bath and a hearty meal before turning in for a
good sleep. We afterwards found out that Mr.
Hallifax’s boy had supplied us for dinner with
food which had been sent out the previous day by
Mr. Gompertz for himself—he was coming out in
tlie morning to spend the day at the Bungalow with
a party!
For most of the journey we wore Chinese
sandals and found them very comfortable, but for
some occult reason we reverted to Western foot-gear
on nearing Hongkong and paid the penalty, as we
arrived more or less lame from blistered and
swollen feet.
On one occasion we lost our way near the
village of Ta Tung, and spent the night in the
open on the San Kok Sau Hills. The experience
was a weird one. The Chinese escort insisted that
the place was a happy hunting-ground for tigers,
and one of our six attendants, an owlish fellow,
was so impressed with the idea that he kept up a
“ sing song ” all night to frighten off any “ lofoo ”
that might be skulking about the locality. We
were all very glad when daylight came as our sleep
was a very broken one under the circumstances.
On other nights quarters were easily secured at
the various villages.
Our most unpleasant experience occurred on
arrival at Hongkong, when unwashed, imshod, and
practically unknown, we were marched off to the
Central Police Station. Before leaving Canton
we were told that it would be necessary to secure
permits for our “braves” to carry arms in the
Colony, and we had anticipated getting what was
necessary from Mr. Hallifax at Taipo. However,
he wasn’t there as it turned out, and the Super-
intendent in charge told us it would be all right
if we explained matters on arrival to the Captain
Superintendent of Police at Hongkong, Mr.
Baddley, wdiom as a matter of fact I knew quite
well, so I didn’t expect any difficulty in the matter.
However, on our arrival on the Island, we were
accosted by a very officious Sergeant who would
not listen to our explanation and insisted on taking
us all up to the Central Police Station—first having
phoned up to the Captain Superintendent of Police
that he had arrested nine people, three of whom
were armed and all of whom looked very suspicious
characters ! I refused to walk any further, so we
hailed nine chairs, and the procession slowly
wended its way up to the Central Police Station
to the wonderment of a throng of spectators —we
liad arrived about the tiffin hour—some of whom
followed us to our journey’s end. Doubtless we
presented a sorry spectacle, and with about five
days growth of beard, we looked more like beach-
combers than respectable citizens. On arrival at
the Central Station, I had great difficulty in per-
suading the Sergeant in charge to let me see Mr.
Baddeley and explain matters, and in fact he
insisted on going in first so I followed him and
broke in in the middle of his conversation. Baddeley
told me afterwards that he couldn’t make head or
tail of the Sergeant’s story, and he could only think
that he had been very clever in nipping an armed
robbery in the bud. It took us a little time to
explain to our “braves” what had happened, as
they were at first very annoyed at being arrested
in a British Colony after having protected us for
several days in Chinese territory. However, passes
were soon forthcoming from Mr. Baddeley, who
made everything very easy for us, and armed with
27
The Hong Kong Radio Review


these and an adequate cumshaw, all ended happily,
and they left for Canton the same evening by
steamer.
The distance covered was about 120 miles, or
some 80 miles more than the route by steamer, and
the journey took us about five days.
It may interest some of my listeners to know
that in the 80’s Sir James Stewart-Lockhart, who
was Colonial Secretary at the time of my walk, in
company with Mr. G. C. C. Master, senior partner
at one time of Johnson, Stokes and Master, Mr.
Fredericks, of Carlowitz & Co., and two others
accomplished the feat of rowing to Canton in an
outrigger boat, and the time taken on that journey
was two days.
HONG KONG AMATEUR
DRAMATIC CLUB
A CENTURY’S FOOTLIGHT
HISTORY
By Cyril Champ kin.
IT is fitting that these centenary talks should
include a brief record of old-time players who
from 1844 onward expressed through the Hong
Kong Amateur Dramatic Club the mental moods
of the age in which they lived. In our community
of constant change the oldest inhabitant generally
gets decently interred before he becomes embar-
rassingly reminiscent. It is, of course, quite
convenient and highly desirable that should, for
most of us, very properly, have a deeper regard for
the defunct than for the living. Much of the
dullness of life is accounted for by the indefinite
survival of our best friends and we all enjoy a
melancholy satisfaction in reflecting upon what
our magniloquently mournful ancestors termed
“the memory of departed worth” ; but if we stir
these dry bones of memory, it is surprising how
little we find that has the convincing charm of
reminiscence or of personal association. It is a
fascinating perplexity that the minor historical
records of this Colony suffer as much from the
unaccountable dumbness of those that made its
history as from the inexhaustible loquacity of those
that didn’t.
When, therefore, we seek to revive old theatre
memories in Hongkong we have necessarily to be
haphazard and eclectic. We must rely principally
upon shreds, from old newspapers, odds and ends
from the pages of the past, fragments of drama,
snatches of the epic and patches of farce; yet all
these have the interest and deserve the respect
that is due to antiquity.
In the opening scene of “ She stoops to Con-
quer ” Squire Hardcastle says: “I love everything
that’s old —old friends, old manners, old times,
old books, old wine.” He might well, I think,
have added “old actors and old stage-plays.”
Certainly'for those who have felt the lure of the
stage there is gladness in the remembrance of
long-gone players. Old plays, too, like old win§,
gain softness and mellowness with age.
The A.D.C. was founded in 1844. Military
Officers were very prominent in its early produc-
tions, and it therefore seems not unlikely that it
was originally a military venture that later outgrew
its confinement and developed into its present form
—a club for limited general membership. This,
however, is pure surmise. What we do know is
that for many years prior to 1855 the Club was
producing plays under some disabilities in what
was called the Victoria Theatre.
Victoria “Theatre”
A description of this theatre, the first home
of the Hongkong A.D.C., gives us a vivid im-
pression of the heroic stuff out of which its founders
were made. It was in Queen’s Road East, Wan-
chai. We have in our records an impressionistic >
sketch of it. It was the upper floor of a two-
storey godown. The only way of getting in and
out of the theatre was by a flight of very steep
wooden steps outside the front of the building.
These connected with a single door, formed by
knocking out a window, and served alike the stage
and the auditorium. The whole place was very
malodorous of what was known as, “ Singapore
Cargo”—that is, damaged rice, fishmaws, shark-
fins and other fulsome produce stored in the base-
ment. Evidently the Fire Regulations of the
period were rather free and easy, and certainly
the audience was less discriminating than nowadays
as to its comfort and convenience.
We have, unfortunately, no record of the
plays produced in this primitive playhouse.
Examination of the four-page newsprints- of the
fifties yield no information in this particular. The
possibilities of “ Maria Martin, or The Murder
in the Red Barn ” can hardly have been overlooked,
while the trapdoor facilities for dealing with that
chief impediment to the wider popularity of homi-
cide—the disposal of the body—would have obvious
advantages in the presentation of that old favourite
“ Sweeny Todd, The Demon Barber of Fleet
Street.”’
From those days has come down to us some
rather amusing lines that refer apparently to an
unnamed enthusiast who, in an access of realism
blacked not only his face but his whole body to
play the part of Othello. They are well worth
quoting;
For my part I deem him a splendid fellow
Who blacked himself throughout to play Othello;
No London, no provincial town or borough
Can surely boast professional more thorough;
He felt the part, and when the boards he trod he
Became Othello, heart and soul—and body!
That prince of amateurs will stand alone,
Hong Kong may take his measure, but his tone
Transcends the Peak, and let it he conceded
All honest players must go in as he did:
And unto such as choose “to go the whole hog”
Be offered as a tribute due, this Prologue.
28
The Hong Kong Radio Review


We must now, I’m afraid turn down an empty
glass to this, the earliest chapter of our history,
with keen regret that we know so little of it.
There were no ladies on the stage in those days
to receive the floral tributes of admiring occupants
of the stalls, but the low comedian no doubt got
his cauliflower bouquet, the “rafters rang” with
“well deserved applause,” and all concerned
brought credit to the A.D.C. and earned the esteem
of the age through which they passed. At any
rate we hope so. We certainly have no reason
for supposing anything to the contrary.
First Theatre Royal
In 1860 the Victoria Theatre was abandoned —
possibly it was closed by the authorities. The
Club then transferred its activities to the first
“Theatre Royal” that was a matshed erected on
the site where, six years later, the foundations
were laid of the City Hall and that is occupied
to-day by the Hongkong & Shanghai Bank.
Fashions in mat sheds have changed little since
then and we can have no difficulty in visualising
what was described as “ a most ungainly edifice
outside.” It probably differed little in appearance
from the njatsheds that periodically are erected
nowadays for the temporary accommodation of
travelling Chinese theatrical troupes —constructions
of bamboo mats and light planks lashed together
with strips of rattan.
The interior, however, was well designed,
spacious and comfortable. The plans were drawn
by Mr. Charles Murray, son of a well-known
Edinburgh actor and manager. Fire precautions
were elaborately manifest. The corridors and
partition walls were decorated with billhooks and
axes and hundreds of fire-buckets were distributed
over the place.
The opening production in this matshed theatre
was “Still Waters Run Deep” staged in 1860.
It is remarkable as recording the appearance of
Attwell Coxon as Hawhesley. Attwell Coxon is
probably the most distinguished name in the annals
of the Hongkong Amateur Dramatic Club, not only
because of his remarkable versatility as an actor,
but for his long connection with the Club. For
how long he had been appearing before 1860 we
do not know, but he outlived all his contemporaries
and was still active in the part of Mr. Colepepper
in “ The Overland Route ” in 1886. His name
last appears in the Club records as an Honorary
Member in 1896—probably forty years after his
first appearance on the stage.
The Theatre Royal matshed was demolished
at the end of every season when the hot weather
came on, and was re-erected, generally on a new
site, at the approach of winter. It is recorded
that the site of the last Theatre Royal matshed
was in Queen’s Road Central on military ground,
where later was built married quarters for the
regiment stationed in the adjoining barracks.
“Grand” Opera
The President of the A.D.C. in the early
sixties was a certain Colonel of whom it was said
that he never spoiled a good story by a too rigid
adherence to fact. Here, at least, is a story that
deserves to be true. The Colonel had got together
a company that rose to the height of Grand Opera.
The leading tenor was a gunner in the battery
quartered in the town and was indispensable to
operatic productions. He had, however, one un-
fortunate failing. His life was a spirited protest
against the errors and estravagances of total
abstinence. The necessity for strict attention to
the business in hand usually kept him fairly sober
during the early rehearsals, but the excitement of
the coming performances generally broke down
his resolution and delivered him into the hands of
convivial friends, with results that might have
been expected.
Having the commendable spirit of the real
actor he knew the need for keeping faith with the
public, so on his own urgent application he was
put under arrest and kept a close prisoner in the
guardroom for three days before the opening per-
formance. He was marched under escort to the
final rehearsals and to the performances. On the
last night, after he had made his bow to an
enthusiastic audience, he was formally released
from arrest, carried shoulder-high to the canteen
and given carte blanche to all the hell-brew the
barman could supply.
In the sixties and, indeed, for long after,
those that acted in plays were darkly suspected
of a-raffishness properly disapproved of in polite
society. Traces were still to be found of the
thoroughgoing oldtime prejudice that classed actors
with rogues and vagabonds, and linked play-acting
with prize-fighting, bull-baiting and other rascally
diversions of the rake-hells and riff-raff of the
period. This unctuously rectitudinous feeling of
doubt as to the respectability of acting lingered
with curious persistence in Hongkong. It is
illustrated with delightfully unconscious humour
in the following newspaper criticism of one of the
best known amateurs of the time:
He is one of the very few amateur actors that
have been brought up and educated as gentlemen.
How far he has availed himself of this peculiar ad-
vantage it is not our purpose to enquire, hut certainly
few men that have appeared on our local stage have
enjoyed, or indeed deserved, more applause.
I suppose this ingenuous comment was a very well
meant appraisal, though nowadays I fear it would
be colloquially referred to as a “ raspberry.” Only
a few years previously Mr. Andrew Gotch, M.P.,
delivered himself in the House of Commons of this
bright utterance:
The theatre only brings together a set of un-
fortunate outcasts who have no other means of exis-
tence.
29
The Hong Kong Radio Review


It is therefore perhaps not surprising that for
more than thirty years after the A.D.C. was
founded all the actors adopted stage names. The
reason recorded is that the taipans of the big
hongs objected to the names of young gentlemen
employed in their merchant-houses appearing on
theatre programmes! There was, however, no
objection to the names of the same young gentle-
men appearing as owners on racing programmes.
Nowadays the position is reversed. Nobody adopts
a noin de theatre, but most of our racing ponies
are owned by one or other of the prolific family
of Mr. X.
Parts for Women
Another indication of Hongkong mid-Victorian
views on the theatre is that it was considered
unmaidenly and immodest for women to appear on
the stage. Until 1880 all female parts were
played by men. It is interesting in this connection
to note that the last production of the A.D.C.
before the demolition of the Theatre Royal, City
Hall, was “Nine Till Six,” an all female cast!
The satisfactory surplus on that highly successful
production might well, I think, have been expended
on a bust in appropriate brass of the first woman
to take a part in Hongkong Amateur Theatricals.
It will be interesting to trace this maker of local
history.
The early programmes are a little confusing-
on the point, for actors playing ladies’ parts
adopted female names. Of one thing we may have
no reasonable doubt—the lady bold enough to thus
storm the citadel of Hongkong propriety would so
do in her own name. Eliminating therefore Miss
Fitzblushington, Miss Si well, Miss Gay, Miss Dolly
Yarden and other obvious impersonators prior to
1880 we have little difficulty in identifying the
intrepid pioneer in Mrs. Philip Bernard. Appro-
priately enough she faced the uplifted eyebrows
of mildly shocked society in “ The School for
Scandal” in December 1879. Her second appear-
ance was in “The Porter’s Knot” in March 1880.
In this latter cast appeared also “ Mrs. Hockey,”
but we cannot deduce from this that Mrs. Bernard’s
bold venture inspired an early follower. “Hockey”
was the stage name of Attwell Coxon who was
regularly cast in all productions of the period, and
it is fairly certain that “Mrs. Hockey” was none
other than Mr. Coxon in a female part.
Mrs. Bernard, a few years later, went to
London and became a professional actress. What
measure of success she achieved in that less con-
ventional circle we do not know. In September
1888 the A.D.C. staged a “ Farewell Performance
to Mrs. Bernard.” This was “She Stoops to
Conquer”—a rather appropriate choice. There
were two other ladies in the cast, Mrs. Chervau
and Mrs. Fraser. Since that performance all
female parts in A.D.C. productions have been
played by women. Some time, perhaps, the name
of Mrs. Philip Bernard will be written in gold in
some prominent place on the Peak, for she made
our stage respectable for ladies in polite society.
Snobbishness
At a much later period of our history—in fact
within my own recollection—traces of snobbishness
survived. The producer was required by the rules
to submit to the Committee the names of the
members of his proposed cast for deliberation as
to whether they were or were not .ladies and
gentlemen received in general society. Nowadays
of course we are merely players—though some of
us, thank God, try to keep up an appearance of
respectability that we may not embarrass the pro-
ducer, who is nearly always received in general
society.
The earliest programme in the Club collection
is “ The Fourth Representation of the Season
1807-68 ” being the Farce “My Wife’s Maid,”
concluding with the Burlesque “ Bluebeard from
a New Point of Hue—Presented with the Most
Reckless Extravagance in the Shape of Guards,
Guests, Spahis and Dervishes, including a Grand
Turkish Ballet featuring Senora Maca Leoda,
Senora M’Organa, Senora Sloppia, Sqnora Azelle
and Senora Apartementa.”
The inner pages of the programme are printed
in the form of a burlesque newspaper entitled
“The Hongkong Diurnal Mess” of which the
following specimen news item is typical:
We are very sorry to learn that the Honourable
the Colonial Secretary, while taking a stroll in the
gardens yesterday evening about dusk, was suddenly
struck by an idea. He was at once conveyed to his
house, where prompt measures were taken to relieve
the sufferer. We regret to hear that he is at present
in a state of complete mental prostration.
There is not much effervescence and precious little
wit in these broad allusions. They sound rather
silly to us, but they belong to an age when the
Joe Millerisms of burlesque represented the popidar
plane of humour.
It was in the season 1870-71 that- Mr. Heart
made the first of a long series of successes in
burlesque. Heart was far ahead of anyone in his
time as a low comedian. He and Attwell Coxpn
are the two outstanding stage characters in the
early history of the A.D.C. A contemporary
writer stated that Beart would have taken a high
position in any professional company. His char-
acter impersonations generally had a local touch
of genius that “ brought down the house ” on
his first stage entry. His Widow Twankey in
“Aladdin ” —“A Faded Flower of Shaukiwan ”
was an exact impersonation of a sampan woman.
His finest effort in make-up and mannerism
was as Sir Joseph Porter, when he impersonated
with astonishing exactness the appearance, the
speech, the gait and the peculiar manner of the
Governor, Sir John Pope-Hennessey, who, for some
30
The Hong Kong Radio Review


reason or other, happened at the time to be very
unpopular with the British community. We
learned from the newspaper reports that it was
only with difficulty that the production could
proceed, for the audience was convulsed with
laughter during the whole time he was on the
stage. His Excellency was not in the theatre —
probably he thought it better not to spoil the sport
—but he was evidently not without a sense of
humour, for he asked Beart to lunch at Government
House the following day and laughed heartily over
the photographs of Sir Joseph Porter. It was
said that with one exception this was the finest
piece of acting ever seen in the Theatre Royal.
The exception was the magnificent effort of the
Lieutenant-Governor, General Donovan, who, with
a distinguished party, occupied the front seats in
the Circle. He sat stolidly through the perfor-
mance and, as in duty bound, showed the most
superb self-command by not moving a muscle of
his face Avhile the whole house was rocking with
laughter.
One More Story
1 am afraid I have time for only one more
story and that is in connection with the production
in 1882 of “The Wedding March” by W. 8.
Gilbert. There were thirty-three speaking parts
and everything was rehearsed with the greatest
care, and a considerable amount of money was
spent on costumes and scenery. Then occurred
one of those dreadful catastrophes that drive pro-
ducers to despair. Mr. Somerset, who was to
have played the lead, fell ill the day before the
opening performance. Like Manna from Heaven
appeared a professional actor from a travelling
company that was just packing up. He volun-
teered to take the part at a day’s notice and to
“ see the thing through.” For the first act he
was fairly firm on his words and when his memory
failed his resource came into play, and pulled him
through without noticeable disturbance to the rest
of the cast. In the two following acts he held
the stage in masterly fashion without having the
slightest idea of what he was expected to do or
say. He brought into service all the snatches he
could remember from all the plays in which he had
acted and when these failed him, he improvised
so effectively as to earn enthusiastic applause.
Needless to say, the other unfortunate players did
their best but were at a decided disadvantage in
this go-as-you-please contest. As a reporter of
the time put it:
The A.D.C. scored another notable success last
night, but we cannot help wondering what the devil
it was all about.
In these random remarks I have said nothing
of the Club’s activities during the last fifty years.
That belongs to another—and in many ways a
much more interesting—era. Since the demolition
of the old Theatre Royal we have no local habita-
tion, but we are proud to have a name.
Fifty years ago the late Lieut.-Colonel Newn-
ham Davis published a book on amateur dramatic
clubs throughout the Empire. In it he wrote:
The best Club that I have found in the uttermost
parts of the earth, is the Hong Kong Amateur
Dramatic Club.
This is high praise indeed from one whose know-
ledge of his subject was unrivalled in his day.
The A.D.C., like a double-fronted Janus, looks
both ways. It views with pride an honoured past,
memoried by high achievement and rich in the
traditional fraternity of the footlights. It looks
forward confidently to a future of equally high
attainment, not only in the standard of its pro-
ductions but in the rare quality of those lasting
gifts of intimate good-fellowship that are the
privilege of all associated with the stage.
SPORT AMONG THE
CHINESE
PROGRESS IN HONG KONG
By Hon. Mr. M. K. Lo.
IVTR. Lin Yu Tang, in his famous book “My
Country and My People,” in the chapter
dealing with Chinese Social and Political Life,
says:
The Chinese are a nation of individualists. They
are family-minded, not social-minded. . . .
They do not indulge in sport, which binds human
beings together, and which is the essence of the
English and American social life. They play games,
to be sure, but these games are characteristic of
Chinese individualism. Chinese games do not divide
the players into two parties, as in cricket, with one
team playing against the other. Team work is un-
known. In Chinese card games, each man plays for
himself. The Chinese like poker, and do not like
bridge. They have always played mahjong, which is
nearer to poker than to bridge. In this philosophy
of mahjong may be seen the essence of Chinese
individualism.
If Mr. Lin’s remarks, which I have just quoted,
are open to objection as an accurate description of
sport among Chinese at the present time in parti-
cular places or environment, they cannot be open
to objection as a generalisation of Chinese charac-
teristics, as they are obviously intended to be.
The reason for my quoting them is that they do
serve to explain the fact that sport among Chinese
in Hong Kong is a matter of recent origin.
The modern Chinese expression for sport is
“teh yuk ” (body culture), and for sportsmanship
“ teh yuk ching san ” (body culture essence spirit).
So modern, indeed, is the Chinese conception of
sport and sportsmanship that these current terms
have not yet found their places in certain standard
English-Chinese dictionaries.
I remember, quite vividly, the days before I
left here for England in 1906. Yery few Chinese
31
The Hong Kong Radio Review


boys, and even fewer Chinese girls, could swim,
and hardly any Chinese played football, tennis or
cricket. I remember being told that sampan girls
were never allowed to learn to swim though
drowning fatalities were frequent —because it was
indecorous for girls to show their forms. What
a far cry from those days to the present time, when
girls take part in athletics in low-necked shirts
and short pants !
Swimming did not come into prominence
among the Chinese community until about fifteen
years ago. Hithertofore swimming was more or
less confined to the wealthier classes who could
afford to hire launches for picnics during the sum-
mer months.
The first Chinese bathing shed to be erqcted
was set up by the Chinese Recreation Club in the
year 1910, near the old Royal Hong Kong Yacht
Club. Subsequently this Club concentrated its
activities on tennis, and a new club known as the
“Chinese Bathing Club" was formed. The
Chinese Bathing Club and the South China Athletic
Association erected bathing sheds for their members
at North Point, and it was from the year 1920
onwards that swimming was taken up seriously by
the Chinese.
The first open aquatic event for Chinese was
promoted by the South China Athletic Association
and the Chinese Bathing Club in the year 1924.
The total number of competitors taking part was
only sixty-eight, eleven of whom came from Canton.
The first permanent bathing shed to be erected
was put up by the South China Athletic Associa-
tion, which was opened by Lady dementi on the
29th June, 1929. Since that date other pavilions
have been erected. At present there are the fol-
lowing pavilions : South China Athletic Association ;
Chinese Bathing Club ; Chinese Athletic Association ;
The Chinese Civil Servants’ Club; and The Bankers’
Association at North Point: and The Chung Sing
Benevolent Society at Kennedy Town. In addition
to the above there are other sheds erected at North
Point by the Chinese Y.M.C.A., The Sincere Co.,
Ltd., The Sun Co., Ltd., and The Wing On Co.,
Ltd.
All these pavilions and bathing sheds afford
facilities to over ten thousand persons daily during
the summer months.
The Chinese have improved to such a great
extent that several of the records for swimming
in the Colony are at present held by them. In
the year 1944 Kwok Chung Hang, the then breast-
stroke champion, was invited to visit Melbourne
to give an exhibition of swimming in connection
with the Australian Centenary Celebrations.
Tennis League
In 1909 the Hong Kong Tennis League was
formed. There were then only seven teams in the
League, with the Chinese Y.M.C.A. as the sole
Chinese team. The Chinese Recreation Club was
formed in the following year. This Club concen-
trated its activities on tennis, and has produced
many champions of the Colony, among them being
Messrs. Ng Sze Kwong, my brother Mr. M. W. Lo,
and the Tsui Brothers, and including one lady
champion, my sister Mrs. Litton.
Tennis has taken such a popular hold on the
community that the Tennis League is now divided
into four divisions, with twelve Chinese teams
participating, namely; C.R.C., 5 teams: S.C.A.A.,
4 teams: Kowloon Garden Club, 2 teams: and the
Hong Kong University Tennis Club, 1 team. The
Chinese (C.R.C.) have been champions on sixteen
occasions during the past twenty-four years; and
this Club has held the title since the year 1942.
It was about the year 1904 that the Chinese
took up football seriously. In that year a number
of schoolboys from Hong Kong Government Schools
formed a (dub known as “ The Chinese Football
Club.”
In the year 1911 the First National Meet of
China was held at Nanking. A number of school-
boys from tlie Colony were selected to represent
“Southern China,” and they won the football
championship. In the following year nearly all
of these players were selected to represent China
in the first Far Eastern Olympic Meet in Manila.
In 1914, for the first time in the history of
football in the Colony, two Chinese teams par-
ticipated in the junior division of the Hong Kong
Football League, under the names of “The Con-
fucian Society” and “The Lam Long A.D.C.”
In 1916 the South China Athletic Association,
which has done so much for local football, was
formed.
In 1924, at the invitation of the Australian
Football Association, a Chinese, team composed of
players from the Colony, except for one player
from North China, made a tour of five States in
Australia. This tour was in every sense epoch-
making for, although delegations of Chinese sports-
men had taken part as representatives of their
country in the Far Eastern Games in Japan and
the Philippine Islands, this was the first occasion
on which a team of Chinese sportsmen ever toured
a foreign country. This tour was the forerunner
of many other tours.
At Olympic Games
In the year 1946 China was represented in
football and other games at the Eleventh World
Olympic at Berlin. Twenty-two football players
were selected and, of these, seventeen were chosen
from Hong Kong. Before reaching Berlin the
football team made an extensive tour of the South
Sea Islands and India, and went through the whole
programme of a series of twenty-seven matches
undefeated.
32
The Hong Kong Radio Review


Whilst in London they played against the
Islington Corinthians, and this is what the Sports
critic of one of the London papers said of their
play:
No use blinking at facts. Islington Corinthians,
almost an English International Amateur team as
names go, were shown at Highbury last night just
how football—real football—should he played. The
Chinese Olympic team, with an exhibition of school
learned soccer, showed the tricks of the game to lads
born more or less with a football in their hands.
Chinese football on this showing, is as good as any-
thing we have seen.
The local Chinese Football Clubs and Associa-
tions also made extensive tours during the off-
seasons, and among the places they visited were
Manila, Saigon,-the Federated Malay States, Java,
Medan and Rangoon. Incidentally, as a result
of these tours, they helped in raising the standard
of football in Manila, Saigon and the South Sea
Islands.
One of the chief features in the annals of Hong
Kong football was the visit to the Colony of the
English Amateur Football team, the Islington
Corinthians, in the year 1938, at the invitation of
the South China Athletic Association.
At present there are six football clubs affiliated
to the Hong Kong Football Association, namely:
The South China Athletic Association ; The Eastern
Athletic Association; The Kwong Wah Athletic
Association; The Sing Tao Sports Club; The Kit
Che Football Club; and The Chinese Athletic
Sports Club.
Eight Chinese teams participate in the Hong
Kong Athletic Football League (four in the First
Division, and four in the Second), and ten in the
Challenge Shield Competition.
The total number of Chinese players registered
with the Football Association is 228, which includes
the names of many famous players such as Mr.
Li Wai Tong, the idol of the Chinese public, whose
skill and sportsmanship are an inspiring example
to all local sportsmen.
The prowess of Chinese in local football can
he gathered from the following record :
(a) They first won the Senior Football Cham-
pionship in 1924. For fourteen years,
from and including 1927 to 1940, they
have won this Championship on no less
than ten occasions.
(b) They won the Senior Challenge Shield in
the years 1929, 1931, 1933 and 1935 to
1940 inclusive.
(c) They carried off all the major trophies of
the Hong Kong Football Association in
the year 1940.
The Chinese football teams have been instru-
mental in raising large sums of money for charity
every season, and the amounts so raised during the
last decade exceed the sum of $lOO,OOO.
Other Games
I have no time to speak on other games which
are played by Chinese in the Colony at the present
time, such as baseball, volley ball, basket ball,
softball, track and field, badminton and miniature
football. But I may say that miniature football
has taken a very strong hold on the Chinese,
particularly the younger set. This game follows
Association Football somewhat, but the size of the
ball is smaller, and the game is played by nine
players on each side instead of eleven. Every
afternoon this game is being played by a large
number of children on the various playgrounds.
That the striking progress which Chinese in
Hong Kong have made in the realm of sport is in
a large measure due to the encouragement, friendly
rivalry, co-operation and example of British sports-
men in the Colony is a fact which all Chinese
sportsmen would wish gratefully to acknowledge.
In the Legislative Council at its meeting on
the 28th November, 1940, speaking in connection
with tlie Immigration Bill, I ventured to remark:
Sir, had the circumstances been different, the
Colony would now be in the midst of its preparations
for celebrating its Centenary next year, and in the
course of that celebration the interdependence of this
Colony with China in general, and with the Province
of Kwangtung in particular, would have received
added emphasis.
Although the celebrations of our Centenary
have had to be confined mainly to this series of
talks over the radio, it is surely a matter for
gratification on the part of all the residents of the
Colony that Sino-British co-operation should con-
stitute such an important chapter in the history of
sport among Chinese in Hong Kong. I know I
am voicing the sentiments of all Chinese in Hong
Kong when I express the hope that such Sino-
British co-operation in the Colony, which has so
happily existed in the past—not only in sport, but
in business, commerce and social affairs—will con-
tinue and increase to the benefit and happiness of
both great Democracies.
Admiral Noel Coward’s diplomatic mission to
the United States remains something of a mystery.
We don’t think much of the suggestion of some
cynical hack or other that the Admiral has gone
over to confer on the British Government’s behalf
with Dame Shirley Temple over the Balkan crisis.
T)ame Temple is now a hag of eleven, and we learn
that she intends devoting the evening of her days
to economics . Having once given Admiral Coward
a big hello and a roguey salute she is likely (says
our informant) to dismiss that bluff old seadog
from her thoughts and concentrate on the Keynes
Theory of Compulsory Saving. —D. B. Wyndham
Lewis in The Bystander.
33
The Hong Kong Radio Review


HISTORY OF YACHTING
IN HONG KONG
A GREAT SPORT AND
ITS GROWTH
By Hon. Mr. A. L. Shields.
rpHF history of yachting in Hongkong goes back
almost as far as the history of the Colony.
In the “forties” of the last century yachting was
still in its infancy in England. The Royal Yacht
Squadron dates from 1812; it was then called the
Yacht Club, and later the Royal Yacht Club, but
no regular Regatta was held until several years
later. The Royal Thames Yacht Club was founded
in 1823, the Royal Northern on the Clyde in 1J324,
and the Royal Western at Plymouth in 1827.
It is therefore interesting to find that in 1849,
just eight years after the Colony was ceded to
Great Britain, and at a time when its resources
were very limited, the Victoria Regatta Club held
its first meeting.
The Canton Regatta Club was formed, how-
ever, in 1837, and races were held that year, and
in 1838, in Macao Roads, so that Hongkong was
not first in the field in these waters, (if you will
excuse the mixed metaphor).
Six cutter-rigged yachts competed in the first
race of the Victoria Regatta Club in 1849, and
there were nine entries the following year for a
cup presented by the Governor, Mr. Bonham. The
cup was again raced for in 1853, but there is no
record of yacht races thereafter until 1862; Harbour
races were held that year and in 1863.
First Recorded Race
The first recorded race outside Harbour limits
was in 1864, the course being round the island of
Hongkong to starboard, that is, starting to the
eastward via Lyeemun. This we still consider one
of our best courses for Cruising Yachts.
In 1866, the Douglas Challenge Cup, presented
by Messrs. Douglas Lapraik & Co., was raced for,
and to quote Sir Henry May from his book,
“Yachting in Hongkong ”: “As long as racing
in large yachts continued, it was the most coveted
of all prizes.”
The first Douglas Cup was won outright by
the “Mayflower” with two consecutive wins in
1866 and 1867.
The second Douglas Challenge Cup was raced
for in 1868, the course being round a mark-boat
off Macao and back, passing to the South of Lantao,
a distance of 70 miles. The cutter “Wave" was
the winner, and her time was 21 hours. On this
occasion the River Steamer “White Cloud” was
chartered by members of the Regatta Club to view
the race, which shows the keen interest taken in
these events, in what Trader Horn called “ the
earlies.”
In 1869 the time for the Macao race was 18
hours 50 minutes, but the best time recorded was
in 1875, by “Naiad”—l2 hours 31 minutes.
The yachts in those days were larger than we
have to-day. There were two schooners of 50 and
30 tons respectively, one cutter of 30 tons, one of
28 tons, one of 22 tons, and two of 20 tons, the
smallest being the cutter “ Yolante,” 9 tons.
These vessels were of the old narrow type,
known as “ Plank-on-edge.” They had long masts
and spars, and carried a spread of sail which called
for great skill, determination and seamanship from
their helmsmen and crews. Modern practice has
evolved a more wholesome type of boat with more
beam and more efficient sail plan, but just as Lord
Dundreary whiskers filled the eye and fluttered the
heart of the Victorian spinster, so the old narrow
gutted “plank-on-edge” type of yacht was just
the “Cat’s Whiskers” in the eyes of the yachts-
men of the same period. Very few boats appear
to have been built in Hongkong in the 70’s and
early 80’s, and these were generally of the smaller
type.
In 1885 there were only three entries for the
Douglas Cup, and in 1866 this cup was won by
“Naomi,” owned by Mr. Forbes, of Russell &
Co., and remained in his possession as no further
challengers came forward.
The Macao Race was not revived until 1924,
when Mr. G. H. Potts gave a Challenge Cup to
the Royal Hongkong Yacht Club for an annual
race which is held during, Christmas week. The
best time for the Potts Cup is 12 hours 23 minutes
and 16 seconds, by “ La Cigale ” in 1926, that is,
barely 8 minutes better than the time for “Naiad’s”
race in 1875, to which I have already referred.
History Repeats Itself
The last race for the large yachts of the old
type was sailed in 1890, and as Sir Henry puts it:
“ This noble sport after 41 years of life, died of
inanition, born chiefly of an ever-falling dollar.”
Thus does history go on repeating itself. The
financial problems which beset us to-day were also
experienced in what we are too ready to call the
“ good old days.”
Possibly some of you are familiar with the
Chinese rigged yachts of the so-called Lorcha type,
which were mostly built in the 90’s. These are
very able handy craft, although not so fast in
windward work as the cutter or sloop-rigged boats,
but the Chinese rig has not been tried, so far as
I know, on a properly designed modern hull.
Before the Great War I had the privilege of
racing “ Tavy,” owned by the Ward Room officers
of H.M.S. “ Tamar,” for one season, and later
“ Miranda,” then owned by Mr. Hall Brutton, and
34
The Hong Kong Radio Review


I have a very warm spot in my heart for the Chinese
Rio-.
In 1889, the Hongkong* Corinthian Sailing
Club was formed and thirteen boats ranging from
14’2" to 20' on the waterline were registered.
Among the boat owners whose names will be
familiar to many of you, we find A. H. Ough,
A. Denison, E. M. Hazeland and Messrs. Hastings
and Pollock. Mr. Heart was elected President,
Mr. Denison, “Captain” and Messrs. Hazeland
and Ough, “ Mates.”
During the next few years there was much
activity, more boats were built, and owners began
sending to England for designs and sails. Several
very successful craft were designed by Mr. Denison,
who was also an expert helmsman.
In 1893 application was made to the Admiralty
for permission to call the Yacht Club the “Royal
Hongkong Yacht Club,” and to fly the Blue
Ensign. In due course the necessary Warrant
was received.
In 1896, Mr. F. H. May, later Sir Henry May,
was elected Commodore, and held the position
continuously until 1904. In 1906 and 1907 he
again served as Commodore. Sir Henry was as
keen a helmsman as ever handled a tiller in these
waters, and many a yachtsman got his first taste
for the sport by being ordered, or I should say
dragged, out by him to pull on the main sheet in
hard weather.
Closely Contested Races
Races at that period were very closely con-
tested, and a deal of strong language was used
over protests for alleged infringements of the
Rul es. This is neither the time nor the place to
quote some of the recorded remarks addressed by
venerable helmsmen to budding yachtsmen, and
vice versa.
In 1904 the Corinthian A r acht Club was formed
by a few enthusiasts who broke away from the
Royal Hongkong Yacht Club. Like the McPher-
sons who are credited with having an Ark of their
own in the Flood, they wished to manage their
own affairs, and a great success they made of it.
They ran their own slipway, brought sail-making
in Hongkong to a high state of efficiency, wore
the most jaunty yachting caps and ran their races,
cruises and Regattas in a brass-bound businesslike,
way.
In connection with sail making, great credit
is due to Mr. G. G. Wood, who not only designed
many successful sail plans, but taught the sail-
makers the art of tapering seams, and other tricks,
and sat over them to see that no mistakes were
made. I have heard him remark: “That was a
good suit of sails, but look at the mess the
blighter has made stretching and cutting it”—the
“blighter” being one of the many boat-owners who
had had the benefit of G.G’s advice and assistance
in getting new sails, and then proceeded to elimi-
nate the few curves for which G.G. has a weakness
—that is in sails—and which even the flat sail
theorists usually agree in time are most efficient.
The Hongkong Corinthian Yacht Club was
wound up in 1921, as their site was to be wiped
out by the new reclamation at Praya East, and
their very successful Gael class and Heyward Hays
class were merged into the Roval Hongkong Yacht
Club.
The Present Fleet
The Royal Hongkong Yacht Club has now over
fifty cruising yachts ranging in size from four to
over twenty-six tons. Some very fine fast craft
have been built in recent years from the boards
of local designers and from designs obtained in
America and Europe. Hollow spars, sheet and
halliard winches and oiher modern gadgets are now
made locally. They compare well with the im-
ported article and are considerably cheaper.
The racing fleet consists of 18 Anker Class
boats and a number of H, I, Y, and G class boats
which compete in the mixed class races. The
total number of yachts now registered in the Club
is over 80, which is a very respectable figure and
probably seldom surpassed by Clubs which draw
their membership only from the city in Avhich the
club is situated.
In Hongkong the cost of yacht-building is
very reasonable and good work is turned out.
The Royal Hongkong Yacht Club has supervised
the building of boats for the Royal Singapore
Yacht Club, the Port Swettenham Yacht Chib and
a sailing club in Durban, South Africa. Several
boats have gone to buyers in America, and periodi-
cally some old “ shellback,” with a knowledge of
values in boat-building, turns up here to have his
dream-ship built, and takes her to “ furrin parts.”
The famous ketch “ Tai Mo Shan” was designed
and built here for’ five Naval officers who sailed
her to Dartmouth in twelve months via the North
Pacific, Panama Canal and the Atlantic. She had
no auxiliary motor.
To those of us who sail boats, it is astonishing
that yachting is not even more popular in Hong-
35
The Hon,, Kong Radio Review


kong. The conditions for racing are ideal, and
the cost of running and upkeep low. In my
experience I have only known of two yachts being
swamped in hard weather while racing, and I do
not know of a single life having been lost in
Hongkong waters.
A Typhoon Memory
Some years ago, a yacht was lost on the North
side of Stonecutters Island in a typhoon. The
black signal went up after she anchored, but there
were prospects of a cheerful evening on shore, and
Causeway Bay Shelter seemed much less attractive.
With the freshening wind, the mudhook
dragged, so a second anchor was dropped, but as
the blow increased, and she still dragged, the
cables were veered until the staples in the chain
locker were sharing the strain, but with no better
results. When sail was made in an attempt to
claw off the lee shore, “Rude Boreas” made short
work of the canvas.
Here was a fine predicament; no one to put
up a word of prayer, no bugler to sound the sauve
qui pent, so the No. 1 boat boy produced a round
of gin and bitters, complete with salver, which
helped a lot. Further stimulants were partaken
of in anticipation of the awful bump to come, and
just as the ship struck a rock and went to pieces,
the faithful boy produced the last round, still all
correct on salver, in accordance with “ 010 ” cus-
tom. After a scramble ashore through the surf,
the rest of the evening was spent joyfully and
comfortably at the Range Mess.
Typhoon signals are now hoisted at many
outlying points and there are numerous safe
anchorages outside the harbour. In any case,
typhoons don’t bother us in the winter months,
as the Royal Observatory refuses to have them
hanging around Hongkong after the Autumnal
Equinox. Weather prophets must have some rest.
Cruising Opportunities
The opportunities for cruising in Hongkong
waters are unsurpassed. To the westward w r e
have the waters north and south of Lantao,
Aberdeen, Channel and Lamm a Island. To the
eastward, we have Junk Bay, Port Shelter, Hebe
Haven, Rocky Harbour, Long Harbour, Tolo
Channel, Starling Inlet and Double Haven.
The scenery out there is magnificent. Doubt-
less most of you have spent what the Americans
call “good money,” to visit beauty spots and
enjoy scenery, but I doubt whether 5% of listeners
have any knowledge of those beautiful Hongkong
waters. The remedy, I suggest, is to take up
yachting and get away from confined spaces,
crowded beaches and golf courses and hot gasoline-
polluted roads. You will then be able to agree
with the boat-sailer when he remarks: “I pity
the poor devils wdio have to stay ashore on a grand
day like this.”
I would like to pay a tribute to the skill and
devotion of our paid hands, that is, the Chinese
boat boys. Coming as they do from the junk and
sampan fraternity, they have the traditions of the
sea in their blood. In fair weather and foul, they
do their utmost in racing and cruising. Even at
the end of a hard day, when weary and soaked
to the skin, they will work with a will to improve
the position of their boat in a race.
In cruising yachts, when an engine is installed,
they somehow acquire an uncanny knowledge of
the “innards” and moods of a marine motor. I
remember one motor which usually defied the
efforts of any European to start it, but which could
always be coaxed into action by the boy with the
aid of a hammer.
They are good cooks, and have that natural
cleanliness and tidiness which is essential in any
well-run boat. The Admirable Crichton himself
could not outshine a good Chinese boat-boy, when
his master is sympathetic and treats him well.
There is a camaraderie amongst people who “ go
down to the sea in ships.” Junks and sampans
almost invariably give way to yachts racing, and
one often gets a friendly hail, and a grin, from
a weather-beaten steersman who sticks his Celestial
thumb in the air, and calls “ Tai Yut.”
The courtesy of the Naval and Merchant ships
even in narrow waters, is also proverbial. A
steamer meeting a line of yachts strung out in a
race will alter course or reduce speed, and yachts-
men reciprocate by causing the minimum of in-
convenience.
In conclusion, I wish to refer to the Hongkong
Naval Volunteer Force, which was given such a
good start by Yacht Club members, to whom I
made an appeal as Commodore at a meeting which
I called as soon as the Government decided to give
the proposed Force its blessing. The Naval
Volunteer Force started with a nucleus of sailing-
men who loved the sea and, what was also very
important, were familiar with the waters around
Hongkong. Many of our boat boys were per-
suaded to join as Eatings, thereby providing some
very fine material with local knowledge who w r ere
proud to be “in the same boat ” with their masters.
Good luck to them all I
36
The Hong Kong Radio Review


RACING IN HONG KONG
A CENTURY’S SURVEY
By C. Bernard Brown.
TN compiling these few notes connected with the
early history of the Hong Kong Jockey Club
and amateur racing in the Colony, I have referred
to the records of the Club which are in my
possession, also to a book called “ Notes on Pony
and Horse Eacing in Hong Kong,” compiled and
published in 1909 by Hon. Mr. F. H. (afterwards
Sir Henry) May, a Steward and racing enthusiast,
subsequently, of course, a Governor of the Colony.
Eacing started here in the year 1844 but the
first recorded Annual Eace Meeting was held in
1845. This, and subsequent meetings, was
organized by a group of sporting gentlemen who
formed themselves into what was known as the
Hong Kong Eace Fund. Various breeds of horse-
flesh took part and we find Arab, Sydney, Cape,
Manila, English, Japanese and China Ponies and
horses competing, and often racing together. The
times on the whole were considerably slower than
at the present day.
In 1851, a sensation was caused by a Sydney
horse being taken out of a buggy and raced to
make up a field.
In 1848, the Wong-nei-Chong Stakes, the
Valley Stakes and the Ladies’ Purse were in-
augurated, these races being, as you will know,
perpetuated in our Annual Meeting Programmes
to-day. In that year, the Ladies’ Purse was won
by a pony called “ Beauty;” and may I here digress
for a moment ?
It was the custom for many years in the past
to include in the advertisement of the Annual
Meeting a statement that “the Stewards requested
the pleasure of the company of the Ladies at the
Eaces,” so that all ladies were admitted free.
This was discontinued in 1922 when an enclosure
was first reserved for Members. The occasion
inspired our local bard “ E. W. H.” to perpetrate
the following lines;
TO THE LADIES
E’er since the Races were begun,
E’er since that first recorded date
When, most correctly, “Beauty” won
The Ladies’ Piirse in ’4B
The Ladies, bless their hearts, have been
The chief adornment of the scene.
The Stewards requested, so ’twas phrased,
The pleasure of their company,
And would of old have been amazed
At any mention of a fee.
The ladies, by an act of grace,
Came down to see their men-folk race.
But now the age of chivalry
Is disappearing all too fast,
Such courtesies appear to be
Confined entirely to the past.
Now Ladies, if you’ll keep the date,
You’ll pay your money at the gate.
But do not therefore strike the names
Of those poor men from off your list;
Thinking there lurks within their frames
The soul of a misogynist.
They love you, Ladies, as before,
But Oh! they love your money more.
As membership carries with it the right to two
free Ladies’ tickets, I do not think that there was
any real cause for “ E. W. H.’s” plaint.
Th e year 1856 records the first race run ex-
clusively for China ponies, and all riders were
Naval or Military officers. There is no record of
the weights carried, but there is the significant
note : “ Won easy-—all bolted ” against this historic
event.
Curious names have been given to ponies in
the past, but many years ago, at a northern Eace
Meeting, a racing stable bad what is described as
“a delicate fling at the missionary body” by
naming one of their ponies “ The Eeverend Mr.
Mitchell ” after a famous Divine of that name.
“The Eeverend Mr. Mitchell ” proved to be faster
than his name would imply, as he won a half-mile
race and came in third in a handicap.
Hong Kong Derby
In 1873, the Hong Kong Derby was run for
file first time.
The Jockey Club was founded in 1884. 1
have a list of the original Members. None of
these is with us to-day, but it includes many names
which are time-honoured in the Colony, such as
C. P. Chater, S. Hancock, T. Jackson, G. E.
Lammert, J. Macgregor, D. Sassoon and E. Shewan.
1891 was distinguished by the appointment of
Mr. T. F. Hough as Clerk of the Course, which
office he held continuously until 1920. Eventually,
he was the Jockey Club, and I always thought that
the manner in which he invariably concluded his
letters: “I am, Sir, your Obedient Servant,” had
file same ironic flavour as it has now, emanating
from certain quarters. No one who attended Eace
Meetings in those days will forget that monumental
figure, invariably dressed in full hunting kit, with
top-hat and riding-crop.
He was a famous jockey in his day, winning
the Champions on more than one occasion, and Mr.
May described him as the strongest rider he had
ever seen on the Course. He was a man of large
frame and always experienced difficulty in keeping
his weight down. In 1894, he sustained a broken
leg when riding “Vagrant” in the Champion
Stakes, which put an end to his career as a jockey.
Mr. May tells a story in this connection.
Whilst in England, Mr. Hough consulted Sir
Frederick Treves about his injured leg, which was
giving him trouble, and was introduced to the
eminent surgeon by Mr. May’s brother, who had
informed Sir Frederick he was a crack jockey. At
that time, Mr, Hough must have weighed 13 stone
37
The Hong Kong Radio Review


and bis broad shoulders gave him the appearance
of being- even heavier. “This is Mr. Hough of
whom I have told you,’’ said Mr. May. Sir
Frederick greeted Mr. Hough and, turning to Mr.
May, said sotto rare: “I say, May, do they race
elephants in Hong Kong?”
My notes would not be complete without
reference to the “ Grand Old Man ” of Hong Kong
racing, the late Sir Paul Chafer. He attended
his first Race Meeting in 1865, was an original
member of the Club, becoming a Steward in 1880,
and was elected Chairman in 1892. From then
until his death in 1926 he continued to direct the
affairs of the (dub in that capacity. His successes
on the Turf were innumerable. Probably his
record year was in 1883, when he won 15 out of 26
events with ten ponies out of a stable of 13.
The first Club House which can be really
described as such was built in 1893 at a cost of
|28,000. It was very much needed. Mr. May
complained at the General Meeting the previous
year as follows: “At the last Meeting T was
generally a long way behind, the mud was thick,
and T got pretty dirty. The only means I had of
cleaning myself was a bucket of water out of the
proverbial ditch, which, as you know, is not verv
clean.” Mr. May was promised that there would
be a bathroom in the new Club House.
The China Ponies
The years 1868 to 1886 saw the decline and
gradual extinction of all but China ponies, and
from 1886 to 1900 practically all races were con-
fined to China ponies. In the latter year, however,
difficulty was experienced in acquiring China pony
subscription griffins, and fiftv Australian Walers
were imported with a height limit of 15.1. They
were not a success, however, the reasons advanced
being that they were much more expensive and not
nearly so hardv as China ponies and provided un-
even racing. One Member observed that they had
to be “fed up with Mellin’s food and treated with
Mrs. Allen’s hair restorer.” Three years later we
find the events for walers reduced to one per day,
and eventually discontinued altogether. Australian
ponies were not re-introduced until 1931.
I do not wish to dw T ell on the disaster of 1918,
when so many hundreds of lives were lost. The
scene will be indelibly impressed on the memory
of all those who were present that afternoon—the
sun shining, the gaily decorated stands and boxes,
the ponies on the Course going out to the Start,
and the Valley looking at its best and brightest
after a most sensational Derby. Then there was
a noise like a bunch of crackers going off, and we
saw the whole line of two and three-storied matshed
stands, crowded with spectators, collapse, literally
like a pack of cards. It was only a minute or
so before the first glow of flame heralded the fire
which soon converted the wrecked matsheds into
an inferno,
Other dates of interest of more recent years
are as follows:—In 1921, the first Chinese jockey
rode in our races. Riding subsequently caught
on tremendously amongst the Chinese, and to-day
a large proportion of our gentlemen riders are of
that nationality, including some of our leading
exponents.
In 1924, the great controversy arose as to
whether cross-breeds should be allowed to race.
The fear was expressed that it would kill racing-
tor the small owner. However, the horses won
the day and now you practically never see a genuine
China Pony on the Course. The pendulum is
swinging in favour of Australian ponies and the
1942 Derby will be confined to them for the first
time.
The Pari-Mutuel
In 1930, the present stands were erected in
record time. The pari-mutuel was functioning
in 1890 and I have seen some unusual occurrences
in my own time. I can remember an occasion
when, to the joy of the public, betting was still
open when the race was over and the winner being
led in.
Some years ago, a dividend was declared in the
Members’ Enclosure of about four times the amount
it should have been, and there was a tremendous
rush to draw the dividend before the mistake was
• discovered. The Manager of the Pari-Mutuel
issued a notice saying that he knew all sportsmen
and gentlemen who had been overpaid would refund
the excess, but only one sportsman and gentleman
responded.
In 1914, the first prize in the Champions
Sweep, amounting to |11,060, was not claimed and
never has been.
In some quarters doubts may be entertained
as to the propriety of carrying on racing in war
time. If any justification were needed, it should
be pointed out that, to date, the Jockey Club has
been able to contribute |309,400 or £19,000 to
War Funds, from sources which could not other-
wise have been tapped, and without detriment to
local charities, the Club’s subscriptions to which
have been increased.
Another scheme with which it has been possible
to proceed is the acquisition of some 50 acres of
land at Fanling now known as Reas River Paddocks,
which is being laid out in paddocks, stables,
quarters and exercise track with adequate shade
and water. This will prove an inestimable boon
to course sick and stable sick ponies by enabling
ihem to have a vacation in the country.
I think it may fairly be said of our Meetings
that the holiday atmosphere is preserved and that
our racing is not such a commercial proposition as
on many other courses. We do try to see that
you are relieved of your money in as comfortable
circumstances as possible.
38
The Hong Kong Radio Review


BRITISH DRAMATISTS
Broadcast from Z.8.W., Hong Kong, on
January 16th, 1940, hy Ft. T. F. Ryan, S.J.
6.-SHAW
/GEORGE Bernard Shaw once said of himself:
“1 am a typical Englishman, 1 was born in
Dublin.” No one would readily admit that he is
typical of anything, but many will see a certain
appropriateness in the Irish birth of this wittiest
man of the century. His family was completely
English, though it had remote Scottish origins,
and it owed its domicile in Ireland to a Williamite
cavalry officer who fought at the Boyne and was
rewarded with a confiscated estate in Kilkenny.
One of his descendants got a title and the dramatist
sard that the family “revolved impecuniously in
a sort of vague second cousinship round a
baronetcy . . . and they talked of ‘ the Shaws ’ as
of the Hohenzollerus or Romanoffs.” There was
not much of this family pride in his own home,
but his mother’s excessively poor opinion of the
Shaws brought some unhappiness into the home
that coloured his childhood. The male Shaws
found their level in the lower ranks of the civil
service, and George Bernard's father saw his whole
world fall to pieces when the undistinguished post
which he held was abolished, and he was left with
a small pension. He tried business with little
success, to the great dissatisfaction of the masterful
lady, twenty years his junior, whom he married.
Shaw senior led a drab life but he was not without
a sense of humour. Once when he brought his
small son for his first bathe at Killiney, he im-
pressed on him the necessity of learning to swim,
for, as he said: “When I was a boy of only
fourteen, my knowledge of swimming enabled me
to save your uncle Robert’s life.” Then he added
in a whisper: “And to tell you the truth, I never
was so sorry for anything in my life afterwards.”
He had convivial tastes, but inherited princi-
ples and an awesome respect for the family name
prevented him from indulging them. So he pre-
served the reputation of the Shaws by doing his
drinking at home. His w r ife, who laid no great
store on principles, who was tired of hearing about
the Shaws, and had had enough of respectability
on the mortgaged estate in Carlow on which she
was brought up, lost interest in her family and
threw all her energy into music. Outside the
home she was constantly engaged in organising
concerts and oratorios and operas, and when at
home she was singing and putting others through
their parts, and in this musical atmosphere the
only son of the house grew up. His father did
not count in his home or in his life.
Young George Bernard went to school at a
Wesleyan College and having failed there made
schools and education in general the subject of
one of his famous prefaces later on.
“ I did not learn my scdiool lessons,” he wrote
in the preface to Misallianfe, “ having- much more
important ones in hand, with the result that I have
not wasted my life trifling with literary fools in
taverns as Johnson did when he should have been
shaking England with the thunder of his spirit.”
Actually it is likely that if intellectual or
literary interests had prevailed in Shaw’s home he
would have shared them, just as he shared his
mother’s interest in music. He was conspicuous
neither for ability nor for character at school. He
left it at the age of fourteen and became an
office-boy in a land office. By his industry and
regularity he rose to be an important clerk in an
unimportant office at eighteen. Then he threw
up the position and went to London.
Early Life in London
He has been candid enough to kill the legend
that grew up about him of the young man going
to the great unknown world determined to make
a place for himself with his pen. He had no
thought of any pen but an office pen when he went
to London. His mother had set up there as a
singing teacher and he knew that she would
support him until something turned up. “I did
not throw myself into the struggle for life,” he
Wrote; “I threw my mother into it.” He got a
small position in the Edison Telephone Co., made
a little money and some interesting acquaintances
by playing accompaniments at concerts, and spent
his time listening to music and visiting picture
galleries. As a boy his greatest ambition had
been to draw like Michelangelo. Though he is
not reticent about his accomplishments he does
not claim to have realised it.
At the age of twenty-one he began to write
a novel. When no publisher would take it he
began another. In five years he had completed
fiv e novels. They were rejected unanimously and
he recalls them, he says, “ as five heavy brown-
paper parcels which were always coming back to
me from some publisher.” Considerate publishers’
readers who had seen more than one of them
recommended, in a kindly spirit, that he should
try some other occupation.
These novels, which have since made a fortune
for their publishers, are full of discussions that
are usually inconsequent, and often witty, on every
conceivable subject, touched off with the impudent
assurance that Shaw has never lost, and they
reveal a restless, questioning, undisciplined mind.
He had read widely and scrappily, he knew no-
thing about science or philosophy and had never
thought it necessary to learn even the terms. But
he had read books and articles on science and
scientific progress, on philosophy and religion, and
on the sins of the ancients and the hope of the
young. Some he accepted by instinct, others he
rejected on principle, and he seemed to have no
more fixed intention than an anxiety to amaze.
39
The Hong Kong Radio Review


The books were obviously the work of a very
clever young man wh(t had power to do something
great but would never do it unless he took himself
well in hand.
It was when he had finished the fourth, and
best, of them, Cashel Byron s Profession, that he
found a focus for his enthusiasm. He had joined
a debating society a few years before, and his first
effort at public speaking had been such a failure
that he determined to make a speech in public
every week for a year. He haunted public
meetings, and in 1882, when he was twenty-six,
he heard Henry George, the economist, lecture on
“ Land and Rent.” Henceforward Socialism was
his creed and his passion.
He started to read economics and he joined
the newly-formed Fabian Society and before long
he became one of its chief propagandists. He
was lecturer, pamphleteer and street orator, and
in years of intense activity developed in speaking
and writing that controversial style which he has
ever since maintained. His wit and his vivid
imagination enabled him to give colour and fire
to even the dullest subject, and when he spoke
in Hyde Park he had a ready answer for every
heckler that made his “ stand one of the most
popular in the Park.
A Literary Career
During all this time he was still living on
his family, for after a very brief commercial
experience he had, as he said, abandoned “ all
attempts to earn an honest living ” and had decided
on a literary career. In nine years he earned £6,
five of which were for an advertising article on
patent medicines, and part of the rest for burlesque
verses which were accepted as serious. It was
the Australian dramatic critic, William Archer,
who saw Shaw’s frayed cuffs and saw through his
pretence of being a young man of independent
means, recognised his ability and got him a place
on the reviewing staff of the Pall Mall Gazette.
This was the beginning. He then became art
critic and musical critic and dramatic critic of
various papers, and for nearly ten years enlivened
London weekly journalism with the most tempes-
tuous, iconoclastic and daringly brilliant criticism
that it had ever known.
Archer, in his friendly patronage of the
scintillating Fabian, had suggested that they
should collaborate on a play—he to produce the
plot and Shaw to provide the dialogue. Shaw
agreed. That was in the eighties, before even
Oscar Wilde had appeared to give a jolt to the
vogue of sentimental comedies at which ladies
wept at the trials of the lovers until they were
restored to one another’s arms to the sound of soft
music in the last act. Archer outlined a domestic
comedy of the approved pattern and handed it over
to his collaborator, but in a short time he received
a message from Shaw saying that he had finished
half the first act and wanted some more plot.
Archer replied rudely and the collaboration ended,
but six years later when it was suggested to Shaw T
that he ought to write a play, he unearthed the
fragment. His critical articles had made him
famous, and the topsy-turvy book, Hie Quintessence
of Ihsenism, had given him further prominence;
his lecturing and debating and endless talking had
shown his power of phrase and capacity for clever
dialogue, and he was growing tired of the weekly
effort to be fresh and new, so he took up the sug-
gestion at once and finished the play.' Widower s’
Houses was the result.
It was something very different from what
Archer intended. Instead of the conventional
play about lovers and their partings it had become
an exposure of housing scandals, with an attack
on slum landlords, municipal jobbery and many
of the other evils at which Shaw tilted in Hyde
Park. It had a noisy if not an enthusiastic
reception, and so had the author when he appeared
before the curtain. The usual first-nighters booed
because they did not understand it, and the Socia-
list following lustily cheered the red-haired man
with the flaming beard and the Mephistophelian
eyebrows who had pleaded their cause at the
street-corners. Expressions of rival opinion con-
tinued in the press notices, and a controversy about
it raged for a fortnight, and Shaw was delighted
with the publicity.
Better Than Shakespeare
He had made a discovery. While others
argued about the play and its alleged brilliance
and its obvious disregard for time-honoured con-
ventions, and while audiences passed it by to go
to see The Private Secretary and Haddon Hall and
Dorothy, that were to be seen in other theatres,
he had discovered that he had the stuff of a
playwright in him. He told the world, in fact,
that he was a much better dramatist than Shake-
speare, but as he had always said that he did not
think much of Shakespeare, this did not surprise
anyone.
His next plays were those that he afterwards
published under the classification of “Unpleasant
Plays,” and though they were able tracts they
40
The Hong Kong Radio Review


did not draw the public. He realised then that
if he wanted to preach social reform on the stage
he would have to make some more concessions to
public taste, for people did not come to the theatre
to see him hold the microscope up to nations. He
was sorry to have to make the concession, but
when he produced Arms and the Man the audience
cheered to the echo, and one critic said it was as
funny as Charley’s Aunt. When the cheering
stopped to allow him speak at the end, one man
in the gallery booed. Shaw smiled and looked
up in his direction.
“ My friend,” he said, “ I quite agree with
you, but what are we two against so many?”
For fifty years Shaw has been writing plays,
and in all he has written more than forty of them.
He has been called philosopher and mountebank,
genius and weathercock, public benefactor and
public danger, and at one time or another he was
called himself all these things, but he remains
one of the best-known of living men of letters and
beyond all question the greatest English dramatist
since Sheridan. This may be limited praise, for
he has had few rivals, but it is all that the present
age can say of him. He has been called a philo-
sopher, because he wrote plays on serious topics
and invited his audience to think, but he has no
fixed philosophy beyond a general vague desire for
the well-being of mankind; he has spoken on both
sides of almost every great subject of controversy,
he has knocked down phantom Bastiles of his own
construction, he has at one time or another ridiculed
every sacred belief of man, and sneered at every
great achievement, and then laughed at everyone
who has taken him seriously, and then said with
Keegan in John Bull’s Other Island “My way
of joking is to tell the truth.” Almost all his
great plays have given offence as well as amuse-
ment, and he makes every unpleasant point over
again in the prefaces that are often longer than
the plays and are generally even more irresponsible.
He has probably irritated more people than any
writer of his time, yet it must be conceded that
he is a great entertainer and it would be an
ungrateful public that would forget it.
His plays have been belittled because they
are “all talk.” But what talk it is, and how
unfailing a sense of the theatre inspires every line
of it! Heartbreak House is almost unbroken
conversation, Baek to Methuselah is half a week
of it, but interest never flags when Shaw is talking.
All his characters are interesting, for every one of
them is one aspect of that impish, challenging,
changeable, annoying, yet in spite of it all greatly
admired and loved, George Bernard Shaw.
WIRELESS NOTES & NEWS
By S. S Luo.
]\/r ODERN inventions are various and multi-
farions. One inventor may have a number
of inventions; a number of inventors may be
responsible for the same invention. The latter is
especially significant, as the modern-time invention
is more the result of collective research than of
the efforts of an individual. It seems that “the
time has come,” and an invention, no matter
whether there is a genius involved, is somehow
brought into existence by the call of necessity,
which is the mother of invention.
According to an article entitled “Colour
Television in U.S.A.” in the November issue of
The IF ireless World, the Columbia Broadcasting
System’s chief television engineer, Dr. Peter
Goldmark, formerly connected with the British
Pye Radio, Ltd. (whose radio was once claimed as
the only British radio with band-spread tuning),
is in the spotlight of television so far as colour is
concerned. Your technical contributor “ D. G.”
considers John L. Baird, who demonstrated colour
television in 1928, a pioneer. A Fnited Press
despatch from Schenectady, N. Y., proclaims the
General Electric consulting engineer Dr. E. F. W.
Alexanderson (whose nationality is not disclosed)
as the inventor of colour television.
* * * *
British contribution to the progress of tele-
vision, in pioneering research as well as in the
development of the television industry (government-
owned industry), is universally held in esteem.
In the spring of 1938, when television was still a
miracle to most Yankees and Dixies, I sailed across
the ocean from the New World to Europe. In
London, I visited the Marconi show room and saw
television for the first time in my life. The image
was very clear and almost as perfect as the sound.
The Marconi people told me that the range of the
transmission of vision was a radius of fifty miles.
I was also informed by some other sources that
the Germans had succeeded in extending the vision
range to about one hundred miles. However, I
did not see television in Berlin and no television
receiving sets were available on the market there
at that time. This led me to believe that at that
time, popular and regular telecast was only confined
to the London area.
* * * *
Latin America has for a long time been in-
vaded by Nazi radio propaganda as Germany,
though geographically more remote from Latin
America than the U.S.A. is, possesses shorter
“short-wave channels’’ to Latin America than
41
The Hong Kong Radio Review


does the U.S.A. To counteract the German
“invasion," the U.S.A. has been trying very hard
to expand its radio programmes for the Latin
Americans and to instal powerful transmitters with
antennae beamed to Latin America. Last year,
the Federal Communications Commission set a
minimum power of 50,000 watts for any short-wave
station to operate in the U.S.A.
Under the capable management of Buck Harris,
the General Electric station KGEI in San Francisco
has proved a tremendous success. It is not only
the only North American station that can be heard
consistently in the Orient, but it also furnishes
excellent reception in Latin America and in South
Africa. Its transmitting power has been increased
from 20,000 watts to 50,000 watts, in order to fulfil
the FCC’s minimum power requirement on the one
hand, and to give its listeners better reception on
the other. Little anxiety should therefore be
caused as regards the discontinuance of its broad-
casts, the reduction of power (which is impossible
under the present FCC ruling), or even a temporary
breakdown of the station.
Poor reception was a general phenomenon
during the past fortnight, and no American stations
could be heard in the mornings. Evening reception
of KGEI, however, was quite satisfactory last
Thursday and Friday. On Friday evening at 9.00,
an electrical transcription of “ The American Town
Meeting of the Air was heard for forty-five
minutes. The subject for debate was Should
the Lend and Lease Bill be Adopted?” Among
the prominent speakers was Norman Thomas,
socialist leader and many times candidate of the
Socialist Party for the Presidency of the United
States, who spoke on the negative side and received
not a few boos from the disapproving audience.
Local static, starting at 9.30, spoiled the rest of
the programme.
* * * *
Before the outbreak of the war, the Columbia
Broadcasting System (U.S.A.) and the German
Radio were on a contract for programme exchange.
On not a few occasions, CBS’s newcasts were heard
over Berlin stations. It appeared that the contract
failed to continue to function some time after war
between Germany and Great Britain was declared.
Last Thursday (January 16th) at 7.45 a.m.,
H.K. time, Berlin station DXB on 9.610 me. was
heard starting persistent calls: “ Hello, America!
Hello, America! Hello, CBS, Columbia Broad-
casting System! This is Berlin calling. It is
0.46, Central European Time. ... It is 0.48,
C.E.T. ... It is now 0.50, C.E.T. . . .
The calls lasted about ten minutes, but no contact
seemed to have been made. At 0.55 a.m., C.E.T.
(7.55 a.m., H.K. time) a five-minute news com-
mentary by an American (perhaps an American
“ Lord' Haw-Haw ”) was heard.
THE CENTENARY OF
HONG KONG
SOME SPIRITUAL ASPECTS
By th e Very Rev. J. L. Wilson, Dean
of Hong Kong.
Broadcast from St. John’s Cathedral
on January 19th, 1941.
A CENTURY is the most familiar and convenient
LY. of conventional time measures. We reckon
history by centuries. But the description may
cover the widest divergences of human experience
and stand for little or for much in the record of
humanity. For human history is not of one level.
The Century during which this Colony has been
built up must take rank among the centuries as
one of the most prolific in decisive forces; one of
the most remarkable stages of the history of man-
kind.
But we are commemorating not a century but
a local event which can claim little more than local
observance. Even if the war had not precluded
a more generous commemoration it is doubtful
whether the centenary of Hong Kong would have
excited great interest even within the Empire, for
much that is known of its past history is not always
creditable and much that makes Hong Kong worthy
to be praised and had in honour has not yet been
written or published from the housetops. Hong
Kong has suffered from the knowledge that she was
an unwanted child, separated so far distant from
her mother that her infant cries and adolescent
grievances could scarce be heard.
Like most unwanted children Hong Kong
proved to be quarrelsome and discontented and the
continual change of nurses and governesses (if the
analogy may be permitted), with their alternating
policies of appeasement and severity, did little
more than aggravate the discontent and retard the
growth and development of the Colony. But what
is our measurement of progress? A Christian
commemoration must be an act of gratitude for the
past and an affirmation of allegiance. We are
not commemorating to-day the growth of the Chris-
tian Church or the history of this Cathedral. Both
as a Cathedral and a Diocese our history begins in
1849. though Anglican services were held in a
matshed church from 1841. _ The Diocese originally
comprised the whole of China and Japan, and the
expansion of its work and the formation of new
dioceses will surely be written during the next few
years and will provide material for thanksgiving
and encouragement for those of us who believe the
words of the Psalmist: “Except the Lord build
this city their labour is but lost that built it.
A Contrast
If I draw a contrast between these two cen-
tenaries, that of the City and the Church, in the
light of my text: “The" things that are seen are
temporal but the things that are not seen are
42
The Hong Kong Radio Review


eternal,” it is not because I believe that one is
wholly Christian and the other wholly Pagan; it
is rather that we have come to judge them by a
different standard of measurement and have been
content to use a double measure. What have been
the glories of the Colony during the past hundred
years? What impression would St. Paul be likely
to derive from our books, our plays, our cinemas,
our newspapers and novels? Must it not have
seemed to him that our view of life was almost as
materialistic as that of the Pagan world in the
midst of which he lived?
We can all understand that a period in which
the energies of the race have been absorbed in the
endeavour to tame and master the forces of nature,
a period in which these efforts have been crowned
with signal success, an age which has witnessed the
almost indefinite “ increase of its enjoyments and
augmentation of its industries ” is one which
presents conditions singularly unfavourable to the
development of man’s purer instincts; that in such
an age as this the vision of things spiritual is
likely to become blurred and dim. So much we
understand; what is harder to realise and sad to
relate is that the first effects of democracy have
paved the way for this age of plutocracy. For
democracy swept aside those checks and barriers
which impeded the activities of wealth. It over-
threw those rival ideals which once divided with
riches the allegiance of mankind. The institutions
were effete, the ideals inadequate, but the homage
paid to rank, the claims of an exclusive class—even
the social prejudices of days gone by—were not
without their use if they served to teach mere
wealth its place. What does it profit to rid our-
selves of these outworn creeds if we put in its place
the standard of money?
Measure of All Values
So far from being a measure of value, money
has threatened to become the measure of all values.
The library of books, the gallery of pictures, is no
longer a test of the taste or skill of the collector.
It exhibits the power of his purse. When there
are so many things worth having which only money
can buy, is it surprising that men should arrive
at the conviction that there is nothing worth having
that money cannot buy? This tendency of the
age has invaded all our measurements. The test
of greatness is apt to be size and numbers. We
measure the importance of a nation by the return
of its census, its prosperity by the volume of its
trade, its intelligence by the circulation of its
journals or the business done at its post office. In
the same spirit we vaunt the mechanical triumphs
of our time : the calibre of the guns, the speed of
the engines, the tonnage of the vessels; plenitude
of resources, and even the death of ten million men,
does not bring home to us the lesson that in mere
bigness there is nothing great.
We may trace it in the changing ideals of
education. To maintain that it is better to train
the taste and judgment than the hand or the e'ye,
or that it is better to prepare people for the business
of. life rather than the business of a profession, has
become one of the impossible loyalties even of
Oxford, that home of lost causes. In the church
itself we trace the same disastrous tendency to
accept the ideal of a well organized parish.
Economic Motives
Most clearly is this influence seen in historical
analysis. Almost everywhere in searching for the
motive for past actions, it is the economic one that
is insisted on. It is not only the English and
Chinese who are known as nations of shopkeepers.
Your historian will attempt to show that all people
were at least influenced by shopkeepers. It is true
that there are periods of history where the issues
involved are mainly economic, but it is also true
that there are periods in history to which this
material aspect is entirely wanting; periods in
which the issues involved are not material but
spiritual ones, the rights of conscience or the
l)i vine principle of authority, and it is here, not
there, that we see the common human clay moulded
into greatness.
But what of the future? A friend of mine
with whom I spoke recently told me that he envied
me this chance of speaking at this Centenary. As
he was leaving the Colony I could not offer him
fhe opportunity to do so, but I asked him why.
11 is answer was that he might speak of the social
evils of the Colony and urge a crusade for social
reform.
Here again the tendency of the age to think
in material terms manifests itself. What is the
accepted principle of those who frame so many
schemes? Is it that the only things which matter
are those which touch the senses? Many of these
reform schemes betray a spirit almost as materialistic
as that of the plutocratic system they wish to
overthrow. To be for ever insisting on the im-
portance of material conditions, to preach that
poverty is the worst of vices, that money is the
thing that all must have: what is this but to pay
homage to the rich man’s creed? It seems to be
assured that if only you can make men neither too
rich nor too poor you will ensure them against the
danger of worldliness. I think that the assump-
tion is unwarranted and that the result would be
a shabby materialism and a squalid Utopia.
May I read some words of F. W. Robertson
written exactly a hundred years ago?
I care but little for the progress of the race if
that only means that some centuries hence individuals
will eat and drink and sleep more abundantly and
more cleanly than the masses now: these individuals
being mortal, perishable, and dying out for ever. You
take away all that makes humanity grand and then
ask us to care for it and its progress. But apart
from religion and all the possibilities that that in-
volves, the destinies of the race appear to me to be
little more interesting than the contemplation of the
prospects of a tray of silkworms, obscene and crawling
reptiles, that may hereafter become moths, or die
when the eggs are only laid.
43
The Hong Kong Radio Review


I think the criticism stands. Much of our
idea of progress is identified with the accidental
and the temporal and cannot be distinguished from
the Pagan view of life. The Christian view or
Eternal view is not concerned with the prolongation
of the things of time and sense, but rather with
a completely different standard of measurement.
We glory not in the progress and development of
material things but in the love for peace and
humbleness of spirit which are being born and
renewed in us daily. “God forbid,” says St.
Paul, “that I should glory save in the Cross of
Jesus Christ.” It was a Governor of Hong Kong,
Sir John Bowring, who from those words composed
in Macau the well-known hymn “In the Cross of
Christ I glory, Towering o’er the wrecks of Time.”
I quote these words not as a pietistic or vague
religious expression but as words of immediate
practical application. Let the Cross of Christ be
used as a measuring-rod of all our thoughts and
actions.
It is astonishing how by that standard little
things become great and things otherwise looming
large become small.
“Father, Forgive Them”
I take as an example something which often
appears to us so great that it forms a background
to our lives, some slight, some grievance, some
feeling of neglect, or unrequited love. We may
try to justify this feeling, but when we measure it
by the Cross of Christ how infinitely small it
appears. When we hear Him saying over and
over again : “ Father forgive them for they know not
what they do.” We realise that no treachery, no
had been able to embitter that loving
spirit, and our own grievance which loomed so
large is now seen to be insignificant. Again there
are times when the pleasures and prizes of this
world seem of great importance. Let us measure
them by the Cross of Christ. What is their worth
then? Are we not like the ignorant soldiers who
at the foot of the Cross threw dice for the tattered
robes of Jesus? It is a true instinct that makes
a man say: “My richest gain I count but loss,
for by that light the glittering prizes of the world
are tawdry. There are on the other hand some
things which we count as trivial and of little
importance. Our prejudices, our narrow-minded-
ness, our bigotry, our ill-temper, our love of ease;
these sins do not unduly worry us. Measured by
the world standards are they not but faults and
foibles which must not be taken too seriously ?
But measure them by the Standard of the Cross
and immediately they are seen to be the very sins
which brought Jesus to that shameful throne.
Had they known it they would not have crucified
the Lord of Glory. Of course not, neither would
we, yet these very things which we call petty,
crucify the Son of Man afresh.
Again we apply our ordinary measuring rod
to our estimate of God’s Love and feel that as
Head of a great concern He cannot be interested
in all the millions of people who are judged as
unimportant. But apply this Divine Standard
of measurement and we see how futile our judg-
ments are.
“ He died for men He never knew,” and the
depth of his love is shown most clearly in his
sacrifice.
The love of God is broader than the measure
of man’s mind. The value that Jesus put on man’s
capacity to achieve the noblest and highest visions
can also be measured by the Cross.
“I, if I be lifted up will draw all men unto
me,” He said. It is as if He said: “I know
human nature —my teaching may not persuade
them; my life may not compel them; but my death
will draw them to me.” So He believed that man
was to be measured not in terms of his animal
ancestry with its pugnacity, its sensuality, its
greed, and its competitiveness, but in terms of
honour, truth, purity, love, and co-operation.
One thing more is necessary. Faith that God
can work this change in man.
After the attempt to climb Mount Everest in
1922 the qualities necessary for such an enterprise
were set down by the participants: “Experience
in mountain climbing, perfect physical fitness,
singleness of aim,” but beyond that “unswerving
faith in the possibility of its achievement.”
Such is the faith in or allegiance to the cause
of Christ that is asked for from Christians. Faith
like that will break the vicious cycles of war, peace,
war; depression, prosperity, depression. Such a
faith can determine the future of this Colony.
“ To-morrow and to-morrow and to-morrow,
And all our yesterdays have lighted for us the way
to dusty death,” says the Pagan cynic. “And
all our yesterdays have lighted fools the way to
eternal life,” is the prayer of all true followers of
Christ.
DOWN ON THE
SHORT WAVES
By “ D.G.”
I HAVE just received my December copy of QST,
which is celebrating its 25th anniversary.
Looking back over the past twenty-five years the
progress that has been made is simply amazing.
To-day, I am afraid, we take too much for granted.
Apart from radio circuits, component parts have
made a lot of headway. Only the other day I
saw a new kind of Tubular condenser, which, it
is claimed will resist dampness much more effec-
tively than the old type. This little component,
I might add, is the cause of a large percentage of
receiver failures. I purchased one in order to test
it. The snag was to obtain a uniform amount of
44
The Hong Kong Radio Review


Time (a.m
.) Location
Call
Frequency
O.OOli
San Francisco
KGEI
9.670 ,,
2.00
London
Direct
on various
4.45
frequencies
5.00
Athlone
—
17.84 Me.
5.00
Hsinking
MTCY
11.77 „
5.15
Rome
12R03
9.63 „
5.45
Motala
SBU
9.53 ,,
5.55*
Bucharest
—
9.28 ,,
6.00
Chungking
XGOY
11.90 ,,
6.00
Moscow
RW96
6.03 „
6.00*
Manila
KZRH
9.635 ,,
6.15
Berlin
DJI
7.29 ,,
6.15S
Manila
KZRH
710 kc.
6.30
Moscow
RAL
9.60 Me.
6.30
Rome
2R04
11.810 „
*
Manila
KZRM
9.570 „
6.45
London
Direct
on various
frequencies
7.00
KZRH
9.635 „
7.00*
Boston
WRHW
11.73 „
7.2511
Boston
WRIT
11.870 „
7.30
Manila
KZIB
9.50 „
7.45t
Boston
WRIT
11.870 ,,
8.00
Shanghai
XMHA
11.85 „
8.15°
San Francisco
KGEI
15.330 ,,
8.30
Manila
KZRH
9.635 ,,
8.45
San Francisco
KGEI
15.33 „
9.00
London
Direct
on various
frequencies
Time(p.m.) Location
Call
Frequency
1.00
Shanghai
XMHA
11.850 Me.
6.35*
Manila
KZRM
9.570 „
6.45
Saigon
FZS
11.780 ,,
6.45
Rome
12R08
17.820 „
7.00
London through
ZBW 845.000 kc.
5 5
Direct
on various
frequencies
7.15
Ankara
TAQ
15.195 Me.
7.30
Berlin
DJB
15.200 „
7.45
Sydney
YLQ7
11.880 ,,
8.00
Shanghai
XMHA
11.860 ,,
8.00
Berlin
DJQ
15.280 ,,
8.30
Tokyo
-TZI
9.535 „
JYZ
11.815 ,,
8.3011
San Francisco
KGEI
9.670 ,,
9.00
London through
ZBW 845.000 kc.
y J
Direct
on various
frequencies
9.30
Tokyo
JYZ
11.815 Me.
9.45
Sydney
YLQ2
11.870 ,,
9.45
Bangkok
HSP5
11.715 ,,
9.45t
Sydney
KZRM
9.570 „
10.007
KZRM
9.570 ,,
10.00
Berlin
DJW
9.650 „
10.00
Chungking
XGOY
9.630 „
10.15
Shanghai
XMHA
11.860 ,,
10.30
San Francisco
KGEI
9.670 ,,
10.45
Berlin
DJW
9.650 ,,
11.30
San Francisco
KGEI
9.670
11.45
Saigon
FZS
11.780 t „
00.00
London
Direct
on various
frequencies
dampness for the experiment. In the end I de-
cided to soak it in water and see how quickly it
deteriorated. Now it has been soaking for over
24 hours and it is still perfect. If they are all
as good as this, it looks as though a lot of our
troubles are over.
The station which I thought to be a Thailander
has turned out to be Bangkok on 11.715 Me. all
right. I was’ under the impression that the
programme hours given in “R.R.” were in local
Hong Kong time, but they are not. One hour
should be added to correct this difference. On
Thursday night, when checking this, I found the
signal fairly strong, but speech was badly distorted
and difficult to follow. Last week I remarked
about KGEI being off the air at times during the
evening at what appears to be irregular hours.
During the past week I have observed the same
thing and think it must be some special break in
the programme. On Friday night I heard Lord
Haw-Haw at 10.15 p.ni. He was as uninteresting
as usual, and after wasting two minutes on him I
said “Ha-Ha!” and moved on. At 8 p.m. on
Fridays, Sydney YLQ2, broadcasts a weekly review
of enemy propaganda which is fully worth listening
to. It is rumoured that Sydney re-broadcasts the
Hong Kong weekly newsletter from ZBW3. I
have listened for it myself but have not been
successful in hearing it. Probably I have been
listening to the wrong station (at this time) because
almost on the same frequency is a 8.8. C. trans-
mitter, and I can never tell “t’other from which
unless I hear an announcement.
Shanghai, XMHA, continues to be fairly good
when not being “jammed.” One evening the
signal was excellent from 6 to 8 p.m., but this is
more the exception than the rule. Mornings are
erratic, with interference and what have you.
The German Shanghai station which is not very
far away in frequency is never “ jammed,” I notice.
Reception conditions, at the present time, must
be rather bad, as after spending ten minutes
listening in the 14 Me. amateur band I heard only
one station, and that was in Manila!
NEWS SERVICES IN ENGLISH
The following are particulars of services in English received in Hong Kong:—
* Sundays excepted,
t Sundays & Mondays excepted.
1i Mondays only. § Approx, frequency.
II Sundays only. 0 Mondays only.
* Sundays excepted. t Saturdays excepted.
* Saturdays & Sundays excepted. J Sundays only,
f Fridays excepted.
45
The Hong Kong Radio Review


• - V
our
'
r
? i
iii
Best Protection
'i?'S z h
'*rn
.. rA>:
Strong Nerves and
Restorative Sleep
SOUND healthy nerves will keep you cheerful and resolute.
Refreshing 1 sleep will restore your energy and drive away
depression. These are your natural, and best, safeguards in these
frying times. For maintaining strong nerves —for ensuring restorative
s ]eep— ‘ Ovaltine ’ has outstanding advantages.
The exceptional nerve-building properties of ‘Ovaltine’ have been
demonstrated in many scientific tests. It is supremely rich in
lecithin —a valuable nerve-building element derived from the
new-laid eggs used in its manufacture. No nerve food is
complete without eggs.
‘Ovaltine’ is the world’s best nightcap. It possesses special
properties which quickly induce natural, restorative sleep. A
3-year series of scientific tests showed that ‘Ovaltine’ taken
regularly at bedtime, cut down tossing and turning and gave
feeling of being “better rested” in the morning. ‘Ovaltine’
is entirely free from drugs.
Moreover, ‘Ovaltine’ is a complete and perfect food, containing the
essential vitamins, proteins, carbohydrates and mineral salts in
correct proportions. Thus, ‘Ovaltine’ will in itself,
sustain strength and stamina over prolonged periods.
It can be eaten dry, if desired.
The supreme economy of ‘Ovaltine’ is evident in the
fact that the small tin makes 24 cupfuls of delicious,
concentrated nourishment —an important consideration
at this time when you must get the best possible value
These are some of the many reasons why you should
insist on ‘Ovaltine’ and make it your constant
stand-by.
cUlicicntJ
Ovaltine
and note the x)ijjerence
Distributors: JARDINE,MATHESON & CO., LTD.
3SC 15 3
■is
.ovaltine
M '* * r -
ii
M
-A.
S
'
hr*
mm
'SSSS&M
fm
1/u 1
u:
- -
The Hong Kong Radio Review


Wednesday, 15th January
Mr. Cordell Hull, the first witness to testify
before the Foreign Affairs Committee of the House
of Representatives when it began its examination
of the “ Lease and Lend” Bill to aid Britain, said
that “control of the high seas by law-abiding
nations is the key to the security of the Western
Hemisphere.” He urged the importance of giving
maximum material* assistance to Britain and said:
“ Overwhelming speed is our greatest need to-day.”
Britain will need the sum of £755,000,000 to
pay for her purchases in the United States from
January Ist, 1941 to January Ist, 1942. Mr.
Morgenthau, Secretary of the United States Trea-
sury, stated that Britain’s exchange assets in the
United States amounted to £443,00(1,000.
By the end of 1940, monetary aid given by
Colonial Governments, native rulers, various bodies
and individuals in the Colonial Empire to tin 1
British Government totalled over £lB million.
The R.A.F. reports the destruction of a further
fifteen enemy aircraft, nine of which were German
Junkers-87 bombers.
Although there is no confirmation of the report
that Sicily has been taken over by the Germans,
information has been received in London that
German airmen helping Italy have bases there.
Herr Otto Strasser, the exiled German leader,
in an interview to-day declared that Hitler will,
perhaps in a few weeks, strike in Ireland and Syria.
By letting loose an army of parachutists and
transport planes over Ireland, he could gain in
three days a formidable invasion base against
Britain.
Italian counter-attacks on a small scale were
beaten off with heavy losses to the enemy, states
a Greek communique. A number of prisoners
were taken.
The Peruvian Senate has approved the motion
for the withdrawal of the licence issued to the
Lufthansa Company to fly in Peru.
A violent earthquake rocked the island of New
Britain. Much damage was done to house property
in and around the port of Rabaul.
Thursday, 16th January
Mr. Cordell Hull, Secretary of State, did much
io secure the passage of the “Lease and Lend”
Bill through Congress, when he delivered a most
severe indictment of the aggressor nations. Much
of his attack was directed against Japan.
Gieat Britain is now getting 00 per cent, of
America’s production of fighter planes.
Subscriptions to the Netherlands East Indies
Spitfire Fund have now reached over a million
guilders. Money for sixty-seven Spitfires and 18
bombers has already been forwarded.
The Belgian Government has decided to <n Ve
£lOO,OOO to the Spitfire Fund.
Shanghai has now contributed £lOO,OOO to-
wards the purchase of an entire squadron of planes.
The squadron will be called the British China
Squadron.
The ILA.F. bombed Catania and its airport,
upon which the German dive-bombers which
attacked the Illustrious were based. Between 30
and 40 enemy aircraft were destroyed or severely
damaged.
The R.A.F. made its heaviest attack on
TV ilhelmshaven last night. Brest, docks at
Emden, Rotterdam and Flushing were also bombed,
as well as aerodromes and other targets in Germany
and Holland.
Eighty-seven Italian planes lie rotting in the
vast Italian aerodrome in El Aden, in Libya.
Most of them were destroyed by the R.A.F. and
the rest by the retreating Italians.
The cruiser Southampton is a total loss, states
an Admiralty communique. She was hit during
an air attack on units of the Mediterranean Fleet.
HISTORY IN THE MAKING
47
The Kong Kong Radio Review


Bristol was the main object of the German
raid on Britain yesterday. Some damage was
done.
The United States and Mexico are to open
negotiations, with the object of forging a stronger
bond of friendship and collaboration.
A new Sino-British trade agreement is to be
signed in Chungking shortly.
Friday, 17th January
The New York Herald-Trihune, in a leading
article declared: “We do not believe that the
British Government should be treated as a potential
pauper and subjected to a ‘Means Test’.”
In a statement in regard to the “ Lend and
Lease ” discussions, Colonel Frank Knox said that
if the United States did not wish to face the
consequences of the establishment in South America
of an aggressive military power, they must now
prevent Germany from overturning British sea-
power.
Prominent Irishmen in Singapore have cabled
Mr. de Yalera, imploring Eire to abandon her
neutrality.
The presence of German dive-bombers in the
Mediterranean will necessitate additional precau-
tions in the matter of convoys of war materials to
Greece and Egypt.
According to the Athens radio, two Italian
liners were sunk in the Adriatic while taking
troops to Albania.
Saturday, 18tk january
Mr. Winston Churchill's reference to the need
of “weapons, ships and aeroplanes” is given great
prominence in the American press.
Sir Arthur Salter, Parliamentary Secretary to
the Ministry of Shipping, speaking of Britain’s
shipping needs stated that “if we have a prospect
of adequate replacement some time ahead and can
get assistance in bridging the interval, we can be
confident about the future.”
In a resume of the R.A.F. attacks on Germany
and occupied territory, it was stated that 270
towns had been bombed, Hamburg, Bremen, Kiel,
Wilhelmshaven and Emden receiving the greatest
damage.
The island of Rhodes was raided and a fire
caused at Maritzi aerodrome. Assab, Berbera,
Zeila and Deina as well as Tobruk were also
bombed.
Subscriptions to all Indian Defence loans
totalled £31,750,000 up to January 11.
Swansea was heavily attacked during Friday
night.
Two British trawlers have been sunk, but no
casualties occurred.
The British Government is putting into force
the new compulsory scheme for incendiary bomb
fighting.
The French claim that two Thai warships were
sunk in a naval engagement. A third was dam-
aged.
Sunday, 19th january
Kassala, on the border of Anglo-Egyptian
Sudan and Italian Eritrea, was captured by the
British forces.
Sikh leaders from all parts of the Punjab
resolved at a meeting in Lahore to form a Defence
of India League, with the object of securing the
maximum effort by the Sikhs in defending India
and ensuring victory for Britain.
Greek troops continue to advance in the central
sector of the Albanian front, capturing much
48
The Hong Kong Radio Review


material. Other sectors remain unchanged though
many prisoners have been captured.
Five German dive-bombers were shot down
over Malta on Saturday, when three raids in rapid
succession took place.
Dr. Clodius, the German Economics Minister,
with 35 experts, is to visit Rome this week, when
talks of “ greater importance than any since the
commercial agreement of February, 1940 ” will
take place.
Colonel Frank Knox, Secretary for the United
States Navy, declared that the United States could
not retain her self-respect if she haggled over the
terms of aid to Britain, Greece and China.
Plans to freeze all foreign assets in the United
States are formulated. The* order would stop the
flow of German, Japanese and Italian funds in and
out of the country.
It is officially announced from Vichy that all
misunderstandings between Marshal Petain and M.
Laval have been smoothed out.
It is reported that the Messageries Maritimes
has been placed under State control.
Monday, 20th January
President Roosevelt took the Presidential oath
for the third time to-day.
A total of 17 enemy dive-bombers were brought
down in an attack on Malta yesterday. In three
days the Germans lost at least 37 machines and
since they appeared over the Mediterranean ten
days ago, nearly 90 have been destroyed.
Southampton was raided during the night,
but not severely. Hundreds of incendiary bombs
were promptly rendered ineffective by fire-fighters.
Five bombers were destroyed during the night.
Although well-informed quarters in Vichy
declare that the Petain-Laval meeting involves no
change of policy, it is assumed elsewhere that
Marshal Petain, due to German pressure, was
forced to give way and that he will now take over
the role Germany wants to see assigned to him.
More money to pay for the German army of
occupation has been borrowed by the French Go-
vernment from the Rank of France.
The Japanese Cabinet has approved a draft bill
revising the electoral law, under which only males
above 25 and who are heads of households will be
enfranchised. The number of seats in the Lower
House will also be reduced from 4GG to 400.
Tuesday, 21st January
A scheme for the more efficient discharge of
ships and the lessening of delays at the docks will
be announced by Mr. Ernest Bevin, Minister of
Labour, when he speaks in the House of Commons
in a debate on manpower and production.
Catania was again raided, and Valona in
Albania was subjected to the heaviest bombing
attack yet carried out in that region.
For the fifth week in succession, British mer-
cantile losses were well below the average.
The Daily Telegraph's Diplomatic correspon-
dent declared that the meeting between Hitler and
Mussolini was held at Berchtesgaden, and that
Mussolini “ was a suppliant for German aid and
had to accept the German terms. They included
the command of the Italian forces, in fact if not
in appearance.”
The South African Air Force successfully
bombed Neghelli in Abyssinia.
The Greeks, in spite of bad weather conditions,
continue to advance. In the southern sector, a
trench-mortar corps was captured.
•
The Greek anti-submarine defences have sunk
an Italian submarine.
49
The Hong Kong Radio Review


Awmsui
wssas
a
h
.iSBJ
T #P
m
¥m*£
s®
<j-3
SmS
D AIBy
wm*,
&&}
■m
SC*
jV*'
3$
wi
m
Sy^s*
5
*BW!
'm
Co
M
AM
/
*0
•i-fe
V/uV
ifVS
%
<2
5?
&
.-SW
5»
Li
iSS
&
w
/
HS&
2*«*
3aS
Sf
/
V*
m
: HP
L-?*"
4
SA-.
y
✓*■ <**<■
THE DAIRY FARM ICE & COLD STORAGE CO., LTD.
A new submarine to replace the Sokol, to
replace the famous Polish submarine Orzel, has
been launched in England.
Italian casualties in Albania are estimated
at 50,000 in London, but the official Italian figures
put the number at 2,000 killed and 6,500 wounded.
The Greeks have taken 16,000 prisoners together
with 1,000 deserters.
The Italians, comprising two divisions, are
retreating as fast as they can in Eritrea. Indian,
Sudanese and British troops are taking part in the
pursuit.
Two British trawlers, the Marx Prince and
Ref undo, have been sunk.
A China National Aviation Corporation machine
has completed its first trial trip to India from
Chungking-. It is thought that a regular service
will he established between Calcutta and Hong
Kong.
Mr. Matsuoka said that Japan’s relations with
Germany and Italy were becoming closer politi-
cally, militarily, economically and culturally.
Japan’s foreign trade for 1940 ended with a
favourable balance of 263,000,000 yen, declared
Mr. Kawada, Minister of Finance.
Wednesday, 22nd january
The British penetration of both the outer and
inner defences of Tobruk to a depth of five miles
is announced in a special communique. The
advance is continuing. Many prisoners have
already been taken, including one Italian general.
The Italian cruiser San Giorgio in Tobruk harbour
is in flames, together with dumps of petrol and
stores.
50
The Hong Kong Radio Review


ADVANCE WIRELESS PROGRAMMES
HONGKONG
All times are Hong Kong Time (8
hours ahead of G.M.T. and 13
hours ahead of E.S.T.).
The following frequencies (wave-
lengths) are used: —
Medium Wave Aerial Power
ZBW 845 kc (355 m.) 2.0 kW.
(Entire programme)
Short Wave Aerial Power
ZBW3 9.52 Me (31.49 m.) 2.5 kW.
(Part programme)
ZBW3 will normally be used for
transmission of the European pro-
grammes between the hours of 1 and
2.15 p.m., and later from 8 to 11
p.m., except on Sundays, when the
morning transmission will open at
the times advertised.
Chinese programmes are broadcast
simultaneously by ZEK on 640 kc
(468 m.), and also by ZBW3 from
6 to 8 p.m.
The News is relayed from London every
day at 7 p.m. and 9 p.m.
Saturday, 25th January
12.15 p.m.—Short Service of Intercession.
12.30 p.m.— Schumann— Trio in D Minor,
Op. 63—Cortot, Thibaud and Casals.
1.00 p.m.— Local Time Signal and Weather
Beport.
1.03 p.m.—Bale da Costa at the Piano.
1-13 p.m.—Billy Cotton and His Band.
1.30 p.m.— Beuter & Bugby Press, Weather
Forecast and Announcements.
1.45 p.m.—Variety with Max Kester,
Flanagan & Allen and Sophie Tucker.
2.15 p.m.—CLOSE DOWN.
5.45 p.m.—lndian Programme.
6.30 p.m.—Closing local Stock Quotations.
6.32 p.m.—Charlie Kunz, Gre’a Keller A
Flotsam and Jetsam.
7.00 p.m.— LONDON—The News.
7.15 p.m.— LONDON — ‘‘ Questions of the
Hour ”.
7.30. p.m.—Derek Oldham (Tenor) and
De Groot and His Orchestra.
8.00 p.m.— Local Time Signal, Weather
Beport and Announcements.
8.03 p.m.— LONDON — Music Hall.
9.00 p.m. —LONDON—The News and
News Commentary.
9.30 p.m.— Rachmaninoff —Concerto No. 3
in D Minor, Op. 30—Vladimir Horowitz
(Piano) & London Symphony Orch.
10.05 p.m.—Local sport results.
10.08 p.m.— Bizet’s “Carmen” Act I.
11.00 pm.— LONDON — TaIk: “In My
Opinion ”.
11.15 p.m.—Variety and Dance Music.
12 midnight— CLOSE DOWN.
Sunday, 26th January
11.00 a.m.— RELAY Morning Service
from St. Joseph’s Church.
12.15 p.m.— Cesar-Franck- —Prelude, Aria
and Finale—Alfred Cortot (Piano).
12.38 p.m.— Gounod’s “Faust” Act I.
1.00 p.m.— Local Time Signal and Weather
Beport.
1.03 p.m.—Songs by Peter Dawson (Bass-
Baritone) .
1.13 p.m.—J. H. Squire Celeste Octet.
1.30 p.m.— Beuter & Bugby Press, Weather
Forecast and Announcements.
1.45 p.m.— Berlioz —Symphonic Fantas-
tique, Op. 14—Orchestre de la Societe
des Concerts du Conservatoire.
2.30 p.m.—CLOSE DOWN.
5.45 p.m.—lndian Programme.
7.00 p.m — LONDON—The News.
7.15 p.m.— LONDON — “Questions of the
Hour
7.30 p.m.—A Light Orchestral Concert.
8.00 p.m.— Local 'Time Signal, Weather
Beport and Announcements.
8.03 p.m.—A Short Piano Recital by
Egon Petri.
8.23 p.m.—Selections from Stainer’s
‘ ‘ The Crucifixion ’’.
8.45 p.m.— STUDIO — Book Reviews.
9.00 p.m.— LONDON — The News and
News Commentary.
9.30 p.m.— Haydn —Symphony No. 88 in
G Major—N.B.C. Symphony Orchestra.
9.55 p.m.—Three Songs by Dennis Noble
(Baritone).
10.05 p.m.— Handel— Concerto Grosso No.
4—The Boyd Neel String Orchestra.
10.15 p.m.— STUDIO — Sunday Evening
Epilogue.
10.35 p.m.—CLOSE DOWN.
Monday, 27th January
12.15 p.m.—Short Service of Intercession
12.30 p.m.—Gracie Fields and A. Askey
in Variety.
1.00 p.m.— Local Time Signal and Weather
Beport.
1.03 p.m.—Dance Music by T. Dorsey
and His Orchestra.
1.30 p.m.— Beuter & Bugby Press, Weather
Forecast and, Announcements.
1.45 p.m.— Mozart —Quartet in F. Major
—Budapest String Quartet.
2.15 p.m.—CLOSE DOWN.
5.45 p.m.—lndian Programme.
6.30 p.m.—Closing local Stock Quotations.
6.32 p.m.— Schumann Concerto in D
Minor—Yehudi Menuhin (Violin) and
Philharmonic Symphony Orchestra of
New York.
7.00 p.m.— LONDON—The News.
7.15 p.m.— LONDON — “Questions of the
Hour ”.
7.30 p.m.—Marek Weber and His Orch.
with Mavis Bennett (Soprano).
8.00 p.m.— Local Time Signal, Weather
Beport and Announcements.
8.03 p.m.—This week’s programmes.
8.07 p.m.—Patricia Rossborough at tlie
Piano.
8.15 p.m— LONDON—“ Hi, Gang”!
9.00 p.m.— LONDON — The News and
News Commentary.
9.30 p.m.—Excerpts from Gilbert and
Sullivan’s “The Mikado”.
9.55 p.m.—Clapham & Dwyer and Cicely
Courtneidge.
10.15 p.m.—Dance Music.
11.00 p.m.—CLOSE DOWN.
Tuesday, 28th January
12-15 p.m.—Short Service of Intercession.
12.30 p.m.—A Bach Programme with his
Violin Concerto in A Minor.
1.00 p.m.— Local Time Signal and Weather
Beport.
1.03 p.m.—Magyar! Imre and His Orch.
1.13 p.m.—Popular Ballads.
1.30 p.m.— Reuter & Bugby Press, Weather
Forecast and Announcements.
1.45 p.m.—Dance Music by Roy Fox and
His Orchestra.
2.15 p.m.—CLOSE DOWN.
5.45 p.m.—lndian Programme.
6.30 p.m.—Closing local Stock Quotations.
6.32 p.m.— Tchaikowsky Aurora’s
Wedding—Ballet Music—London Phil-
harmonic Orchestra.
7.00 p.m.— LONDON—The News.
7.15 p.m.— LONDON —“ Questions of the
Hour
7.30 p.m.—Portuguese Programme.
8.00 p.m.— Local Time Signal, Weather
Beport and Announcements-
-8.03 p.m.—Max Miller, Florence Desmond
and Michael Moore in Variety.
900 p.m.— LONDON—The News and
News Commentary.
9.30 p.m.— LONDON—TaIk: ‘‘Scots
Abroad
9.45 p.m.—Joseph Hislop (Tenor), Mary
Kay (Contralto) and the Pipers of the
Cameron Highlanders.
10.15 p.m. Aldershot Tattoo, 1938
Massed Bands, Aldershot and Eastern
Commands.
10.35 p.m.—Light Orchestral Selections.
11.00 p.m.—CLOSE DOWN.
Wednesday, 29th January
12.15 p.m.—Short Service of Intercession.
12.30 p.m.— Auber —Overture to “ Fra
Diavolo ” —Milan Symphony Orchestra.
12.40 p.m.—Some Welsh Songs.
1.00 p.m.— Local Time Signal and Weather
Beport.
1.03 p.m.— Mozart —Concerto in (I Minor
—Edwin Fischer (Piano) and London
Philharmonic Orchestra.
1.30 p.m.— Beuter & Bugby Press, Weather
Forecast and Announcements.
1.45 p.m.— Latest Variety.
2.15 p.m.—CLOSE DOWN.
51
Additionql Daventry relays will be made as convenient; these & any other alterations to programmes will be announced from time to time.
The Hong Kong Radio Review


5.45 p.m.—lndian Programme.
6.30 p.m.—Closing local Stock Quotations.
6.32 p.m.—Excerpts from Act II of
Mozart’s “The Magic Flute”.
7.00 p.m.— LONDON—The News.
7.15 p.m.— LONDON— “ Questions of the
Hour
7.30 p.m. —Sydney Gustard at the Organ.
7.45 p.m.—Hawaiian Selections.
8.00 p.m.— Local Time Signal, Weather
Beport and Announcements.
8.03 p.m.—A Programme of English Com-
posers.
8.30 p.m.— STUDIO—TaIk by Father
T. Ryan, S.J.
8.50 p.m.—Three Songs by S. Robertson
(Bass-Baritone).
9.00 p.m — LONDON—The New* and
News Commentary.
9.30 p.m.— LONDON—TaIk.
9.45 p.m. — Grieg —Concerto in A Minor,
Op. 16—William Backhaus (Piano) and
Ncav Symphony Orchestra.
10.13 p.m.—Songs by Kirsten Flagsted
(Soprano).
10.23 p.m.—Compositions of Dvorak.
11.00 p.m —CLOSE DOWN.
Thursday, 30th January
12.15 p.m.—Short Service of Intercession.
12.30 p.m.—Songs by Turner Layton at
the Piano.
12.40 p.m.—Nat Gonella and His
Georgians.
1.00 p.m.— Local Time Signal and Weather
Beport- „ _.
1.03 p.m.—The Hill Billies, Molly Picon
and Reginald Dixon.
1.30 p.m.— Beuter cfc Bughy Press, Weather
Forecast and Announcements.
1.45 p.m.—Marek Weber & His Orchestra
with Essie Acklaud (Contralto).
2.15 p.m — CLOSE DOWN.
5.45 p.m.—lndian Programme.
6.30 p.m.—Closing local Stock Quotations.
6.32 p.m.—A Haydn Programme with his
Quartet in B Major, Op. 76, No. 4.
7.00 p.m.— LONDON—The News.
7.15 p.m —LONDON— “ Questions of the
Hour ”.
7.30 p.m.—Selections from Light Opera.
8.00 p.m.— Local Time Signal, Weather
Beport and Announcements.
8.03 p.m.—Alfred Cortot at the Piano.
8.15 p.m.— STUDIO—Local Newsletter.
8.30 p.m.—Raymond Newell (Baritone) in
a Light Orchestral Concert.
9.00 p.m —LONDON—The News and
News Commentary.
9.30 p.m.—Ambrose and His Orchestra
playing Dance Music.
10.00 p.m.—A Variety Programme with
R. Houston, A. Marshall, S. Holloway,
Geo. Formby and Others.
11.00 p.m.— CLOSE DOWN.
Friday, 31st January
12.15 p.m.—Short Service of Intercession.
12.30 p.m.—Saint-Saens —Concerto in G
Minor, Op. 22—Arthur de Greef (Piano)
and New Symphony Orchestra.
1.00 p.m.— Local Time Signal and Weather
Be port.
1.03 p.m. —Jack Hylton & His Orchestra.
1.30 p.m.— Beuter & Bughy Press, Weather
Forecast and Announcements.
1.45 p.m.—Excerpts from Gilbert and
Sullivan.
2.15 p.m —CLOSE DOWN.
5.46 p.m.—lndian Programme.
6.30 p.m.—Closing local Stock Quotations.
6.32 p.m.—Malcolm MacEachern (Bass)
and the Band of H.M. Grenadier
Guards.
7.00 p.m.— LONDON—The News.
7.15 p.m.— LONDON—“ Questions of the
Hour”.
7.30 p.m.—Dance Music by the 8.8. C.
Dance Orchestra.
8.00 p.m.— Local Time Signal, Weather
Beport and Announcements.
8.03 p.m.—*A Variety Request Pro-
gramme.
9.00 p.m.— LONDON—The News and
News Commentary.
9.30 p.m.— LONDON—TaIk! “Books and
People
9.45 p.m.—Alfredo <fe His Orchestra.
10.05 p.m.— John Gay’s “The Beggar’s
Opera ’ ’.
11.00 p.m — CLOSE DOWN.
Saturday, Ist February
12.15 p.m.—Short Service of Intercession.
12.30 p.m.—Variety with The Mills Bros,
and Elsie Carlisle.
1.00 p.m.— Local Time Signal and Weather
Beport.
1.03 p.m.—Vivian Ellis at the Piano.
1.13 p.m.—Film Selections.
1.30 p.m.— Beuter & Bughy Press, Weather
Forecast and Announcements.
1.45 p.m.—Dance Music by Harry Roy and
His Orchestra.
2.15 p.m — CLOSE DOWN,
5.45 p.m.—lndian Programme.
6.30 p.m.—Closing local Stock Quotations.
6.32 p.m.—A Rossini Programme with his
Overture to “L’ltaliana in Algeri.”
7.00 p.m — LONDON—The News.
7.15 p.m.— LONDON— “ Questions of the
Hour
7.30 p.m.—A Light French Programme
with Damia and Charles Trenet.
8.00 p.m.— Local Time Signal, Weather
Beport and Announcements.
8.03 p.m.— LONDON — “Music Hall.”
9.00 p.rn — LONDON—The News and
News Commentary.
9.30 p.m.—Local sport results.
9.33 p.m.— Tchaikowsky —Symphony No. 5
in E Minor, Op. 64—New Symphony
Orchestra.
10.20 p.m.—A Concert by B. Gigli (Tenor),
Pan Casals (’Cello) and W. Gieseking
(Piano).
* Listeners are invited to send in Re-
quests for any items they may care to
hear. Letters must reach the Secretary
not later than 5 p.m. on Wednesday, 29th
January.
11.00 p.m.— LONDON—TaIk: “In My
Opinion.”
11.15 p.m.—Dance Music.
12 midnight— CLOSE DOWN.
Sunday, 2nd February
10.30-11.30 a.m.— RELAY—Morning Ser-
vice from the Union Church.
12.15 p.m.— Schubert —Duo for Piano and
Violin in A Major, Op. 162—Sergi Rach-
maninoff (Piano) & F. Kreisler (Violin)
12.36 p.m.— Schubert Songs.
12.46 p.m.— Max Bruch —Kol Nedrei, Op.
47—Pau Casals (’Cello) and the London
Symphony Orchestra.
1.00 p.m.— Local Time Signal and Weather
Beport.
1.03 p.m.—Piano Duets by Rawicz and
Landauer.
1.15 p.m.—The Boston Promenade Orch.
1.30 p.m.— Beuter & Bughy Press, Weather
Forecast and Announcements.
1.45 p.m.—A Beethoven Programme with
his Symphony No. 5 in C Minor, Op. 67.
2.30 p.m.— CLOSE DOWN.
5.45 p.m. —Indian Programme.
7.00 p.m.— LONDON—The News.
7.15 p.m.— LONDON— “ Questions of the
Hour
7.30 p.m.— Amy Wcodforde-Finden’s ‘The
Four Indian Love Lyrics ’ sung by N.
Eddy (Baritone).
7.45 p.m.— Chopin —Grand Studies, Op. 60
—Kilenyi (Piano).
8.00 p.m.— Tmcol Time Signal, Heather
Beport and Announcements. '
8.03 p.m.—Scarlatti—“ The Good Hu-
moured Ladies’ Ballet—London Philhar-
monic Orchestra.
8.20 p.m.—Songs.
8.30 p.m.— Tartini —Sonata for Violin and
Piano (“ Devil’s Trill ”)—Y. Menuhin
(Violin) and A. Brown (Piano).
8.45 p.m.— STUDIO—Book Reviews.
9.00 p.rn.— LONDON—The News and
News Commentary.
9.30 p.m.—Beethoven—Symphony No. 1
in C Major, Op. 21—8.8. C. Symphony
Orch. conducted by A. Toscanini.
10.15 p. m — STUDIO—Sunday Evening
Epilogue,
11.00 p.m.— CLOSE DOWN.
Monday, 3rd February
12.15 p.m.—Short Service of Intercession.
12.30 p.m.—H. Torrani (Yodeller) and L.
Fillis & His Hawaiian Orchestra.
1.00 p.m.— Local Time Signal and Weather
Beport.
1.03 p.m.—Songs by Leslie Hutchinson at
the Piano.
1.13 p.m.—The Regal Cinema Orchestra.
1.30 p.m.-— Beuter Bughy Press, Weather
Forecast and Announcements.
1.45 p.m.—Compositions of Gershwin in-
cluding his “An American in Paris”
Suite.
2.15 p.m— CLOSE DOWN.
5.45 p.m.—lndian Programme.
6.30 p.m.—Closing local Stock Quotations.
52
Additional Daventry relays will be made as convenient; these & any other alterations to programmes will be announced from time to time .
The Hong Kong Radio Review


6.32 p.m.—“Swing” Music with Dinah
Shore.
7.00 p.m—LONDON—The News.
7.15 p.m.—LONDON—“Questions of the
Hour ”.
7.30 p.m.—Edith Loraud and Her Orch.
7.45 p.m.—The Kentucky Minstrels.
8.00 p.m.— Local Time Signal, Weather
Report and Announcements.
8.03 p.m.—This week’s programmes.
8.07 p.m.—“Fats” Weller at the Organ.
8.15 p.m—LONDON—“ Hi, Gang!”
9.00 p.m—LONDON—The News and
News Commentary.
9.30 p.m.—Selections from Gilbert and
Sullivan’s ‘‘ Ruddigore ’’.
9.55 p.m.—Violin Solos by Temianka.
10.12 p.m.—Rachmaninoff—Symphony No.
2 in E Minor, Op. 27—Eugene Ormandy
and the Minneapolis Symphony Orch.
11.00 p.m.—CLOSE DOWN.
Tuesday, 4fh February
12.15 p.m.—Short Service of Intercession
12.30 p.m.—Military Band Music with
Percy Heming (Baritone).
1.00 p.m.— Local Time Signal and Weather
Report.
1.03 p.m.—Lalo—Symphonic Espagnole—
Bronislav Hubermann (Violin) <fe Vienna
Philharmonic Orchestra.
1.30 p.m.— Reuter <h Rugby Press, Weather
Forecast and Announcements.
1.45 p.m.—Variety Avith Frank Luther.
2.15 p.m—CLOSE DOWN.
5.45 p.m.—lndian Programme.
6.30 p.m.—Closing local Stock Quotations.
6.32 p.m.—Mendelssohn—Quartet in D
Maior, Op. 44, No. I—Stradivarius
String Quartet.
7.00 p.m.—LONDON—The News.
7.15 p.m.—LONDON—“Questions of the
Hour”.
7.30 p.m.—Portuguese Programme.
8.00 p.m. —Local Time Signal, Weather
Report and A nnouncements.
8.03 p.m.—A Programme of Popular
Classics.
9.00 p.m.—LONDON—The News and
News Commentary.
9.30 p.m—LONDON—TaIk; “Soots
Abroad ”.
9.45 p.m.—Sir Harry Lauder in some
Scottish Songs.
10.05 p.m.—A Variety Programme with
Murgatroyd and Winterbottom Mary
Ellis, Kenny Baker & Others.
11.00 p.m—CLOSE DOWN.
Wednesday, Sth February
12.15 p.m.—Short Service of Intercession.
12.30 p.m.—Compositions of Handel with
his Casadeus Concerto in B Minor.
1.00 p.m.— Local Time Signal and Weather
Report.
1.03 p.m.—Dance Music by Bob Crosby
and His Orchestra.
1.30 p.m.— Reuter & Rugby Press, Weather
Forecast and Announcements.
1.45 p.m.—Musical Comedy Selections.
2.15 p.m.—CLOSE DOWN.
5.45 p.m.—lndian Programme.
6.30 p.m.—Closing local Stock Quotations.
6.32 p.m.—A French Programme.
7.00 p.m.—LONDON—The News.
7.15 p.m.—LONDON—“ Questions of the
Hour
7.30 p.m.—STUDIO—TaIk on Ballet illus-
trated by gramophone records.
8.00 p.m.— Local Time Signal, Weather
Report and Announcements.
8.03 p.m.—Latest Dance Music & Variety.
8.30 p.m.—STUDIO—“ Makers of Medi-
cine—l ” by Fr. Byrne, S.J.
8.50 p.m.—lnterlude.
9.00 p.m.—LONDON—The News and
News Commentary,
9.30 p.m—LONDON—TaIk.
9.45 p.m.—Vaughan-Williams —Fantasia
on a Theme by T. Tallis—The 8.8. C.
Symphony Orchestra.
10.00 p.m.—John Ireland —Sonata for
’Cello and Piano—Antoni Sala (’Cello)
and John Ireland (Piano).
10.23 p.m.—Quilter Songs.
10.35 p.m.—Compositions of Elgar.
11.00 p.m.—CLOSE DOWN.
Thursday, 6th February
12.15 p.m.—Short Service of Intercession.
12.30 p.m.—Frances Day & Sandy Powell
in Variety.
1.00 p.m.— Local Time Signal and Weather
tic port.
1.03 p.m.—Reginald Foort at the Organ.
1.15 p.m.—.lack Hylton and His Orch.
1.30 p.m.— Reuter & Rugby Press, Weather
forecast and Announcements.
1.45 p.m.—Mozart —Concerto in E Flat
Major—Artur Schnabel and Karl Ulrich
Schnabel (2 pianos) and London Sym-
phony Orchestra.
2.15 p.m.—CLOSE DOWN.
5.45 p.m.—lndian Programme.
6.30 p.m.—Closing local Stock Quotations.
6.32 p.m.—A Beethoven Programme with
the Egmont Overture and Sonatas in G
Major, Op. 49, Nos. 1 and 2.
7.00 p.m.—LONDON—The News.
7.15 p.m.—LONDON—“Questions of the
Hour”.
7.30 p.m.—New Mayfair Orch. and songs
bv Nan Maryska (Soprano).
8.00 p.m.— Local Time Signal, Weather
Report nnrl Anv^mce.ments.
8.03 p.m.—Violin Solos.
8.15 p.m.—STUDIO—Local Newsletter.
8.30 p.m.—Half an hour of Light Opera.
9.00 p.m—LONDON—The News and
News Commentary.
9.30 p.m.—-Charlie Kunz at the Piano.
9.40 p.m.—Hawaiian Selections.
10.00 p.m.—An hour of Dance Music.
11.00 p.m.—CLOSE DOWN.
Friday, 7fh February
12.15 p.m.—Short Service of Intercession.
12.30 p.m,—Modern French Music includ-
ing Ravel’s ‘ Daphnis and Chloe ’ Suite
Symphonique.
1.00 p.m.— Local Time Signal and Weather
Report.
1.03 p.m.—The Merry Macs and Carlyle
Cousins in Variety.
1.30 p.m.— Reuter 6c Rugby Press, Weather
Forecast and Announcements.
1.45 p.m.—Dance Music by Geraldo and
His Orchestra.
2.15 p.m.—CLOSE DOWN.
5.45 p.m.—lndian Programme.
6.30 p.m.—Closing local Stock Quotations.
6.32 p.m.—A Programme of early Italian
music with Vivaldi’s Violin Concerto
in C.
7.00 p.m.—LONDON—The News.
7.15 p.m—LONDON—“Questions of the
Hour ”.
7.30 p.m.—Norman Allin (Bass-Baritone)
and the 8.8. C. Wireless Military Band.
8.00 p.m.— Local Time Signal, Weather
Report and Announcements.
8.03 p.m.—Popular Old Variety Stars in a
programme of their well known songs.
9.00 p.m.—LONDON—The News and
News Commentary.
9.30 p.m —LONDON—TaIk: “ Books and
People.’’
9.45 p.m.—Brahms—Sonata in F Minor
Lionel Tertis & Harriet Cohen (Violin
and Piano).
10.10 p.m.—Puccini’s ‘La Tosca ’ Act I.
11.00 p.m.—CLOSE DOWN.
MANILA
KZRM—RADIO MANILA
Long 486 M.—618.5 k.c.
Short 31.35 M.—9570 k.c.
FAR EASTERN BROADCASTING
Saturday, 25th January
5.30 a.m.—Radio Reveille—Band Music.
5.45 a.m.—FEB News in Spanish.
6.00 a.m.—News in Chinese—presented by
Chinese Commercial News.
6.30 a.m.—FEB News in English.
6.45 a.m.—Tropical Moods—Xavier Cugat
and his Orchestra.
7.00 a.m.—The Master Singers.
7.15 a.m.—Composer’s Corner.
7.30 a.m.—The Musical Clock Time
Signals, Weather Report and Resume
of Programme for the Day.
8.00 a.m.—Sign Off.
12 Noon—Tabacalera’s Midday News and
Music:
12.05 to 12.15—News in Spanish.
12.20 to 12.30—News in Tagalog.
12.30 to 12.45—International News Ser-
vice.
12.50 to I.oo—Local news in English.
1.00 p.m.—News in Chinese and Music—
Sponsored by Dy Buncio.
1.30 p.m.—Sign Off.
5.00 p.m.-—Moment Musicale—A Concert
in Miniature.
5.45 p.m.—Programme Preview, Weather
Report.
5.50 p.m.—Happy Harmonies.
6.00 p.m.—Thrifty Guide (Aling Juana
Mapag-Impok).—Sponsored by National
Food Products Corp.
6.25 p.m.—Vitalis Sportscast presenting
“The Sports Newsreel of the Air.”—
Sponsored by Bristol-Myers.
53
The Hong Kong Radio Review
Additional Daventry relays will he made as convenient: these & any other alterations to programmes will be announced from time to time


6.30 p.m.—Local Market Report.—
Courtesy of Bureau of Commerce.
6.35 p.m.—FEB News in English.
6.45 p.m.—FEB News in Spanish.
6.55 p.m. —The Jai-Alai Sports Review-
Sponsored by Jai-Alai Corp, of the
Philippines.
7.00 p.m.—DMHM Programme—Philip-
pine Songs.
7.15 p. m.—Radio’s Little Theatre Fea-
turing Ana Maria and Rodrigo with
Guest Stars in “Preview Night.”
7.45 p.m. —Records.
8.15 p.m.—Fo*o News Open Forum of the
Air.
9.00 p.m.—NEPA Voice of Industry.—
Local Artists of Note.
9.30 p.m.—Dance Music from the Fiesta
Pavilion, Manila Hotel.
10.00 p.m.—“lt’s Dance Time’’—Spon-
sored by Tabacalera.
10.30 p.m.—Studio Party.
11.00 p.m.-—News in Chinese —Sponsored
by Tabacalera.
11.30 p.m. —Sign Off.
Sunday, 26th January
11.30 a.m,—Tabacalera’s All-Request Pro-
gramme.—“Your favourite selection as
and when you want it played.”
1.00 p.m.—Sign Off.
5.00 p.m.—Dance Music.
5.25 p.m.—Lutheran Hour.
5.50 p.m.—Vitalis Sportscast presenting
“The Sports Newsreel of the Air.”—
Sponsored by Bristol-Myers.
6.00 p.m.—Philippine Army Band Concert
from the Luneta.
7.00 p.m.—The Commonweal Hour.—
Radio Dramatization.
8.00 p.m.—The Quintette of the Hot Club
of France.
8.15 p.m.—“Sundays at Home.”
8.30 p.m.—Lipton’s Tea presents A. Roth
and his Music.—Sponsored by Connell
Bros. Co. (Phil.).
8.45 p.m.—Tabacalera’s Overseas New
Period.
9.00 p.m.—“PHILIPPINE TOWN MEET-
ING OF THE AlR”—Sponsored by
The Philippine Long Distance Tele-
phone Co.
10.00 p.m.—Tabacalera’s International
News Service Period.
10.15 p.m.—-Sunday Concert.
1(4.45 p.m.—Tabacalera’s UP and INS
Overseas News.
11.00 p.m.—Sign Off.
Monday, 27th January
5.30 a.m.—Radio Reveille—Baud Music.
6.00 a.m.—News in Chinese—presented by
Chinese Commercial News.
6.30 a.m.—FEB News in English.
6.45 a.m.—Novelties.
7.00 a.m.—The Song Shop—Yours for a
Song.
7.15 a.m. —Composer’s Corner.
7.30 a.m.—The Musical Clock Time
Signals, Weather Report and Resume
of Programme for the Day.
8.00 a.m.—Sign Off.
12 Noon—Tabacalera’s Midday News and
Music:
12.05 to 12.15—News in Spanish.
12.20 to 12.30—News in Tagalog.
12.30 to 12.45—International News Ser-
vice.
12.50 to I.oo—Local news in English.
1.00 p.m.—News in Chinese and Music—
Sponsored by Tabacalera.
1.30 p.m.—Sign Off.
5.00 p.m.—Moment Musicale—A Concert
in Miniature.
5.45 p.m.—Programme Preview, Weather
Report.
5.50 p.m.—Happy Harmonies.
6.00 p.m.—Thrifty Guide (Aling Juana
Mapag-Impok).—Sponsored by National
Food Products Corp.
6.25 p.m.—Vitalis Sportscast presenting
“The Sports Newsreel of the Air.”—
Sponsored by Bristol-Myers.
6.30 p.m.—Local Market Report.—
Courtesy of Bureau of Commerce.
6.35 p.m.—FEB News in English.
6.45 p.m.—FEB News in Spanish.
6.55 p.m.—The Jai-Alai Sports Review—
Sponsored by Jai-Alai Corp. of the
Philippines.
7.00 p.m.—Salon Strings—Dinner Music
—Sponsored by Tabacalera.
7.15 p.m.—“AT THE CIRC US .
7.45 p.m. —Latin Rhythms by the Stude-
baker Champions.—Sponsored by Manila
Motor Co.
8.00 p.m.—Tabacalera Presentation. — .
Native and Latin Airs.
8.30 p.m.—Captivating Lady presented
by Glo-Co.
8.45 p.m.—Tabacalera’s Overseas News
Period.
9.00 p.m. —Gems from the Operas.
9.45 p.m.—Tabacalera’s International
News Service Period.
10.00 p.m.—“lt’s Dance Time’’—Spon-
sored by Tabacalera.
10.30 p.m.—Musical Interlude.
10.45 p.m.—Tabacalera’s UP and INS
Overseas News.
11.00 p.m.—News in Chinese—Sponsored
by Dy Buncio.
11.30 p.m.—Sign Off.
Tuesday, 28th January
5.30 a.m.—Radio Reveille—Band Music.
5.45 a.m.—FEB News in Spanish.
6.00 a.m.—News in Chinese—presented by
Chinese Commercial News.
6.30 a.m.—FEB News in English.
6.45 a.m.—Tropical Moods—Xavier Cugat
and his Orchestra.
7.00 a.m.—The Master Singers.
7.15 a.m.—Composer’s Corner.
7.30 a.m.—The Musical Clock Time
Signals, Weather Report and Resume
of Programme for the Day.
8.00 a.m.—Sign Off.
12 Noon—Tabacalera’s Midday News and
Music:
12.05 to 12.15—News in Spanish.
12.20 to 12.30—News in Tagalog.
12.30 to 12.45—International News Ser-
vice.
12.50 to I.oo—Local news in English.
1.00 p.m.—News in Chinese and Music—
Sponsored by Dy Buncio.
1.30 p.m.—Sign Off.
5.00 p.m.—Moment Musicale—A Concert
in Miniature.
5.45 p.m.—Programme Preview, Weather
Report.
5.50 p.m.—Happy Harmonies.
6.00 p.m.—Thrifty Guide (Aling Juana
Mapag-Impok).—Sponsored by National
Food Products Corp.
6.25 p.m.—Vitalis Sportscast, with Dudley
Lyndon presenting “The Sports News-
reel of the Air.”—Sponsored by Bristol-
Myers.
6.30 p.m.—Local Market Report.—
Courtesy of Bureau of Commerce.
6.35 p.m.—FEB News in English.
6.45 p.m.—FEB News in Spanish.
6.55 p.m.—The Jai-Alai Sports Review—
Sponsored by Jai-Alai Corp. of the
Philippines.
7.00 p.m.—Salon Strings—Dinner Music
—Sponsored by Tabacalera.
7.15 p.m.—The Five Shades of Blue.
7.30 p.m.—Philippine Charity Sweepstakes
Programme.—Music from the World of
the Classics and Light Classics.
8.00 p.m.—White Horse Programme, fea-
turing Evangelina Tamesis, the White
Horse Trio and “The Wizard of the
Bow”.—Sponsored by Hanson, Orth &
Stevenson. Inc.
8.15 p.m.—“Night at the Ritz”.
8.30 p.m.—Rodrigo Danao’s “ South
American Way.”
8.45 p.m.—Tabacalera’s Overseas News
Period.
9.00 p.m.—Symphony Hall of the Air.—
Sponsored by San Miguel Brewery.
9.45 p.m.—Tabacalera’s International
News Sex-vice Period.
10.00 p.m.—“lt’s Dance Time”—Spon-
sored by Tabacalera.
10.30 p.m.—Musical Interlude.
10.45 p.m.—Tabacalera’s UP and INS
Overseas News.
11.00 p.m.—News in Chinese—Sponsored
by Tabacalera
11.30 p.m.—Sign Off.
• . ■ .. ■
Wednesday, 29th January
5.30 a.m.—Radio Reveille—Band Music.
5-45 a.m.—FEB News in Spanish.
6.00 a.m.—News in Chinese—presented by
Chinese Commei'cial News.
6.30 a.m.—FEB News in English.
6.45 a.m.—Musical Workshop Bill
Wirges and Company.
7.00 a.m.—The Song Shop—Yours for a
Song.
7.15 a.m.—Composer’s Corner.
7.30 a.m. —The Musical Clock Time
Signals, Weather Report and Resume
of Programme for the Day.
8.00 a.m.—Sign Off.
12 Noon—Tabacalera’s Midday News and
Music:
12.05 to 12.15—News in Spanish.
12.20 to 12.30—News in Tagalog.
12.30 to 12.45—International News Ser-
vice.
12.50 to I.oo—Local news in English.
1.00 p.m.—News in Chinese and Music—
Sponsored by Tabacalera.
1.30 p.m.-—Sign Off.
5.00 p.m.—Moment Musicale—A Concert
in Miniature.
5.45 p.m.—Programme Preview, Weather
Report.
54
The Hong Kong Radio Review


5.50 p.m.—Happy Harmonies.
6.00 p.m.—Thrifty Guide (Aling Juana
Mapag-Impok).—Sponsored by National
Food Products Corp.
6.25 p.m.—Vitalis Sportscast presenting
“The Sports Newsreel of the Air.”—
Sponsored by Bristol-Myers.
6.30 p.m.—Local Market Report.—
Courtesy of Bureau of Commerce,
6.35 p.m.—FEB News in English.
6.45 p.m.—News in Spanish.
6.55 p.m.—The Jai-Alai Sports Review—
Sponsored by Jai-Alai Corp. of the
Philippines.
7.00 p.m.—Salon Strings—Dinner Music
—Sponsored by Tabacalera.
7.15 p.m.—Novatime—Ted Steele and his
Novatone with Gwenn Williams.
7.30 p.m.—Words About Music—The
Masters and their Works.
8.00 p.m.—Twentieth Century Serenade—
Sponsored by Hamilton-Brown.
8.30 p.m.—The Party Girl with Swingali—
Sponsored by Kuanzle & Straiff, Inc.
8.45 p.m.-—Tabacalera’s Overseas News
Period.
9.00 p. m.—The Old Refrains —The
Dreamers Trio.
9.15 p.m.—Dance Music from the Fiesta
Pavilion of the Manila Hotel.
9.45 p.m.—Tabacalera’s International
News Service Period.
10.00 p.m.—“lt’s Dance Time”—Spon-
sored by Tabacalera.
10.30 p.m.—Musical Interlude.
10.45 p.m.—Tabacalera’s UP and INS
Overseas News.
11.00 p.m.—News in Chinese—Sponsored
by Dy Buncio.
11.30 p.m.—Sign Off.
Thursday, 30th January
5.30 a.m.—Radio Reveille—Band Music.
5.45 a.m.—FEB News in Spanish.
6.00 a.m.—News in Chinese—presented by
Chinese Commercial News.
6.30 a.m.—FEB News in English.
6.45 a.m.—Novelties.
7.00 a.m.—The Master Singers.
7.15 a.m.—Composer’s Corner.
7.30 a.m.—The Musical Clock Time
Signals, Weather Report and Resume
of Programme for the Day.
8.00 a.m.-—Sign Off.
12 Noon—Tabacalera’s Midday News and
Music:
12.05 to 12.15—News in Spanish.
12.20 to 12.30—News in Tagalog.
12.30 to 12.45—International News Ser-
vice.
12.50 to I.oo—Local news in English.
1.00 p.m.—News in Chinese and Music—
Sponsored by Dy Buncio.
1.30 p.m.—Sign Off.
5.00 p.m.—Moment Musical©—A Concert
in Miniature.
5.45 p.m.—Programme Preview, Weather
Report.
5.50 p.m.—Happy Harmonies.
6.00 p.m.—Thrifty Guide (Aling Juana
Mapag-Impok).—Sponsored by National
Food Products Corp.
6.25 p.m.—Vitalis Sportscast presenting
“The Sports Newsreel of the Air.”—
Sponsored by Bristol-Myers.
6.30 p.m.—Local Market Report.—
Courtesy of Bureau of Commerce.
6.35 p.m.—FEB News in English.
6.45 p.m,—FEB News in Spanish.
6.55 p.m.—The Jai-Alai Sports Review—
Sponsored by Jai-Alai Corp. of the
Philippines.
7.00 p.m.—Salon Strings—Dinner Music
—Sponsored by Tabacalera.
7.15 p.m.—Browsing Among Books with
D.T.S.
7.30 p.m.—Tabacalera Presentation.—
Native and Latin Airs.
8.00 p.m.—The Selinksky String Quartet.
8.15 p.m.—Ceramic Industries of the Phi-
lippines.—Outstanding Classical Artists
of the Philippines.
8.30 p.m.-—Lipton’s Tea Programme.—
Sponsored by Connell Bros. Co. (Phil.).
8.45 p.m.—Tabacalera’s Overseas News
Period.
9.00 p.m.—Listerine Amateur Hour.—
Master of Ceremonies Wally King with
“Prof.” Ocampo.
9.45 p. m.—Tabacalera’s International
News Service Period.
10.00 p.m.—“lt’s Dance Time’’—Spon-
sored by Tabacalera.
10.30 p.m.—Musical Interlude.
10.45 p.m.—Tabacalera’s UP and INS
Overseas News,
11.00 p.m.—News in Chinese—Sponsored
by Tabacalera.
11.30 p.m.—Sign Off.
Friday, 31st January
5.30 a.m.—Radio Reveille—Band Music.
5.45 a.m.—FEB News in Spanish.
6.00 a.m.—News in Chinese—presented by
Chinese Commercial News.
6.30 a.m.—FEB News in English.
6.45 a.m.—Aloha Land Lukewela’s Royal
Hawaiians.
7.00 a.m.—The Song Shop—Yours for a
Song.
7.15 a.m.—Composer’s Corner.
7.30 a.m.—The Musical Clock Time
Signals, Weather Report and Resume
of Programme for the Day.
8.00 a.m.-—Sign Off.
12 Noon—Tabacalera’s Midday News and
Music:
12.05 to 12.15—News in Spanish.
12.20 to 12.30—News in Tagalog.
12.30 to 12.45—International News Ser-
vice.
12.50 to I.oo—Local news in English.
1.00 p.m.—News in Chinese and Music—
Sponsored by Tabacalera.
1.30 p.m.—Sign Off.
5.00 p.m.—Moment Musicale—A Concert
in Miniature.
5.45 p.m.—Programme Preview, Weather
Report.
5.50 p.m.—Happy Harmonies.
6.00 p.m.—Thrifty Guide (Aling Juana
Mapag-Impok).—Sponsored by National
Pood Products Corp.
6.25 p.m.—Vitalis Sportscast presenting
“The Sports Newsreel of the Air.”—
Sponsored by Bristol-Myers.
6.30 p. m.—Local Market Report—
Courtesy of Bureau of Commerce.
6.35 p.m.—FEB News in English.
6.45 p.m.—FEB News in Spanish,
6.55 p.m.—The Jai-Alai Sports Review—
Sponsored by Jai-Alai Corp. of the
Philippines.
7.00 p.m.—Salon Strings—Dinner Music
—Sponsored by Tabacalera.
7.15 p.m.—-“ Palmolive Hollywood Quiz-
zard ” with Francesca and Rogers, the
Hollywood Orch. & “Prof.” Quizzard.
Audience Participation for Prizes.—
Sponsored by Colgate-Palmolive-Peet Co.
7.45 p.m.—Elizalde y Cia.
8.15 p.m.—“ Shall We Waltz?”—Harry
Horlick and his Orchestra.
8.30 p.m.—The Band of the Week presents
“ Hits of the Week.”—Sponsored by
Hormel’s.
8.45 p.m.—Tabacalera’s Overseas News
Period.
9.00 p.m.—Symphonic Band Concert with
Guest Soloists.
9.45 p.m. Tabacalera’s International
News Service Period.
10.00 p.m.—“lt’s Dance Time’’—Spon-
sored by Tabacalera.
10.30 p.m.—Musical Interlude.
10.45 p.m.—Tabacalera’s UP and INS
Overseas News.
11.00 p.m.—News in Chinese—Sponsored
by Dy Buncio.
11.30 p.m.—Sign Off.
BANGKOK
HSPS 25.6 metres, 11.715 Kc/s.
HS6PJ* 15.77 metres, 19.02 mo/s.
* Mondays only.
Saturday, 25th January
8.00 p.m.—National Song and Opening
Announcements.
8.05 p.m.—News in Thai.
8.20 p.m.—Musical Tit-Bits : Si-Chanthra
Troupe.
8.45 p.m.—Weather Report—Local News
in English: Market Quotations.
9.00 p.m.—From HS7PJ: Historical Thai
Drama, Fine Arts Department.
9.30 p.m.—Musical Tit-Bits.
10.00 p.m.—Close Down.
Sunday, 26th January
8.00 p.m.—National Song and Opening
Announcements.
8.05 p.m.—News in Thai. .
8.20 p.m.—Classical Thai Music & Songs:
Phathyakoson Troupe.
8.45 p.m.—Talk on Thailand (English)
followed by Local News in English and
News Summary of the Week in French.
9.00 p.m.—Thai Songs: Maui Benchanawi.
9.20 p.m.—Miscellaneous Readings.
9.40 p.m.—Classical Thai Music & Songs.
10.00 p.m —Close Down.
Monday, 27th January
8.00 p.m.—National Song and Opening
Announcements.
8.05 p.m.—News in Thai.
8.20 p.m.—Light Music: Lawo Film Orch.
8.45 p.m.—Weather Report—Local News
in English: Market Quotations.
9.00 p.m.—Xylophone Solos: C. Duri
yapraneet.
55
The Hong Kong Radio Review


9.15 p.m.—Light Music.
9.45 p.m.—Xylophone Solos.
10.00 p.m.—Close Down.
Tuesday, 28th January
8.00 p.m.—National Song and Opening
Announcements.
8.05 p.m.—News in Thai.
8.20 p.m.—Classical Thai Music & Songs:
Seri-Duriyang Troupe.
8.45 p.m.—Weather Report—Local News
in English; Market Quotations.
9.00 p.m.—Saxophone Solos & Thai Songs ;
“ Sunthraphorn.”
9.20 p.m.—Miscellaneous Readings.
9.40 p.m.—Classical Thai Music & Songs.
10.00 p.m.—Close Down.
Wednesday, 29th January
8.00 p.m.—National Song and Opening
Announcements.
8.05 p.m.—News in Thai.
8.20 p.m.—Billy and His Boys.
8.45 p.m.—Weather Report—Local News
in English: Market Quotations.
9.00 p.m.—Radio Comedy; Charukanok
Troupe.
9.35 p.m.—Billy and His Boys.
10.00 p.m.—Close Down.
Thursday, 30th January
8.00 p.m.—National Song and Opening
Announcements.
8.05 p.m.—News in Thai.
8.20 p.m.—Dance Music interspersed with
Thai Songs; Duriya-Yothin Dance Band.
8.45 p.m.—Weather Report—Local News
in English: Market Quotations. .
9.00 p .m —From HS7PJ: Classical Thai
Music <fe Songs, Fine Arts Department.
9.20 p.m.—Miscellaneous Readings.
9.30 p.m.—Dance Music interspersed with
Thai Songs.
10.00 p.m.—Close Down.
Friday, 31st January
8.00 p.m.—National Song and Opening
Announcements.
8.05 p.m.—News in Thai.
8.20 p.m.—Classical Thai Music & Songs:
Fine Arts Department.
8.45 p.m.—Weather Report—Local News
in English : Market Quotations.
9.00 p.m.—Pianoforte Solos: R. M.
Sequeira. .
9.15 p.m.—Classical Thai Music & Songs.
9.45 p.m.—Pianoforte Solos.
10.00 p.m.—Close Down.
RADIO-SAIGON
25.46 metres = H. 780 Kc.
49.05 6.116 Kc.
Saturday, 25th January
8.00 a.m.— News in French.
1.00 p.m.—News in French—Rice quota-
tions.
1.15 p.m.—Press review & weather report.
1.20 p.m.—A concert of light music.
5.20 p.m.—News in French.
6.45 p.m.— English programme: News in
English.
7.00 p.m.— Listeners’ arranged session.
8.45 p.m.—Topical Talk.
9.00 p.m.—News in French.
9.15 p.m.—Dance music.
10.00 p.m.—Popular dances.
11.30 p.m.— English programme: Concert:
Listeners’ arranged session.
11.45 p.m.-— News in English.
1.00 a.m.— News in French.
Sunday, 26th January
8.00 a.m.—News in French.
1.00 p.m.—News in French—Rice quota-
tions.
1.15 p.m.—Press review & weather report.
1.20 p.m.—Religious music.
5.20 p.m.—News in French.
6.45 p.m.— English programme: News
summary of the week.
7.00 p.m.— Musical programme.
8.45 p.m.-—Topical Talk.
9.00 p.m.—News in French.—Review of
the week’s events.
9.20 p.m.—Comic Opera : La Mascotte.
11.30 p.m.— English programme: Concert.
11.45 p.m.— News summary of the week.
1.00 a.m.—News in French.
AUSTRALIA
Programme of Short-Wave
Transmissions.
The following Schedule uses Greenwicn
mean time:—
The Department of Information, in con-
junction with the Australian Broadcasting
Commission, is now broadcasting pro-
grammes of news, talks and supporting
musical items in ten daily transmissions
from the following stations:
31 Metres
VLQ Sydney, 31.2 metres, 9.615 mc/s.
VLQS Sydney, 30.99 metres, 9.680 mc/s.
VLW2 Perth, 31.09 metres, 9.650 mc/s.
YLW4 Perth, 31.04 metres, 9.655 mc/s.
25 Metres
VLQ2 Sydney, 25.27 metres, 11.870 mc/s.
VLQ7 Sydney, 25.25 metres, 11.880 mc/s.
16 Metres
YLQB Sydney, 16.85 metres, 17.800 mc/s.
OPERATING SCHEDULE
Transmission I
To New Caledonia & French Oceania
STATION, VLQ, Sydney
19.25—20.00 Noumea time
G.M.T.
NEWS in French at ... 08.30
Talk in French at ... 08.50
Transmission II
To North & East Asia
STATION, VLQ, Sydney
19.40 —20.15 Shanghai time
G.M.T.
NEWS in English at ... 11.45
Talk in English at ... 12.00
Transmission 111
To North America
STATION, VLQS, Sydney
07.25—08.00 E.S.T.
G.M.T.
NEWS in English at ... 12.30
Transmission IV
To South-East Asia
STATIONS, VLW2, Perth
and VLQ7, Sydney
13.10—14.45 G.M.T.
NEWS in French at ... 13.15
Talk in French at ... 13.30
NEWS in English at ... 13.45
Talk in English at ... *14.01
NEWS in Dutch at ... *14.15
Talk in Dutch at ... *14.30
(* Previous Day).
Transmission V
To North America
STATION, VLQS, Sydney
07.25 —08.00 Pacific Time
G.M.T.
NEWS in English at ... 15.30
Transmission VI
To South Africa
STATION, VLW4, Perth
18.55—19.30 S. African Time
G.M.T.
NEWS in English at ... 17.00
Talk in English at ... 17.15
Transmission VII
To Southern Europe
STATION, VLQ2, Sydney
17.55—18.55 G.M.T.
NEWS in English at ... 18.00
Talk in English at ... 18.15
NEWS in Italian at ... 18.30
Talk in Italian at ... 18.45
Transmission VIII
To Northern Europe
STATION, VLQ7, Sydney
19.30—21.00 G.M.T.
(Previous Day.)
NEWS in French at ... 19.35
Talk in French at ... 19.50
NEWS in German at ... 20.00
Talk in German at ... 20.15
NEWS in English at ... 20.30 .
Talk in English at ... 20.45
Transmission IX
To North America
STATION, VLQS, Sydney
18.10—19.00 E.S.T.
G.M.T.
NEWS in English at ... 23.15
Talk in English at ... 23.35
Transmission X
To North America
STATION, VLQB, Sydney
21.55 —22.45 Pacific Time
G.M.T.
NEWS in English at ... 06.00
Talk in English at ... 06.20
On Sundays and Wednesdays, at the
conclusion of each transmission, details
will be given of the talks which are to
be broadcast in that transmission during
the following week. Any changes in this
programme of transmissions will be an-
nounced on Sundays and Wednesdays.
56
The Hong Kong Radio Review


BBC OVERSEAS
SERVICES
Waveband
Callsign
Me.
Metres
49-metre
GSA
6.05
49.59
GSL
6.11
49.10
41-metre
GSW
7.23
41.49
GSU
7,26
41.32
31-metre
GSB
9.51
31.55
GSC
9.58
31.32
GRY
9.60
31.25
GRX
9.69
30.96
25-metre
GSD
11.75
25.53
GSN
11.82
25.38
GSE
11.86
25.29
19-metre
GSF
15.14
19.82
GSO
15.18
19.76
GSI
15.26
19.66
GSP
15.31
19.60
16-metre
GSG
17.79
16.86
GSV
17.81
16.84
13-metre
GSH
21.47
13.97
GSJ
21.53
13.93
GST
21.56
13.92
GRZ
21.64
13.86
B.B.C. TRANSMISSIONS
The following are particulars of the 8.8. C. trans-
missions, with all times given in H.K. time: —
PACIFIC TRANSMISSION: 2.10 p.m.—6.15 p.m.
25.53 m, 31.55 m. (to 4.45 p.m.), 19.82 m. (from 5 p.m.).
Australia 25.29 m, 19.66 m, 31.55 m. (to
4.45 pm), 19.82m.(fr0m 5 pm)
New Zealand 19.66 m.
19.82m.(fr0m 5 p.m.).
Oceania As for Australia.
India Central America
South America As for New Zealand.
South and West Africa 19.66 m. and 16.84 m.
Near East & East Africa 31.32m.(t0 3.30 p.m.), 19.60 m.
(from 3.45 p.m.).
Western Canada 31.32 m. (to 4 p.m.).
Special items in the above broadcasts are:
The News: at 2.15 p.m. every day.
Headline News and News Commentary:
at 4.30 p.m, every day.
Talk: at 5 p.m. every day
(Tuesdays: “Matters of Moment”).
(Saturdays : “ World Affairs ” by Wickham Steed).
“Radio News Reel”: at 5.45 p.m. every day.
CENTRAL TRANSMISSION—PART Is EASTERN
6.55 p.m.—00.30 a.m.
India, Burma and Malaya ...13.93m.(t0 9.45 p.m.), 19.82 m.
(from 10 p.m.), 16.86 m. (to
10.45 p.m.), 25.53 m. (from
11 p.m.).
Far East (6.40 p.m.—
9.45 p.m.)... 16.84 m, 25.53 m. (from 10 pm),
31.65m.(fr0m 10 p.m.).
West Indies & Ctl. America ...13.93 m. (from 10 p.m.).
South America 13.92 m.
Africa 13.97 m. (to 00.45 a.m.),
16.84 m. (10 p.m.—00.45 a.m.).
Canada and N. America 19.60 m. (to 8 p.m.), 16.84 m.
(8.15 p.m.—9.45 p.m.; 10 p.m.
—00.30 a.m.).
Special items in the above broadcasts are:
The News: at 7 p.m. and midnight every day.
The News and News Commentaries;
at 9 p.m. every day.
“ Questions of the Hour” : at 7.15 p.m. & 00.15 a.m.
CENTRAL TRANSMISSION—PART 2; AFRICAN
(00.55 a.m.—6.25 a.m.).
South Africa 19.66 m. (to 4 a.m.), 31.32 m.
(from 4 a.m.), 25.53 m. (to
8.45 a.m.).
East Africa 19.82m.(t0 4.15 a.m.), 31.25 m,
(from 4.30 a.m.).
West Africa 19.66 m. (from 4.15 a.m.).
Canada and N. America 25.53 m. (from 4.15 a.m.).
South America 19.82 m. (from 6 a.m.).
Special items in the above broadcasts are:
The News: at 2 a.m. and 4.45 a.m. every day.
Talk : at 5 a.m. every day
(Mondays: “Matters of Moment”).
(Fridays: “World Affairs” by W. Steed).
NORTH AMERICAN TRANSMISSION:
6.42 a.m.—12.35 p.m.
Canada and U.S.A 31.32 m, 25.53m.(t0 10 a.m.),
49.10m.(fr0m 10.30 a.m.).
Western Canada 25.53 m. (from 10.45 a.m.),
31.32 m. (from 11 a.m.).
West Indies & Ctl. America ...25.53 m.
Central America 31.55 m. (from 7.20 a.m.).
South America 31.55 m. (from 7.20 a.m.),
19.82 m. (to 10.15 a.m.),
25.29 m. (to 10.30 a.m.).
6.42 a.m.— 7.15 a.m. On all scheduled frequencies.
7.15 a.m.— 9.00 a.m. On 31.32 m., 25.53 m.
9.00 a.m.— 9.15 a.m. On all scheduled frequencies.
9.15 a.m.—10.00 a.m. On 31.32 m., 25.53 m.
10.00 a.m.—10.45 a.m. On 31.32 m., 25.53 m.
10.45 a.m.—12.35 p.m. On all scheduled frequencies.
Special items in the above broadcasts are:
The News: at 6.45 a.m. and 9 a.m. every day.
“ Headline News <fe Views ” : at 9.45 a.m. every day
(by various speakers).
“ Britain Speaks ” : at 9.30 a.m. and
12.15 p.m. every day.
“Within the Fortress”: at 11 a.m. every day.
“Radio News Reel”: at 11.30 a.m. every day.
“News Summary”: at 12.30 p.m. every day.
NEWS BULLETINS IN ENGLISH
Time (H.K.) Callsigns of transmitters in operation
2.00 a.m. GSI, GSD, GSF.
4.45 a.m. GSC, GSD, GRY, GSI, GSD.
6.45 a.m. GSC, GSD, GSL, GSB, GSF, GSE.
9.00 a.m. GSC, GSD, GSL, GSB, GSF, GSE.
9.45 a.m. GSC, GSD, GSL, GSB, GSF, GSE.
11.30 a.m. GSC, GSD, GSL, GSB, GSF, GSE.
12.30 p.m. GSC, GSD, GSL, GSB, GSF, GSE.
2.16 a.m. GSD, GSB, GSE, GSI, GSB, GSF, GSV, GSC.
4.30 p.m. GSD, GSB, GSE, GSI, GSB, GSV, GSP, GSC
5.45 p.m. GSD, GSF, GSE, GSI, GSV, GSP.
7.00 p.m. GSJ, GSG, GSV, GST, GSH, GSP.
9.00 p.m. GSJ, GSG, GSV, GST, GSH, GSV.
Midnight GSF, GSD, GSV, GSB, GSJ, GST, GSH.
57
Ihe Many Kong Radio Review


THE VOICE OF CHINA
Dally Schedule of The International Broadcasting Station,
Chungking, China.
H.K. Time
Transmission I—Directed to Europe
XGOY—2S.2Im. or 11,900 Kcs.
H-K. Time
Neivs-talk in German ... 1.01 a.m.
War Songs ... ••• 1-15 ~
News-talk in French ... 1.20 ~
National Anthem 1-30 ~
Stop ... ... ••• 1-35 jj
Transmission 2—Directed to Asia and the South Seas
XGOY—3I.6m. or 9,500 Kcs.
H-K. Time
Press News in Chinese ... 3.00 a.m.
Stop ... ••• ••• 5.20 ~
Transmission 3—Directed to the British Isles
XGOY—2S.2Im. or 11,900 Kcs.
H-K- Time
Western Music ... ... 5.10 a.m.
News in English ... ... 6.30 ~
Talk in English ... ... 5.45 ~
Chinese Opera ... ... 5.55 ~
News in Cantonese ... 6.00 ~
War Songs 5.10 ~
News in Chinese 6.15 „
National Anthem ... ... 6.25 ~
Stop ... ... ••• 6.30 ~
Transmission 4—Directed to North America.
XGOX—I9.7Sm. or 15,200 Kcs.
H.K. Time
News in Chinese ... ... 8.00 a.m.
Chinese Music ... ... 8.15 ~
Talks in English ... ... 8.20 ~
News in English ... ... 8.30 ~
News in Cantonese ... 8.40 ~
News in Japanese ... 8.50 ~
National Anthem 9.00 ~
Stop ... ... ... 9-05 ~
Transmission s—Noon Hour for China and
Other Countries in Asia
XGOX—I9.7Sm. or 15,200 Kcs.
Western Music ... ... 12.30 p.m.
News-talk in Japanese ... 1.00 ~
War Songs ... ... 1-10 ~
News in Chinese 1.15 ~
News in Shanghai Dialect 1.30 ~
Chinese Opera ... ... 1.40
Stop ... ... ... 1.50 ~
Transmission 6—Directed to N. America (Pacific Coast)
XGOX—I9.7Sm. or 15,200 Kcs.
H.K. Time
News in Cantonese ... 2.00 p.m.
Chinese Music .... ... 2.15 ~
Talk in English ... ... 2.20 ~
News in English ... ... 2.30 ~
Western Music ... ... 2.40 ~
Stop ... ... ... 2.50 ~
Transmission 7—Directed to Japan and Hawaii
XGOX—I9.7Sm. or 15,200 Kcs.
H K- Tivie
News-talk in Japanese ... 3.00 p.m.
Western Music ... ... 3.10 ~
News in English ... ... 3.30 ~
Chinese Music 3.40 „
News-talk in Cantonese ... 3.45 ~
National Anthem ... ... 4=.00 ~
Stop ... ... ... 4.05 ~
Transmission B—Directed to Asia, Australia & N.Z.
and E. Russia
XGOY—2S.2Im. or 11,900 Kcs.
H.K. Time
News in Chinese ... ... 6.00 p.m.
News in English ... ... 6.10 ~
Western Music ... ... 6.30 ~
News-talk in Russian ... 6.50 ~
Stap ... ... ... 7.00 ~
Transmission 9—Directed to Japan
XGOY—2S.2Im. or 11,900 Kcs.
H.K. Time
Japanese Music ... ... 7.00 p.m.
Talk in Japanese 7.05 „
Western Music ... ... 7.15 ~
News in Japanese ... ... 7.20 ~
Stop ... ... ... 7.30 ~
Transmission 10-—Evening Hour for China and
Other Countries in Asia
XGOY—2S.2Im. or 11,900 Kcs.
H.K. Time
News in Shanghai Dialect ... 7.30 p.m.
Chinese Opera ... ... 7.45 ~
Talk in Chinese ... ... 8.00 ~
Stop ... ... ... 8.20 ~
Transmission 11—Directed to Asia,
The Philippines and Australia
XGOY—2S.2Im. or 11,900 Kcs.
H.K. Time
News in French ... ... 8.20 p.m.
News in English ... ... 8.30 ~
War Songs ... ... 8.40 ~
News in Cantonese ... 8.45 ~
Stop 9.00 „
Transmission 12—Directed to Asia and the South Seas
XGOY—2S.2Im. or 11,900 Kcs.
H.K. Time
Hakka Dialect ... ... 9.00 p.m.
Amoy Dialect ... ... 9.15 ~
Malay ... 9.30 ~
Dutch ... 9.40 ~
Stop ... ... ... 9.50 ~
Transmission 13—Directed to N. America (Pacific Coast)
XGOY—3I.Im. or 9,635 Kcs.
H-K- Time
News in English ... ... 10.00 p.m.
Talk in English 10.10 ~
Western Music ... .... 10.20 ~
News-talk in Cantonese ... 10.30 ~
Stop ... ... .... 10.45 ~
Transmission 14—Directed to Asia and The South Seas
XGOY—2S.2Im. or 11,900 Kcs.
H.K. Time
Press News in Chinese ... 11.00 p.m.
Stop ... 12.00 midnight
Transmission 15—Directed to India and Asia Minor
XGOY—2S.2Im. or 11,900 Kcs.
H.K. Time
News-talk in Hindustani ... 0.05 a.m.
News-talk in Arabic ... 0.15 ~
Stop ... ... 0.25 ~ ,
Transmission 16—Directed to The U.S.S.R.
XGOY—2S.2Im. or 11,900 Kcs.
H.K. Time
News-talk in Russian ... 0.30 a.m.
National Anthem 0.45 ~
Sign Off ••• 0.50 ~
58
The Hong Kong Radio Review


Short-wave Broadcasting Stations of the World in Order
of Frequency.
(This list may not be reproduced, in
whole or
in part, without full acknowledgments to the
Hong Kong Radio Review).
Station
Call Sign
Me.
Metres
Station
Call Sign
Me.
: Metres
120-Metre Band (2.3-2.5 Me.)
Bangkok, Thailand
HSP6
7.968
37.65
Delhi, India
VUD6
VUC3
2.305
2.495
130.2
120.2
Moscow, U.S.S.R
8.070
37.17
Calcutta, India
Budapest, Hungary
HAT4
9.120
32.88
Bucharest, Rumania
9.280
32.33
85-Metre Band (3.3-3.5 Me.)
Radio-Nations, Switzerland ...
HBL
9.340
32.12
Tandjongpriok, N.E.I
Bombay, India
YD A
3.040
98.68
*Chengtu, China
XOY
9.370
32.02
VUB4
3.305
90.77
Ankara, Turkey
TAP
9.460
31.70
Calcutta, India
VUC4
3.365
89.15
St. John’s, Newfoundland .. .
VONG
9.480
31.64
Madras, India
VUM3
3.435
87.34
31-Metre Band (9.5-9.7 Me.)
Chungking, China
Delhi, India
VUD7
3.495
85.84
XGOY
9.500
31.58
Khabarovsk, U.S.S.R
RW15
4.273
70.20
Belgrade. Yugoslavia
YUC
9.500
31.58
Lahti, Finland ..
OFD
9.500
31.58
60-Metre Band (4.77-4.965 Me.)
4.840
61.98
Melbourne, Australia .
VK3ME
9.500
31.58
Bombay, India
VUB5
Manila, P.I
KZ1B
9.500
31.58
Medan, N.E.I
Tandjongpriok, N.E.I
YDX
4.855
61.79
London, Great Britain
GSB
9.510
31.55
YDR
4.910
61.10
Paris, France ... .
TPB11
9.520
31.51
Delhi, India
VUD8
4.920
60.98
Moscow, U.S.S.R.
RW96
ZBW3
JZI
9.520
31.51
Madras, India
VUM4
4.960
60.48
Hong Kong
9.525
31.50
Kuala Lumpur, Malaya
—
t5.200
57.69
Tokyo, Japan
9.535
31.46
49-Metre Band (6.00-6.20 Me.)
Montala, Sweden
SBU
9.535
31.46
RNE
ZRH
6.00
6.005
50.00
49.94
Berlin, Germany
DJN
9.540
31.45
Moscow, U.S.S.R
Johannesburg, S. Africa
Vatican City. Italy
HVJ
9.550
31.41
Bombay, India ..."
VUB5
9.550
31.41
Rangoon, Burma
XYZ
6.007
49.94
Soerabaja, N.E.I
Schenectady, U.S.A
Perth, Australia
YDB
WGEA
VLW2
9.550
9.550
31.41
Pretoria, S. Africa
ZRH
6.01
49.92
31.41
Tokyo, Japan
JLR
DJC
6.015
49.88
49.83
31.38
Berlin, Germany
6.02
Berlin, Germany ...
D.TA
9.560
31.38
31.36
Moscow, U.S.S.R
Berlin, Germany
RW96
DXP
49.83
49.75
D.UZ
Manila, P.I. .,
KZRM
VUD2
9.570
D.Uo
Delhi. India ,
9.575
31.33
Boston, U.S.A
WRUL
K7TB
49.67
49 67
6.04
London, Great Britain .
GSC
9.580
9.590
9.590
31.32
31.28
31.28
31.28
London Great Britain
GSA
WLWO
ZHJ
6.05
49.59
49.50
49.34
Cincinnati, U.S.A.
Rangoon, Burma
VV L VV U
Cincinnati, U.S.A
Pennnn Malaya
6.06
6.08
Huizen, Holland
PCJ
9.590
Athlone, Eire
9.595
31.27
31.25
VUM2
GSL
6.085
6.110
49.30
49.10
—
London, Great Britain
London, Great Britain
GRY
9.600
•Moscow, U.S.S.R
Cape Town, S. Africa
RAL
ZRL
31.25
31.23
31 22
31.20
•Manila, P.I
KZRF
CRY9
6.120
49.02
49.00
9.606
Macau, China
6.122
Berlin, Germany
DXB
9.610
Perth, Australia
VLW
6.130
48.94
Sydney, Australia
VLQ
9.615
Kweichow, China
XGSA
48.94
4«
Saigon, French Indochina
FZS3
9.620
9.625
31.19
31.17
KZRG
CJRO
6.140
6.150
6.170
48.78
48.62
Budapest, Hungary
HATS
Wayne, U.S.A
WCBX
Quebec, Canada
CFA5
9.630
31.15 i
Rome, Italy
T2R03
9.635
31.14 i
Vatican City, Italy
HVJ
6.190
48.47
Manila, P.I
KZRH
9.635
31.14
Schenectady, U.S.A
WGEO
TAG
HRQ
XPSA
6.190
6.350
6.670
6.980
48.47
47 20
Chungking, China
XGOY
9.635
31.14 :
31.09 1
31.09 :
Radio-Nations, Switzerland ...
*Kweiyang, China
44.94
42 98
Perth, Australia
•Manila, P.I
VLW2
KZRH
9.650
9.650
Perth, Australia
VLW4
9.655
31.04 ■
Valladolid, Spain
EETI
7.070
42.43
Buenos Aires, Argentine
LRX
9.660
31.06
41-Metre Band (7.2-7.3 Me.)
San Francisco, U.S.A
KG El
t9.665
31.04
GSW
YDR
7.230
7.240
41.49
41.44
Vatican City, Italy
HVJ
9.660
31.06
Tandjongpriok. N.E.I
Rome, Italy
I2R09
9.670
31.02
9.670
31.02
31.01
3.099
Singapore, Malaya
ZHP3
7.250
41.38
Bound Brook, U.S.A
WRCA
JVW
7.258
41.34
Berlin, Germany
D.TX
9.675
GSU
CSW8
DXM
TPB25
7 260
41.34
41.34
41.27
Sydney, Australia ...
VLQ5
TPC23
9.680
7 260
Paris, France
9.680
30.99
7.270
London, Great Britain
GRX
9.690
30.96 :
Paris, France
7.280
41.21
•Moscow, U.S.S.R
RW96
9.690
30.96
30.96
JLG
DJI
RWG
RKT
7.285
7.290
7.360
7.520
41.18
41.15
Singapore, Malaya
ZHP1
9.690
Buenos Aires, Argentine
LRAI
9.690
30.96
40.76
Lisbon, Portugal
CSW7
9.740
30.80
Moscoav. U.S.S.R
39.89
Rome, Italy
IRF
9.830
30.52
Stations of which the names are “indented” are working outside the regular broadcasting bands.
* Indicates the station is not given in the latest (January, 1940) official list,
t Indicates approximate frequency only.
59
The Hong Kong Radio Review


Short-wave Broadcasting
Stations of
the World in Order
:
of Frequency.
(This list may not be reproduced, in whole or in part, without full acknowledgments to the
Hong Kong Radio Review).
Station
Call Sign
Me.
1
Metres
Station
Call Sign
Me.
Metres
EAQ
ZTJ
JDY
9.870
30.40
Bandoeng, N.E.I.
YDC
SBT
15.150
15.155
19.80
19.80
Johannesburg, S. Africa
30.27
30.23
y.yiu
9 925
Tokyo, Japan
JZK
15.160
19.97
19.76
Bandoeng, N.E.I
PMN
DZC
10.260
10.290
29.24
29.16
GSD
15.180
Moscow, U.S.S.R. —.
RW96
OIE
15.180
15.190
19.76
19.75
Buenos Aires, Argentine
Bandoeng, N.E.I
LSX
PLP
10.350
11.000
28 99
Lahti, Finland
27.27
TAQ
15.195
19.74
XGOX
15.200
19.75
25-Metre Band (11.70-11.90 Me.)
Berlin, Germany
DJB
15.200
19.74
CSW6
11.040
27.17
Pittsburgh, U.S.A
WPIT
15.210
19.72
19.71
19.68
19.67
19.66
19.65
19.63
19.63
19.62
19.62
19-61
19.60
19.60
19.57
19.57
19.56
19.53
19.52
19.47
Radio-Nations, Switzerland ...
*Mr.ofnw IT S S k
HBO
11.400
11.640
26.31
25.77
Huizen, Holland i
Paris, France
PCJ2
TPA2
15.220
15.243
XGOK
11.650
25.75
Boston, U.S.A
WRUL
15.250
15.260
15.270
15.280
IQY
SBP
11.670
25.71
London, Great Britain
GSI
11.705
25.63
Mason, U.S.A
WLWO |
TPA4
CJRX
PHI
WRUL
HVJ
GSD
DJD
MTCY
FZS
WRUL
JZ7
11.720
25.60
Berlin, Germany
DJQ
11.720
25.60
Wellington, New Zealand
ZL4
15.280
15.290
15.290
15.300
11.730
25.58
Buenos Aires. Argentine
LRU
Tlna+nn ’ IT S A
11.730
25.58
Delhi, India
VUD4
11.740
25.55
Rome, Italy
12R06
11.750
25.53
London, Great Britain
GSP
15.310
15.310
15.330
15.330
15.340
11.770
25.49
Soerabaja, N.E.I
YDB
11.775
25.48
Schenectadv, U.S.A
WGEA
Saigon, French Indo-China
Boston, U.S.A
11.780
11.790
25.47
25.45
San Francisco, U.S.A
Berlin, Germany
KGEI
DJR
11.800
25.42
Berlin, Germany
DZG
15.360
15.370
15.41
DJZ
I2R04
JVZ
GSN
11.801
25.42
Budapest, Hungary
HAS3
Rome, Italy
11.810
25.40
Moscow, U.S.S.R
RW96
Tokyo, Japan
11.815
25.39
London, Great Britain
——, India
11.820
tlL830
25.38
25.36
16-Metre Band (17.75-17.85 Me.)
Berlin, Germany
DJE
TPC3
PHI
TPB2
WNBI
WPIT
JZL
GSG
VLQ8
GSV
I2R08
17.760
16.89
Perth, Australia
VLW3
11.830
25.36
Paris, France
17.765
16.88
Wayne, U.S.A
WCBX
CSW1
XMHA
DJP
HAD3
GSE
VUD3
VLQ2
WRIT
11.830
25.36
Huizen, Holland
17.775
16.88
Lisbon, Portugal
11.840
25.34
Paris. France
17.780
16.87
‘Shanghai, China
11.850
25.32
17.780
16.87
Berlin, Germany
11.855
25.31
17.780
16.87
Budapest, Hungary
11.855
25.31
17.785
16.87
London, Great Britain
11.860
25.30
17.790
16.86
Delhi, India
11.870
25.27
17.800
16.85
Sydney, Australia
11.870
25.27
17.810
16.84
Pittsburgh, U.S.A
11.870
25.27
25.25
Rome, Italy
17.820
16.84
Sydney, Australia
YLQ7
TP A 3
XGOY
RNE
DZH
HBJ
IQA
11.880
Wavne, U.S.A.
WBCX
17.830
16.83
Paris, Prance
11.885
25.24
HVJ
17.840
16.82
‘Chungking, China
11.900
25.21
17.840
16.82
Moscow, U.S.S.R
12.000
25.00
DJH
TPB19
17.845
16.81
Berlin, Germany
14.460
20.75
17.850
16.81
Radio-Nations, Switzerland ...
Rome, Italy
14.540
14.790
20.64
20.28
13-Metre Band (21.45-21.75 Me.)
London, Great Britain
19-Metre Band (15.10-15.35 Me.)
Marapicte, Brazil
GSH
WGEA
21.470
21.500
13.97
PSE
14.935
20.09
Schenectady, U.S.A
13.95
14.945
20.07
19.95
19.87
Rome, Italy
I2R016
WCAB
GSJ
WPIT
21.510
1 21.520
21.530
13.95
Moscow, U.S.S.R
RKI
15.080
15.10
Philadelphia, U.S.A
London, Great Britain
13.94
13.93
I2R012
15.100
19.87
Pittsburgh, U.S.A
21.540
13.93
DJL
15.110
19.85
London, Great Britain
GST
WCBX
WGEA
21.550
13.92
HVJ
SP19
15.120
19.84
Wayne, U.S.A
21.570
13.91
Warsaw, Poland
15.120
19.84
Schenectady, U.S.A
21.590
13.90
Paris, France
TPB6
15.130
19.83
Bound Brook, U.S.A
WRCA
21.630
13.87
13.86
Boston, U.S.A
Tokyo, Japan
WRUL
JLU3
15.130
15.135
19.83
19.82
London, Great Britain
GRZ
DXL
21.640
21.730
Berlin, Germany
Berlin, Germany
13.81
GSF
15.140
19.82
DXN
21.740
13.80
Stations of which the names are “ indented ” are working outside the regular broadcasting bands.
* Indicates the station is not given in the latest (January, 1940) official list,
t Indicates approximate frequency only.
The Hong Kong Radio Review


NOTES FROM THE TRAVEL BUREAU DIARY
' - ?-»■
40
m
m
1..
m
r
•> 4,
“ Met a fellow called Macgregor the other day,
“ just back from a holiday in Hong Kong. Says
“he always spends his short leave there and
“ benefits from it immensely.”
For free information on the finest holiday
environment in the Far East write:
HONG KONG TRAVEL ASSOCIATION,
HONG KONG.


RYE RADIO
MANUFACTURED IN CAMBRIDGE, ENGLAND.
The only BRITISH RADIO
with BAND=SPREAD tuning
Are SEPARATED
and SPREAD over
this space on a
Stations on ordinary
radio dial crowded
into this space . . .
9.5 n
10.0 U
P YE
BAND
SPREAD
RADIO
8 Wave-bands, including 6 Band-spread
13 metre (21.2 to 21.9 m.c.) 25 metre (11.6 to 12.1 m.c.)
16 „ (17.5 „ 18.2 „ ) 31 „ (9-4 „ 9.8 „ )
19 „ (14.9 „ 15.5 „ ) 41 „ (7.0 „ 7.3 „ )
9.4
M.C.
9.5
9.6
9.7
9.8
MANILA
MELBOURNE
HONGKONG
MANILA
SYDNEY
MANILA
DAVENTRY
SAN FRANCISCO
M.C.
Demonstration in your own Home —without charge or obligation.
GILMAN & CO., LTD.
Gloucester Arcade, Hong Kong. 132. N.lh.n Rond, Kowloon.
Sub Agent:-S. MOUTRIE & CO., LTD.. York Building.
Printed by Ye Olde Printerie, Limited, China Building, Hong Kong
and published by authority of The Postmaster General, Hong Kong.






