

MISCELLANEOUS PIECES
BY
BASSTETT DICKSONT, JUN.


HONI HEKI,
In Two Cantos;
WARBECK,
In Two cantos;
AND MISCELLANEOUS PIECES.
BY BASSETT DICKSON, JUN.
LAUNCESTON :
HENRY DOWLING, PRINTER AND STATIONER.
(UttWisficJ! for lilt Author.)
1847.


Launceston :
Printed by Henry Dowling, Jun.,
Brisbane Street,


CONTENTS.
PACE
Host Heki.. 9
Warbeck, tub Tasmanian Settled 33
MISCELLANEOUS PIECES.
Song 103
Song 104
Extempore 104
Song 105
Extempore 10C
Extempore, on a Lady presenting me with a Rose 100
Song 107
Extemporaneous Address to Tasmania 103
Stanzas 108
Lines, written after hearing the Rev. Mr. preach
extempore 110
Riley Jeffs’ Last Thoughts 112
The Old Maid’s Song 113
Song 114
Song 115
Ileki’s War Song 115
Song 110


J'AGK
Song 117
Stanzas 118
Ode to Affliction 118
ERRATA.
Warbeck,— Canto 1, 48, p. 48.
For— 41 O Temperance I chaste goddess of delight.
To thee through life let general vows be paid •,
Peace are the joys thou giv’st /*..*•
Read— 44 To thee, through life, let all my vows bo paid ;
Pure are the joys thou glv’st
04, p. 50, For— 44 But Warbeck had no ear for music/ 4 ,...
Read— 4, But Warbeck had an ear for music.”
81, p. 58, Dele the word 44 and” sth line, and read—'Gainst halls, parks,
castles
112, p. 69. For— 44 The rocks below,”,.Read— 44 The Rooks below/’..
To the Reader,— Several minor errors appear throughout the work; arising from the
absence of the author, and the impossibility of his revising the publication during its
progress through the press. These errors will, however, be readily detected during perusal.


HONI HEKI,
A POEM, IN TWO CANTOS.


Tins Poem is founded on the following account of “ the late
affair at New Zealand,” copied from the Australian, a Sydney
paper:—
“ The grand attack on Tuesday, the 11th March, 1845, was
made by three parties of natives : one by Heki, a Christian and
a man of a noble nature, with about two hundred followers;
another under Kowiti, a heathen, with about the same number,
his followers professing to be Roman Catholics; and a third
under Pumuku, with about the same number. The three parties
did not exceed six hundred men. They had muskets and double-
barrelled guns, with few exceptions; and also tomahawks, of
which it was reported they intended to make use under certain
circumstances. Early in February, Kowiti, formerly a friend of
the Europeans, though a man of no principle, had begun to
plunder the settlers a mile or two from the settlement, parti-
cularly Mr. Wright’s, formerly a master mariner. This was not
resisted by Mr. Beckham, for this good reason—he had then no
force sufficient to encounter Kowiti’s party of two hundred
armed men. But H.M.S. Hazard arrived at the settlement in
the end of February from Auckland, bringing with her the mate-
rials to erect a block-house near the flag-staff. In a few days the
block-house was finished, and a guard of twenty soldiers was
placed in it under the command of Ensign Campbell. Soon after
the arrival of the Hazard, Kowiti attempted to steal some
horses from one of the suburban settlers. The commander of the
Hazard, hearing of it, sent an armed boat to the place, which
pursued the natives. The latter fired at the boat, and wounded
one of the boat’s crew. This was the first act of war, or open
rebellion, on the part ol the natives.


“ Tlie new flag-staff was erected when the block-house was
finished. Our readers in New South Wales are aware that the
British flag has for a long time excited the jealousy and active
opposition of the chief Heki, on what he considers patriotic
grounds. Having been taught to read the Scriptures and other
books, he has always argued against the flag-staff, as being a
token of the subjection of his country to the British, which he
compares to the subjection of the natives of New South Wales
and Van Diemen’s Land; and he has repeatedly declared his
resolution to prevent this flag from flying, or die in the attempt.
He indeed promised Governor Filzroy, when Major Bunbury
arrived at the Bay of Islands with two hundred troops, to desist
from his hostility on this point; but when the troops had returned
to Sydney, his former feelings revived ; and his resolution to pre-
vent the flag from being hoisted has evidently grown stronger
and stronger from that time. Not long before the attack on the
11th, he had delivered his gold-laced cap to Archdeacon Williams
‘ to cry over’ after his death, having made up his mind to sacrifice
his life to his inclinations as to the flag. Heki also alludes to the
treatment of the Israelites in Egypt by Pharaoh, and makes com-
parisons between those two nations, and the English and his own
people. Heki is a religious man, a Protestant, and has prayers
among his people every day. Wrong or right, he is allowed
by all to be acting on what he conceives to be his duty to his
country . He never joined the other chiefs in plundering the
settlers. He contends for one object, and one only , the non-
erection of the fag-staff," &c., &c., &c.


HONI HEKI.
CANTO THE FIRST.
Having, just now, some idle time on hand.
And idleness being sire of many a vice
In Britain, also in Yah Diemen’s Land,
I therefore seek employment, and my choice
Now falls on rhymes, though I no theme have planned.
No matter, I don’t mean to be too nice.
But take the first that flits across my mind ;
So in New Zealand 1 my hero find.
His name is Honi Heki, he a chief
Descended from a line of warriors, who
Had made the days of all their foes but brief,
And, not content therewith, did eat them too :
Strange diet! prized by them above roast beef.
Or pork, or yams. Of enemies’ skulls some few
Were kept as trophies of each direful scene.
To tell their sons how brave their sires had been.
But Honi Heki was no cannibal;
For in his youth he had converted been.
And taught this saving truth—Christ died for all;
And that he makes no difference between
The white man and the black, but those who call
In faith on Him he saves, though e’er so mean.
This was the faith which Heki had received,
Unlike his brother chiefs, by idols still deceived.
B


Yet Heki saw, with pain and great distrust.
The encroachments daily made upon his land
By British subjects, which he deemed unjust;
So he resolved in future to withstand
Farther aggression, and, if fight he must,
Why, then he had his brave devoted band
Of faithful warriors; also great Pomare
And brave Kowiti powerful allies were.
Yet Heki wished not war; for he loved peace,' —
If with his country’s safety ’twere consistent:
He was a patriot such as ancient Greece
Had viewed well pleased, had he been then existent;
His only wish his country to release
From hated bondage to a nation distant:
His warrior sires from such had been exempt.
So he would be, or die in the attempt.
About this time the British flag was planted
Upon some land which still was in dispute;
Some British settlers claimed it, and they wanted
By force of arms alone to urge their suit.
This Heki saw, but saw it still undaunted.
Resolved that there it should not long take root;
But, lest of rashness his first act should savour.
He called the neighb’ring chiefs in full “ palaver
There to discuss what might be done to save
Their native land from bondage; or, if they
Would calmly let the British ensign wave
O’er them as vassals, he for one would say.
His sires lived free, he would not die a slave!
This to the chiefs his message was that day.
Pomare, Kowiti, Waka Nen6, all
Chieftains of note, responded to his call.


And now they are in full palaver met;
Chiefs, warriors, sages, from all parts are seen ;
The largest meeting ever known as yet,
Though many a meeting on that spot had been.
All now are silent, while in phrases set
Heki explains to them what he does mean;
And I propose, if that my time affords,
To give his speech entire in his own words.
“ Chiefs of New Zealand, countrymen, attend!
Your willing ear to Honi Heki lend ;
For he it is, whose humble voice you hear.
Whose tongue shall tell of fearful danger near.
Behold the British on our native soil.
How they of lands our countrymen- despoil!
Encroaching still, as every year doth show.
Too powerful soon, if left in peace to grow.
When first they came, they merely sought to trade;
They came, and went, and came again and stayed ;
Then mingled with our tribes, with the pretence
Of teaching us their arts, religion, sense.
Their arts we loved, religion some admired,
And for awhile such intercourse desired.
Even I myself, at my great sire’s request,
And my own wish, (deceived as were the rest,)
Their friendship sought, their language learned, and
arts,
And their religion, which, I own, imparts
A loftier hope, a nobler mind to man.
Than our weak priests, or weaker idols, can;
But, as I said, their arts I quickly learned.
But soon their monstrous vices I discerned;
Though, doubtful first, I scarcely could believe
They were so base, or could so much deceive.
b 2


Their books I read; and, as my knowledge grew,
I found their deeds but wore a darker hue.
As many a distant land enslaved may show.
Received as friends, they proved a deadly foe.
Destroyed the natives, or from country tore,
And hurled them outcasts from their native shore.
Such was their fate; the same may be our own ,
If our united valour be not shown.
Then mark, my friends, the flag which late they reared
On yonder hill no longer must be spared;
For, know ye not, it means that while it stands
We are but slaves, they masters of our lands ?
To-morrow’s sun must see that flag laid low :
By me it shall be done, bring weal, bring woe.
What! shall our sires from other worlds upbraid.
And say how we in valour have decayed!
Or shall our sons in future times deplore
Our cowardice, a valiant race no more!
Ah ! no, my friends! our future deeds shall tell.
At British cost, that we our sires excel;
In future times our sons our deeds will trace.
And point to us as heroes of their race.
In arts of war we shall improve by use*:
Britons shall own New Zealand can produce
In war their equals, their superiors in
Aught else; though dark the colour of our skin,
Our deeds shall fairer prove, as time will show,
When they shall weep to have provoked such foe.
Bat still, my friends, think not I wish for war :
I hate, abhor it—few men love peace more;
Yet, when my country calls, I must obey.
I will not see my native land the prey
Of foreign foes, so long as I can wave
A sword in its defence, or die to save !


This my resolve no power on earth can move.
As future days and future deeds will prove.
My further thoughts at present I forbear,
While other chiefs their various minds declare.”
Thus Honi Heki spake. Then great Pomaro
Arose, and thus addressed th’ assemblage there i
“ Chiefs, heroes, warriors, whom I view around.
Whose names have been by glorious deeds renowned,
Have ye not heard what Honi Heki spake?
His words are true, and we must vengeance take.
Too long we’ve slumbered, while our artful foe
Usurped our lands, and did more powerful grow.
Emboldened thus, they now begin to brag.
And fling the gauntlet down in yonder flag!
Shall we refuse their challenge ? Shall we pause
To risk our lives in such a glorious cause ?
E’en I myself, though now advanced in age,
Will lead my warriors in the hottest rage
Of deadly strife, and make our British foe
Pay in their blood the forfeit which they owe.
Lives there a wretch whose dastard soul would shrink.
While stands his country on destruction’s brink?
None such exist! Our country’s danger will
Make cowards brave, and brave men braver still.
Then rise, my friends; let Heki lead our van;
There lives no wiser, nor a braver man;
Well fitted be his native land to save.
As wise in council as in battle brave.
One fault alone his noble mind corrodes.
He for the Christians’ left his country's gods ;
But time, I doubt not, will again restore
His former faith, to be forgot no more.
Meantime, my friends, we should not linger long
In these debates, but haste t’ avenge our wrong.


My further words shall, therefore, be but brief,
I vote for war, and Heki as our chief.”
Thus great Pomare. Kowiti then arose;
Dark was his look, and knitted were his brows;
A thirst of vengeance sat upon his face.
The fiercest savage he of all his race ;
And thus began:—“ My friends, why linger here?
Behold our foes in yonder town appear.
Unguarded yet, they deem themselves secure;
Then arm at once, and make our vengeance sure.
An easy prey this dreaded foe appears ;
Let Korararika burn about their ears.
’Twere easy done as said ; then why debate ?
We’!! leave no soul alive to mourn their fate;
Wives, children, all, in one wide ruin hurled ;
A terror to our foes, a lesson to the world !”
Here ceased Kowiti. Heki then arose,
Kowiti’s desperate purpose to oppose.
And thus:—“ My friends. I’ll not detain you long;
But, when I hear the brave Kowiti’s tongue
Such barbarous counsel give, I have no choice.
But firmly thus to raise my humble voice
Against all treach'ry, even to our worst foes.
Whom we should fairly fight, and hand to hand oppose.
Oh! think, my friends, what dire disgrace would fall.
By such an act of baseness, on us all!
No! let us fight them in the field like men.
And show in battle’s hour our bravery then;
And, conq’rors proved, let them our mercy view.
We war with men, but not with women too.
If me you honour with the chief command.
Then know, that Heki ne’er will stain his hand
With innocent blood. In battle gore must flow.
But babes and women ne'er shall be my foe.”


Thus Heki spoke, convincing old and young;
For soft persuasion sat upon his tongue.
He ceased —a murmur of applause went round.
And ’mongst the chiefs but one dissentient found,
And that was Waka Nen6. He alone
Approves not, and his reasons thus makes known:
“ Ye chiefs and heroes, sages, warriors, all.
Assembled here at Honi Heki’s call,
Your patient ear a moment I would crave.
In hope my words may from destruction save;
For much I fear the path you now pursue
Will cause your ruin and your country’s too.
Though Heki with his flowery speeches may
Your judgments warp, and lead your minds astray.
His words are lost on me; for I can view
His purpose deep, and his deception too.
He boasts his country’s love, that he may gain
Your confidence, and thus his wish attain.
JBeware, my friends! be cautious what you do!
Make him your chief, he’ll prove your tyrant too !
This his ambition, here his purpose tends ;
His hollow words but cloak his private ends.
But why make Heki chief? Can none but he
Lead our brave warriors on to victory?
Have we not other chiefs as brave and wise
As Honi Heki ? Cast on such your eyes.
Yes, there’s Pomare, the worthiest chief of all;
A thousand warriors wait upon his call.
What, though advanced in years, he is more sage:
We know that wisdom is the friend of age.
Then let him lead our warriors ; him I prize;
And heart and hand I’ll join your enterprize.”
Thus Waka Nea6 spoke with envious tongue.
His slanderous speech did Honi Heki wrong;


But, jealous of that chieftain’s growing fame,
He basely sought to blight his rising name.
He ceased, and then Pomare once more arose.
And thus—“ Thy speech, 0 Waka Nen6 ! shows
A discontented mind ; for what you urge
’Gainst Heki is as powerless as the surge
Repulsed from yonder cliff. Who can believe
That Honi Heki could such thoughts conceive?
Thou art no friend of Heki’s well I know;
But do not to thy country prove a foe.
Our future liberties are now at stake;
Then cease all quarrels for our country’s sake,
And on the common foe thy vengeance pour.
Till we shall drive him from our native shore.
This, to effect, both friends and foes should join.
And with their lives alone their cause resign.”
He ceased, and shouts of joy now rend the skies ;
Each chief is seen with vengeance in his eyes ;
They rise tumultuous, and on Heki call.
To give his order for the flag-staff’s fall.
He leads them on, five hundred warriors brave.
Rude though they be, resolved their land to save
From foreign foes : in ardour they abound ;
But Waka Nend is not ’mongst them found.
A traitor he unto his country proves.
And British gold his sordid bosom moves.
But Heki now the British flag surveys.
And thus his order to his troop conveys ;
“ Tear down yon flag, and tread it in the dust.
The few who guard it may retire, or must
The consequences of their folly take;
A nation’s liberty is now at stake 1”


This order scarce was given ere 'twas obeyed.
And prostrate was the British ensign laid.
The few who guarded it, at such a sight
To Korararika sped with hasty flight,
And there related what they had seen done
By Honi Heki, and the war begun.
Commotion now doth in the town appear.
The troops are called, the townsmen volunteer;
All are enraged at Heki having dared
T’ insult the flag which British hands had reared.
T’ avenge this insult they, in furious mood.
Resolve on taking Honi Heki’s blood.
And his confed’rates —this their stern decree,—
Not doubting of an easy victory.
With this intent they forward march with speed,
Quite confident, of order take no heed.
Of soldiers, sailors, volunteers, there were
Four hundred men in all collected there.
The Hazard , sloop*of-war, rode in the bay.
Whose guns might aid in the approaching fray.
Thus on they march, and soon behold the foe.
Who stand prepared to meet the coming blow.
With Heki at their head, who, sword in hand.
No danger fears, fit leader for such band.
The British captain gives the word to fire.
And now begins a scene of carnage dire.
Loud peals the musketry on every side.
And the green sward with human gore is dyed,
And dismal screams and dying groans are given.
And fire and smoke insult the face of heaven.
And this is war! Ah! when will mankind learn
To live in peace, and their own good discern?
False proved the fruit which Eve our mother ate!
What “knowledge” have w r e in our present state?


Short-sighted beings, blind to our own bliss.
We choose the “evil,” and the “good” we miss.
This life, which all men might in peace enjoy,
By our own sins and follies we destroy;
As if the few short years which heaven bestows
To man on earth a heavy burthen grows.
But to our theme: the battle rages still
With desp’ratc fury ; neither party will
The victory yield ; the British are surprised
To find such valour in a foe despised;
Forgetting that when men for freedom fight,
Each patriot warrior strikes with double might,
By freedom nerved: no danger then restrains ;
Death is less hateful than oppression’s chains.
But Heki now, to take his foes in flank.
Had placed some troops concealed behind a bank.
With orders to rush forth with dismal yell
Upon the British, and to flight compel;
While he in front should charge; which having done,
Once more in front he leads his warriors on.
And makes a furious onset on his foe.
Who waver, and recoil at every blow.
Death tracks his footsteps, foes before him fall.
His deeds strike terror to the hearts of all;
While from their cover rush the ambuscade ;
Then was the British flight not long delayed.
They broke and fled ; each man his safety sought
As best he could; some by the foe were caught,
But not destroyed; for Heki’s orders were
To slay who fight, but those who yield to spare.
The battle lost, the British in despair
Have reached the town, but find no shelter there.
Wives, children, all, perceive no hope below.
Save in the mercy of an injured foe.


And he of savage race; small hope I ween;
When, lo! a flag of truce advancing seen
Their drooping hopes revives. Approaching near.
This message doth the welcome herald bear:
“ Our leader, Honi Heki, sends to say.
He has no wish your vanquished troops to slay.
To free this land, which you unjustly claim.
And to regain his rights, is his sole aim.
This end attained, no dire revenge he bears ;
He lights for freedom, but the vanquished spares.
On board your ships you, therefore, may retire.
And unmolested by our further fire.
A s for your slain, they shall with ours receive
A Christian burial and a soldier’s grave.”
Such w r as the message which the herald brought
To the despairing British troops, who thought
No hope remained on earth ; but Heki proved
A generous foe, who was by mercy moved ;
Unlike Kowiti, who, had he the sway,
They all bad perished on that fatal day.
On board their ships they now embark with speed.
Wives, children, all, that they may be conveyed
To Auckland, seat of government, where they
Might state their hapless fate, and for assistance pray.
Meanwhile their town was plundered by the foe.
Then laid in ashes. With this deed of woe
This Canto we conclude. The next may tell
What further fortune to our hero fell.


HONI HEKI.
CANTO THE SECOND.
What sounds of woe in Auckland streets were heard.
Soon as was learnt what had so late occurred
At Korararika ! friends, relations slain.
While houseless those who had been spared remain!
Roused by the news, the Government prepare
To try the issue of another war;
They arm the troops, nor volunteers refuse.
And Colonel Despard for their leader choose.
A worthy choice, a gallant soldier he.
In danger dauntless, cool in victory.
Ills troops he musters, drills them day by day.
Makes them the rules of discipline obey ;
Being conscious that a small disciplin’d band
Can easily a motley host withstand.
One veteran heart which death can fearless view.
Is worth a hundred of the rabble crew.
This. Sweden’s madman-hero* taught his foes;
This, history from the world’s commencement shows;
This, Despard knew, and therefore drilled away.
Till he had taught his soldiers to obey
Each order soon as given; so thus prepared.
The war’s commencement he no more deferred ;
But now embarks his troops, and cannon too,
A well-served train, although in number few.
* Charles XII.


Two men of war (which weathered many a gale)
Received his troops on hoard, and then set sail;
Swift through the deep the gallant war-ships glide,
Despising mountain billows, wind and tide.
The tempest’s force with them might strive in vain,
They rode resistless monarchs of the main ;
Full many a clime had heard their thunders roll.
From sultry India to each frozen Pole.
Triumphant still their ensigns were unfurled.
When Britain’s navy strove against the world,
Part of the squadron which brave Nelson led
At Trafalgar, where Britain’s hero bled
In’victory’s arms : to save whose life alone.
Each British seaman would have .given his own.
(Yet Britain still need have slight cause of fear;
For, when required, fresh Nelsons will appear).
These gallant vessels thence o’er many a sea,
Victorious swept w’here’er a foe might be ;
Conveyed at length, yet pitying him the while,
Europe’s dictator* to his prison isle.
The generous tars felt for their captive’s woe, —
The brave exult not o’er a fallen foe;
And he their kindness with like kindness met;
They parted from him with a deep regret.
In search of other foes, till none were seen.
And earth hailed Britain as the ocean Queen !
Yet still employed these gallant vessels were.
Conveying now Britannia’s troops to war.
In earth’s remotest isles. The sun ne’er sets
On Britain’s empire, yet each conquest whets
Her appetite for more: she well might spare
New Zealand to the chiefs who govern there!
* Buonaparte.


But now their destined port the vessels gain.
The troops are landed, and the artillery train.
Two thousand soldiers on that beach now stand.
Eager to fight, a well-disciplin’d band.
Encamped on mountain tops is Heki seen.
With force inferior—braver ne’er had been ;
Yet anxious he, to save the further flow
Of human gore and further deeds of woe.
To Colonel Despard, therefore, he sends o’er
A herald, this the message which he bore :
“ To Colonel Despard Honi Heki sends,
To show the evil which on war attends ;
Our bravest troops by hundreds may be slain,
Your towns, or mine perhaps, may burn again :
Women, and children, by the rage of war.
Must suffer likewise, and its miseries share.
To avert these evils, therefore, I propose
A single combat; let my British foes.
Choose from among them one whom I may meet,.
And let that combat’s issue be complete.
If I am vanquished in the fatal fight.
We all submit to your superior might.
But if I conquer, then, you shall resign
These lands disputed, which I claim as mine.
Yourself, the chieftain of a warlike band.
Perhaps will combat with me hand to hand ;
Or, if your Queen’s vicegerent would prefer
To be your Champion, we’ll the fight defer
Till his arrival. Or, if you decline.
In single lists to match your strength with mine ;
Say, will you choose five hundred from your side.
While I an equal number shall divide.
And let their nervous arms our fate decide.”


Thus Heki’s herald did his message bear,
'Twas heard with scorn: for battle both prepare.
Meantime the traitor Waka Nenc joined
The British troops, and now the force combined
Is ordered to advance towards Hcki's camp,
Who marched to meet them, flanked by a deep swamp.
His left wing halts, a river on his right.
Plain ground in centre, thus begins the fight.
Thick from the British lines the bullets fly.
While answering vollies to their peals reply.
In vain they charge, they cannot force their way ;
New Zealand warriors still dispute the day.
Although outnumbered, yet their valour stood
In lieu of numbers, and discipline good.
Wherever Heki fought, he seemed to be.
Himself a host, such feats of valour ho
Performed that day. Kowiti and Pomare
Were also noted for their conduct there.
Foremost in fight, by such examples fired.
Their troops fought bravely, even their foes admired
Their desperate valour. Though the cannon’s roar
Had thinned their ranks, their courage rose the more.
But now, alas ! a ball has struck their chief;
Brave Heki falls ! his troops behold with grief
This fatal blow : they take him to the rear.
And find he has received a wound severe;
His right breast entered by a musket ball.
And faint from loss of blood, death seems for him to
call.
But now, behold the force of woman’s love !
Kuwani, Heki’s much-loved wife does prove
The saviour of his life, for she had learned
Of herbs the virtues, and their power discerned.


Quick from her stores she brings the balsam rude.
Yet efficacious ; soon it stops his blood,
And life, which seemed as though it ebbed away.
Returns again, to animate his clay.
Kuwani had been left by him that day
Safe in the “ Pah,” where all their women stay;
Yet could not rest, by hopes and fears so torn.
The dire suspense no longer could be borne.
Such gathering doubts her gentle bosom pain,
Lest her loved Heki should be ’mongst the slain.
Forth from the “ Pah” she takes her way alone,
Resolved to know the worst which could be known.
While she advances still increase her fears,
As every volley thunders in her ears ;
At length a gentle eminence she gains,
Whence she can view beneath the outstretched plains
Where hostile bands contend; one glance she throws
In search of where her Heki’s standard rose :
She gazed a moment, but she gazed no more.
She saw him fall, and from the battle bore.
Swift as the dove, which cleaves the liquid sky.
On wings of love Kuwani seems to fly ;
Nor thinks of danger, or of foes how near;
Her Heki’s safety now her only fear.
Such true affection in her bosom rife.
She thus arrives in time to save his life.
Meantime the battle fiercely was renewed.
The British charged, but still their foes withstood ;
Though Heki’s sword no longer waved o’er all.
They fought with fury to revenge his fall.
Their stubborn valour obstinately rose
Whenever fortune smiled upon their foes :
Thus, when the British thought that Heki’s fall,
Would be the signal of retreat to all,


It only gave fresh impetus to those ;
More deadly still the furious contest rose.
Yet, what avails the force of warriors rude,
While British cannon from a distance hewed
Their bravest ranks ? had they like arms to wield,
They would have triumph’d on that well-fought field
Though thinned their ranks, yet scorning to retire,
They kept their ground, returning fire for firc;
And bravely still pursued the unequal fight.
Till parted only by the approach of night.
Meanwhile Kuwani tends her wounded lord.
And his recovery is her best reward.
She watches over him, even as mothers watch
Their first-born infants, anxious she to catch
Each symptom of improvement; and would fain.
If it were possible, have borne his pain.
Oli! what can equal gentle woman’s love !
A guardian angel she doth ever prove.
To those she fondly loves, in want, in woe;
’Tis then that we her value truly know.
She soothes each sorrow, heals each deeper grief.
And finds for all some species of relief.
Oh ! who like her on sickness’ bed can tend ?
Or, who, like woman, for a faithful friend ?
Her gentle heart with love of peace imbued.
She calms our passions in their fiercest mood.
Her soothing voice our gathering wrath allays.
And even the sternest with a smile she sways.
Or, should some breast more obdurate appear.
Cold were that heart which could resist her tear.
Oh, what were earth unblest by woman’s smile ?
A dreary wilderness, a desert vile!
c


Parted by night, the hostile bands retired.
To seek that rest which each so much required.
Their limbs, so wearied from the desp’rate fight, "j
Felt grateful for the intervening night; V
Conscious of battle with the morning's light. j
Now deep oblivion either camp has bound,
Except'the sentinels who pace around
To guard against surprise. How calmly sleep
Some, whose next slumber will be far more deep !
Yet there are some, who cannot sleep, nor rest.
By doubts and sad presentiments opprest;
Some inward monitor foreshows their fate.
Yet warns in vain, such warnings come too late.
’Mongst those who thus felt death’s presentiment.
In Colonel Despard’s lines, is Captain Grant,
As brave a man as ever held command,
His sabre’s edge few foes could e’er withstand.
As Heki’s troops might testify too well.
Of whom some twelve before him prostrate fell.
But something now within his dauntless breast,
O’erclouds his mind, nor suffers him to rest.
In vain he tries such feelings to dispel,
The thoughts which bode him ill he cannot quell.
Death haunts his vision, seems for him to wait.
And points exulting to the doom of fate.
So Brutus’ evil genius, we are told.
On plains of Philippi appeared of old.
To warn that patriot of his coming doom.
Leaving a summons to an early tomb.
Yet Brutus saw that spectre undismayed.
And calmly was the patriot’s answer made ;
So just to him his every act appeared,
No death he shunned, no powers of darkness feared.


Like him, brave Grant, though conscious of his fate.
Disdained to shrink from what might him await,
A true-born Briton, to ins country true.
Beloved by all his private worth who knew ;
Yet still he grieved at what he could not shun,
To leave his wife beloved, and infant son;
And they to him so dear! her grief alone
Almost unmans him, more than death foreshown.
On his own fate he scarce bestows a thought,
But deeply mourns his lovely widow’s lot;
His fancy paints her stricken with the blow.
Speechless in the intensity of woe.
fSo well to him her faithful heart is known.
Too well he feels she lives for him alone;
That, when she hears his fate, no skill can save.
His death must be her summons to the grave.
But now the lamp of night from heav’n's withdrawn.
And bright Aurora ushers in the dawn;
At whose appearance th* opposing bands aw ake.
And, once more, hostile preparations make.
’Mongst Heki’s troops such havoc had been made.
That they in battle are not now arrayed ;
But keep within their pah, of which Pomare,
Takes the command, while Heki’s wounded there.
Now, Colonel Despard seeing that his foe
Declines the battle on the plains below.
Resolves to storm the pah: with this intent
His cannon and best troops are forward sent.
To occupy those posts which may annoy
His foes, and whence his cannon may destroy.
But oh ! what toil and labour there was found.
To drag the cannon o’er the. tangled ground,
c 2


For on the sloping hills so thickly grew
The forests, that they scarcely could pass through.
Thick scrubby brushwood spread from tree to tree.
And made their march a work of labour be.
But perseverance wonders will effect.
So they at length their batteries erect.
On sites, from which they could the pah command.
And pour a fire their foes could not withstand.
But now the order for th’ assault is given.
And cannons thunder like the peals of heaven.
Th’ assaulting columns march to the attack
Of the stockade, but there were beaten back.
Devoid of axes, and of ladders, they 'j
Tore down the palisades which blocked their way, y
And did most heroic bravery display; J
Yet could not force an entrance, for their foes,
In every breach most gallantly oppose,
And make a rampart of assailants slain
In fierce attempts an entrance there to gain.
Among the foremost British, Grant appeared.
Their bravest leader, and he now had cleared
The entrance of the breach, when brave Pomare
Bushed to the spot; they met in conflict there;
Fierce was the struggle, nor continued long,
Pomare the aged, w r as a veteran strong:
While Grant his sad presentiment recalls,
A headless bleeding corpse he prostrate falls.
Struck with the sight, the British troops recoiled.
And all their hopes were in an instant foiled.
Their leader’s death so filled them with dismay.
That with reluctance they at length gave way;
ilctiring in good order, while their locs
Dared not pursue, nor their retreat oppose.


Yet still the British loss had been severe.
So much exposed—their foes more sheltered there.
Still on the pah the British batteries play.
And make sad havoc on this dreadful day.
Till night approached. That fearful night was spent
In consultation deep in Heki’s tent:
He by his fond Kuwani’s skill and care
So much restored, now well his part could bear
In their debates; at length, they thus decide—
Within that pah no longer to abide;
But to retreat, ere daylight, several miles
O’er mountain passes, and through deep defiles.
Where scarce their foes could follow, nor to stop
Till they should gain some rugged mountain’s top,
Where they might once again defy their foes.
And form a pah impregnable to those.
Decided thus, they march in silence thence.
Nor from the British meet the least offence.
Who never dreamt of such resolve being taken.
Or that their pah they would have thus forsaken.
Now fade the stars from out the eastern skies.
And with the dawn the British troops arise.
Prepared once more to combat with their foes,
Whose desp’rate valour doth so well oppose
Their stronger force; but daylight doth unfold
A sight most strange; no foes can they behold
In yonder pah,—yet fearful of surprise.
They deem some stratagem beneath it lies.
And with much caution enter; still they find
Not e’en the wounded have been left behind.
With wonder filled, they search around in vain.
But still no tidings of their foes can gain.


Then, numerous scouts are sent on every side,
Their orders are to scour the country wide;
Till they discover where their foes have fled.
That British troops against them may be led.
Thus passed that day, to them no foes appeared;
(Yet still some ambuscade the British feared)
Till night approached, and then returned a scout
With this report, “ Our foes I have tracked out;
Encamped upon a rugged mountain’s brow
They rest secure, whence they defy us now.
Attack were vain, so rough and steep th* ascent.
While every passing hour by them is spent
In raising strong stockades, as if decreed
To make their camp impregnable indeed."
This scout’s report, when Colonel Despard heard
Confirmed by others, he perplexed appeared.
Scarce knowing what to do. If he pursued,
A foe so active might again elude;
Or could he reach them, it were hard to say.
So strong their camp, if he could win the day.
Besides, his losses had been so severe, —
For what he'd gained, his troops had paid too dear.
Provisions short, no reinforcement nigh,
And on his allies he could scarce rely;
For Waka Nen6 was a doubtful friend.
False to his country! How could he depend
Upon a traitor! if the foe he joined,
His troops must yield unto their force combined.
In these reflections Despard passed the night;
Then sent a herald with the morning’s light
To Heki’s camp; a flag of truce he bore.
With proffered peace, and offers to restore


The long-disputed land to Heki, who
Should, on his part, the ancient peace renew.
Allowing all the British who once held
Lands at the Bay, from which they were expelled,
To occupy those lands again, and be
From hostile depredations henceforth free.
Such were the terms to Heki offered, and he
Accepted them, so just they seemed to be;
And thus was peace restored. The chiefs now meet.
And all with ardour Honi Heki greet,—
Who, from his wound had now recovered quite.
The British leader views him with delight:
And brave men still, or whether friend or foe.
Must prize the man who did such brav’ry show.
Who for his country, not for conquest fought.
Whose noble heart knew no unworthy thought.
To deeds like his we should accord our praise.
And not on ruthless conquerors fix our gaze:
Those whose ambition plunges realms in woe,
Mankind should look on as their common foe.
Fame ne’er should crown the brows of such as would
To aggrandize themselves shed human blood ;
Napolean—Caesar—Alexander—all
Such misnamed “ heroes,” whether great or small.
Instead of fame should meet with mankind’s scorn.
Fame should be given to none but who their race
adorn.
Were this the case, had “ heroes” but their due ,
Then wars and “ heroes” would henceforth be few;
O’er all the earth peace would extend her sway.
And smiling plenty make all nations gay.
Then arts would flourish, commerce spread more wide —
Electricity perhaps to it applied.


Distance annihilated, mankind grown more sage,
Thus should we realize “ The golden age.”
For me, ray humble pen (though weak ’tis true)
Will point to merit where I deem it due ;
E’en though in humble, or in savage life.
My muse will praise but where true worth is rife.
For this she chose from out the numerous throng
Of “ heroes,’’ Hekj, hero of her song;
Hoping his heroic deeds may yet inspire
Tasmanian patriots with an equal fire.
Whene’er their injured country stands in need
Of patriot swords, then patriot hearts shall bleed
In its defence, till stem oppression rue
The foiled attempts to fetter hearts so true.
Here ends our tale—we part from it with grief;
Yet Heri lives, an independent Chief.


WARBECK;
on,
THE TASMANIAN SETTLER:
A POEM, IN TWO CANTOS.


Dedication.
Co
To thee, Zelima, I now dedicate
These artless strains, tfi’ o’erflowings of my heart;
For in this life, whate’er may be my fate, —
Though clouds should low’r, thy love will still impart
A sunshine to my soul, which will abate
And lessen, if it cannot heal my smart.
Whate’er the world may prove, at least I’m sure
Thy love will last, long as life may endure.
The world may smile, or the world may frown on me,
I think that I could calmly bear with either;
Not swelled by pride, if in prosperity,
Nor yet cast down by woe. Light as a feather
I hope my now warm heart may ever be, —
And thine the same, —or absent or together;
Our last best hopes placed in the realms on high,
A sweet “ Maria” thou! but, ah! no “ Warbeck” I!


WARBECK.
CANTO THE FIRST.
I.
When on Tasmania Warbeck first arrived.
Crown lands were not so scarce as they are now.
So therefore he the benefit derived
Which ev’ry candid person must allow
Accrued to early settlers; he contrived.
Without much trouble, though I know not how.
To place his “ grant,” two thousand acres, down
Upon a stream, and near a rising town.
n.
He was a steady man; his years, I think,
When truly told, might number twenty-five;
Strong was his resolution not to sink
While he could swim, but fearlessly to strive
’Gainst ev’ry obstacle, and not to shrink
From toil or trouble till he should arrive
At independence, which his heart held dear, —
Yet which so oft recedes as we draw near.
in.
Yet Warbcck’s views were mod’rate at the present;
’Tis with our wealth that our desires increase.
Few are the wishes of the humble peasant;
Yet grant him these, and others in their place
Will quickly spring; our longings are incessant.
And with our wishes gratified keep pace.
But Warbeck was contented with his lot;
An easy competence was all he sought


IV.
With his own hands he helped to build his hut;
’Twas built with logs; I will not say ’tvvas proof
’Gainst ev’ry blast of wind, although he put
The logs as closely as he could : the roof
Was thatched with grass, which close at hand he got,
And helped to carry : as yet he’d not a hoof
Of horned cattle; but with two convicts’ aid
He built his hut, and first improvements made.
v.
Which having done, he took one day a walk
To his next neighbour; for he wished to buy
Some breeding ewes, that he his land might stock ;
And if John Andrews would not be too high
In price, from him he’d purchase a small flock.
Which would increase. The house now meets his eye :
It held four rooms, a kitchen, and a hall;
Quite large enough, —the family was small.
VI.
Before the house a lovely garden lay,
Well stocked with shrubs and trees of ev’ry kind;
But to the front-door it blocked up the way,
So that all visitors approached behind.
Tis a colonial fashion I must say,
And also not in the best taste designed ;
Besides it has this disadvantage too,
That from the front it oft shuts out the view.
VII.
John Andrews was a married man, and had
Two grown-up daughters and an only son.
About fifteen, a clover active lad.
His daughter—that’s to say the eldest one—


Maria, was at times a little sad:
Her five-and twentieth year she had begun;
But whether this her spirits might depress.
Or some mofe serious cause, I cannot guess.
vm.
Perhaps it was her natural bent to be
Not melancholy, but a little serious.
She seldom joined in youth’s frivolity.
But loved to read of Pompey, Caesar, Marius,
And ancient Greek and Roman history;
Indeed her mind held stores of knowledge various,
And in the most of which she was self-taught:
For knowledge she most diligently sought.
IX.
Her sister Emelina was nineteen ;
At least she’d not acknowledge she was more.
Though I have heard ’twas but four years between
Maria’s birth and hers : I must implore
Her pardon, if six years did intervene.
Her manners quite a different aspect wore;
She was not sad, her heart was light and gay.
Cheerful as children’s when engaged in play.
x.
In point of beauty she might doubtless claim
The precedence. Just five feet four her height;
Shot from her eyes, love’s dart ne’er missed its aim,—
For they were black as jet, and sparkled bright
As e’er did eyes in a fond lover’s dream.
Or as the stars upon a cloudless night;
Her eyebrows nobly arched, her forehead fair,
O’erhung by the profusion of her hair.


XI.
Her face was rather long, so therefore she
Looked best in ringlets; yet the “ Grecian style”
She sometimes wore, perhaps for novelty.
Although it doubtless did her beatty spoil;
Her teeth were whiter than the ivory ;
Her cheeks were sometimes dimpled by a smile;
Some thought her nose was rather too acute —
But on these points we will not be minute.
XII.
She was a lovely maid, although her figure
Art rather had deformed than improv’d ;
Her waist was laced so tight ’twas not much bigger
Than her fair neck, though oft she’d been reproved
By her mamma, and sometimes used with rigour.
Yet threats and arguments she stood unmoved ;
Nor would she change : no martyr at the stake
E’er showed more constancy for conscience’ sake.
XIII.
Such were John Andrews’ daughters. He appeared
A plain, straight-forward, plodding sort of man;
One who with cautious prudence safely steered
His prosp’rous bark, for on no shoals he ran.
At present he had fifty acres cleared.
All fenced with post and rail, and sown with grain.
His farm contained six thousand acres, and.
What is still better, all alluvial land ;
XIV.
The greater part of which he bought from neighbours
Who did not thrive, (though equal were their means)
But lost their land, —besides some years of labour.
Because to folly they gave up the reins.


They were more fit to march with glitt’ring sabres
Than to bestow on sheep the proper pains.
To Hobart Town they did too often stray,
And got involved, —then sold their farms to pay.
xv.
From such he bought,their lands at a low price,
Because they were in want of ready cash.
For which they made the greatest sacrifice.
Such are the fruits of “ cutting a great dash !”
I can’t exactly say the sum precise
He paid per acre to those settlers rash ;
But in no case did it a pound exceed,
Which for such land was a low price indeed.
XVI,
But Andrews was a diff’rent sort of man ;
Just fit to bear an early settler’s life ;
In fortune’s race his neighbours he outran.
Being aided also by a prudent wife,
Who loved him still as when her love began,—
For constancy was in her bosom rife, —
Which he repaid with love sincere and true,
Not by his words alone but actions too.
XVII.
But on our hero we must keep an eye,
For Warbeck is the hero of the talc.
We left him to the house approaching nigh ;
And by this lime he surely cannot fail
To be engaged in conversation high
With Mr. Andrews, on th’ intended sale, —
And also with his wife and daughters fair.
Who charmed him with their wit and graceful air.


XVIII.
But chiefly Emelina he admired.
So fair her form, her piercing eyes so bright!
(And jet-black eyes have oft with love inspired
The thoughtless heart of many a youthful wight)
Maria seemed to him too much retired, —
She was not formed to captivate at sight;
Her charms were veiled from superficial eye;
So brightest pearls beneath the ocean lie.
xix,
Yet with each hour more unreserv’d she grew.
Improving on acquaintance. Warbeck found
That he had been deceiv’d at the first view,—
For every virtue did in her abound.
Though not a beauty of the brightest hue,
Yet was her heart with real goodness crown’d.
Nature had been too lavish, had she joined
A lovely form to such a noble mind.
xx.
Yet thus true worth oft lives unsought, unknown,
While glitt’ring folly does attract the eye.
Alas! how oft is real merit thrown
Into the shade, because reserv’d and coy !
Too oft we prize the outward form alone,’
As children for some painted bauble sigh;
Regardless of the mind contained within.
We seldom look much deeper than the skin.
XXI.
Unlike those who but in one art excel.
Unto Maria nothing came amiss.
She danced with grace, could sing, played music well,
Had read the histories of Rome and Greece,


And of that modern patriot, William Tell,
Who first gave liberty unto the Swiss;
Neither was Sobieski, Washington,
Or any hero unto her unknown.
XXII.
But of romances she was no admirer;
She thought them toys for children, neatly gilt;
Love seemed to be their author’s sole inspirer,—
A thing much talked of, yet but little felt;
Their long descriptions merely serv’d to tire her;
She scorned them all, but to true genius knelt;
A Shakspere, Dryden, Milton, Gibbon, Scott,
Such, and such only, deem’d she worth a thought.
XXIII,
Nor yet did she neglect the useful arts;
She was a skilful housewife, and could make
Pies, puddings, butter, pickles, cheese-cakes, farts, —
And also a good loaf of bread could bake;
She knew the flavour which each spice imparts
To jellies, jams, preserves, and to pound cakes ;
She also did to eminence attain
In ornamental needlework and plain.
XXIV.
Yet for applauses she did never ferret;
Whate’cr she did she did with the sweet grace
Of modesty, which thus enhances merit.
No haughtiness in her you e’er could trace;
And, though she bore within a lofty spirit.
Yet she was mild as Nature’s smiling face
In autumn, when abundant harvests wave
On ev’ry side, and woo mankind to save.
D


XXV.
But now we will proceed with Warbcck to
Inspect the sheep which Andrews has for sale.
His lowest price ten shillings for each ewe, —
The lambs were given in—l’ll not detail
All their good qualities, as owners do —
The bargain was concluded on the nail:
Let it suffice to say the sheep were good.
And price was fair, as then the market stood.
XXVI.
Indeed John Andrews did not even try
To “take in” Warbeck, although “a new chum;”
And most new chums (let not the old deny)
Were mostly cheated of a pretty sum,
In buying stock at prices far too high:
Indeed it seemed to be their common doom.
To find experience must be dearly bought,
That it may not be easily forgot.
XXVII.
Alas! how many thus have been the prey
Of prowling sharpers with unfeeling hearts.
Who strove to lead new emigrants astray.
By deep deception and detested arts ;
Being ruled alone by avarice’s sway, —
Which to the mind the basest thoughts imparts ;
Nor scruples by what means it may attain
Its selfish ends, if it the object gain.
xxviii. ,
Oh! who can tell the troubles and the trials
Which early settlers had to undergo !
The cares, vexatious, sorrows, self-denials,
Which none but those who’vc borne them fully know.


’Twas hope alone (which cheers with its descrials
Of future joy through clouds of present woe)
That nerved their drooping hearts to persevere,
And all their woes with fortitude to bear.
xxix.
But Warbeck was more fortunate than others,
In dealing with a man so just and fair.
Whose word alone was better than another’s
Oath, bill, or bond ; deception lurked not there.
He bated avarice, that vice which smothers
All the best feelings which the heart can bear;
Ho w r as a gen’rous, lib’ral-mindcd man.
Whose honest heart could no deception plan;
XXX.
And he with Warbeck was so pleased, he gave
To him a cordial, gen’ral invitation
To call whene’er he could spare time, and waive
All ceremony, idle affectation;
And that he always should much pleasure have
To pass the time with him in conversation.
The ladies also said ’twould give them pleasure
To see him there, whenever he had leisure.
XXXI.
Warbeck returned his thanks in terms polite.
Yet open, artless, free from all disguise.
And then departed ; for approaching night
Was spreading fast her mantle o’er the skies.
But Warbeck heeds not this ; his heart was light,—
Though sometimes Emelina’s piercing eyes
Would cross his thoughts, as he pursued his way,—
Until at last they led him quite astray.
d 2


xxxii.
O ye who in the bush have gone astray.
And spent the night in wandering to and fro;
Breaking your shins o’er logs which cross your way,
And more perplexed the more you forward go,—
Oft wishing for the lingering dawn of day,—
The misery of such a night ye know;
And doubtless do not envy Warbeck’s lot.
Nor all the falls and bruises which he got.
xxxm.
He being well-tempered bore them all with patience —
And patience is a virtue much required
In life, to curb the more unruly passions ;
And when with wandering he at length grew tired.
He sat absorbed in his own meditations.
Like a philosopher, or poet when inspired,
Until the dawning day dispelled the gloom;
And then he quickly found his way to homo.
xxxiv.
“ 0 home, sweet home !” well does the song express
That “ no place is like home, though it may be
Ever so homelystill we love no less
The home where we have spent our infancy.
In age our memory clings with tenderness,
To our first home, when our young hearts were free
From all the cares which lengthened life bestows;
For whoscan pass through life and feel no woes ?
XXXV.
And Warbeck’s present home, though mean enough.
Was dear to him as the most splendid mansion
Can be unto its owner; beneath such roof
My happiest days were spent; I need not mention


This to those settlers, who have also proof
That happiness rests not in the expansion
Of lands or dwellings. Could we be content
With competence, life might in peace be spent.
XXXVI.
But still ambition will not let us rest;
Whate’er we be, we would be greater still;
This restless passion in the human breast, —
The latent cause of all our good and ill, —
Directed right, a blessing 'tis contest;
But wrong,, with woe it does our whole lives fill.
What different acts from the same cause proceed.
As different sounds produced by the same reed.
XXXVU.
Without ambition what would mankind be?
Debased below the rudest savages,
Whom on New Holland’s arid wastes we sec
In nudity, at whom we wondering gaze.
Can they have the same intellect as we ?
Or is it education which does raise
The white man o’er the black ? The world beheld
Negroes rule Egypt, where the arts excelled.
xxxvnt.
But now they seem of meaner intellect;
Although some bright exceptions may be seen, —
Like Touissaint, who merits our respect;
(Though unsuccessful he at length I ween)
And others, whom I also might select.
As instances of negroes who have been
Endowed with a capacity as great
As white men, though so circumscribed their state.


XXXIX.
Yet by ambition many are undone;
Whilst some shine as true heroes; look to where
Almost in our own times rose Washington ;
A name which unborn nations must revere ;
His is true fame, he for his country won
Her liberty, which to his heart was dear.
Yet scorned a crown, though in his grasp it lay,—
For which through blood so many plough their way.
XL.
Rome has her Brutus, Switzerland her Tell,
Greece has her patriots, but wc look in vain
For one like Washington : though Caesar fell.
Worse tyrants rose to bind with heavier chain ;
But Washington, whose genius did repel
His country’s foes, triumphant scorned to reign ;
■Yet leaves to all posterity a name,
Which sounds the sweetest from the trump of fame.
XLI.
Compared with him, how mean all other heroes !
Napoleon, Alexander, Tamerlane, —
All masters of the world in different eras ;
Caesar and Mahomet, Cromwell. Charlemagne,
Fame on her annals rank, all cruel Neros,
Who strove to fetter all men with their chain; —
Rejoicing o’er the universal gloom,
As did the tyrant o’er his burning Rome.
XLII,
But these arc history’s heroes —Warbeck’s mine, —
An humble hero, but unstained by crime.
I might have chosen a loftier, but confine
Myself to this: I seek not the sublime.


I ask no laurel on my brows t’ entwine.
Nor fame to hand my name to future time ;
Content to pass my hours of leisure thus,
Verse my amusement, and so has its use.
XLIII.
Cut in Tasmania there is not much taste
For poetry, —at least that 1 discover;
And oft have I been told ’tis but a waste
Of time, to let such useless fancies hover
One moment in the mind, which should be placed
On higher matters ; verse but suits the lover,
To pour his passion in some plaintive strain,
To melt the maid whom else he’d woo in vain.
XLIV.
But though they say so, yet I will maintain
Verse has its use; it gives the mind employment;
’Tis sweet amusement if we do not strain
Our faculties too much in its enjoyment.
The mind requires some exercise ’tis plain,
To keep it healthy, this is all I meant, —
And not that any should neglect their duties.
To get enraptured with poetic beauties.
XLV.
T’ employ the mind when we have nought to do,
To keep it from a general stagnation.
How various are the means which men pursue!
Many of which deserve much reprobation.
Some drink, some play, some smoke, some snuff, some
chew.
Vile practices ! which need extermination.
Poets may praise the “jolly god,” but I
Deem Bacchus a foul demon we should fly ;


XLVI.
For see what evil he hath done the world
By w'ar and wine, —more by the last, than first.
Although his conquering banners he unfurled
O’er prostrate India, soon the bubble burst.
Not long o’er earth he war and slaughter hurled,
But by one base invention he has curst
With deadliest curse, the human race, but most
Those nations which of civ’lization boast.
XLVII.
110w r strange that drunkenness should thus entice !
The drunkard’s life is but a conscious death ;
Devils themselves disdain so low a vice,
Which sinks man to a brute—or far beneath,
For brutes do not get drunk of their own choice.
Taste not of wine the Turkish Prophet saith,
Yet wine, like all the gifts of God, of course
Is good,—men make God’s blessing their own curse.
xtvin.
O Temperance ! chaste goddess of delight.
To thee through life let general vows be paid ;
Peace are the joys thou giv’st; thy form so bright
And lovely, long my heart has swayed ;
O guide me stijl, protect by day, by night,
0 leave me not till I in dust am laid ;
But when temptation most assails, be near
To breathe thy warnings in my willing ear.
XLIX.
But we digress—l love a short digression
In poetry, it gives at least variety.
Besides the sentiments’ more full expression ;
A changeless song, like methodistic piety,


Pulls the tired car, and does not wake a passion:
But now at least I’ve rated inebriety,—
A vice our hero Warbeck ne’er had known.
Though he to five and twenty years had grown.
L.
At home we left him at the earliest dawn ;
Where having breakfasted, he went to view
The sheep which he from Andrews’ flock had drawn ;
His shepherd was a careful man he knew,
And fed his flock upon the verdant lawn.
Which sloped down from his hut; on it there grew
Mimosas sweet, Tasmania’s loveliest tree.
Which crowned with bloom greets spring’s approach
we see.
LI.
The sheep looked well, and seemed contented there,
The playful lambs were frisking to and fro,
“ Ah, happy innocents so free from care 1”
Thus Warbcck thought, “nosorrows do ye know.”
Would I were jTkc ye, all your joys to share.
No thought of present, past, or future woe
To mar your mirth, while man, creation’s lord.
Feels woes unfelt by brutes which clip the sward.
Lll,
He turned for home while thus soliloquising.
And oft with his own thoughts he did commune, —
For he was always fond of moralizing
On what he saw ; perhaps to keep in tune
His finer feelings, for there’s no disguising
The heart that’s sensitive feels woe too soon ;
Full many a hint he did from nature draw.
And profited by every thing he saw.


LIII.
He lived alone, yet felt not solitude,
For his own thoughts his sweet companions were;
He sought none else, he was of serious mood.
Yet where mirth reigned, lie there his part could bear,
As gay as those whom vanities delude;
For cold that heart must be which will not share
The general joy, when gladness reigns around.
Nor beat with transport to sweet music’s sound.
LIV.
But Warbeck had no eai* for music, he
Had “music in his soul,” the murmuring stream
And sighing breezes breathing harmony.
To him were music, fancy’s brightest beam
Shone on his mind, and made each flower and tree
Appear to him more beautiful than seem
Such things to others, —fancy does bestow
A higher zest to joy, but deepens every woe.
LV.
Yet "Warbeck’s woes were few indped, if any,
For Heaven from childhood had been kind to him;
And his warm heart was grateful for the many
Blessings bestowed, of which he did not deem
Himself deserving, for he was not vain, he
In early youth had drank from the pure stream
Of piety, whence flows that sweet rill charity,—
The sight of which on earth is such a rarity :
LVI.
By Charity I do not mean the act
Of giving to the poor, but what Saint Paul
Describes in first Corinthians with such tact.
He says unto the poor though we give all


Our goods, yet if true charity be lacked,
It profiteth nought; yet many whom we call
Good Christians, doubtless must mistake its features.
So coolly they condemn their fellow creatures.
L Vll,
All who may differ from them, they, at once,
Without reluctance, give unto the devil;
Nor will allow of Heaven the slightest chance.
To those who err, though they err not from evil
Propensities, but by deluded glance ;
Doubt in the mind is like in wheat the weevil,
In New South Wales, —it preys upon the mind.
And nothing leaves but chaff and bran behind.
LVIII.
Yet many doubt, —if all who doubt were damned.
Saint Peter’s post would be a sinecure ;
Hell’s spacious courts would be too thickly crammed.
So fast from earth would doubting mortals pour.
’Twcrc a hard case if Heaven's wide gates were
slammed
On all who doubt, doubt sometimes works its cure:
But Warbeck doubted not, condemned no creed.
Since different roads to the same heaven may lead.
LIX.
But not far distant from his farm there dwelt
A man who held religious doctrines strange:
’Twas said "in church or chapel he ne’er knelt,
And that he strove the minds of youth to change.”
He also took a great delight to pelt
All clergymen who came within his range;
Protestants, Catholics, Methodists, all
He deemed impostors, who men’s minds enthral.


LX.
He held it as the soundest doctrine that
A T o clergyman an honest man can be;
In ev’ry land they live upon the fat.
And leave the lean unto their followers ; he
Thought it a shame that those who did not sweat
Should live on others’ sweat; the industrious bee
Expels the idle drone; their hives contain
But those which by their toil their living gain.
LXI.
Lawyers he held in equal detestation, —
Those hungry sharks which prey on all mankind:
Our laws, he thought, required reformation ;
“ Law eats the oyster, leaves the shell behind.”
Lawyers, like spiders, seem in ev’ry nation;
They deem all those their lawful prey they find.
Or can inveigle into law, with lies; —
Their cobwebs snare mankind as spiders’ flies.
, LXII.
His name was Selab. Was he happy? No.
Did happiness depend on wealth alone.
Then Selab’s bosom could no sorrows know.
Twelve thousand acres he could call his own,
A house convenient, garden, where did grow
Earth’s loveliest fruit. Beneath, a bright stream
shone,
And made this spot a paradise appear;
No toil to tire, no Eve to tempt him here.
LXIII.
Yet Selab held sound maxims of morality ;
He was, I think, a moral-minded man ;
He really was much better in reality .
Thau those might deem who did not closely scan:


liis house was famous for its hospitality,—
A hearty welcome there for every one ;
A true John Bull in all things, e’en in grumbling,
Without effect, like distant thunder rumbling.
LXIV,
He held strange doctrines ; and they were not pent
Within his breast; he spread them far and near.
To see this neighbour Warbeck sometimes went;
He kept an open house and had good cheer;
So with him now and then a day he spent:
Not that his arguments he loved to hear.
For sometimes he could scarce contain a smile,
When “ Brahma," Vishnu,” did his host beguile.
LX V,
For “ Brahma,” “ Vishnu," “ Siva,” and the rest
Of Hindoo idols, were the source, he said.
Of our religion, which from India’s breast
Drew its first nourishment, and quickly spread.
As all plagues do, from east into the west.
He said that Moses, and Menou, who led
Some Indian Budhists westward, were the same:
That Jews from India, not from Egypt came.
LXVI.
Abram must have been, he thought, a cannibal.
Preferring human flesh to bread and cheese;
Or, at the least, like Carthaginian Hannibal,
Who offered human victims, to appease
His country’s gods, but found it unattainable.
These were his thoughts, and rev'ries wild as these;
For, though he had a most capacious mind,
Strange phantasies would thus his vision blind.


LX VII.
He thought the world eternal, still upheld
By One Great Cause, which guides and governs all—
A space-pervading Spirit—which impelled
Myriads of worlds around, the great and small,
Each in its destined path : our world excelled
By other worlds ; and what the sun wo call
Is but a brighter world : for in the sky
Worlds our world, and suns our sun outvie.
LXVIII.
Nor can I think that all these worlds were made
To serve one petty world, and man alone !
Those orbs unnumbered, in the heav’ns displayed—
Suns, planets, comets, all that yet are known—
By wise, unerring, changeless laws are swayed.
To man incomprehensible! I own
My inability to comprehend
Their origin, duration, use, and end.
LXIX.
Yet still I deem that all those orbs on high
, Are peopled with inhabitants, to suit
Their various spheres, with intellect more high
Than man on earth ; some stand in high repute,
Others inferior; so beneath our eye
Link joins to link—from insect to the brute.
From brute to man, from man to angels—till
We stop at infinite perfection still.
LXX.
Oh ! who can look upon the glist’ning skies.
And not he humbled to the dust, to see
Man’s nothingness ! Omnipotent, all-wise,
Alhmcrciful must their Creator be!


And what are we, base worms ! that he should prize!
And yet he offers an eternity
To all who will accept. What would we more ?
Bend to the dust, proud man, and nature’s God adore !
LXXI.
But War-beck was submissive to his God :
For he was pious ; not in outward show',
But in his heart; he followed the same road
His parents trod before him ; they did sow
The seeds of piety in him ; to them he owed
A debt of gratitude;—most children owe
More to their parents than they ever pay ;
Like debtors, they put off the reck’ning day.
LXXII.
And there are few who love to pay their debts, —
And fewer still who have no debts to pay.
Cash is so scarce at present that it sets
All men to think how they may pay their way;
Except the greedy usurer, who gets
Fifteen per cent., or twenty, as some say :
But those who lend at such a rate must be
Contented with the worst security.
rxxni.
Of usury laws* much has been talked of late :
To establish them in vain the debtors try.
Some say Tasmania owes her present state
Of poverty to int’rest being high.
Few can afford to pay the present rate:
Yet, on the other hand, I cannot see why
Money should differ from all other things,—
It shows its value by the rate it brings.
* Written in 1843.


LXXIV.
’Tis strange that int’rest here should stand at ten
Per cent, at home ’tis only three, or four.
1 wonder that some enterprising men
Of capital do not come to this shore,
And money lend at six or seven, they’d gain
At least some three or four per cent, or more ;
And they might get “ securities undeniable”—
And this would make the usurers much more pliable.
LX XV,
But no political economist am I,
No “ Adam Smith,” no “ Harriet Martincau” —
I wish I were, I then perhaps would try
The causes of our present state to show.
Our merchants every day (it makes me sigh)
To the insolvent court are forced to go :
On every side insolvency abounds
debts, one hundred thousand pounds.
LXXVI.
But Warbeck was no creditor, nor debtor.
He neither borrowed, nor lent money, he
Was quite contented with his farm : a better
Upon Tasmania you could scarcely see.
He only wished the climate to be wetter.
And that from summer frosts it might be free ;
Then would this isle “ with milk and honey” flow, —
'Twould doubtless be a Paradise below,
LXXVII.
By this lime he had purchased all required
Upon a farm,—bullocks, ploughs, and harrows;
And also a good ploughman he had hired ;
Yet often ploughed himself some crooked furrows ;


But daily he improved as he desired :
No longer to the beam the plough he burrows.
But draws each furrow straight, and even too;
As ploughman he could be surpassed by few.
LXXVIII.
He also learned to sow, to reap, to shear, —
And in each art he such good progress made.
That when he wished he foremost could appear.
And throw the quickest workman into shade.
He did in nothing competition fear,
Whate’er he tried, in it he took the lead :
He was the same from childhood, when at school
First in his class, none could dispute his rule.
LXXIX.
He bought a horse, it was an Arab grey,—
I love a grey, it is a pretty colour.
Though some perhaps prefer a black, or bay,—
Both were content, the buyer, and the seller ;
His name was Badger, full of life and-play
Was he, no animal was fuller :
But, since there’s nothing faultless here below,
His only fault was shying that I know.
LXXX.
To see his neighbours oft on him he rode, —
But to his neighbour Andrews most of all;
He certainly a predilection showed
For the society at Werton Hall, —
The name which Andrews gave to his abode, —
A sounding name for a brick cottage small.
But in Tasmania such is oft the case.
Parks, halls, and castles, .on all sides we trace.
E


LXXXI.
I wonder that no palaces arc seen;
I think my cottage I shall call a palace.
If but for singularity. I mean
Offence to none, I really bear no malice
’Gainst parks, halls, and castles ; though the last I
ween.
Are mostly built in air : where men oft fail is
In building their high hopes on bad foundations :
We are too sanguine in our expectations.
LXXXII.
I said that Warbeck showed a predilection
For Werton Hall; and beauteous Emelina
Was the attraction; pure was his a flection,
And she was lovely ; he had never seen a"
Maiden who could like her bear close inspection:
Her eyes so brightly shone! and well I ween a
Bright sparkling eye oft fixes lovers’ fate, —
A single glance the soul can fascinate.
LXXXIII.
Oh how I love a brilliant eye ! it seems
To say there’s soul within : no matter what
The colour be, if life be in its beams !
This makes me call to mind what I have not
Forgotten yet, one of my boyhood’s dreams.
Ere I of love had formed a single thought;
Yet at thirteen I felt some passion move
My heart; —at such an age could it be love?
LXXXI V,
Yet then I felt what I ne’er felt before,
And never since, at least with equal force;
If ever lover did I did adore.
And drew my draughts of love from the pure source


Of ray young heart; but now such dreams arc o’er:
With every year I wiser grow of course.
And now can scorn the tyrant love, whose dart
May slightly touch, not deeply wound my heart.
I.XXXV.
O love! thou great enslaver of the world !
Thou tyrant of the tyrant and the slave!
For thee how oft has desolation hurled
Its blighting breath o’er many an empire brave ?
What caused Troy’s fall but Helen’s ringlets, curled
With taste, and those bright charms which nature
gave:
Alas ! that ought so frail should cause such woe !
Men fight for baubles, as their histories show.
LXXXVI.
Antony lost a world for Egypt’s queen.
Who in the midst of battle basely fled;
Yet still her slave his Roman soul was seen.
E’en in the hour when by his sword he bled :
While she, the dastard heartless wretch so mean,
Looked coldly on; no sorrows bowed her head;
She shed no tears upon her victim’s grave,
But tried all arts his conqueror to enslave.
LXXXVII.
Love works a world of woe upon this earth,
As Petrarch, Werther, and a thousand more
Bright instances of men of real worth
Might testify; and deeply I deplore
That such a passion ever had its birth
In Warbeck’s bosom; but I can't do more
Than state plain facts, not adding nor abating.
Since these are truths, not fictions, I am stating.
*»


LXXXVIII.
And Warbeck gazed on Emelina’s eyes;
Ah ! wherefore did he see those eyes at all!
The more he gazed, the more did love arise
Within his breast, and placed his heart in thrall.
We’re told that “ no man at all hoars is wise
We own this truth, —for look at him we call
The wisest man, King Solomon the sage;
The slave of love—a fool in his old age.
LXXXIX.
He loved strange wives, and stranger concubines:
But ’twas not love, but lust for them he felt—
True-love’s bright lamp for one fond bosom shines;
Changeless, howe’er the storms of life may pelt.
How blest are those whom pure affection joins,
Who in each other’s fond embraces melt;
Whose inmost thoughts in one pure current roll;
Each true to each, as needle to the Pole!
xc.
And Warbeck loved with a first love, as pure
As ever love upon this earth was seen :
But such a love is almost always sure
To fail—who woos with truth will seldom win :
Plain truth, alas! few maidens can endure;
So you who would succeed, with lies begin,—
“ Sigh, fawn, and flatter,” as some poet sings;
This rule observe, success it ever brings.
xci.
Yet Warbeck sighed, but could not fawn and flatter ;
’Twas here he erred, —his spirit was too high.
And I may say without the slightest satire.
Those should not fall in love who will not lie;


But they some truth should with much falsehood scatter.
In their soft talk ; and cautious be, and sly.
And practice all sorts of deceptive arts:
These are the surest means to win their hearts.
xcu.
But to proceed: when Warbeck “popp’d the question,”
The maiden blushed, and smiled, and half said yes,
Yet still said no; so Warbeck thought he’d best shun
To urge the point at present; but no less
Uncertainty will try a patient Christian; —
Are Christians patient? she, 1 must confess.
Cared not if she her lover’s feelings hurt;
She was, that worst of characters, a flirt:
xcm.
Yet still he loved her, and she made him feel
Himself her slave; by turns she frown’d and smil’d;
Sometimes she listened to his fond appeal
Apparently with pleasure; and beguiled
Warbeck who thought his woes she soon would heal;.
He was as artless even as a child, —
And so she played upon him without doubt,.
As anglers play a salmon, or a trout.
XCIV.
And doubtless ’tis great sport to see a lover
Once fairly hooked, thus dangling at the tail
Of some fair maiden’s line, who makes him hover
About her person with his woeful wail.
Lovers are game, like pheasants, or like plover;
And sportive maids, in season, may assail
Their hearts; but when the season’s o’er, ’twere shame.
Laws, lovers should protect, as well as game.


xcv.
But Emelina, in and out of season,
Made constant war on Warbeck’s peace of mind.
Sometimes she’d thaw, and then again she’d freeze on;
As changeable as woman, or as wind, —
For both are fickle. I can’t tell the reason
Why she to Warbeck ever proved unkind:
In fact I think herself could scarce tell why
She acted thus, —and therefore how can 1?
xcvi.
I might declaim until I should be hoarse.
And yet the causes of her acts not find.
Less difficult to find the Niger’s source.
Than trace the wand’rings of a woman’s mind.
In hate, she’s furious as the whirlwind’s force ;
But when she loves, she really is too kind, —
Extreme in all things, whether good or evil;
If good, an angel; but if bad, a devil.
xcvii.
But oh! what language can describe the state
Of Warbeck’s mind ? unutterable woe.
And black despair, upon his bosom sat;
Yet still his inward grief he did not show
To aught but her who doom’d him such sad fate.
Could Heaven permit such wickedness below?
The murderer shall not live, the scripture saith.
But what is murder to this daily death ?
xcvm.
Could I describe what Warbeck felt, all eyes
Would shed a tear of pity o’er his woes;
But such description all my art defies.
My pitying muse, alas ! but partly shows


His tale of woe; and since in vain she tries,
Perhaps his own words may the best disclose
AY hat he then felt; so now his thoughts I’ll show them,.
As he described them in a pastoral poem.
XCIX,
For he with artless touch could strike the lyre.
And pour in plaintive strains his heartfelt woe
Not sweeter strains could Handel’s self desire.
So sadly soft the mournful numbers flow.
For all the muses did his song inspire.
His own in Colin’s griefs at once you’ll know ;
As in the language of a simple swain,
He poured his song, and this his mournful strain.;—
colin’s complaint—a pastoral poem.
’Twas spring, and fields and flowers were smiling gay,.
All newly clad by Sol’s reviving ray.
When hapless Colin while his flock did graze,
Thus poured his soul forth, in these mournful lays
“ Oh ! thou, who still must claim my artless song,.
The wilful cause of all my grief and wrong
On thee I call! oh ! listen to my strain.
Perhaps ray words may wake thy love again.
Ah ! foolish hope, which but my weakness proves,.
No more my song my Emelina moves ;
For now, alas! as changeable as wind,
She scorns my love, inconstant as her kind ;
Yet time has been when she would deign to hear,.
And listen to my strains with willing ear.
How oft with her I’ve wandered in these bowers.
For her have plucked and culled spring’s sweetest flowers !'
Plucked by my hand, all flow’rs alike she praised,
And sweetly blushed whene’er on her I gazed.
Ah! blissful days! when, heedless of disguise,
Love spoke in volumes from her brilliant eyes!


When hearts to hearts, and souls to souls confess
The love that burns within, words can’t express \
The glowing thoughts which such fond bosoms bless. )
But now no more I’ve pow’r to fix her mind;
She scorns ray love, without a cause assigned.
Perhaps some fairer form her heart may move;
But who can love her with so pure a love?
What can she see in other swains, that I
May not their poor pretensions far outvie ?
What rival swain from me can bear a prize ?
Whose song so sweet in praise of her bright eyes ?
When such the theme, oh! how my bosom swells!
As she all maids, my song all song excels.
Nor yet in song alone : who can compete
With me in skill?—whose pasture is so sweet?—
Whose flock so fair?—who tends his charge so well?
Speak, fickle maid !—ray favoured rival tell.
Here bright mimosas in full bloom abound—
On evTy branch birds chirp their loves around—
On yonder bank my playful lambs disport;—
But I to melancholy shades resort.
Oft on such scenes I’ve gazed with fond delight,
Though now I find no pleasure in the sight.
When sad the heart, all nature smiles in vain;
No charm in landscape, grove, or verdant plain.
Dear Emelina, wilt thou ne’er be kind,
As once thou wert ?—say, what has changed thy mind ?
Oh! with thy former smiles thy lover bless, —
Who loves with love no words can e’er express.
One tender look will banish all my woe; -v
Thy love the greatest bliss I seek below; \
No richer gift on me can heaven bestow, J
Oh! where are now those former blissful days,
When thou didst list with rapture to my lays,
Smiled as I sung, and didst my strains approve,—
Thyself the theme, my song inspired by love ?


Blest with thy love, no sorrows then I knew;
Approving nature smiled in brighter hue ;
With hasty flight the happy moments rolled,
And night approached ere half our tales were told ;
But, since thy smiles my sight no longer cheer,
Hours seem like days, each ling’ring day a year.
In vain at night I seek my former rest,
My wakeful couch by restless limbs is pressed ;
Sleep grows a stranger to my weary eyes,
And unrefreshed at early dawn I rise;
Pensive I rove, nor join in mirth or jest,
And melancholy is my constant guest.
Thus some lone mariner, cast on desert shore,
Without a hope to cheer him, smiles no more ;
So I, alas! as desolate in mind,
Feel equal solitude among mankind,
I, who was once the gayest of the throng,—
’Mongst tuneful swains I sung the merriest song;
In rural sports the foremost part I played,
And all my laurels at thy feet were laid ;
But now no more 1 join the cheerful swains—•
Grief should not mingle where such pleasure reigns;
In lonely groves my mournful numbers flow,
And yet they fail to utter half my woe.
Relentless maid! canst thou inflict such pain,
Nor pity feel, nor yet the cause explain?
Not free from faults am I, too well I know;
But who is perfect in this life below ?
’Tis vain to search for such the world around ;
Immortal angels are imperfect found ;
Then think, my Emelina! think, once more!
Relent at last, thy Colin does implore.
As slumb’ring embers o’er a smoking plain,
Waked by a breath, in flames burst forth again ;
So joy, which slumbers in my bosom’s core,
Waked by thy smiles, would light my heart once more,


But, ah! in vain I pour my mournful lays,—
’ Nor in her bosom can compassion raise.
Then cease my song : ray sheep demands ray care,.
And to their fold ’tis time that they repair.
Yon western sky, which purple clouds adorn,
Now gives the promise of a lovely morn; —
But morning calm, or ev’ning’s milder hour,
To soothe my mind no longer has the power.
My flock secure, I to ray cottage go,
And there in solitude indulge my woe.
c.
Thus Warbcck poured his artless tale of woe:
The pitying groves wept o’er the mournful song;
The murm’ring stream did meantime silent flow.
And sighing zephyrs bore the notes along;
All nature joined, their sympathy to show.
And universally proclaimed his wrong;—
While she, for whom be poured so sad a strain.
Smiled as he sung, and gloried in his pain.
CI.
She, who could list to such a tale unmoved.
Was deaf alike to father and to mother,
Who pleaded Warbeck’s cause in vain. She proved
Heedless alike of sister and of brother.
At length Maria did find out she loved.
Or had, at least, a fancy for another ;
For such a heart true love could never feel;
’Tvvas callous as the flinty rock or steel.
cn.
Yet she imagined that she was in love;
Imagination’s equal to reality:—
I do not know what did her fancy move;
The man she loved had not a single quality


Which ought to be beloved ; yet she did prove
Attached to him, as if by some fatality :
She heard her friends’ remonstrances unmoved;
The more opposed, more obstinate she proved.
cm.
Thus love grows stronger fed on opposition ;
We prize not what is easily attained ;
This makes some maids show such an exhibition
Of feigned reluctance, —and their point is gained ;
’Tis thus they bring their lovers to submission;
They Te prized the most by those whom most they
pained:
So love in Emelina’s thoughtless breast
Grows stronger for the man her friends detest.
civ.
At length they left her to herself; and she
Was quickly wedded to her quondam lover.
At first she felt as happy as could be ;
But, ere the honeymoon’s short month was over.
Woe, want, and discord you might daily see;
She, in her husband, did a sot discover.
And debts and duns did daily him environ ;
He also ruled her with a rod of iron.
cv.
Thus Emelina sutfered for her folly :
She, who with Warbeck happy might have been.
Now doomed to pine in hopeless melancholy.
E’en in her youth, while yet her heart was green;
For former failings now she paid most fully ;
And yet most just her punishment, I ween.
Ye flirting maids ! in Emelina’s fate
Behold your own.—Avert it, ere too late.


CVI.
But now Ave’ll take our leave of her, and turn
To Warbeck, who his grief could not suppress
At once; —for he at times his loss would mourn.
To Werton Hall his visits did not cease:
His friends, with grief, beheld his visage worn ;
Yet there, at least, he seemed to suffer less
Than when elsewhere; all did such kindness show;
And sweet Maria oft dispelled his woe.
CVII.
But woe, like all things else, must have an end :
The fierce tornado will not always last;
The earthquake does not long earth’s bosom rend ;
The ocean’s wrath subsides, as does the blast;
What fiercest foams, its force will soonest spend;
The thunderbolt is in an instant past;
The broils of nations, too, must also cease; —
So Warbeck by degrees regained his peace.
CVIII.
Unto Maria much he owed; for she
Felt for his woe, and oft in pity strove
To heal his heart; and not in vain, we’ll see.
And was it nought but pity which did move
Maria thus his comforter to be?
We’re told that “pity melts the mind to love:”
I’ll pause not to inquire, nor seek to find.
The causes which may move a maiden’s mind.
cix.
Slight causes oft will great effects produce,—
As from a spark may burst a sheet of flame :
Yet, without diving into thoughts abstruse,
Tis plain enough, in this harmonious frame,


That naught exists without its proper use, —
Though man, perhaps, may not find out the same,
Yet madly dares his Maker to asperse :
Man’s but an atom in the universe.
cx.
Oh ! man, how strange, bow wonderful art thou !
Compared with aught on earth, how vastly great!
Compared with heaven, how mean ! Thy pride must
bow
Before an angel of the lowest state.
We’re born —we die —we know not when or how—
Alike unknown our past and future fate ;
Half-reasoning brutes, by passions urged along.
We know the right, yet oft prefer the wrong,
CXI.
But now ’tis time this canto should be ended.
Though not for want of matter or of rhyme,—
For neither is, as yet, one-half expended,—
But that I deem prolixity a crime.
This canto is the length which I intended.
At the commencement of this tale sublime;
So here I’ll pause, to hear what may be said
By those who have thus far my poem read.
cxn.
And now, ye gentle critics of Tasmania!
You ’re like your English brethren, I suppose;
So that, when authors strive to entertain you,
Your brow contracts, and long your visage grows.
Think not by flattery I will strive to gain you.
I scorn you all; so ye, in verse or prose,
May pour your wrath : and shall it pain me ? No !
The eagle soaring high disdains the rocks below.




WARBECK.
CANTO THE SECOND.
i.
Tasmania, loveliest isle of Southern Ocean!
Thou Erin of the south ! I grieve to see
That thy decay awakens no emotion
In their cold hearts who rule thy destiny.
Oh! could they feel a patriot’s warm devotion
To thy true int’rests, then prosperity
Would soon return unto thy lovely isle.
And make thy children with contentment smile.
ii.
But now in vain thy settlers till thy soil,
And weary industry may strive in vain:
The farmer’s unrewarded for his toil;
“ He gains a loss,” so low the price of grain.*
His land becomes the prey of usurers vile, —
Those hungry vultures, of this land the bane.
Who fatten on the wretchedness of others :
Avarice every better feeling smothers.
* In 1843, when this was written, wheat was not worth more than
from 3s. to 4s. per bushel, while the interest of money stood at 10 per
cent.


111.
Alas! Tasmania—my adopted land,
Thou 'rt but the wreck of what thou late hast been!
So, when a pilot with unskilful hand
Directs the helm, the vessel’s fate is seen;
She strikes the rocks, nor can the shock withstand :
Vain are the efforts of her crew, I ween.
Who, spent with toil, her hapless fate deplore ;
She slowly sinks, alas! to rise no more.
IV.
But wherefore grieve ? Grief makes not woe the less ;
So to our tale. I think we left our hero
Endeavouring his passion to suppress ;
His spirits had been sunk as low as zero,
But peace does now once more his bosom bless;
And from henceforth he dates a brighter era; —
And when he looks upon the past and gone.
He sighs to think such weakness he had shown.
v.
Oh! who that looks back on his former life
Would once again his ev’ry deed react?
E’en saints themselves might use the pruning-knife
On actions which their characters have blacked :
Yet Warbeck’s youth with prudence had been rife.
Or, what may seem the same, not being attacked
By strong temptations, he appeared to be
As virtuous as a mortal well can be.
VI.
And thus we see we never should despair.
E’en when our hopes are at their lowest ebb.
Since fortune is as fickle as the fair:
So unaccountably she weaves her web,


That when she smiles the most we should beware :
Her frowns soon follow, —like a new-born babe,
Whose half-formed smiles are dashed with sudden
tears:
Thus changeable dame fortune oft appears.
VII.
And Warbeck felt how foolish he had been
To grieve so much, —for such a trifle too ;
A heartless girl he lost, —yet I have seen
Such loss a gain: though strange ’tis no less true.
O ! could the future like the past bo seen.
Then some events we’d bless which now we rue;
Oft, what we deem a curse, a blessing proves,
When time the film from our dimmed eye removes.
VIII.
And now he bends his mind to cultivate
His farm, and many great improvements made.
Some of his paddocks he did irrigate,
Th’ expense of which but badly they repaid :
His farm, unlike what it had been of late.
Where forests grew, now under corn was laid.
And bore good crops; for fertile was the soil.
And Warbeck farmed it in the English style;
IX.
That is, he kept his fields in good condition.
And not like many of our farmers, who
Sow the same crops in endless repetition.
And when one field is worn out, plough a new'.
Such mode of farming is the laud’s perdition.
And those who practise it in time must rue;
But Warbeck farmed on quite a diflf’reht plan;
System through all his cultivation ran.
F


X,
He also built a handsome cottage, which
Was neat, not large, but built with greatest taste.
Our hero now was growing daily rich, —
Yet still was prudent; he disliked all waste:
He held it a good maxim that “ a stitch
In time saves ninenot “ famine or a feast.”
With Irish brogue pronounce my latest rhyme.
And then with taste and waste a feast may chime.
XI,
[l’ve heard some persons reading rhymes, who would
No diff’rence make or if’twere verse or prose.
To me, however, it seemed exceeding rude;
My ear it grated, and my blood it froze.
I may be wrong ; but still, I think, they should
On the accented syllables repose.
And to the author’s gen’ral style attend.
And not with discords harsh the ear offend.]
XII,
By this time Warbeck had a garden planted ;
And he displayed much taste in the selection
Of trees, and shrubs, and flowers ; he nothing wanted
Which could delight a botanist’s inspection;—
His garden was on rising ground, which slanted
Down tow’rds the stream ; he had a rare collection
Of plants indigenous, whose names defy
My skill, because no botanist am I.
XIII,
But he could tell you the botanic name
Of every little plant and shrub you saw;
He thought this science should attention claim
From those who strive to study nature’s law.


For mo, alas ! I tell it to my shame.
For botany I do not care a straw ;
And yet I love to see a lovely flower.
It soothes ray mind in meditative hour.
XIV,
I’ve seen the rose in summer sweetly blooming,
And to the sun its lovely hues unfold :
When next I sought it, time was fast consuming
Its transient bloom ; its fate need not be told!
Thus grief, alas ! is daily fast entombing
The sweetest human flowers that we behold ;
Plucked from the stem while yet in bloom arrayed.
Withered by death, —the loveliest soonest fade.
xv.
And then we weep for whom we should rejoice.
At having flown to brighter worlds than this;
Where virtue is rewarded, and where vice
Is never known in their abodes of bliss.
Ah ! happy those who wisely make their choice
In youth, of paths which never lead amiss ;
For them death has no terrors, —he appears
A friend to lead them from this world of tears.
XVI.
O meditation ! silent, thoughtful maid.
With downcast eye, but with expanded mind ;
Whose lofty brow appears to have a shade
Of melancholy with thy thoughts entwined :
By thee, full oft, has my young heart been swayed;
From.infancy thou hast been ever kind.
In mirth let others seek for happiness ;
But let thy calmer joys my bosom bless.
f 2


XVII.
For me, full oft, thou hast withdrawn the screen
From mankind’s vain pretensions, till I saw
Vice lurking where I deemed true worth had been ;
Some, whom I once believed without a flaw.
With num’rous vices closely masked, were seen,
Sinners in secret, I beheld with awe;
And while instructed by truth’s transient gleam,
I sighed to think, men are not what they seem.
XVIII.
At distance viewed-how great the hero seems!
The sage how wise! and piety how meek !
The conquering hero while on earth ho gleams,
Does nought but fame and deathless glory seek;
The sage, whose wisdom like bright Phoebus’ beams.
Illumines the whole earth, seems never weak:
And piety, with humble downcast eyes,
Alas ! too often proves rank pride’s disguise.
XIX.
And if we scan the hero, and the sage.
And trace their actions to their hidden source.
They’d make but a poor figure on life’s stage:
The sage’s precepts would lose half their force ;
Few heroes then would grace the poets’ page;
Poets themselves are like the rest, of course,
Not by their lives, but by their verse they teach ;
So parsons seldom practice what they preach.
XX.
Man is a curious animal; a strange mixture
Of evil and of good : there’s none so base
But has some virtue in his breast a fixture;
And none so good but vice will claim a place;


And though divines may pass a harder stricture.
Yet more of good, than evil, I can trace
Within the human heart, —whate’er its state.
Yet does the good o’er ill predominate.
XXI.
•*»
But vve must take this life as men take wives,
“ For better or for worse Ido not know
If those are happier who lead single lives.
Or those who to the fane of Hymen go :
At least there’s one thing certain, man derives
True happiness from neither; I could show
That those who’re single seldom are contented.
And those who wed, alas ! too oft repent it.
XXII.
Yet he, who fondly loves a lovely wife.
And who his love as fondly does return,
Must doubtless be the happiest in this life ;
Blest with each other, without cause to mourn.
No angry jars, no sharp domestic strife,
But pure affection on each face is worn :
But are there really such 1 ah, wherefore cherish
Such hopes, which like some flow’rs but bloom to perish.
XXIII.
True happiness, a native of the skies.
Dwells not on earth ; or, if a moment seen.
Like “Will’ the wisp,” it but deludes the eyes.
And leads astray all those who seek I ween ;
In vain ’tis sought for by earth’s fools, the wise
Know that on earth its dwelling ne’er had been ;
For e’en when seen ’tis like a falling star;
It gleams a moment, then dissolves in air.


XXIV,
The most that mortals can expect below.
Is but contentment, which is rarely found ;
For e’en when fortune docs her gifts bestow,
We find new wants on every side abound :
’Tis our desires uncurbed that form our woe.
Those are least happy who by'fortune crowned.
Allow fierce passions to corrode the mind ;
Pall’d by the present, to the future blind,
xxv.
But, gentle reader, I must beg your pardon
For these digressions of my wand’ring muse;
Although in sooth they serve to help a bard on.
And give his tale some variegated hues.
Variety is pleasing in a garden;
And in a tale who would a sameness choose?
So does my muse her varied strains impart.
Yet merely breathes the thoughts of her own heart.
XXVI,
But now we’ll seek our hero, and shall find him
At Werton Hall; a place where he had found
His bane and antidote; though love did blind him
While he to Emelina’s chain was bound :
Now, Cupid's slave no more, the god resigned him
To Pallas’ guidance, she with wisdom crowned.
And for his “ mentor” sweet Maria chose:
So with a second flame our hero glows.
XXVII.
I do not know what name to give his passion.
It-differed so from what he felt before.
His former flame you doubtless deem a rash one.
And yet it penetrated his heart’s core;


But love is sometimes changeable as fashion ;
Think not those who once love can love no more.
First love shines with a bright, but transient gleam.
And after loves less bright, more constant beam,
xxvm.
And Warbeck now for sweet Maria felt
A warm unalterable pure devotion ;
And piety did to love her bosom melt,
And made her heart glow with a new emotion ;
’Twas the first time to love she ever knelt.
And, being a novice, had at first no notion
That she this truth should by experience prove,—
That even the wisest must submit to love.
XXIX,
And Warbeck now appeared to her to be
(As certainly he was) superior to
The common herd of mankind ; she did sec
Virtues in him which seldom meet our view ;
From human failings he was nearly free.
He had, what’s rare, an honest heart, and true ;
But oh ! he was thrice blest in now possessing
Maria’s love, —heaven’s blest and choicest blessing.
xxx.
She fondly loved him, with a love as pure
As angels love in heaven ; ah ! could I find
Such love on earth, I would not long endure
A single life; yet celibacy’s kind.
And I, at least, need not complain I’m sure, —
Maria gave to Warbeck her whole mind.
And heart, and soul; he, in or out of sight.
Engrossed her thoughts by day, and dreams by night.


XXXI.
To love and be beloved by virtuous woman.
Fair in her person, lovely in her mind,
Is certainly a bliss so great that few men
Have been as yet so fortunate to find.
Oh ! why is mutual love a love uncommon ?
The bands of Hymen discords oft have joined.
And what should be a blessing thus may turn
A deadly curse which must through life bo borne.
xxxii.
What pity ’tis that those who disagree
In matrimony, cannot be unmarried ;
A great improvement it would doubtless be.
And save full many a noble heart being furrowed
By broils domestic, as we often see
Where love once dwelt, but where he has not tarried.
Yet, after all, what equals matrimony?
That homely dish, made up of gall and honey.
XXXIII.
There’s not a blessing in this life below.
But doubtless has some mixture of alloy ;
Sufficient still to make all mortals know
That perfect bliss is found alone on high.
Thrice-happy those whose well-spent lives can show
A certain promise of eternal joy!
Whate’er their griefs, their conscience being pure.
Makes them all ills with fortitude endure.
XXXIV,
But once more to our tale. Maria loved
And was beloved by Warbeck in her turn :
Indeed it seemed as if one spirit moved,
And made a mutual flame in their hearts burn.


A love so guiltless was by heaven approved.
So artless they, each did deception spurn.
From each to each the electric spirit flies:
They need no language but their glowing eyes.
xxxv.
For there the inmost thoughts of each were read
Without disguise, as from their hearts they sprung,
So artless they, (as Fve already said,)
They never harboured e'en the thought of wrong.
But Warbeck now, by inspiration led.
Attuned his lyre, and thus poured forth his song :
While as he sung, Maria, with emotion.
Blushed like Aurora rising from the ocean.
SONG.
1.
Wilt thou return a pure affection
For love sincere and true,
When Hymen’s bands in close connection
Shall bind my soul to you ?
2.
Oh yes ! I know that thou wilt love me,
And I will love but thee ;
And changeless as the heav’ns above me,
Our mutual love shall be.
3.
And e’en when time shall plant a wrinkle
Upon thy lovely brow ;
And ago its silvery locks shall sprinkle,
Then, will I love as now.


4.
And when some transient grief may harrow
Thy mind, some future day,
Then will I strive to soothe thy sorrow,
And kiss thy tears away.
5.
And oh! I hope thou wilt forgive me,
Should I e’er prove unkind,
When care and worldly crosses grieve me,
And sour ray troubled mind :
6.
One word of kindness will reprove me,
And all my errors show :
To find there’s one who still so loves me,
Will banish all my woe.
7.
Thus will we love till death shall sever ;
And then we’ll meet above;
Yes, we shall meet, to live for ever
In pure eternal love,
xxxvi.
As Warbeck sung this simple artless strain,
Maria’s bosom swelled with tenderness.
She bade him sing those touching strains again,—
They thrilled her very soul, she did confess ;
And in her speaking eyes these words were plain,—
O that such love our future lives might bless !
Ah ! doubt it not, said Warbeck, as he kissed
And fondly clasped her to his glowing breast.
XXXVII.
Who that embraces thus the maid he loves.
But feels emotions words can ne'er express !
Love pure as theirs consenting heaven approves,
And owns on earth it can no further bless.


’Tis happiness supreme, when passion moves
Two virtuous hearts, who thus their love confess ;
Who live but for each other ; in whose eyes
Each reads the love which utterance defies.
xxxvin.
But oh! it lies beyond ray power to tell
What bliss, what transports, now awaited them ;
Each day, each hour, their happiness did swell ;
All you may fancy, or by night may dream
Of happiness, was theirs. I may as well
Leave them in transports, and here change my
theme.
My muse now starts for Hobart Town, along
With Mr. Andrew's, so I’ll change my song.
xxxix.
On business of importance Andrews went-
It seems some crown lands close to his did lay,
Which were put up for sale by Government,
At public auction, in the usual way.
To purchase these now Andrews was intent;
So he appeared on the appointed day.
Among a crow d of others, whom the same
Business brought,—or speculation’s game.
XL.
’Tis a bad system selling lands by auction ;
The ruin of this island it has been ;
Its fall dates from that Downing-street concoction.
In which such gross absurdities are seen;
Of late they’ve given the system some correction.
By which the sting is ta’en away, I ween;
For now they ask for land a price so high.
That few can be so foolish as to buy.


XLI.
A pound an acre for a barren rock !
The same, if it should be alluvial soil!
But of the last there is but a small stock
As yet unsold; at least within this isle:
’Tis thus the Government would fleece their flock;
For them alone the weary settlers toil;
For what with quit-rents, taxes, and police.
For them, not for ourselves, we shear the fleece.
XLII.
Eager as claimants, but as debtors slow.
Of all bad pays the Government is worst;
As to my cost, alas! too well I know :
But ’tis no matter now ; I’m not the first
Whom they did cheat; in equity they owe
(But equity! a dream too fondly nursed)
Three hundred sterling pounds and thirty-five.
For which I did no benefit derive.
XLIII.
That sum just now would be acceptable;
1 want to make improvements on my farm ;
T’ enlarge my house, to build a barn as well.
Where I might keep my corn secure from harm, —
And several other things I need not tell;
Perhaps a wife, to keep my bosom warm:
But I must put off these for some time longer.
Until my purse shall grow a little stronger.
XLIV.
And thus, my gentle reader, you may see
What injury they may do the nation.
A race of poets might spring up from me,
Who would deserve the whole world’s approbation;


Bat if I die without, posterity
Will doubtless fly into a dreadful passion,
And rail ’gainst those who cheated them and me,
Me of some hundreds, them of poetry.
XLV.
Thus great events from petty causes spring:
You see from cause so slight the world may lose
A host of bards, each greater than a king;
For what is greater than a gifted muse?
Now this is truth, not fiction, that 1 sing.
And credence you should not to me refuse;
For I protest I’m serious, though I trace
Th’ incredulous smile upon my reader’s face.
XLVI.
But you may say bards’ sons may not be bards.
And may, perhaps, adduce some instances ;
But you forget, while thus you play your cards.
That we are now at the antipodes.
And nature here a diff’rent fate awards
To animals and men: you need but gaze
On the oppossums, or the kangaroos ;
They arc alike, so either you may choose.
XLVII.
So now I’ve proved my strange position true :
I hope, my reader, you are satisfied ;
And, though my doctrine may, perhaps, be new.
On this account it should not be denied ;
Yet some will doubt it, for “ the elect are few';”
And some oppose it, out of stubborn pride.
I therefore leave my doctrine to its lot;
I care not who believes, or who does not.


XLVIII.
I leave all men to form their own opinions.
And would not pin another’s faith to mine ;
Nor do I doom to Satan’s dark dominions
Those who are not inclined with me to join.
I leave such threats to bigotry’s base minions;
And so this doubtful doctrine I resign.
And turn to Andrews, who began to bid
For sev’ral lots, which I regret he did.
XLIX.
The auctioneer, who was a witty fellow, —
I know not if a true-born Briton he;
His hair was black, his skin was very yellow.
As if he came from Spain or Italy ;
He had good lungs, and now did loudly bellow.
As if he feared his bidders deaf might be ;
Fit agent of a government, which would
Wring from the unwary settler all it could.
L.
None could accuse him here of incapacity;
He seemed designed by nature for his trade;
He lied so often, and with such audacity,
Tou scarcely could believe a word he said;
Persisting, with amazing pertinacity,
(’Twas pity he was not a lawyer bred)
In falsehoods gross, yet clear to others’ sight:
To serve his ends, he’d tell you black was white.
LI.
As Andrews bids, another does oppose,
And merely for the sake of opposition ;
He did not want the land, although he rose
The price on Andrews, who wished this addition;


And now so spirited the bidding grows.
That it was quickly brought to a decision.
Knocked down to Andrews as the bidding ceased,
The price four times its value at the least.
LII.
Another lot was then put up for sale.
Which a new emigrant now wished to buy;
He was a man of forty, and looked pale,
And melancholy gleamed upon his eye.
Has he a chance? Ah! no; he’s sure to fail.
I pity him; and would you ask me why ?
He has a num’rous family, and has come
To make this island be their future home.
LIII.
For he had read at home, in some newspaper.
That crown lands here were to be purchased cheap;
Each acre half a guinea, or much cheaper;
So therefore he resolved to cross the deep.
He is opposed; and hope’s expiring taper
Leaves him in dreary darkness. Must he keep
His family in town till the next auction ?
To his small capital this would be destruction,
LIV.
So now to rent a farm he must endeavour;
No chance to buy one he might call his own ;
This cherished hope, alas ! is gone for ever;
Yet ’twas this hope, this pleasing hope alone.
Which made him leave his home: but for it never
Would be have left a home where he had known
So many happy days, to trust the wave.
What will not man for independence brave!


LV.
The coarsest food which independence gives
Is sweeter than the sweetmeats of another.
I hate the fawning servile wretch, who lives
Upon another’s bounty. It must smother
The heart’s best feelings. He who nobly leaves
His early home, to seek elsewhere some other,
Where he from such dependance may be freed.
And by his own exertions live, is great indeed!
LVI.
But by this time ’tis fit that I should tell you,
That Andrews purchased all the lots he wanted.
’Tis strange how competition will impel you
To offer more than prudence would have granted.
Take my advice; let no such fancies swell you ;
Whate’er the bargain, let it be transplanted
Into another soil; if price too high.
Better its loss than afterwards to sigh.
LVII,
So, having purchased all that he required,
Andrews prepared for his return to home.
My muse, like him, of town grows quickly tired ;
For all things there wear artificial bloom ;
By nature's beauties she can be inspired,
But town her flights of fancy would entomb ;
So she in Andrews’ gig has ta’en a seat.
And now they’re driving down Macquarie Street.
LVIII.
He drove a splendid mare, a famous trotter,
I think she stood some sixteen hands in height;
A rich dark bay she was; good judges thought her
The handsomest that ever met their sight:


Now Andrews had not bred her, but had bought her;
He gave for her one hundred guineas quite:
I would not give so much for the best horse
That runs, —excepting Pegasus of course.
LIX,
She passed all other horses on the road ;
You’d almost think she thought it was a sin
To be behind, she such high spirit showed ;
But now they arc at “ Mawle’s Hotel,” I ween,
And there they find accommodation good ;
They thence proceed unto the “ London Inn,”
Where, having had their tea, the mare a feed.
And paid the fare, to Oatlands they proceed.
LX.
And there they stopped at “ Samuel Page’s” door;
The ostler ran as fast as be w as able;
A smile upon his countenance he wore,
While lie the mare was leading to the stable ;
He calculated on a shilling more:
Now here, at least, I do not deal in fable:
Meantime ray muse and Andrews had been shown
Into the parlour, and there left alone.
LXI.
He pays to her some compliments ; she smiles ;
I’m sorry that I am so far away ;
We’re told that “ when a husband’s fifty miles
From his own spouse, both may be rather gay
But, ah ! my muse was chaste ; seductive wiles
Could never lead her guileless heart astray;
Like Cmsar’s wife, my muse must ever be
Not only chaste, but from suspicion free.
G


LXII.
At early morn from Oatlands they departed :
A place where storms arc almost always blowing,
And many a trav’ler under them has smarted.
’Tis also famous for so often snowing;
But it was mild, for once, when Andrews started ;
And now along “ St. Peter’s Pass” he’s going:
My muse, of course, is seated by his side.
Surveying nature with a conscious pride.
LXIII,
Now “ Tunbridge Wells” is gained, and quickly
passed,
And in the distance “ Mona Tower” is seen:
My eyes upon that tower have oft been cast,
As o’er the “Salt Pan Plains” I rode; I ween
That monument its owner will outlast.
But, reader, at the “ Salt Pans” have you been,
To see bright Phoebus, on a summer’s day.
There making salt in such a curious way ?
LXIV,
It seems that Phoebus understands all arts, —
A sort of universal genius he;
He here makes salt, while in West Indian marts
Him as a sugar boiler you might see.
Nought comes amiss to him, so vast his parts;
He also fabricates all poetry ;
E’en at this very moment, as I write.
He is directing my poetic flight.
LXV.
But while in these digressions we lose time.
My muse and Andrews fly along the road.
My muse’s thoughts are doubtless most sublime.
Though from her tongue her thoughts but seldom
flowed.


Bat Andrews knew not of her turn for rhyme.
M acquarie River now beneath them flowed.
They cross the bridge at Ross, and now they stopx
At Ross Hotel—'tis kept by Mr. Hope; >
But where’s the man of Ross ? ah, where is Pope! '
LXVI,
Oh ! that his mantle he had left behind.
As did Elijah, when he flew to heaven!
In vain he sung bold truths to all mankind ;
They heeded not, preferring flattery’s leaven.
In vain his inspirations were designed
To bless all men ; but they in vain were given.
Men list to flattery ; truth they will not hear :
Truth sounds like discords unto vice's car.
LX VII,
O Pope ! thou best of bards ! not Milton’s self
Can give such pleasure to my mind as thou :
Whene’er I take thy works from oil’ my shelf.
To thy departed genius low I bow ;
Thou, who couldst spurn the sordid lust of pelf.
And from thy hand Gragg’s proffered pension throw;
Whose virtuous life was faultless as thy strain :
Worth, prudence, genius, all in thee did reign.
LX VIII,
By this, the mare has had her feed of corn, —
My muse and Andrews some refreshment too ;
So now once more along the road they ’re borne.
And quickly “ Campbell Town” appears in view.
Three splendid inns do this small town adorn—
Which shows that temp’rance here has much to do:
But they to stop no inclination showed ;
They turn oil' now on the Avoca road.
g 2


XXIX.
But soon they find what difference lies between
A good road, and a bad ; now through the sand
The gen’rous beast all o’er with sweat is seen.
Andrews gets out, and leads the mare in hand.
It is a shame this road so long has been
Lett in a state of nature; a small band
Of convicts should be placed here, and not all
Sent up unto the station at “ Fingal.”
xxx.
But they got through at last, and on they drove
With speed ; for Andrews always found delight
In driving at a rate I disapprove.
But now the South Esk river meets their sight,—
Then disappears again as on they move ;
Now opposite my cot they stop their flight;
And I just now am welcoming my muse,
Rejoiced to see her after her long cruise.
XXXI.
Her lovely form to my fond heart is prest.
And tears of joy are sparkling in her eyes ;
With such a spouse was ever mortal blest ?
Not Adam with his Eve in paradise.
She tempted him to sin,—you know the rest; —
But she who in ray fond embraces lies
Is pure and stainless, as in heaven above
Bright angels may be seen; like their’s her love.
xxxii.
But where is Andrews 1 he would not accept
My invitation, but pursued his way.
His further journeying must be o’erleapt;
Perhaps you deem his home at “ Break o’ Day ?”


Indeed I do not know which road he kept ;
Perhaps “ Benlomond” in his journey lay :
But, if it did, he must at “ Glover’s" call,.
That is, if he has any taste at all r
LXXIII.
For there an artist dwells, a painter he ;
A man of genius, as his landscapes show;
In them you view Tasmanian scenery,
A nd huge “ Benlomond” in his cap of snow.
The monarch of surrounding hills ; you see
How he does frown on all the rest below:
Towering on high, in majesty alone.
He fears no rival to usurp his throne.
LXXIV,
But tell me, reader, have you been at Glover’s,
These offsprings of his genius to behold ?
Ah no ! of genius here there are few lovers;
We seem to be in such things rather cold.
’Tis wealth alone that in our fancy hovers, —
Why tell a tale which has been often told !
Yet such the fate of genius may be said.
Neglected living, idolized when dead !
LXXV.
But Andrews now has reached his home once more.
And Warbeck and Maria there he found
As happy as I said they were before:
Thus mutual, virtuous love, with bliss is crowned.
Here lies the moral, here the virgin ore;
The rest is mixed with dross, which does abound
In every mine, of gold, and silver too :
So rare pure truth, discovered by so few.


LXXVI,
And now all things were ready for the marriage ;
Andrews consented, as a thing of course,
I will not pause a moment to disparage
Those who see nought in lovers but their purse.
Yet still ’tis very certain that a carriage.
And a fine house and farm, act with some force,
Not only on the parents, but the maid ;
Who may pretend by love alone she’s swayed.
LXXVII.
The wedding day at length arrived, and they.
With several other friends, sincere and hearty,
Drove to the church ; the parson soon did say
The awful words unto the wedding party.
Now list ye maids, “ love, honour, and obey
These are the very words, so without art, ye
Should never substitute the words “ be gay’’—
As I once heard a certain lady say.
LXXVIII.
But now it is my province to describe
The wedding party, and the wedding dinner :
But I must leave the last unto the tribe
Of epicures, of whom each is a sinner.
I’ve not the least propensity to jibe.
And in all satire scarcely a beginner:
So you must be contented if you view
A rough, but true description of a few,
LXXIX.
The dinner now is on the table laid;
The guests are seated round in their due places ;
The bride and bridegroom too may be surveyed.
Love in their hearts, and joy upon their faces :


Each one, and all in their best dress arrayed,
The ladies in their satins, silks, and laces.
So lovely, and so charming they are seen,
With their descriptions I of course begin.
LXXX.
But “ age is honourable,” and should claim
The precedence; yet I this truth must own,
I seldom closely scan an aged dame,
Whose spring and summer seasons long have flown.
Perhaps all such may say it is a shame;
It may be so, yet I’ll leave them alone.
And turn unto those lovely charmers, whom
1 now can view in all their vernal bloom.
LXXXI.
Behold Miss Delia Simper at the table, —
To have an appetite she ne’er was known;
To taste a bit just now she was not able, —
She doubtless must have lived on love alone;
A pleasing diet truly, and most stable—
Miss Delia weighed, I think, about twelve stone:
So love as diet is you see potential,
And yet I must have something more substantial.
LXXXII.
I can’t exist on love alone, however
It may succeed with others; yet with me.
Lean as I am, ’twould make me much more spare—
And, apropos, all poets lean should be.
Out now I'll turn unto another fair.
Whom opposite Miss Delia you may sec;
Miss Lydia Clicket is the lady’s name,—
You say “ she lives at Blank Hall,” yes, the same.


LXXXIII.
She is a little chatt’ring monkey, who
Is blessed, or cursed, with wondrous volubility ;
Some think it is a blessing, though some few
Perhaps may deem it of the opposite quality :
However this may be, 'tis no less true,
The best way is to listen with humility
To these eternal talkers, whom I prize:
Though shallow brooks flow with the greatest noise.
LXXXIV.
But while they talk, you may be thinking still.
Yet give them now and then, a nod, or smile;
They, with their chatter so engaged, they will
Think that you are attentive all the while.
The subject mostly, is some neighbours ill.
Some maiden’s frailty, or some scandal vile, —
The usual topics of their conversation.
As also of their silent meditation.
LXXXV.
But lower down behold Miss Serious now.
With face so grave, one of the " few' elect
Yet pride, rank pride, sits on her haughty brow.
Although she deems herself without defect.
Differ from her, and she will not allow
But that on error’s rock your heart is wrecked ;
And all your hopes of heaven at once expel.
She’ll calmly tell you that your doom is hell.
LXXXTI.
She can’t be wrong, infallible like the pope ;
Faith drives all mists of error from her eyes ;
For her, and her alone, bright truth docs ope
Its hidden mines,—sec how she bears the prize


Of heaven’s inheritance. She has more than hope;
She would not change with Eve in paradise.
Before the fatal apple had been given :
Unfit for earth, she must be fit for heaven.
LXXXVII.
I wonder if the science of phrenology
Was ever tried, to find her turn of mind ;
And that she was, as doctress of theology.
By nature from her infancy designed.—
But I must make to her ray best apology
For thus presuming her small specks to find.
We know the sun is not from blemish free, —
As those who use good telescopes may sec.
Lxxxvm.
And now another lady meets my eye,
A youthful matron she, it makes me grieve
To see her here, in such strange company :
A daughter worthy of her mother —Eve ;
She thinks all others like herself must bo
Full of duplicity ; trying to deceive
With petty arts, her neighbours and relations :
Guile still the subject of her meditations.
LXXXIX.
But here, as worthy females seem so rare.
They should not be forgot when them we view;
On this account I cannot now forbear
From noticing yon virtuous matron too.
A pattern she to the surrounding fair.
All praise were weak to give her but her due ;
From all her sex’s failings nearly free.
And what she is, such should all matrons be.


xc.
Not distant far 1 also can behold
Another, who my praise must also claim.
A matron fair and lovely, not yet old.
Whom envy’s self can scarcely dare to blame ;
Had I now passed her by my heart were cold.
And scv’ral others I might also name
With great respect; yet this must be confcst.
These two bright jewels sparkle o’er the rest.
xci.
But now unto the gentlemen I turn.
And of the present party sketch a few.
Truth guides my pen, all fiction now 1 spurn ;
I wish to give to every one his due;
But vice and folly can’t by me be borne.
So they may here behold a mirror true.
1 throw the fool’s-cap up, so those who choose
To fit it on, may wear, or may refuse.
xcn.
Now Mr. Spitfire claims the foremost place;
You see him yonder, with malicious grin.
Which always sits upon his fiery face
And demon heart ; for he takes pleasure in
Another’s woe: it gives him joy to trace
The downfal of a worthier man, I ween.
A wretch so base has my contempt and scorn;
But now to Mr, Bombast I will turn,
xcm.
He thinks himself a mighty man, no doubt.
Because “ J. P.” is tacked unto his name.
With proud, but graceless stride, he struts about,
And from all persons would submission claim;


He speaks to all with magisterial shout;
A pompous manner seems to bo his aim ;
From human weakness, doubtless, quite exempt.
And yet I look upon him with contempt.
XCIV.
And why? Because a hollow thing of pride,
A mindless man, (if I may use the expression)
Who fain would be by others deified ;
So, therefore, he need not fly in a passion.
Because I choose his follies to deride.
And thus, with gentle hand, to lay the lash on :
I might be more severe, if so I chose;
But I am mild, I wish you to suppose.
xcv.
But Mr. Barebones next attracts my eye.
With solemn brow and visage sanctified.
As if his thoughts all centred in the sky.
So meek and humble! He can have no pride!
Yet in his dealings cunning, artful, sly ;
'Tis then religion’s cloak is cast aside:
'Tis then that he a hypocrite stands contest;
A prowling wolf, but in sheep’s clothing drest.
xcvi.
Not distant far, Apicius you may view.
So nice in diet! a great epicure.
Who’s always finding out some dish that’s new.
Some sweeter dainty, which may him allure.
And his insatiate appetite renew.
For me, I must confess, I can’t endure
Those who a temp’rate diet don’t enjoy.
Who think in eating all our pleasures lie.


xcvn.
Yet, after all, he is a pleasant fellow,
A good companion, and a hearty friend.
Whose mirth and wit, especially when mellow,
Flow in a stream which seems to have no end :
And many a tale and anecdote he’ll tell you,
If you with him some winter ev’ning spend.
Whate’cr his faults, his heart is ever kind;
A hearty welcome at his house you’ll find,
xcvin.
These are a few of those at Warbeck’s wedding;
At present I will not describe the rest;
Though I might write till you were tired of reading;
But all long tiresome stories I detest;
So I will pause, if but to show good breeding:
My flights of fancy now must be represt.
Meantime I hope that some may see their pictures
In this my verse, and profit by my strictures,
xeix.
I laugh at others, and I leave them free
To laugh at me ; —for who is free from folly ?
So they may laugh, when they my follies see;
’Tis laughter cures the spleen and melancholy.
I care for none who do not care for ms.
Or if men take my satire warm or coolly ;
But did I really say my satire? oh!
I never deal in satire, as you know.
c.
The dinner o’er, the ladies now retire;
The bride and bridegroom’s health was drunk, ol
course;
I hope I don’t my reader’s patience tire.
But, reader! you must “ patience have per force,”


Until I choose to lay aside my lyre.
But at the door now stands a gig and horse.
In which, with blushing face, close by the side
Of Warbeck, sits Maria, his sweet bride.
ci.
But, as they started, I could then discern
A tear just springing in Maria’s eye.
She o’er her early home did fondly yearn.
Ah ! who can part from home without a sigh ?
The generous filial heart will fondly turn
To parents, friends, and scenes of former joy ;
But these, and more than these, Maria gained
In him w r ho with her hand her heart obtained.
cn.
They’re wedded now; and happy they must be.
If happiness was e’er in wedlock found ;
They’re blest; but, ah! such bliss waits not for me;
No sweet Maria can I view around.
My tale is done. —Thus, reader, you may see
How virtue will at last with bliss be crowned.
Here ends my song.—l now lay by my lyre.
Till, haply, loftier themes once more my muse inspire.




MISCELLANEOUS PIECES.
SONG.
Yes —she is the pride of her sex.
The fairest of women is she;
In person and mind without specks,
More lovely no mortal can be.
Though gold is found mixed with alloy,
Though flaws e’en in diamonds abound,
No blemish in her meets the eye ;
She dazzles beholders around.
Then say, could you wish her more fair ?
Or her eyes with more lustre to shine ?
Let stoics find fault if they dare:
Ah! no! they must own her divine.
She can scarcely a mere mortal be.
She savours so much of the skies :
In her wc undoubtedly see
An angel on earth in disguise.


SONG.
’Tis not her form alone I prize.
Though that is fair indeed ;
Nor yet alone her sparkling eyes,
That make my bosom bleed ;
But, ’tis with these combined, her heart
For love and friendship formed,
And soul, devoid of every art,
That my fond bosom charmed.
EXTEMPORE.
While envy’s tongue with vcnomcd sting,
Spares neither friend nor foe.
Shall friendship’s voice forbear to sing
A virtuous matron ? No.
A pattern she to all her sex ;
Ah! had I such a wife,
No more would cares my bosom vex.
So blest I’d be for life.
Her heart is kind, her temper mild.
Her tongue can speak no ill;
“ In innocence she’s quite a child,
In wit a woman still.”
Sincere in soul, in friendship warm ;
In short, she seems to be
An angel in a mortal’s form.
From mortals’ foibles free.


SONG.
Hu loved her, but he loved in vain.
Another claimed her hand ;
Yet he could not his love restrain ;
Ah! who can love command ?
He struggled with his passion long,
But struggled still in vain,
And many a resolution strong
.He formed—to break again.
He could not without love behold
Her face, where beauty shone ;
Yet still his love remained untold,
Save by his eyes alone.
For these he could not quite coutroul;
They would at times reveal.
The cherished secret of his soul.
He would from all conceal.
He heard the music of her tongue;
He gazed upon her eyes;
He thrilled with rapture, as she sung,
And felt his heart her prize.
He mourned in secret o’er his love,
He loved against his will.
Yet nothing could his flame remove,
He lives, to love her still,
n


EXTEMPORE,
[on spending an evening with miss , at
her father’s house.]
I’ve seen her in the ball-room shine.
Surpassing all in every charm ;
But seen at home, she is divine, —
An angel in a mortal’s form.
EXTEMPORE.
[on a lady presenting me with a rose.]
This lovely rose from thy fair hand
Is now grown doubly dear to me;
Thy touch, like that of magic wand.
Hath made it still more lovely be.
Behold it placed in my fond breast.
An emblem of my faithful heart:
My truth to thee let it attest;
Like me it droops from thee to part.
And who can part from thee unmoved ?
I’m happy only where thou art;
And shall I be for this reproved 1
Ah ! who can quite controul the heart ?
Let colder souls, and frigid breasts
Condemn what they can never feel;
For me, my fate with thee now rests, —
’Tis thine the wounds thou giv’st, to heal.


SONG.
On ! let me the lyre of Tasmania now take!
Ah! why should it slumber so long ?
’Twill soothe my lone bosom its music to wake.
And pour forth my sadness in song.
I’ll sing of Emilia, the cause of my care ;
Though lovely, alas ! she’s unkind :
Ah! wherefore did heaven to a form so fair.
Give a heart which to true-love is blind ?
CHORUS.
I have loved her too long, I have loved her too well,
The love I have borne her no words can e’er tell;
Too deep for expression, too ardent to be.
With equal affection returned to me.
I envy no prince, nor no king on his throne;
My highest ambition would be.
To press to my bosom, and call as my own.
This maiden, so cruel to me.
How strange, that the heart should continue to feel
When hope has forsaken the breast!
I’ll breathe my last sigh as I pray for her weal,
And death shall then lull me to rest.
CHORUS.
For I’ve loved her too long, I’ve loved her too well,
The love I have borne her no words can e’er tell;
Too deep for expression, too ardent to be
With equal affection returned to me.
ii 2


AN EXTEMPORANEOUS ADDRESS TO TASMANIA.
Why slumber, Tasmania, when dangers surround thee ?
Wilt thou wait till from ruin no conduct can save?
Has the chill of despair with cold apathy bound thee?
Are thy hopes of the future all laid in the grave?
Ah! hope should be never, oh! never, forsaken;
Though ruin’s grim visage now stares in thy face.
Yet thy energies rouse, from thy torpor awaken.
And quickly thy present distresses will cease.
Wait not for thy rulers ! to them what’s thy sorrow ?
Dream not for a moment they share in thy woe ;
By affluence surrounded, hope smiles on their morrow.
While fortune at present to thee seems a foe.
Remember, as winter by spring is succeeded,
So bright may futurity dawn upon you,
If sloth be abandoned, frugality heeded.
And you to yourself be but faithful and true.
STANZAS.
How seldom true love is repaid by affection!
Love’s softening influence some never feel;
Some seemingly love, but on closer inspection.
At Hymen’s bright altar they hypocrites kneel.
But those are thrice blest, who with rapture possessing
The persons they love above all in this life:
For me—could I choose—l would ask but this blessing.
To love, and be loved, by a fond faithful wife;


Who’ll soothe me in sorrow, and share in my gladness.
Whose fond heart with mine would in unison beat.
Whose smiles would dispel from my bosom all sadness.
Whose councils would aid me when dangers we’d
meet;
Who would be the latest my faults to discover.
The last to condemn, and the first to forgive;
Whose form, like an angel’s, around me would hover.
And by her example instruct me to live.
Whoso heart would be pure as the snow on the
mountain.
As free from all sin as a mortal’s can be;
Whose hopes would be drawn from religion’s pure
fountain;
No hypocrite, as, alas! many we see.
To the failings of others forgiving and tender ;
Who w ould not feel pleasure in marking their slips :
To deception a stranger; her bosom all candour;
Whose heart without danger might dwell on her lips.
Who alike would adorn a cottage or palace ;
Contented whatever her station assigned ;
Unacquainted with anger, untainted by malice ;
In person as lovely as faultless in mind.
But away with such fancies, ’tvvere folly to cherish
A hope so delusive, so fatal to rest, —
True love’s like a flower, which blooms but to perish ;
We pluck it—it droops and decays in our breast.


LINES.
[written after hearing the REV, MR. PREACH
EXTEMPORE.]
How many men their talents mis-apply !
Those sink the most who fain would soar too high.
Vast were that genius which alike could shine
As hero, statesmen, poet, and divine.
Although some wondrous Crichton may indeed
Alike in various sciences succeed:
Or he who gave the eastern world its creed,
And from the deserts did his squadrons lead ;
Peace in one hand, a sword the other drew;
At once a hero, statesman, prophet too.
Yet these are but exceptions, since we find
One science still most suited to each mind:
Confined to that, each may therein succeed.
Demosthenes was eloquent indeed ;
In council bold, yet foremost in the flight;
In words a hero, war a coward quite.
So thou, whose written sermons so inspire
That even the longest never seem to tire;
So rich they flow, so stamped with heavenly truth.
They melt the old, and fix the wav’ring youth.
Why not to these thy genius then confine ?
Extemporaneous preaching suits not thine.
No laurels there on thy attempts await.
If I may judge from that I heard of late.
With pain I listened to thy slow discourse.
Wanting alike in energy and force;
In matter weak, so laboured every word,
The first forgot before the last was heard.


Pensive I sat, but no instruction gained.
Because, alas! thy hesitation pained.
I gazed around me, wondering with a sigh
How long the patience of your flock you’d try.
Not long indeed —and had you not been brief.
Sleep doubtless must have come to our relief.
’Tis vain to say, truth should alone inspire;
What ear with rapture hears a tuneless lyre 1
E’en though the notes be Handel’s, or Mozart’s,
They wake no sympathy within our hearts.
So gospel truths move not the old or young,
When thus expounded by a faltering tongue.
Our stubborn hearts, to evil thought so prone,
Must still be roused by an impressive tone.
Hear how Saint Paul, before Agrippa makes
His famous speech, which charms, excites, awakes.
Moves every passion, fills his judge with awe,
And does the hearts of all his hearers draw.
Could’st thou like him in eloquence succeed.
Then might’st thou preach extempore indeed ;
But, since unstudied language is not thine,
’Twere best to practice that in which you shine.
Still let thy sermons from the pulpit flow.
With case and strength, convincing all below;
Pour the rich balm on every bleeding breast.
Alarm the guilty, comfort the distrest;
Raise our low thoughts ; from vice withdraw her
screen.
And let her as she really is, be seen :
Her soft allurements would no more entice.
So great is the deformity of vice !
Thus far my verse, which seeks not to offend,
I but advise thee as I would my friend.


RILEY JEFFS’ (THE BUSHRANGER’S) LAST
THOUGHTS.
’Tis come, my final hour is come!
And shall I fear to meet my doom ?
No. Though the gibbet meets ray eye
I feel no shudder, breathe no sigh ;
Whate’er the pain, I will not swerve ;
The death I suffer, I deserve;
Nor would I, if I could, retain
A few short years of grief and pain.
For life has ever been to me
Fraught with woe and misery :
A boon I never would have sought,—
Then why was I to being brought ?
Or, if to life predestined, why
Born with ignominy to die?
But since, e’en from my birth, endowed
With stronger passions than the crowd.
Who calmly through life’s stages go,—
Because they ne'er were tempted so ;
Can I be blamed for what I’ve done.
When urged by such fierce passions on ?
Shall I, when these brief pangs are o’er,
Revive again—to suffer more ?
Can such, oh heaven ! thy justice be ?
Oh ! must I bear eternity
Of hopeless suffering ? in such state
’Twere mercy to annihilate.
Soon as my sufferings here are pass’d.
Oh ! could I be with chaos class’d!
Mingled with nothingness, unseen.
And be, as I had never been.
This would my dying moments cheer;
’Tis life alone, not death I fear!


THE OLD MAID’S SONG.
[written for the benefit of young ladies.]
I once was eighteen, and was lovely and fair.
Though now an old maiden am I;
And then I was prized as a jewel so rare.
Whose brightness attracted the eye.
Young Sandy first offered his heart and his hand ;
All thought I would surely have him ;
For graceful his person, and broad was his land.
But—his whiskers were not in due trim.
Next, an Irishman offered a fond maiden-heart.
And he sighed as he gazed on my eyes;
He said that each glance was from cupid a dart.
Which pierced him, and drew forth his sighs.
He told me my cheeks bloomed as bright as a rose.
Which spring doth with beauties endow;
He said I was fairer than lilies, or snows
Which fall on the dark mountain’s brow.
He told me —but why should I tell what he told ?
I found him both constant and true ;
Yet I teazed him, and plagued him, until he grew cold.
And bade me a final adieu.
’Twere needless to mention who next did await;
To all I continued unkind ;
But, alas ! from experience I’ve learned too late.
Perfection no mortal can find.


Who seeks for perfection in woman or man ,
Seeks that which can never be found;
But pardon the faults of each other we can:
Then life will go merrily round.
This maxim, young maidens ! on you I impress.
You may learn a lesson from me ;
Oh ! had I the knowledge which now I possess,
I would not an old maiden be.
SONG.
Though beauty captivates the wise.
Though kings its slaves appear.
Yet, would’st thou seek a nobler prize.
Then seek a soul sincere.
I’ve felt the power of beauty’s eye.
And could each glance revere,
But now ’tis not for such I sigh,—
’Tis for a soul sincere.
An angel’s form, with seraph’s grace.
How bright and sweet soe’er.
Awhile may charm —but soon gives place
Unto a soul sincere.
But where, oh! where can such be found 1
Where hides a gem so rare 1
Truth whispers, “ Such in heav’n abound ;
Earth holds no soul sincere!”


SONG.
Her heart was never form’d for love;
His bands can ne’er confine;
She never could so cruel prove.
Had she a heart like mine.
And yet, how strange! I love her still.
With ardent truth, sincere;
I love her —but against my will.
When reason’s voice I hear.
’Tis folly sure to sigh for those
Who cannot love return ;
But still the heart no prudence knows.
When love doth in it burn.
So I must love, yet love in vain.
By hope forsaken long;
She coldly hears my mournful strain.
She’s callous to my song.
I would not have a heart so cold
For all that earth could give;
I’d bear all griefs that e’er were told.
But could not heartless live.
HEKI’S WAR SONG.
Haste to the battle field.
Warriors brave!
Let no base heart yield
To be a slave.
The foe is before us—
Fiercely we’ll fight;
Heaven watches o’er us.
Guarding our right.


Our ancestors brave
Look from on high;
Who bends as a slave
Ne’er meets them on high.
Those heroes of old,
Who won bright renown,
In the earth may lie cold.
Yet their spirits look down.
The deeds they have shown us.
Shine bright from their graves ;
As sons they’ll disown us,
If we become slaves.
Our children and wives
Each coward will scorn;
Then worthless our lives.
If as slaves we return.
Then let us ne’er fly.
While a foe shall remain ;
We’ll conquer, or die;
Glory waits for the slain.
SONG.
Oh ! I have never fondly loved,
Save once, in boyhood’s days;
Although my heart may still be moved.
When beauty meets my gaze.
But never, never can I love
As I have loved before!
No charms have now the power to move
Those feelings felt of yore.


I gazed with rapture on her eye,
I trembled at her touch.
She seemed an angel from on high ;
I fondly deemed her such.
Time has not yet dissolved the charm
Which bound me in its spell:
She’s wedded—yet my heart, so warm,
Its passion cannot quell.
Though many a year hath pass’d away
Since her I bade adieu.
Still doth her image with me stay;
Years but my love renew.
Still, still, upon my boyish truth,
I look with fond regret;
The flame thus lit in early youth,
Will burn till life shall set.
SONG.
Farewell ! we must part; o’er the ocean
Thou shortly wilt wander away ;
And my bosom now beats with emotion.
While for thy safe passage I pray.
If virtue, true worth, and religion.
Can shield their possessors from harm,
Alike unto thee were each region;
Thou never need’st feel an alarm.
But weak are all words in expressing
The thoughts in ray heart which arise;
Ah ! ’tis when we part with a blessing
That duly that blessing we prize.


But, farewell! we must part, and for ever.
Thy duties forbid thee to stay ;
Then go to thy friends, and may never
Misfortune appear in thy way.
STANZAS.
Tired and weary, late returning
To a peaceful, much-loved home,
How sweet to view the bright lamp burning,
Glimm’ring through the dark night’s gloom !
Thus mariners on stormy ocean.
The tedious voyage nearly o’er.
Their bosoms swell with deep emotion,
Approaching to their native shore.
ODE TO AFFLICTION.
Goddess with the marble heart!
Affliction! whose envenom’d dart
Fills human breasts with grief and woe,
Hast thou at length become my foe 1
Behold me, then, prepared to bear
All that thou canst inflict of care.
Hurl all thy ijls, of every hue ;
Thou may’st depress, but not subdue.
My soul will rise superior still,
Triumphant over every ill;
With ev’ry shock ’twill firmer grow,
And scorn thee as a feeble foe.
Think not, stern Goddess! e’er to sec
A fawning suppliant in me.


Housed by oppression, now I brave
Thy fiercest wrath—nor mercy crave;
Hut do thy worst; misfortunes fling;
Perhaps I’ll own that thou canst sting.
So insects, bred by summer’s heat,
Which we may crush beneath our feet,
And kill by thousands, though they die,
We own they can their lords annoy :
As powerless thy most bitter sting.
From me ’twill no submission wring.
Though thou may’st give a transient pain.
My soul its strength will soon regain.
Elastic, as an archer’s bow
Springs from the hand which bent it, so
My soul will thus new strength attain.
And thou shalt feel thy efforts vain.
O’er every scene of future ill
I feel that I shall triumph still.
Hut, hark! whose voice is that I hear?
My Guardian Angel’s hov’ring near.
Who softly whispers, “ I am nigh;
Thy grief has called me from the sky.
Why murmur thou at Heav’n’s high will.
Thou who, even now, art favour’d still ?
All human ills arc kindly meant;
Hy Heav’n in love, not anger sent.
E’en deep afflictions are of worth ;
They help to wean the soul from earth.
And lead to brighter realms above.
Even to eternity of love.
If perfect bliss were found on earth.
And man quite happy from his birth.
Say, could the thought of death be borne.
From happiness so rudely torn ?


That thought would every bliss destroy.
Embittering deep all human joy.
Then be content, and murmur not,
Whate’er may be thy future lot.
If woes be thine, submissive bend ;
Be sure they have some useful end :
But if from such thy lot be free.
If cradled in prosperity.
Oh ! more than ever then beware,
Adversity has no such snare ;
For Satan then has double power.
To tempt thee in unguarded hour;
To lure thee from the paths thy youth
Has trod, and farther still from truth.
But, oh! let all thy care be given
To tread the path which leads to Heaven;
Thy duties carefully fulfil,
And I will be thy Guardian still.”
THE END.
Henry Dowling, Jun., Stationer anti Printer, Launceston, V. D. Land.
