

“Honour to Whom
Honour is Due.”
A FEDERAL RETROSPECT.
BY
BRUCE SMITH.
PRICE, 1/-
(Proceeds to be devoted to the Funds of the Federal Association
of New South Wales.)
Sydney:
McCARRON, STEWART & CO., 44 and 86 PITT STREET.
1899.




“Honour to Whom Honour
is Due.”
A FEDERAL RETROSPECT.
BY
BRUCE SMITH.
Dabney:
MoCARRON, STEWART & GO., 44 and 86 PITT STREET.
1899.


“ The crimson thread of kinship that runs through us all.”
(Speech by the late Sir HENRY PARKES.)
« What I understand by the sentiment of a united
“ Australasia is—a sinking oi all subordinate questions. I
“ speak for my colony, which is as great as the rest of
“ you. We are prepared —and I will answer for the
“ parliament, and the people of the country I represent—
“to go into this national union, without making any
“ bargain whatever ; without stipulating for any ad-
“ vantage whatever for ourselves ; but trusting to the
“ good faith and justice of a Federal Parliament.”
Speech by Sir Henry Parkes, at Conference Banquet, Melbourne
6tli February, 1890.


From a Photo. by Falk.




PREFACE.
The following small contribution to the literature of
Australian Federation has been undertaken with two
purposes,—that of seizing upon the fittest moment for
reminding the people of New South Wales, of their great
indebtedness to the memory of the statesman with whose
utterances it deals, for his able, lofty, and persistent
advocacy of the great cause of Union ; and that of placing
before those, who are willing to sit at the feet of a truly
great man, some of the best and most luminous passages
from those utterances, on the vital question of the hour.
The speeches, from which I have made my selection, ex-
tend over a period of many years, and were delivered—
excepting only that of 1867—at a time, (1889-90) when,
in the judgment of ordinary men, it was highly proble-
matical how so large and far-reaching a movement, as that
which he was espousing, would be received by the people
of Australia. The selection may serve a further useful
purpose—in preserving, in a convenient form, for those
who find interest in such matters, some singularly fine
and elevating examples of the lofty treatment of a great
subject, by a great man, whose rare ability for large
political conceptions was in keeping with the best
traditions of English statesmanship.


The portrait of the old statesman, which stands as
a frontispiece to these pages, is, I think, the most
pathetic of all that were ever taken of him. It repre-
sents him at a stage when time had at last had its way, in
dominating the austere and haughty spirit, that caused him
to hold his head erect, and, at times, almost defiant, even
when most men have lost their mature physical vigour.
The powerful face is deeply scored with the furrows of
care and keen disappointment, which unfortunately came
to him, in full measure, in his last days ; but the portrait
is, nevertheless, a splendid reproduction of the great,
shaggy, leonine head ; and it brings out, in singular
clearness, the strong indomitable character, that
peculiarly fitted its possessor for the leadership of men,
and had served to lift him from the position of a farm
labourer, to that of Prime Minister of one of the most
important colonies of the Empire; at a period,
when the parliament of New South Wales stood at its
highest intellectual range, and could boast of a
veritable galaxy of eminent political figures.


“HONOUR TO WHOM HONOUR
IS DUE.”
A Federal Retrospect.
HVT OW that the great cause of Australian Union has
' passed safely through the ordeal of Parliamentary
criticism, and has been remitted to the direct voice of
the people, whose final word no parliament, and no
politician, will have the temerity to question ; it is but
right that we should review its checkered course, ex-
tending as it does over many years, and do honour to
that one of our public men, to whom v;e are most deeply
indebted for its now imminent consummation, for his
persistent, consistent, and disinterested advocacy of the
great cause ; —that one of all its public men, whose name
is most justly entitled to be inscribed upon the scroll of
history, and of fame, which will surely go down to
posterity, in connection with the birth of an Australian
Commonwealth.
Live men can tell their own story, and sound their
own praise ; but I wish here to revive the utterances of


one who is gone, but whose work “ lives after him ” ; to*
draw public attention, in an age of short memories, to
the magnificent work of one, whose voice is now still, and
whose character and reputation are yet suffering the
short sleep which nearly all the lasting figures of history
must undergo at the hands of their contemporaries, w 7 ho,
for the most part, are unable to realize the true greatness
of things that are familiar, and certainly of any public
man, with whom they have had opportunities of personal
acquaintance, or of whom they have at least had personal
knowledge.
The review of such a career, even in regard to one
great question, is no easy task; for the necessary period
has not yet elapsed to admit of the opinions and actions
of one, so recently among us, being dissociated from the
shallow criticism of shallow men, such as all broad,
statesmanlike conceptions must inevitably excite.
The politician is of his day; the statesman of his
generation, or of his century ; the horizon of the one is
bounded by his constituency; that of the other by his
country or his race ; and as every community produces
but one of the latter, to a thousand of the former; it
follows that the broad and sweeping conceptions of the
bigger mind are destined, ever and always, to run the
gauntlet of that hysterical criticism, which is at once local
and petty. We are now in the year 1899; and it is,,
therefore, just 32 years since Sir Henry Parkes first raised
his voice, in advocacy of Federal Union ; at which time
the whole population of Australia amounted to no more
than 2,000,000. In the Melbourne Argus of the 18th
March, 1867, there is a report of the speech in question,
delivered on the occasion of the assembling, in Victoria,


of the representatives of all the colonies, save only
Western Australia, but including the more distant colony
of New Zealand. The conference had been convened with
a view to the formulation of some scheme of Federal
Union; and it fell to the lot of Sir Henry Parkes to
voice the following sentiments, at a time when most of
the men, who are now loudly protesting their ardour for
the cause, were carrying a school satchel.
“ For the first time,” he said, “ in the history of
“ these Australian colonies, they have all assembled,
“ including New Zealand—l may say all of them, because
“ they are all represented, with the exception of Western
“ Australia—with no feeling of emulation less worthy
“ than the desire to have the largest share in effecting a
“ common end—to promote their common interests.
“ It appears to me a very important occasion.
u I think the time has arrived when these colonies
“ should be united by some federal bond of connection.
“ I think it must be manifest, to all thoughtful men, that
“ there are questions projecting themselves upon our
“ attention, which cannot be satisfactorily dealt with by
“ any one of the individual Governments. I regard this
“ occasion, therefore, with great interest; because I
“ believe it will inevitably lead to a more permanent
“ federal understanding. Ido not mean to say that,
“ when you leave this room to-night, you will see a new
“ constellation of six stars in the heavens. Ido not
“ startle your imagination, by asking you to look for the
“ footprints of six young giants in the morning dew,
“ when the night rolls away ; but this I feel certain of,
“ that the mother country will regard this congress of
“ the colonies, just in the same light as a father and


<l mother may view the conduct of their children, when
« they first observe those children beginning to look out
“ for homes and connections for themselves. I am
“ quite sure that the report of this meeting in your
“ city of Melbourne, little as it may be thought of here,
“ will make a profound impression upon the minds of
« thoughtful statesmen in England. They will see that,
“ for the first time, these offshoots of empire, m the
“ Southern Hemisphere, can unite, and that., in their
“ union, they are backed by nearly 2,000,000 souls.
Sir Henry Parkes quoted this speech at St. Leonards,
in 1889, in answer to some .comments,—then lately made,
by the same journal in which the speech had appeared,
22 years before,-on his having “suddenly awakened to
an interest in federation.
Sir Henry Parkes was, above all things, a generous
opponent at heart, whatever he may have been m words ;
and he can never be accused of stealing the reputations
of other public men, by directly or indirectly claiming
credit for work done by them, or by attempting to discount
their efforts, as pioneers of any great movement. I say
“generous at heart” advisedly; for very often, when
goaded by the bitter criticism, which has unfortunately
characterized so much of our colonial public-life, lie
allowed himself to be led into the use of angry, biting
phrases, concerning his opponents. But he never did
so, without experiencing regret for what he had said.
He once observed :■ —
“ I have said things occasionally—generally I must
“ plead, having been provoked to the step—which,
“ however much they might have wounded other persons,
“ have wounded me more keenly. I never said an unkind


“ thing of any man, without having deeply regretted it.
“ I have never engaged in a hot party-struggle, without
“ suffering acutely for the excesses to which I have been
“ led.”
In addressing the members of the 1890 Conference,
at Melbourne, he made the most generous acknowledg-
ment of the services of the men who had first moved in
this great question. He spoke with equal generosity of
Wentworth ( “ who ranked second to none among the
greatest men we had ever had in any of the colonies ” )
and of the members of the Select Committee of the
Legislative Assembly of Victoria, who brought up a report
on the subject of Australian Union, as far back as 1857,
which report he characterized in terms of high praise.
He pointedly alluded to Mr. William Nicholson, who
(when Chief Secretary of Victoria), had made that report
public in 1860; and he named Sir Charles Gfavan Huffy,
as one of the authors of that report, who had, he said,
“ taken a wide and warm interest in the subject of
Federation.”
He went further, in reading to the conference long
passages from the 1857 report; thus showing that,
upwards of 30 years before he spoke, some of the most
thoughtful of Victorian politicians had foreseen the
Federal necessities of Australia, in almost all their details.
And at a later stage of the same speech, he made the
most generous reference to the late Mr. James Service,
as the principal mover in bringing together the Conven-
tion of 1883.
There is one characteristic in particular, with regard
to which Sir Henry Parkes may be clearly differentiated
from most public men of our colony, who have so lately


espoused this great cause. He was singularly true to
that tradition of English statesmanship, which is well
expressed in the application of the term “ leader of the
people ”to the higher class of public men; he did not
stand by, like a timid mariner, waiting for meteorological
signs, which should give him courage to embark upon
a difficult voyage, that he believed to have a useful
purpose at its destination; he did not, as a politician,
hold himself in skilful equilibrium, until the scales of
public opinion had tipped with sufficient distinctness to
ensure him the “ safe ” espousal of a particular cause.
In one of his own speeches, delivered at the Con-
ference of 1890, he said : —“ All through my life, and
“ all through my reading, I have heard, in connection
“ with the English nation, and the great nations that
“ have sprung up from her, of ‘ the leaders of the people.’
“ The expression has been ‘ the people and their leaders.’
“ Now, however, I hear, for the first time, of the states-
“ men and their drivers. I don’t understand this strange
“ doctrine ; and I venture to say, in contradiction of it,
“ that there has not been one great movement for the
“ benefit of mankind, that did not, in the first instance,
“ arise in some pregnant, far-seeing, human mind. A
“ great thought has been communicated to other minds;
“ it has been propagated by contact with other minds;
“ and, not until the real leaders of the people have
“ become seized of it, have the people themselves been
“ roused to its truth, its importance, its grandeur, and
‘ its necessity to their welfare. That has been the
history of every great movement known to England—
“ of every great movement in the world.”
Sir Henry Parkes led; he did not follow ; he may


Jliave looked at the political sky for signs ; but nothing
that he saw daunted him, or caused him to hesitate in
his enterprise. He went forth with true courage, to
fight the federal fight; to teach men what union meant,
io tell them of its advantages, to guard them against its
interested opponents. He took up the great question,
for “ better or for worse,” and fought it through, from
down to town, and from year to year, caring apparently
nothing whether the question was popular or unpopular,
but doing all in his power to lead the people to a full
appreciation of its broad advantages and deeper signifi-
cance, in the gradual evolution of an Anglo-Saxon Empire.
Ho far back as 1867, as I have already shown, when the-
people of New South Wales had no collective thought of
Federation, he saw, and openly advocated National
Union. We must therefore credit him with the utmost
independence in the early espousal of this cause ; for no
one understood better than he the responsibilities of a
real leadership of men.
In August of 1889 Sir Henry Parkes delivered what
the Pall Mall Gazette called “ a remarkable speech,” in
the Legislative Assembly of our colony, on the subject
of Eesponsible Government for West Australia, in which
he expressed his aspirations for Australia generally, in
broad, sweeping terms :
“ I do see very clearly that there may come a time,
■“ and that time not very remote, when the Australian
colonies may be brought more into the position of one
“ great and united people. I do see a time when the
“ South African colonies may be brought together into
“ one great Anglo-African people. And I see that if a
*“ grand and powerful congeries of free communities,


“ such as I haye grouped, in three parts of the world,.
“ becomes steadily formed, they may enter into an
“ allegiance with the parent state, on something like a
“ broad ground of equality.”
And again in 1889; when speaking out of Parlia-
ment, he said :
“ The time was close at hand when they ought to
“ set about creating the great national government for
“ all Australia—an Australian Government distinct from
“ the local governments now in existence. They must
“ appoint a convention of leading men from all colonies,
“ delegates appointed by the authority of Parliament,
“ who would fully represent the opinion of the different
“ parliaments of the colonies.”
In that now historical despatch of October, 1889,
which he directed to Mr. Gillies, the Premier of Victoria,
setting forth his reasons for declining, on behalf of New
South Wales, to enter into the Federal Council, he made
the proposal which in a few months led to the Mel-
bourne Federal Conference of 1890. General Edwards,
who had been deputed by the Imperial Government to
report upon Australian defences, had recommended the
federalization of all Australian troops ; and in this report
Sir Henry Parkes found an occasion lor again attempt-
ing to create a practical interest in the Federal Union of
the colonies.
# “Itis a question,” he said in one of the paragraphs
of that despatch—“ a question to be put to the mind
“ and heart of Australia, in view of the destiny of Aus-
“ tralia, and on which it is hoped all sections of the
“ collective population will unite, without regard to
“ narrower considerations. Believing that the time is


<£ ripe for consolidating the Australias into one, this
“ Government respectfully invites you to join in taking
“ the first great step, namely, to appoint representatives
“ of Victoria to a national Convention, for the purpose of
“ devising and reporting upon an adequate scheme of
“ Federal Government. With much deference to the
u views of the other colonies, it is suggested that, in
“ order to avoid any sense of inequality in debate, or any
“ party complexion, the number from each colony should
“ be the same, and should be equally chosen from both
“ sides of political life.”
A copy of this despatch appeared in the London
Times of the 4th November, 1839 ; and, immediately,,
from all parts of England and Scotland there went up a
newspaper chorus of congratulations, at the renewed pro-
spect of a consolidation of Australian national interests,
and a consequent further step in the more remote project
of Imperial Federation. Within a week, nearly one
hundred leading articles appeared in English and Scotch
newspapers, dealing in an informed manner with the
proposal.
The Times said : —“ Sir Henry Parkes is a capable
statesman, and his judgment is entitled to all respect
when he pronounces the time to be ripe and the method
to be feasible. If that is so, the difficulties will gradually
disappear, and the Federation of the Australian colonies
will before long be accomplished.’
The Pall Mall Gazette spoke of “ the development of
a policy, which, conceived in the fertile brain of Sir
Henry Parkes, may be destined to mould the future of
the whole British Empire.” And it added: “He has


brought the federation of the Empire within the range of
practical politics.”
The Birmingham Post concludes a lengthy article by
saying: “We have little doubt that the more the pro-
posal is considered, the more desirable it will appear, and
that in a year or two, if not sooner, the good seed, which
the New South Wales Premier has sown, will have taken
xoot and brought forth a valuable harvest, in which the
Mother Country will have a share.”
In 1889, speaking at Albury, he referred to the
opportuneness of the time for taking the great question
in hand. There was no feeling of the public pulse; no
experimental resolutions by other people ; no mere sug-
gestion that others should undertake it; but just a bold,
straightforward statement of policy, the responsibility of
which he was prepared to take upon his own shoulders.
Here are his words : *
“ He could do little individually, but he could do
much with the assistance of the people of New South
“ Wales. The path before him was a devious one, and
“ must be trodden with caution; but caution was con-
“ sistent with boldness and determination; and, there-
“ fore, he desired, by all means in his power, to avoid
“ any cause of irritation. The question first arose :
“ Why advocate this thing to-day ? The answer was,
“ that the colonies were ripe for the great movement.”
It is interesting and instructive to trace Sir Henry
Parkes’ methods in the advocacy of this movement. He
seemed to recognize the necessity for a course of national
education on the subject; and he never tired of dwelling
upon the boldness, the greatness, the grandeur of the
scheme, by which a number of separate and outlying


communities should consolidate themselves' under one
central government, for the more complete administration
of the broader and greater questions of state, leaving
the more local matters to be dealt with by the separate
parliaments of the several colonies. And, on all
occasions, he painted his pictures of Australia’s future,
with such bold colours, and in such glowing phrases,
that “ practical ” men began to sneer at “so much
sentiment ” —for they failed to grasp the purpose of
the broader and more subtle mind, in its efforts to
present the subject in its most attractive form, to the
more elementary understandings of the people. Here
are some instances of his word painting, on the subject
ol Australia’s future. Speaking at St. Leonards, in
November of 1889, he said :
“We should at once rise to a higher level; we
“ should occupy a larger place in the contemplation of
•“ mankind ; the sympathies of every part of the civilized
“world would go out to us; and, figuratively, they
*“ would hold out the right hand of fellowship. We
“ could not doubt how the chord awakened by such a
“ movement would be responded to in the noble old
“ country, where our forefathers’ graves were still. All
“ England had awakened with sympathy for this move-
** ment, through its press. We should have an outline
41 of empire, such as we could never hope for as isolated
“ colonies ; and our place would be admitted, in the rank
“ of nations, that still were under the noble and glorious
“ flag of the mother land.”
In a speech of August 7th, 1889, on the question
of Responsible Government for Western Australia, he
indulged in another and finer burst of imagination, in


regard to the future of Australia; and no one can read
the following passage, without feeling that, though the
conditions it assumes are prescient, the picture itself is
feasible and practical.
No one can doubt that it is but the anticipation of
what must be, in so fair and fertile a land, if only the
race are wise enough to preserve their energy, enterprise,,
thrift, and love of progress, together with the simple
principles of freedom, which have given the English-
speaking race its present ascendancy in the world’s affairs.
“ The path for Australia is broad : it is also dis-
“ tinct: there is nothing like it in the past ages, and
“ there can be nothing like it in the future, because
“ the earth spaces of the globe have been so far taken
“ up that nothing like Australia can again arise. .. Our
“ path, I say, is broad, and it is distinct: it is clear in
“ its freedom and sunny beauty, and it is that we, the
“ free people of this land, shall to the best of our
“ power avoid the errors of our ancestors, shall free our-
“ selves from their prejudices and trammels : shall as
“ far as possible assimilate to ourselves the wealth of
“ their intelligence, the wealth of their inventive genius ;
“ and while we inherit all their glory in the past, try to
“ acquire for ourselves a new and purer glory founded
“ upon the everlasting basis of good-will and peace.
“ There can be no reason why the great nation, which
“ it requires no prophetic ken to discern is fast filling
“ up the outlines, and becoming more gloriously palp-
“ able as the years roll on—there can be no doubt—that
“ that great nation ought to be in its intelligence, in
“ its enterprise, in its love of true glory, and in its attach-
“ ment to what is best in the fabric of the British


Constitution, a nation unprecedented in the past, and
“ one that never shall be excelled in the future.
Speaking at a great Banquet given in Melbourne, on
the occasion of the Conference of 1890, when it was said
that “ nearly every representative man in Victoria was
present,” he rose to a pitch of eloquence which excited
the admiration of all who heard him ; and in speaking
in the New South Wales Assembly, on 7th May, 1890,
when he moved the resolutions adopted by the Mel-
bourne Conference of February, he again dealt with the
whole subject, in a manner that left nothing of a
rhetorical nature to be desired.
“ How true it is,” he said, in a fine peroration, “ that
“ in all the long, checkered, blood-bespattered history of
“ the human race, there never was a land so favourably
“ situated, as this fair land of Australia. Surrounded by
“ pacific seas, lying apart from all the warring elements
“ of the old civilizations of the world, waiting for God’s
“ fair morning, as those beautiful words express it, when
“ our children, not we, shall ‘ build up the glory of a
“ ‘ grand new world.’ Ten years will probably blot out
“ most names from the roll of those who are listening to
“ me ; but our children will be in our places, with a
“ fairer education for the common people, with finer
“ prospects for all, with the way all smooth to the
“ marching feet; and our children, God willing, will
“ preserve that fabric of freedom which their fathers
“ did something to erect. They will extend and solidify
“ its foundations ; they will bring under its shelter all
“ the good and peace-loving people of the world; and,
“ where we stand now, men of high culture, of pure
“ ambition, of single-hearted objects, will take our place;


“ and wnat we are doing by this great movement is not
“ for ns, but for them—it is not for the passing race,
“ but for the untold millions that will follow us ; until
“ this land of Australia shall gather within its bosom all
“ the fruits of the culture of the world, all the lessons
“ from the philosophy of the world, all the high examples
“ from the brilliant courage of our great forefathers; and
‘ 4 until the flag of freedom shall be planted here so firmly,
“ and guarded with such a fervid patriotism, that all the
“ powers on earth shall never assault it.”
This is truly picturesque, and will probably not
commend itself to merely “ practical ” men, who want
only to know “ What will it cost ? ” “ What shall we
gain ? ” “ What shall we give up ?” ; but to the student
of the philosophy of politics, it is otherwise interesting,
as illustrating the old statesman’s method of making the
great movement attractive, glowing, full of promise, and
seeming worthy of patriotic support.
One of the most interesting aspects of the whole
question, to those who have studied the movement as a
movement, during the last ten years, has been the
manner in which it has rolled on, like the proverbial
snowball, gathering strength as it went, sweeping before
it, and out of its course, all other questions of moment —
even the eternal fiscal issue, that at one time threatened
to paralyze our body-politic.
Beginning, in its later career, by a short speech at
Tenterfield, on 24th October, 1889, when few people in
our colony had given the constitutional question (as
applied to Australia) even the slightest attention, the
movement immediately took hold of the public mind, —
for it was then presented in bright and attractive colours


and began its onward course. Men, who, to-day, speak
of Federation, and act in regard to it, as if they had lisped
it as infants, and talked it all their lives, then stood and
smiled at “ the old man’s latest fad,” as it was jeeringly
called. The same men talked of “ Protection and Free
Trade” as the “real battle ground of parties,” and
referred slightingly to Federation, as a “red herring.”
Men, who are prominent among us to-day, and whose
dearest wish now is that their names may be embalmed
in the archives which posterity will some day ransack
for the material of Australian histories—these men, or
many of them, at least, laughed at the old man eloquent,
and derided his proposal, because their political horizon
extended no farther than the boundaries of their own
colony. But, through it all, the old statesman saw what
would happen, knew the people, and predicted their
course in regard to it. He rightly judged it to be
inevitable. At St. Leonards, in 1889, he said :
“ The cause itself is safe —it might be delayed, but
“ it could not be put back.”
At Albury, in the same year, he said :
“ It would take place ; for the wit of man could not
“ stop it.”
Speaking at the great Banquet in Melbourne, already
referred to, he said:—
“ Light has been thrown upon it, volumes of new
“ light will be cast upon it, as days roll on ; and, be-
“ lieving, as I firmly do, that the people of this country
“ have already made up their minds to be united; 1
“ consider that no hand on the face of the earth is strong
“ enough to keep them asunder.”
Again, when addressing the Legislative Assembly


in 1890, on the introduction of the Federal resolutions,
he said :
“ The union of the Australian people so commends
“ itself to the most far-seeing of those who have come
“ from other lands ; so inter-twines itself with the very
“ life of the native-born, that no opposing effort can
“ possibly stop its progress.”
Sir Henry Parkes’ knowledge of Federal history,
particularly as exemplified in the struggle that preceded
the adoption of the United States Constitution, led him
to anticipate many and great difficulties in the accom-
plishment of Australian Union. He knew, as most
informed persons know, that every objection, every fear,
every gloomy prediction that had found expression in
connection with the union of the American colonies, •*
more than a century ago, would have its parallel in. the
consummation of Australian Union. The taxation panic,
fostered by the statistical eccentric; the groundless fears
of the provincialists, of each particular colony, that their
neighbours were about to take some dishonest advantage
of them, and steal away their commerce ; the parrot-cry
of shallow constitutionalists, that Union meant a loss of
control, in regard to local affairs—all these objections
had their prototypes in American history, of a century
ago, and had to be met, and swept aside, by such
crusaders as Hamilton, Adams, and Jay, in those now
famous collections of political essays known as the
•“ Constitutionalist ” and the “ Federalist ” ; though,
for a time, those objections had the same effect, as others
similarly shallow have had in our own day, of delaying,
for some years, the achievement of Federal Union.
In speaking at a meeting of the Australian Natives


Association, on Bth November, 1889, Sir Henry Farkes
endeavoured to meet some of these objections. He said :
“ The time in the agitation had not yet come ; but
“ it would come; and they wuuld have to face the
“ question of the distribution of power —the limits to
“ the functions of authority—in the Federal Govern -
“ ment, and the limit of the functions in the authority
“of the separate Governments. It would have to be
“ worked out in the light of all the intelligence, which
“ those who had gone before left for our guidance, and
“ must be done in a generous spirit of patriotism, with-
“ out seeking to obtain a number of advantages for any
“ one colony. He, for one, and his friends present
“ were fully awake to the difficulties that must come in
“ settling the questions as to the balancing powers in
<! the grand structure, the power of taxation, the power
“ of paying away money, and of creating armed forces,
“ whether military or naval.”
And speaking in Melbourne on 6th February, 1890,
he cautioned his hearers of the difficulties that they had
before them :
“ Remember gentlemen, that no work, worthy of
“ achievement, was ever attained without surmounting
“ difficulties. Supposing ours were tenfold greater than
“ they are, they ought not to turn us from our object,
“ for it is sound and good.”
He did not, it will be observed, complain of those
difficulties, nor did he mar his scheme by any exhibition
of bitterness or impatience, but rather looked upon all
such temporary impediments as inevitable, where so
large and far-reaching a conception, requiring more than
the average intellectual grasp to appreciate, had to be


made acceptable to an audience as wide as the Australian
continent itself.
“ He did not know,” he said, “ that history
“ furnished any example, in any age, where any move-
“ ment had been set on foot for the attainment of some
“ great object of truth, where captious and half-sighted
“ persons did not raise all kinds of absurd objections
“ When it became his fortune to take a prominent step
“ in this movement, he was quite prepared for every-
“ thing that had since taken place ; he was quite pre-
“ pared for persons who could not see beyond the range
“ of their immediate interests, to try to misrepresent
“ what was aimed at in support of federation; he was
“ prepared for persons yielding to local jealousy or
“ personal feeling, and being thus swayed against the
“ advocacy of any principle whatever, however true and
“ noble ; he was quite prepared for persons of that kind,
“ and the objections they would raise to what was being
done. He was by no means sure that he was not
“ quite prepared for the opposition that had been
“ assumed by some men, who certainly ought to know
“ better, in raising all kinds of collateral issues in this
u great movement.”
I have said that Sir Henry Parkes was, at heart,
generous to his opponents; but he was strikingly so in
his manner of looking at this great question, in speaking
of those who differed from him as to its wisdom, and in
advocating the doctrine of “ give and take ” in the
negotiations which it would of necessity involve.
“ It would,” he said, in addressing the Australian
Natives Association, so far back as 1889, “ have to be
■“ worked out in the light of all the intelligence which


41 those who had gone before left for our guidance, and
“ must be done in a generous spirit of patriotism, with-
u out seeking to obtain a number of advantages for any
“ one colony.’
He went so far as to extend the hand of good-
fellowship across the border, to each and all of our
sister colonies, to tell them how much the people of
New South Wales respected and admired the enterprise,
which, as younger communities, they had exhibited in
their rapid growth and development
“ We, as separate communities, have had to fight
“ our way. We have had that which, at times, I dare
“ say, has degenerated into antagonism, naturally
“ enough; but, on the whole, Ido not believe that the
“ thoughtful men of Yictoria have ever lost sight of the
“ good qualities of the men of New South Wales. I
“ do not believe that the people of the. mother colony—
“ and we have many men and women, in the second
“ and third generation, born on the soil —have ever lost
“ their admiration of the legitimate enterprise and fine
4 « emulation of the people of Yictoria. What may be
“ said of Yictoria may be said of Queensland, South
“ Australia, and Tasmania, and may be said of our
“ sister, New Zealand, if she will condescend to permit
** us to call her sister.”
Again, in addressing six hundred of the most
prominent men of the colony of Yictoria, in 1890, he
said :
“ Forty years ago, the colony of Yictoria had no
“ existence. I had been an inhabitant of Australia ten
“ years, before Yictoria was born; I was an inhabitant of
Australia, and had a seat in a Legislature, before the


“ colony of Queensland was born. There is, however,,
££ no man in Victoria or Queensland, who more rejoiced
“ in their birth, and in their prosperous career, and in
“ the grand results that followed, than I did. These
“ two colonies, the great and splendid Victoria on our
“ south, with Queensland, hardly less splendid, if at all
“ less splendid, on our north, are truly daughters of
“ New South Wales.”
All this, it will be seen, was part of the broad,
statesmanlike project which he had before him, and
upon which he rang so many changes, in the series of
able speeches delivered in different parts of Australia—
to placate opponents, to disarm criticism, to dispel fears,,
to remove doubts, to solve difficulties, to soften asperities,
and to explain away border animosities—in short, to
convert the political sword into a ploughshare, and offer
to the sister colonies the hand of the friendly neighbour,
in the cause of our common national welfare.
It is interesting to compare the magnanimity of
this conduct, and the fine breadth and depth of its
generous cosmopolitanism, with the noisy braggardism
of those men who screamed “ immorality ” across the
border, to one Australian capital, ££ wolves and robbers
to another, and, to a third, sneered charges of national
insolvency and ££ cabbage garden ” dimensions.
It is equally interesting to contrast the liberal spirit
of the offer which Sir Henry Parkes held out to the
sister colonies, in order to attract them to his proposal,
with the selfish and exacting nature of many of the
demands put forward in subsequent years.
•“ I say then,” said he, “ that what I understand by
“ the sentiment of a united Australasia is a sinking of


r“ all subordinate questions. I speak for my colony,
which is as great as the rest of you. We are prepared
“ —and I will answer for the parliament and the
“ people of the country I represent—to go into this
“ national union, without making any bargain whatever,
“ without stipulating for any advantage, whatever, for
“ ourselves, but trusting to the good faith and justice of
“ a Federal Parliament.”
“ We cannot become one united people, and cherish
“ some provincial object, which is inconsistent with that
“ national unity.”
Sir Henry Parkes ever recognized this great truth,
in connection with Federation —that it was vain for any
particular colony, even if it so desired, to attempt to
“steal a march,” or “sneak” an advantage over its
neighbours ; for whatever may be the form of the
constitution in its initial stage, it is bound, ultimately,
to take that shape which is most concordant with
the sense of national justice of the majority of the
electors of the Commonwealth—wherever situated. As
a consequence of this well grounded belief, he made the
sentiment of trust in the Federal Parliament, a sort of
watch word, which would form a fit badge for every
advocate of Union.
“ All through these negotiations,” he said, in ad-
dressing the members of the 1890 Conference, in Mel-
bourne, “ I have not only said that we are willing to
“ come into a Federal Dominion with the smallest
“ colonies, but I have said that we seek no advantage
“ for ourselves ) we do not wish to make any condition
“ whatever; we are prepared to trust to the wisdom, to
“ the honour, and to the justice of a Federal Parliament,


“ and to commit all onr interests to it. That is our
“ position; and, unless we are willing to trust to s
“ Federal Parliament, I cannot understand how we can
“ hope to federate in any way which will be worthy of
“ the name.”
It would be difficult to fix upon the particular time,
when it became clear to the public, and to the general
run of politicians, that the fiscal difficulty in the way of
federation was, after all, not a difficulty at all, but could
be relegated to the long catalogue of subjects left to
be adjusted by the Federal Parliament. Several keen
minds, among those in our own colony, who professed
to have compassed all the bearings of the question,
quite failed to grasp this simple solution. Sir George
Dibbs, for instance, speaking in November, 1889, said :
“He would never allow Sir Henry Parkes to ignore
protection , in his scheme for Federation ” ; and, again,
speaking in another part of the colony, he said: “ The
majority of the colonies were Protectionist, and they
were asked to wipe their views out of existence, and allow
one Free-trade colony, dominated by Sir Henry Parkes,
to overrule them.” In the same speech he (Sir George-
Dibbs) said : “ Until New South Wales pulled down the
fiscal boundaries, and came in common accord with the
prevailing fiscal policy of the other colonies , Federation was an
impossibility .” And ;to show how widespread was this-
conviction, that the tariffs of the different colonies would
have, first, to be assimilated, before federation could be
accomplished; Sir George Dibbs said, in a third speech :
“ It was admitted by every statesman in this colony, and
out of it, that, before Federation could come about,
there must be one fiscal policy, common to the whole shore of
Australia.”


Now amid all this misconception, Sir Henry Parkes
appears to have seen from the first how this difficulty
was to be overcome ; —the “ lion in the path,” as it was
afterwards called, by one of the speakers in the 1890
Conference.
Speaking at St. Leonards, in November, 1889, Sir
Henry Parkes said :
“We were told that we could not have federation,
“ until we were reconciled with one another as to our
“ tariffs. As we were situated, however, the tariff
“ question ought not to be considered, in bringing about
“ the federation of these countries. We must trust to
“ the intelligent exercise of the counsels of the whole
“ of Australia, for a general policy to be adopted, which
“ would be for the advancement and evolvement of
“ Australia, in her great future.”
A year or more later, when speaking at Broken Hill,
he reiterated this sentiment, in different words
“ They made no stipulation in the matter, and
“ would leave to the Federal Parliament the task of
“ settling all conflicting questions. He was even pre-
“ pared to leave the great question of freetrade and
“ protection to the Federated Parliament. If he was
“ disappointed in his belief concerning freetrade, he
“ would submit with the best possible grace.”
The truth is, as most of his finer utterances demon-
strate, that, although he regarded freedom of commerce,
when compared with a system of fiscal restrictions, as
light is to darkness ; he was perfectly content to leave it,
and all other questions, concerning which the peoples of
the several colonies differed, to be settled by the
Australian people, as a whole. The following is a


passage from his great speech, delivered at the banquet,
given, in Melbourne, to the members of the 1890 con-
ference. It shows in what light he regarded protection,
as an artificial expedient for diverting commerce from its
natural and economic channels.
“Now what stands in the way of a federated
“ Australasia? A common tariff! National life is a broad
“ river of living water. Your fiscal notions —and lam
“ a freetrader, remember your fiscal notions on one
“ side or the other, are as the planting of a few stones or
“ the piling up of a sandbank, to divert the stream for a
“ little, in order to serve some local interest This
“ question of a common tariff is a mere trifle, compared
“ with the great, overshadowing question of a living and
“ eternal national existence. Freetrade or protection,
“ all must admit, is to a large extent but a device for
“ carrying out a human notion; but there is no human
“ notion at all about the eternal life of a free nation. I
“ say then, that what I understand by the sentiment of a
“ united Australasia, is a sinking of all subordinate ques-
“ tions. I speak for my colony, which is as great as the
“ rest of you. We are prepared,—and I will answer for
“ the Parliament and the people of the country I
“ represent, —to go into this national union without
“ making any bargain whatever —without stipulating for
“ any advantage whatever for ourselves, but trusting to
“ the good faith and justice of a Federal Parliament.”
, It is important, now, to ascertain to what extent he
anticipated the chief features of the Constitution, as it
stands to-day, for acceptance by the people of New
South Wales; and how far he foresaw the innumerable
and groundless objections which would be made to it.


It will be seen that, while other and smaller men
stood idly by, waiting for “a fall ” of this topmost of Aus-
tralian statemen, he himself was heedless or careless of
their designs, or of their shallow' ridicule. Whilst they
were groping among the elements of this great subject,
which for a time bewdldered them ; and were secretly
hoping that he would fall from the heights that they
were themselves unable to scale, he was moving famili-
arly among its topmost peaks, pointing the way to all
who chose to listen and learn.
“ They (the advocates of federation) wished,” he
said, “ to raise the people to a higher sphere of national
“ life; to bring them into a region of light, where their
“ range of vision would be widely enlarged, and where
“ the prospect would open to the highest objects of
“ attainment.”
We all know, too well, —for we have them dinned
into our ears from day to day, and every day the
wretched local fears and misgivings* which are blinding
the broader vision and the national spirit of many of our
otherwise intelligent fellow citizens. One man is
stricken with fear, lest the banking competition of a sister
colony should affect his interests ; another is in terror
lest his shop-keeping output should be materially re-
duced ; a third is agitated lest the newspapers of another
colony should cross the border and interfere with his
circulation ; a fourth cries out “ more taxation! ”; a
fifth, who regards his colony’s capital as the axis around
which all human affairs revolve, is in dread of its losing
its commercial importance ; a sixth suspects the in-
habitants of all the other colonies of having designs to
loot the treasury of his own colony ; another sees danger


to our national railways ; and all of them may be com-
prehended under one general principle of having so
little confidence in the ability of their own fellow citizens,
and in the stability of their own colony’s resources, that
they shrink from a contest, on level ground, with the
citizens of the neighbouring colonies.
Sir Henry Parkes foresaw all this, as clearly as if he
were living and actively engaged in the struggle to-day ;
and he prepared his many audiences for it: —•
“ Any one,” he said, “ who set his hands to a
“ movement like this, w T ould be very unwise if he could
“ not see beforehand that all kinds of captious objections
“ would be made to the course he proposed to pursue.
“ He did not know that history furnished any example,
“ in any age, where any movement had been set on foot
“ for the attainment of some great object of truth, where
“ captious and half-sighted persons did not raise all
“ kinds of absurd objections. When it became his
“ fortune to take a prominent step in this movement, he
“ was quite prepared for everything that had since taken
“ place ; he was quite prepared for persons, who could
“ not see beyond the range of their immediate interests,
“ to misrepresent what was aimed at in support of
“ federation; he was prepared for persons yielding to
“ local jealousy or personal feeling, and, being thus
“ swayed against the advocacy of any principle whatever,
“ however true and noble; he was quite prepared for
“ persons of that kind, and the objections they would
“ raise to what was being done.”
He foreshadowed, in general terms, and with
astonishing accuracy, the form which the constitution
would take at the hands of the leading men of the


different colonies. He knew, and boldly predicted, in
October, 1889, that—
“ All great national questions of magnitude, affecting
“ the welfare of the colonies, would be disposed of by a
“ fully-authorised constitutional authority, which would
“ be the only one which could give satisfaction to the
“ people represented. This meant a distinct executive,
“ and a distinct parliamentary power ; a government for
“ the whole of Australia; and it meant a Parliament of
“ two Houses, —a House of Commons and a Senate, which
“ would legislate on all great subjects.”
“ It must,” he said (November, 1889), “ be founded
“ in the light of the teaching of Canada and the United
“ States. There was no doubt, whatever, that the great
“ founders of the Constitution of the United States copied
“ its principles from the British Constitution ; and there
“ was no doubt, whatever, that the very able men who
engaged in the federation of the North American
colonies, had before them, constantly, the example of
“ the United States, and the example of England. The
“ present Prime Minister of Canada, (Sir John Mac-
donald), had expressed his opinion that, in framing
“ their Dominion Constitution, they had avoided the
“ worst features of the American Constitution, and had
“ secured a Constitution which was more satisfactory,
“ either than the British or that of the United States.”
Sir Henry Parkes foretold the title of the projected
form of Federal Government, and one that has not been
used before in modern times, when he spoke of it as
“one great Commonwealth, under one flag and one
Government ; and he gauged, with the nicest accuracy,
the kind of difficulty which would arise in the definition


of the limits of the powers of the central government,
as distinguished from those of the states governments.
“ The Government and Parliament of New South
« Wales,” he said, in November 1889, “ would be just as
“ effective as now in all local matters.
“ The creation of this great Federal Government,
which was so much wanted for the very highest pur-
“ poses of Australian progress, would in no way limit or
“ impair the rights and powers of the several govern-
“ ments and parliaments. The Parliament of New South
“ Wales would, as now, deal only with the affairs of New
“ South Wales. It had no power to go beyond this now;
“ and all the parliaments of Australia, put together, could
“ not do any of the things which were waiting to be done
“ by the Federal Government, because these matters
“ pertained not to any one colony, but to the whole of Aus-
“ tralia. Therefore, none of these separate Governments
“ could do them ; and thus they had hitherto been left
“ undone. Then the Federal Government, if its powers
“ were properly defined, would not in any way trench on
“ the rights of the separate colonies. It would simply rise
“ to a higher level, and would do the great things which
“ were required to be done by Australia as a nation, and
“ which could not be done by any inferior power.”
In addressing the public meeting of the Australian
Natives Association, in November, 1889, he told them
that “ they would have to define, with great accuracy,
“ the powers of the Federal Government, in dealing
“ with the national interests ; so as to reconcile the
“ security of provincial rights with federal supremacy.
And, finally, in addressing the 1890 Melbourne Con-
ference, in reply, he said :


“ X agree entirely, and I have as much interest in it
“as a citizen of New South Wales—as any of the mem-
“ bers of the conference ; I agree entirely, I say, in not
“ stripping the colonial governments of any power which
“ they can hold consistently with due power being given
“ to the national government which represents them all.”'
In moving his resolutions of May, 1890, in the
Legislative Assembly, he dealt once more with this
aspect of the subject, because of the misconception
which appeared to exist in regard to it.
“ And now,” he said, “ I will dwell for a moment
“ on some objections which I have occasionally heard
“ —objections that we would be giving up the individual
« power, and authority, and independence of New South
“ Wales. In what way will New South Wales be less
“ self-governed, and less independent than she is now ?
“ Under a federal constitution she certainly will be as
“ well governed ; that is, she will have the means of
“ being as well governed. She certainly will be as inde-
“ pendent. She certainly will be the better, for having
“ all the power which she possesses now, and, in
“ addition to that, her full share in the large powers of
“ the federal government, which she has not at all now.
“ So far as her own boundaries extend, she will be the
“ self-governed country she is now. But, beyond that,
“ she will have her share of power over the whole of
“ Australia, and over the whole of the seas of Australia.”
The latter part of this quotation had been addressed
to an observation, made by the leader of the Opposition,
—Sir George Dibbs ; who had said, in a speech of 1889,
that “ New South Wales was to be made simply a
municipality on a large scale.”


The subject of State Eights has been one of the
most prolific sources of error and misconception, in
regard to the effect of Federal union upon local interests;
and it was only by these repeated explanations that it
came at last to be understood how little the operations
of the Federal Government would interfere with the
local affairs of each colony.
In all the more important speeches delivered by Sir
Henry Parkes, on the subject of Federation, he gave
marked prominence to the condition that it should be
under the Crown of England; and this was by no
means so redundant a stipulation, a few years ago, as it
seems to-day, when the element of Monarchy, as a
feature of the British Constitution, stands at its record
pitch of popularity.
Ten years ago the people of the Australian capitals
were well accustomed to hear public speakers, of the ultra
democratic and socialist class, giving glib utterance to
such phrases as, “ Cut the painter,” “ Australia for
the Australian ”; and the sentiment of a national inde-
pendence,—the result of a consummate ignorance of our
real helplessness, but for the sheltering wing of the
mother country,—was then more widely diffused than the
self-contained portion of our population imagined.
In 1890, the then leader of the Opposition in our own
Parliament, Sir George Bibbs, who had a keen sense
for gauging the public moods, boldly declared himself
an advocate of separation. That gentleman said, in the
early part of 1890, that 9 he did not want to say any-
thing disloyal to the mother country ; but, if they w ere
going into Federation, it should be on the distinct
understanding that that was a step of separation from


the old country, and the establishment of a nation of
their own.”
And Sir Henry Parkes, it may be presumed—for he
quoted the speech in question—seized upon an early
opportunity to counteract any possible growth of so
disloyal a sentiment in the people, by emphasising that
feature of his Federal scheme which brought the pro-
posed Commonwealth under the British Crown ; and he
went further, as I shall hereafter show, in directing the
attention of his different audiences to the part that
Federation would ultimately play in the consolidation of
the British Empire, as well as in that greater Federation
of which we are all now hopefully dreaming, —the Fede-
ration of the Anglo-Saxon race.
“ The flag of United Australasia,” he said, “ means
“to me no separation from the Empire. It means to
“ me no attempt to create a foreign political organiza-
“ tion. Admitting, as I do, that the interests of the
“ Australian people ought to be the first object of
“ concern; still I say that our interests cannot be pro-
“ moted by any rash, thoughtless, and crude separation
“ from the grand old country of which we are all so
“ proud. All free communities must have a political
“ head ; and I should like to ask any thoughtful student
“ of history, what supreme head we could have, more
“ attractive, more ennobling, more consonant with the
“ true principles of liberty than our august Sovereign,
“ who, during her beneficent reign, has seen more
“ improvements for the amelioration of the human race,
“ than ever any sovereign saw before in the history of
“ the world. There is no reign of emperor, king, or
“ potentate, which has included such tremendous


“ changes for the improvement of the world, for the
“ spread of Christian civilization, and for increasing the
“ happiness of the mass of the human family, as that of
“ Queen Victoria. Let it not go forth for a moment —
“ and I think I may speak for my colleagues in the con-
“ ference—that in seeking complete authority over our
“ own affairs, in this fair land of Australia, we are seeking
“ any separation from the great empire.”
The anticipatory references to the form of the Coni'
monwealth Constitution, in the many speeches which I
have before me, are so numerous, that I have difficulty
in making a choice. I take only one or two of a more
general character, leaving those that refer to the more
particular functions till later.
In 1889, when speaking at St. Leonards, he said :
“ The scheme which he proposed was a complete
“ system of Federal Government. It must be founded
“ in the light of the teaching of Canada and the United
“ States. There was no doubt, whatever, that the great
“ founders of the Constitution of the United States
“ copied its principles from the British constitution;
“ and there was no doubt whatever that the very able
“ men who engaged in the federation of the North
“ American colonies, had before them, constantly, the
“ example of the United States, and the example of
“ England. The present Prime Minister of Canada (Sir
“ John Macdonald) had expressed his opinion that, in
“ framing their Dominion Constitution, they had avoided
“ the worst features of the American Constitution, and
“ had secured a Constitution which was more satis-
“ factory, either than the British or that of the United
“ States. There must be ahead of the Government;


“ and he proposed that they should have in Australia, as
“ in India and Canada, a Governor General.”
Speaking again, in another part of the colony, in the
same year, he said :
“ The plan that he had foreshadowed to the other
tf Governments was a very simple one. He had pro-
“ ceeded on the outlines of what had already been done
“ to recommend the establishment of a union govern-
“ ment —a government to represent United Australia.
“ He proposed to have a Parliament, consisting of two
“ Houses, to represent the whole of Australia, and an
•“ Executive, representing all the colonies, to execute
“ the laws of that Parliament.”
The reference, in the above quotation, to a *• plan ”
was an allusion to his well-known despatch of the same
year, addressed to Mr. Gillies —the same which had
drawn from nearly one hundred of the most prominent
journals, in England and Scotland, articles of a most
respectful, and in many cases of a most complimentary
character.
In it he made the following, among other pro-
posals
“ The scheme of Federal Government, it is
“ assumed, would necessarily follow close upon the
“ Dominion Government of Canada. It would provide
** for the appointment of a Governor General, for the
“ creation of an Australian Privy Council, and a Parlia-
** ment, consisting of a Senate and a House of Com-
li nions. In the work of the Convention, no doubt, the
“ rich stores of political knowledge, which were collected
“ by the framers of the Constitution of the United
States, would be largely resorted to, as well as the vast


“ accumulation of learning on cognate subjects since
“ that time.”
Referring, now, to the subject of Federal functions;
a perusal of Sir Henry Parkes’ speeches leads one to
infer that he placed the consolidation of the Australian
military forces, under Federal administration, first
among the list of purposes to be effected by union ; and
there is no doubt that, though he had advocated the
movement with considerable energy, as far back as
1867, his vigorous resuscitation of the question, in 1889,
was due to the report of General Edwards, who visited
the Australian colonies as an Imperial Commission, to
examine into their military provision, and who recom-
mended, in his report, that the whole of the military
strength of Australia should be united in one army.
Speaking at Tenterfield, in October, 1889, Sir Henry
Parkes said:—
“ General Edwards had also advised that the forces
“ of the several colonies should be federated for opera-
“ tion in concert, in the event of war, so as to act as
“ one great army. If an attack were made upon any of
“ the colonies, it might be necessary for us to ‘bring all
“ our power to bear on one spot of the coast.”
“ If they were to carry out the recommendations
“ of General Edwards, it would be absolutely necessary
“ for them to have something more than the Federal
“ Council —one central executive authority, which could
“ bring all the forces of the different colonies into one
“ national army.”
And again, at Broken Hill, he made allusion to the
military question:—
“ If the time should come for them to defend their


“ homes and their honour, against foreign invaders, how
“ much more complete would be the means of defence,
“ as United Australia, than as separate colonies ! ”
“ No organization existed,” he said, “ such as that
“ which was necessary to direct the movements of large
“ military bodies, from one part to another. In the
“ armies of old countries, the necessary organization
“ existed. As we had never wanted anything of the kind,
“ we had never created anything of the kind ; and it
“ could only be originated by this federal power. If we
“ required to detach part of this force, and send it to
“ one point, where danger threatened, there was no ad-
“ ministrative and co-operative machinery to carry it
“ out. The necessary military organization did not
“ exist, and could not exist, unless it proceeded from
this federal power. In point of economy, if they
“ could get uniform action in obtaining armament,
“ means of equipment, and all other matters of army
“ supply, he had reason to know, on consultation with
“ the best authorities they had, that enormous expendi-
“ ture would be saved; that was, if the forces, under
“ one general command, could act with some uniformity
“as to arms, general equipment, regulations, and
“ discipline. Obviously, it would be a much more
“ perfect machine to meet danger, when it should arise,
“ and would be wielded at much less cost. The result
“ would be great economy of expenditure. Not only so ;
“ but we ought to make our own gunpowder and small
“ arms; for if danger arose, we should be in a pretty
“ predicament, if we had to depend on the outside
“ world for supplies of that kind. Under a Federal
“ Government, we could establish manufactories, and


“ practice greater economy; but, separated, we could
** do none of these things. Under a Federal Govern-
“ ment, we could have a highly organized and effective
“ military college ; but we could have nothing of the
“ sort, separated, as we were at present. In all these
“ military matters, they could see that great advantage
“ would arise, if they were to act under only one power,
“ and that a Federal Government.”
Another subject, intimately connected with the
military question, to which Sir Henry Parkes made fre-
quent reference in his Federal speeches was that of the
State railways. He never for a moment advocated an
attempt to effect a Railway partnership in the Common-
wealth Constitution itself, but rather to so provide in it,
that such a result could be brought about when the
time should be ripe for such a step. And that is what
has been done.
“ It might take,” he said, “ a little time; but the
“ colonies must come to an understanding to carry out,
“ from one end of Australia to the other, this uniform
“ gauge in their railways. The cost of such a change
“ ought to be borne by the different colonies, in propor-
“ tion to their respective advantages.”
Many people—many'hundreds of people—are under
the impression that, because the actual amalgamation of
the railway systems of Australia has not been effected
under the Commonwealth Constitution, such an amalga-
mation cannot take place; but this is an obvious error ;
for the measure contains a provision under which it is
possible, and easy, for the Federal Government to pur-
chase the whole of the railway-systems, from the
different states, subject to the approval of each state ;


but so stupendous a transaction, involving, as it would
do, a contract of one hundred millions sterling, would
take a considerable time to arrange and mature ; and it
would have been obviously ridiculous to delay the whole
question of Union, until all the preliminaries in so
gigantic a transaction had been completed.
Sir Henry Parkes advocated the federation of the
railways ; but only at first, by regulation of their working.
Speaking particularly of the railway system, at
St. Leonards, in 1889, he said :
“ Why should they not be turned to the best account
“ for the travelling public, for the removal of merchan-
“ dise, and the general purposes of communication ;
“ and that could only be done under federal regulation.”
Sir Henry Parkes attached much importance to the
Financial and Diplomatic advantages which we should
enjoy under the Commonwealth Constitution. He does
not seem to have ever touched upon the very practical
and detailed question of the conversion of Australian
indebtedness into Federal indebtedness, by which the
colonies as a whole would save an enormous sum per
annum —variously estimated by experts at, from half a
million, to one million and a half per annum ; but he
clearly saw what an enormous gain would be effected in
the borrowing of future public moneys, by reason of
the loans being made in the name of United Australia.
“If,” said he, speaking of all the colonies, “their
“ credit now stood high in the London Market, it would
“ stand much higher if they were federated.”
“ The credit of Australia under the powers of a
“ Federal Government would, I think, be second to
“ none, certainly it would be second to none,


“ excepting England. She would stand amongst the
“ best before the world.”
And in regard to diplomatic advantages he said :
“ If Victoria, South Australia, New South Wales,
“ and Queensland were strong as separate colonies, how
“ much stronger would they be in dealing with the
“ affairs of the world as a United Australia !”
The question of citizenship, in its highest sense,
was one that afforded scope for some of Sir Henry
Parkes’ finest thoughts. He certainly entertained high
conceptions of the political duties of a free man, in a
free state; and it would, I think, be impossible to find,
in any of his speeches, from first to last in his career,
any single instance in which he had “ stooped ” or
“ played down ” to his audience, in order to win an
ephemeral popularity. Throughout his career, he ever
“ held himself up,” in dealing with the people, and
insisted on the seriousness of political thought, and of the
possession of the franchise, instead of fostering the idea
that the one could be engaged in, and the other could
be exercised, with the same easy-going spirit that young
people display in a game of football, or a visit to a fair.
And this insistence which was so marked in his manner,
probably alienated certain classes ; though it doubtless
won in another direction what it had so lost; and
certainly it brought with it the consciousness of arousing
the younger and more irresponsible of his fellow citizens
to a sense of their political duty as units in the body
politic.
The following question, baldly put to a country
meeting in the course of one of his federal addresses,
sounds almost out of place in these days of platform


familiarity and electioneering buffoonery. “ Would
“ they,” he asked his audience— u Would they desire
“ their policy in the structure of Government carried
“ out by the highest and most cultivated, or by the
“ lowest and least cultivated ? ”
And it was in the same speech that he reminded
his audience of the value of history, in an understanding
of this great subject.
“ Depend upon it,” he said, “ there is only one
“ lamp to guide men —the lamp of experience.”
Such observations would be thought too serious,
and too solemn, in these days of political low comedy ;
but they are, nevertheless, glimpses of the statesman —
of the real leader of men ; such as are nationally
“ wanted,” when there are big problems of State to be
solved, and great political responsibilities to be carried.
The question of the influx of foreign criminals to
Australian shores has ever been one of difficulty; and it
has always been felt that it, aud many other kindred
questions, could have been more effectually dealt with,
if the Australian colonies could have voiced their desires
in one, instead of in several voices. Sir Henry Parkes
drew attention to this advantage in his speech at
Broken Hill.
“If we were one great power in Australia, our
“ name would be known and honoured throughout the
“ world. If we rose as one nation, with our own
“ national flag, we should, as if by a magician’s wand,
“ take rank amongst the nations of the earth. This
“ could be done without a single drop of blood being
“ shed, or a single conflict taking place.”
Sir Henry Parkes, more than once, referred in the


course of his federal speeches, to the advantages which
would follow on the establishment of a Federal Appeal
Court, and on the adoption, by all the colonies, of identical
marriage laws. He dwelt, with force and eloquence, on
the added national power and influence which Australia
would enjoy, in its dealings with the outside world: —
“ There are,” he said, “ even higher objects than
“ these, waiting to be achieved by an Australian Govern-
“ ment, a government that can appear everywhere, as
“ representing the whole people; a government to
“ which the doors of every Court will be thrown open,
“ and before which no nation would appear wanting in
“ respect and appreciation, of its present and future
“ importance.” . . . “ There is a higher object
“ still—the object of national influence. What influence
“ have these detached colonies ? It is surprising that
“ they have so much; but the influence of the proudest
“ —we will say Victoria—is nothing to the influence of
“an Australian nation, an Australian Government. She
“ would be able to influence the destinies of civilized
“ men, in all parts of the world. Who can doubt that
“ our national power would be incalculably increased, by
“ its being exercised by one strong, intelligent head ?
“ And there is, highest of all, the object of national
“ honour. Why should not the name of an Australian
“be equal to that of a Briton ? Why should not the
“ name of an Australian sailor be equal to that of a
“ British sailor ? Why should not the name of an
“ Australian citizen be equal to that of the citizen of the
“proudest country under the sun?”
I have already spoken of the unusually wide mental
horizon which was so characteristic of Sir Henry Parkes,


whenever he was called upon to deal with great and far-
reaching political questions. Almost all men who en-
joyed opportunities of working in co-operation with him,
in the political arena, have observed the remarkable faculty
which he possessed, for rising to a great mental altitude,
when the occasion demanded it; from which he was able
to obtain a sort of bird’s-eye view of the most out-lying
consequences of a proposed movement, and see, in
imagination, results which were quite beyond the vision
of ordinary politicians. The possession of this faculty,
added to his wide and deep knowledge of political
history, enabled him to see into the future of
Australia to an extent which was far beyond the reach of
his contemporaries. He seemed, for instance, to fore-
see, so far back as ten years ago, the growth of that
racial sympathy which is so rapidly fusing the inter-
national interests of the British Empire and of the United
States into a common cause.
“ He could,” he said, “foresee the time when all
“ English speaking communities would be drawn closer
“ together and he anticipated and foreshadowed, with
greater vividness and detail, that the Federation of Aus-
tralia was but the nucleus of a larger Federation in the
Southern hemisphere, in which the national interests of
the Australian continent should be linked with those of
other lands, lying in different parts of that great, but
little-known expanse of sea, vaguely named the Pacific
Ocean.
“ The Australian future,” he said, “ went far beyond
“ the colonies ; it went outside and across the sea, to
“ the vast assemblage of countries in the Pacific—not
“ little islands, but considerable countries, lying on the


“ bosom of the peaceful Southern Ocean, whose riches
“ and capabilities were comparatively sealed to the
“ world at present, and had only been touched, but which
“ would not remain neglected much longer. Those
“ lovely, rich and capable lands would be occupied;
“ and would it not be a noble thing for Australia, as a
“ united people, to have its full influence, in directing
“ civilization over the vast southern sea which belonged
“ to us a little more than to others ? ”
“ These countries must develop steadily. They
“ must advance in the acquisition of the industrial arts;
“ and as the result of all this advancement, there must
“ grow up a large and valuable commerce. To whom
“ does that commerce rightfully belong so much as to
“ Australia ? ”
I am quite conscious of the fact that many minds,
of the severely “ practical ” order, will regard such
passages as mere sentiment, forgetful of the fact that
the most practical and prosaic conceptions are capable
of being clothed in the most ornamental garb. But,
there is a deeper philosophy than that of the severely
“ practical” man, which consists in looking beneath the
sentimental, and discovering its germ of good sense;
for just as there is no smoke without fire, so there is
very little lasting sentiment that has not some enduring
truth at its root.
Sir Henry Parkes’ now T famous sentiment, which I
have placed upon the title page, has frequently been
repeated in a satirical spirit, as if it were a mere combi-
nation of pretty words. But the world’s history, that
has been made since the sentiment was expressed, has
shown us that the single truth, lying at the root of that


simple sentence, has, in the case of the American and
English peoples, probably turned the whole course of
European history, by averting the interference of other
powers, in the Spanish-American struggle. It is hardly
doubtful that but for that “ crimson thread ” of
Anglo-Saxon blood, that knit the different branches of
the race, when the struggle culminated, other powers
would have claimed a voice in the question of Spain’s
downfall.
There are those who say that Sir Henry Parkes did
not identify his proposals with the people : and that he
always dealt with the subject in a transcendental spirit,
as if it were quite beyond the peoples’ comprehension ;
but this charge is sufficiently met by the past and
following quotations from his speeches, and by the fact
that no man addressed the people on the subject oftener,
in past years, than he did, or took more trouble to
acquaint them with his views upon it.
“ He could,” he said, “ do little individually ; but
“ he could do much more with the assistance of the people
“of New South Wales.” And again, he said, “ But after
“ all, the determination of this question rests with the
“ populations of the colonies.”
There is so much more of value that I could profit-
ably quote from these speeches, that I should rapidly
reach the dimensions of a volume, were I not to curtail
my excursion into their pages.
I think I have sufficiently shown that, in years past,
when many men who are now protesting their burning
ardour for the great cause, were underrating, and even
making capital out of his utterances, as indications of
his decadent powers, he kept his mind bent on the


great end ; maintaining an untiring and unbroken
advocacy of its advantages, as well as of its inevitable-
ness, as part of the great evolution of all self-governing
peoples.
I may fitly conclude my sketch of his federal efforts
with the following eloquent warning to all who may
happen to read these words.
“ Many and many is the occasion where men
“go on with their eyes closed, when only the
“ few far-seeing students of philosophy and history
“ can see. And it may be at this moment that the
“ people of these Australian colonies are going on
“ with their bartering, rejoicing, and merrymaking
“of which we know they are so fond with-
“ out being aware that they are standing on the
“ imminence of an event that can only occur once
“in the whole world’s history the creation of a
“ nation.”
The following are one or two valuable tributes to the
important part that Sir Henry Parkes played in the
formation of public opinion on this great subject; and I
revive them in these pages in the hope of reminding the
younger generation of their lasting indebtedness to him,
for his magnificent contribution to the accomplishment
of this great end; for his work may be likened to
that of the sower, who went forth over a great
part of the Australian continent, and scattered the
seeds of Federal knowledge everywhere among the
people; while we of to-day are on the eve of reaping
the harvest which has sprung from the work of the
dead sower.


Extract from letter from Mr. Lecky, the well known
historian, to Sir Henry Parkes.
“ December 28, 1889.
“ Dear Sir Henry,
“ I have been reading, with great interest, the
“ papers you were kind enough to send me. Your great
“ work seems marching steadily to its consummation.
“ If a Federal system, such as you propose, had existed
“in the American colonies in the last century, it is
“ probable that their quarrel with England would have
“ been avoided.
“ If America had then been constituted, as Australia
“ would be upon your plan, no difficulty would have
“ arisen; and it is totally certain that British taxation
“ would never have been proposed.
“ You seem to be engaged in a work of unity and
“ conciliation, the most appropriate and noblest employ-
“ ment of old age.”
The Sydney Morning Herald, September 12, 1890 :
“ In this way the federal movement, initiated less
“ than twelve months ago by Sir Henry Parkes, and
“ then laughed at, as a ‘sham,’ a ‘ fad,’ and a ‘trick,’
“has accreted to itself strength from all sides; has
“ passed triumphantly through all the Australian
“ colonies, and has conducted us to the victorious
“ decision arrived at last night.”
“ Even the hardening influence of political an-
“ tagonism could not render men insensible to what the
“ cause of federation owed to the initiative, the great
“ power, and the influential personality of Sir Henry


“ Parkes. All would rejoice, were he enabled to aid, by
“ his great ability, experience, and force of character, in
“ carrying on, to its end, the work he has so success-
“ fully begun.”
“ It would be vain to speculate, by whom or in what
“ form it will be ended. But, when it is brought to a
“ happy issue, and the new Australian union starts out
“ on its life as a great federal dominion, then will be the
“ time to remember, and to remember with patriotic
“ recognition, what the great work owes to the strong
“ initiative and compelling impetus it received from
“ the hand of Sir Henry Parkes.”
Mr. G. H. Reid’s speech, May 21, 1890 :
“ I have no hesitation in saying that the in-
“ fluence of those speeches of Sir Henry Parkes,
“ throughout the length and breadth of this country,
“ was a noble influence. Whether union comes or
“ not; whether we are prepared to unite or not; the
“ influence of the hon. gentleman’s speeches has been
“ such that Australia feels drawn more closely together
“ to-day, than it was a year ago. There is a greater
“ breadth of Australian sentiment; there is a greater
“ confidence between one colony and the other; in-
“ spired, I frankly admit, by the great eloquence of the
“ distinguished statesman at the head of the present
“ Government.”
I have now finished the task I set before myself—
that of presenting to my readers an orderly reproduction
of some of the most instructive, and otherwise valuable


passages, from the long series of speeches delivered by
the late Sir Henry Parkes, at different times, and in
different Australian centres, on the absorbing subject
which is now agitating the public mind of our own
and our sister colonies.
I am hopeful that the memory of the eloquence of
that great man will be sufficiently green, and the sense
of our national obligations to him sufficiently deep, to
invest those utterances with the interest which they
undoubtedly deserve. On this, the eve of the achieve-
ment of the great end which he had in view, when the
minds of many sincere men are hanging in the balance,
between approval and disapproval of the great national
step, a perusal of them may help to turn the scale, by
bringing conspicuously before the mind, the broader,
and deeper, and more outlying considerations, which the
greater mental vision of that eminent man enabled him
to foresee, so many years ahead in our history.
I have purposely restricted my selection to the
speeches which were delivered in or before the year
1889, when general public opinion was immature, if not
altogether unformed, and when his utterances came
upon his hearers as so much fresh material for
thought.
That the great project to which he looked forward,
will be consummated, there is scarcely room for doubt;
and that his name will be year by year more closely
associated with the Commonwealth, which it will bring
into existence, is as certain as that the sun will rise on
the morrow of its accomplishment. Kemembering all
the sad and saddening circumstances of his last days,
and the mortifying reflections—so suggestive of the


■soliloquy of the great Wolsey which must have
crowded in upon his final hours, I cannot but feel the
application, to my humble effort, of those well known
words used by the brother of Robert Burns, when, soon
after the poet’s death, a monument was erected to his
memory :
“ He asked them for bread ;
And they gie him a stane.”
McCarron, Stewart & Co., Printers, 44 and 86 Pitt Street, Sydney.




