

H fiOpwi’l
MG&viifrS
CEDRIC AND SYLVIA WEIG ALL-CHASC


I' r V


—V
1‘
cll,c
u x*
yO<OL X
si'
(J
n 2. vs




Hookum’s
Or
The Story of Jimmie
and His Elephant
CEDRIC and SYLVIA WEIGALL-CHASE
1940
NEW CENTURY PRESS PTY. LTD.
3 North York Street
Sydney


New Century Press Pty. Ltd., 3 North York St., Sydney.
Registered in Australia for transmission by post as a book.
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
COPYRIGHT.


CONTENTS
Chapter I. Introduces Jimmie Lang .. 11
Chapter 11. The Possums Introduce
Themselves .. .. 14
Chapter 111. Rory Is Injured .. .. 20
Chapter IV. The Arrival of Hookum .. 24
Chapter V. The Possums Meet Hookum 30
Chapter VI. Maggie Meets Hookum .. 37
Chapter VII. Matilda Is Injured .. .. 47
Chapter VIII. Plans For A Raid .. .. 55
Chapter IX. The Raid 65
Chapter X. Jimmie Decides To Move .. 82
Chapter XI. The Start 'For Yendoola .. 92
Chapter XII. Jimmie Sets Out .. .. 101
Chapter XIII. The Arrival Of Bob Watson 113
Chapter XIV. Matilda Relates Her
Experiences .. .. 118
Chapter XV. At Yendoola 124
Chapter XVI. Jimmie’s Visit To The
Barracks 132
Chapter XVII. Hookum’s New Friends .. 142
Chapter XVIII. Pirn Tells Another Story 150
Chapter XIX. Matilda Meets A Cousin .. 162
Chapter XX. The Bunyip Hole .. .. 167
Chapter XXL The Poem 174
Chapter XXII. Jimmie’s Accident .. .. 177
Chapter XXIII. The Operation 183




Far away, in a Soldiers’ Settlement in the irri-
gation area of New South Wales, the author of this
book lived and worked. He grew oranges and
lemons, grapes and peaches, and all sorts of fruits.
Near him lived a whole family of children. When
the day’s work was done he used to collect the
children round him and tell them stories about
Hookum and Jimmie. There was nothing these
children liked better than to hear these stories, and
Hookum became their friend as well as Jimmie’s.
But, at last, he found that he was not strong
enough to go on growing the oranges and other
fruits, and he had to come to Sydney and find
something else to do. Last Christmas all the
children and their mother came to Sydney to stay
with him. They had never been to the city before,
and they had a glorious time. They bathed in the
sea, they went to the Zoo, and there they saw old
Jessie and rode on her back. But perhaps the
times they liked best of all were the evenings when,
sitting on the cool verandah, they listened to more
stories about Hookum and his friends.
One day Mr. Chase’s wife said to him, “Why
shouldn’t we write some of the stories about
Hookum and make a book of them, so that lots of
other children in Australia and other lands can
read them?”
So Mr. Chase thought he would, and here is the
book.
MARGARET H. HARPER,
M.8., Ch.M., F;R.A:C;P




CHAPTER I.
INTRODUCES JIMMIE LANG.
“Oh! Master Jim! What have you done?”
The rather stout woman looked down at the poor
little knight as he lay on the ground in a forlorn
heap.
“Mag! I've hurt my back and I’m afraid I can't
get up. Do you think you could manage to carry
me?”
“My lamb, my lamb, of course I could. What has
happened and why are you dressed up like this? I
was in the kitchen and Rory came to the door and
barked and barked so I knew something was wrong
and I followed him down here.”
“Well, you see Mag, I dressed up as a knight and
I was going across to punish those Thomson boys.
I used the clothes prop as a lance and as I was rid-
ing Dolly down here, my lance caught in the ground
and I came off and now my back hurts me dread-
fully.”


•nr m
T
Maggie bent over the
boy and gently lifted him
in her arms while Dolly,
the pony, stood quietly by
and seemed, too, to realise
that something was very
wrong.
Maggie slowly and care-
fully carried him up the
drive followed by Rory, his
dog.
It was two years since
that accident, and Jimmie
Lang was now twelve
years old. He was still un-
able to walk in spite of
all that medical science
could do for him. His
mother had died when he


was quite young and he had been left to the care of
his father and faithful old Maggie, the housekeeper.
His father was a very wealthy business man and
spent most of his time in the city. He was kind
hearted but inclined to be pompous and did not
really understand his son.
Their home was at Mosman near the Taronga
Zoo and had a lovely view across Sydney Harbour.
Jimmie spent nearly all his time on the verandah
and unless the weather was very bad, always slept
there. In spite of all Maggie’s efforts and those of
his boy friends, Jimmie led rather a lonely life and
sometimes the days seemed very long to him. They
were red letter days when his Uncle Bill, a wealthy
station owner, came to stay with him. He would
take Jimmie for long rides in his wheel chair and
tell him wonderful stories about bushrangers and
cattle thieves.


CHAPTER 11.
THE POSSUMS INTRODUCE THEMSELVES.
One calm summer evening Jimmie was lying
awake on the verandah. Mr. Lang had spent a very
short time talking with him and had then gone to
bed. Maggie had gone out to visit some friends and
had taken Rory as protector. Over Jimmie’s bed
was an electric light and he had been reading a
book called “The Vengeance of Red Tooth.” It was
a paper-covered book and was all about Indians.
Red Tooth had just scalped Juniper Joe, the pale-
faced villain. Jimmie was very pleased about this
as he had very little sympathy for Juniper Joe.
Now he felt that he had read enough for that night,
so leaning over, he switched off the light. But
sleep would not come to him. Inside the house he
heard the big clock ticking away the seconds. Other-
wise there was no sound. The moon was shining
brightly and most of the verandah floor on his side
of the house was clearly seen. Jimmie’s thoughts


were far away and he was wondering what kind of
a knife Red Tooth used to take off Juniper Joe’s
hair, when he heard a bump on the verandah
quickly followed by another slightly heavier bump.
Turning his head, he saw that two possums had
dropped on to the verandah and had started to walk
towards him. They walked right up to his bed. He
had often seen possums at night but these two were
very daring to walk round his bed as they were do-
ing. Now all that day Jimmie had spoken to no one
for longer than ten minutes, and he was aching
for a talk. Rather afraid that he might frighten
them away, he said,
“Good evening, Possums.”
To his pleasure and surprise, the taller one
answered.


“Good evening. Matilda, my wife here, and I
thought we’d pay you a visit and have a talk.”
It was a long time since Jimmie had felt so happy.
He had found some new friends.
“Come and sit on the end of my bed,” he said,
“and then I can see you better.”
When they had seated themselves comfortably, he
went on,
“To begin with, I’m delighted that you’ve called
as I was feeling rather lonely and I would like to
make friends with you.”
“Well, let’s get acquainted,” said the bigger one.
“This lady here is Matilda and she’s my wife, as I
said before. My name is Sam and I’m her husband.”
“But,” said Jimmie, “if she’s your wife, you must
be her husband mustn’t you?”
“Oh, yes, indeed, most decidedly, to be sure, in-
deed yes.”
Jimmie was not expecting such a definite answer
and felt amused until Sam shot the question at him,
“Why do you ask?”
Now Jimmie did not quite know why he had
asked so coughed and pretended not to hear the
question. To change the subject, he asked them
whether they would like an apple. Sam said,
“Yes, I would.”
But Matilda gave him a poke in the ribs and told
him to say “please.”


Jimmie produced a large apple that he had under
the pillow and soon they were both munching away
very noisily. Between the munches Sam asked,
“Why do you lie here all day, instead of running
round like other boys?”
Jimmie wondered how they knew that he lay
there all day, so he asked,
“How do you know I lie here all day?”
“Well not being blind, I see you. I see you from
our verandah,” replied Sam. Here he pointed to a
big gum tree. “So does Matilda. So do the kids.”
“Well,” said Jimmie, “when I was ten I was rid-
ing Dolly my pony and I fell and hurt my back and
it has never got better and I can’t walk.”
“Well, well,” said Sam, “I’m sorry to hear that
but it seems very strange to me because we dropped
Angus twenty-seven feet when he was only one
month old, and he never hurt himself.”
Jimmie thought that they were not very sym-
pathetic possums, unil he felt what he thought were
drops of water falling on his foot. He looked hard
and saw that Matilda was crying and her tears were
falling fast. However, Jimmie did not make any
remark about her tears and changed the conversa-
tion again. He asked,
“Is your name possum or o'possum?”
Sam answered him very quickly and, as Jimmie
thought, very angrily. “Possum, of course. We


have some sort of relatives in America called
o’possum, but we’re good plain Australian possums
—P-0-s-s-e-m.s.”
Jimmie really didn’t like to mention that Sam had
spelt his own name wrongly, as he seemed very
irritable and peppery. Very soon Sam remarked
that he was going home, and, with a curt “Good-
night,” trotted off, leaving Matilda with Jimmie.
When he had gone she came and sat on his pillow
and started to speak.
“My dear,” she said, “and you must pardon an old
woman possum for calling you ‘my dear’—you must
try to forgive Sam for his rudeness to-night, but he
isn’t himself at all. He’s in pain. Last night he was
hanging head down and a bulldog ant bit him twice
on the tail. I did what I could and gave him a wet
gumleaf poultice, but he is still in pain and for
some of the things he said to-night I felt very
ashamed of him. You know, my dear, —there, I’ve
called you ‘my dear’ again. I hope you don’t mind ?”
“No, of course not,” laughed Jimmie. “Go on.”
“Well, my dear. I’m very, very sorry that you
can’t walk and it hurt me when Sam started talk-
ing about Angus instead of saying he was sorry.”
Here Jimmie felt a tear splash on his cheek, but
did not like to offer her his handkerchief because
he did not want her to know that he had noticed.
“Now, my dear,” she went on, “I think I can
help you. I know that you have doctors who ought
to be able to cure you, so perhaps you won’t let an


ignorant old woman possum try. But let me tell
you about a grandson of mine, Billy by name. When
Billy was two weeks old he tripped over one of his
father’s boots and fell forty feet on to a log. 'For
weeks and weeks Billy lay in bed groaning, and
then his father took me to see him. Well, I put on
redgum poultices and fed him on the very youngest
of leaves. In two months Billy was quite well and
only last week was married, to such a nice girl
possum too. Well, my dear, I think that perhaps I
may be able to cure you if you’ll only let me try.”
Jimmie laughed to himself, because she was such
a kind old thing that he didn’t like to laugh out
loud and perhaps hurt her feelings.
“Well, Matilda,” he said, “I’d be very very grate-
ful if you did try, and perhaps—per-haps—per-r”—
Jimmies’ eyes closed and only for the marks on the
pillow next morning he might have thought he had
been dreaming.


CHAPTER 111.
RORY IS INJURED.
When Jimmie awoke Rory was lying on the ver-
andah by his bed. He was whimpering and licking
one of his hind legs. When Jimmie made him get
up and walk he did so with an effort and Jimmie
called out to Maggie. When she came he said,
“I say, Mag, what’s wrong with Rory? He seems
as though he had hurt his leg pretty badly. Did he
get mixed up in a fight last night?”
“Master Jim,” replied Maggie, “I wasn’t going to
tell you about it, as I thought you might fret like,
but seeing as how you’ve seen the damage I’ll tell
you about it. When we left the Watsons last night
it must have been eleven o’clock or close on that. I
was walking along with Rory a bit in front of me.
You know where the Thomsons live, in that poky
little house in Elm Grove? Well, outside the Thom-
sons’ house there’s a pillar-box and just as Rory got
near it a half brick came flying over the hedge and


hit him fair. Then I done what you are always
telling me not to do—l lost my hair. I opened their
gate and I called out—‘My word you Thomsons
are a dirty lot. What did you want to do that for?
If you want to throw a half brick come out now and
throw it at me but don’t pitch it at a dog, wot
can’t get back at you.’ ”
A half brick came
flying over the
hedge.
“My word, Master Jim, I
I offered to fight the three
one hand behind my back.
was wild right enough,
of them at once with
Thinking it over this
morning I don’t know whether I could have done it,
but my word, I would ’ve given ’em something to
go on with. They didn’t say anything, and all I
hear is a giggle by the side of the house. That of
course makes me worse, and I start to walk in up
the path until I hear them running for their lives,
and then I hear a gate by the side of the house
slam hard so I know it’s no good and I come out and
have a look at Rory. First look, I think his leg is
broke but I take him nearer the light and see it is
not. But I carried him home all the same and, my


word, Master Jim,” she concluded, “if ever I catch
any of those Thomson boys, I’ll give them some-
thing to think about.”
“One minute, Maggie,” Jimmie said, “Do you
really think that all the Thomson boys were there?”
“I don’t think so,” she replied, “I think there was
only two of them. The light wasn’t too good in
front of their house, so I won’t swear to it, but I
only see two of them—that big one, Archie, and
the little fellow —I forget his name for the minute—
no, I don’t! It was Tom. I won’t swear that Harry
was there.” Without stopping for breath she con-
tinued, “Now I must lay the table for your father’s
breakfast, but don’t you go worrying about it. I
never meant to tell you at all, because I’d knew
you’d worry. Just you wait. I don’t care what the
Doctors say, you’re going to get well. Then I’ll
give you a hand to give them Thomsons something
to think about.”
Maggie bustled oif, and Jimmie lay back to think
over what he had just been told. If only he was
well he could go to the Thomsons and offer to fight
them one by one, except Harry. He wasn’t a bad
chap at all. Jimmie remembered Harry once help-
ing him to fix his bicycle on the road. The chain
had come off and he hadn’t been able to put it back
until Harry had come along and helped him. It had
been a hot day, too, and the grease off the chain had
made nasty marks on their clothes. Jimmie had
offered Harry a sixpence that had been given to
him and remembered how Harry had refused to


take it, saying—“Thanks all the same, but I don’t
want it for giving a chap a hand like this.”
That had been decent of him—and yet his
brothers, Archie and Tom—what rotters they were!
It might be only a question of time, however, before
he grew well and gave them something to think
about.
Jimmie leant over and patted Rory, whose tail
wagged in a half-circle on the verandah floor. “Poor
old Rory! I came a buster when I had declared war
on the Thomsons, so perhaps in one way I deserved
what I got. You were walking along quite peace-
fully, and a half-brick came through the air, and
you stopped it and it stopped you. But look here,
Rory, when we’re well we’ll do something, won’t we,
old partner?”
Rory swished his tail harder than ever on the
floor, by way of agreement.


CHAPTER IV.
THE ARRIVAL OF HOOKUM.
After lunch that day, Jimmie continued reading
“The Vengeance of Red Tooth” and Rory hobbled
off to the scrub in front of the house. After about
twenty minutes reading it suddenly dawned upon
him that Rory had been barking for a long time. He
had been too interested in Red Tooth’s new exploits
to pay any attention to Rory’s barking but now he
put the book on one side and wondered what could
be engaging the dog’s attention. It was unlike Rory
to bark at nothing. He gave a whistle and Rory,
always obedient, came limping up to the verandah.
At Jimmie’s command he lay down by the bed but,
as Jimmie noticed, with his eyes looking towards
the spot whence he had just come, Jimmie thought
this rather curious but he picked up his book again
and his mind was soon thousands of miles away
from his actual surroundings. After he had read
another seven pages, however, he realized that
Rory was disobeying him and was again barking


monotonously in the thick undergrowth. This was
too much for Jimmie so he crawled into his wheeled-
chair and pushed himself down the path. He saw
Rory watching something very closely and every
few seconds barking. What could it be? It could
not be a cat, or a dog, or a snake—perhaps it was
a man? And yet that seemed unlikely because
Rory was no coward and he would have done more
than bark. So Jimmie wheeled his chair to a posi-
tion just behind the dog and looked between the
foliage. The sight that met his eyes made him
wonder whether he was not asleep and dreaming,
for there, within twelve feet of him, stood a small
elephant. Jimmie pinched himself to make quite
sure that he was not dreaming. He found that he
was very wide awake. The elephant was about five
feet high and was a perfect specimen of elephan-
tine youth. His trunk was slowly swaying from side
to side and his eyes were half closed.
With Jimmie beside him, Rory’s barking became
fiercer.
“Lie down, Rory,” said his master. “That little
elephant won’t hurt you.”
At that the elephant opened this eyes and said,
“Those are the first kind words I’ve had spoken
to me for a long time. Thank you very much for
them but now you’d better go and tell Johns and
have me put back in the Zoo.”
“But,” said Jimmie, “I don’t know anything at
all about you, and I’m not going to have you taken
away if I can keep you. Of course, that is if you


want to stay with me. But suppose you tell me who
you are, and how you got here.”
“Certainly,” said the little elephant. “I’ll tell
you all about it. My name is Hookum, and mum
and I used to live in India until we were
“Vll tell you all about it,” said the little elephamt.
caught and brought out here. We live at the Zoo
and Johns leads me an awful life. Last night I ran
away and I’m going to run back to India, where I
came from, and I’m not going to stay in any more
Zoos and I never want to see Johns any more.”


“But, Hookum, you can't possibly go back to
India because there are thousands and thousands
of miles of water between here and India.”
“No,” replied Hookum, “I know that I can’t run
all the way but I can swim, and when I feel tired,
I’ll just lie on my back and float.”
The thought of this silly little elephant floating,
legs up in the air, nearly made Jimmie laugh, but
Hookum was so very serious that he curbed his
desire.
“Anyway, Hookum, tell me how you came here
from the Zoo and then we’ll think out what’s to be
done.”
“All right, Ace,” said Hookum, “I’ll tell you. It’s
my job up there to keep the dead leaves off the
paths. Johns always sees that I do it but yesterday
afternoon he went out and I didn’t pick them all
up. When he came home at night, at about twelve
o’clock, he saw some of the leaves on the path and
he came to my bedroom and woke me up. He said,
‘Wake up, Hookum. You’re a scamp and a loafer
and a little bag of sin. Here, take this lantern and
go and pick up those leaves at once or I’ll boil you
in oil.'
“When Johns woke me up I was dreaming. I was
dreaming that mum and I were back in India. We
were bathing in a river and were having great larks,
squirting water over each other. But, not wishing
to be boiled in oil, I took the lantern in my trunk
and toddled off. Johns stood watching the light
moving about and if it stopped, he would call out,
‘Hurry up, Hookum. Don’t you loaf!'


“It was windy and a bough that was leaning over
the path, and swinging about, gave me an idea. So
I hooked the lantern up to the bough and it swung
about just as if I was swinging it. Johns didn’t not-
ice any difference so I thought I’d leave, and I did.
One of the front gates was open so out I walked.
He told them to sit on his bed, as he wanted their advice.
Then I ran and ran and ran and when I saw this
house, with all these trees in front, I came in and
here I am. I eat a good deal of the grass and I’m
not hungry but I’m as thirsty as anything. That’s
all I’ve got to say.”
“Now, look here, Hookum,” said Jimmie. “I don’t
quite know what is to be done about you but I will
think it out. There is a tap over there, on the lawn,


and after dark you can steal out and get a drink but
don’t let anyone see you. I’ll see you to-morrow and
we’ll have a talk, but, before I go, I want you to
make friends with Rory because if he started bark-
ing at you to-night, he might give the show away.”
Hookum put out his trunk towards Rory, who
at first bristled with anger, but when it came to rest
on his head without hurting him, his confidence re-
turned and he very soon wagged his tail as a sign
of friendship. Then Jimmie said good day to
Hookum and he and Rory went up to the house.
After he had finished his tea, it was nearly eight
o’clock and Jimmie put on his thinking cap. For one
thing, if he kept Hookum how could he feed
him? He knew that the grass in front could not
last for very long while Hookum’s appetite contin-
ued to be healthy. And for another thing, would it
be safe to tell Maggie about Hookum or would she
have him returned to the Zoo? Jimmie knew that
it would be hard to keep Hookum’s presence a secret
from everyone but would it be worth while to risk
telling Maggie?
He heard two bumps on the verandah and saw
that Matilda and Sam had arrived. He would dis-
cuss Hookum with them. So after having said
“Good evening,” he told them to sit on his bed, as
he wanted to ask them for their advice.


CHAPTER V.
THE POSSUMS MEET HOOKUM.
When they had seated themselves he told them
the whole of the story about Hookum and wound up
by asking—
“Now what do you think I’d better do about
him?”
Sam cleared his throat and began to speak,
“I don’t know. Best thing I can think of is to send
him back to the Zoo. Us possums haven’t a big
enough house to have him boarding with us and I
might only get angry with him and hurt him.”
“Shame, Sam, shame,” cried Matilda, “to talk
that way.”
Then turning to Jimmie she said,
“My dear if he’s a friend of yours he’s a friend of
ours. Just you tell him he’s welcome to come and
stay with us for as long as he likes. We’ll make
him comfortable and look after him—the poor little
fellow.”


“Thank you very, very much for your kind invita-
tion but Hookum isn’t as small as you think he is,
Matilda,” replied Jimmie. “Why, he’s fifty times
bigger than you and Sam put together. He could eat
up every speck of food you have and still be hungry.
That’s one of my troubles. I don’t know how I’m
going to feed him.”
“Look here,” put in Sam, “if Hookum is fifty
times bigger than Matilda and me, and he swings
about in the trees, he’ll break every one. We don’t
want that to happen.”
The thought of Hookum swinging, by his funny
little tail, like a possum, made Jimmie laugh. He
felt that it would be impossible to explain to Mat-
ilda and Sam exactly what Hookum was like but he
suddenly thought of a good plan.
“Look here possums, I’ll go down and see Hookum
now. When I whistle you come down the path and
I’ll introduce you to him. He’s very big but you
mustn’t be frightened. He won’t hurt you.”
Sam mumbled something about having some
work to do but Matilda seemed pleased and anxious
and Jimmie knew that she would persuade Sam to
accompany her. Jimmie got into his chair and went
off down the path. He found Hookum quite easily
but, to his surprise, heard a sound of munching
which he knew could not possibly be made by eating
grass. The elephant seemed most contented and
greeted Jimmie with,
“Hello, Ace, like an apple?”


. C ||l
a °w
Jimmie wondered where Hookum could have got
apples. There were no apple-trees in front of the
house.
“Where did you get those apples, Hookum?” he
asked.
Hookum looked very surprised. “To tell you the
truth, my trunk was leaning over the fence and a
“Some of the apples tumbled out into my trunkT
man passed with a basket of apples and some of the
apples tumbled out into my trunk.”
Jimmie went cold with fright. If the man had seen
an elephant’s trunk come over the fence and take
some of his apples, he would know that, at the other
end of the trunk, there must be an elephant.
Hookum would soon be discovered and taken back
to the Zoo. So Jimmie gave him a good scolding and
made him promise not to put his trunk over the
front fence again.


“Now listen, Hookum,” he went on, “I have some
very good friends that I want you to meet. They
are only little and you could easily hurt them or
frighten them but they are such good little things,
that I don’t want you to do that. If I bring them
down here, will you promise to be very gentle with
them?”
“Yes, of course I will,” replied Hookum, “I’ll be
friendly with all your friends and I’ll treat them
very gently.”
So Jimmie gave a whistle and soon saw Matilda
and Sam standing near him, holding each other by
the paw. They looked very frightened and only for
the fact that Jimmie was between them and
Hookum, might have run away.
“L-l-lawks,” stuttered Sam, “he’s big right
enough.”
“Possums,” said Jimmie, “this is my new friend
Hookum. He won’t hurt you.”
“No, I won’t hurt you,” Hookum assured them.
“I’m very pleased to meet you and I hope we become
good friends.”
Here he extended his trunk over Jimmie’s head
and lightly ran the tip of it down Matilda’s, and then
Sam’s back. There was no doubt that they were
both terribly frightened and Jimmie thought that
it might be best for them to go, so that they could
come to know Hookum gradually. Still, they had
made a beginning.
“Possums,” he said quietly, “perhaps you’d like
to go now.”


A look of great relief came over their faces and
Sam turned round to go, but Matilda said, “We
hope to be good friends with you, Hookum, but to-
night we’re both a bit scared. You’re so very big
and we’re so small.”
“Good night, Matilda,” said Hookum. “I must say
that I’m glad to have met you and we’ll be good
friends soon.”
When they had gone he turned to Jimmie.
“Funny little things but they seem to be very
friendly. I like Matilda best but Sam’s all right too,
I expect. Anyway I’ll look after both of them.”
The meeting between Hookum and the possums
had passed off more successfully than Jimmie had
expected. Certainly, there had not been much con-
versation but Hookum had touched them with his
trunk and they had not run away. Had they done
so, Jimmie would not have blamed them as it must
have been rather an ordeal. He felt tired now, as
it had been a very exciting day for him. So he said
“Good night” and was just starting to wheel him-
self to the house when Hookum said—“l will carry
you home.”
Hookum very gently wrapped his trunk around
Jimmie and lifting him up, placed him on his own
head. He left his trunk coiled back, for Jimmie to
use as a support. Then very slowly he walked up
the path and on to the verandah. At Jimmie’s dir-
ection, he stopped at the bed and very gently
placed him on it. Then, saying “Good night,” he
walked off. Jimmie was soon fast asleep and did


not hear Maggie put his chair on the verandah,
when she returned late that night.
The next morning, Jimmie had not been awake
for long before Maggie came out of the house, on
to the verandah.
“Look here, Master Jim,” she said, “there’s some-
thing very strange going on here. I don’t know
whether this place is haunted but it seems like it
was.”
“Why, what’s wrong Maggie?” asked Jimmie.
“Have you seen any ghosts?”
“No, I haven’t seen any but I think they are
here. When I got inside the front gate last night,
things began to happen. First of all, I was coming
up the path and nearly breaks my neck over your
chair. Now, how did that get there?”
“Perhaps the wind blew it off the verandah to
where you saw it.”
Maggie gasped. “Rubbish and fiddlesticks, there
wasn’t any wind at all last night, which makes what
I’m going to tell you all the more ghostly like.
When I saw your chair, I got it and started to wheel
it up the path. All of a sudden, I felt my hat being
lifted off my head. It was gone before my hands
could reach it. I looked all round but couldn’t see it
anywhere. Then I thought that perhaps it had got
caught in a bough and me walking past, had lifted it
off my head. So I came up to the house and got
a candle and then I went back. But it wasn’t any


good. I couldn’t see it so I came up again and went
to bed. This morning I got up early to go down and
have another look for it. I went out the front way
and, in my hurry, I nearly stepped on it for there
it was, on the door mat. Now what do you think of
that, Master Jim?”
“Perhaps,” replied Jimmie, “the wind blew it back
again.”
“Look here, Master James.” (Whenever Maggie
got very irritated she called him Master James). “I
wish you’d remember that last night there was no
wind. There wasn’t even a puff. And everything I
tell you about, you say, ‘Perhaps it was the wind.'
It’s a puzzle to me and a pretty big one too.”


CHAPTER VI.
MAGGIE MEETS HOOKUM.
Maggie bustled off and Jimmie thought over what
she had just told him. It was lucky that she had
not repeated her question about his chair. It had
been careless of him to leave it and if she had re-
peated her question, he would have had to tell her.
As for her hat, Jimmie felt that Hookum must
have had something to do with its temporary loss.
Again he wondered whether he would tell Maggie
about Hookum but decided not to do so, for the
present, at any rate. After he had finished his
breakfast, Jimmie asked Maggie to bring him the
morning paper. He wanted to read about the
cricket match, that New South Wales was playing
with Victoria. In turning over the sheets of the
paper, he saw a headline that made his eyes almost
start from his head. The heading was, “YOUNG
ELEPHANT ESCAPES.” He folded the paper so
that he could better read this item of news. The
paper said,


On Monday night, a hitherto unpreced-
ented incident occurred at the Taronga Zoo.
A small elephant most mysteriously dis-
appeared. It is not yet certain whether the
animal has escaped from the boundaries
of the Zoo, or whether it is hiding in some
of the dense undergrowth, with which the
Zoo abounds. The curious part of the es-
cape lies in the fact that the entrance to
the animals' quarters, was securely locked
for the night. William Johns, the keeper,
has no theory to advance. Meanwhile, a
close look out is being kept in the vicinity
of the Zoo, and the Directors entertain
every hope of re capturing the fugitive,
before the end of the week.
That paragraph decided Jimmie. He would tell
Maggie and risk her disapproval. Nevertheless he
thought it wiser to wait until her temper had im-
proved. After lunch that day, she seemed to be in
a good humour so he called out to her and she came
to his bed.
“I say, Mag, do you know how you lost your hat
last night? An elephant took it."
"Look here, Master James," she replied, “you are
talking rubbish. You'll tell me next it was a whale.
An elephant ? I never heard such rot in all my life."
"Just have a look at this then, if you won’t believe
me."
Here he gave her the morning paper, pointing
with his finger to the part about Hookum’s escape.


She read it but was quite unmoved and did not seem
at all interested. Lower down the sheet of the
paper, she saw another item of news. A notorious
criminal, by the name of Tomkin, had escaped from
a gaol near New York.
“I don’t supose that this American criminal is in
the front, with the elephant, is he?”
Jimmie saw that it was useless trying to con-
vince Maggie about Hookum, so altered his plan.
“Well, anyhow, Mag,” he said, “just suppose that
a small elephant was really here. Suppose that he
and I are friends and that he’s done no damage to
anyone. Supposing all this, will you keep his pres-
ence here a dead secret?”
Maggie looked at him in alarm and was some time
before she replied.
“If you had three tigers and a crocodile in front
and they didn’t do no harm to anyone, you can bet
I’d help you to keep them. That is, if you wanted
to.”
She left him and Jimmie lay back and laughed
because he knew that Maggie thought that he had
been joking. There was too, one thing that gave him
comfort. Never had he known her to break her
word and although she had not believed a thing
about Hookum, Jimmie knew that she would keep
her promise.
Maggie sometimes talked to Rory and it would
have amused Jimmie, had he heard her talking to


the dog. She was saying, “Poor boy. Do you know
Rory, I’m afraid your young master is wandering
in his mind like?”
That afternoon Jimmie considered the best way
to bring Maggie to meet Hookum. He thought that
the only way was to take her down and let her see
the elephant for herself. He was rather afraid that
she might scream and if Mr. Lang came out of the
house and saw Hookum, what then? Jimmie knew
that, if this should happen, Hookum would be taken
back to the Zoo. That was a risk, however, which
had to be taken. After tea that night, he asked
Maggie to sit near his bed and he let her talk, so
that her temper might be improved. She talked
about the Watsons and told him of Bob Watson’s
progress. Bob was a furniture remover and Maggie
told Jimmie that he had just bought a covered-in
motor lorry.
Jimmie wasn’t very much interested, but let her
talk because he knew that nothing put Maggie in a
better humour than having someone who would
listen to her. When she had finished he spoke.
“Look here, Mag, to change the subject, what I
told you about Hookum is the plain honest truth.’’
Maggie’s face looked so puzzled that he added,
“You know Hookum is the little elephant I was
telling you about.’’
She looked worried, “Master Jim, you haven’t
been too much in the sun to-day, have you? Your
head’s so full of queer fancies that I don’t rightly
know what to think about you.”


Jimmie felt himself becoming angry.
“Listen, Mag. Help me into the chair, and I’ll
take you down and we’ll see Hookum, and then per-
haps you’ll believe me. But before we go down I
want you to promise not to scream, because if you
do dad will hear. Then he’ll come down to see what
is wrong, and that’ll be the end of Hookum as far
as I am concerned.”
Maggie promised but Jimmie could see that she
still thought he was crazy.
When she had helped him into his chair he
thought it would be best to see Hookum alone, and
prepare the way for Maggie as he had done for
Matilda and Sam, so he arranged to whistle to her
when he was ready for her to come down. On going
down the path he found Hookum rummaging about
and pulling up grass.
“Hullo, Ace,” said the little elephant, “I’m glad
to see you as I’m beginnirig to feel a bit lonely, and
there’s something must be done soon about my food.
I’ve got a fairly good appetite and this grass isn’t
going to last me for long, and when it’s eaten what’s
going to happen?”
Now Jimmie hadn’t thought that Hookum would
require quite so much, although he had been wor-
ried over the food question. He was surprised to see
that more than half of the feed had been eaten, and
in a day or two, Hookum would have to starve un-
less something was done. All the same, that problem
could stand aside for a few minutes until Maggie
had met him.


“Hookum,” he said, “we must think that out, but
before we do it I want you to meet Maggie who lives
with us up at the house.”
To his pained surprise Hookum looked very
frightened.
‘Wo, Ace, not to-night. I'm not feeling very well."
“No, Ace,” he said, “not to-night. I’m not feeling
very well. I’m feeling kind of weak, and I’m afraid
a woman might upset me or give me a cold, or some-
think like that. Anyway I saw her last night when
she was coming up the path with your chair.”
So Hookum had been responsible for the loss of
Maggie’s hat. Here was an awkward position! If


Hookum persisted in his refusal to meet Maggie she
would have reason to think that Jimmie had been
romancing.
“Don't be a goat, Hookum, Maggie won’t bite you,
and if she makes friends with you she’ll see that
you get feed somewhere. I’m afraid if you don’t
make friends with her I mightn’t be able to keep
you, and you’ll have to go back to the Zoo. I’d
simply hate that to happen, but if you aren’t sen-
sible, I’m afraid it might.”
“Oh, alright, Ace, if you put it that way I’ll meet
her, but tell her I’m very weak and can’t see her
for long.”
Jimmie laughed and whistled for Maggie who
came walking down the path. It was a trying time
for him as Hookum looked terrified, and seemed to
be on the point of running away. When she arrived
Hookum was actually trembling with fear, and
Jimmie kept on saying “it’s all right, Hookum, it’s
all right.” Maggie’s surprise when she saw the lit-
tle elephant was shown by a loud scream.
“There! You’ve done it! I knew you would,” said
Jimmie, “why Matilda didn’t scream when she saw
Hookum, and I reckon she must have been a lot
more frightened than you are.”
“Oh, I’m not frightened, Master Jim, I’m only
surprised.”
“What on earth you’re surprised at I don’t know.
I told you about Hookum and you wouldn’t believe


me, and now, when you simply have to believe me,
you scream. Anyhow, shake hands with him.”
Hookum had by this time regained his composure,
and stretched out his trunk to Maggie who seized
it, and shook it.
“I’m very pleased to meet you,” he said. “Ace
said that you may be able to help me.”
Maggie said nothing in answer to this, and it
dawned upon Jimmie that she had not understood
a word that Hookum had said, so turning to her,
Jimmie said,
“Hookum says that he's very pleased that he’s
met you, and hopes that you’ll be able to help.”
“Master Jim, I don’t know what to say, I’m that
surprised. Of course I thought you was only joking,
but now I see for myself that you weren’t, but how
on earth you can say that Hookum says what you
just told me he did, I don’t know.”
“I can talk to Hookum,” replied Jimmie, “and he
can talk to me, and if you like I’ll prove it. Yes,
I’ll prove it. You tell me what you’d like Hookum
to do, something quite easy of course. Don’t say
that you want him to balance himself on his trunk,
or anything like that, but give him something easy
to do. Ask him to touch my foot with his trunk
or something like that.”
“Yes, I will,” she said, “Tell Hookum to lift you
out of your chair, and if he does that I’ll really be-
lieve that you do understand each other.”


“Right-ho, Mag!” Here he turned to Hookum.
“Hookum,” he said, “Maggie doesn’t believe that
we can speak to each other. So to prove it I’m going
to ask you to lift me out of my chair, and if you do
it she will believe. So lift me out of the chair, and
put me on the ground, there’s a good chap.”
Hookum put his trunk under Jimmie, and having
got a firm hold lifted him out of the chair and
gently placed him on the ground. Maggie was so
astonished that she could hardly speak. When she
found her voice she said,
“I give in. You can speak to him and he under-
stands you. I thought you were only joking. I’m
sorry.”
“Maggie! Maggie!” Here a deep voice called out
from the house. “Where are you?” It was Mr.
Lang calling out for her.
Jimmie’s mind worked like lightning. At all costs
his father must be prevented from coming down
and seeing the elephant.
“Answer him, Mag, answer him, and then go
straight up and see what he wants. Just leave the
rest to me. Tell him I’m down here if you like.”
Maggie obeyed the boy, and Jimmie whispered to
Hookum,
“Quick, Hookum. Put me in the chair and wheel
it on to the path. Then go and hide yourself, and
be quick.”
Hookum lifted him back into the chair, and
pushed it on to the path. Then with scarcely a


sound he vanished. A few seconds later Mr. Lang
and Maggie appeared.
“Well, my boy,” said Mr. Lang, “you and Maggie
have been enjoying the twilight, I see. I couldn’t
make out where you were. Let me wheel you up to
the house, son.”
Here he took the chair handles and pushed Jimmie
up to the verandah. Mr. Lang sat and talked for
a few minutes and then went inside the house to
write some letters. A few minutes later, Maggie
who had been in the kitchen while Mr. Lang was
talking with Jimmie re-appeared, and sat down by
his bed. Their talk was about Hookum and Maggie
was very excited about him. To Jimmie’s delight
she was quite determined to keep him. When the
question of food was mentioned she lightly dis-
missed it.
“Oh nonsense,” she said, “Dolly does nothing and
we can take some of her food for Hookum if he
needs it.”
“Mag, you’re an angel,” said Jimmie, “you’re an
old angel. Of course we can. What a chump I’ve
been not to think of that!”
They talked for a few minutes longer and then
Maggie, saying that she was tired, left him and
went inside the house.


CHAPTER VII.
MATILDA IS INJURED.
Jimmie went to sleep soon after Maggie left him
but was awakened by something furry being brushed
across his face. He sleepily opened his eyes and
saw by the moonlight that it was Sam. He knew by
the way the possum’s body was shaking that Sam
was in trouble.
‘Hello, Sam,” he said. “Are you in trouble?”
Sam swallowed hard a couple of times before
speaking.
“A most frightful thing has just happened. I feel
sick,” he murmured: “You know across the road
there is a pear tree ?” Jimmie remembered it very
well; for on one occasion he and Ted Mullens had
raided it. They had almost been caught and Ted had
left a portion of his clothes on a nail on top of the
fence.
“Yes Sam,” he said, “I know it well—go on.”


“Oh,” said Sam, “I’ve been a bad husband to
Matilda. I’ve never been half good enough to her
The car ran right over her.
and now this dreadful thing has happened, all
through my fault. I do wish I had been a better
husband to her.”
Jimmie was, by this time, very wide awake and
was afraid that poor Matilda had been killed.


“Go on, Sam, go on. Tell me the whole story. Tm
anxious.”
“Well,” continued the possum, “after tea this
evening I got a craving for a pear. So I persuaded
Matilda to go with me across the road to that pear
tree. We had a good feed and had started to walk
back across the road when suddenly a bright light
flashed on to us from a motor car. I was in front and
was safely clear, when Matilda became puzzled and
flustered by this light. I looked towards her and
called out, ‘Hurry, Matilda.’ That only seemed to
confuse her more than ever. Poor old Matilda! The
car ran right over her.”
“Oh! Sam, Sam,” almost wailed Jimmie, “don’t
tell me that Matilda has been killed.”
“No. She wasn’t killed but her leg is broken.
After the car had passed, I rushed over to her and
I was half dragging, half carrying her when I heard
a shout from the other side of the road: ‘Look, Tom,
look at the two possums. Get a stone quickly.’ Then
a stone or two came whizzing through the air and
just missed us. Then I heard a cry. ‘Hurry up
Archie. They are almost over the fence. Have
another shot.’ A stone caught Matilda fair on the
head. We were on the top of the fence then and
the stone knocked us off. If we had fallen back on
to the footpath it might have been the end of us
but we fell on this side of the fence and when the
boys got across the road I had dragged Matilda out
of harm’s way. Then we met Hookum. At first I
was frightened that he was going to hurt us but


instead of that, he helped us. When he saw that
Matilda was hurt so badly he was terribly upset.
Then he picked her up and carried her home. He
put her on a bough a good way from the ground and
Matilda is hurt ,
from there she managed to crawl into our home.
She’s in dreadful pain and I don’t know how to help
her. Can you do something for her?”
The possum stopped speaking and Jimmie thought
over what he had just been told. He had once been
a boy scout so knew a good deal about first aid. He
thought that there would not be much difference
between setting a possum’s leg and a human leg. He
felt that he simply must do something. Yes, he


would set Matilda’s leg. Luckily Mr. Lang slept on
the opposite side of the house from where Jimmie
slept, so the burning of the electric light over
Jimmie’s bed would not disturb him.
“Sam,” he said, “I’ll fix up Matilda. You go down
and get Hookum to come up. Then he can bring
her here. But tell him to be as quiet as he can.”
Sam nodded and slipped away. Jimmie switched
on the light and began to prepare for the operation
he was about to perform. Against his bed was a
cupboard in which he kept some of his clothes and
most of his prize possessions. Could he get all that
he needed from that cupboard? First of all he
needed splints. What could he use for splints? A
flat wooden ruler met his eye. Of course it was too
long so getting out his jack knife he hacked off two
pieces, each about five inches long. For bandages
he was rather at a loss, so decided to use one of his
shirts. This he cut into strips, about an inch wide.
One thing more that he wanted was padding for
the splints. Suddenly he thought of his box of
bird’s eggs. There was enough cotton wool in that
box to do the work. So he picked out the wool and
put it on the bed with the splints and bandages.
Very soon he heard Hookum’s footsteps and a few
seconds later the little elephant appeared. His
trunk was rolled back under his chest and Jimmie
could see no sign of Matilda until Hookum unrolled
his trunk and gently put her on the bed. Jimmie
did not want Hookum to stay on the verandah, in
the glare of the light, while he was setting Matilda’s


leg. So he told him to go off the verandah and wait
in the shadow until Matilda was ready to be taken
to her home again. Hookum at once obeyed him.
Sam, who had been standing unnoticed up till then,
jumped on to the bed and sat down by his wife.
Hookum to the
rescue!
“My dear,” said Matilda, “I’m dreadfully sony to
make all this trouble. It’s all my fault too. If I
hadn’t been so stupid there would be no need to put
you to all this trouble.”
“Don’t say such things, Matilda,” replied Jimmie.
“I’m dreadfully sorry that you’ve been hurt but
now I’m going to do my best to mend your leg.
I’ll try my hardest not to hurt you, but I’m afraid
I may not be able to help hurting you a little.”
Jimmie could see that Matilda was in a great
deal of pain and her only answer was to nod her
head a couple of times.
Before doing anything, he carefully examined
the injury. The leg was very much swollen but


Jimmie knew that it was what is called “a simple
fracture.” First of all he pulled the leg straight and
then he wound a bandage round it. The straighten-
ing of the leg must have hurt Matilda terribly but
she was a brave old possum and set her teeth. Then
Jimmie padded the splints with cotton wool, and
placed one on either side of the limb. Finally he
fixed the splints in place with a bandage. When
he had finished, he asked Matilda whether she was
in pain. He got no reply and saw, to his dismay,
that she had fainted. So he whistled for Hookum
and when the little elephant had come up to the
bed, Jimmie gave him directions. He told him that
Matilda was not well enough to be moved that
night.
“On the first streak of daylight, Hookum,” he
said, “you come up here and take Matilda back to
her home. Thank you for your help to-night but
now I want you to go—there’s a good chap.”
Hookum promised to be back very early the next
morning, said good night and walked off. Then
Jimmie turned his attention to Matilda. He placed
her on her back and with a book (The Vengeance of
Red Tooth) fanned her. To his delight, she soon
opened her eyes.
“My dear,” she said, “I’m very sorry that I was
so silly and fainted. If Hookum is here, he can carry
me home. I’m sure that, in the morning, I’ll be
quite all right again.”
Jimmie was determined that she should not go
that night but it needed a lot of talk from him and


Sam before she was persuaded to stay. At last they
succeeded and, with Sam beside her, she was soon
fast asleep. This delighted Jimmie because he had
been afraid that she might be in too much pain to
sleep at all that night. He put a part of his rug
over the two possums and made sure that Matilda
was comfortable. Then he lay back to think over
the events of the day. He felt terribly bitter against
the two Thomson boys, Tom and Archie. He was
glad that Harry had not been there because he liked
him. A bright idea came into his head. Couldn’t
he get Hookum to go down and give Tom and Archie
a thrashing? And yet Hookum, intelligent as he
was, could hardly be expected to do it all by him-
self. Even for Jimmie it might be hard work be-
cause he would have to find out where the boys
slept and then he would have to pick out Tom and
Archie. Jimmie noticed that he had left the light
burning above his head so he switched it off.
Although Sam was awake by her side, Jimmie could
hear Matilda sleeping peacefully. He felt that he
had done all that he could so did not try to keep
awake and was soon fast asleep.


CHAPTER VIII.
PLANS FOR A RAID.
When he awioke next morning. Jimmie at once
thought of Matilda but he could see no sign of her
or Sam. The sun was up and Jimmie thought that
Hookum must have come up and taken Matilda
home, without waking him. What a good chap
Hookum was!
Mr. Lang would soon be getting up and Jimmie
had no time to visit Hookum before breakfast.
After his father had gone to the city he could go
down and have a good talk with the little elephant.
While he was having his breakfast, Maggie came
and talked to him. She told him some news that
made him think very hard. She said that Harry
Thomson was working for Bob Watson, who thought
a lot of him because he w,as so reliable and intellig-
ent. Harry was now living with the Watsons as
Bob often wanted to make an early morning start
and it was much more convenient to have Harry
living on the premises.


“Do you like Harry, Mag?” asked Jimmie.
“Yes, I do,” replied Maggie. “I like him very
much and Bob thinks the world of him. I think it
best for him to live away from those brothers of his.
Harry was telling me last night that, at his home,
he and his brothers sleep in a little room in the back
of the house not big enough to swing a cat in. I
know just exactly where it is and, from the out-
side, it looks like it was as small as Harry described
it. At the Watsons, he’s got a fine room. He’s that
proud of it, you’d think it was a palace.”
“Do you know where Tom and Archie sleep? I
mean do you know where their room is, Mag?”
She looked surprised, but replied, “Yes, I know.
You know that lane that runs at the back of the
Thomsons’ house?”
Jimmie nodded and she went on.
“If you went through the back gate, it would be
the first bit of the house you come to. It sort of
juts out but anyway, why are you so interested
about where the Thomsons sleep?”
Jimmie said that he just wanted to know and she
told him that he was a “rum ’un.” She did not
know that he was making plans and that the ques-
tions he was asking were very important ones.
When she asked about Hookum, Jimmie told her of
the need for some of Dolly’s feed. Maggie promised
to have a truss of hay left outside the stable so that,
when Hookum came up that night, he could take it
with him. Jimmie did not tell Maggie about Mat-


ilda and Sam, because he knew that she would not
believe him.
After Mr. Lang had left for the city, Jimmie got
into his chair and went down to see Hookum. He
found him pulling up the very last of the grass.
“Hello, Ace, how’s Matilda?” he asked.
For a minute Jimmie thought that Hookum must
have forgotten about Matilda, and that she had
had to return home with only Sam to help her.
“I don’t know,” he replied, “I haven’t seen her
this morning. That’s what I wanted to ask you.
You promised to take her home this morning.”
“Yes,” replied Hookum, “I took her back. When
it was just light enough to see I came up. Sam was
awake but you were asleep and so was Matilda. So
Sam and I had a talk, and we decided not to wake
you up. We got her home, and I don’t think we
even woke her. Sam told me that she had slept
well all night.”
“Good old Hookum,” said Jimmie. “You’re a brick
and I think Matilda ought to recover completely
now, as I’m pretty sure I made a good job of set-
ting her leg. I’m glad to hear she had a good night
and I’m sure she must be grateful to you for the
help you have given her. Now, I want to ask you
a question. You once said that friends of mine are
friends of yours. But are enemies of mine enemies
of yours?”
“Yes,” replied Hookum, “they are. If I have
made enemies here, they are the two boys who gave
Matilda and Sam such a bad time last night.”


Jimmie felt delighted.
“Oh, Hookum, that’s just what I wanted to talk
to you about. Now just you listen. Before I start
about those Thomson boys, don’t you go worrying
about your food. Maggie is going to put out a truss
of hay for you and you can get it to-night. Now
for a business talk. Pay attention.”
Hookum’s eyes fairly twinkled but, “Go on, I’ll
listen hard,” was all he said.
Jimmie continued, “I’ve thought of a way to hit
back at those boys. My plan is this. After twelve
o’clock to-night, I’d like you to come up to the ver-
andah and get me. I could sit on your back I sup-
pose, couldn’t I?”
“Yes,” replied Hookum, “of course. But go on,
I’m listening. I think I know what you are going
to say.”
Jimmie went on. “I’ll sit on your back and then
we’ll go down the street to the house where the
boys live and then we’ll give them something to
make them sorry for themselves. I’ve thought it all
out. When we get to the Thomsons, and to the
window of the room where the boys sleep, could
you put your trunk through it? Then you could
shake them up, and bump their heads together, and
scare them properly. You could, couldn’t you,
Hookum ?”
“Certainly,” replied the elephant, “I’d simply love
to do it and I’ll come up for you to-night, directly
it’s dark. I’m pining for a good walk with some fun


at the end of it. When we get to the Thomsons,
I’ll show you what I can do.”
Now Jimmie had no intention of going out of the
grounds while there was a chance of meeting any-
one in the street. If anyone saw Hookum it would
probably mean his return to the Zoo. Of course it
was a risk, taking Hookum out at all; still Jimmie
felt that with the chance ahead of getting a shot
back at the Thomsons it was worth while taking
that risk. He then impressed upon Hookum that it
was most important that no one should see them
on their expedition and, for that reason, they must
not start before midnight. Hookum’s eyes were
dancing at the thought of some fun that night.
“Ace,” he said, “you asked me whether I would
be strong enough to tip those boys about. I don’t
think you know how strong an elephant is. Of
course I’m only small and I’m not nearly as strong
as a big one like Mum, but let me tell you a story
that is quite true. This happened in India one day
before Mum and I were caught. It was a blazing
hot day and we were by the shady side of a river.
I wanted to go in for a swim but Mum wouldn t let
me. Of course I was young and foolish then and
didn’t take her advice. I went into the water and
was swishing my trunk about in it when it was
suddenly grabbed by a crocodile. I was in terrible
pain so I let out an awful squeal. Then Mum saw
what had happened and she gave a bellow of rage
and came dashing into the water. She put down her
trunk and wrapped it round the crocodile and then


she gave a mighty heave. The crocodile was thrown
right out of the water and fell on to the bank. Then
she turned round and rushed up to it. By the time
I had got up to her, she had trampled that crocodile
into a pulp. Well, as I say, I’m not as strong as she
is but if I can’t throw those two boys about, my
name isn’t Hookum.”
Much as Jimmie wanted to punish the Thomsons,
he did not w/ant them treated in the way Hookum’s
mother had treated the crocodile. So he made sure
that Hookum understood that before he left him.
Jimmie thought it would be best for him to whistle
to Hookum that night when it was time for them to
start. He knew how keen the elephant was to go
and it was quite likely that Hookum might arrive
for Jimmie soon after dark. So the final arrange-
ment made was that when Hookum heard a whistle
that night he was to come up to the verandah.
That afternoon Jimmie made more plans. When
they reached the boys’ bedroom and Hookum had
poked his trunk through the window, how were they
going to see ? They must have light of some kind.
The moon had waned and even if there was a moon
it would have to be very strong indeed to throw
light inside a room. A candle might do but it would
be very awkward. Jimmie knew that no elephant
has very good eyesight and Hookum would need
light of some sort. He wondered what had become
of the lantern that Hookum had used the night that
he had escaped from the Zoo. Then he remembered
that it had been left swinging on a bough. What
sort of a light did burglars use? Yes, of course.


What he wanted was an electric torch. As it hap-
pened Maggie had to do some shopping that after-
noon so before she left Jimmie gave her some money
and asked her to buy him a torch. She was surprised
at his request and asked him all sorts of questions.
He told her that he wanted it so that he could visit
Hookum at night. This was true, although Jimmie
did not tell her why he particularly wanted the
torch. Maggie was away for only about an hour and
brought back with her just the thing that he
needed. It was a very neat little torch and re-
quired only the pressing of a button to send out a
good strong ray of light. It would do beautifully.
He wondered whether he would take Rory but de-
cided not to do so because if the dog were seen he
would be traced. That evening after tea Maggie
started off to visit the Watsons, taking Rory with
her. Rather to Jimmie’s surprise Mr. Lang came
out and stayed wiith him for nearly an hour. He
told Jimmie about the escape of an elephant and
remarked how extraordinary it was. Jimmie agreed
that it was extraordinary. Mr. Lang said that the
animal was sure to be caught but Jimmie, although
he said nothing, did not agree with his father. It
was a big temptation for Jimmie to say, “If I gave
a whistle that elephant would come here to the ver-
andah now.” He said nothing, however. That
night was to be an exciting one for Jimmie and his
mind was so occupied that he was not listening to
what his father was saying. When he heard Mr.
Lang ask, “What do you think about that, my boy ?”
he did not know what to say. He did not, in the
least, know what his father had been talking about


so had no thought at all on the subject. However,
not wishing to admit that he had not been listening
he said, “I think the same way as you do, Father.”
This reply seemed to please Mr. Lang but Jimmie
never knew what the subject under discussion had
been.
When his father said, “Good night, my boy” and
went inside, he felt relieved. It was then about
nine o’clock. In three hours’ time he and Hookum
were to start. Jimmie lay back on his bed but was
afraid to go to sleep in case he should not wake
up until the morning.
The time dragged and when he heard Maggie go
past he thought it must be nearly twelve o’clock. He
flashed his new torch on his watch and saw, to his
sorrow, that it was only half past ten. Another
hour and a half to wait. He wondered whether it
would be too risky to start then and was just on
the point of whistling for Hookum when, like the
sensible boy he was, he decided to wait. He won-
dered how Matilda was and was delighted to hear
on the verandah a bump which he knew was caused
by Sam. Jimmie had another look at his watch and
saw that it was a quarter to eleven. However, with
Sam there, the time might pass a little quicker.
“Hello Sam, how’s Matilda?” he asked.
Sam jumped on to the bed and sat down.
“Oh, she’s fine,” he replied. “She’s sleeping like
a baby but why are you so wide awake? You don’t
seem a bit sleepy to judge by your voice.”


Jimmie turned one of his pillows and settled his
head in it. “No, Sam, I’m not. Fact is, I’m going
out to-night with Hookum to give those boys who
pelted you with stones a bad time.”
“Lawks,” said the possum. “Lawks, can I come
too? Can I? Don’t say no. Please don’t say no.
I’ve been a bad husband to Matilda and if only I
could help you punish those villains, I’d be doing
something for her. Do let me come.”
Jimmie hadn’t expected the possum to be so war-
like but his opinion of Sam went up with a bound.
It might hurt Sam’s feelings to tell him that he
was not wanted but it had to be done.
“Sam,” Jimmie said, “I admire your pluck but
I’m afraid to take you. Your place is with Matilda.
If I took you, you might be hurt and how would
Matilda manage then?”
It needed a lot of talk before Jimmie felt that he
had persuaded Sam to stay at home.
“You can see us off, Sam,” Jimmie conceded, “and
then when we get back, we can tell you all about it.
I’m sorry we can’t take you but I’m glad you
wanted to come. You’re plucky!”
Jimmie had another look at his watch. To his sur-
prise it was half past eleven. In another quarter
of an hour it would be time for him to start dress-
ing. Sam was very quiet and, if Jimmie had not
been so excited, he would have been worried by the
thought that he had hurt the possum’s feelings.


As a matter of fact he had almost forgotten Sam’s
existence until he heard the question,
“When it’s time to start, will you let me go
down and tell Hookum?”
Jimmie thought this rather a good idea because,
besides giving Sam the idea that he was doing great
work, it would be quieter than whistling. So he
gratefully accepted the possum’s offer.


CHAPTER IX.
THE RAID.
Would that last quarter of an hour never pass?
Jimmie looked at his watch and saw that it was
twenty minutes to twelve. Another five minutes to
wait. They seemed like five years but at last they
passed and it was time to start dressing. Jimmie
began to dress and Sam watched him intently as he
laced up his rubber shoes. When he was fully
dressed it was five minutes to twelve and Jimmie
told Sam to go down and get Hookum. He carefully
slipped the torch into his pocket and waited. Very
soon he heard the plod, plod, plod, of Hookum and
the elephant appeared.
“Good evening, Ace/' he said, “are you ready?"
Jimmie patted his pocket as though to make
quite sure that the torch had not fallen out.
“Yes, Hookum," he replied, “I'm ready but be-
fore we start there are some things I want to tell
you. To begin with, we must be as quiet as we


*• * { *spsrr%?
possibly can. We are going out on a dangerous job
and there mustn’t be much talk. Now, are you
willing to let me manage things and will you do as
I say?” Hookum nodded hard and Jimmie went on,
“First of all put me on your head and I’ll show
you a few things.”
He heard the plod, plod,
plod of Hookum .
Hookum wrapped his trunk around the boy and
put him in position. When Jimmie had adjusted
himself he continued his instructions.
“Now when I want you to start I’ll just press
with my hand on top of your head, like this.”
Here he put his hand between his legs and
pressed. Hookum started off but on being told to
stop he did so. When he was steady again Jimmie
went on—
“Now don’t move at all, Hookum, but just re-
member what my signals mean. You know what


the signal to start is. When I want you to stop I’ll
press hard with just my thumb. When I want you
to go to the right, I’ll pull your right ear and when
I want you to go to the left I’ll pull your left ear.
Do you understand?”
Hookum nodded. “Everything is plain,” was all
he said.
Sam was looking very wistful and sad and Jimmie
almost changed his mind about not taking him. He
knew very well, however, that it would be best to
leave Sam at home so pressed Hookum’s head with
his hand and off they went. That day, years ago,
when he had been a Knight of King Arthur and
had fallen off Dolly’s back, came into Jimmie’s mind.
Soon they were past the spot where he had fallen.
He thought how strange it was that once he had
w>aged war on horse back and now he was going
again on the back of an elephant. He felt certain
of success, that night.
They came to the gate, Hookum opened it and
they passed through on to the road. The raid had
begun. Jimmie pulled the left ear and Hookum
turned to the left. They were in the middle of the
road but Jimmie lifted one of Hookum’s ears and
whispered—
“Get right on the footpath, Hookum, and keep in
the shadow if you can.”
The elephant obeyed at once and was walking
ahead when Jimmie suddenly pressed hard with
his thumb. Hookum stopped and remained motion-


less. There, not a hundred yards away but luckily
on the other side of the road, was a policeman. He
was walking in their direction, too. Jimmie leant
over and whispered in the elephant’s ear, “Keep
quite still. Don’t even move an eye. Keep still.”
Would this policeman see them? Jimmy felt his
heart pounding away with excitement. Luckily they
were in deep shadow but Hookum was not exactly
small. On the policeman came, nearer and nearer.
He was exactly opposite to them when—horror of
horrors—he stopped. Jimmie could see him putting
his hand in his pocket. Had he seen them and was
he searching for his revolver? Jimmie thought it
might be best to wait for a few seconds before urg-
ing Hookum to make a dash. He felt sure that very
soon bullets would be whizzing round them, per-
haps striking them. The policeman pulled his hand
out of his pocket. What was in it? Jimmie could
not see although he was straining his eyes. Then he
saw, him put the object in his mouth and a few
seconds later the light from a match flared up.
Jimmie breathed freely again. The policeman had
stopped only to light his pipe. Yet the danger was
not quite past for although they had not been seen,
any movement might betray their presence. After
a few seconds the policeman walked on, but not until
the sound of his footsteps was dying away did
Jimmie dare to speak to Hookum. When he did so
it was only in a whisper.
“Near thing that time, Hookum.”
Hookum nodded and, at the pressure of the boy’s
hand, moved on again. In a few minutes they came


to a cross street and, on Jimmie’s signal Hookum
turned down it to the left. Jimmie reckoned that
they were now half way to the Thomsons’ house.
After another quarter of a mile, they would have
to turn to the right. If they kept on the left of the
street, they would have to cross it in the full glare
of the street corner lamp, so Jimmie decided to cross
it at once. When they were on the other side, and
were nearing the corner Jimmie whispered, “Get
round this corner quickly.” The elephant obeyed
and Jimmie felt that the worst of the trip was over.
They were now in a much narrower street and only
five houses lay between them and the Thomsons.
Then Jimmie could have kicked himself. He
realized that they were off the track. They should
have taken the lane that they had passed, running
off the street they had just left. So he pressed the
elephant’s head with his thumb and Hookum
stopped.
“Hookum,” he said, “I’m frightfully sorry but
I’ve made a mistake. It's not the front of the
house we want to get at, but the back. We should
have gone down that lane we passed before we
came to this street.”
“It’s all right,” replied Hookum. “I understand.”
He turned and walked down the street again.
They were soon round the corner and were nearing
the lane when Jimmie heard the sound of footsteps.
He pressed hard on Hookum’s head with his thumb
and the elephant stopped. Luckily they were in
deep shadow but if the owner of those feet turned


towards them, they would be discovered. Which
way would he turn—for Jimmie could tell by the
sound that it was a man. A few seconds more and
the man came into view. He stood at the corner,
as if undecided Which way to proceed. For a sec-
ond time that night, but not for the last, Jimmie’s
heart started to pound and thump. Luck was with
them and the man walked oif in the opposite dir-
ection. What tremendous luck they had had. The
mistake made by Jimmie had been a blessing in dis-
guise. When the man had been gone for a few min-
utes Jimmie directed Hookum and they entered the
lane. It was dark. For once Jimmie felt rather
nervous because he was afraid that Hookum might
stumble. But he need not have worried. The backs
of seven houses were passed and they, at last,
reached their destination.
On the signal being given, Hookum stopped and,
from his elevated position Jimmie could see over
the fence into the back yard. Then he saw their
real objective, the boy’s room. It jutted out from
the rest of the house, exactly as Maggie had des-
cribed it. There seemed to be a number of oblong
stones lying about but otherwise the yard looked
empty. Jimmie say that the back gate was ajar so
they entered and on the signal Hookum stopped.
Now they were in the enemies’ lines. Jimmie drew
out his torch and flashed it on one of the objects
he had thought were stones. It was not a stone but
an empty kerosene tin. The whole yard was littered
with kerosene tins. He turned his torch on the
house and, in the flash, saw a door, facing them. It


was further away from the gate than the boys’
room but Jimmie rightly thought that it was the
Thomsons’ back door. Anyone coming out from the
house, into the yard, would use that door. He knew
that it would be worth while making preparations
against a surprise from anyone using that door.
Then an idea came to him. Leaning over, he whis-
pered,
“Hookum, I want you to put me on the ground
for a few minutes, while you do some work. Do
you see those tins lying about?”
He flashed his torch and Hookum nodded. Jimmie
continued,
“I want you to carry them, one by one, and put
them about three feet from the door. You’ll have
to be very careful, because if you drop or rattle
one, it may wake up the Thomsons. Put me on the
ground and you can begin right away.”
Hookum obeyed and was soon hard at work. Once
a tin was rattled and Jimmie tried to tell Hookum
to stay quite still, but the elephant did not hear.
Luckily, the noise passed unnoticed by anyone in-
side the house. Probably they were all too fast
asleep to hear it. Jimmie, who was sitting with his
back against the fence and one hand resting on the
ground felt something furry brush against him. On
looking down, he saw that it was Sam. It made him
almost angry. Of what use could a possum be on
an expedition such as this? Perhaps Sam read his
thoughts for it was he who broke the silence.


“Don’t be angry,” he said. “It was Matilda’s wish
that I should come with you. After you had left,
I went home to Matilda. She was awake and when
I told her about you and Hookum, she was dread-
fully worried and said that my place was with you,
to look after you. She said that if I didn’t go with
you, she’d never think the same of me again.”
“Come with us ? You didn’t come with us, did you,
Sam?”
“Of course I did,” replied Sam. “I’ve been with
you nearly the whole of the time. I caught up to
you when Hookum was standing on the footpath
and there was a man on the other side of the road.
Now, what do you want me to do? I’m ready.”
Hookum had, by this time, finished his work. A
wall of tins, about three feet high and six feet long,
was standing outside the back door. The elephant
now came across to the boy.
“Look, Hookum,” whispered Jimmie, “Sam's
here. He’s been with us ever since the first stop
and now he wants to help us. What can he do ?”
As he was speaking a wave of sympathy swept
over him for the possum. Poor old Sam was plucky
enough, but what could a possum do to help? He
didn’t want to laugh at Sam who was so very earn-
est and serious. Now he was afraid that Hookum
would reject the possum’s offer of help but he need
not have been anxious about that.
“Ace,” whispered the elephant, “I'm glad that old
Sam is here. It shows his heart’s right. Just now


there’s no work for him that I can see but we can’t
tell. Let him sit on my head with you until we find
him a job. If we don’t find him a job, he’ll keep us
company, anyway.”
Jimmie felt relieved at Hookum’s reply and, when
he was again lifted into position with Sam beside
him, it was a comfort to feel the possum snuggling
against him.
“Now, Sam,” he whispered, “whatever you do,
don’t talk.” Sam made no reply and Jimmie guided
Hookum to the window of the boys’ room. There
they stopped and Jimmie’s face was within six
inches of the glass. The window was shut but he
felt sure that, with a sharp jerk, he could open it.
He pressed his face to it and looked inside but it
was too dark to see anything. Should he risk a
flash from his torch? He felt that the risk was
worth taking; so, putting the torch against the glass
beside his face, he pressed the button. All that he
saw was a wall with a box against it. On the box
were heaped a lot of clothes and a number of boots
were lying on the floor. He had not discovered the
position of the boys. He tried another flash, this time
to the right, but the result was much the same. He
saw a rough washstand with a big china jug on it
and a half open door. The door, Jimmie knew, must
lead into the rest of the house. No sign could he
see of the boys. Where could they be? He felt des-
perate. Had they come to the wrong room? Had
Maggie made a mistake?
There was just one more chance of finding them
in that room. He turned the torch to the left of the


room and pressed. The brief glance satisfied him
and he switched off the torch, for there, within four
feet of the window was the bed. He saw in it two
ridges which he knew must be the boys but he
could not see their faces because they had drawn
the blankets over their heads. This suited Jimmie
splendidly because it meant that he could use his
torch freely, without fear of awakening them. So
pinching Hookum’s ear and pointing in the direc-
tion of the bed, he switched on the light again. This
time he kept it burning for nearly half a minute
while the elephant had a good look. Lifting
Hookum’s ear he then whispered,
“Can you reach them when the window’s opened ?”
Hookum nodded and Jimmie turned his attention
to that obstacle. With the aid of the torch he
closely examined it. It was what is known as a
casement window. It did not slide up and down but
was hung on hinges like a door, and opened out-
wards. He got a good grip at the bottom and pulled.
The window did not budge. He then saw that there
was a catch on the inside, and the catch was home.
Hookum also saw it for he put back his trunk and
whispered,
“I’ll break the glass and get them. We mustn’t
let a window stop us.”
Jimmie knew that Hookum could do that, but he
also knew that Hookum would probably cut his
trunk terribly in doing so. No, that scheme was no
good. Perhaps a knife would open the catch. What
an ass he had been to leave his jackknife at home.


They must have a consultation on the matter of that
window but it would be best to hold it away from
the house. Jimmie gave the signal and Hookum
moved off. When they reached the spot where
Jimmy had been sitting, during the piling of the
tins, he halted the elephant.
“Look here, Hookum, we have a tough problem
to solve. I'm not going to have you cutting your
trunk to pieces. If I had an old knife or something
thin like that I might be able to open that window.
While you were working, on those tins, you didn’t
come across anything that would do the trick, did
you ?”
“No,” the elephant replied, “I came across a big
bucket of paste, an axe, and some empty bags but
I didn’t see any old knives.”
Sam, whose presence had almost been forgotten,
began to speak.
“If you and Hookum put me in that house, I’ll get
to the room and undo the catch.”
Jimmie knew that this was the solution of the
difficulty, but he hesitated before accepting the
offer. He knew that if Sam was caught the Thom-
sons would kill him. Sam must have read his
thoughts for he added,
“Please let me. I can do it and if you’ll let me
you’ll know that I’m a chap who isn’t afraid. So
please let me try.”


Jimmie did not know whether to accept or to re-
fuse Sam’s offer, and was thinking it over when
Hookum spoke.
“If you won’t let Sam open that window, let me
smash it.”
The elephant had no idea of the danger, and it
was useless, besides being very unwise to argue
with him there. So Jimmie turned to the possum.
“Sam, you’re a little brick and we accept your
offer. We’ll help you to get inside the house and
then you’ll have to find your way to the room. When
you get to the window, just tap lightly on the glass
and I’ll flash the torch on the catch. When you un-
lock it I’ll open the window and you can get out but
if you can’t unlock it we’ll break the window for
you. Now be very careful not to be caught.”
The next thing was to get Sam inside the house.
It took them a long time before they found an en-
trance for him and Jimmie was just on the point
of deciding to smash the window after all when
Hookum told him that there was a little window over
the back door. Although they could not get very
close because of the wall of tins they got close
enough for Jimmie to satisfy himself that it would
do. It was a fanlight and there was a gap of about
six inches at the top of it. Now six inches was not
much but it was quite big enough to admit Sam,
if only he could reach it. Again Hookum solved the
difficulty. With his chest almost touching the tins,
he extended his trunk towards the window. There


was a gap of about two feet left between the tip
of Hookum’s trunk and the window.
Jimmie nudged Sam but the possum did not need
such a signal. He ran lightly up the incline and
sprang through the gap. They could hear the bump
when he hit the door inside the house. So far all
was well.
“Now, Hookum,” whispered Jimmie, “find one of
those empty bags and that tin of paste you were
talking about."
Hookum turned and went over to the far corner
of the yard. Jimmie flashed his torch and saw a
tin with a bag thrown over it. He saw that the tin
was nearly filled with a dirty liquid.
“That’s not paste," he said. “It’s only dirty
water."
Hookum made no reply but seizing a bit of stick
that was lying on the ground, dipped it in the liq-
uid and handed it up to Jimmie. It smelt abomin-
ably and was only slightly sticky, but it would
serve the purpose. At Jimmie’s direction, Hookum
spread the bag flat on the ground and poured some
of the slimy mess over it,
“Bring it to the window," whispered the boy,
“and before the attack starts, I want you to take
off the blankets and slap that bag right over the
boys’ faces. Then they won’t be able to see or yell,
for a few seconds, and it will give you more time to
do your work."


Jimmie could feel Hookum’s body shaking and
realized that he was laughing. The plan had appeal-
ed to him and when they moved off towards the
window, the bag was carried with as much care as
if it had been gold. They reached the window and
waited. Jimmie could feel that Hookum was becom-
ing impatient and he himself was beginning to feel
anxious. The minutes passed without any sign from
Sam. What could have happened to him? Had he
been caught? After a minute or so, the strain be-
gan to tell on them, perhaps on Hookum most. The
elephant was trembling slightly so Jimmy whis-
pered,
“It’s all right, Hookum, we’ll wait a little longer.”
Hookum’s reply made Jimmie’s hair nearly stand
on end.
“It’s not all right. They’ve caught poor old Sam.
I’m going to break into this house and when I get
inside I’m going to stamp on them, one by one.
They’re not going to hurt Sam and be unhurt them-
selves. I’ll get them and stamp on them and tear
them to pieces.”
Hookum’s voice had risen until it was a scream
and Jimmie was almost at his wit’s end. Then the
longed for sound was heard, tap-tap-tap on the win-
dow. With the torch to help him, Sam at last un-
locked the catch, Jimmie opened the window and
the goal was near. It was not the time to ask Sam
any questions about his delay, so Jimmie gave him
a friendly pat and lifted him out of the room on to
Hookum’s head where he was in safety. Jimmie


told Hookum to close the door of the room but the
elephant’s trunk was not long enough to reach it.
Jimmie tried to whisper his final instructions to
Hookum but, against his will, his voice rose and he
almost shouted.
Hookum and the bad boys.


“Now for it, Hookum, do your work.”
He kept the torch burning 1 and the bed was in the
centre of the light. The elephant put his trunk into
the room and deposited the bag on the bed. Then
he put his trunk into the water jug and Jimmie
could tell by the sound that he was filling it. In
withdrawing it, he knocked over the jug which fell
to the floor with a crash. Almost instantly the boys’
faces appeared, to look with terror into the light
from the torch. But only for an instant were their
faces visible for Hookum picked up the sticky bag
and plastered it across their heads. What happened
next was so swiftly done that even Jimmie had
difficulty in following. For a time the air in the
room seemed to be full of flying boys. Hookum ,was
tossing them up and they were falling on the bed,
otherwise they might have been killed. The bag
came off their faces during one of the fights and
soon the most frightful, blood-curdling yells were
echoing through the house. Then Hookum rolled
them together and put them on the floor. Jimmie
could not hear their heads being bumped, because
of the awful noise they were making, but he could
see the terrified look in their eyes.
“Squirt them, Hookum, squirt them,” he shouted
but if the elephant heard him, he did not obey.
Another figure had arrived on the scene, for there,
standing in the doorway, was Mr. Thomson, hold-
ing a candle in one hand. His face was a ghastly
colour and his knees Were shaking with fright. He
opened his mouth, as if to speak, but he did not
get the chance. Hookum, who at the sight of this


man had withdrawn his trunk from the room shot
at him the water he had sucked up out of the jug.
The stream hit him with terrific force, on the chest,
and knocked him backwards out of the room. The
yelling of the boys had not died down and, when
Jimmie lifted Hookum’s ear he had to shout out,
“Get away quickly.” Hookum instantly obeyed and
started off for the gate. Suddenly the back door
opened and Jimmie saw Mr Thomson come charging
out of the house. But Hookum’s work had been well
done and, too late, Mr. Thomson saw the tins. There
was a crash and the tins came rattling to the
ground, Mr. Thomson amongst them. At that mom-
ent Jimmie felt almost sorry for the boys’ father
because he had certainly shown pluck in attempting
to‘stop them. It was no time, however, to indulge
in vain regrets so on they went and were soon
through the gates.
The sky had become dark and a few spots of rain
fell. Then the heavens opened and rain fell in tor-
rents. Luck was with them for in that rain no one
could possibly follow them and their retreat was
safe.
Just how they reached home Jimmie never had a
very clear idea. Certain it is, that he did not guide
Hookum but after what seemed to him a long time,
he found himself on his own bed. By a tremendous
effort of will, he pulled off his wet clothes and put
on his pyjamas. Then he got into bed, feeling very
happy but also very sleepy, and was asleep almost
directly his head touched the pillow.


CHAPTER X.
JIMMIE DECIDES TO MOVE
In the morning, when Jimmie awoke, the sun was
well up in the sky. He looked at his Watch and saw
that it was half past eight. He wondered why
Maggie had not called him although, as a matter
of fact, she had done so, but he had not heard. He
was wondering how Hookum and Sam were feeling,
when Maggie came hurrying out on to the verandah.
“Well, Master Jim,” she said, “you're a real sleepy-
head this morning but now, wake up. I’ve got some
news that will surprise you.”
Jimmie sat up but, “Go on, Mag, out with it,” he
said. He could see that she was excited so was
anxious to hear the news, whatever it might be.
Maggie cleared her throat and, as Jimmie would
have expressed it, “went in off the deep end.”
“Milkman’s just been,” she said,” and he’s got a
great yarn. He says the boys look like real pictures,
knocked about something fierce, he says.”


Here Jimmie broke in, “Hold hard Mag, hold hard.
I don’t know what you’re talking about.”
When Maggie had a story to tell she generally
told the end of it first and worked back to the be-
ginning. Now she began again and Jimmie enjoyed
every word of it. The milkman had told her the
story that he had heard at the Thomsons. Tom and
Archie had told him a very wonderful story of how
they had fought three men and given them an
awful thrashing. To Jimmie’s great relief, the
Thomsons had no idea of the identity of the raiders
but imagined them to have been desperate burglars.
Just as Maggie was finishing the story, as recounted
by the milkman, she saw the heap of Jimmie’s wet
clothes.
“Well I never did,” she exclaimed, “how on earth
did your clothes get in that state, I’d like to know ?”
Jimmie was startled as he had quite forgotten
about them. Then he decided to tell Maggie the
whole story, every bit of it. He felt sure that she
would keep it a secret. So he told her and Maggie’s
eyes opened wider, and wider, as the story went on.
When he had finished, she was laughing heartily.
“Good enough for them,” she said, “but why
didn’t you tell your old Mag about it, before it
happened? You know I would have helped you.”
Jimmie knew nothing of the sort. He knew quite
well what she would have done. She would have
prevented him, purely out of concern for his safety.
It was unnecessary to tell her that now, so he did
not reply and Maggie did not press the question.


The sound of a knock at the back door sent her
inside the house and for the rest of the morning
Jimmie saw very little of her.
During the afternoon, he went down to see
Hookum. He found him to be in a very unsettled
state of mind and not at all happy. The elephant
was the first to speak.
“It’s no good, Ace,” he said, “it’s no good. I’m
tired of being cooped here, like a bird in a cage.
Last night was good fun but unless we go out every
night, I’ll never get enough exercise. I’ve always
led an active life and I’m sick of standing here all
day with nothing to do. Why can’t I go out for a
walk?”
Jimmie felt dismayed that Hookum was getting
so restless but understood the elephant’s desire for
activity. A sudden thought came into his mind.
Why not ask his Uncle Bill whether he might go to
Yendoola? Then he could take Hookum with him.
“How would you like to go up country, Hookum ?”
he asked.
Hookum scratched the top of his head with the
tip of his trunk. “It’s hard for me to say but I think
I’d like it very much. Anyway, it’s worth trying.”
They talked it over and Hookum grew more and
more cheerful until a sudden thought seemed to
strike him.
“Can we take the possums?” he asked. “We can’t
go away and leave no one to look after them.”


It surprised and pleased Jimmie to know how
fond Hookum had become of Matilda and Sam.
“Upon my word, Hookum,” he said, “you’re a
jolly good chap, you know. I’m afraid that I forgot
the possums myself, for the time being, but if you
can be taken to Yendoola, I don’t see why the little
possums can’t. Now I’m going up to the house and
I’ll write to my Uncle to ask him to send me an in-
vitation. I’m sure he’ll do it but it may be a week
before we can start. You can hang on for a week,
can’t you Hookum?”
The elephant nodded. “Certainly,” he replied, “so
long as I’ve got prospects ahead of me, I can wait.
The idea cheers me up like anything.”
They talked over the plan for some time and then
Jimmie went up to the house to write to his Uncle,
William Harper of Yendoola, Gundibool. He wrote
as follows,
Dear Uncle Bill,
I hope that you are well and will do what I ask.
I feel that I would like a change and would ever
so much like you to write to Father and ask him
to let me come up and stay with you. I think it
would do me good as I want a change and the
verandah is rather dull at times and I’d like a
change.
Here Jimmie put down his pen and read what he
had written. He noticed that he had mentioned the
fact that he needed a change, no less than three
times. Would it seem as though he was grumbling ?


He wondered, but decided to let the sentence stay
as he had written it. The next part of the letter
was harder. He simply must say something about
Hookum and yet, would his Uncle Bill think him
mad? That was the worst of it. If he said, “I
want to bring my dog/' or “I want to bring my
pony,” he knew that his Uncle Bill would say, “By
all means, bring it.” But if he said, “I want to
bring my elephant,” what then ? Jimmie knew that
his Uncle would think, as Maggie had thought, that
he was out of his mind. He chewed away at the
end of his pen until an idea came to his mind and
he began to write again,
What I'm going to tell you now is a dead sec-
ret not to be breathed to another living soul and
please don’t think I've gone mad or have a Noah's
Ark or anything silly like that. Please don’t
mention it in your letter to Father when you
write to him to ask if I can go up to you. I have
an elephant Hookum and I’m going to bring him
with me if you don’t mind. Please write soon.
Your affectionate nephew,
Jimmie.
He read through the letter and then, for the first
time, realized the difficulty of getting Hookum to
Yendoola. How was the elephant going to travel?
He couldn't go by train and he certainly couldn’t
walk. Jimmie decided to ask Maggie for her advice.
He called her and, when she had come, told "her of
his newly-formed plans. She listened with interest
but, not until he had finished speaking, did she make
any remark. Jimmie was afraid that Maggie would


oppose the idea but, to his joy, she agreed. She
thought the plan a good one and told him not to
worry over the difficulty of moving Hookum.
“You leave that to your old Mag,” she said, “and
to-morrow morning I’ll tell you whether I’ve fixed it
up. To-night I’ll have a talk to Bob Watson. Of course
in many ways, I’m awful sorry that you’ll be leaving
me but in a way I’m real glad. You see, it’s a marvel
to me that Hookum has been here for so long with-
out being discovered and I’m sure you’d miss him
terrible, if he was taken back to the Zoo. You don’t
mind if I tell Bob Watson about Hookum, do you?
Then, to-morrow morning, I’ll be able to tell you
something.”
Jimmie gave his consent and Maggie left him.
During his evening meal, he gave her the letter
that he had written and she promised to post it.
She asked him the distance to Yendoola and Jimmie
told her that it was 270 miles.
After tea, Mr. Lang came out to him and Jimmie
guessed, from his manner, that his father had some-
thing to say, of more than usual importance. Not
for long was he kept in suspense.
“My boy,” said Mr. Lang, “I hope that you will
not feel annoyed with me for what I have done to-
day. At lunch I met an old friend, Arthur Tremlow.
In the course of conversation, Mr. Tremlow told me
that, for some time past, he had been desirous of
getting a pony, for his son. Mr. Tremlow asked my


advice about purchasing one and I, perhaps thought-
lessly, offered to lend him Dolly. Do you mind very
much, son?”
Jimmie was such a long time before replying that
Mr. Lang imagined him to be feeling hurt. As a
matter of fact, he was only feeling doubly glad that
he had decided to move Hookum to Yendoola. If
Dolly was lent to someone there would be no hay to
give Hookum.
“Well, Father,” replied Jimmie, “I’d just love to
go and stay with Uncle Bill. I wrote to him to-day
and asked whether I might. If I go to stay at Yen-
doola, I won’t mind Dolly being lent to someone.”
Mr. Lang’s face brightened.
“That’s good, son,” he said, “of course your de-
sire to stay with your Uncle Bill seems rather sud-
den but if you think you can stand the journey, I
will raise no objection.”
For an instant Jimmie felt inclined to tell his
father all about Hookum but decided that it would
be too risky a thing to do. He knew that Mr. Lang
would consider it his duty to send Hookum back to
the Zoo. Jimmie could not risk that but, at the
same time, he wished that he could take his father
into his confidence. Mr. Lang and Jimmie talked
for some time and then Mr. Lang told Jimmie that
he was going out to see a friend. “You won’t be
lonely, son?” he asked, before leaving. “Maggie
has gone out, I know, and if you would prefer me to
remain with you, I will do so.”


Jimmie assured his father that he would not be
lonely and Mr. Lang left the house and soon the
click of the front gate signalled his departure from
the grounds. Jimmie knew that it would be an
ideal time for him to have a party so he gave a
whistle and very soon Hookum appeared. “Hookum,”
said Jimmie, “Maggie is out and father is out so
it is a good time for a talk. Will you go and get
Matilda and ask Sam to come along?”
Hookum nodded with enthusiasm and padded off
to the possums’ tree. While he was away Jimmie
propped himself up in a sitting position. Very soon
the elephant returned, with Matilda coiled up in
the end of his trunk and Sam sitting on his head.
“Hello, Matilda,” said Jimmie, “I am pleased to
see you again. How are you?”
Not until Hookum had placed her on the bed, and
she had made herself comfortable, did she reply.
“Oh, my dear,” she said, “I’m getting on fine but
last night I thought that I was going to die with
anxiety for you all. It was a most dreadful time. I
didn’t sleep a wink while you were away and when
Sam came home and told me that you and Hookum
were safe I had a little cry with joy.”
“Lawks,” broke in Sam, “Matilda is a funny old
girl, the way she cries because she is happy.”
Sam might have said more only for the fact that
Matilda gave him a poke in the ribs and he suddenly
stopped.


“My dear,” went on Matilda, “I wish that you
and Hookum would tell me the whole of last night’s
story. Sam isn’t much good at telling a story.”
Jimmie nodded and began to tell her all that had
happened. Sometimes Hookum joined in and told
parts that Jimmie left out. When Matilda heard
about Sam’s heroism, in entering the house and
opening the window, she could not stay silent.
“Why didn’t you tell me that part, Sam?” she
asked turning to her husband and then to the other
two—“l’m proud of Sam. Do you know, he never
told me a word about what he did. He said that he
just watched you two. Oh, I do feel proud of him!”
Jimmie had never seen Sam look more uncom-
fortable. The possum really looked quite annoyed
so Jimmie hurried on with the story. When he had
finished, he told them the plan for going up country
and, to his delight, the possums readily agreed. “I’ll
look after you both on the trip,” said Hookum. “We
can’t travel in the train but I’m going to walk and
I’ll carry you both.”
Jimmie laughed. “Hookum,” he said, “you are too
ambitious. Once you wanted to swim to India and
now you want to walk to Yendoola. I don’t doubt
that you could do the walking but you would be dis-
covered in no time. Maggie is fixing things up for
us, to-night.”
“Well, the change of air will do Matilda good,”
said Sam. “It’s just what she wants.”


The four of them talked over the scheme and by
the time the party broke up for the night they were
all in a state of great excitement. Before they left,
Jimmie gave Matilda a small bag made of calico
and laughingly told her that it would hold her and
Sam’s spare clothes. She was delighted with it and
when Hookum carried her home, held it with great
pride. After they had gone, Jimmie lay down and
was soon in the land of dreams.


CHAPTER XI.
THE START FOR YENDOOLA.
While Maggie was giving Jimmie his breakfast,
the next morning, she told him of her talk with Bob
Watson.
“I told him all about Hookum,” she said, “and it
took me a long time before he’d believe me. Any-
how Bob will take Hookum to Gundibool for fifteen
pounds. He says he won’t make much out of it at
that and only for him knowing about you, and the
like of that, he wouldn’t do it so cheap.”
Jimmie’s heart sank. Fifteen pounds seemed a
huge sum to him and he sadly replied,
“Thank you ever so much, Mag. It was good of
you to go to all that trouble for me but I’m afraid
the scheme is no good. I haven’t fifteen pounds so
I must think of some other way.”
Maggie’s face fairly beamed.


“Now, Master Jim, don’t be foolish. Your old
Mag has saved a lot of money since she came here
and if you won’t let her lend you enough to pay
Bob Watson—well, you will, won’t you?”
At first Jimmie would not consent to this arrange-
ment but Maggie pleaded so hard to be allowed to
help him, that at last he agreed and thanked her
with all the warmth of his nature.
It was a big thing for Maggie to do and only for
the fact that she had actually pleaded to be allow-
ed to help him, he would not have accepted. So
Hookum’s transport was arranged and the only
cause for delay was the expected letter from Mr.
Harper. Two days later it came and Mr. Lang read
part of it to Jimmie.
“Dear Fred,” wrote Mr. Harper, “I have
had a letter from Jimmie and he seems keen
to come up here. Eileen and I are pleased that
the lad wants to come. Do you remember old
Peter Short who owns ‘Widgee’ up here? Next
Tuesday Peter is returning to Gundibool and
he would look after Jimmie on the trip. So if
Jimmie catches the 8.30 p.m. train on that day
we will meet him at Gundibool. Our children,
Jess and Dick, are looking forward to seeing
him, as indeed are we.”
Then followed a lot of news of little interest to
Jimmie, and the letter ended with another expres-
sion of pleasure at the thought of having him to
stay at Yendoola.


“Do you think that you can stand the journey,
my boy?” asked Mr. Lang.
Jimmie told his father that, if he got a comfort-
able seat he could travel for a week. So the matter
was arranged and, it then being a Thursday, only
four clear days were left before his departure. Mr.
Lang talked the matter over with Jimmie for some
time and then left him. Maggie was at home so Jim-
mie called her. He told her of his Uncle’s letter and,
at her suggestion, he decided to let Hookum and the
possums start twenty-four hours before he did. That
would be on the Monday night. Maggie promised
to arrange matters with Bob Watson. Although she
had not meant to visit the Watsons that night, she
put on her hat and started off to do so. As she was
passing Jimmie, on the way to the street, she
stopped.
“Master Jim,” she said, “What’s going to happen
to Rory? Are you going to take him with you?”
Jimmie felt almost ashamed of himself because
he had not thought of Rory. Yes, he would certainly
like to take him. And yet, Maggie was very fond of
Rory. She would miss him terribly, Jimmie knew.
Maggie was lending him the money to move Hookum.
It was the least he could do to leave Rory with her.
So he replied,
Well, no, Mag. I wasn’t thinking of taking
Rory. That is, if you would like him to stay with
you.”


Maggie was delighted and thanked him. She then
walked off, with Rory as companion, to make final
arrangements with Bob Watson.
Mr. Lang, soon after Maggie’s departure, return-
ed to Jimmie and suggested a game of draughts.
Jimmie did not like to refuse but he would have
preferred the company of Hookum and the possums.
They played several games and it was late before
Mr. Lang left him. Jimmie was just wondering
whether he would call Hookum when he heard the
front gate slam and the sound of Maggie’s foot-
steps. Maggie came up the path and, seeing that
he was still awake, stopped by his bed. She told
him that Bob Watson would call on Monday night
at about eight o’clock. They talked over details
and Jimmie called Maggie “an old angel” several
times.
The following days were long ones to Jimmie. He
saw Hookum several times but until the Sunday
night, saw nothing of the possums. They left their
home only by night and Mr. Lang now wished to
see as much of Jimmie as he could. Jimmie could
not tell his father that, much as he liked his com-
pany, he would prefer to entertain an elephant and
two possums. Late on the Sunday night, so late
that it was almost Monday morning he took the
risk of awakening Mr. Lang and gave a final party.
Hookum was talkative but Matilda and Sam were
too excited to say much. Matilda was ever so much
better and wanted to show the party how well she
could walk but Jimmie wouldn’t hear of it.


“This is our last party here for some time,” said
he. “I hope that you all have a good trip and that
we meet safely at Yendoola.”
Then the party ended and Hookum took Matilda
home.
The next morning Mr. Lang said to Jimmie as he
was leaving for the city,
“My boy, I’m sorry about to-night but I fear I
cannot get home before nine o’clock. I have to meet
a client at the club to discuss some important busi-
ness. Were the business less important, I would
cancel the arrangement but it happens to be most
urgent and—well, you’ll forgive me, son?”
Jimmie was delighted and found it hard to keep
the pleasure from his voice when he replied. He
told him not to worry on his account and said that
he would be awake when he came home.
That day seemed like a month to Jimmie. After
his lunch he went down to Hookum and spent the
afternoon with him. Hookum was very excited and
talked incessantly. At about seven o’clock that
evening Jimmie whistled for Hookum and the
elephant appeared as if by magic.
“Get the possums, will you, Hookum?” said
Jimmie.
Hookum did so and soon the party was assembled
on the verandah. Matilda had the bag that Jimmie
had given her. It was fairly bulging but Jimmie,


himself, was too excited to ask what it held. Sud-
denly it dawned upon him that he had made no ar-
rangements about food for the journey. “Hookum,”
said he, “go to the stable and get a truss of hay for
the trip. You’ll need it.”
Matilda spoke.
“It’s all right, Hookum. You needn’t worry. We’ve
brought enough food for all of us.” She tapped the
little bag that she had been given.
“That is very good of you, Matilda,” said Jimmie,
“but it mightn’t be a bad idea to take some hay as
well.” Jimmie did not like to hurt Matilda’s feelings
by telling her the truth. Even if Hookum liked gum
leaves, as Jimmie rightly supposed the contents of
the bag to be, Matilda’s provisions would satisfy
Hookum’s appetite for not longer than five minutes.
So he signalled Hookum to get the hay and the
elephant went off, to return very soon with a truss,
which he put on the verandah. It was then a quarter
to eight. Maggie came out to the party, with Rory.
At the sight of the dog, the possums looked
terrified.
“Go away, Rory,” shouted Jimmie and then to
Maggie, “I say, Mag, take Rory to the back and
chain him up, will you please? Then come back and
meet Matilda and Sam.”
Maggie did as she had been asked and while
she was away Jimmie told the possums that they
need not be afraid of Maggie. When she came back
he said, “These possums are going up for a change,
too. They’re going to look after Hookum.”


Maggie laughed.
“You’ve got some funny friends, Master Jim,” she
said, “but so long as they amuse you, so much the
merrier.”
Jimmie did not think it worth while to say more
about the possums then. Besides, he was anxious.
Supposing Mr. Lang came home earlier than was
expected ? But not for long did his anxiety last. The
gates at the end of the drive were heard to open and
the lights from a car flashed up the drive. Jimmie
put his arm around Matilda.
“Don’t be frightened Matilda,” he said, “this car
won’t run over you. I’ll take care of that.”
The car, Jimmie could see, was hardly a pan-
technicon but it was just as good for the purpose.
It had sides and a roof and Hookum would be shield-
ed from curious eyes.
Bob Watson was the driver and he came to the
verandah.
“Hello, Jimmie,” he said, “how’s business?
Rummy job you’ve got me on but I’ll manage some-
how. Where’s the passenger?” He had not not-
iced Hookum, who had been standing quite still.
It was then a quarter past eight and Jimmie, who
was in fear of Mr. Lang’s return, did not delay mat-
ters by talking. He replied,
“I’m afraid there’s no time to waste now. Here
he is.”


He turned to the elephant and said,
“Go and get in, Hookum.”
Hookum walked over to the car but Bob Watson
called out,
“Don’t let him try to get in like that. He’ll smash
the floor to pieces if he scrambles in.”
Jimmie called out to Hookum and the elephant
came back to the verandah. At Maggie’s suggestion,
Bob Watson backed the car against the verandah
and the verandah floor acted as a station platform.
The loading was then easy work. First, the truss
of hay was put in, by Hookum, and pushed to the
far end. Then Hookum carried Matilda in and
placed her on the hay. Sam got in next and sat
down beside Matilda and, last of all, Hookum. There
was plenty of room. Matilda said “Good bye, my
dear. We’ll look after Hookum for you.” Sam made
some remark which Jimmie could not hear and
Hookum said “So long, Ace, we’ll see you soon.”
Then Bob Watson got into the driver’s seat, the
engine started with a roar, the clutch was slipped in
and off they went.
Maggie had been talking with Bob Watson while
the car was being loaded and after the party had
left she said,
“Bob says he’ll be at Gundibool when your train
gets in.”
Five minutes after the car had gone Mr. Lang
arrived from the city.


CHAPTER XII.
JIMMIE SETS OUT.
Jimmie felt quite deserted after Hookum and the
possums had gone. His father, noticing his abstrac-
tion, was worried. Mr. Lang even suggested the
postponement of Jimmie’s visit to Yendoola. The
suggestion frightened him and he forced himself to
talk brightly. That night his sleep was troubled
with nightmare. He dreamed that the car had
broken down, that Hookum was very ill and that
Matilda was nursing him on her knee. It was a
great relief when the night was over.
During the morning Maggie packed his suit case.
Jimmie was most excited and the only damper to
his high spirits was Maggie’s long face, caused by
the thought of losing him. Mr. Lang, who had re-
turned from the city early in the afternoon, had tea
with Jimmie at six o’clock and at seven a motor-car
arrived. The wheeled chair was put in the front
seat with the driver, while Jimmie and Mr. Lang


shared the back. Before they left, Jimmie patted
Rory affectionately and shook hands with Maggie.
“Good bye, Mag,” he said, “you old angel. We’ll
write to each other, won’t we?”
Maggie promised and as the car was leaving
handed him an envelope telling him to put it in his
pocket and not to open it until the train had started.
Jimmie put the envelope safely away but was too
excited to ask questions about its contents. The
journey to the station was uneventful although the
trip, in the punt, across the harbour interested
Jimmie. When they arrived at the station it was
nearly eight o’clock. A porter was engaged, the
chair was unloaded, and Mr. Lang pushed Jimmie
to the platform of the Gundibool train.
“I wonder,” said he, “where Mr. Short is. The
fact that you are in a wheeled chair ought to be
sufficient indication of your identity.”
The minutes passed but no one came up and spoke
to them.
“It doesn’t matter about Mr. Short, Father,”
said Jimmie, “just put me in the train. I will be
quite all right.”
Mr. Lang shook his head. “I can’t let you travel
alone, Son,” he said.
It was then twenty minutes past eight, only ten
minutes before the train was to leave.
“Put me in charge of the guard, Father,” said
Jimmie desperately, “if you won’t let me travel
alone.”


Mr. Lang was just about to reply when a fat
little man rushed up to them.
“ Ton my soul/' he said, “you are Mr. Lang, I
suppose. Bill Harper’s brother-in-law. Your boy is
to travel with me?”
Soon the forty winks
began.
There was no time to discuss matters but Mr.
Lang thanked him and they soon had Jimmie
settled in a comfortable corner seat. Mr. Short pro-
duced a cushion and put it behind Jimmie’s back.
Mr. Lang shook hands with Jimmie and said,
“Take care of yourself, Son, and good luck to
you.”
Jimmie had no time to reply for a whistle blew
and the train moved out of the station.
“Well,” said Mr. Short, “we’re the lang and short
of it, eh? Ha, ha, ha.”
He was a merry old man and kept Jimmie amused
for an hour or more. Jimmie did not say much for
the simple reason that he could not get in a word.


At about half-past ten Mr. Short announced his in-
tention of having “forty winks.” He rearranged
the cushion behind Jimmie before settling himself,
then took off his hat and folded his arms. The top
of his head rather fascinated Jimmie. It was quite
bald, very red and fairly shone. Soon the “forty
winks” began and every one of them was like a
severe thunderstorm. The other three occupants of
the carriage looked at Mr. Short in alarm and then
one of them, a man of about thirty, started to
laugh. Soon, however, the noise died down a little
and Jimmie was just going to sleep when he re-
membered the envelope that Maggie had given nim.
He pulled it out of his pocket and opened it. It con-
tained three five pound notes. It was the money
with which to pay Bob Watson. He felt very grate-
ful to Maggie and decided to ask his Uncle Bill to
lend him the money to repay her. Then, after put-
ting the money carefully away he fell into a light
sleep. Several times during the night he awoke and
each time he heard Mr. Short having his “forty
winks.”
Just before daylight Jimmie went to sleep prop-
erly and was awakened by some one tapping him
on the shoulder. It was Mr. Short.
“Wake up,” he said, “another five minutes and
we’ll be having something to eat. You are a lucky
little beggar to sleep as you did. I couldn’t get a
wink of sleep all night.”
Jimmie didn’t like to contradict him. When the
train stopped Mr. Short stepped out and went to the
refreshment room. He brought back a pot of tea


and some hot buttered rolls. The train started again,
and it did not seem long to Jimmie before Mr. Short
told him that they would reach Gundibool in another
quarter of an hour. That last quarter of an hour
dragged but at last the train stopped and Jimmie
saw his Uncle on the platform. Mr. Harper saw Mr.
Short before he saw Jimmie.
“Morning, Peter," he said, “don’t tell me that
you haven't—” He left the sentence incomplete
when he saw Jimmie.
“Hello lad," he went on, this time to Jimmie." I
didn’t see you at first. Your Aunt Eileen is waiting
outside the station in the car. How are you? Not
too tired out by the trip, I hope."
Mr. Harper came into the carriage, shook hands
with him and then he and Mr. Short carried Jimmie
out and put him on a seat. The wheeled chair was
brought from the guard’s van and he was put in it.
They both thanked Mr. Short and Mr. Harper
wheeled Jimmie off.
Jimmie was in a fever of excitement as they left
the platform. Would Bob Watson be outside? They
were soon in the street but there was no sign of him.
Mr. Harper, noticing his agitation, stopped and
leaning over the back of the chair, spoke.
“What’s wrong Jimmie, lad?" he asked. “Not
feeling queer, are you?"
“No, Uncle Bill,” he replied, “I’m quite all right
but there is something I simply must tell you before
we start for Yendoola."


Mr. Harper promised to listen to what Jimmie
had to say, after they had got into the car and they
went on towards it. Jimmie was put in to the back
seat with Mrs. Harper who was delighted to see
him.
“Come on, Bill,” she said to her husband, “get
in, the children will be dying with impatience if we
don’t hurry.”
Mr. Harper got into the front seat but did not
start the engine.
“Before we start, Jimmie wants to tell us some-
thing important,” he said, and then turning to his
nephew, “Go on lad.”
Jimmie briefly told them about Hookum and of
Bob Watson’s queer load. His Uncle whistled with
surprise and seemed to think that the story was
too fantastic to be true.
“I can tell you,” he sair, “that every one round
here knows Yendoola and Watson, or whatever his
name is, can find you there. I can hardly credit the
story yet. But will it be right to go home now,
lad?”
Jimmie laughingly agreed and they started off.
From Gundibool to Yendoola was a distance of
about seven miles, five miles of which was along
what is known as a “stock route.” A stock route
is a tract of country, generally about three quarters
of a mile in width, along which big flocks of sheep
and mobs of cattle are driven. There was a road for


vehicles beside it and the drovers were supposed to
keep their animals off this part.
‘This is due to some careless drover,” said Mr.
Harper, as the car ran over a very bumpy stretch.
“They will not keep the cattle off the road surface.”
However a few minutes more and they turned to
the right up a road. Jimmie, of course, knew the
way, having travelled it dozens of times during
previous visits.
Mrs. Harper told him that everyone was looking
forward to his visit and he asked her many ques-
tions about the people he had met there before. He
asked about Syd, a boundary-rider who had always
been a particular friend of his. She told him that
Syd was quite well and had made great friends with
a new hand by the name of Pirn.
“The men all call him ‘By jinks Pirn/ ” she said.
When a slight rise was mounted the gate of
Yendoola homestead came into view and Jess and
Dick were seen sitting on it. They saw the car and
came running up to meet it.
“Hello, Jimmie, hello,” they shouted as the car
met them, and Mr. Harper stopped to let them get
in the front seat with him. He always spoke of the
two as “my magpies” because of the way they
chattered. They kept up their reputation and it
was a very noisy party that spun up the drive, a
distance of about half a mile, to the homestead.
From the windows in the front of the house flags
were hanging and Dick asked, “What do you think


of our decorations ? Jess thought of it but I helped,
didn’t I, Jess?”
“Why, you did it nearly all,” she replied, “I only
thought of it.”
At the door were standing Ida and Dora who
were old friends of Jimmie. They were the two
housemaids and they were really glad to see him
again. Yes, it was good to be at Yendoola once
more.
The talk before and during lunch was very lively,
and Dick would ask questions as Jimmie was answer-
ing one from Jess. Mr. and Mrs. Harper said little
but let the younger ones do the talking.
Dick said, “To night you must come across with
me to the barracks and meet ‘By-jinks Pirn.’ He’s
a circus though he’s not playing speaks with me
now. He said he wouldn’t till the paint wore off.
But if you go with me I reckon he’ll be friends
again.”
“Paint wore off? What do you mean, Dick?”
asked Jimmie.
It was Jess who answered.
“About a month ago Dick had some white paint.
He found it in the shearing shed and one Saturday
afternoon he went across to the barracks and
painted B.J.P. on old Pirn’s dog and ‘By-jinks’ said
he wouldn’t speak to Dick until the paint wore off.”
“Well, it’s nearly worn off now,” put in Dick,
“the J. you can’t see at all and the B. and the P.


look pretty thin. Anyhow I think he’ll forget it
now.”
After lunch Mr. Harper said that he wanted to
talk to Jimmie alone but Jimmie pleaded for Jess
and Dick to be allowed to stay. Mr. Harper con-
sented and at Mrs. Harper’s suggestion the talk
was held on the verandah. When Mr. Harper had
filled and lit his pipe he said,
“Now lad, tell us the whole story about that
elephant, right from the start.”
Jimmie began and Jess and Dick were so absorbed
that he could not stop for a second without a “Go
on, Jimmie,” from one or both of them. They were
wild with excitement at the thought of meeting
Hookum and Dick said that he would ride to Gundi-
bool to see whether Bob Watson had arrived there.
To Jimmie’s very pained surprise, his Uncle took
a serious view of the situation. “Lad,” he said, “I’ve
reared cattle and horses and dogs and thousands of
sheep but never has there been an elephant on
Yendoola. Now, don’t think me a spoil-sport but
you are in a strange position and, by keeping the
elephant here, you would be putting me in a strange
position. You know what cattle-duffing is?”
Jimmie nodded and Mr. Harper went on.
“Well, elephant duffing seems just as bad, if not
worse, and you don’t want me gaoled, do you?”
Jimmie saw the sense of his Uncle’s remarks but
the others put up a bitter protest. The upshot of


the talk was that Hookum could stay for a week be-
fore anything was done. After the week Mr. Harper
would write to the Zoo authorities and tell them the
facts of the case. Jess put up a fierce argument
against this.
“Dad,” she said, “surely Hookum can please him-
self. How would you like to be kept in a Zoo?”
“That’s all very well, Jess,” replied her father,
“but unless I do write I might be kept in a gaol,
which would be worse. I’m giving the elephant
one week’s grace, as it is.”
So the matter was arranged and Dick rode off to
Gundibool to try to find Bob Watson. Mr. Harper
went off to his office leaving Jimmie and Jess
together.


CHAPTER XIII.
THE ARRIVAL OF 808 WATSON.
Jess asked Jimmie dozens of questions about
Hookum and he answered them and told her about
Matilda and Sam. They decided to give Hookum
the summer-house on the lawn and a certain tree
near the verandah was chosen as a home for Matilda
and Sam.
“But tell them to keep off the roof of the house,”
said Jess. “We’ve got a lot of possums round here
and some nights you can hardly sleep for the noise
they make on the roof. I don’t mind, but Dad some-
times grumbles and says he’ll have to get rid of
them. Still he’s always said that, although he’s
never done a thing to hurt them.”
Jimmie told Jess that Hookum was very nervous
and was always afraid of meeting strangers. He
asked her to keep away when Bob Watson’s car
first arrived and she promised to do so. Suddenly
she sat up very straight in her chair.


“Hello,” she said, “Here comes Dick.”
Jimmie looked towards the drive. Dick’s pony
was at full gallop and not far behind him was Bob
Watson’s car. Jess ran inside the house and Jimmie
wheeled himself to a spot where he knew the car
would stop.
He had not long to wait. Dick arrived breathless
and “They are quite well” was all he could pant out
before the car arrived.
Bob Watson looked a sorry sight. He had not
shaved since leaving Sydney, was very dirty and
looked terribly tired. Jimmie greeted him with joy
and was just about to ask him the cause of the
delay when Hookum called out “Hello, Ace. Is the
trip over?”
“Yes, it’s over. You’ve arrived,” called back
Jimmie and he heard the elephant breathe a sigh of
relief and whisper something to the possums.
Jimmie, who had gone to the back of the car,
heard Mr. Harper, who had come on the scene, say
to Bob Watson, “Been a nasty trip, eh? Well, you’d
better spend the night here.”
Bob Watson backed the car towards the house
and against the verandah which was used as a plat-
form. The back of the car was unstrapped and
Hookum pushed himself out backwards. Matilda
was coiled up in his trunk and Sam was sitting on
his head. The possums looked quite dazed when
they came into the strong sunlight.


“Follow me, Hookum,” said Jimmie, “and we’ll
put Matilda and Sam to bed at once.”
He led the way to the tree that Jess had pointed
out. Hookum put Matilda and then Sam down a
hole, in the trunk, about seven feet from the
ground.
Hookum pushed himself out backwards.


“Now," said Jimmie, “we can talk. There are
ever so many people that you’ll have to meet but
they are all as kind as anything. To begin with,
this is my cousin, Dick."
Hookum put out his trunk towards Dick and said,
as Jimmie had known he would, “If you’re a friend
of Ace you’re a friend of mine."
Dick looked puzzled and rather scared.
“Put out your hand and shake his trunk," said
Jimmie. “You heard what he said."
Dick did as he was told, but the puzzled look did
not leave his face.
“I didn’t hear him say anything," he said. “He
only made funny noises." Dick turned to his father
who had joined them. “Did you hear Hookum say
anything, Dad?" he asked.
Mr. Harper laughed. “No," he replied, “the
elephant only gurgled." Then Jimmie realized that
he was the only person who could understand what
Hookum said.
Bob Watson joined the group and remarked to
Mr. Harper,
“Do you know, that elephant is a marvel. He can
do almost anything, except talk."
“But he can talk," said Jimmie. “Perhaps I am
the only one he can talk to but I understand every
word. I’ll show you."
He turned his back to them, “Now one of you
hold up a hand,"


Mr. Harper held up two fingers of his right
hand. “Go on, we’re ready,” he said. “Ask Hookum.”
Jimmie did so and Hookum replied, “The man who
owns this house is holding up two fingers of his
right hand.”
“Hookum says,” said Jimmie, “that you, Uncle
Bill, are holding up two fingers of your right hand.”
Even then they were not convinced and Jimmie
had to make Hookum do a few more things before
Mr. Harper said, “Well, lad, I give in. I know now
that you and Hookum can talk but, ’pon my soul, it
fairly staggers me.” Then he turned to Dick and
told him to take Bob Watson over to the barracks, as
the building occupied by the station hands was
called.
When Dick and Bob Watson had gone Mr. Harper
said, “I’ll just go and get your Aunt Eileen and
Jess.”
Directly he had left them Jimmie told Hookum
how splendid his Aunt and Jess were. “There’s no
need to be frightened, Hookum,” he said, “they
won’t hurt you. I’m sorry to have to put you
through all this business but it’s just as well to get
it over.”
“It’s all right, Ace,” Hookum replied. “It won’t
last for long.”
Almost directly Mr. Harper entered the house,
Jess came dashing out of it.


“What a beautiful little elephant Hookum is,”
she exclaimed. “I wonder if I can understand what
he says as you do.”
“Hello Hookum,” she went on, this time to the
elephant. “Shake hands.” She put out her hand and
Hookum grasped it with his trunk and shook it.
“He understands me, Jimmie. Hookum understands
me,” Jess shouted in delight.
Now Hookum had not really understood her but,
having seen her outstretched hand, had guessed
that she wanted to shake his trunk.
“I like her very much,” said the elephant. “I like
her better than I’ve ever liked any girl.” Jess heard
the noise coming from Hookum but she did not
understand what he was saying.
“Did Hookum speak ?” she asked and Jimmie told
her what Hookum had said.
Jess was both glad and sorry. She was glad that
Hookum liked her but very sorry that she could
not understand his talk.
Mrs. Harper with Ida and Dora and fat Betty,
the cook, came out of the house and Jimmie intro-
duced them all to Hookum. Dick came running back
from the barracks where he had arranged lodging
for Bob Watson. He asked whether he might have
a ride but Jimmie, knowing how tired the elephant
must be feeling, asked him to waft until the follow-
ing day. After the party had thoroughly satisfied
their curiosity, Jimmie decided that it would be
best for Hookum to go to his new quarters and rest.


Mrs. Harper and the maids went inside and Jimmie
pointed out to Hookum his new bedroom, the sum-
mer-house.
Jimmie himself was feeling tired and when
Hookum had gone to his new quarters he went over
to his bed on the verandah and lay down, with Dick
and Jess sitting beside him.
The gardener at Yendoola was a Chinaman, Wong
by name. Old Wong kept the station supplied with
vegetables. He lived by himself, did his own cook-
ing and worked when it best suited him. He did
not mix with the rest of the station-hands but
seemed quite satisfied with his own company.
In summer-time Wong would spend the greater
part of the day in his hut, starting his work at
about five o’clock in the afternoon. How he spent
the time in his hut was a subject for a great deal
of guessing. Jess said that he slept but Dick was
certain that he used to smoke opium. Wong had
been known to work for three days with an occa-
sional rest of only about an hour. There had been
a plague of locusts and Wong’s beloved vegetables
had been in peril. He had spent most of his time,
for those three days, in scaring the pest. He had
walked about the garden beating a tin and crying,
“Shoo, shoo. You eatee cabbigee and lettucee and
callot. You debils, shoo, shoo, shoo.”
The noise had been dreadful but old Wong had
saved the vegetables.


While Jimmie was lying on the verandah with
Jess and Dick by his side old Wong had started to
work again. He had left some seeds in the summer-
house and, on entering it, had bumped into Hookum.
The fright had almost killed him but now he came
flying across the lawn.
“Debil-debil, debil-debil,” he screamed out.
Jimmie and the other two guessed what had hap-
pened and laughed till it hurt them; but Wong went
dashing past and around a corner of the house.
There he met Mr. Harper who soon joined the
others.
“I say, lad,” he said to Jimmie, “that elephant of
yours has scared my heathen Chinee to fits. I don’t
expect he’ll ever go into the summer-house again.”


CHAPTER XIV
MATILDA RELATES HER EXPERIENCES.
That evening at dinner Dick reminded Jimmie of
the visit they had decided to make to the barracks,
Mr. Harper, who had been talking with his wife
about matters of little interest to the others, sat up
very straight in his chair. “What’s that you are
proposing?” he asked Dick. Going across to the
barracks to-night?”
Dick told him their plans. “No, not to-night,
Dick,” said his father. There the matter ended, for
as Dick had once remarked, “When Dad says a thing
he jolly well means it. It’s waste of breath to
argue.”
Much as Jimmie wanted to meet Syd, he was not
sorry the meeting had been delayed, as he felt very
tired. So after dinner, when his Aunt suggested
bed for him, he gladly agreed. After having said
good night to the others he was wheeled to his bed
on the verandah by Dick. He was soon in it but


did not immediately go to sleep. He lay awake think-
ing of Hookum and of his Uncle’s decision. Poor
Hookum! The thought of losing him was hard to
bear. He tossed restlessly about. The sleep that he
desired would not come.
Suddenly it dawned upon Jimmie that he was
not alone. No noise had he heard, no sign was there
of another’s presence. Yet the feeling persisted. At
last he could bear it no longer.
“Is anyone here?” he asked. The answer made
his heart jump with joy.
“Oh, my dear,” said a voice that he knew. “Only
us possums.”
It was Matilda who had spoken.
“Jump on to the bed, both of you,” said Jimmie.
“I am pleased to see you again. How are you,
Matilda?”
“Oh, I’m fine,” she replied. “We’re both a bit
tired and stiff but my leg is ever so much better
and the splint fell off on the trip. But are you sure
we did not wake you up, my dear?”
Jimmie told her that he had not been asleep and
asked her to tell him all about the journey.
“Well, my dear,” said Matilda, “I’ll tell you. The
night we left we went for miles and miles and miles.
I thought we must be going round in a circle we
went so far but Hookum said, ‘No.’ After we’d
gone a long, long way, my leg began to hurt a bit.
You see the road was rough and the motor car


bumped about. Hookum must have guessed it hurt
because he picked me up and let me stay in the curl
of his trunk. That was fine and I dozed off to sleep.
When I woke up we were all out of the motor-car
and the man who drove us was boiling water. I
thought that we were here but when I asked
Hookum he only laughed and said that the driver
had stopped for the night. Oh, I forgot to tell you
something that happened before Hookum put me in
his trunk. I asked him if he would like some gum-
leaves out of my bag and he said, ‘That’s very good
of you, Matilda. Thank you.’ He took about two
leaves, no more, and I thought he had enjoyed them
but Sam told me to-night that he didn’t eat them.”
“He didn’t,” said Sam. “I saw him throw them
out of the little window in front when Matilda
wasn’t looking.”
Matilda went on with her story.
“My dear, I know that I’m an ignorant old pos-
sum but I thought that he’d like them. He was like
a father to us on the journey and the man who
drove was glad that he was with us, too. Next day
the car got stuck in some mud and if Hookum
hadn’t been with us I don’t know what we would
have done.”
Jimmie laughed because it was so funny to think
that Matilda imagined the car to have been ordered
for her and Sam and, as a great treat, Hookum had
been allowed to travel in it. “Go on Matilda,” he
said and Matilda continued.


“My dear, that day we had a lot of bad luck.
After Hookum had pulled us out of the mud we
hadn’t gone far before there was a loud noise. Some-
thing went bang and the car went bump-bump-
bump. Then it stopped. The man got off his seat
and we could hear him working. He was talking
out loud to himself and Hookum said that he heard
the man say, ‘This is the last time I’ll cart eleph-
ants about.’ Not that I believe that Hookum under-
stood but the man seemed quite angry and he might
have said it. I wondered what had made the bang
and Hookum said it was the air coming out of the
wheel. I didn’t think he could be so silly. When
the man had mended something we went on for a
little and then we stopped. He talked to himself
this time very loud and made a noise in the front
like tin being rattled. It was a long time before we
started off again. When it got dark we stopped for
the night. Sam had toothache and wasn’t very
polite to any of us. He’s a terror when he has tooth-
ache. This morning he didn’t feel like getting back
into the motor car but Hookum said we were nearly
here and cheered us both up. To-day we had a lot of
stops which made us late, I suppose. That’s all the
story, my dear.”
“Hookum was good to us,” added Sam. “I didn’t
know what we would have done without him.”
Jimmie asked the possums a lot of questions about
their journey and then about their new home.
“Oh, it’s fine,” said Matilda. “It’s ever so much
bigger than our own home in Sydney but we don’t
have it all to ourselves.”


Jimmie was surprised as it had not occurred to
him that other possums might occupy that tree.
“I hope that you’ll like them,” he said.
“Yes, we like them,” replied Matilda. “They’re
friendly but they are a little rough in their ways.
They drop their aitches a lot but that’s nothing
against them. We don’t know what their names are
but there are four in the family with us. The
woman nearly cried with envy when she saw the
little bag you gave me. I let her hold it for a bit
and she was as proud as proud. To-night her hus-
band asked, ‘Care for a game of Slippery Sam with
us ?’ My dear, I thought my Sam was going to hurt
him.”
“I would have too,” put in Sam, “but he ex-
plained that Slippery Sam is a game they play. They
all get on the roof near the top and then one of
them says ‘Go.’ They all slide down the roof and
whoever gets to the bottom first is Slippery Sam.
It’s a ‘honour,’ his wife says. So I wasn’t angry
then.”
Jimmie told them that although their country
friends might be very fond of the sport, Mr. Harper
was not, but actually disliked it. He asked them not
to play Slippery Sam and they promised. After a
little more talk Sam said,
“We’d better go now. Come on, Matilda. I'm
sleepy.”
“My dear,” said she to Jimmie, “may we come to-
morrow night?”


He told them that he would like to see them
every night and then they left him. Jimmie
turned over in his bed and this time sleep came to
him.


CHAPTER XV.
AT YENDOOLA.
When he awoke next morning, the sun was well
above the horizon although the time was only half-
past six. Jimmie, at first, did not realize where he
was but gradually his mind awoke. His first
thought was that Hookum was living his last week
of freedom. He was wondering whether it would
be kinder to say nothing of his Uncle’s resolve when
he saw a man striding across the lawn towards
him. Jimmie recognized him as his old friend Syd,
the boundary rider.
“Hello, Jim,” he said, “I’m real pleased to see
you again.’’ He put out his hand to Jimmy, who
seized and shook it.
“And I’m pleased to see you again, too,’’ he said.
“Dick was going to take me across to see you last
night but Uncle Bill stopped us.”
Syd put his pipe in his mouth, and having
brought out a plug of tobacco from his pocket,


started to cut it into strips with his knife. “I was
real sorry to hear of your smash,” he said, “but
—well —least said soonest mended. I was never
much good at saying things but I’m real sorry to
see you like this. Anyhow,” his face brightened as
he went on, “dare say this country air will fix you.”
They talked for some time and Jimmie told him
about Hookum. To his surprise, Syd knew about
the elephant.
“I knew that he was here,” he said, “yesterday
afternoon. Soon after he came, I expect. Toppie
Watts told me when I was down near the creek,
fixing up a fence. Toppie had been up to the bar-
racks for something and had seen the elephant. He
rode a couple of miles out of his way to tell me.”
Syd laughed. “How’s that for bush wireless?”
he asked. “ 'Course I wasn’t the only one who
knew it either. Before I’d got home three others
told me the same yarn. Naturally, we all wanted
a screw at the elephant. After we’d had our tucker
last night we came across to the summer house but
it was too dark to see much.”
“You can see him now,” said Jimmie. “I’ll
whistle him.”
He was just going to whistle when Syd stopped
him.
“No, thanks, Jim. I must make tracks now. How
about bringing him across to the barracks to-
night?”


Jimmie agreed and Syd walked across the lawn
to where his horse was tethered.
At breakfast that morning Mr. Harper told them
something of interest. “Do you know, lad,” he said
to Jimmie, “I just remembered last night that I
know the boss of the Taronga Zoo. He and I went
to school together in Sydney. Even then he was
fond of animals. He made friends with a wretched
little mouse that used to come up a hole in the
floor near his desk. Pon my soul, that’s why we
called him ‘Mousey.’ Morris his name was, and
Mousey Morris sounded well. Mousey was really
fond of his friend and was the only boy in the room
who could entice it from its hole. He used to
bring it all sorts of food. We used to laugh at him
and one of the boys said that the mouse helped him
to do his arithmetic. Mousey was always a popular
boy but he was fairly cranky about animals. Old
‘Bunty,’ our master then, used to say, ‘Morris, your
arithmetic is shocking, your French is just as bad,
and your Latin is worse. If you knew a little less
about animals and a lot more about your work, I
would be far better pleased.’ ”
“Perhaps, Dad,” suggested Jess, “Mr. Morris
would let Hookum stay here if he knew that he had
a good home.”
Mr. Harper smiled. “I’m very much afraid not,”
he replied. “Elephants cost a lot of money.”
There was one part of the story about Mousey
Morris that Mr. Harper had not told them, and


later you will see how important it is in this story.
There had been a boy at the school who was rather
a bully, by the nickname of “Bull.” Carter was his
proper name. It had been his ambition to kill the
mouse, and to that end he had set a trap. Harper
had been indignant and he had destroyed it. Bull's
rage had been furious and he and young Harper
had come to blows. Although Bull had given him
a severe thrashing, the sympathy of the other boys
had been aroused, and from that day the mouse
was left in peace.
Jimmie told Mr. Harper that he would like to see
Bob Watson before he left on the return trip to
Sydney.
“Why, lad,” his Uncle said, “Watson left here a
couple of hours ago. Why did you want to see
him?”
Jimmie explained that he wanted to pay him but,
to his astonishment, his Uncle told him that he had
done that.
“Just you give me that fifteen pounds,” he said,
“and I’ll send it back to Maggie. We can’t let her
be out of pocket.”
Jimmie thanked his Uncle warmly, but Mr.
Harper treated the matter lightly.
“Not another word,” he said. “I hate being
thanked. Now, come outside and see how your
friend is.”


They all went out on to the verandah and Jimmie
whistled for Hookum, who soon came plodding
across the lawn.
“Hello, Ace," he said. “Strange place, this is."
“Why, what’s wrong?" asked Jimmie.
They laughed harder than ever.
The Harper family looked puzzled because, al-
though they had not understood Hookum’s talk,
they had heard Jimmie ask him what was wrong.
“Late yesterday afternoon," said Hookum, “a
whole lot of birds came and laughed at me. I was


rather angry and I shouted out at them, 'What are
you laughing at? Haven’t you seen an elephant
before?’ Do you know what they did then? They
laughed harder than ever. I have never been so
insulted in all my life.”
Jimmie told the family what Hookum had said
and soon they, too, were laughing. The elephant
looked surprised and hurt until Jimmie told him
that the birds were called Laughing Jackasses be-
cause it was their nature to make a noise like that.
Then Hookum himself saw the joke and laughed
till his sides shook.
Dick then reminded Jimmie that he had promised
him a ride on Hookum.
“Can I have one, too?” asked Jess, hopping with
excitement.
“Hookum,” said Jimmie, “Dick wants a ride and
so does Jess. Would you mind very much?”
“I wouldn’t mind in the least,” replied the
elephant. “I can carry the three of you at once.”
Jimmie told them what Hookum had said and
then he asked to be lifted up to his usual place.
Hookum, putting his trunk round Jimmie, carefully
lifted him up and put him in position. It was a
usual event for him to be lifted up by the elephant,
but the Harper family fairly gasped. Mr. Harper
said,
“ Ton my soul, I wouldn’t have believed it pos-
sible.”


“Now, Hookum,” said Jimmie, “lift Jess up and
put her behind me.”
Jess went rather white as HookunTs trunk en-
circled her, but once on his back, she smiled again.
Hookum then tried to lift up Dick and put him be-
hind Jess, but he could not manage it, and Mr.
Harper had to help him scramble up. Then, at the
word from Jimmie, Hookum started off.
“OA, clikee! Debil-debil again.”
“Ask him to go down and see Wong,” said Jess,
and Jimmie did so.
Hookum walked down to the vegetable garden
and the three on his back could see old Wong
bending over a row of beans. Having reached the
fence, Hookum stopped and put his trunk over it.
Wong was so busy that he had not noticed their


approach, but the elephant announced their pres-
ence by making a loud noise in his trunk. Wong
looked up and gave a howl of terror as he saw
them.
“Oh, clikee,” he screamed, “Debil-Debil again.”
Then he made a dash to the fence on the opposite
side of the garden and threw himself over it. Then
he scrambled to his feet and ran off towards his
hut as fast as he could lay legs to the ground. They
all laughed, Dick so much that he nearly fell off.
At Jimmie’s request, Hookum took them back to
the verandah, where they dismounted. Mr. Harper,
who had seen the incident, was smiling, but he
asked Jimmie to tell Hookum that Wong was of
value to Yendoola and that he did not wish him to
be scared away.


CHAPTER XVI.
JIMMIE’S VISIT TO THE BARRACKS.
That evening after dinner, Dick and Jimmie were
ready to visit the barracks. Hookum was whistled,
and when the two were comfortably seated on him,
he set out. When they neared the barracks, they
were met by Syd.
“Hello, Jim,” he said, “so you’ve come. I was
expecting you.”
He walked along by Hookum’s side, talking the
while.
“No doubt, he’s a little beauty. Bit heavy in the
fetlock perhaps, but I reckon he’s got plenty of
strength.”
When they reached the barracks Jimmie stopped
the elephant.
“I’ll lift you off and put you on this bed,” offered
Syd, pointing to a bed on the verandah.


“It’s all right, Syd,” replied Jimmie. “Hookum
can do that.”
To the boundary rider’s astonishment, the
elephant did as he had been told. Dick slid off his
back and he padded off, having been told to return
when he heard a whistle. Syd told them that he
and Pirn were the only ones at home, all the others
having gone to a concert in Gundibool.
“I wonder where Jack Pirn is,” he said. “He
was here ten minutes ago. I’ll just go inside and
see if I can find him.”
Syd left the two boys, to return in a few minutes
with his friend.
“Jim,” he said, “this is Jack Pirn.”
Pirn shook hands with him, remarking, “By
Jinks, Pm pleased to meet you.” Then he noticed
Dick. “Hello, Dick, shake hands.”
They shook hands. “I’m sorry I painted your
dog,” said Dick.
“Forget it,” replied Pirn. “Boys like their fun,
by jinks they do.”
Jack Pirn was what is known as a “character.”
He had been a sailor, and for twenty years or more
had roamed the world. He was born in England,
and there to his mother he sent a large part of his
wages. Pirn had left the sea and come to Yen-
doola soon after Jimmie’s previous visit. Although
no bushman, he had won through at Yendoola by


his ability to adapt himself and learn. Pirn’s
stories were generally strange, but as he used to
say, “Fiction isn’t half as queer as truth.” The
talk had been about fish and Pim remarked,
“I can tell you rather a strange story about a
shark, by jinks I can.” Syd, who had been filling
his pipe, lit it.
“Go on, Jack, out with it,” he said.
Pim, having settled his back against the veran-
dah post, began.
“About ten years ago I was aboard a tramp and
we were having a cruel time of it what with bad
grub and a worse skipper. We were in amongst
the Solomons, and the morning I speak of the
weather was dirty and a heavy sea was running.
All at once there was a crash as if we had hit some-
thing. I was below decks at the time but, by jinks,
when the boat started to roll over to port I was
soon on deck. I took my kit bag with me as I
thought it would be handy to have a change of
clothes if I got ashore. Well, I was beating it
along the deck when the boat gave another lurch
and I was chucked, bag and all, into the water.
When I come up, I saw an island about half a mile
off. Pleasant looking place it was, and I said to
myself, ‘By jinks, Jack, old man, you’d better swim
ashore instead of trying to get aboard again.’ You
see, I thought the old tub was just about punctured
and that it would be nice to feel some terra cotta,
as the saying is, under my feet again. So I set a
course for the island and started off. My kit-bag


was done for, I knew, but I was O.K. and, being a
strong swimmer, half a mile was nothing to me. I
had only swum a hundred yards or so when I felt
something fishy brush against me and, looking
down, I saw a shark. A whopper it was, too. I
“Do you know what that shark had in his mouth?
My kit-hag r
said to myself, I said, ‘By jinks, Jack, old man,
you’re going to be shark food if you’re not very
lucky.’ But I swam on, thinking it best to have a
shot at getting ashore. The shark was swimming
abreast of me and I risked another look at it. To
my surprise, it had something in its mouth, but I
couldn’t make out what it was, till I had another
look. And then I knew.”


Pirn stopped his story to light his pipe and was
so long about it that his audience became im-
patient.
“Go on, what happened next?” asked Dick.
Having lit his pipe, Pirn went on,
“Do you know what that shark had in his
mouth? My kit bag. It saw me looking at it and
wagged its tail in a most friendly way. When I
reached shore a lot of niggers were waiting on the
beach for me. The shark had given me the kit
bag and was waiting in the shallows wagging its
tail. ‘Well, Jack, old man/ I said to myself, ‘by
jinks, that shark has been good to you. Least you
can do is to buy a nigger or two and sling him in/
so I bowled up to the chief and, having some
money in my pocket, I fished it out. ‘Two niggers,
please/ I asked, ‘and fat ones, too/ The chief gave
me a really nasty look and said to his men, ‘Grab
him and take him up to Rudolph/ They soon had
me trussed up like a fowl and carried me up to
Rudolph, the chief’s cook. Now, what do you
think of that for a shark story?” Pirn asked. The
boys had almost forgotten the shark in their desire
to hear what happened to Pirn.
“Please go on,” said Jimmie. “What happened
then?”
Pirn, having re-lit his pipe, continued.
“As I say, I was left in the kitchen with Rudolph.
He felt me all over and prodded me here and there.


Then he got out a book, a cookery book I suppose
it was, and started looking through it. ‘What are
you going to do with me?’ I asked. He looked at
me over the top of his spectacles. ‘Do?’ he replied.
‘Cook you, of course.’ ” It came as a nasty shock
to me, but I didn’t let him know that. ‘Yes,’ I said,
“Fd make rissoles
of you.”
‘of course, but how?’ He scratched the top of his
head and looked puzzled. ‘That’s one thing that’s
got me beat,’ he said. ‘l’d make rissoles of you if
someone hadn’t broken my mincing machine.’ Then
I saw a bag lying on the floor and an idea came to


me. ‘Ever try boiling?’ I asked. ‘No/ he said.
‘Can’t say that I have. Do you think you’ll boil
tender?’ I told him that boiling was the one and
only way to do me and suggested him tying me up
in the bag first. ‘You want to nail the outside of
the bag to the door/ I said, ‘and then sprinkle the
inside with flour.’ Rudolph did this and also had a
big tub of water on the fire. When the water was
boiling he cut all the ropes and asked me to step
into the bag. By jinks, I played cunning then. I
was just going to step into the bag when I turned
to him. ‘Rudolph/ I said, ‘you haven’t spread the
flour properly on the bottom of the bag. If you
don’t do it you’ll spoil me.’ He was dead simple,
that nigger was. He said, ‘l’m sorry to keep you
waiting,’ and he leant into the bag and started
brushing the flour about with his hand. That was
just what I wanted. I picked him up by the legs
and tipped him in. Then I tied up the mouth of
the bag and dumped it in a corner of the room. Of
course I could’ve easily put him in the boiling
water but, by jinks, he wasn’t a bad sort and I’ve
met plenty of white people not so polite as
Rudolph.”
“How did you get away then?” Dick asked.
“Well,” replied Pirn, “I went to the back of the
cook-house and there I saw a balloon. So I got into
it and cut the painter. Off I went and the wind
blew the balloon right over the steamer, which
hadn’t sunk after all. When it got right over the
deck I let out a lot of the gas and came down on it.”


“But how on earth did a balloon happen to be on
cannibal island?” asked Dick.
“That,” replied Pim, “is a mystery to me but, by
jinks, it was useful.”
“That’s a great story, Jack,” said Jimmie. Then
he turned to the boundary rider. “You tell us one
now, Syd.”
Syd laughed. “Well, I dunno,” he replied,
“whether you’ve ever heard Jerry Brown’s story?”
None of them had, so Syd began.
“Some years ago I was living in North-Western
Victoria, mallee country it was, and there I made
friends with Jerry Brown. Reliable sort of chap
he was, so I know this story is true. Jerry was
looking over a farm he was thinking of buying and,
at the back of the house, he happened to kick over
a sheet of galvanised iron that was lying on the
ground. Under that iron were two snakes, and
Jerry picked up a lump of wood to knock their
heads off. The owner of the farm was with us,
and when he saw Jerry go for those snakes he
called out, ‘Don’t touch ’em. They are pets.’ I
don’t know why Jerry listened to him but he did.
He just put the sheet of iron back over ’em. He
bought that farm and forgot about the snakes. One
day, his wife was sitting on the verandah with one
of the nippers and, all of a sudden, she felt a tug
at her skirts. She looked down and there was a
snake pulling at her dress. First pop off, Mrs.


Brown was scared almost stiff, but the snake
wagged its tail most friendly. Mrs. Brown could
tell that the snake wanted to lead her somewhere,
so she got up from off her chair, and when the
snake wriggled off she walked behind it. She fol-
lowed it to the back of the house, where there was
The snake wanted to
lead her somewhere.
a well, and the snake stopped there. Mrs. Brown
was a bit puzzled till she caught sight of another
snake coiled round the drum of the windlass. She
couldn’t see its head until she looked down the well.
Then she saw that the mate of the snake who had
fetched her was holding up her youngest nipper,
a kid of about two. After that, Jerry Brown said
he’d kill no more snakes.”
Syd’s face, as he had told the story, had been
quite grave and solemn, but when the others
laughed, a slow smile crept over it.
“Do you know what I think?” asked Dick. “I
think Jerry Brown has been pulling your leg.” This
remark made them all laugh more than ever.
After Syd had told his story it was not long be-
fore the boys said that they must be going home.


Jimmie whistled for Hookum, but the elephant did
not come. Syd, who could whistle like a steam
engine, put two fingers between his lips and made
an almost deafening noise.
“What you want, Jim,” he said, “is a proper
ready-made whistle. I’ve got one somewhere, but
I never use it. You can have it if you like. Just
hang on a minute while I get it.” He went inside,
to return very soon with the whistle, which he
handed to Jimmie.
“Might come in useful,” he remarked. How useful
that whistle was to prove no one, least of all its
new owner, could guess. Jimmie blew it, more to
test its power than to summon Hookum, but in a
very short time the elephant appeared.
“I’ve made friends with a rummy sort of chap,”
he said. “I’ll tell you about it. When ” but
Jimmie stopped him. “Not now, Hookum. Just
take us home, like a good chap, and you can tell
me of your new friend later.”
Hookum looked rather disappointed, but did as
he had been asked. Before leaving, Jimmie invited
Syd and Pirn to come across to the homestead on
the following night, and they promised to do so.
When Jimmie had got into bed that night the
possums visited him, but as he was feeling very
tired they did not stay long.


Hookum sees a kangaroo.
CHAPTER XVII.
HOOKUM’S NEW FRIENDS.
The next morning, Jimmie asked Hookum to tell
him of the friend he had made on the previous
evening.
“He was really the curiousest chap,” began
Hookum. “Friendly, you know, but curious. He
had two very long legs and a big thick tail on which
he balanced himself. I don’t know what his name
was, but he was in a bad state of mind when I met
him, because of a row he’d been having with his
wife. Most upset he was about it. It seems that
his wife was out yesterday and she was carry-
ing the baby. ‘Joey,’ this chap said his name was.
'From what I can gather, his wife always carried
Joey inside her somewhere. As I was saying, she


was out yesterday afternoon and she was chased
by a pack of dogs. Off she went, but somehow
Joey was a bit of a nuisance. So do you know what
she did? She took hold of him and chucked him
away. This chap I’m telling you about, he was
almost heartbroken. I said to him last night, when
he told me about it, I said, Til give you a hand to
find Joey now. Do you know where abouts he was
dropped?’ The chap had an idea, so off he went.
He hopped along, but whether it was impatience
or just his way of walking, I don’t know. A long
way it was, but at last we were there. We looked
all round for a long time but could see no sign of
Joey. We were just going to come away when we
found him. He was all right, but as lonely as any-
thing. After we’d found him, his father didn’t
know how to carry him. So I picked him up in my
trunk and carried him. We had just started off
when up came another chap, like Joey’s father. It
was the chap’s wife, and she smiled when she saw
the nipper. 'There, old man,’ she said to the funny
chap with me, ‘are you satisfied now? I knew he’d
be safe, and if I’d kept him those dogs would have
only killed us both.’ ‘Here,’ I said, ‘take your
precious— ’ and I put Joey on the ground near her.
Do you know what she did then? She put him in-
side her, and all 1 could see of Joey was his head
sticking out. Then they said good night and off
they went. Most curious pair I’ve ever seen.”
Jimmie told Hookum that they were Kangaroos,
and that the young ones were always carried by
their mothers, as Joey had been carried. Hookum


listened with interest but, “They are friendly, but
they are too curious for me,” was all the comment
he made. Then he told Jimmie that Matilda and
Sam had spent a part of the night with him.
“All I could see of Joey was his head sticking out.”
“Matilda seems quite well again,” he said,
although the possums they are staying with are
ignorant things. Their heads are just full of funny


ideas. Do you know what one of them told Sam?
He told him that the world was round like an apple.
You know how touchy Sam is at times. 4 You’re
mad/ he said, ‘prove it.’ Of course this other
possum couldn’t, and they all laughed at him. I
believe there would have been a fight only for
Matilda.”
‘‘Why, what did she do?” asked Jimmie.
“You know what a peacemaker Matilda is? She
said, ‘Shame, Sam, for shame to be so angry. What
does it matter if the world is flat or round or
square? The shape is good enough for us, what-
ever it is/ She didn’t say that Sam was telling a
lie, mind you, Ace. She just patched things up.
Sam had another argument, too, but I forget now
what it was about.”
WTiile Hookum had been talking, Jimmie decided
to tell him about his Uncle’s intentions to write to
the Zoo authorities. Much as he dreaded the
thought of telling him, he felt that it would be only
right to let him know.
“Hookum,” he said, “I’ve some very bad news to
tell you. I didn’t mean to tell you at all, but—
well, if I don’t tell you, the blow may come harder
when it falls.”
“Go on, Ace,” said Hookum, “I’ll bear it, what-
ever it is.”
Then Jimmie told him of Mr. Harper’s resolve.
The telling was hard, very hard, and Hookum


listened without any comment. When he finished
the elephant spoke.
“Now, don’t you worry about me. I’ve been a
prisoner nearly all my life and it won’t kill me to
be one again. Thank you for the splendid time
you’ve given me. When I’m back in the Zoo will
you sometimes think of me? I’m a very lucky
elephant to have had such a good time with you.
You’ve been very kind to me, and I’ll never forget
you, so ” Hookum’s voice became just a
mumble for a minute, but he brightened up again
very quickly and Jimmie could hear what he was
saying.
“Anyhow, Ace, for the time being let us forget
all about it, shall we?”
This they agreed to do. Hookum said that he would
like to go out for a walk and, Jimmie having
agreed, he started off.
After he had gone Jess and Dick, who had ridden
into Gundibool, returned. They had been hoping
to have another ride on Hookum, so were disap-
pointed to hear that he had gone for a walk. As
it was a hot day, Dick said that he would like to
bathe in the creek. Although Jimmie could not go
into the water, he said that after lunch he would ride
down to the creek on Hookum and watch. At lunch,
however, Mr. Harper told Dick that he wanted him
to ride to Widgee to get a branding iron that he
had left there. So the boys agreed to postpone the
swim until the following day.


Jimmie lay on the verandah and read a book.
During the afternoon, Hookum returned from his
walk and came up to him.
“I met another funny bird to-day, but he was a
bird who couldn’t fly. I was a long way from here,
and I saw it walking towards me. It had long legs
and a long neck, and its body was covered with
feathers. I stood quite still and just watched it.
On it came, nearer and nearer. It walked round
me a few times. Then it stood still, peering at me
and making a funny gurgling noise in its throat. I
said, ‘Good day, bird. You’re not going to laugh at
me, are you?’ ”
“Laugh?” it said. “I’ve got nothing to laugh at.”
“That’s all right,” I said.
“It’s not all right,” it said. “It’s all wrong.”
“Excuse me asking,” I said, “but are you a bird?”
It looked hard at me and made that gurgling sound
again.
“Yes,” it said.
“Have you any wings?” I asked
“Yes,” it said. “Look.”
It had pulled out one of the silliest little wings
you ever saw. I don’t suppose it would have been
much good to a sparrow, let alone this big thing.
“Show me how you can fly,” I said.
“I can’t fly at ail,” it said, blushing like fire.


I' • •* J. ,
if *m*~y
"* ,I y y N^
Si 8 i )
We talked for a while and it said that, although
it couldn’t fly, it could run as fast as a horse.
It kept up that gurgling sound in its throat.
“What’s wrong with your throat?” I asked
“Nothing,” it said
“7 waved my trunk
at it”
“Excuse me,” I said, “but are you a man or
woman bird?”
It blushed again. “A man bird.” Then after a
bit more talk
“Well, I must be going or they’ll get cold,” it said


HOOKUM’S GANG 149
“What will be getting cold?” I asked".
“The eggs," it said.
“If you’re a man bird, what have you got to do
with eggs?’’ I asked.
At this it seemed to get angry. “I help hatch
them,’’
“Well, Ace, I’m what you’d call good-natured,
aren’t I?”
Jimmie nodded and Hookum went on.
“This bird thing had told me lies, I know, so I
got angry. ‘To begin with,’ I shouted, ‘if you can’t
fly how are you going to reach your nest? Next
thing, if you’re a man you ought to let your wife
sit on the eggs and, to finish, I think you’ve been
telling me lies. Go off home!”
“I waved my trunk at it and it turned and ran.
It hadn’t told me a lie about how fast it could run,
either. But it had a funny sort of run, like a bag
of water on legs. Now, what do you think that
bird was?”
Jimmie told Hookum that it was an Emu, and
that it had told him the truth.
Hookum listened gravely.
“I’m sorry that I called it a liar,” he remarked,
“but if I meet it again I’ll tell it a few things about
myself that will surprise it.”


CHAPTER XVIII.
PIM TELLS ANOTHER STORY.
That evening Syd and Pim came, and sat on the
verandah near Jimmie’s bed. Before they came,
Dick and Jimmie had decided to ask Pim to tell
them another story.
“Have you often been shipwrecked?” asked Dick
of Pim.
Pim looked at him in surprise.
“What a question to ask!” he cried. “Dozens of
times!”
He thought for a time and then asked, “Would
you like me tell you a shipwreck story now?”
Given the necessary encouragement, he began
his story.
“This happened about ten years ago. I was on
a cargo boat that carried a few passengers as well.


My great mate on her was a chap by the name of
Dart, Dart Thistleswift. Dart was one of the best.
We were somewhere in the Pacific off the Philip-
pines when we hit a reef. Dart and I were playing
crib down below and the game was so exciting that
we took no notice of the bump when the reef was
hit. But when I found that our feet were in a
pool of water I said, ‘By jinks, Dart, we’re sink-
ing.’ ‘I don’t think so, Jack,’ he said. ‘That’s
twenty with a pair.’ ”
“You see, old Dart was winning, and he hated
being disturbed before we could finish the game.
So I didn’t worry him until the water was nearly
up to our knees. Then I said, ‘Listen, Dart, I’ll
just run up and have a look.’
”So I went up on deck, leaving him grumbling.
The sight I saw made my blood run fast. The old
boat was nearly down. So I howled out to him and
up he came, grumbling because I wouldn’t finish the
game. All the others had gone but, by a bit of
luck, a lifeboat was still in the davits. So we got
in and rowed off. I forgot to tell you that when
Dart saw that the boat was really done for, he
dashed into one of the passenger’s cabins and came
back with two dressing gowns and two top-hats. I
put on a pink dressing gown and Dart put on a blue
one with flowers painted on it. Then we each put
on a top-hat. When we’d got about half a mile
away, the old boat sank. Dart was groaning
loudly. ‘What’s wrong, Dart?’ I asked him. ‘Oh,
he said, ‘and I was winning, too. That’s the first


game of crib I thought I’d win and this happens.’
‘That’s all right, Dart,’ I said. ‘You won the game
fair and square.’ We shook hands and became
quite cheerful. ‘Thanks, Jack,' he said, ‘but I did
play well, didn’t I?’ I told him that I’d never seen
anyone play better except a Russian I once knew.
This made him dumpy again, and I had to tell him
a lot of lies about how I thought he could beat the
Russian easily, and things like that, before he
brightened up. Well, Dart and I saw an island not
far away and we set a course for it. Old Dart had
the pack of cards with him and he brought them
out of his pocket and wanted me to play. ‘Not now,
Dart,’ I said, ‘wait till we’re ashore.’ When we
landed on the beach a native youngster came run-
ning up to us. ‘Hello,’ he said. ‘You had bad luck
with your big canoe being sunk.’ ‘Yes,’ said Dart,
‘and I was just winning, too.’
“The youngster looked in a puzzled way at him
and then turned to me. ‘He hasn’t been drinking
sea-water, has he?’ he asked. Of course I could see
that the boy thought that poor old Dart was mad.
‘No,’ I replied. ‘He’s just upset because he was
winning a game of crib which was disturbed by
the boat sinking.’ The boy laughed. A merry
laugh he had, too. ‘That’s all right,’ he said, ‘but
now you’d better come home with me.’ ‘Before we
start,’ I said, ‘you’re not cannibals, are you?’ ‘Of
course we’re not,’ laughed the native. ‘We’re human
beings just like you two.’
“He thought I’d asked him whether they were
animals, you see. So I explained what I meant,


X W
and he was so horror-stricken that I knew they
wouldn’t eat us. It wasn’t much of a home he
took us to, but it was very clean and tidy, which
is the main thing. There was only a very old
woman in it, and she looked frightened when we
came in with the kid. ‘Gran,’ said the boy, ‘here
they are. I knew they wouldn’t hurt us.’ ‘Bundle,
you’re a stout-hearted boy,’ she said to him. Then
“ You'd better come
home with me."
she turned to us and told us that she was pleased
to see us and was really friendly. She said that
she hoped we’d stay with her and showed us a
room we could sleep in. There wasn’t much fur-
niture in it and only one picture. And what do
you think it was? It was a jam-tin label that I
supposed had been washed ashore. A kinder old
woman than Gran I have never met. She told us
that the rest of the natives had run round to the
other side of the island when they saw us coming
ashore. She sent Bundle to tell them we wouldn’t


hurt them and that they'd better come home. ‘Why
didn’t you run too?’ I asked. ‘Oh,’ she said, ‘I
didn’t think you’d hurt me. I’m so old.’ At that
“/ explained what I
meant."
old Dart forgot his troubles and went and put his
arm round her. ‘Neither we will, Gran,’ he said.
‘Jack and I will help look after you.’ She was as
pleased as could be at that, and told Dart to take
off his boots as she thought his socks were wet.
He was so pleased at her thoughtfulness that he
took off his dressing gown as well and gave it to
her.
“‘Do you play crib?' he asked. She said she
didn’t, and he promised to teach her. Then Bundle
and the rest came back. They were a decent-
looking mob. One chap and his wife came into our
new home and Gran introduced them. His name
was Tam and his wife’s was Koo Koo. They were
nice people and as friendly as Gran, though a bit


more scared. Well, old Dart and I liked them at
once and I think they liked us. We settled there
with those islanders and a happier time we’ve
never had. Bundle was a bit of a nuisance some-
times, as he was always up to monkey jokes with
Dart, who was always saying he’d skin him alive,
though I’m sure he really liked the kid. Dart
taught Gran how to play crib, and when we’d been
there a week or so I’m blowed if she didn’t beat
him! But somehow he didn’t mind being beaten
by old Gran. Then we used to have concerts at
night, and the music those people played was
lovely. They played on a sort of banjo. At one
concert, they asked Dart to do something and he
got up and started to recite ‘The Wreck of the
S.S. Hefferus,’ I think it was called; but he could
only remember a little of it and forgot the rest. I
had taught old Gran ‘Three Blind Mice,’ and she
said that. It would have brought the house down,
as the saying is, if we’d been in one, but we were
out in the open air. They asked me to perform, so I
got up and asked them riddles, ‘Why is a door not
a door?’ and things like that. They did laugh
when I told them the answers. That concert was
great fun. Now we come to the strange bit of
this story.”
Pirn started to light his pipe, but the boys
grudged him even this little respite.
“Go on, Jack, go on. Never mind about your
old pipe,” Dick said.


This did not hurry him, and it was a minute or
two before his pipe was burning to his satisfac-
tion. At last he went on.
“Where was I? Oh, yes, coming to the queer
bit now. After we’d been on the island about a
week, Dart caught a bad cold, and one morning
he and Bundle and I were sitting in the sun and
I was playing crib with Bundle. Suddenly old
Gran came outside the hut. ‘Bundle,’ she says,
‘come inside and peel those spuds. I’m waiting
for them.’ Well, Dart saw that Bundle was en-
joying the game, so he hopped up and shouted out,
‘l’ll peel them for you, Gran.’ Then he went in-
side. He’d only been inside the hut a minute or
two when I heard him shout out, ‘Jack, come here
a minute.’ T won’t be long,’ I said to Bundle,
putting down the cards I was holding. I went
inside, and Dart was so excited he could hardly
speak. ‘Look at this,’ he said, handing me the
knife Gran had given him to peel spuds with,
‘what’s it made of?’ Directly I saw it, I knew.
The knife was solid gold, handle and all. Bundle
had come inside and I said to him, ‘By jinks,
Bundle, where did this come from?’ ‘The cave,'
he replied. ‘Come on, Jack, I’m ready to finish
the game.’ ‘Just a second, Bundle,’ Dart said.
‘Anything more like this in the cave?’ ‘No,’ re-
plied the kid, ‘that was the only knife there.’ Then
he turned to me. ‘Come on, Jack, it’s getting on
towards dinner time.’ ‘All right, Bundle,’ I said,
‘just you tell us what’s in that cave you told us
about. Then I’ll finish the game.’ ‘Well,’ he said,


‘that was the only knife there, but there are dozens
of other things made of that funny yellow stuff
and bits of glass, too. Gran’s great-grandfather
got them out of a ship that was wrecked here
years and years and years ago. He put them in
the cave because he liked the look of them, but
they are no good. Come on, Jack, and we’ll finish
the game.’ ‘By jinks,’ I said, ‘by jinks.’ Dart
sprang up off his chair. ‘Can you take us to this
cave, Bundle?’ ‘Of course I can,’ replied Bundle.
‘l’ll take you after dinner if Jack will finish the
game with me now.'
“Would you believe it, but that kid beat me
seven games one after the other, I was so excited.
During dinner he said, ‘l’m going to take Jack
and Dart to the cave this afternoon.’ Gran
pricked up her ears at that. ‘You can take Jack,’
she said, ‘but not Dart. His cold’s too bad and
he may get his feet wet.’
“It took a lot of talk before she agreed to let
Dart go, but when I promised to see that his feet
didn’t get wet she said that it would be all right.
After dinner we set out and Bundle led us along
the shore until we came to a steep cliff. We walked
along the bottom of this for nearly a mile and then
Bundle stopped. ‘There’s the cave,’ he said, point-
ing to a hole about five feet from the ground. For
a second, Dart thought the boy had been at one of
his monkey jokes again, but I had a peep through
the hole and saw that there was a passage inside.
‘Give me a leg up,’ I said, ‘and I’ll get in first.’


When I climbed through I was in a passage so I
called out, ‘By jinks, Dart, Bundle is right. Come
on inside!’
“When the three of us were in the passage,
Bundle led the way. We went on, and on, and I
was just wondering how much further we were
going, when he suddenly stopped. ‘We’re there,’
he said. I lit a rush light Gran had given me and
the sight we saw made our eyes blink. It was a
big room we were in, but part of it was full of
big gold things. There were gold chairs and gold
tables and gold jars and a lot of other things.
Everything was gold, not just covered in gold
paint, but real solid gold. Old Dart’s mouth was
open and he was gasping like a fish.
“ ‘W T hat’s in that bag?’ I asked, pointing to a
bag that was standing against the wall. In fact,
there were bags leaning against the wall all
round the room. ‘Funny bits of glass, that’s all,’
said Bundle, opening it. Directly he opened that
bag it looked just like as if it was on fire. Do
you know what was in it? Diamonds! Diamonds
as big as your fist. Beautiful things they were.
The next bag we opened was full of sapphires and
the next of rubies, and so on. There were enough
valuable things in that room to buy half the
world.’
“ ‘They sparkle nicely, don’t they?’ said Bundle,
picking up a handful of stones and rolling them
along the floor. ‘Now just you stop that,’ growled
Dart. Bundle laughed at him and was just going


to sprinkle a handful of diamonds when Dart
caught him a clip over the ear. Not hurting him,
you understand, just sobering him. Dart and I
filled our pockets with diamonds and our top-
hats and our handkerchiefs and our shirts, till we
could just stagger along. Then we went home and
put them under the bed. We could hardly sleep
that night for thinking of them. Next day old
Gran scolded us for bringing home such a lot of
rubbish, but we didn’t care and only laughed.
‘Don’t you want some, Gran?’ I asked. ‘No,’ she
said. ‘They are no good. Not even for making
paths. The kiddies cut their feet on them/
“Some weeks after that a boat came and
anchored off the island. Saying good-bye to Gran
and Bundle and Koo Koo, and the rest, was hard
work, as we had grown awfully fond of them.
Gran cried when we left, but Dart had a wife and
children in England so he figured it out that it
was up to him to go. I would have liked to stay,
but I had to stick to him. Now, the sad part of
the story comes in. We had every stone except
six stolen from us when we’d left that island about
a week. If I only knew the name of the island
I’d go back to it to-morrow. A kinder, nicer,
honester lot of people I’ve never met. I reckon
that the time I spent there was the happiest in my
life.”
“Don’t you think you could find it again?” asked
Jimmie, and Dick added,
“Yes, don’t you?”


Pim scratched his head. “I’m afraid not," he
replied. “You see, round that part of the world
there are dozens of islands just like it, and unless
I had a boat to myself ” Then his face
brightened. “Well, perhaps some day I will.”
“But how about the six stones that were not
stolen?” asked Dick.
“Those were Dart’s,” replied Pim, “and although
he wanted me to take three of them I wouldn’t,
because I knew he was married and had a lot of
mouths to feed. Anyway, they were his, as he put
them under his pillow the night we were robbed.
Did he sell them? Yes, and to-day old Dart is
one of the richest men in England. If I wanted a
thousand pounds bad, I’d just drop him a line and
the money would be out by the next mail. But,
by jinks, one day I’ll take it into my head and
find that island!”
“Did you ever hear from Dart?” asked Dick.
“Often—only the other day I had a letter from
him. He’s quite well, but has troubles just like
ordinary people. Old Dart is very generous with
his money, you know. Does a lot of good, but he
gets terribly sick of wearing a top-hat all the
time. His wife won’t let him wear anything else.
He must have a fine place from what I can gather.
Piano in every room, even in the bathroom. You
see, it’s his wife who says a piano looks so nice,
and she buys one nearly every month. Funny
part of it is, no one can play them. Some time


ago a lady was staying there, and one night Dart
says to her, ‘Can you play a piano?’ She said
she could and sat down to the big piano in the
front room. ‘There’s three keys missing,’ she
said when she opened the lid. ‘Can’t you knock
out a bit of a tune without them?’ asks Dart. ‘l’d
fancy a drop of music.’ ‘Right ho! I’ll have a
shot at it,’ she says.
“She thumped a note or two and then jumped
up with a yell. Dozens of white mice came hop-
ping out of the gaps where the notes were gone.
Do you know what had happened? Dart’s young-
sters had turned the piano into a home for white
mice. That made him suspicious, and he looked at
a lot of the other pianos. The one in the kitchen
was used for keeping pots and pans in, and the
one in the bathroom was full of sponges and
toothbrushes and soap and things like that. Yes,
Dart has his troubles and says that he often
wishes he was back with Gran. And, by jinks, I
do too!”
When Pirn had finished his story, Syd told the
boys that, as they had to make an early start in
the morning, Pirn and he would have to go. Soon
after they had gone, Dick went to bed and Jimmie
was left alone.


CHAPTER XIX.
MATILDA MEETS A COUSIN.
It was not long that night before Matilda and
Sam arrived for their usual visit.
“How are you, my dear?" asked Matilda.
“I have been worrying about you. You remember
once I said that I thought I could cure you? Well,
I’ve done nothing, but somehow I think these
leaves might help.”
Here she opened her bag and brought out some
gum-leaves. Jimmie thanked her and put them
under his pillow.
“Shall I eat them, Matilda?” he asked.
“Yes, my dear, when they are finished I’ll bring
some more.”
“Matilda’s found a sort of relation,” said Sam,
and, on being asked, Matilda told her story.
“Late last night,” she began, “I was near our
home when I heard a noise like some one crying.


Sam was over with Hookum, and the family we’re
living with were all playing Slippery Sam. I wan-
dered about from tree to tree and at last found
who was making the noise. She was something
like a very big possum but was carrying her baby
on her shoulder. She could cling to the boughs but,
Carrying her baby on her shoulder.
would you believe it, my dear, she had no tail. I
said good evening and she said good evening, and
we started talking. She told me her name was bear
and spoke of her husband as Teddy. Of course we
began talking about Sam and Teddy.”


“What did you tell her about me?” asked Sam,
at once interested.
“I told her how brave you were and about the
time when you opened the window and a lot of
things like that. She said that her Teddy was a
good husband but that he didn’t know much about
opening windows. She wasn’t a very exciting com-
panion, but I’m sure she’s good. My dear, I’m not
fast, but she seemed just a little slow. I liked her
baby and nursed it for a while, and we became
good friends. She looked so innocent, you know.”
“Now, Matilda,” put in Sam, “it’s the innocent
people of whom you must beware. I remember,
because of my tooth.”
“What about your tooth?” asked Jimmie.
It was Matilda who replied.
“Once Sam was hopping with toothache and he
met some woman possum. She gave him a special
sort of leaves to suck and, would you believe it, my
dear, they made him ever so much worse. Before
he sucked them, Sam said she looked innocent, but
afterwards, I daren’t let him speak about her. This
Mrs. Teddy Bear I’m telling you about told me
that she was a sort of cousin of mine, and I believe
she is.”
“Well,” said Sam, “she may be a cousin of yours,
but if she looks as innocent as you say, she’s no
cousin of mine.”


It was then that Jimmie told the possums of the
letter his Uncle was going to write and that it
seemed certain that Hookum would have to go back
to the Zoo. Hookum’s freedom was drawing to a
close and it was becoming harder and harder for
Jimmie to forget it.
“My dear, you’ll miss Hookum terribly, won’t
you?” asked Matilda.
“Yes, I’m afraid we will, but we won’t talk about
it. Talking only makes it worse and we can’t do
anything. I’m sorry I told you about it if you’re
going to feel miserable, but I somehow couldn’t
help it.”
“My dear,” replied Matilda, “I’m glad you told
us. Now I want to go away with Sam for a few
minutes. We’ll be back soon. Come on, Sam.”
Before he could stop them or ask for reasons, the
possums had gone. Jimmie wondered why they had
left him and what they could be discussing. He won-
dered if it could be anything to do with Hookum.
In about five minutes they returned and stood near
the bed, holding each other by the hand. Jimmie
was reminded of the time when they had first met
Hookum. They had joined hands then because they
had been frightened. Were they frightened now?
Matilda broke the silence.
“My dear, don’t worry. We’ve talked it over
and we’ve thought of a way. Hookum is friendless
without you and you’d miss him terribly. It’s dif-
ferent with Sam and me. If we’re together we’re


never lonely. So we’ve got a plan. We two pos-
sums will go to the Zoo instead of Hookum. It
won’t be bad there because I’ll have Sam and Sam
will have me. You’ll let us do this, won’t you, my
dear?”
They were really such splendid possums that
Jimmie felt a lump come into his throat. He felt
inclined to cry, as he had never cried before. And
because he didn’t want them to see his distress, he
was very short in his reply.
“Possums,” he said, “if you care for me, go away,
go away at once.” He lay awake for hours that night
thinking over their offer. The pathetic part of it
lay in the fact that, however splendid it might be,
it was useless. They imagined that the Zoo
authorities would be just as pleased with two
possums as with a truant elephant. Probably an
elephant would be of more value to the Zoo than a
dozen, a hundred, perhaps even a thousand pos-
sums. Yet he could not tell Matilda and Sam that.
Why had Zoos ever been made? But then, had
there been no Zoo, it was certain that Hookum
would never have been brought to Australia.
Jimmie’s mind was very troubled and his sleep that
night was haunted by bad dreams.


CHAPTER XX.
THE BUNYIP HOLE.
When the mail came in, on the following day,
there were two letters for Jimmie. One was from
his father and one from Maggie. Although he
enjoyed his father’s letter, Maggie’s was of more
interest to him. She said that Bob Watson had
told her all about the trip and of the bad luck he
had had, “what with blowouts and engine trouble
and one thing and another.” She was surprised at
having the fifteen pounds returned so quickly, and
thanked him. She told him that Bob Watson had
made friends with “one of the men up there called
Syd.” Syd had spoken a lot about him to Bob and
“had seemed real cut up” to see him so sick. Syd
and his friend had promised to cheer him up, and
Syd’s friend had said that he would tell him a few
yarns. Maggie hoped that they were doing it. She
wrote, “The place seems real lonely since you left
and no Hookum here to snatch the hats off my
head, but tell him I forgive him.” She thanked


him again for having left Rory with her, and ended
her letter with the hope that he would grow well
at Yendoola.
As a matter of fact, Jimmie was feeling better
and had hopes of completely recovering. The
country air was doing him a great deal of good.
After lunch Dick reminded him of the plan they
had made for going to the creek. Dick fetched his
pony, Jimmie rode on Hookum, and they started.
It was a hot day, but the two miles to the creek
were soon covered. Hookum, having put Jimmie
under a tree near the water’s edge, plodded off with
the hope of meeting “that bird thing” again.
Now, the creek at Yendoola was not a rushing
stream in the summer. It was a line of holes, the
holes being connected by a mere trickle of water.
The spot that Dick had chosen for his bathe was
known as “The Bunyip Hole.” Many years before,
some Australian aborigines had declared that a
weird animal, which they called a Bunyip, lived in
it, and the pool had taken its supposed occupant’s
name. It was a good place for bathing purposes,
one end being very shallow and the other deep, with
a gradually sloping bottom. Dick was very soon in
the shallow water and splashed about in enjoyment.
After about a quarter of an hour, he came out and
lay in the sun near Jimmie.
“I’m going in again,” he said, “and this time I’m
going in the deep end. I can swim well enough to
have a shot at it, and I remember someone once


telling me that a chap can swim if he thinks he
can. You know, just sort of crawl out.”
The boys talked the matter over and decided that
it seemed a sensible theory. Then Dick went to the
deep end to test the truth of the statement. His
confidence was great, and he dived into the water.
After his head appeared, Jimmie could see that
something was very wrong. Dick’s arms were go-
ing like flails but he was making no progress and
his head was going under.
“Try to crawl, try to crawl out,” yelled Jimmie.
Dick opened his mouth, as if to reply, but swal-
lowed a lot of water instead. Jimmie noticed that
he was looking frightened. Why was he a cripple?
Why couldn’t he go in and save his cousin? Then
he thought of Hookum and whistled, but the noise
he made was not great. Why couldn’t he whistle
louder? He remembered the whistle that Syd had
given him. Had he brought it? In a frenzy of
excitement, he put his hand into his pocket and felt
for it. Yes, he had that whistle. Putting it to his
mouth, he blew. Blast after blast echoed and re-
echoed. Dick was sinking now and only his hands
were visible. Would Hookum hear the call? Again
and again the whistle’s shrill blast rang out.
Dick’s hands had disappeared from view. Would
Hookum never come? Still blowing, Jimmie looked
in the direction where Hookum had gone. About
half a mile away, he saw a cloud of dust appear,
and when it got nearer Jimmie saw that the
elephant was in it. Soon Hookum had reached
him.


“Dick’s drowning,’’ shouted Jimmie, pointing to
the spot where his cousin had gone under. Not
for a second did Hookum pause, but ran into the
water with a mighty splash. Jimmie saw him
groping with his trunk and soon he was back on
the bank, carrying the boy. Dick was quite un-
conscious and Hookum laid him down beside
Jimmie.
“Turn him on his side, Hookum, please,’’ said
Jimmie, “and then the water will run out of his
mouth.’’ This Hookum did.
Again the knowledge gained from the Boy Scouts
came to Jimmie’s aid.
“Hookum,’’ he said, “dash up to my bed on the
verandah and bring back all the blankets you can
carry.’’
The elephant ran off and Jimmie turned his
attention to Dick.
He turned him on to his back, and having made
a roll of his coat, put it under Dick’s shoulders. So
engrossed was he, that he did not hear two horse-
men gallop up. It was only when he heard a voice,
“Lad, lad,’’ that he realized that his Uncle had ar-
rived. Syd was with him, and together they took
control of the situation. In a short time Dick’s
eyes opened. When his breathing had become
almost natural, Hookum returned. He had brought
not only Jimmie’s blankets, but his mattress and
pillow as well. It was no time to ask questions, and
Mr. Harper made a bundle of Dick, wrapping him


up in the blankets and laying him on the mattress.
Then he sent Syd up to the house to get the car.
When Syd had gone, Mr. Harper asked for details,
and Jimmie told him of Hookum’s rescue work. Mr.
Harper listened, but “ ’Pon my sour’ was the only
remark he made. He told Jimmie that when they
heard the whistle Syd had recognised it and
guessed that something was wrong. It was not
long before Mrs. Harper arrived in the car and
Dick, still swathed in blankets, was put in the back
seat. Mrs. Harper drove off and Jimmie’s Uncle
got on his horse and, leading Dick’s pony, he and
Jimmie, on Hookum, started for home. Mr. Harper
said little but his brows were knitted, as if in deep
thought.
“What are you thinking about, Uncle Bill?”
asked Jimmie once but, receiving no reply, he did
not repeat his question.
That evening at dinner, Mr. Harper made a re-
mark that hurt Jimmie.
“To-night,” he said, “I’m going to write to Mr.
Morris about Hookum,” and then, seeing the pained
look on Jimmie’s face, “Why, lad, what’s wrong?
Nothing, I hope.”
“Oh, tell him, Bill,” added Mrs. Harper; “don’t
hurt him like that. Tell him what you’ve decided
to do.”
Dick was in bed but Jess was there, and asked
her father to hurry up and tell them.


“Lad/' said he to Jimmie, “your Aunt Eileen and
I have been talking matters over. There is no
doubt that you and Hookum saved Dick’s life this
afternoon. That being so, it would be rather an
ungrateful trick if we were the means of having
Hookum sent back to the Zoo. On the other hand,
we cannot keep him unless we buy his liberty. To
make a long story short, that is what I am going to
write to Mr. Morris about.”
Jimmie felt that a great weight had been lifted
off his mind but could make no reply. He felt that
he was just bursting with happiness. Now he
could thank Matilda and Sam for their offer. They
need never know how useless it would have been.
He laughed from sheer happiness.
“Of course, lad,” added his Uncle, “we mustn’t
be too positive. I don’t want you to take it for
granted that Hookum can be bought, but ”
Here he turned to his wife. “Come on, Eileen,
we’ll leave the youngsters alone and talk it over.”
Jimmie was still laughing when he went to bed
that night. The possums came, and when they
had jumped on to the bed he told them that he was
sorry if he had seemed rude on the previous night.
He thanked them both very warmly and said that
he hoped they understood.
“Oh, my dear,” said Matilda, “we understood.
When do you think we’ll have to go?”
“Go? Go where?” he asked.


“To the Zoo,” said Sam.
“Never,” replied Jimmie.
Then he told them of the events of the day and
of Mr. Harper’s plan to buy Hookum. When he
had finished, Matilda said “Good night, my dear,”
jumped off the bed and ran into the trees.
“Lawks,” said Sam, “Matilda’s a funny old girl.
She’s going off to cry. To cry just because she’s
happy. Lawks, she’s funny.”


CHAPTER XXI.
THE POEM.
The following days were anxious ones for
Jimmie. He was naturally impatient to hear
whether Hookum could be bought, but day after
day passed and no reply came from Mr. Morris.
One night at the barracks, Syd was reading and
Pirn was rummaging through his box.
“At last Fve found it, Syd," he remarked.
“Found what?" asked Syd, laying down his book.
“The poem. No, you don’t know about it. The
other night when you went in to Gundibool, to that
concert, I was over with Jim. I was telling him
of my sister Kate and how she was so clever about
knocking poetry together. Years ago I was at
home on a holiday and she was walking with me
across a bit of a green. There were a lot of butter-
cups growing here and there and I kicked one. She
cut up rough about it, and when we reached home
she wrote this poem. She was only eighteen at the
time, so she may be able to do even better now.”


Pim was reading it to himself. “Not bad either,”
he reflected, and then turning to Syd, “Care to see
it?”
Syd took it and read it.
“What do you think of it?” asked Pim.
“Well,” replied Syd, “you know, Jack, I’m not
much of a hand at judging poetry. If it was a
horse, now, I’d have a better idea.”
“Yes, I know, but how does it strike you? Do
you like it?”
The boundary rider looked uncomfortable.
“It’s not for me to say, but don’t you think ”
He left the sentence incomplete. It was not until
Pim had pressed him to say what he thought that
he finished his remark.
“Don’t you think—of course I don’t pretend to
know much about poetizing—but don’t you think
it’s a shade, you know, just a shade, sentimental?”
The two men talked the matter over and agreed
that, although it might be beautiful poetry, it was
just a little sentimenal.
“Don’t think I’m trying to run down your sister’s
work, Jack,” Syd almost pleaded, “but that’s the
way it strikes me. Still, as I’ve just said, I’m no
judge.”
Before he went to bed that night, Pim put his
sister’s work in an envelope and walked over to the
homestead with it. There he met Dora, to whom
he gave the envelope, asking her to hand it to
Jimmie. When Jimmie had finished his breakfast


on the following morning, Dora gave it to him, and
this is the poem he read:—
THE BROKEN BUTTERCUP.
(A Poem by Kate Maria Pim.)
Verse One.
A buttercup in a field it grew
So yellow and so green.
It was as nice a buttercup
In all this world was seen.
Verse Two.
It looked so lovely standing there
Waving its gorgeous head;
What happened next was hard to bear—
My heart it almost bled.
Verse Three.
My brother Jack was with me when
I saw it on the sward;
I don’t think Jack he knew much then
How much I that lovely dower adored.
Verse Four.
He swung his great big foot right back.
And gave an awful kick.
The buttercup it fell in twain—
It made me feel quite sick.
Verse Five.
It lay all crushed and crumpled there.
As dead as a door-knob,
I picked it up and tended it
And gave a sob-sob-sob.
Verse Six.
Then, turning to my brother Jack,
I said, “You broke that flower I”
But Jack he only laughs alack:
“Don’t worry, Kate, they grow up every hour I"
Verse Seven.
But I was almost quite heart-broke.
Although Jack he didn’t cry;
I didn’t then much to him spoke.
But he said, “By Jinks, if we want any dinner we
must fly.”
Verse Eight.
But that dead flower it haunts me yet
To think what it might have been
If Jack had left it undisturbed,
So yellow and so green.
While Jimmie was reading it, he laughed loud
and long, for he saw that it was crammed with
funny mistakes.


CHAPTER XXII.
JIMMIE’S ACCIDENT.
That day the letter came from Mr. Morris, and
Mr. Harper read parts of it to Jimmie. Mr. Morris
was surprised to hear that a boy had outwitted
them. Still, he had not forgotten how “you (mean-
ing Mr. Harper) saved Ermyntrude from destruc-
tion.” Mr. Harper explained that Ermyntrude
was the name of the mouse that young Morris had
tamed at the school. Although Mr. Morris had no
power to sell any animal, he thought, at the next
meeting of the Directors he could secure the neces-
sary permission. Altogether it was a very cheer-
ing letter, and Jimmie was in high spirits when he
heard it.
A fortnight later Mr. Morris wrote again,
making a definite offer. How much money Mr.
Harper paid for Hookum, Jimmie never knew, but
now Hookum was his, and there was no fear of
the elephant ever having to return to the Zoo.


Life was very enjoyable to Jimmie, after
Hookum’s purchase. Jess and Dick rode every day
to Widgee. Mr. Short’s children were taught by a
governess, who also taught the young Harpers.
Hookum spent much time with him, and every
night the possums came to his bed. Sam had be-
come quite friendly with the others and Matilda
was very proud of his social success. Hookum
made several attempts, but without success, to find
the Emu again, as he was bent on telling it some
surprising information about himself. On two of
his trips he took Jimmie with him. Mr. Lang had
been very surprised to hear about Hookum, but
said that he would not object to Jimmie keeping
him.
The holiday at Yendoola was drawing to a close
when an unfortunate event took place.
One Wednesday afternoon, Jimmie had been
reading. Tiring of the book, he put it down and
whistled for Hookum. About two feet from his bed
was a table, and on it lay the whistle that Syd had
given him. As Hookum had not come, he lent
across to get it. The corner of the table was
within easy reach, but the whistle lay on the other
side of the table. 'Farther and farther he
stretched until his body was almost horizontal. His
right hand was within six inches of the object it
sought when something slipped and he fell to the
verandah floor, where he lay unconscious.
Now as it happened, Jimmie’s signal had been
heard and, very soon after the accident, Hookum


arrived. At the sight of Jimmie’s white expres-
sionless face and unnatural position, he guessed
what had happened. But this was no situation for
him to handle. It was very different from rescuing
a drowning boy. In his distress, Hookum made the
noise he had made when he had frightened Wong.
It was the housemaid, Ida, who heard it. On
looking out of a window, she saw what had hap-
pened and raised the alarm. She rushed to Mrs.
Harper, but all that she could say, in her excite-
ment, was, “Jimmie killed himself.” Mrs. Harper
and Ida lifted the little figure and put him to bed
inside the house. The doctor at Yendoola was tele-
phoned and a message was left asking him to come
out as soon as possible. They did all they could to
make Jimmie comfortable, but it was half an hour
before his eyes opened.
“Where’s Hookum?” he asked. “I want him and
” but his voice died away before he could
finish and he relapsed into unconsciousness.
When Jess and Dick came home that afternoon
Hookum was behaving as they had never seen him
behave. Walking round in a circle, he was making
a most weird noise in his trunk.
“I wonder what’s wrong with Hookum,” said
Dick, but it was Jess who guessed.
“Oh, I hope nothing’s wrong with Jimmie,” was
her comment. It was she who had seen Dr.
Campbell at Widgee, where he was paying a social
visit. Widgee was telephoned and within half an
hour the doctor arrived. Dr. Campbell was a man


with a great deal of experience. Although not
young, he had gone to the war with the first Aus-
tralian Division. In 1917, while in France, he had
been badly wounded. On recovery he had been sent
to a hospital in England, where he served for
nearly two years. To that hospital were sent the
soldiers with spinal injuries, and Dr. Campbell had
learnt a great deal during his time there.
The reason why he practised his profession at
Gundibool was because the country suited his
health. Although he could have had a large prac-
tice in any city, at Gundibool he stayed.
Mr. Harper, who had been out when the accident
happened, returned to the house a few minutes be-
fore Dr. Campbell arrived, and was with him while
he examined Jimmie. That examination took
nearly an hour. After it, the two men went to
another room, where they were joined by Mrs.
Harper. Dr. Campbell was very grave, and said
that an operation was necessary. Jimmie’s condi-
tion, however, was too serious to attempt it then.
“My advice, Mr. Harper,” said he, “is this. To-
morrow if your nephew’s condition has sufficiently
improved to warrant it, I will operate. To-night I
should like to stay here. Will you inform the boy’s
father? I should like him to be here. I should
also like him to bring a trained nurse from Sydney.
Dr. Chappie from Bundong” (Bundong was the
next town to Gundibool) “will give the anaesthetic.
I can make all necessary arrangements by tele-
phone. The matron from our local hospital will


come here to-morrow and I will make arrangements
with Dr. Chappie to bring my instruments.”
Acting on the doctor’s advice, a telegram was
sent to Mr. Lang.
That evening at the Barracks Syd and Pirn
were sitting on the verandah, silently smoking
their pipes and occasionally looking towards the
house.
“You know, Jack, I’m all of a jump.”
There was a long pause before Pirn replied.
“So am I, but worst of it is we can’t do any-
thing.”
There was another long pause.
“I’m dead afraid young Jim will pass out. The
doctor wouldn’t stay the night if he didn’t think
so, too.”
“Oh, I don’t know, Syd. Plucky kid, Jim. He’ll
pull through.”
“Shake on it, Jack.”
The two men shook hands and relapsed into
silence.
When Matilda and Sam left their home that
night they were met by Hookum. He told ithem
what had happened, and the three decided to spend
the night by Jimmie’s window.
“Just wait a minute,” said Matilda, and she
hurried up the tree, to return very soon.
“I’ve just asked the other possums not to play
‘Slippery Sam’ to-night. They understand and say
that, of course, they won’t.”


Late that night Dr. Campbell went on to the
verandah to smoke his pipe. He was surprised to
see that outside the window of Jimmie’s room there
was the statue of an elephant. Strange that the
sculptor had carved the elephant’s ears right on
top of the head? Then one of the “ears” moved
and the doctor saw, by the moonlight, that it was
a possum. Strange that possums should sit on a
statue ?
An hour or two before daybreak the doctor again
went on to the verandah and saw that the possums
were still there.
In the morning Dr. Campbell said that Jimmie’s
condition had improved sufficiently to operate.
During breakfast he remarked, “That is rather an
unusual statue you have outside the boy’s window.
Last night two possums slept on it, which is rather
curious. I have never known possums to sleep on
stone before.”
“It is not a statue, doctor,” said Mr. Harper. “It
is a very much alive elephant. There is rather a
long story connected with it and the lad. Some
day I’ll tell you.”
The telephone bell rang. It was a message from
the Gundibool post office, a telegram from Sydney.
“Will you meet train? Am bringing nurse.
Lang.”


CHAPTER XXIII.
THE OPERATION.
Mr. Harper met the train that morning. Mr.
Lang had brought the nurse, a Miss Alsop, and also
Maggie. The two men were in the front seat of
the car and, on the way to Yendoola, Mr. Lang ex-
plained her presence.
“I hope that you don’t mind, Bill. I had quite
intended leaving her, but she was so cut up and
looked so terribly woeful that I could not do it.”
Mr. Harper assured his brother-in-law that he
was very pleased that she had come, and she could
help them look after Jimmie.
On reaching Yendoola, Mr. Lang and Maggie
were allowed to see Jimmie for a short time.
Maggie, on going to his bed, held his hand. He was
very weak but managed to whisper, “Mag, you old
angel.”
Her eyes filled with tears and she hurried from
the room.


“Son,” said his father, “I wish that I could bear
this for you. But the doctor told me that this
operation may cure you.”
Dr. Campbell was very pleased that Sister Alsop
was the nurse that Mr. Lang had brought. She
had worked for him in England and he had a great
respect for her ability. Before lunch, the matron
of the hospital and Dr. Chappie arrived and, after
the meal, preparation was made for the operation.
It was a very long operation, but after it was over,
Dr. Campbell professed himself satisfied. He said
that Jimmie had come through it very well and that
everything was going on satisfactorily.
The week following was one of anxiety, but the
day came when Dr. Campbell said to Mr. Lang,
“I think that I may safely say that your son is
out of danger. I have great hopes that he may
completely recover the use of his limbs.”
Jess and Dick had noticed that Hookum had
stayed near the house nearly all the time and that
at night the possums would come and sit on his
head.
“Curious thing, Eileen,” remarked Mr. Harper
to his wife, “but I haven’t heard any possums on
the roof since the lad’s accident. It almost seems
as though they knew.”
A week later Mr. Lang and Maggie returned to
Sydney. The night before she left, Hookum had
said to the possums,
“I think Ace is much better because his cousins
and Maggie seem so happy. I’m almost sure they


were trying to tell me something, but I couldn’t
understand them.”
44 You can talk from there."
Dr. Campbell had told Mr. Lang that it would
be best for Jimmie to stay in the country for at
least a year.
After another week Jimmie was so much better
that visitors were allowed to see him. He became


great friends with Sister Alsop and told her all
about Hookum, Matilda and Sam. One evening she
allowed the possums to enter the room. They sat
on his bed and talked with him for nearly half an
hour. Then an elephant’s trunk came through the
window.
“Hello, Ace,” said Hookum, “can I come and sit
on your bed too? I’ll be interesting.”
“You little scamp,” laughed Jimmie, “if you sit
on my bed, you’ll be far too interesting. You can
talk from there.”
Syd and Pirn spent many evenings with him, and
Pirn told some wonderful stories. Mr. Short came
twice to see him, and altogether he could not have
been cared for better.
He was always wanting to get out of bed to see
whether he could walk, but Sister Alsop made him
promise not to attempt such a thing. The day
came when he was allowed to wheel himself about
in his chair and a few wieeks later, with Dr. Camp-
bell’s help, he stood beside his bed. Certainly he
was rather shaky, but it was the first time that he
had stood for more than two years. After that,
Jimmie, with Sister Alsop’s help, would stand
every day for a short time.
Some weeks later, Dr. Campbell took him for a
walk, a walk of perhaps nine feet. Then, as with
the standing exercises, Sister Alsop took charge
and Jimmie went for a walk every day. Everyone


-c^C-
was delighted at his signs of recovery—none more
so than Hookum and the possums.
It was some months later. Two boys were run-
ning across one of the paddocks at Yendoola. One
boy was ahead of the other and the distance be-
tween them was increasing.
“Not quite so fast, Jimmie,” panted the boy in
the rear. “You know you can run a lot faster than
I can.”
“Not quite so fast, Jimmie,” panted
the hoy in the rear.
THE END


"Gulliver's Travels in Lilliput"
(By Dean Swift)
Illustrated with pictures from the talkie now being shown in Aus-
tralia, this book has been published in two editions by New Century
Press. The first, at 1/-, is for younger folk and is written in simple
language, in modern story style, with plenty of dialogue and action.
Another edition, bound, in boards and with an attractive coloured
jacket, is equally well illustrated with pictures from the film. This is
the original version, with the nasty bits omitted. Sold everywhere at 2/6.
"The Magic Seeds"
(By Keith McKeown)
Here is a wonderful story of a little girl, who, through swallowing
some magical fern-seeds, grows small enough to enter the homes of
the insects and to examine their ways. The author,, a famous Aus-
tralian entomologist, has put a great deal of natural history into his
story—but the story is the thing! Boys and girls of all ages will
delight in it. It is delightfully illustrated with pictures, showing the
little heroine's amazing adventures. Sold everywhere at 3/6.
"Jessie the Elephant"
(By W. M. Fleming)
Written by one of the best-known Australian authors, this book is
at once an enthralling story and an authentic history of Jessie, the
beloved elephant who for over half a century carried on her back the
young visitors to the Zoo. People who are grey-headed (or bald) to-day
can remember riding on Jessie; youngsters who have not yet left school
can remember her at Taronga Park. The book is plentifully illustrated
with photographs and drawings. Well-bound and clearly printed, sold
everywhere at 3/6.
"Bunyip Says So"
(By W. M. Heming)
The author's first delightful book, "Bunyip Told Me," is now a
classic among stories for children. "Bunyip Says So", the sequel, but
even more delightful and quite complete in itself deals with the same
charming group of scallywags—the birds and beasts of the Australian
bush, who in Mr. Fleming's story, meet and swap yarns, always clinching
any argument with "Bunyip Says So". The book is fully illustrated and
is on sale everywhere at 3/6.
Published by
NEW CENTURY PRESS PTY. LTD.
3 North York Street, Sydney.


"Hysterical History of Australia"
(By Eric Curry)
This book is primarily intended for laughing purposes
only. The illustrations are strictly in keeping with the text,
and the artist, Leslie Turnbull, is an Australian equivalent of
W. Heath Robinson. No more truly comic pictures have
ever before adorned and strengthened an Australian book
of Humour.
The author confesses that he has gone to great pains
to prepare his material. Not only has he crept furtively
into the free libraries —the only sort he says he can afford
—but he has also studied Livy, Caesar, Ovid, Plato,
Macaulay, Gibbon, Virgil, Karl Marx and a modern com-
pendium entitled "Mein Camphor." He has also consulted
many living authorities on contemporary Australian history,
including his greengrocer, dustman, milkman and paper-boy.
Many of the quaint tacts unearthed by the learned author
will doubtless become current knowledge after a tew scores
of thousands of "Hysterical History" have been circulated.
For instance:—The reason why Botany Bay was originally
called Bottomy Bay; Why Dirk Hartog's Island has a tin
dish on it; Why Captain Cook never saw the transit of
Venus; The true story of the Rum Corks; Governor Bligh
and his notorious sister, Nellie; The tacts about the Siamese
twins, Bassanflinders; The first shaving saloon in Australia;
The authentic Tasmanian Devil; Mrs. Macquarie and her
share; Australia's first aviator, the Flying Pieman; Why
Australian politicians bite off each other's noses; The dis-
graceful story of Sir Isaac Newton and Tasmania; The inside
history of Ned Kelly, the man who invented the axe; The
thrilling exposition of what really happened at the Eureka
Stockade. And so on. Price 7/6.
Published by
NEW CENTURY PRESS PTY. LTD.
3 North York St., Sydney.


"THEY BUILT A NATION", by Francis Clancy (full cloth, fully illustrated
by three well-known artists, 9/6).
"CERTAIN WORTHY WOMEN," by E. Marie Irvine (full cloth, profusely
illustrated by John Baird, 7/6),
"BROAD ACRES", by W. M. Fleming (full cloth, coloured jacket, 6/-).
"THE BRIERLEY ROSE", by Leslie Haylen (full cloth, coloured jacket,
■4/6; Popular Edition, well bound, well printed, coloured jacket, 2/6).
"IN BEN BOYD'S DAY", by Will Lawson (full cloth, coloured jacket, 6/-).
"FOR THE TERM OF HIS NATURAL LIFE", by Marcus Clarke. (De Luxe.
gold-lettered edition, 8/6; full cloth, coloured jacket, -4/6; Popular
Edition, well printed, well bound, coloured jacket, 2/6).
"BAIL UP!"—The Story of Ned Kelly, by Hilary Lofting (full cloth,
coloured jacket, 4/6; Popular Edition, well printed, well bound,
coloured jacket, 2/6).
"THE JINGLER", by S. A. Hosgood (full cloth, coloured jacket, 6/-).
"THEN AND NOW", by James Valentine (full cloth, coloured jacket,
illustrated, with dozens of maps, 4/6; Popular pocket edition, suitable
for motorists, hikers, tourists, overseas visitors; 2/6).
"APRON STRINGS", by Mary Kelaher (full cloth, coloured jacket, 6/-).
"BURNT SUGAR", by F. E. Baume. (2/6). (Also full cloth, coloured
jacket, 4/6).
"WHEN COBB & CO. WAS KING", by Will Lawson. (2/6).
"HERE'S ANOTHER", by L. W. Lower. (2/6).
"YOU'RE TELLING ME!" by W. Stewart Howard. (2/6).
"TURKISH SPY", by Charles Cooper. (2/6).
"TIMBER WOLVES", by Bernard Cronin. (2/6),
"DIGGER YARNS", A collection of A.I.F. Stories, as told by the men
themselves. Attractive cover. (2/-),
AND THESE NOVELS BY FREDERICK J. THWAITES:
"WHERE GODS ARE VAIN". (2/6).
"THE MELODY LINGERS". (2/6).
"THE MAD DOCTOR". (2/6).
"THE DEFENDER". (2/6).
"THE REDEMPTION”. (2/6).
"ROCK END". (2/6).
"HELL'S DOORWAY". (2/6, also in Full Cloth, 4/6).
"BROKEN WINGS", (2/6 also in Full Cloth, 4/6.)
"FLAMES OF CONVENTION". (2/6, also in Full Cloth, 4/6.)
Published by
NEW CENTURY PRESS PTY. LTD.
3 North York Street, Sydney.


f\)
AS 23
CHA
vM A -
VAft cajpir-


