

. r-r 1 n N
* ■ ' £ ■"• *> ‘ : jr
Hr- *
*.
■
o *
■ ,
-
■ *
' •*
* wm *• *'
■ * > ■'
• ,
! • ■
* ,
i
. #\ % / ■- J
v ■* -r:
.
■
■
■
|


I
I
%
*


/ J ft c
HORRORS
RUSSIAN RULE,
BARBAROUS CRUELTIES
OF THE
GRAND DUKE ALEXANDER,
EMPEROR OF RUSSIA,
AS THEY CAME UNDER THE PERSONAL OBSERVATION OF A
POLISH EXILE,
WHO WITH FOUR HUNDRED OTHER PRISONERS RECENTLY MADE HIS
ESCAPE FROM SIBERIA.
PRICE, 2s. 6d.
MELBOURNE:
PUBLISHED BY THE AUTHOR, 43, CONDELL ST. COLLINGWOOD,
AND MAY BE HAD AT ALL BOOKSELLERS.
1855.


SHORTLY WILL BE PUBLISHED,
THE SAME AUTHOR,
THE WAR WITH RUSSIA,
ITS PAST AND PRESENT HISTORY-HER FREQUENT
WARS WITH TURKEY-THE STATE OF HER ARMY
-THE STATE OF HER NAVY-THE CHARACTER
OF ALEXANDER 11., EMPEROR OF RUSSIA-
AND THE PROBABLE TERMINATION OF
THE PRESENT WAR.
PRINTED AT THE ARGUS OFFICE, COLLINS STREET, EAST.


CONTENTS.
CHAPTER I.
Peasantry of Russia and General Treatment of Russian Subjects ... 5
The Knout, the Stick, and Cruel Barbarity of the Present Emperor,
Alexander 11. ... ... ... ... ... ... 14
The Gauntlet ... ... ... ... ... ... 23
Punishment Most Commonly Inflicted by the Direction of Lords or
Noblemen ... ... ... ... ... ... 26
Siberia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 27
CHAPTER VI.
Stratagems of the Czar, and Further Illustration of the Cruelties of
Siberian Discipline ... ... ... ... ... 29
Treatment of Prisoners in Siberia—their Employment.—The Cruel
Process of Branding.—A Brief Outline of the Author’s Escape
from Siberia ... ... ... ... ... .... 37
t
CHAPTER YIH.
The River Neva and the Prison ... ... ... ... 51


#
.. •
■' ■
...
• <
0
c . - . i- .


TREATMENT
RUSSIAN SUBJECTS.
CHAPTER I.
PEASANTRY OP RUSSIA AND GENERAL TREATMENT OP RUSSIAN
SUBJECTS.
The native population of Russia consists of two distinct bodies
only, except the clergy, namely, the nobles and the peasants; the
latter of which are as yet but little removed from the uncivilised
and brutish state in which they were left by the Rurics and Yal-
dimirs of other days.
In other parts of Europe we find between the aristocracy and
the peasantry a vast number of intermediate classes; and it is no
uncommon occurrence to find one of the lower class by birth,
rising from his original station by interest, caprice, or talent, to a
more elevated position. But in Russia such change or improve-
ment in the position and character of an individual is never known.
The Russian peasant, however desirous he may be to improve his
present condition, or to change his occupation, is so bound and
fettered by the iron hand of a tyrannical lord, whose interest it is
to keep his subjects in a state of brutish subjection, that all hope
of improvement is cut off, and every effort thwarted. Indeed, the
peasant cannot even change his residence without his lord’s consent
and approval. The peasantry are ruled and enslaved by about


sixty-thousand noble families, in whose hands is the entire ad-
ministration of law and justice. Indeed, the law of Russia protects
the interests of none except those who are connected with the
government. There is no enactment of laws by the state, or are
there any courts of justice to redress the wrongs of the serf; inas-
much as he is considered the legitimate property of his lord, and is
viewed in the light of a mere farming machine. He is reduced to
such a degree of passive obedience and mental submission, that he
never thinks he has need of law or justice beyond his lord’s ad-
ministration ; and imagines that justice or a court of appeal was
only intended for the nobility. The lord judges all differences, and
his decision is without appeal; and in order to keep his slaves in an
entire state of passive obedience, he employs all means of correction
and whatever unusual punishments he may deem necessary. He
can even send them as convicts to the Siberian bastiles, accom-
panied by their wives and children !
The character of the Russian serf is a profound mystery;—
cruelly disciplined under a yoke of atrocious servitude, he seems
indifferent to all around him, and appears not to be aware of the
enormity of ill-treatment under which he is bowed down; he may,
like the Poles, hoard up in his heart projects of a terrible ven-
geance, or he may simply feel pain after the manner of a mere
animal. Like the negro, he entertains the greatest aversion to
work; like him, he has a most awful dread of death; and like
him, too, he practises the art of dissimulation to an extent of which
it is utterly impossible to convey any adequate idea. This cha-
racter, however, is common to all nations, where the degrading
yoke of an autocratic government has subjected thorn to the will
and caprice of a despot. Reduced by the iron yoke of despotism,
all intelligence appears to be extinct in this specimen of human
nature, and it would seem that nothing remains, save the coarse
instinct of the brute.
From the age of sixteen, both males and females are compelled
to labour; and each one is obliged to give three days’ work in each
week to his or her lord; and during the remainder of the week,
the serf cultivates as much land as will supply him with corn for
the sustenance of his family and his cattle.


It often occurs, that the poor serf endeavours to effect his escape,
when goaded to madness and driven to desperation by the bar-
barous cruelty of his lord; but he is mostly brought bach again,
sooner or later, through a reward of one hundred florins (equal to
50s. English) offered to any one who will recover the runaway, and
place him once more in the safe custody of his tyrannical lord.
The punishment for the first offence is a whipping, or a severe
flogging with the stick. The whip is a leather plaited thong
measuring three yards in length, and one and a half inch thick near
the handle, tapering to a narrow point, having three knots near the
end at a distance of one foot from each other. The serf, when
about to undergo the punishment of the whip, is fixed to an up-
right iron frame, made for the purpose, with his back parts quite
bare and exposed; his hands, legs, and feet well secured to prevent
his moving. In this perpendicular position he receives, for the
first offence, one hundred and fifty lashes; for the second, five
hundred; and for the third offence, he is condemned to the t( knout.”
This instrument of cruelty, or invention of refined barbarity, will
be explained hereafter. The female offender is punished in a
similar manner to the male ; but fifty lashes are given for the first
offence, one hundred for the second, and for the third offence, she
also is condemned to the knout. Like the brute creation, the
Russian peasant is kept in subjection by fear, and awed into
obedience by the tyrannical barbarity of his superior. The serf
has but one apartment for himself, his family, his pigs, fowls,
horse) bullocks, geese, or whatever live stock he may possess. In
the same apartment or hovel, thus huddled together, the impure
and dirty habits of living must infect the atmosphere of the
cabin or apartment most injuriously. The severity of the winter
season compels the occupier of such hovels to exclude all the fresh
air possible on account of the cold; and the light of day finds its
way through oiled paper, or a greenish glass, in substance and
colour like our wine bottles. He is liable to the inspection of his
lord, who has a right to take whatever he thinks proper, whether
the serf s pig, horse, or even his wife, or any, or all of his children,
at any hour of the day or night. Therefore, locks, bolts, or bars
are implements quite useless, and almost unknown.


The unlimited power of the noble on his estate, enables bim to
dispose of the labor, property, or life of any of his subjects as he
pleases. He can abuse either the married woman or young girl,
with a brutality altogether incredible; and when he has once ex-
pressed the words, “ such is my will,” there is none in all the
length or breadth of his estate, who dares offer the least opposition
to his desires. Hesitation or refusal is in his eyes a crime, punish-
able by every torture that can be invented, and even death beneath
the thong of the “ knout.”
The Russian peasant, thus enslaved, is induced to practise all
sorts of deception, dissimulation, and falsehood. Indeed, from a
being so degraded and oppressed, there can be expected but little
virtue, energy, or integrity In the various localities, remote from
the capital, the male peasant, from his dress, deportment, thick
rough hair, and long unshorn beard, resembles more a wild animal
than a human being. His aspect is most repulsive; and from his
filthy habits, he leaves behind him a most disgusting odour. In
such districts, the uncultivated appearance and manners just men-
tioned are by no means confined to the peasant; for even the lord,
in a general way, is not distinguished from his slave, either by
his manners or dress, and is only recognised as a superior in the
carrying out of his authority in the use of his stick wherever
he goes.
The greatest barbarity is seen in the governments of the west,
between Ladoga and the Hwyna; in the solitudes which are thinly
peopled, and without roads, except the tracks formed by th£ feet
of the bear and the wolf; and between Limbirsk, Perm, and the
governments between Kasan and Moscow, the Russian slave is
treated the most cruelly. There it is that serfdom flourishes to its
fullest extent, and in all its brutal severity; there it is that men
and women are driven and treated in all respects like animals !
there it is that crimes and tortures inhuman are practised with
impunity; and were only the half of them narrated, the hardest
heart would bleed at their description. Indeed, these lords do not
hesitate to use most unmercifully the whip, the knout, and what-
ever kind of barbarous torture they deem necessary for the further-
ance of their objects, and even poison and assassinate at their


pleasure. Besides being subjected to numerous acts of barbarity
unparalleled on the face of the earth, the peasants are often ex-
posed to dreadful famines. There are several cases on record, in
which the inhabitants of a whole province or district have been
under the necessity of eating straw and the bark of trees; which,
after having been pounded up together, and made into an earthy
and nauseous paste, served to fill their stomachs and to satisfy their
craving hunger. This was the last resource to save them from
starvation ; for the cattle, poultry, and vermin had all been killed
and eaten. During this period of famine, in 1847, the Czar ex-
ported the corn —which he extorted from his subjects in the various
districts, and for which he paid them a mere nominal value—and
obtained for the same forty or fifty millions of pounds sterling,
which he invested in the banks of France and England, while
many of his people were reduced to utter deprivation, and hundreds
died of starvation.
This autocrat who has robbed whole nations, who has coveted
Turkey, and made every preparation to subjugate it to his despotic
rule and government, to enrich himself, and to augment his own
territory, which already consists of seven millions of square miles—
being the ninth part of terra Jirma, and the twenty-eighth part of
the whole globe —would feel no qualms of conscience in plundering
his own enslaved subjects, to add a few thousands to his
immense revenue. This vast territory, peopled by nearly seventy
millions of degraded beings, is governed by a single man ! —an in-
flexible, inexorable autocrat; the supremacy of whose will is never
contested, disputed, or even discussed. His people are so completely
subjugated to his will and power, that they yield implicit obedience
to his commands, bowing their necks and grovelling beneath the feet
of their Czar, ready to rise at the first signal, even to the hazard of
their lives, to do him service.
Much has been said against American slavery, which the talented
work of Mrs. Harriet Beecher Stowe’s “ Uncle Tom’s Cabin” has
revealed; but the wretched condition of the American slave is a
small matter, compared with that of the Russian serf; for the
former, if manumitted by his owner, becomes a free man, and is at
liberty to follow any occupation he pleases, while the latter is


seized upon by the Emperor and made a soldier for life ) so that ifl
regard to tbe Russsian, he only changes his harness and his driver.
Up to the present time, the iron hand of the Czar has been able
to crush all conspiracies in the bud ; but the day may not be far
distant, when the Russian people shall learn that such a thing as
liberty exists, and, rising en masse, demand their rights as human
beings. This mighty autocrat who rules so many tribes of beings,
and who presides over and governs so vast a territory, casts a longing
eye over the whole of Europe, and determines to gratify his am*
bition at any cost. He begins by sending armies into Turkey on
the most frivolous pretext, little thinking that other nations would
send their armies to assist the Ottomans against the mighty
Nicholas, Emperor of the North, and his successor Alexander the
Second. However, the result proves the short-sightedness of the
tyrant, who is now learning a lesson at the hands of the English
and French, which neither he nor his successor will easily forget.
But, to return to the subject, not only is the serf a slave —the en-
tire population or people of Russia are slaves; as well the noble as
the peasant. Even the common feelings of humanity cannot be
carried out either by the free man, the serf, the lord, or the Prince j
for a kind of license must be obtained before any person can aid
another in a state of suffering or affliction; for instance, should an
individual meet with a person who had been wounded, a person sud-
denly taken ill, or struck with apoplexy, the individual must first
report the case of suffering he or she may have witnessed, to a
magistrate or the superintendent of police; when such person being
willing to assist the sufferer, will have liberty given, on the payment
of ten florins, or five shillings English. The dying man, whose
head is resting on the threshold of the barber’s door, or on the steps
of the surgeon’s residence, and only requires to be bled, or needs a
glass of water to save his life, finds neither compassion nor help
from the former, who might bleed him if permitted, or from the
latter, who might staunch his blood. No I on witnessing such a
scene, whether the barber or the surgeon, each one barricades him-
self within his house, all the persons in the neighbourhood shut
their doors, and the place around the dying wretch is immediately
deserted, as though he was infected with the plague ; no one dares


run for help, or dares any person assist the unhappy being who lies
in the agonies of death I No, the dictates of humanity cannot be
carried out, for the law forbids it; it matters not whether it be a
friend or near relative, the law must be respected and obeyed. This
ridiculous law prohibits assistance in any case, until the agents of
justice have come and drawn up an official report of the occurrence.
Any person who transgresses this ridiculous law, by rendering as-
sistance to a suffering individual, whether it be a friend, neighbour,
or near relative, is dragged off to the station-house and fined to the
amount of one hundred florins (505.). If the person have no
money, he or she (it matters not whether male or female, young or
old) is sentenced to imprisonment with hard labour for six months.
At the expiration of the term of imprisonment, the said individual,
instead of having a certificate of discharge, as is the case in England
and Australia, and being allowed to go where he pleases, is taken
before a magistrate, who gives an order for the person’s discharge,
and the said person is escorted by two policemen, in chains, to his
or her plaoe of abode j for this attention, a fee of five shillings for
each policeman has to be paid, so soon as the manacles and chains
have been unlocked. Should the money not be immediately pre-
sented, the police take anything of value from the dwelling and
report it to the magistrate, after which the article or goods are
sold publicly by the government auctioneer, and if any surplus
remain, after deducting expenses, &c., it is returned to the
individual in due course. Should a second offence be com-
mitted, the transgressor has double punishment awarded him.
Yea I should your neighbour be assassinated before your eyes,
should his cries for help reach your ears, and, as an occurrence
which occasionally takes place, a horse runs away, dragging his
rider, whose foot is caught in the stirrup, what does this matter ?
Ely from the spot as fast as you possibly can, do no attempt to stop
the horse as it passes by you in its mad career. Again, your friend,
or even your parent, is likely to be drowned at a few paces distant
from where you stand, he calls to you, he implores your assistance,
for the current is about to carry him away and swallow him up for
ever; it matters not, there is neither excuse for ignorance of the
law, nor apology under any circumstance allowed.


The Russian people are forbidden to be humane, as they are for-
bidden to talk or discuss politics ; and if a person be found reading
the Bible, or explaining its contents to his family, he would be
condemned to the knout forthwith.
In order to live in the midst of such a degraded population, you
must place your soul, your heart, and all your noble sentiments on
a level with it. Generosity, charity, sympathy, and frankness
appear to be unknown in the country. You must close your purse,
and steel your heart against misery in whatever form it may pre-
sent itself.
A man in Russia is viewed as a very insignificant object; and no
notice is taken of the disappearance of any one, and any conver-
sation on any such subject is prohibited. The police never institute
any inquiry, or do they search after a missing individual. Even
his family, unless it be very influential, dares not adopt any means
for finding him Suppose, for instance, that the police, in obedience
to superior orders, had secretly conducted the absent person to
Siberia (which is a very common occurrence), you would be con-
sidered very curious were you to institute any inquiry, and would
run the risk of being sent there yourself for your inquisitiveness
and interference. In all instances of doubt, it is the duty of a
Russian subject to abstain from investigation; and to be quiet. Thus,
the facilities afforded for murder and assassination are very great,
and the occurrences very many. A corpse is seen floating down the
river, no one knows whence it came; in the course of ten or fifteen
days, the dead body will have been seen by hundreds of persons, yet
no one has thought of taking it up, examining it, or seeking out
the family to which it belonged, or even of giving it burial. Driven
by the wind, perhaps it is seen beating on the sand of the beach for
days together, but every one has fled from it; it is ultimately
stopped by the bushes, reeds, or the shrubs which line the banks,
and either rots away, or is devoured by some animal, without a
single person troubling his head about it. If, as is rarely the case,
the agents of the police deign to take any notice of it, they come
down to where it lies and strip it of whatever it may have, and
then throw it like a dead dog into a hole hastily dug on the
shore, or in the forest, without the least ceremony or the


slightest attempt to discover who the person is, or what
had caused his death. It often occurs that a person is
missed or disappears, but whether such a case is to be
attributed to the mysterious justice of the Czar, or to the ven-
geance of those possessed of power, no one knows; so that a person
may be assassinated, and the corpse carried a few paces out of the
city into the immense marshy forests, or it may be thrown into the
water, and there the matter ends. The authors or perpetrators of
the crime are rarely sought, and, of course, rarely punished. Up to
the year 1801, the Czars and nobles of Russia had practised the
barbarous custom of giving slaves, men, women, and children as
presents. The nobles could stake and lose in the same evening, at
games of chance, the head of a family, who was obliged to follow his
new master, leaving behind him his wife and family, who per-
haps, won by another noble and sent in a different direction. The
family was thus disorganized and dispersed. The Emperor Alex-
ander, however, abolished this odious practice. Traffic in slaves is
nevertheless still carried on privately; one lord sells to another, or
exchanges as he pleases; he sometimes disposes of females, between
the ages of fourteen and twenty for a single florin (sixpence); above
the age of twenty, twopence each. A male, from fourteen to sixty
years of age, two florins per head, or one shilling English,
The letters of all foreigners are invariably opened, examined,
and read, both at the office where it is posted, and at the office
whence it is delivered. Any one who might relate the impression
of his mind produced in the course of his travels through the
country, or whose correspondence with persons abroad is suspected
or considered by the police to be dangerous, such a person is quickly
conducted to the frontier, and expelled the country.


CHAPTER 11.
THE KNOUT, THE STICK, AND CRUEL BARBARITY OF THE PRESENT
EMPEROR, ALEXANDER 11.
Let us now take a glance at the “ knout ” and the terrible
cruelties inflicted by this inhuman instrument of torture, used
with unrelenting pity upon females as well as males. The loving
wife may be torn from her affectionate husband merely through
speaking an inadvertent word on the state of the country, or re*
specting the government; she is dragged from the bosom of her
husband by the ruthless executioners of a tyrant’s will j she is ex-
posed in the public square, half uncovered, to the gaze of the
soldiers, and the piercing cold; she is then stretched out as upon
a rack, the executioner advances, armed with his terrible weapon of
torture raised high in the air, the lash descends with a fearful force
and twines round her body like a huge snake, cutting through the
flesh, and laying the muscles and veins bare ; she gives a heart-
rending shriek, as the executioner brutally recovers the lash
covered with blood and mangled flesh, when he raises it above his
head ready to deal the second blow, and repeats it fifty, or one
hundred times, till the victim is taken up a lifeless corpse, or
removed to the place appointed, with her flesh and muscles hanging
down her back like strips of bloody leather. Many suppose that the
administration of the knout is death ! but it is not always so; it is,
if possible, a thousand times worse, —more like flaying a human
being alive. There is not in the language of any civilized nation,
a word which conveys the idea of more atrocious and inhuman suf-
fering than the u knout! ” On hearing this single word, a Russian
is seized with an icy shudder throughout his whole frame, he feels


the cold invade the citadel of life, and the blood appears to coagu-
late and to run sluggishly through his veins ; this word produces a
fever in his system, it confuses the senses, and fills the mind with
indescribable terror. This single word has such an electric influence
and invincible power on these degraded people, that they appear
paralysed at the very expression of its name. The “ knout I”—an
invention well worthy of the unrelenting, cruel, savage, and fero-
cious Czars of Russia I Well is it suited to redress imperial grievances
and to force secrets from the lips of defenceless women. Much has
been urged, and justly too, against whipping in the British army
and navy, but reprehensible as it is, their form of punishment with
the cat-o-’nine-tails is quite lenient and humane compared with that
of the Russian “ knout.” This instrument of refined barbarity is
a thong of thick leather, cut in a triangular form, from four to five
yards long, an inch wide, tapering off at the end, with sometimes
small pieces of metal or hooks attached to the extremity; the
wider end is fastened on a wooden handle about two feet long. But
we proceed further with its mode of administration; for instance,
a robust man, full of health, is condemned to receive fifty blows of
the “ knout;” he is conducted half naked to the place chosen for this
kind of execution, all that he has on him is a pair of simple linen
drawers round his extremities; his hands are bound with the
palms placed flatly together, the cords with which he is bound are
so tightly drawn that they penetrate the flesh, and sometimes even
break his wrists ! However, this appears of little consequence, as
no notice is taken of it ; he is placed flatly on his stomach on an
inclined frame, at the extremities of whicli are fixed iron rings; his
hands are secured to one end of the frame, and his feet to the other;
he is then stretched in such a manner that he cannot make a single
movement, just as a man placed upon the rack. The stretching of
the victim on this frame often causes his bones to crack and dislo-
cates them. At a distance of two or three yards stands the man
who is to administer the punishment; his sleeves are tucked up so
that nothing may embarrass him in his movements, and on the
signal being given, he advances a few steps with his body bent,
holding the knout in both hands, while the long thong is dragged
along the ground between his legs. On coming to about three or


four paces from the condemned man, he raises the knout by a
vigorous movement high above his head, and then instantly draws it
down swiftly towards his knees; the thong flies and whistles through
the air, and descending upon the body of the victim, twines round
him like a hoop of iron. In spite of the extreme tension to which
the poor creature is stretched out, he bounds with the pain as if
suddenly galvanized. The executioner now retraces his steps and
repeats the same operation as many times as there are blows to be
inflicted. When the thong envelops the body with its edges, the
flesh and muscles are literally cut into strips, as if by a sharp
knife; but when it falls flat then the bones crack, and the flesh in
that case is not cut, but crushed, and the blood spouts forth in all
directions. The sufferer now becomes green and blue like a dead
body in a state of decomposition. When the victim has received
the number of lashes to which he was condemned, he is removed to
the hospital, and should he recover (which is highly improbable),
he is then banished to the Siberian mines, where he is kept on
black bread and snow water, and compelled to labour hard the
remainder of his miserable existence.
The knout is fatal or not, according to the intention of the Czar
or executioner. If the autocrat’s intention be to afford his people a
sight worthy of their eyes and of their intelligence—if some power-
ful lord or some great lady wish to indulge in the pleasure of
viewing the sanguinary spectacle, to behold the victim with his
lips covered with foam and blood, writhing and expiring in frightful
agony —the fatal blow will be reserved to the last.
The executioner also sells his pity and compassion for money,
when the family or friends of the miserable sufferer desire to pur-
chase the fatal blow. If a large amount be given to the executioner,
as a bribe, he will cause less pain and inflict death at the very first
blow, as surely as if it were an axe he held in his hand instead of
the terrible knout!
What language can be found sufficiently strong to reprehend this
horrible cruelty of the government of Russia ? and that government
vested solely in one man ! The Czar pretends that capital punish-
ment does not exist in Russia; neither does it in a certain sense;
but capital punishment would be a thousand times more preferable
than the horrible torture of the knout. •


What would be the feelings of a Briton were he compelled to
witness such a scene as above described ? He would quiver and
faint with horror at such disgusting cruelty.
Russian law does not measure punishment by the standard of
physical pain: the chastisement is not proportioned to the nature of
the offence; it is sufficient that a crime has been committed, it mat.
ters not of what nature, and the penalty awarded by a sanguinary
law will be administered, because the object of the government is,
above all things, to keep the people in a state of terror.
The various punishments for different offences are the waters
of the Neva, the rod, the whip, and the horrible knout! Of
these four punishments, a termination of the mortal career in the
Neva is by far the most preferable.
Strangulation, imprisonment, the gallows, and decapitation were
punishments too mild, not sufficiently frightful; therefore the Czars
of Russia must invent the stick, the rod, mutilation of the face,
and the knout. There are also the awful depths of the Siberian
mines, for those who do not sink beneath one or other of these
various kinds of punishment.
The following is a narration of an act of cruelty, perpetrated in
the last century, and may be taken as a correct criterion of that
which is practised in Russia at the present day :
In the year 1760, under the reign of the indolent and luxurious
Elizabeth, who abolished capital punishment, there was a lady who
was possessed of large estates in Moscow, Madame Lapoukin, a
person of rare beauty, who, in order to escape from the envious eye
and vindictive sentiments of the Empress, of whose jealousy she had
been forewarned, took up her residence in the capital of Poland,
supposing that she might in this retired position pass her time in
quietness, without exciting the ambition of one who envied her.
But her efforts proved futile and vain; for Elizabeth, on receiving
intelligence of her place of abode, despatched special orders for her
immediate return to her estate at Moscow, alleging that she com-
mitted a crime in changing her place of abode without her (Eliza-
beth’s) proper leave and permission. This lady, whose outward
beauty was enhanced by her benevolent and amiable disposition,
was beloved by all who had any knowledge of her person and


character; her qualifications, which were of the highest order, won
for her a larger share of respect and attention than Elizabeth was
favored to receive. From these premises it will at once appear to
the intelligent reader what was the real cause of the punishment
about to be described. Madame Lapoukin was condemned to the
knout, and, should she survive this punishment, she was to be
sent to Siberia for the remainder of her life. At the time ap-
pointed she was conducted by the executioners to the public square,
where she was exposed by one of them, who rolled up her chemise
as far as her waist; he then took her up and placed her upon his
shoulders, when another arranged her with his coarse dirty hands in
the required position, obliging her to hold her head down, while a
man of the lower class held her feet in order to keep them still.
The executioner then cut her flesh into shreds by one hundred
strokes of the “ knout,” from the shoulders to the lower part of the
loins. The empress Elizabeth was present to witness and to see
that her commands were fully carried out. During the torturous
agony, which can hardly bo conceived, much less can it be des-
cribed, Madame Lapoukin cried out “ God avenge my innocent
sufferings I” The dolorous cries so affected the feelings of the
spectators who surrounded the square, that many hissed and cried
shame ! Elizabeth, infuriated by this demonstration of public com-
passion and sympathy, immediately gave orders to silence her by
pulling her tongue out of her mouth with a pair of iron tongs. In
this state of agony and blood, she was ordered to be at once con-
veyed in a kibitka (a kind of prisoner’s omnibus) to Siberia.
Whether this lady ever reached the place of her intended destination
is unknown. It is quite improbable that she reached Siberia alive,
for the blood was streaming from her mouth through the loss of her
tongue, and likewise from many parts of her body when she was
removed, no medical attendance being allowed her, or any more
notice taken of her than if she were a dead dog.
The above tragical scene is well authenticated, and is handed
down from the historical records of former days. The following
came under the personal observation of the writer and fully con-
firms the statements before made :
A lady, whose maiden name was Countess Wanda Elizabeth
• •


Karnikowska, and after marriage Lipska, whose husband was com-
mander-in-chief of the Polish array in 1831, and was killed in the
great battle with the Russians near the town of Ostrolenka, was
deprived of her husband’s property and also of her two sons, who
were taken by force after the father’s death to St. Petersburg to be
Russianised. This lady refused to give up her dear children, when
requested, and with all the feelings of a mother, determined to
defend and to protect those whom she so dearly loved. However,
an officer and soldiers were sent to the house to demand the two
boys (the elder was two years of age, and the younger but one year
old). This lady’s residence or palace was purposely shut up, and
all the doors and windows secured; but of course an entrance was
soon effected by the soldiers, who broke away the fastenings from
the windows, and in an upper room they discovered the elder boy in
the arms of his mother. The countess implored them to spare her
boys and leave them under her care, as they were her only comfort
since the loss of her husband; but the Emperors orders must be
obeyed, therefore, the child was wrung from the mother’s arms, and
the question put “ where is the younger ?” When, after searching
the house, he was discovered in the arras of a faithful servant,
secreted in a cellar. This servant refused to give up his charge,
and immediately the officer drew his sword and pierced him through,
killing him on the spot. The two children were then at once con-
veyed to St, Petersburg. The whole of the property and estate of
the late general had been confiscated and appropriated to the use
of the Czar. The countess was therefore obliged to take up her
residence on her own proper estate, which she held by hereditary
right from her parents. Shortly after this, the government of
Russia passed a law prohibiting all pecuniary assistance to, and all
correspondence with Polish refugees, who had made their escape
from the vindictive grasp of the Czar after the late war. The in-
fringement of this law entailed on the transgressor, banishment for
life to the Siberian mines. But as distance of place cannot remove
the affectionate regard of the wife towards the husband, or the
ties of relationship either paternally or maternally, the oppressed
Poles who remained in their own country under the Russian yoke,
formed private committees for the purpose of raising subscriptions


on behalf of their near relatives and friends who had fled for their
lives from the northern tyrant —Nicholas the First, and had taken
refuge in England, France, and other countries. The male portion
that remained in Poland was too narrowly watched to carry out the
intentions of these private committees, and the ladies volunteered
their services, and were for some time very successful in obtaining
contributions and forwarding assistance to those of their relatives
and fellow countrymen who were in need. However, spies were
employed in all directions to detect the violators of this prohibitory
law, and many noble-minded ladies were discovered, sentenced to
the whip, the knout, deprived of their property, and sent to Si-
beria ; among whom was the countess, who called, in confidence,
on another lady for a subscription. This lady willingly subscribed
one hundred florins (505.), and requested the countess to show her
the list of the committee and also of the subscribers; the countess
shewed the list of subscribers, and stated that she had not with her
the list of the members of the committee, but would be happy t 0
show her the list if she would call at her residence, little thinking
that this lady of high family was employed by the Czar as a
secret detective. But the following day, instead of receiving this
lady guest, who had faithfully promised to pay a visit to the coun-
tess, she was surprised to find her house surrounded by a
body of Cossacks, commanded by Gendarme Batty (celebrated
for his cruelty and barbarity to females), who immediately
ordered chains to be put on the legs of the countess,
telling her that she was his prisoner, and must proceed
with him without delay to Warsaw, to appear before Prince
Paskiewicz. She kindly requested him to ride with her in her
carriage, but the ruffian replied he had brought with him a carriage
of the Emperor (properly called kibitka) for her accommodation.
She was at once placed in this prisoner’s van and conveyed to
Warsaw, the distance of thirty Polish miles from the residence of
the countess. Here she was confined in a prison for three weeks,
and treated as a common felon ere she was brought before the Prince
Paskiewicz. On her appearing in court, she was charged with the
violation of the law passed by the Most Gracious Benevolent Em-
peror. The tribunal consisted of the Prince, the Grand Duke


Alexander (now Emperor), Duke Constantine, and Prince Orloff.
To which she replied, that she had only done her duty as a Polish
lady towards her fellow countrymen, and added, “ if they were in
her position they would do the same.” To this, Prince Constantine
(pleading for her) said, she had lost her husband, her property, and
both of her children, “ let us liberate her and attribute her vio-
lation of the law not to a bad intention, but to some aberration of
mind.” The Grand Duke Alexander (who was scarcely out of his
teens) instantly turned upon his brother, the Prince Constantine,
and rebukingly said, “ you know very well that I have the power
from father to do as I please, inasmuch as I am the true successor
to the crown.” This caused a dead silence in court for some time.
After which the Grand Duke Alexander requested Prince Paskie-
wicz and Prince Orloff to retire with him to the private room for
consultation. In about half an hour, Prince Paskiewicz and Prince
Orloff returned into court and gave orders to Batty to conduct his
prisoner, by the assistance of two Cossacks, into the presence of the
Grand Duke. Batty having complied, the Grand Duke gave orders
to the soldiers to withdraw, when he locked the door of the apart-
ment, and politely addressed the countess, telling her that she was
in his power, and all would be forgiven her if she would promise to»
respect and obey the law in future, and never more transgress in
like manner, and if she would willingly submit to his desires (as
he was enamored with her); to which she indignantly replied,
“ What! degrade myself as a Polish lady, by submitting to the vile
passions of a Russian northern bear, to obtain my liberty ? No !
not to the old bear would I consent to degrade myself and disgrace
my sex, much less to one of his cubs ! ” However, the heat of
passion was so great that he, by physical force, accomplished his
abominable intention, and then opened the door with his face dis-
figured and bleeding by the scratches from the finger nails of this
lady, and cried aloud, “ take her without any delay to Sasky Place
(the locality where offenders were punished), and give her one
hundred stripes, and immediately send her to Siberia for life.”
When the countess arrived at the place of punishment, she publicly
stated before the spectators what had transpired while in the pre-
sence of the Grand Duke, and added, “ God will avenge me for my


innocence.” According to custom, she was stripped naked from the
loins upwards, and compelled to walk behind two soldiers with
crossed bayonets, pointed to her breasts, between two lines of
soldiers, fifty on each side, and arranged at convenient distances to
allow each soldier, who holds in his hand a narrow stick, about
seven feet long (a branch of the willow), adequate space to give on
the shoulders or back a severe stroke with his flexible weapon.
During the course of punishment, the face of the counters first
turned white, then blue, afterwards black, and at last quite green.
She never spoke a word that was audible from the commencement
of the stripes. So great must her sufferings have been, that she
bit her tongne asunder while undergoing this barbarous treatment.
A part of her tongue was picked up and showed to the Grand Duke,
who laughed and turned away quite unconcerned.
Again, in order to illustrate still farther the character of the
misnamed Pacific Emperor Alexander, the following particulars
are narrated. There were two noblemen, Poles, Moraczewski and
Lachewicz, who after the last war in 1831, instead of taking
refuge in other countries, as many did, resolved to remain in their
estates, and. on the first opportunity reported themselves to the
Emperor Nicholas, acknowledged their error in taking up arms
against him, at the same time stated their peculiar position during
the war, for the Poles hanged or shot all who refused to join them
in the insurrection. They were, therefore, compelled to take the
part they did against their will. A petition was drawn up by them
submissively and humbly worded, expressing their fullest contrition,
and hoping that the most gracious Emperor would pardon them
and receive them under his paternal care. The Emperor on the
receipt of this petition, despatched instructions to Prince Paskie-
wicz to Warsaw, authorising him to issue orders for the apprehen-
sion of the two noblemen before named. Their estates were to be
confiscated to the crown during their imprisonment. They were
merely to be deprived of their liberty and to be treated in all
respects as noblemen in the Emperor’s prison, till their case was
fully investigated. These gentlemen were incarcerated three years
and eleven months before their case was decided. In the early part
of 1835 the ukase or order was sent from the Emperor to Prince
Paskiewicz, instructing him to set the two noblemen at liberty, and
to restore to them their former estates. At the time that these
despatches reached Warsaw, the late Emperor’s family, consisting
of the Empress, Grand Duke Alexander, Duke Constantine, and
the Emperor’s daughter Olga, arrived from Berlin to the palace of
Prince Paskiewicz. The prince informed his royal visitors that
he had instructions from the Emperor to liberate two Polish noble-
men who had taken part in the insurrection of 1831, and if they
desired it they might see them previously to their discharge. Grand
Duke Alexander, infuriated at the intelligence, exclaimed,my father
must have lost his reason in setting such men at liberty. I will
take it, said he, on my own responsibility, as the successor to the


throne, and I forthwith countermand the orders given for their
liberation. His mother the Empress, his sister, and his brother
Constantine, likewise Prince Paskiewicz, expostulated with him,
but all in vain. He gave sentence to treat them in the same
manner that other revolutionists had been treated ; “ Give them,”
said he, “ one hundred lashes each, and send them to Siberia for
life and added it was well that he arrived previously to their
discharge. The Grand Duke Alexander then wrote to his father
the Emperor, in justification of his conduct, stating that he had
taken the present steps from a conviction that his father did not
see the consequence of letting loose upon society such dangerous
characters. Nicholas acknowledged his want of penetration and
judgment in this case, and ascribed to his son a superiority of in-
tellectual capacity, fully justifying him in the course he had taken,
and confirmed the latter sentence passed on the two noblemen.
Here is a picture of the so-called pacific Emperor Alexander! And
what may Europe expect in regard to the present obnoxious war,
under the administration of this pacific hear I
CHAPTER 111.
THE GAUNTLET.
Some description of this barbarous punishment was given in the
case of Countess Lipska, and the following particulars may not be
uninteresting to the reader. It is the army that carries out the
sentence of the autocrat. This punishment of “ running the
gauntlet,” is supposed to have been borrowed from the North
American Indians; but these savage, though noble people, were
more humane in the infliction of this punishment than are the
cruel Russians of the present day; for the former allowed the
victim to pass as quickly as possible through the double row of the
administrators of the punishment, in order to lessen the number
and force of the blows which hack the flesh to pieces, or if suf-
ficiently active, to leap the line of executioners, and gain refuge at
a post placed on a certain spot for that purpose. But the Russians
place three non-commissioned officers with their bayonets fixed and
brought to the charge : two before and one behind the sufferer.
They impel the unhappy creature forward or retard his progress by
driving the points of their bayonets into his breast or back, accord-
ing to instructions. In this manner the unhappy victim is conducted
between the two rows of soldiers, who, as before stated, stand at
appointed distances from each other; and every stroke of the
switch or stick must tell; it must lacerate the skin or even the
flesh, and cause the blood to gush out! Pity is unknown ! Every
one must properly perform his inhuman duty. Should there be any
hesitation on the part of the soldier to comply, woe be to him ! A
c 2


number of lashes on his own shoulders will surely be inflicted on
the spot, from twenty-five to one hundred.
The Russian government is ridiculously scrupulous in the most
trifling details, and the soldiers are regularly drilled and exercised
in the use of the stiok, in the following way: a truss of hay or straw
is placed on a kind of truck, and driven slowly between the lines or
ranks of soldiers; on this inanimate mass the men practise the use
of the stick, to prepare them for its effective use on the human
frame. The bundle or truss, ere it reaches the end of the line, is
literally cut into pieces.
In this description of punishment, the number of soldiers is equal
to the number of stripes to be inflicted. The minimum number of
stripes is one hundred, but the maximum number cannot be stated,
for this rests entirely with the Czar, who generally, with his well-
known clemency (?), awards six thousand. Here the ferocious cruelty
of the Russian Bear (the Czar) is again displayed ; for less than a
thousand blows will deprive the victim of life. This, nevertheless, is
not taken into the account; dead or alive the full sentence must
be carried out to the extreme letter of the law. Whenever the
sufferer sinks (ere he has received the full number) under the
infliction of the punishment, the remainder of the stripes is adminis-
tered after death, because the commands of the Czar must be
obeyed.
The following is a description of this kind of punishment, which
was inflicted in the year 1841, on the person of an unhappy man
of Swedish extraction, in the prime of his age and strength:
He had been in the employ of a Russian Prince as gamekeeper,
and was discharged without receiving his wages. He had a wife
and several children depending on him for support, winter was close
at hand, and being destitute ,of bread and fuel, and his family
perishing from hunger, he went repeatedly to St. Petersburg to
beg, as a favor, what he would have demanded in England or Aus-
tralia as his right. On each occasion he related the misery and
distress which pressed on him and his family. He intreated most
humbly; but a nobleman possessing fifteen or twenty thousand
slaves, and supplied with all the luxuries the world can afford,
could have no sympathy with the poor gamekeeper who was suf-
fering from privation, and whose family was dying from want of
common necessaries. The Swede importuned the Prince to pay
him his just due, but he was driven from the door of his creditor
with sticks. It was considered sufficient that the Prince was not
at liberty to attend to the request of the gamekeeper; no matter
what might be his distress, a Russian Prince was not to be inter-
rupted by the dolorous tale of a poor gamekeeper. The Swede, ex-
asperated at the cruel treatment, and having no resource left, was
driven half mad, and having armed himself with a pistol he re-
turned to the Prince and demanded his wages. He then declared
that, after the repeated applications for the money he had earned,
if his claim were not immediately satisfied he would shoot the
Prince, his late master, and abide the consequences. He was over-


come, beaten, and turned out of doors. Upon this his reason
failed him, and waiting till the Prince came out, without
further ceremony he shot him dead upon the spot. Of course the
crime of murder was committed ; nothing could justify so rash an
act attended with such consequences. However, the formalities of
a trial would have been too tedious in the case of a peasant; it was
sufficient that a serf had killed a nobleman, no matter under what
circumstance, or what the aggravated cruelty to which the poor
man had been subjected. A few hours after the deed was com-
mitted he was taken to prison, and then before a Council of War,
whose object was merely to identify him as the murderer of the
Prince; he confessed his crime, and was condemned to six thousand
strokes of the rod. In the space of twenty-four hours six thousand
men were drawn up in two parallel lines on a field outside the city,
armed with green rods about the thickness of the little finger,
awaiting the hour of execution. The condemned criminal was con-
veyed in a cart, fettered, and dressed in a pair of drawers rolled
up and fastened by a cord above his hips. He was then taken out
of the cart, his hands were secured to the muzzles of two muskets,
crossing each other at the bottom of the bayonets. Thus, his
hands rested on the barrels and his breast on the bayonets. A roll
of the drum was now heard, and all the officers retired within the
ranks, while two non-commissioned officers came and took the mus-
kets before-mentioned, and held them in the same position that a
soldier does when he advances or retires with his bayonet at the
charge. These two officers walked backwards, while they conducted
the unhappy man between the ranks. At a given signal the suf-
ferer advanced with a slow step between the double line of soldiers,
each of whom in turn delivered a vigorous blow on his naked back,
the two non-commissioned officers retreating slowly step by step, in
order to afford every one time to perform his task. The sufferer
advanced up to the nine hundred and third stroke, and had not as
yet uttered a single cry, or made a single complaint; a convulsive
shudder from time to time was the only indication of the horrible
agony which he endured. The foam then began to gather upon his
lips, and blood to start from his nostrils. After fourteen hundred
strokes, his face, which long before had begun to turn blue, sud-
denly assumed a greenish color; his eyes became haggard and almost
started out of their sockets, from which large blood-colored tears
trickled down his face. He was now gasping and gradually sinking;
the flesh was hacked to pieces, and reduced almost to a state of
jelly, long stripes of it hanging down the poor creature’s sides like
so many thongs, while other pieces remained fastened and glued to
the sticks of the executioners. The sufferer now* became insensible;
but this was of no consequence, for he was laid upon his stomach
on a litter and carried forward, and the punishment continued,
until the surgeon appointed by the Government, who had followed
the tragic scene step by step, gave orders for it to be suspended.
He did not suspend the punishment till two thousand six hundred
and nineteen strokes had cut the body nearly to pieces, and had


rendered the poor creature insensible to further punishment. The
unconscious and half dead gamekeeper was then taken to the hos-
pital, where, according to Russian custom in such cases, he was
placed in a salt water bath, and then treated with the greatest care,
until a complete cure was effected, so that he might bear the re-
mainder of his sentence. He was for seven months under medical
treatment, and was then declared convalescent. At the expiration
of this period he was again conducted to the place of execution,
and forced once more to undergo the inexpressible torture of
running the gauntlet, in order to the completion of the sentence
of six thousand blows. Heath, however, shortly terminated the
sufferings of this object of pity, for on the receiving of less than
one hundred stripes, he became a lifeless corpse. So soon as he
expired, information was forwarded to the Emperor, who gave
orders to place the corpse in a proper position on a bundle of straw,
that the soldiers might pass by it, and each one, with his rod, strike
the lifeless, lacerated body, till the six thousand blows had been
administered.
The foregoing exposure of Russian brutality will, in all pro-
bability, cause the reader to pause, and to ask the question, can
such things be true ? Is it possible that in Europe such atrocious
cruelties can be perpetrated and openly practised ? Is it possible
that a people, professing to be civilised, refined, polite, can be the
willing slaves, the mere dupes of the Russian despot, the Satanic
tyrant, Nicholas (now Alexander II.) ? To these questions the
writer answers, most emphatically,—Yes! These, as well as the
following, are authentic facts. And if* the barbarous practices of
the various tribes of Australian aborigines were brought forward
and compared with the studied, unrelenting cruelty of the Russians,
under the late or present Emperor, they would sink into utter insig-
nificance. The disgusting animal propensities, together with the
brutal sentiments of the Russian Czar, outvie and exceed everything
that history has recorded, either ancient or modern.
CHAPTER IV.
PUNISHMENT MOST COMMONLY INFLICTED BY THE DIRECTION OP
LORDS, OR NOBLEMEN.
The whip or the stick is the most general mode of redressing
grievances. In both these cases two men alone are sufficient to
execute the sentence. The offender condemned to smart beneath
the stick, or the lashes of the whip, which consists of seven tails, is
laid, with his body bare, upon a bench. One of the men appointed
to execute the sentence seats himself astride on the sufferer s legs,
and the other upon his head, and both of them strike him in turn
with similar instruments, until the nobleman, or his wife, or who-


ever has ordered the punishment, judges it sufficient for the offence
which the sufferer has committed.
The Russians, like all savage nations, are acquainted with every
species of torture and punishment; only, as before stated, the
Russians have exceeded all others in their barbarous cruelty.
Impalement was practised as late as the reign of Peter the First.
Elizabeth formally abolished the punishment of death ; but she
herself soon infringed her own law to gratify her sentiments of
cruelty and vengeance. The waters of the Niwa, however, remain ;
and those whom the government dare not strangle, are drowned.
The slightest offences are punishable with the stick, to which every
one throughout the Russian empire is liable; as well the priest
and the noble, as the serf; with this difference, that the serf is
beaten publicly, the priest and the noble privately. In the year
1837, the Poet Ponschkinn was whipped in the room of the Prefect
of Police, in Warsaw, by the command of the Czar, in order, as he
was told, to soften down the caustic humour of his writings. What
would be the fate of the London Punch , were he within reach of
the Russian Czar ? Not a week or a day passes without some
officer, student, or some official, undergoing this same kind of
punishment, with his trowsers down and his shoulders bare, for the
least intemperance of language. But this is always done in private;
for if the people were to learn that the priests and the nobles tingled
beneath the blows of the stick as well as themselves, what would be
the result ? If the people were to know that the noble, priest, and
themselves were composed of the same flesh and blood, and experi-
enced the same emotions, both of pain and pleasure, what would be
the consequence ? It is quite certain that it would raise the people
in their own estimation, which is the very thing the priests and the
nobles wish to prevent. The Czar’s object in prohibiting the
reading of the Bible, or any explanation of the Bible, is self-evident;
it would not do for the Czar’s subjects to understand,what the Bible
so emphatically declares, viz., that God has made of the same blood
all the nations of the earth. No ! they would at once rise en masse ,
and demand their rights as human beings, and would forthwith
shake off the yoke of slavery and despotism, and free themselves
from the servitude of their unjust and cruel oppressors.
CHAPTER Y.
SIBERIA.
After the knout, the rod, and the whip, comes Siberia. When a
Russian subject is condemned and sentenced to Siberia, his beard
on one side of his face is shaved entirely clean, and on the other half
of his face the beard is merely cut short: so in regard to the head,
the one half is shaved and the other half is cut short, leaving it


like a brush ! For instance, when the right side of the face is
shaved, the opposite or left side of the head is shaved. He is then
dressed in a pair of thin linen trowsers, a great coat of very coarse
cloth, a round cap in the shape of a pancake, and enormous leather
boots, without stockings or socks. He is then despatched upon a
sledge, or a van, in company with other Russian exiles, under the
escort of a few Cossacks. These prisoners are obliged to travel in
all weathers; no matter how intense the cold, they must reach their
destination. During their journey their movements are entirely
free, and no precaution is taken to prevent their flight. As above
described their appearance is so unnatural, or monster like, that
if they attempted to escape their capture is quite certain. More-
over, what would they be benefited by liberty ? They possess no
passport, and in Russia it is almost impossible to travel for twelve
hours without such paper. An inhabitant of Moscow or St.
Petersburg can neither enter nor leave the city without a permit
or passport. Again, when a Russian female is sentenced to Siberia,
the whole of her head is shaved, leaving her entirely bald; she is
clothed in coarse black cloth, and enormous leather boots without
stockings. It matters not whether she be a lady of title or a mere
peasant, no distinction is made; the treatment is the same in all
cases in regard to the Russians, but far more rigorous in the case
of a Polish prisoner. When a Polish nobleman or lady, or even
priest, is ordered to be taken to Siberia, the individual is conveyed
in his or her proper dress in a prisoner’s van (called kibitka). In
this conveyance the prisoner is kept, whether the journey be short
or long, till he shall arrive at the capital of Siberia. The light
of day is excluded from this locomotive prison, and the only light
that enters is from an oil lamp suspended from the top or roof.
During the whole of the journey (which distance from some parts
of Poland is about seven thousand miles) the van or kibitka tarries
no longer than two minutes at any one station. The day previously
Cossacks are sent forward to give notice at each stage that the
kibitka will arrive at a given time. Each stage is four miles
apart, where the horses are waiting at the time appointed, harnessed
and ready to be attached to the vehicle.
So soon as the prisoner reaches Siberia, he or she is placed in a
small square cupboard-like apartment, too narrow to allow the
individual to sit: he, of course, stands, that being the only posture
in which he can place himself. He remains in this position for
twenty-four hours, without any kind of refreshment, and without
seeing any one.
The cell more resembles a chimney than anything else, from its
narrow construction, as it is open at the top to admit the air.
While confined in this narrow prison the poor creature’s ears are
dinned with the dolorous cries from other cells —some cursing the
day of their birth, some calling on Grod to take away their life,
some praying to the Lord for patience to bear the sufferings and
cruelty with becoming fortitude, and others uttering the most
awful oaths and imprecations, cursing the very parent who gave


them birth, and even God who gave them an existence. The
strongest nerves are here overcome by the gloomy prospect that
already opens on the view, and the stoutest heart here quivers
and sinks from feelings of despair.
At the expiration of the time mentioned the turnkey or officer
brings a pint of water and two pounds of black mouldy bread, and
instructs the prisoner to be ready in half an hour, as he is to
appear before the Governor of the prison. At the time appointed
the prisoner, whether male or female, is conducted by the officers
to an apartment, where instructions are given to change the dress
(we speak of Polish prisoners), and in the interim the individual,
whether male or female, is shaved completely bald, then a shirt
made of sacking, dipped in tar, is placed on the naked body : a
pair of trowsers, jacket, a pair of shoes, a leather belt for the
loins, and a cap made of the same material as the shirt, trowsers,
and jacket (all dipped in tar to preserve from vermin) form the
complete dress. It would be impossible to recognise the female, or
to distinguish the male from the fairer sex, since all are dressed
alike. In a short time the hair of the female and the beard of
the male are the distinguishing marks of difference between the
sexes, for the process of shaving is never afterwards repeated. The
prisoner being dressed as just described, is brought before the
Governor of the prison, who interrogates the prisoner as to who
and what he or she is, from what county of Poland, town, or
village, and what is the crime committed. To which the prisoner
answers as the case may be. The Governor then informs the indi-
vidual that he or she is condemned by the Emperor for life to hard
labor ; that the daily allowance of provisions will be two pounds of
black bread and a pint of water, and on the Sunday an addition of
one third of a herring. The kind of labor is then assigned, either
cutting stone, digging or excavating in the mines, or cutting and
sawing wood; at the same time the Governor reads a paper from
the Emperor, which states that every prisoner previously to entering
his cell, must receive his or her passport, which consists of twenty-
five lashes. The individual, male or female, is then taken to a
room, and stripped up to the loins, and receives the infliction of
the stripes or lashes above mentioned.
CHAPTER YL
STRATAGEMS OF THE CZAR, AND FURTHER ILLUSTRATION OP THE
CRUELTIES OP SIBERIAN DISCIPLINE.
In the year 1844 the Reverend Clemens Wosczynski, who was
born in the village Podgorze, which is situated near the town of
Kolo, in the County of Kalisz, the son of a rich farmer, and a
schoolfellow of the writer, entered the convent of St. Francis,


called Ordenis Barnardinorum, in the year 1829, and was ordained
Priest by Bishop Pawlowski, of the diocese of Plock, in 1837, in
the Cathedral St. Cross, Warsaw, on the first Monday after Pen-
tecost, called the second feast. After his ordination he was
appointed preacher in the convent Lenczyca, of the same order,
being highly gifted as an orator. His eloquence and general de-
portment gained the admiration and respect of all who knew him.
So highly was he esteemed that no fete was celebrated without his
presence. Thus he gained the confidence of all the nobility in that
county. To him was entrusted large sums of money from the
secret committee of Polish patriots, as well as documents and
letters of a confidential character respecting the movements of the
Poles, who were forming a plan to shake off the Russian yoke, and
to render their country once more free. He delivered the money
to the sister of the late Prince Joseph Poniatowski, whose title
since marriage is Countess Wonsowicz, residing in Zator, Galicia,
under the government of Austria. This lady received contribu-
tions from all the secret committees throughout Poland, and three
times in a year transmitted the same to Prince Adam Czartoyiski,
who resided in Paris, and whom the Poles had already proclaimed
King, in hope that he might be successful in his attempt to free
them from the Russian yoke. The priest afore-named was visited
by many ladies who were members of the secret society, and in a
short time the Mayor, whose name was Boldowski, and a well known
Russian spy in that town This Mayor placed spies in all direc-
tions, and used all the means possible to ascertain why so many
carriages with ladies constantly surrounded the convent. For some
time all the means used proved abortive, till at length one listened
at the door of the guest’s room, where there were several ladies
engaged in conversation with the priest, and this spy overheard a
few words respecting Prince Czartoyiski and the Polish refugees.
This was reported by the Mayor to the Czar, and from that time a
strict eye was kept on him and on every individual who visited
him. Among the many visitors was Lady Jodlowska, relict of the
late Captain Jodlowska, who was killed by Russians in the last
revolution in Poland, near Warsaw. This lady resided in her
hereditary village Sierpowo, two miles from the convent. In fine
weather she visited the priest nearly every day, hearing mass in the
morning, and afterwards holding conversation with him and those
present. When prevented by weather from visiting the convent, a
letter was sent by a servant boy containing some intelligence re-
specting the secret committee, but no individual’s name was men-
tioned. At length the boy was taken on his way to the convent
with a letter on his person, and brought before the Mayor, who
took the letter from him and charged him to say nothing to the
lady about what had happened, threatening to send him to the
Russian army for life if he disobeyed the Mayor’s orders. But, as
might very naturally be expected, on his return he directly told
the lady all that had occurred. This put a stop to the writing, but
she continued to visit the convent, and to communicate in person.


She was narrowly watched by spies, but she defeated them in all
their intrigues; instead of confessing publicly as heretofore, she
confessed' three or four times weekly before the priest, which gave
rise to suspicion on the part of the Mayor that she must, after the
confession, make some secret communications to the priest in the
confessional box. Of course all these particulars were commu-
nicated to the Czar by the Mayor. The Czar then sent instructions
to the Mayor to make a search in the priest’s apartments, and in
the palace of Lady Jodlowska. After a strict search had been
made according to instructions, they found themselves completely
baffled, for all the letters found in the priest’s possession were
anonymous, and gave no clue to the writer; also the letters found
at the lady’s palace were entirely of a religious character. So
exasperated was the Emperor on the receipt of this intelligence,
that he ordered the priest to be taken to prison, and to be kept in
confinement in the citadel of Warsaw till he should reveal the
secret of this lady’s confessions. At first he was treated with
kindness and promised to be promoted to the dignity of Bishop, if
he would reveal all the secrets of the lady’s confession. To which
the priest answered that he would rather lay down his life than
break the seal of auricular confession, since it is the strictest order
in his church. Moreover, after hearing the confession and granting
absolution, he said he had no more remembrance of what had
passed than as though he had never heard it. During two whole
years he was importuned to divulge the secrets, and always returned
the same answer. The Emperor, disappointed on finding all his
plans frustrated, gave orders to flog the priest every fourth month,
inflicting at each time one hundred lashes, telling him that, since
kindness had produced no sort of effect, he was determined to see
what the lashes would do. The priest still remained firm, and
repeated what he before stated. He underwent the first hundred
lashes, the second in due course, and the third at the end of the
year. He was by this time a mere skeleton, having been incar-
cerated for three years, and showed no signs of yielding to the
commands of the Emperor. He was now sentenced to Siberia for
life. On his arrival at Tobolsk the question was again put to him
as before, promising him forgiveness and restoration to his former
dignity, with the addition of promotion, but he replied I am
already half killed, and if I die I will not be unfaithful to my
priestly oath. He was then condemned to one thousand lashes of
the rod; during the course of punishment his face turned pale,
then green, and afterwards black, so that he was unable to walk
the line any longer ; a strong Russian soldier was then ordered to
carry him on his back, and to proceed slowly till the full number
should be administered. The flesh hung about his body like parts
of a cobweb, and pieces adhered to the rods, as the soldiers in turn
struck the mutilated mass. After undergoing this exquisite torture,
some signs of life still remained, and orders having been sent pre-
viously from the Emperor, stating that, should he not comply with
the request as before named, and provided he outlived the punish-


ment, then his tongue was to he torn out by a pair of tongs. This
part of his sentence was also carried out, and no sooner was the
tongue wrenched out, and with it a part of the windpipe, than he
expired. Thus ended the career of one, whose sufferings were
beyond expression, and whose only fault (in regard to the Czar )
was fidelity to his Church and religion. After his death, his body
was burnt to ashes, and the wind carried away the remains. The
same course of treatment after death is followed in all cases, to pre-
vent, as they affirm, the inducement for the wolves to assemble near
the town. This heart-rending scene was witnessed by the water,
when he was himself a prisoner in Siberia, with several thousands
of political Polish prisoners of both sexes.
Another instance was that of two Protestant clergymen :
In the year 1845, a religious meeting was held at the Emperor’s
palace in St. Petersburg, at which all Greek schismatic archbishops
and bishops, and all Roman Catholic archbishops and bishops in
Poland, were summoned to attend. The Emperor presided on the
occasion, and opened the meeting by stating the object in calling
them together, namely, that it might be understood that he intended
to enforce the Greek Orthodox religion throughout his dominions,
including the whole of Poland 3 and that he intended to extirpate
all other creeds. He addressed the Roman Catholic bishops very
kindly and persuasively, desiring them to state from their pulpits
that the Roman Catholic religion, and that of the Greek Church,
were precisely the same, except in language. The Roman Catholics
objected to make this announcement from their pulpits, and stated
that they would not dare take such steps, inasmuch as they would
incur the liability of being torn to pieces by their people, whose
zeal for their Church, and whose jealousy for its honor, were very
great. However, they promised for themselves that they would
offer no opposition to the desires of the Emperor; that they would
remain quite neutral; and if any of their priests, or any of the
laity, wished to join the Emperor’s Church, they would meet with
no disparagement from them. The Emperor then introduced to
them three of his bishops, who were appointed from their knowledge
of the Polish language, to carry out his mission He stated that
he had empowered these three bishops to use any kind of punish-
ment they might deem necessary, to those who showed any oppo-
sition, or refused to become converts to the Greek Russian Church :
that they would have at their service either the military or the
police force, in every county they might visit. The names of these
Russian missionaries were —Archbishop Sieraiaszko, from Wilno 3
Bishop Lemieszko, from Moscow 3 and Bishop Zubko, from Mog-
hilev. These missionaries commenced their labours in the diocese
of Wilno, with great success, and two Roman Catholic priests joined
them. But a number of Roman Catholics and Protestants openly
opposed them Some were captured and whipped to death, in num-
ber one hundred and seventy-five. From whence, the missionaries
came to the diocese of Lublin. Here, the Roman Catholic bishop,
Joseph Bzinciclski, most vigorously opposed them 3 and was stabbed


in the breast, and killed on the spot, with a dagger, by the Arch-
bishop Siemiaszko. This produced such excitement throughout the
diocese, that the missionaries were obliged to leave. They then
entered the diocese of Minsk, the greater part of which consists of
the Greek Russian Church, and the less part of Roman Catholics.
Fifteen Roman Catholic priests, with their parishioners, became
converts. The missionaries at last proceeded to the town Minsk,
where there is a large convent, but very few Roman Catholics in
the town. They entered the convent and found forty nuns; the
name of the Abbess was Margaretta Mieczyslawska, who opposed
them to the utmost. They then withdrew, and after intoxicating
a whole battalion of Russian soldiers, consisting of two hundred,
they gave them instructions to enter the convent by force, in the
evening, with full liberty to do as they pleased with the nuns till
six o’clock the next morning. The soldiers having carried out the
diabolical intention of their instructors, withdrew accordingly.
About eleven a m. of the same day, these three missionaries again
entered the convent, and found all the nuns in one room together,
weeping over eleven of their sisters who were dead, and covered
with blood, from the violence of the drunken soldiers; they then
impudently put the question, whether they still considered them-
selves nuns, faithful to their monastic oath ? This added to their
anguish, and increased their grief, and no answer was given.
Abbess happily effected her escape, with one of the nuns (who died
on the way, from the excitement) and their father confessor, Rillo,
who still resides in Rome. Various means were used, and many
kinds of punishment administered to bring about a conversion to
the Greek Church, but all without success. At last they stripped
them naked, having previously escorted them by soldiers
to the banks of the river Pripet, and the question was
once more, and as they said for the last time, proposed,
whether they would become converts to the Greek Russian Church ?
They were then informed, that on their refusal they would be
drowned in the river before them. To which the nuns replied, that
they would rather die than accede to the request: and in regard to
the crime committed by the soldiers, they called God to witness their
entire innocence. The missionaries then ordered a long rope with
slip knot to be tied to the neck of each one; and three soldiers were
directed to get into a boat (the number of boats were five), two were
to pull the boat by means of sculls, and one to hold the end of the
rope which was fastened to the neck of the nun On a given signal,
the boats proceeded into deep water, dragging after them the nuns,
till each had reached the depth (in water) to the chin ; they then
asked them, whether they would comply with the Emperor’s request
and save their lives? But they still declined; and the boats were
ordered to proceed to deeper water till they were all drowned.
The said missionaries then returned to the town in great pomp,
and held an open air meeting in the market place of Minsk, where
they preached to upwards of twelve thousand persons; they assured
their audience that the same course would be taken wherever


they found opposition, and if needful more rigorous means
would be used to enforce the religion of the Greek Russian Church,
than they had witnessed in the case of the nuns. They stated that
their most gracious Emperor had given them full power to carry out
the object of their mission in exterminating all heretical creeds,
in order to the establishing of the one true Orthodox Church, of
which the Emperor is the head. They then proceeded to the
Archi-diocese of Warsaw. Three towns in this diocese were newly
built; the noblemen who formerly possessed the estates where these
towns now stand, were banished with their families to Siberia, and
their estates were confiscated to the crown; and shortly after the
Emperor caused the said properties to be put up and sold in allot-
ments to Protestants of other countries, with the understanding that
they should have full liberty to use their own form of religion,
under their own pastors, without molestation or interference. This
was done with the view to extirpate the Polish race. The greater
portion of this community was engaged in the manufacture of
cloths, cotton, and linen. These people were Lutherans. Since
the missionaries found so much opposition from the Roman
Catholics, they determined to try their success with the Protestants.
They made a commencement in the newly built town of Ozurkow.
The pastor, John Joshua Walter, had previously desired his people
to close all their doors and shutters, to take into their houses suf-
ficient provisions for a week, and to remain inside. The missionaries
were taken by surprise at the deserted appearance of the streets,
and proceeded to the Mayor, who was a Russian and held his ap-
pointment to office from the Czar, stating their appointment by the
Emperor authorising them to carry out the object of their mission,
and since they had no military in this town to aid them, requested
the said functionary to give them the police. The Mayor replied
not only the police, but I also am at your service, and will accom-
pany you in person. He then told them that the pastor, the Rev.
John Joshua Walter, was so highly esteemed and respected by the
people, that they would do whatever he would dictate to them. The
first point, said he, will be to go directly to the said pastor. They
then proceeded according to instructions to the pastor’s house, and
finding the place shut up and closed, they knocked at the door, and
the inmates refused them admittance. After the police had sought
in vain to enter, the Mayor (who lived on the highest terms of
friendship with the pastor) requested that the door might be
opened, stating that he desired an interview with the pastor. The
pastor, on hearing the Mayor’s voice, instantly complied, and ad-
mission was given to him and to those with him immediately.
When the Mayor, the missionaries, and the police force entered,
they found the house filled with persons of both sexes engaged in
prayer to the Lord for His protection from the will and desires of
their enemies. The missionaries interrupted, and at once put a
stop to the devotions of these persons by stating the object of their
mission, and ordered the pastor to request his people to assemble in
the open air, instanter, to hear a discourse from them. To which


he replied, “I would sooner suffer death than comply with your
request; moreover,” said he, “we enjoy our privileges as Protestants
by the Emperor’s own grant and permission, and we never intermix
or interfere with the religious creed of any other sect.” The mis-
sionaries acknowledged the truth of the pastor’s assertion, and
reminded him that “ throughout the dominions of the Emperor
such grant or permission to foreigners did not extend over five
years, according to the Russian laws, and,” said they, “since the five
years have already expired, you and your people are no longer
foreigners, but the subjects of the Emperor,” The pastor still
firmly refused to comply, when one of the missionaries struck him
several times with his fist. Those who had assembled in the house
instantly rose up in defence of their pastor, disarmed the police,
and set the church bell going; this brought out all the inhabitants,
who joined as one man, and expelled the missionaries. The
pastor in company with several of his faithful followers then went
to the next town (a few miles distant), Zgierz, and informed his
brother clergyman,the Reverend Henry Martin Haydrich, what had
taken place. These two clergymen then sent to the Reverend
Frederic William Wizner, pastor of the town of Alexandrow,
requesting his immediate attendance.
These three pastors consulted together, and their decision was,that
the male portion of their people should assemble, armed with sticks,
and act in defence of their rights, if necessary. These people had
no better weapons than sticks, because the Emperor, in 1832, had
passed a law prohibiting the possession of fire-arms, and even axes
for cutting wood, or any other sharp instrument, in any part of
Poland. The farmer could not cut his hay, without going to the
magistrate to ask permission to use his hay-knife; and after using
it, he was bound to lodge it in the custody of the magistrate imme-
diately. The scythe, sickle, or reap-hook, wood-axe, or chopper,
belonging to whomsoever, were all lodged in the custody of the
government official. In a few days the missionaries returned to the
same town whence they were expelled, in company with an immense
army of Russian soldiers, and proceeded to the residence of the
pastor whom they had previously visited, and found no one at home
but the servant. They interrogated her as to her master’s move-
ments ; she told them she did not know, all she could say was that
he was from home with his wife and child, and she did not know
when to expect their return. They then knocked her down and
whipped her till she could bear the pain no longer, and then
she said her master was in Zgierz with other clergymen. They
directly set fire to his house and burned it to the ground;
then they proceeded with the army to Zgierz, where the
people with their three pastors were waiting to resist them.
The army found a vigorous resistance from the people on endeavor-
ing to enter the town; but of course, sticks were hardly a match for
muskets and bayonets ; and numbers were killed, among whom was
the Reverend John Joshua Walter, who was the chief commander
of the people. The soldiers, at last, entered the town, and the mis-


sionaries ordered the two remaining pastors to be brought before
them, and to be whipped; they were then bound with cords, and
sent to St. Petersburg, with their wives and children : also the wife
of the deceased pastor and his child, as revolutionists. When they
were taken before the Emperor, they were told that they would be
forgiven, if they would join his Greek Church, and cause their people
to follow them. They declined, stating, that rather than deny their
conscience, they would suffer death, or any punishment that might
be inflicted. For this refusal to comply, the Emperor ordered them
fifty lashes each, in his presence; after which, they were to be chained
and taken to prison. They were incarcerated three months, and
then were brought before him again. He put to them the same
question as before, and they replied, that neither whip, knout, nor
death, would deter them from acting in accordance with the dictates
of their own conscience. The Emperor, incensed at their boldness
and determination, ordered them each one hundred lashes, in his
presence, and to be afterwards taken in prisoners’ dress to Siberia,
there to await his further pleasure. What was done with the wives
and children is unknown. These proceedings caused such general
excitement throughout Poland, that a complete revolution appeared
inevitable.
The Emperor, on receiving this intelligence, ordered his mission-
aries to return to their dioceses, and discharge their duties as
formerly. When the two clergymen arrived at Tobolsk, they were
first placed in the chimney-like cell, as before described, and after
twenty-four hours underwent the usual ordeal, being brought before
the governor, who told them that he had received papers from the
Emperor, in which they were represented as revolutionists ] but
the Emperor was favourably impressed them, and once more
offered them liberty and promotion, provided they acceded to his
request. If, on the contrary, they refused compliance, they would
have to bear the infliction of one thousand lashes each. Moreover,
said the governor, I am instructed to tell you that the Bibles which
were taken from you at St. Petersburg, which I now hold in my
hand, and which books you so much respect and implicitly obey,
will be nailed to your heads, so soon as you have received the
punishment afore-named To all this the pastors replied, that they
were still undaunted; that their minds had undergone no change
whatever; and that they would unflinchingly adhere to the doc-
trines of the Bible. The governor, on hearing this statement, im-
mediately ordered them to be taken to the place of punishment.
When these persecuted men were brought to the place above-named,
the soldiers were already formed into four lines, five hundred in a
line, each holding in his hand a rod. All the Polish prisoners (to
the number of twenty-five thousand) were called out of their differ-
ent stations to witness the punishment to be inflicted on these two
madmen (as they were named), who respected the Bible more than
they did the Emperor’s commands. This incredible number of
prisoners, who were summoned to witness this scene of brutality,
appeared with chains on their legs and hands, and formed such a


frightful spectacle, that they terrified each other. This number
belonged to one prison only, to which the writer also belonged, and
who occupied a place in this hideous group of spectators.
On a given signal, the flogging commenced; the poor creatures
being conducted forward (in the manner before described, of others),
uttered not a word that was audible ; and from the change of coun-
tenance as they proceeded, the spectators had clear indication of the
intense sufferings they endured. Long before the full number of
lashes had been administered, the sufferers were unable to walk from
loss of blood and flesh, much of which hung about them like pieces
of bloody leather. They were then supported by soldiers, who con-
ducted them along the line, till the sentence was fully carried out.
On the completion of the punishment, two blacksmiths were brought
forward, with a long nail, a hammer, and a pair of tongs each, pur-
posely prepared, and each minister’s Bible was perforated through
in the middle, to admit the nails The sufferers, being nearly dead,
were laid down on the ground, on their backs, and the blacksmiths
were ordered by the governor of the prison to place each pastor’s
Bible on the top of his head, and to drive the nail through the Bible
and the head of each, and to Cause the nails to protrude through
under the chin, and then with the tongs to turn up the point of the
nail, as though it were clinched. When the smiths struck the nails,
the head divided into two parts, and the greater portion of the
brains fell out. This heart-rending scene produced such a sensation
that the writer can never describe, nor will he ever forget while life
lasts. Three female prisoners and one male, unable to stand against
the shock, fell down in fits, and died on the spot; but of this no
notice was taken, for no prisoner dared move to render another the
least assistance. The bodies of these faithful pastors, or rather the
remaining parts of their bodies, were then placed on a heap of straw
and wood, together with the bodies of the four prisoners who had
died at the sight of the barbarous exhibition, and they were all
burnt and their ashes scattered to the winds. The prisoners were
then ordered to return to their cells, but being unable to restrain
their feelings longer they wept aloud as they went; even the Rus-
sian soldiers were obliged to wipe away the tears from their faces
with their sleeves. The Emperor’s intention in bringing out these
twenty-five thousand Polish captives to view these diabolical scenes
was to impress them with feelings of awe and terror on viewing
this exhibition of unlimited power and autocratic misrule; and
without doubt, the end was fully answered.
CHAPTER VII.
TREATMENT OF PRISONERS IN SIBERIA. —THEIR EMPLOYMENT. —
THE CRUEL PROCESS OF BRANDING. —AND BRIEF OUTLINE OP
THE WRITER’S ESCAPE.
It has before been stated that the treatment of the female is in
all respects like that of the male: it matters not whether the


female be a lady of title or a mere peasant. The Russian subjects
are treated more leniently than the Poles, inasmuch as the Russian
prisoner has no chains on his or her hands and legs; a Russian is
allowed daily three pounds of the black bread and two pints of
water, and on the Sunday half a pound of fresh meat and a glass
or gill of gin ; also on every Russian feast day the same allowance
of bread, and a double quantity of meat and gin. They work only
four hours in the day, and four hours each day is set apart for their
religious instruction, in the principles of the Greek Russian
Church, and on the Sunday they are exempted from all labor, and
attend the Russian service in their church. But the poor Poles
have heavy chains on their legs always, and every night a long
chain is attached to the leg and one hand crossing the body; that
is, the chain which is fastened to the left leg is fastened to the
right hand, and so of the contrary. The poor Pole is aroused by
the sounding of the bell at a quarter before four o’clock in the
morning, and at four o’clock precisely the cell door is opened by the
turnkey, who unattaches the chain from the hand and places it on
a nail where the prisoner’s name is written; the prisoners then
dress, and at a quarter before five they are marched in procession of
four abreast to Russian Oratorium, as it is called, for prayer. The
silent system is carried out in its full perfection in the case of the
Poles, whether at night or during the day. At a quarter before
six o’clock the Polish prisoners are marched from the oratorium to
their cells again, and to each is assigned his or her particular post
or work for the day. They have no food or refreshment whatever
till midday, when they receive two pounds of black mouldy bread,
scarcely baked, and often full of maggots, and a pint of water.
The time allowed for this repast is one hour. Those who have
worked during the former half of the day now proceed to their
employment, and are kept at work till eight o’clock in the evening,
when they are again marched to the dormitory or cell for the night.
One meal in the day, as before stated, is all that is allowed; on a
Russian feast day every prisoner is served with a half pint of tur-
pentine (or a liquid very much like it), called by the Russians
dziegiee, which is very unpalatable to the Polish taste, though
much liked by the Russians. The Russian soldiers frequently
barter with the Polish prisoners, and give them tallow candles in
exchange for the dziegiee, which the Poles melt in hot water (being
allowed on such days half a pint of hot water), in which they soak
their mouldy bread, making a kind of broth; this forms the greatest
delicacy the poor Pole has. When the prisoners are conducted to
the dormitory, each one stands opposite his or her berth whilst the
bell is rung; when the ringing has ceased, the Russian priest enters
and with his long stick makes certain movements, describing three
crosses, and blesses them in the name of the Emperor. The pri-
soners then standing in rows, males on one side and females on the
other, are ordered to strip themselves. Their night dress consists
of a canvas sack with sleeves at the top or mouth : a piece of twine
is run in the fold made at the top, which, when the prisoner is in


the said dress, is tied round the neck. The prisoner’s bed consists
of a plank on an incline, the head part a little elevated, covered
with bear’s skin, and another bear’s skin and a piece of felt to
cover over the body. The females are employed in making dresses
for the Russian army and for the prisoners, and in carrying large
pieces of wood to be cut into convenient lengths for fuel and
other purposes. The males are employed in digging for copper,
iron, zinc, and platina; cutting stones, masonry, sawing timber,
casting balls for cannon, and preparing ammunition for the army
and navy, together with all kinds of warlike implements. To
each one is allotted a certain portion of work; if he or she fail
to complete the portion assigned, for the first offence half the
allowance of food is withdrawn, for the second twenty-five lashes
are administered, and should a third offence occur the offender is
exposed to the cold for four hours in the night dress, and placed
like a crucifix to beams in the form of a cross, with the arms
stretched out, an iron ring round the middle of the body, which
is often frozen to the sack or night dress and the skin. The arms
are kept extended at full length by means of an iron ring which
secures the wrists to the cross beam; some are frozen to death,
being unable to stand against the rigour of the climate.
There are persons imprisoned for politics who are kept under
ground without ever seeing daylight, except when they are
brought up to witness the sufferings of their fellow countrymen,
who are about to be branded. What severe cruelties are
practised on these poor sufferers it is impossible to say, for none
have ever escaped from these dungeons to tell their sad tale of
horror and of woe, and none ever visit them, nor does any one
know, save the officers in charge of them and the government,
what unearthly tortures are used towards these pitiable objects,
who drag out their miserable existence with chains on their legs
weighing twenty-five pounds, in profound silence, and almost in
utter darkness. These prisoners have already passed through the
cruel process of branding. The number of these prisoners is
necessarily small compared with others, for the best of reasons,
viz., few constitutions can endure the severities inflicted by the
order of the northern tyrant.
BRANDING.
The cruel torture of branding was invented and practised first
under the reign of the Empress Catherine, who ordered all
prisoners who were banished to Siberia, to be immediately
branded. Alexander the First, tried by all possible means to abo-
lish the barbarous practice of branding, but the Russian Princes
and the major part of the government opposed him, and caused a
law to be passed that every prisoner after having been in Siberia
two years should then be branded. This law was in force till the
late Emperor Nicholas ascended the throne. Nicholas caused a
law to be passed which altered the former in regard to time, and
d 2


left it entirely to his will to brand at whatever time he pleased,
and for any offence which he considered deserved it. When the
process of branding is about to be performed, the Polish prisoners
who are to undergo this torture have their heads shaved, male as
well as female; the chains are then taken off their legs; they are
dressed in black shirts, trowsers like the Chinese wear, only
black, and a black smock frock with wide sleeves. All prisoners
are brought into the yard of the prison, and so arranged that they
may witness the cruelty about to be practised on some of their
fellow countrymen. Afterwards, those who are condemned to be
branded are brought forward, and each one’s legs are secured to a
massive timber partition about seven feet high, by means of irons:
each leg is fastened separately to the partition below the knee,
a little distance apart, and also above the knee; another iron band
fixes the middle of the body firmly; the wrists and elbows are
then secured by irons, causing the hands to hang down near the
sides of the prisoner; a wide iron collar or broad ring, which
like the other irons is fixed to the timber partition, and opens to
receive the neck. In this iron collar are two holes, one on each
side, to receive a screw bolt to fasten two upright pieces of iron,
one on each side of the face. The iron collar being tightly
fastened, the bolts are screwed in till the sufferer turns black in
the face, and sometimes these side screws are tightened till the
cheek bones crack. The sufferer being thus fixed without the pos-
sibility of any movement whatever; from a subterraneous passage
a Russian priest makes his appearance into a pulpit, arrayed in
black, with a long black cap on his head about two feet high, and
in his hand a cane about six feet long, to which is affixed on the
top a representation of the Emperor in silver. The priest kisses
the feet of this image or idol, and in the right hand holds out the
said cane whilst he addresses the condemned prisoners and the
spectators in the name of the Emperor. When the priest has
finished his address, he bows to the Governor of the prison and
disappears. There are two furnaces for heating the irons, one on
each side of the yard, and the number of the irons is equal to the
number of prisoners to be branded. These irons, which are cast
metal, are three inches long and one inch broad, containing the
word Siberia, and are fixed to a long iron handle. The Governor
stands on an elevated form, holding in his hand a white pocket
handkerchief. He orders the men engaged for the purpose to
commence operations. The severity of the branding is regulated
by signs made by the Governor with his white handkerchief: for
instance, when he tosses his handkerchief on his right shoulder,
the man places his brand lightly on his victim’s forehead, causing
the smoke to rise with a hissing noise, and the blood flows down
his face and covers all his body ; when the handkerchief is taken
from the shoulder and carelessly held down in the Governor’s
hand, the branding iron is applied with the full force of the ope-
rator, and the brains protrude through all round the iron, and
the eyes sometimes drop out and at other times fall inwards,
which of course kills the individual at once. No notice is taken


of the sufferings or death of any till the whole process is com-
pleted; that is, till all have been branded. The doctor is present
the whole while, but he is inert till the branding is over, when he
places a plaster on the forehead of those who are alive, and orders
them to be taken to the hospital. Those who survive are sent to
the lower dungeons before mentioned, and those who die under the
torture are committed to the flames.
During the four years that the writer was imprisoned in Siberia
he was compelled to witness the atrocious cruelty of branding
whole groupes of his fellow countrymen at sixty-five different
times. There is one occasion out of the sixty-five, which is still
vividly before the writer’s eye, and will never be obliterated from
his memory so long as he has the use of his reason. It is as
follows : —Thirty-one Poles were brought up and arranged as be-
fore stated to be branded, twenty-five were males and six females.
One of these females was a lady personally known to the writer :
her name was Emilia Sulimierska, born in the hereditary village
of Sulmierzyce, which is situated in the district Widawa, in
Poland. As on all occasions' the males were first branded, the
handkerchief of the Governor was held down by his side, and
the branding iron, being excessively heated, was applied with
such force to the forehead of each male that it penetrated the skull
and caused a great portion of the brain and cerebreal matter to
gush out, and each one expired in a few minutes. A sight so
appalling and heart-rending caused instant death to four of the
females, who were also condemned and arranged on the opposite
side to be branded. After the branding of the twenty-one males
the handkerchief of the Governor was tossed on the shoulder, and
the last four men were lightly branded and lived. The men then
proceeded to brand the females : though four of them were dead
it made no difference; with the exception of their being insensible
to the suffering, they also were branded; two of the ladies only
were alive, and one of these after enduring the torture survived
only one day and then died; the other one whose name was men-
tioned before recovered, and was committed to the depths of the
Siberian mines to pass the remainder of her miserable existence,
together with the four surviving males, in perpetual solitude and
darkness. To credit all the atrocities of Siberian barbarity, an
individual must have ocular demonstration of the savage cruelties
practised in the nineteenth century by the northern tyrant, whose
art in butchery, and whose genius in the invention of torture,
appear to make him more than a match for the Prince Lucifer
himself! And from the example and training in such a school,
what may be expected from the new Emperor Alexander 11., son
of the late Nicholas 1., whose sentiments are in every respect
equally brutish? In spite of the misrepresentations which have
appeared in the public press by his dupes of his “pacific” inten-
tions, he has already avowed his determination to carry out the
policy and views of his father.


A BRIEF OUTLINE OF THE AUTHOR’S ESCAPE FROM SIBERIA.
It was for no other offence than for translating and explaining
the Bible to my fellow countrymen and the Russians, that I was
taken from my home and hereditary village Radziwilowo, in
Poland, and all my property and estate confiscated, and 1 con-
demned to Siberia for life. For the first six months I was obliged
to cut timber, and after this period I was sent to the mines, where
I remained for one year and eleven months without seeing day-
light, so that I lost my sight. When they found that I was
unable to perform my task of labour on account of my blindness,
they ordered the doctor to examine me, and he decided that I
was blind, and had lost my sight through the density of the un-
derground atmosphere. I was then removed to another prison,
and under the medical treatment I received from the doctor my
sight was restored. I was then obliged to cut stones till the day
the Lord appointed for my miraculous escape with others. The
means that were appointed to effect our escape were as follows :
A Russian Prince, related to the late Emperor Nicholas, had
lived with a wife for fourteen years, and she died without any
issue. He then' married a young Princess, who bore him twins
eighteen months after marriage. Previously to the accouchment,
the princess told her husband that if she were delivered safely, her
mind was impressed to give a grand dinner to all prisoners in
Siberia. In a short time her hopes were fully realized, and beyond
her expectations, she brought forth two sons. The Prince was so
overjoyed at this unexpected honor of being the father of two sons,
that he immediately proceeded to St. Petersburg to carry the
tidings, and to bear the petition of his wife to the Emperor, to
grant him and his wife the honor to celebrate this great event, by
giving them permission to treat all the prisoners in Siberia with a
dinner. When the Emperor heard this, he indignantly replied, “ I
would rather give the half of my dominions than comply with such
a request.” The Prince returned to his wife, and reported the
Emperor’s decision. The Princess assured her husband that she
would, the first opportunity, ask the Emperor herself. A few
months elapsed, the Emperor having been solicited to become
the godfather to these children; on the day appointed the children
were christened, and the Emperor gave a grand entertainment.
The Princess, watching the opportunity, finding the Emperor in
very good cue, being highly inebriated, and from his affability to
her in drinking her health, &c., she expressed her high delight on
seeing the Emperor’s good spirits, and said how much moi e would
she be delighted if his Majesty would condescend to grant her a
very small request. The Emperor instantly replied, “ All that is
in my power I will grant you.” She directly drew forth a written
petition, and begged him to accede to it, and to sign it. He at
once, without reading it, put his name, and ordered his seal to be
affixed forthwith. She then showed the Emperor’s ministers the
petition, who at once expressed their surprise, saying, the Emperor
Las forgotten himself; for it is contrary to our laws to show any


mercy or kindness to those who have been condemned for life to
Siberia. After great disputing and consultations, they ultimately
agreed to assent to what had been done; provided the religious
prisoners, or those who had been sent to Siberia for religious
offences only, were treated. A despatch was immediately sent from
St. Petersburg to the Governor of Tobolsk, to that effect. At six
o’clock in the morning of the 4th of May, 1847, we were all called
by name, and ordered out of the prison into a large room, where
several blacksmiths were waiting to unfasten the chains from our
legs. When the chains had been removed from our legs, we were
ordered to proceed to a bath of warm water, where soap and towels
were prepared, and servants in attendance to wait upon us. We
were all supplied with clean linen, and the clothes in which we
were first taken, being our own proper dresses, our boots polished
and ready for us, and all money, watches, and valuables that were
in our possession when we were taken, restored to us. So soon as
we were dressed, we were informed that we were to appear before
the Governor, and were at liberty to walk, not as prisoners in our
ranks of two abreast, but as we pleased. When we were admitted
into the presence of the Governor, he addressed us thus :
“ Gentlemen, I have received glorious news for you, and if you will
confess that you were in error, which was the cause of your being
brought here, and to acknowledge your adherence to the Russian
Greek Church, instead of the Bible; and further, if you will
promise, by oath, that you will never reveal the treatment which
you have witnessed towards the Polish prisoners, and if you will,
from this time forward, use all your influence to convert those with
whom you were formerly associated to the Orthodox Church, I
hold in my hand instructions from the Emperor to set you at
liberty in forty-eight hours.” To which we unanimously responded,
that “in forty-eight hours we would give a decided answer.” He
then explained to us the particulars respecting the Princess, before-
named, and her two twin sons, hoping that we would pray sincerely
to-day and to-morrow for the preservation of the two infants, that
they may grow up to be an honor and ornament to the Russian
government. All most humbly bowed, and faithfully promised
implicit compliance. However, when we viewed each other in the
church, our minds were more occupied with the way to make our
final escape from Siberian thraldom, than with the devotional ser-
vices of the Russian bears. We were furnished with every luxury
that could be supplied, at the expense of the Prince and Princess.
As the Russians always commence their entertainments by drink-
ing to excess, so, the table being spread, they brought a whole
hogshead of wine, also one of brandy, another of whiskey, and a
large puncheon of honey. On viewing these luxuries, the whole
of the Russian soldiers, as well the Governor as the prison servants,
at once became our friends, and sat down with us to take part of
the refreshment. The Governor first drunk our health with brandy,
taking a half-pint tumbler full at the time ; then all the soldiers
and the servants did the same. We also drunk the Governor’s
health, the health of the Emperor, the Prince and Princess, and the


children’s. But we excused ourselves from taking spirits, as the
custom is in our country to drink the wine at the first; moreover,
We stated that we were too weak at present to take spirits, and
after dinner we would join them. Long before dinner the Russians
had emptied the barrels of brandy, whiskey and wine ; the Gover-
nor being in high spirits, cried out, What ? shall we have no
more ? To which we replied, by all means, bring double the quan-
tity. In a short time our order was obeyed, and double the former
quantity was brought in. The Russians, unable to withstand the
strong temptation, instantly opened the hogsheads, and commenced
to drink, without orders. When the dinner was served up, very
few Russians were able to partake ; even the Governor was so in-
toxicated that he laid down on the floor like a sleeping pig. When
we observed the state in which all the Russians were, we imme-
diately began to concoct means to escape ; we all swore fidelity to
each other, to defend each other to the last drop of our blood.
Towards evening we mixed together, in an immense boiler, which
was placed over a large fire, brandy, whiskey, and honey, which
mixture, when boiled, is called Russian punch. When we had
prepared the punch, we all feigned to be drunken, and rolled about
on the floor amongst the soldiers, who, as well as the Governor,
laid down fast asleep. We aroused them, desiring them to see our
loyalty in drinking the health of his most gracious Majesty the
Emperor. We used a pint wooden vessel, which was quite plain,
aud a little hollow at the bottom, on the underneath part; and as
they, the Russians, were quite insensible, they were not able to dis-
cern whether we used the vessel bottom upwards or not. We said
every one must drink an entire measure of punch, or he would be
considered a traitor to the Emperor. To which the Governor and
all the soldiers cried out —“ Bravo.” We used a large wooden
spatula to stir up the punch, and to fill the measure. We then
drunk, or rather pretended to drink, a measure full of punch to the
health of the Governor and the soldiers. They then, in return,
commenced to drink his Majesty’s health and ours ; and we took
good care that each Russian should have a full measure each time.
The intoxicating nature of such a mixture can be readily conceived.
Some of the Russians, after partaking of the punch, declined to take
any more, but we again aud again urged, that he who did not
drink the full quantity did not love the Emperor. This had the
desired effect, and they replied that they would drink if they died.
Some were so insensible that they could not even sit; and then
we brought the measure of punch, and poured it down their throats,
as they laid on the floor. About half-past ten in the night, we
pretended to sport with them, pulling their noses, chins, feet, &c.,
to see whether they were entirely off their guard. One of our
number, Albert Paschalis Blazeiewski, at this moment suggested
that we should strip the soldiers of their clothes, and dress ourselves
in them. This we did directly, and not having sufficient, we broke
open the’store rooms, and supplied ourselves with uniform, linen,
ammunition, guns, &c., and filled the knapsacks with provision.
We had ascertained from the soldiers the password for the night


before they had lost their senses. When we had prepared every
thing necessary, we locked np the Governor, soldiers, and servants
in the room where they all laid snoring like pigs; we took the
key with us. We made the projector of this successful plan our
lieutenant and commander, and another one, John Nowak, second
officer. We then marched in proper order as a regiment of
soldiers to Tobolsk, The night being very gloomy and dark was
all in our favor. At two o’clock in the morning we reached the
gates of Tobolsk, our Lieutenant gave us orders to stop, and he
knocked at the gate, each one trembling through fear of being
detected, and the cold sweat trickled down us while we waited the
answer; indeed we were as wet as though we had been in the
river. In the middle of the gate is a small iron door perforated,
through which the sentinel looked and sternly demanded who was
there. Our Lieutenant replied, “ Chief patrolthe sentinel de-
manded the watchword. This was given promptly, and our
Lieutenant ordered him to open the door immediately. This was
directly done and we entered, presented arms, &c., and our Lieu-
tenant ordered the door to be shut and we proceeded through the
high street. When we had marched three quarters of the way
through the town, we met the guard, who immediately rang the
bell, when twenty-five soldiers and their officer made their ap-
pearance and presented arms, &c. Our Lieutenant proceeded to
the officer, the watchword was demanded and given by our
Lieutenant (who had served as a lieutenant in his younger days
in the Russian army), and after going through the usual military
forms we proceeded towards the outer gate.
When we reached the outer gate we came in contact with the
sentinel, an old Russian soldier, who, contrary to all Russian rule,
was smoking a pipe. Our appearance so surprised and frightened
him that he was unable to hide his pipe; our Lieutenant directly
took away his pipe and struck him several times with his sword,
and told him that to-morrow he would teach him to pay proper
respect to military rules. With great fury our Lieutenant then
ordered him to open the gate; this he did, and we all came out,
and in order to prevent any suspicion on the part of the sentinel,
our Lieutenant told the soldier that he was to be on the alert, and
that if he heard any firing from us he was to reply immediately.
He then ordered the sentinel to shut the gate, and we proceeded
on our march on the left side df the town towards the forest. We
had no sooner reached the forest than we all prostrated ourselves
on the ground, and thanked God for the miraculous deliverance so
far from the Russian *• Hades,” and implored the guidance of the
Lord in directing our steps in the future. We journeyed to-
gether for about three weeks till we came to the river Zara, and
having no provisions, for we had consumed all that we brought
away with us, we decided to separate into parties of twelve and
thirteen, and each party to take a different route towards Circassia.
It was agreed amongst us that whichever party should reach the
mountains first, should erect a certain sign on the most prominent
position; each party had its own peculiar sign. It was our in-


tention to shoot bears, wild pigs, buffalos, &c.; but our numbers
frightened all the wild animals and kept them out of gunshot.
The writer’s party consisted of eleven; the second day after the
division we journied and came to the river Trish, where we shot
a young bear; we skinned him and roasted him. We all enjoyed
our meal, for we had been already three days without partaking
of any solid food. After this repast we went on through the
forest till we came to Bukhtarminsk, and being greatly fatigued
and exhausted from want of food, for we had passed now four
days without having anything to eat except snow and a little
resinous substance which exudes from some of the trees. Here
we resolved to pass the night, five watched and six slept during
one half of the night, aud the six watched and the five slept the
other half. We made a large fire and kept it up all night. As
soon as the sun rose in the morning we proceeded onwards through
the forest, and about ten o’clock, a.m., we came in contact with a
herd of wild pigs; we fired on them each of us, and killed eleven
young ones. We quickly prepared them and made a large fire
to roast them. Ere they were half roasted we commenced
satisfying our hunger. After we had made a hearty meal from
the pigs, we took with us what remained over after we had eaten,
and journeyed for five days towards the desert of Karakoum. We
wandered about this desert, and having consumed all our pork we
began to be in great want again, for we were unable to see the
least sign of anything like a living animal in this trackless maze.
We began to despair of life, and resolved to make one more effort
to reach a high hill at a distance of about ten miles ; and we
agreed to climb (whoever would be able) the highest tree, in order
to discover any house or dwelling, provided such could be seen.
We also resolved, as we wore in a starving condition, to enter any
house we might see, and there offer to purchase bread. We had
money; if they refused to sell us, then we determined to take by
force whatever they had that was eatable, and to leave the full
value in money with them. As we approached the hill in the
evening, we managed to ascend a little distance by taking hold of
the branches of trees, for we were quite faint and unable to proceed
erect any further, and then sat down about half an hour, and
feeling chilly from the cold inclement evening, for it rained and
snowed, we made another effort to reach the top, which in some
places was quite bare of shrubs, and almost perpendicular. On
reaching three-fourths of the distance up this hill, one of our num-
ber, who was conductor, alarmed us by a frightful shriek, uttering
the expression—“ Lord help me.” It was very dark and still
rained; we all trembled, and endeavored to obtain a light to see
what was the matter. We succeeded in getting a light, as we
always prepared some bark and carried it with us for that purpose,
when each one’s name w T as called, in order to see whether any one
was missing. We soon found our friend Nowak was not with us.
We called out his name a long time and no answer was given;
we therefore supposed that some animal had run off with him.
We immediately commenced a search with our lights to discover


whether there were any marks either of blood or of any animal’s
feet; we soon came upon the footmarks of our friend whom we
had missed, and whose voice had startled some of us by the shriek
before mentioned, and all followed the said footsteps till we came
to a deep hole, and from the termination of his footmarks in the
snow, we were quite sure that our friend had fallen down this
hole, which to us appeared like the crater or top of a valcano. We
listened but heard nothing ; we again called out his name, when
to our surprise our friend responded to the call, and told us he was
afraid to speak, for he did not know where he was, or what kind
of place it was into which he had fallen. However, one of our
number descended with a light, and to our surprise, there was
abundance of provisions. A ham was immediately thrown up to
us, which we greedily devoured. This volcano, as we supposed,
turned out to be a den belonging to some powerful banditti. It
was evident to us that it had been forsaken for some months, for
the bread which we found in casks the next day was quite mouldy.
There were barrels of spirits, wine, honey and beer ; also cheese,
hams, bacon, flour, barley, and one barrel of gunpowder,half-barrel
of musket shot, and about one hundred stands of Russian arms.
There we tarried sixteen days, eating, drinking, and sleeping, till
our strength was quite recruited. We found also a great quantity
of jewellery, plate, &c. In a box we found Russian bank notes, a
large amount in silver roubles, and a few gold ducats. The plate,
jewellery, &c. we carried a little distance, and dug a hole in the
ground and buried them; the silver and gold coin and a few notes
we took with us. When we left, we each carried as much provi-
sion as possible. After this our journey was more prosperous;
we often fell in with white bears, pigs, buffaloes, &c., which we
shot, roasted and ate. We next journeyed towards Uralsk, which
is situated between the rivers Ural and Volga. Having consumed
all our bread and salt, and having discovered a large house sur-
rounded by walls, we climbed up a high tree a little distance from
the house, and though we saw some cattle, yet we could not dis-
cover any person about the premises. Towards evening we saw
smoke ascending from the chimney and we resolved that two
should go to the house and nine should watch, We all loaded our
pistols and guns. I, the writer, and my friend Nowak were the
delegates appointed to visit the house and to endeavor to purchase
bread and salt. About nine o’clock p.m. we walked round the
wall to find the entrance, and on reacliing it we knocked at the
door, when a Russian servant with long beard, in livery, demanded
who we were and what we wanted. We replied, we wish to see
your lord: to which he replied “the Archirey” is at home, but I
must tell him before I give you admittance. We found by the
servant’s reply that his master was a Bishop, and discovering
that the servant was not very sharp, we questioned him respecting
his master’s wife ; to which he said, Oh ! she has been dead two
years. Oh! we replied, it cannot be so long since we saw her.
He then began to sum up the weeks and months with his fingers,
and exclaimed, —I am sure it is quite two years ; and a good mis-


tress she was. Oh yes, wc replied, we are well aware of that,
otherwise we should not have called to see her. We further en-
quired how the children were and how many, and how many ser-
vants there were kept on the premises. He said there are two
sons in the army in St. Petersburg; the oldest daughter is
married to a Russian baron, and lives in St. Petersburg; and the
younger, Miss Wolga, is at home, and is the housekeeper ;I am
the servant and cook; we have a servant girl and three men ser-
vants in the stables. He then gave us a pinch of snuff, and told
us where to buy the best snuff, telling us the distance they were
from town was one mile.
The servant then left us at the gate and went to his master to
inform him that two gentlemen, soldiers, who represented them-
selves as old friends of the Bishop, desired to see him. The Bishop
instructed his servant to admit us immediately. We entered and
introduced ourselves, telling him the whole truth as to our cha-
racter, whence we came, and what our object was in taking the
liberty to call upon him. He at once expressed himself willing to
assist and to befriend us to the extent of his power, and said, “my
dear brothers, if you had been imprisoned for politics I oare not
sympathize with you; but as you were imprisoned for your reli-
gion I most cordially receive you and will treat you as a father.
He then showed us the newspaper in which our names appeared,
and all our persons were described and a reward of a thousand silver
roules for each one’s head was offered to any one who would appre-
hend us. He then added, if I did not intend to act like a father to
you, I would never show you the reward offered for your appre-
hension. He at once interrogated us as to the others who had escaped
with us, whose names also he had shown us. We told him that we
were obliged to disperse, because we had not food sufficient, and
we said we are two only, and have no idea what route the others
have taken. He observed our bare feet that were galled with the
journey, and ordered his servant to bring hot water in two vessels,
and he mixed salt and mustard and put them in the water; and
while we were soaking our feet we partook of refreshments which
he had ordered, and he also partook with us and drank excessively
of Russian punch which he placed before us, and invited us to
drink also. We drank a little after having satisfied our hunger,
and he then sat down with us with his large pipe, and we also
smoked with him while the servants washed our feet and legs. He
then sent his servant for stockings and boots for us, and change
of linen, which we gladly accepted ; he told us we should remain
in his house for a fortnight and no one would be admitted, or should
any one leave the house, therefore, said he, make merry and I will
also make merry with you till dinnertime. The dinner was served
up, and after we had enjoyed ourselves the Bishop’s daughter
played on the piano, and we also joined with her in singing Russian
songs. About half-past eleven o’clock he said to his daughter that
it was time for bed ; he then took his daughter into the next room
and talked with her, and we being on the alert, heard him speak to the
daughter in the Russian language, and we gathered from the lew


words that dropped what was our benefactor’s intention, viz., to
send his servant on horseback to the Mayor of the town to bring
soldiers and police directly, as he had captured two of the Polish
prisoners whose names were advertised in the Gazette. When he
returned to us he pretended to be very kind and urged us to drink
more, telling us that we would not go to bed to-night, but we
would sleep all day to-morrow. My friend Nowak hastily replied
you may sleep for ever, but we understand your diabolical inten-
tions. The Bishop reached a pistol from the wall (which was well
ornamented with fire-arms) and aimed and fired at his head, but the
shot missed. I jumped from my seat and seized him (the Bishop)
by his hair and his long beard and flung him on the floor, and to
prevent his noise I pushed a part of the skirt of Bis long coat into
his mouth and sat on his chest, and my friend Nowak ran outside
and gave the sign for our other friends to come to our assistance.
Eight of our number came directly, leaving one to watch outside.
Nowak ordered all the servants to be taken into the cellar and to be
bound, telling them that there should not be one hair hurt if they
made no noise, for we only intended to bind them and take provi-
sions with us and leave immediately. Having bound all the ser-
vants, a consultation was held respecting the Bishop, who was still
lying on the floor under me; some wished to hang him, but the
majority decided that we should each administer to him twenty-
five lashes with his own riding whip, and then bind him and place
him with his servants; we accordingly chastised him and spared
his life. We forced the daughter to show us where the provisions
were, and having supplied ourselves with all we required, we took
with us the daughter, two carts, and three horses to each. We
offered the young lady payment in full for all we had taken, but
she declined to receive it. We left the money on the table and
wrote a few lines to the Bishop, expressing our hope that this would
be a lesson to him for the future, and we hoped it would teach him
to treat the Poles honorably instead of betraying them as he had
done before; we then locked up the house and took the key with us,
and the daughter also. We started on our journey, and having pro-
ceeded twenty-seven miles in the forest the day dawned and we
stopped and told the young lady that she might return with the
horses and carts and take with her the keys, and if she pleased she
might go and tell the magistrate what we had done. After we had
despatched her we still proceeded on the same route till we found
she was out of sight, and we directly took a different track. These
provisions lasted us for three weeks till we passed the Volga be-
tween Astrakhan and Tenotaensk ; here we shot a large wild pig,
which we skinned and roasted. No sooner did the roasted meat
send forth its odor than we were surprised with the appearance of
an immense flock of wolves of extraordinary size. W e all trembled
as we stood around the fire and faced the wolves, none daring to
move hand or foot. In a short time a still larger flock of bears
came, most of them white, and as the bears like the fire, for the
warmth, they came close to us. No language can express our terror
when thus surrounded. The wolves commenced an attack on each


other; at length a young bear was attacked by a wolf, and in a mo-
ment this wonderful horde of bears declared war and commenced
an attack on the wolves; a fearful combat ensued which lasted fully
twenty minutes, and after the surprising struggle the wolves were
defeated, ran away (those that remained alive, for numbers were
killed), and the bears gave them chase till they were lost from our
sight. Fear had deprived us of our appetite, and we all ascended
a tree there to remain during the night. About ten o’clock in the
evening the same horde of bears returned and laid themselves down
around the fire, till daylight; the night was very stormy and we
were all wet through, but we dared not move so long as we had any
life or power to maintain our position on the tree. About nine
o’clock in the morning the bears all left and we descended to par-
take of our pork, but we found the principal part burnt to a cinder;
still, a portion remained unburnt, of which we gladly partook. We
now marched to the river Terek, and met a boy in charge of a herd
of cattle; we asked him who he was and to whom the cattle be-
longed; he replied to his father. We asked him if he would sell
us a calf? He said he never saw money, therefore could not sell us
any, but his father would be glad to sell us (pointing out two
calves) these as he wanted money to buy salt. We then folded up
a note for five hundred Eussian florins and placed it inside his
shirt and tied it up, telling him that we had sent his father money
for both the calves, and intended to take only one with us, and to
call another day to see his father and to take the other calf. We
had ink with us which we brought from the Bishop’s, and prepared
a piece of wood, on which we wrote to the father in the Eussian
language that we were deserters from the Eussian army, and being
in great need we had taken from his son the calf, and had given
double the value of it, which he would find tied up in his son’s
shirt underneath the arm. The boy cried, and said if we would
give him some of our shining buttons we might take two of the
calves ; we cut off several buttons and gave him and pacified him.
We then made off as quickly as possible with one calf to the forest,
and ceased not to run till the next morning, when we and the calf
were quite exhausted ; we came to a beautiful valley between two
rivers where we killed the calf, made three large fires and roasted
it in three parts. Having refreshed ourselves, we proceeded, carry-
ing the remainder that was left to Circassia. In fine days we ob-
served the signs of three flags of our fellow prisoners placed on
trees on the mountains ; this appeared to give us new life. On ap-
proaching the mountains the Circassians fired on us, supposing we
were Eussian soldiers; we directly put up our sign and they
unanimously ran to us and exclaimed “Welcome brave Poles;
“ come and join your fellow sufferers who are here with us waiting
to receive you.” We were most agreeably surprised to meet our
old companions once more, who had braved the hardships and en-
countered so many difficulties. There was one party only, eleven
in number, missing, and after tarrying three weeks in the Circas-
sian mountains we held a public meeting to decide what should be
our sphere of action. It was determined that we should all join


the Circassians in arms against the “ Russian bear.” Four, in-
cluding myself, declined to stay and take up arms, as we had re-
solved to proceed to Constantinople.
The day following, we, four in number, started under an escort
of Circassians, or rather Poles disguised, two hundred in number,
and proceeded on horseback till we arrived within the limits of the
Turkish territory ; our escort then bid us farewell; they returned,
and we proceeded to Constantinople. We no sooner entered the
Turkish capital than we were surrounded by Russian spies, who
tried by all means in their power to bring us before the Russian
ambassador, but their stratagems proved futile, for there were Poles,
noblemen, at that time residing in Constantinople, who took us by
the hand, advised and protected us. Three of my companians re-
mained, and as I wished to visit Brussels, in order to see the late
Secretary of State of Poland, Baron Selewell, and letters of intro-
duction were given me and I embarked on board a British vessel
for Malta, and from thence to Brussels. The captain, who refused
to take from me any payment, treated me most kindly. I had an
interview with Baron Selewell, and would have remained with him
but the danger of being betrayed into the hands of the Russians by
spies appeared so great that I resolved to flee to the land of free-
dom, viz., England. A few days after I arrived in London, I met
a few of my countrymen, who informed that there were two of my
companions (two out of the eleven missing when we were in Cir-
cassia), at present in London, I shortly joined my old friends
and passed the time with them, till finding the climate of England
unsuited to my broken constitution, I was advised to try the
salubrious atmosphere of Australia. I arrived here by the ship
George Marshall, in the month of April of the present year.
CHAPTER VIII.
THE RIVER NEVA AND THE PRISON.
There is a fortress, or rather a prison, built opposite the palace
of the Czar, on an island in the middle of the Neva, This place was
built by Peter the Great. A church consecrated to St. Peter and
St. Paul occupies the middle of the building, and receives the
remains of the Russian Emperors and their families. This prison
is used for the punishment of small offences, such as omitting to
bow before the Czar or any of his ministers—for not giving infor-
mation of a conspiracy, or political sentiments that might have
been expressed by some other person, &c. From the windows of
the palace, which overlooks the prison, the autocrat or his friends
can feast their eyes with the sufferings of those victims whom their
policy or their vengeance is about to immolate.
In this isolated spot no one is able to view (except from the
palace windows) the sufferings endured by the wretched inmates.


or the barbarous tortures which are practised in this human channel-
house; where, instead of cannons, are to be seen dead bodies torn
by the thong of the knout. The icy cold of winter, which causes
these walls to crack, which kills the sentinel in his sentry-box
often, also kills the prisoners when the season of ice comes round.
The dungeon floors of this prison are on a level with the Neva ;
the windows look out upon the cold stream which washes the walls,
and when the waters, beaten by the winds, invade the cells, which
is often the case, no one replies to the cries of distress and the
dying groans of the poor sufferers. No one ever returns from this
prison to tell the tale of woe to his fellow-creatures. No ! all who
enter this building, die within its walls; and after death, each one
is thrown into the river.
In conclusion, I would observe, that this one man, who rules
this country, where slavery flourishes in its fullest extent, —where
the whip, the stick, the knout, and the rod, are the only means of
argument which the tyrant deigns to use, —where the most sacred
laws of nature are daily violated, —where seventy millions of slaves
are governed by the herculean form of the “ Northern Bear,” this
true chief of a barbarous nation, of a people restrained only by a
false civilization, has destroyed the peace of Europe, which has
lasted nearly forty years—has conceived the project of placing the
Ottoman cresent with the double-headed eagle, and flatters him-
self that he can chain the British lion and the French eagle, with
the design of harnessing them to his chariot, and driving in triumph
over the whole of Europe. The number of his slaves is not suffi-
cient, the extent of his territory and dominions are too small; his
desire is, to grasp the sceptre of the whole world, and dole out
justice with the whip in one hand, and the knout in the other !
ALBERT J. VICTOR, D.T.
THE END.
MELBOURNE : PRINTED AT THE ARGUS OFFICE, COLLINS-STREET.




• * . • r
y ' • * •
p I *•<' M, -0t 4
.
/
d
.»
. .
■ .; if.
.
.
ii
