



OOnSTTEIN'TS.
UP THE MOUNTAINS
Points and Warnings ..
The Journey
The Gum Bush
Sports in the Blue Mountains
SPRINGWOOD, WOODFORD,
and LAWSON
Springwood
Sassafras, or Flying Fox Gully
Lawson ...
Dante’s Glen and Falls
The Adelina Fall
WENTWORTH FALLS
The Falls
The Weeping Rock
KATOOMBA
Sights Accessible
Nelly’s Glen
Katoomba Falls
The Coal Mine
Fern Gully
The Neck of Land
Leura Falls, Meeting of the
Waters, Echo Tree
Cliff View
BLACKHEATH
Govett’s Leap
The Mermaids’ Cave
PAGE PAGE
3 i MOUNT VICTORIA 45
Sights Accessible ... ••• 16
5 | Mount Piddington ... 47
6 i Mount York ... ... 48
7 The Little Zigzag 50
1 i. tt: •_ l) AT
Mount Victoria Pass 51
11 The Grose Valley, the Mine,
and Victoria Falls ... 53
Hartley Vale ... ... ... 54
Fairy Dell ... ... ... 56
j.;> parry ueu ... ... ...
r , THE ZIGZAG, ESKBANK,
LITHGOW, and BO WEN-
FELLS 60
17 i JENOLAN CAVES 66
i Route from Katoomba . 67
20
Route from Mount Victoria .. 67
Route via Tarana ... ... 68
Oberon ... .. . .. 69
~4 Points and Warnings . ... 70
Summary of Cave Sights ... 70
The Caves ... ... ... 71
31 Geological Facts ... ... 74
32 The Imperial Cave ... .. 76
The Lucas Cave ... 81
33 The Nettle and Arch Caves .. 82
34 The Devil’s Coach House ... 84
38 The Elder Cave ... .. 84
39 The Mammoth Cave ... . 86
41 The New Cave ... ... ... SS
Publisher’s Note. —Though this first edition of the Handy Guide has been
compiled with great care, the Publisher will be glad to receive any notes or sug-
gestions likely to promote the accuracy or the usefulness of future editions.


HORROCKS’S
HANDY GUIDE
TO THE
BLUE MOUNTAINS
AND
CAVES,
New South Wales.
PRIGE - - SJZKZPZEnNOIE.
COMPILED J.HC.S.
Edited and Published by
JOHN J. HORROCKS, 61, MARKET STREET, SYDNEY.




UP THE MOUNTAINS.
-~‘ rv O^~"
Summer resort of the jaded denizens of Sydney is the
$9 Blue Mountains. When faces begin to look sallow, when
complain of livers, and women grow cadaverous, ex-
hausted and thin (that is to say, between Christmas and Easter),
the trains running westward are full, and,the houses and purses
of the indigenous mountain folk are in the same condition.
Yes, the Blue Mountains are popular all the year round, but
especially in summer, when the sweet, cool nights (mosquito-
less), and dry, invigorating air bring back vitality which ebbed
in Sydney’s humid furnace. In fact, to visit Sydney in sum-
mer without a final whiff of mountain air, is to take a Turkish
bath in its first stages only. Without the blissful contrast of
the cold shower and cooling chamber, what is it 1
Consider the Jenolan Caves as the cigarette and coffee and the
simile is complete.
In Spring and Summer the Mountains are gorgeous with
flowers; in every bush they blaze in scarlet, orange, yellow,
magenta and pink, while the ground is netted, and the shrubs
are bound by tangled cobwebs of purple creepers. Christmas
bush and Christmas bells, waratahs and lillies, fuchsias, fringed
violets and wattles, and beside them scores who own no common
title, but go disguised in Latin names, which keep no memories
of beauty.
Winter paints in milder colours, but has her harmonies not
less attractive. Of course, the weather is the chief factor in
enjoyment, but even in Winter sunny days are the rule ; splendid
days for pedestrians when the ground is firm and the air as in-
spiriting as iced champagne.
It is true that the thermometer deals in small figures at
night-time and never overtaxes his register by day, but the
exhilaration of the sharp, brilliant weather is indescribable and
at night a double thickness of rug is a secure defence.
No one who visits New South Wales should leave the Moun-
tains and the Caves unseen, nor fancy—like the fabled English
tourist—that a visit to Parramatta will make him acquainted
with the depths of Colonial forest territory.


The majesty, the scope, the beauty of the mountain pictures,
stir the artist love of Nature latent in us all, and none who see
the wondrous landscape drawings hung within this Mountain
Gallery will cavil at the place we give them—the best place “ on
the line.”
As to the Jenolan Caves, the sights there are so strange and
novel, so quaint, grotesque and huge, that to have joined hands
with Alice, and travelled in her company through another Look-
ing Glass would scarce have yielded visions more fantastic and
delightful. . . .
Therefore, to the healthy who want pleasure; to the sickly
who need strength ; the oracle can only give this one direction
To the Blue Mountains !
POINTS AND WARNINGS
If you intend to walk at all, you will need stout boots.
Wear flannels. The days are very hot, the nights very
cold. Between May and October prepare for extreme cold.
Hotel charges are much the same as in town. Lodgings can
be had at £2 2s. a week.
Hire of a saddle horse, 10s. a day ; a buggy, about 15s. or 20s.
In the summer or holiday seasons it is advisable to order
rooms by letter or telegram in advance.
Families intending to spend a lengthy holiday on the Mountains
and who wish to economise, can generally obtain without ditii-
culty a small furnished house, costing from 40s. to 100 s. per
week. To arrange this it is desirable to send on some one in
advance, to make the selection. _
As there are very few passenger trains, travellers between the
smaller Mountain stations must accustom themselves to a guard s
Those who are content to use this means can travel at the
tail-end of a goods train at almost any hour in the day. Most
of the sights are, however, within an easy walk or drive of one
or the other Mountain centres.
To forestall disappointment in those who have heard the Moun-
tain cascades compared in height with the cascades of the Old
World it mav be as well to mention that the marvel oi the
Mountain cascades- the Wentworth, Katoomba, and other Falls-
lies not in the volume of the Fall but in the depth of its descent.
The Mountain streams are too numerous, roo rapid, ami too
swift to hold (except immediately after heavy storms) any
great volume of water. It is not, therefore, the size o


the torrents, but the bewildering depth of their plunge, and
the colossal size and wondrous charm of their surroundings
which earn from all who see them the ready tribute of wonder
and the richest adjectives of laudatory description.
For the convenience of those who have only a few days at
their disposal, we have arranged, under the heading of “ Sights
Accessible ” all the views which can be seen from any given
centre, within a morning or an afternoon’s walk, in the order of
their probable merit. This will enable the best or most novel
sights to be selected, if time does not allow a visit to all.
THE JOURNEY.
At date of writing trains leave Sydney at 9 a.m , 5 p.m.,
and 8 p.m., Saturday additional, 7 p.m., and 1.45 p.m., but these
hours being subject to alteration, reference should be first made
to the Railway Guide, copies of which may be obtained free from
the Central Booking Office, George-street, Sydney (next G P. 0.).
Tickets.— Cost is quoted under the name of each district
hereinafter treated. Return ticket is available for two months
The i-ailway journey is not a very interesting one during the
first fifteen miles. At Parramatta the suburbs are finally left
behind, and the next fifteen miles lie through cultivated plains,
still held here and there by the rear-guard of the retreating bush.
After two hours ride Penrith is reached, the Nepean River
crossed, and the Mountains are at hand.
Penrith and its surroundings seem to have been laid by
Nature with a spirit-level, they are flatness itself; but with a
freer hand the dark blue ridge beyond was fashioned.
The railway seems to run full tilt at the centre of the ridge,
and the first low hills stretch right and left, their serrated sky-
line softened and broken by the irregular rim of tree tops.
The Mountains are well named “ Blue,” for whether near or
distant, whether viewed from Sydney or from their own cool
heights, they wear the same cerulean garments.
The first marked rise is the preliminary grade of the Little
Zigzag, by which ingenious piece of railway engineering, or
rather railway cork-screwing and doubling on the track the first
short steep of the ranges is surmounted, the first step in the
Mountain staircase accomplished.
From the height of a few hundred feet thus attained there is
a magnificent outlook over the broad flats of Emu Plains, and
on over the dark strips of bush to Sydney. Below stretch the
parallelograms of cultivation —the brown and green chess-board


of the settler—the small white houses, the orangeries and the
willow-marked line of the Nepean River (scene of sculling con-
tests).
THE GUM BUSH
from this point onwards monopolises the scene. From either
side the railway line, all along the continually rising grade,
nothing is to be seen but gum-trees. They clothe the gullies,
swarm over the ridges, and closely border the line. No spot of
earth or rock to rest the eye upon ; everywhere naked, straggling,
writhing stems, surmounted by lumps and patches of foliage. A
perfect vegetable Republic ; all equal and alike and matched in
size and uniform, like a picked regiment.
It is as well to mention that this bush, which in general par-
lance consists exclusively of “gums,” or “ bluegums,” contains a
great many varieties of Eucalyptus, some so nearly allied to one
another, that only a very experienced woodsman or a very clever
botanist can accurately name them at sight.
There are 135 species belonging to the genus Eucalyptus, and
nearly 50 are indigenous to New South Wales. Many are known
by one name here and by another appellation in another colony
or district.* As if to make the acquaintance with their individu-
ality still more difficult to achieve they alter at different ages
the character of their bark and foliage. The leaves change in
shape; they alter in position. In youth they spread horizon-
tally ; in age they have apparently found this attitude too hot,
and they unanimously turn their narrow edges to the sun.
This vertical position of the leaves is a noticeable peculiarity,
and is very apt to be discovered by the perspiring traveller, pan-
ting for shade and finding only that shelter which the gum-tree
gives.
In most cases, where the nomenclature is popular, it is wrong,
and the “ blue-gums” of the mountains are misnamed. There
are no blue-gums (Eucalyptus globulusJ on the mountains,
but there are red gums and white gums, and this is the
same thing to most people who have no time to investigate
a slight difference in the bark or the internal texture of
the trees they are passing. On the mountains you will
hear of iron bark, stringybark, messmate, bloodwood, pepper-
mint, mountain ash (all of the Eucalyptus family), sassa-
fras (the prettiest of the mountain trees), black wattle, and a
host of others; but for purposes of popular description the word
* Bent ham gives seven varities of Eucalyptus, popularly known as
“blue-gum,” eight as “ red-gum,” twelve as “ white-gum,” six as “pep-
permint,” and seven as “ stringy-bark.”


“gum,” hereinafter used, may be taken to possess a general bush
inclusiveness, and to have no ulterior scientific precision of
meaning.
The gum bush consists for the most part of tall, lithe, con-
torted trees, slender and pale. Clad in ragged dress of red brown
bark, or half shorn of it, wiJi melancholy strips of cuticle
dangling down. Half of them sheer naked, showing smooth
skins of pink or silver-grey, some plain, some streaked, all showing
white against the green bush back-ground. Crowns of drooping
leaves in loose sparse bunches, narrow, lanceolate leaves, less
meant for shade than decoration.
Tai off on the ridge some taller fellow than the rest outlines
his skinny shape against the sky, showing his heavy, drooping
leaf-clumps perched aloft, dark and rounded like tea-cosies hung
out upon a great coral branch.
The bush by twilight looks ghostly and drear. Glancing be-
tween the trees through the interlaced boughs and leaning trunks
it seems a woodland cemetery. In other forests the white trunks
are the dead ones, in other bush the seared bare, leafless arms,
which stretch out white from among their green brothers, are the
signs of death, and the dethroned monarchs of the forest stand
like white marble pillars— gravestones recording their own
demise. But here, where all the stems are grey and pale, it
seems a cemetery of trees, a convocation of sylvan spectres in
white cerecloths, and at night the dark fringe of topmost foliage
hardly establishes the gum-trees’ claim to life.
In colour the foliage is sombre, a dull, blue-green, or brown,
but in sunlight the leaves glisten and flash as if among the bosk-
age were swung a million silver pendants. When the sun de-
clines, and his oblique rays strike through the bush, the gum-
trees’ claim to verdancy is well and instantly established, no one
disputes the beauty of the illumined emerald tree tops. There-
fore, the very best effects among the many mountain glories are
the evening scenes, looking westward.
Sport in the Blue Mountains.
Shooting parties will be arranged when desired, by
Mr. F. C. Goyder, of The Carrington Hotel, Katoomba.
Mr. P. G. W hittall, of The Imperial Hotel, Mt. Victoria.
Mr. Delaney, of the Mount Victoria Hotel, miles from
Mount Victoria
Mr. Sidney J. Bellingham, care of Mr. Goyder, Katoomba.
Mr. Richard Yates, Railway Hotel, Tarana.


The game obtainable is ; —Rock Wallaby, Scrub Wallaby,
Wallaroo, Wombat, Tiger Cat, Native Cat, Ducks, Lyre Birds,
Gill-birds, Satin-birds, Cockatoos, Parrots, Hares, Platypus, and
Possum.
Winter and Spring are the best shooting seasons, as the sum-
mer days—November to February—are too hot for severe
exertion. In Summer fishing can be had, the Mountain streams
yielding —Perch, black-brim, black fish, eels, fresh-water her-
rings, etc
Mr. Bellingham has made the bush his home, and lived by his
gun during the past five years, he is therefore familiar with all
the sporting secrets of the Mountains.
He will ride, if desired, with parties by the bridle track from
Xatoomba to the Caves, shooting en route.
For terms, etc., see his detailed advertisement.


SPRINGWOOD.
WOODFORD.
LAWSON.




SPRINGWOOD, WOODFORD,
AND LAWSON.
>°<S#S>o<
OpHESE places are associated with the very earliest history
of the now immense Blue Mountain tourist traffic. When
'u y the railway line was opened in 1867, as far as Wentworth
Falls, it was at Woodford that it first occurred to the enter
prising residents to offer to Sydney people the advantages of
their sanatorium. The parent boarding establishment of the
Mountains being thus created, Lawson followed suit, and the
applications for rooms soon exceeded the accommodation.
These places have since maintained their reputation as health
resorts, and Spring-wood and Lawson are full of comfortable
villas where invalids get well, and healthy people improve and
build up their strength. Though these spots have pretty scenes
of their own, they are more used by families making a restful
holiday than by those whose intention it is to see all the best
that the Mountains have to show.
They are warmer and reach summer temperature some weeks
earlier than the larger tourist centres whose altitude can boast
another thousand feet above sea level.
SPRINGWOOD.
48 Miles from Sydney. 1216 Feet above Sea Level. Railway
Ticket —ls£ Class, 7s. 6d. ; Return, 10s.
Hotel. —Royal Hotel, opposite Railway Station. Terms—
-355. to 425. per week at public table. Special terms at
private tables,
For those who need change and mountain air, and whose con-
stitutions cannot stand the more sudden change to Katoomba,
which is usually many degrees cooler, Springwood may be safely
recommended as a bracing and healthy resort, with great natural
advantages.
There are many charming glens and pretty gullies, fair, and
not too distant or too steep. ISTo break-neck precipice paths, no
views of boundless valley plains, but the mild, alluring beauty of
valleys paved with maiden-hair and wainscoted with ferns.


Madeline’s Glen, lying only ten minutes walk north of the
station is a pretty fern gully, but the best scene of all, and one
which, even after all the mountain sights, seems new is the
SASSAFRAS, OR FLYING FOX GULLY.
This lies about a mile and a half south of the railway, and
can be approached by a path from the back of the Royal Hotel.
The way leads through the bush, over a fence or two, past the
quarry, and diverges to the left at the Bee Farm.
The flying foxes, who in fruit time make the valley their
home, hanging the advance guard of their foraging army upside
down to the tree boughs, are not so numerous as in past days of
undisturbed seclusion.
All forest roamers steadily retreat before the peering horde of
modern tourists. The rocks are now defamed by chisseled steps
and rustic balustrades, and downy emerald banks of coral-fern
are sullied by the transverse line of trampled muddy pathway.
But whether flying foxes go or not, the sassafras—fairest of
forest trees—remains to hold the title to the valley.
If there were no ferns, no chattering stream and miniature
cascades, no piled rock terraces on either hand, these trees would
be enough to keep their valley memorable. Their stature is mag-
nificent—some count 100 feet and more—and their small, full-
bodied, sharp-peaked leaves, almost heart-shaped, are marked
upon the sky as you look upwards, like intervening black lace
veils, designed in starry patterns.
After a somewhat lengthy descent over the rocks and down
among the unclothed tree stems, the valley debouches into another
gorge of still more romantic beauty. Along the centre channel
of the defile are chains of water-pools, broad and clear and mo-
tionless, forming the flooring of a lofty tunnel to which the over-
arching trees are sides and perforated ceiling.. On the still,
transparent surface of the water dead leaves and wandering,
bracken fronds are floating. Like specks upon a mirror they
break tire faultless reproductions of this liquid looking-glass.
From the pure water graceful curves of green seem reaching up
to touch the points of overhanging ferns. Boulders muffled in
moss, grey tree-stems, swinging loops of creepers, gleams of light
through leafy interspaces have here their colour symphonies
reflected and refined.
All the trees are tied by festooned supple-jacks. Swaying
wooden ropes, thick as a man’s arm, or in some parts slender as
bis finger, but always lissom, hang from upper boughs, or swing
in twisted lengths from tree to tree.
Long loops of natural cordage unite the forest masts, tie
themselves in knots unknown to sailors, hang in distorted shapes,


twine spirally about the trees and coil in springy hoops and
circles like natural man-traps on the ground. Strong and pliant
as ropes they interwreathe their loops and pendants, clustering
together, plaiting with one another, crushing into the bark and
stem of the trees they take within their python-clasp, curling in
ligneous corkscrews and fastening tree to tree with their lithe,
wooden hawsers.
Parasitic ferns are perched in forks of trees, and from vantage
points of knots and rough bark ridges hang down their pa e,
green pennants. The whistles and calls of birds echoing through
the glade complete the wild, sub-tropical charm of this delight-
ful gully.
LAWSON.
58 Miles from Sydney. 2399 Feet above Sea Level. Railway
Ticket — lst Clans, 9s. Qd. ; Return, 12s. %d.
Hotel. — The Blue Mountain Hotel (Mrs. Wilson),
San Jose Sanatorium (Mrs. Hay).
OOHIS pretty little aggregation of villas is named after
L) Lieut. Lawson, one of the famous trio who made the
first passage over the Blue Mountains in 1813. Much care
has been taken, by the creation of public parks, to preserve the
beauties of the adjacent scenery, but unfortunately the truncated
stumps of many tree-ferns attest the vandalism stopped too late.
From view points in the neighborhood many mountain peaks
and ridges may be seen, but the pre-eminent charm of the place
lies in the pleasant shady gullies, musical with many waterfalls
and prodigal of ferns and verdant coverlets of velvet moss.
DANTE’S GLEN AND THE FALLS.
lie north of the Railway Station, and as the road leads from the
Railway Bridge direct to a conspicuous finger-post, no minute
directions are needed. The cascade in Dante’s Glen lies furthest
from the station, of the four pretty waterfalls which play a
bubbling liquid quartette all day to the quiet valley.
Of the three which precede it, St. Michael’s, with a fall of 70
feet earns most applause, but it is only by name and not by
beauty that the Cecilia, Sebastian, and St. Michael Falls can be
distinguished one from the other. In each the stream, by years
of soft ablution, has worn along the rock a clear, smooth bed,
and won from closely-crowding banks of fern and flowering
underbush a narrow sinuous channel.


Slipping from ledge to ledge, over the falls, the rivulet divides
into a fringe of glittering columns and reunited in the lucid pool
below, flows on towards its lower passage round the rocky bars
and over the barricades of bark and forest debris.
AT DANTE’S GLEN.
the rock borders and overhanging shelves enclose their cherished
ornaments so well, that only for an hour each day does the sun
look into this darkened grotto of ferns The green fronds wave
from every ledge around the dark-stained walls of rock and till
the vistas of the glade. Big boulders in the hollow have long
given up the rolling stone business to which they served a short
apprenticeship, and now pursue an easy and successful moss
gathering profession.
THE ADELINA FALL.
South of the Railway Station, is within an easy walk on a new,
clear track. The Fall is the largest of four or five pretty cas-
cades which lie within the public park of Santa Cruz. The
depth of its descent is about 60 feet, and it holds the centre of
the steep, circular end of a wooded gully. It falls into a perfect
little bay; runs down into a little sea of verdure, over green
fern beaches and reefs of rock, moss coated, and then is drowned
among the shadows of the sassafras and myrtle.
♦ y~- tst ♦


WENTWORTH FALLS




WENTWORTH FALLS
Railway Station,
62 Miles from Sydney. 2856 Feet above Sea Level. Railway
Ticket —l si Class, 10>-. 3d. ; Return, 13s. 9 d.
Hotels — Mulheran’s Hotel.
The Wentworth Falls Hotel.
FALLS, new as it looks, with its hotels
' a . nd cot tages sprinkled among the bush, has associa-
° tions as old as any place on the mountains.
Its “ King’s Table Land,” its “ Prince Regent’s Glen,” were
named in that year so full of terror and triumph to nations at
the other end of the world, the memorable year, 1815.
Before Waterloo was fought in the tumult of Europe, occurred
a day in the quiet of the antipodes which was one of the starting
points of Colonial development. It was the day on which
Governor Macquarie opened the western road over the Blue
Mountains to Bathurst.
Only two years before that time the ranges had not been
crossed by any white man. In May, 1813, however, Blaxland,
Lawson, and Wentworth, after a twenty days’journey, succeeded
in reaching the spot now known as Bowenfells. In less
than two years after, convict gangs had opened through the
virgin bush the 150 miles of road, separating Sydney and
Bathurst. Governor Macquarie, probably the first man who
travelled the Mountains bent on pleasure, bestowed on the splen-
dours of Wentworth scenery the Royal names of the King and
Prince Regent The Falls he styled the Campbell Cataract,
after the English statesman of that name, but subsequent years
have seen the title of the district and the waterfall changed, first
to “Weatherboard,” and then, in honour of the statesman and
explorer, to “ Wentworth.” We may suppose the name has now
acquired some fixity of tenure, for District, and Cataract, and
Railway Station are all now known as “ Wentworth Falls.”
In all the old “ Histories” and “ Travels” the Weatherboard
Hut gains mention. It was a military station for the sergeant’s
guard placed there to escort prisoners of the gangs who were
removed from one district to another.


There are legends, too, about the keeper of a hut near to the
cliff edge, a dealer on the sly in contraband liquors. Tradition
says that lucky diggers travelling along the road, pursued their
journey no further. Their money stayed within the hut and
their corpses lay at undiscoverable depths among the trees in
the valley below the precipice. In those rough times, no doubt,
rough scenes occurred where now are only pic-nic parties and
holiday-making children, but this murderous tradition probably
grew out of the romantic instinct stirred by talk of convict
gangs and by the sight of those stupendous cliffs, over which
toppling a man could but be lost for ever, deep down in the
unrevealing grave-yard of the valley.
Though these Falls and the view from the adjoining cliff
edges are the main charms of this delightful district, a visitor
who has time to spend a few days in the locality, can find many
a track through the bush, leading to spots less known, yet hardly
less beautiful.
For the pedestrian the Blue Mountains are full of charms
every mile he can force round these valley ramparts, discovers
some new cascade, some dell, or gully, richer in ferns and
mountain flowers, quainter or deeper than the rest.
THE FALLS.
Track,— Cross the bridge, which is about 200 yards from the
station, and follow the road which branches, almost at right
angles, to the left, A broad, straight road of about 1J miles
leads to the head of the Falls.
The ground about the Falls has been reserved by the Govern-
ment, and there are well-made paths, protecting railings, &c.
There are few fairer views in the Mountains than the stretch of
the Jamieson Yalley, which is overlooked from the cliff point at
the Wentworth Falls. 4 The immense sweep of the valley, the
practical insignificance of everything lying so far below, the soft
shadows of the lower ridges, outlined by tree tops and—surround-
ing and absolutely enclosing all—the straight, grey, massive
walls, of rock ; the one simile left in the world for the acme of
colossal size, majestic height, and stupendous solidity.
All round this huge indentation in the earth, this deep dimple
on the face of the world, the water from the heights falls over
and plunges down the perpendicular steeps into the gulf below.
Whenever the stream is of fair magnitude the place is named
and becomes celebrated. But the streams have none of them


much volume; they are so numerous that no one can be very
large, and their velocity is such that they cannot long retain any
great quantity of water. Therefore, the only time when the
■cascades themselves, on their own merits, are worthy of much
admiration, is immediately after a heavy rain-storm.
But their environments are always noble and always sublime,
and this one, although it has rivals, is probably the noblest.
The Falls occupy the centre of a deep circular bay or crescent,
and from the horns of this rocky inlet the cascade may be over-
looked, as it falls into the pool a thousand feet below.
The water does not, as at Katoomba and at Govett’s Leap
plunge suddenly over a straight edge of cliffs—it runs here
leisurely down a long rock staircase, separating as it runs into
several rills which then drop suddenly and lose themselves in a
thin veil of mist. Sometimes the wind which hustles up the
gully drives the fragile streamlet back in clouds of spray, or
scatters the liquid diamonds wide over the waiting ferns and tree
tops, but in quiet times the spray collects again upon a ledge,
three hundred feet below, and with re-assembled forces runs
down the bare rock steps which form the first tier in this great
amphitheatre. Then, again, it plunges for another ledge, and
finally into the pool and down among the trees.
Breaking the grey and brown of the smooth, vertical walls
•are ledges of ferns and sloping shelves of rich, moist verdure.
Down in the valley the wind may sway the tree tops, but looking
down upon them from this height no motion can be perceived.
So deep the gulf that all below seems as undisturbed and silent
as the shadow that envelopes it; an inaccessible abyss of green-
ness, soundless, motionless, and dim.
On the other side this sea-less bay the cliffs, marked and
seamed with a million transverse lines of cracks and ledges, cast
their sharply-outlined shadows into the ravine. Topmost rocky
peaks and pinnacles catch the light, and throw long pointed
shadows of themselves over the green level of valley tree tops,
bold, straight precipice edges mark on the same plain with square,
firm-outlined fields of shade, their splendid images.
Looking out into the valley, point beyond point of rock and
wave beyond wave of green melt at last into the blue ridges fifty
miles away. To the right the Solitary Mount rises from bush-
covered slopes and shuts off the view by its steep cliffs and
tree-crowned level summit.
At sunset and by moonlight the great scene develops new and
stranger beauties, weird and glorious, which Dore might have
painted, or Keats described, and which are worthy of no lesser
genius.


THE WEEPING ROCK,
lies above the Wentworth Falls and is reached by a path
branching to the left, as the main gates to the Falls are entered.
It is one of the minor cascades in the little hollow down
which the stream runs to the Falls.
Over a heavy, projecting, convex shelf the water plunges
heavily in white foam on to a rock stairway, ten feet below.
Through the pellucid veil of falling water the pale green fronds
of ferns which nestle below the ridge are partially revealed.
Below are tranquil pools and more cascades, so that the dell is
filled with the melody of the unfaltering monologue of the
stream. The rocks encompassing the hollow, project a heavy
roof and shield luxuriant ferns, and from the edges of the
cumbrous balcony long grasses hang a variegated fringe.
It is “ a miniature of loveliness.” The splendid features of
the mountain scenes distilled and squeezed into a locket picture.


KATOOMBA.




KATOOMBA
66 Miles from Sydney. 3349 Feet above Sea Level. First Class
Fare, 11s. Return (2 mos.) 14s. 9 d.
Hotels. —The Carrington (Mr. F. C. Goyder). Splendidly situ-
ated, close to the Station and commanding fine views. Ac-
commodates some 150 persons and is excellently managed.
Terms, 12s. a day, or £3 10s. per week.
Thomson’s Hotel, late Biles’ (Mr. I). Thomson).
Katoomba Family Hotel (Mr. J. Nimmo).
For the above, and for Physicians, Private Boarding Houses,
Banks, Stores, Livery Stables, (be., see advts.
<?‘|/oATOOMBA is the most vigorous and growing place on
the Mountains. The township has an atmosphere of
TV 0 new paint and mortar about it, a consequence of the con-
tinual building operations, but there is no mistake about its life
and steady progress. It has by no means the quiet aspect of the
bush village, it is obviously tourist made.
A few years ago Katoomba was known only as a coal pro-
ducing district; now its hotel accommodation is unsurpassed in
the Colony, it has rows of houses of stone and brick, shops with
plate-glass windows, resident doctors and other appurtenances of
a popular resort. Much has been wisely done by the residents
to open up and render clear and easy the numerous tracks to the
adjacent views.
To make every visitor his own guide we have endeavoured to
give, in the following summary, some indication of the route to
every scene. With the exception of the first and second in the
list the sights are all within a morning or afternoon walk.
SIGHTS ACCESSIBLE.
Wentworth Falls. (5 miles) by road or train. See special chapter.
“ Wentworth Falls.”
Govett’s Leap
(8 miles) by road or train to Blackheath. See
special chapter, “ Blackheath.”


Nelly's Glen,
or
Megalong Cleft.
1 i miles from Railway Station, upon the Pathurst
Road is the Explorer’s Tree Wilt round with
masonry. The track to Nelly’s Glen diverges to
the left over rising ground, some 20 yards short
of the tree.
Katoomba Falls.
Follow Katoomba Road running from Railway past
Carrington Hotel. About 400 yards from hotel
is a sign post, directing to the right hand track.
Katoomba Mine.
Fern Gully, below
the Falls.
Orphan Rock.
Katoomba Falls track, but diverge to right, close
to the cliff head from which the Falls are
viewed. The pathway to the Mine runs between
the Orphan Rock and the main cliffs.
The Neck of Land.
AND
Lone Mountain.
Katoomba Falls track, but leave it by the first
considerable path to the right, after passing the
sign-post and cottages. The track passes the
vegetible gardens and leads to the engine-house
on the cliff edge. Enquire here; but a very
short spell through the bush, over the ridge
brings the Neck of Laud in sight.
Leura Falls.
Meeting of the
Waters.
Echo Tree.
From Railway past facade of Carrington Hotel to
sign-post. Thence, as directed, to the left into
Waratah Street. 150 yards down the street the
second track to the right is the Leura Falls
track.
Cliff View.
Katoomba Falls track until junction of two roads
at small border plantation of trees fenced in.
Turn to left over rustic bridge crossing Upper
Falls.
Mountain
Chain View.
A marked path leaves old Bathurst Road and will
be passed on the way to Nelly’s Glen.
■
NELLY’S GLEN.
Nelly’s Glen, or Megalong Cleft is the rift in the cliffs through
which access is obtained to the Kanimbla Valley, and down
which the first part of the bridle track from Katoomba to the
Jenolan Caves precipitates itself.
Just at the point where the track branches from the main road
stands the Explorer’s Tree, popularly believed to be the furthest
spot reached by JBlaxland, Lawson and Wentworth, on their first
journey of exploration in the Blue Mountains. Tradition says
that with infinite labour they reached this point, and having
thus demonstrated the practicability of the pass, and being
fearful as to their commisariat, they, or one of them, notched


upon this now celebrated tree, their, or his, now glorious initials,
and full of content the company turned homewards.
The fact that they notched the tree is the only veritable part
of this legend despite the ministerial endorsement.
In May, 1813, they actually crossed the Mountains and reached
the plains where now is Bowenfells.
Mountain legends are like snake stories; all interesting, many
romantic, none credible.
The letters notched on that great day are not now traceable
save by a pre-convinced imagination, but in 1869 they were still
clear, and served Mr. Woolls, F.L.S., for an illustration of the
unchanging nature of the gum tree. In a note to his “ Austra-
lian Flora,” he says:—“To show how little some of the trefs
alter in the course of half a century, I may mention that a
black-butt, on which the late Mr. Lawson cut his initials with a
tomahawk in 1813, still presents the letters as legibly as ever.”
The Hon. J. S. Farnell has enclosed the historical trunk in
railings and walled it round substantially, but we do not know
whether it is he who is responsible for the grammar of the fol-
lowing inscription, which in gilt letters faces the road :
This
Wall and fence has been erected by the
Hox. J. S. Farnkll, Esq., Minister of Justice,
To preserve this tree, marked by
BLAXLAND.
LAWSON.
WENTWORTH.
Being the furthest distance reached in their first
attempt to cross the Blue Mountains in the
month of May, a.d. 1813.
As to Mr. Lawson’s initials, he probably would wish them lost.
and curse the woeful precedent he made, for the autographs of
Billy Smith and Tommy Snobkin (subsequent explorers who
have reached this tree), are only too visible in hideous plenitude.
The old tree still bears leaves and will live longer yet than the
inscriptions made by clay-brained scarifiers of its antique bole.
The track descends in long curves through the bush until at
last by peremptory constraint of crowding cliffs it narrows its
swing to a zigzag, and lower still to a close-pressed spiral, with
short turns and doublings making the steep descent. At the top


of the zigzag the sunlight begins to disappear and the twilight of
the under cliffs—the associate of moss and ferns and ice-cold
mountain streams—usurps its place. Abo've, slopes a lattice-work
of tall, straight tree-trunks, peeled to the root, and through their
grey bars the sun rays glance on the enamelled gum-leaves, filling
the glade with glittering woodland jewels; a chamber in green
and diamonds fit for the Queen of the Dryads.
The winding path runs under the cliffs, whose faces, scarred and
torn by that great cataclysm, of some ante-human epoch, are now
by Time and Nature healed and beautified. For half way of
their height is reached by sassafras and tree-fern, and the rest
carries in every seam and crevice a group of waving plumes,
green ferny tufts, like Prince of Wales’ feathers. From the
upper ledge the swinging strips of red-brown bark—cast gar-
ments of the gum-trees who inhabit there—-hang down like scal-
ing ropes, or lissom vegetable icicles.
The centre of the rift, the massed and heterogeneous pile of
tumbled rock, cunningly smoothed, broken and adjusted, carries
the path down like a grey snake, winding and disappearing in
the green depths below.
Some alliterative poet called the open valley “a sea of sum-
mer silencethis is a gorge of sunless silence, which the echo
of rippling water, spoken words, or falling stones, makes only
more impressive. Lower down the path, the walls of the
cliff are all too high and straight for ferns; by straining up you
catch a glimpse of sunlight on some topmost ridge, and see
agiinst the sky what seems a rim of bushes, but is a fringe of
splendid trees upon the upper table land.
Within the shadowed gorge are shelves and banks of ferns ;
they curtain the dark rock with pale, but vivid green, and the
central stream runs over and round enormous blocks of fallen
sandstone, scarcely less brilliant, in vests of yellow moss.
At the foot of the cleft the valley opens. Looking back at
this wonderful rift in the huge mountain frontier, a rift so dark,
ru 6 ged and Titanic, that it would seem a demon’s work, were it
not decorated like a fairy’s summer palace, you stand, as it were,
in the auditorium of Nature’s Free Theatre.
The wings, five hundred feet high, are of solid and immovable
rock, and there are real water effects and live birds. There are
no actors; it is a tableau arranged by the scene-shifters. The
scene is an intricate miracle of woodland properties, arranged in
the light, with a cavernous, dark background.
The orchestra is falling water. The drop-scene a satin fall of
of mist. The curtain, night.
Nature is the scene-painter, and wealth and fame wait on the
copyists who imitate with truth some fragment of her master-
pieces.


KATOOMBA FALLS.
These Falls can be approached from behind, or viewed from
the cliff head—now railed in and surmounted by a summer-
house— or seen from the Cliff View; or from the Orphan Rock,
during the descent to the Mine.
As in the case of the Wentworth Falls, this cataract usurps
the extreme hollow of a great circular indentation in the cliffs ;
an immense semicircle, built from the sky-line (a ragged forest
fringe) down to the shadowed depths where sink
“Its sunless pillars deep in earth,”
of solid, smooth, perpendicular sandstone rock.
One thousand feet of brown and grey precipice, barred here
and there by narrow lines of green and sloping shelves of ferns
and bushes.
At first its greatness, rather than its beauty, catches the hesi-
tating fancy. Heights so stupendous, cliffs so unscalable and
ponderous, stultify man, and half convince him that he is but a
pigmy and an insect. What if he has a soul to feel delight and
awe at grandeur tempered so by beauty, what if he knows that
science in his hand could bridge and break this mountain
prodigy 1 Its very uncouth bulk so threatens danger, that sage
reflections cannot heal his sense of childlike impotence.
If lie plays on it with language he is just as weak • the aver-
age vocabulary falls below its concert-pitch. The calibre of
English words is made to suit a smaller measure. From top to
bottom this is what he sees.
A broken green rim against the sky, the dots and splashes of
boughs and foliage silhouetted upon the aerial blue background ;
a straight, sharp edge of rock, and over it water falling two
hundred feet to the first ledge.
On either side the cliffs, grey where old and weatherbeaten,
dull red where their faces are peeled by later frosts and tempests,
descend as far, smooth and vertical. Then they overlap, and in
the shallow cave are the pale green stars of ferns. Along
the rock ledges hang the mantle-fringes of pendant grass and
fern-fronds. The water falls on the terrace, and with ceaseless
violent lavation cleanses the rock stairway of clinging moss and
ferns. Bushes and larger trees get dangerous foothold and rise
tall and slender. The cascade falls again, a longer way this
time, and barely reaches its next terrace entire. For if ever,
growing faint with the fall, it weakens to thin spray, the mis-
chievous wind will seize and dissipate it remorselessly.


More cliffs, bare rock, seamed and lined, bent and cracked,
and furrowed. Shelves, casting deep shadows under them,
holding upon their upper edge a ragged gum-tree ornament.
Rifts that hide their dark mouths by green curtains of ferns—
depth on depth—more leaps of water on lower terraces, more
abysmal hollows and then the feathery tops of gums and sassa-
fras. An almost sunless hollow, silent, but for the sound of
falling water, and frowning cold and terrible, but for the cling-
ing green which hides its scars, flecks its face with gentle con-
trasts and plants upon its rugged shelves and broken, jagged
brackets, the unchiselled ornaments of Nature.
The best view is from the ledge below the Falls, admitting, as
it does, some comprehension of the immediate aspect of the cliff
and waterfall, viewed closely, and some faint apprehension of
both heights above and deeps beneath.
It is a scene where merriment, somehow becomes unfit, the
influence of its silent vastness permeates the air and speaks in
tongueless unenunciated tones.
Perhaps it says to each what the heart brings capacity to
hear. Its soundless speech seems something of this strain :
“ The present is but a fleeting atom of Time’s dust-cloud. I
commemorate the ages past, and yet shall see ages of human
knowledge, which your wit fails even to foreshadow. Drink
deep of beauty while you can, for the skill of your brief days
will never make companion pictures to the scenes which centuries
have fashioned-—-to the splendours I inherit and preserve.”
THE COAL MINE.
The Mine itself, and the methods by which the coal is drawn
to daylight are well worth the closest scrutiny.
Three powerful winding engines : two and a-half miles of steel
cable : and forty “ skips” of coal, loosely harnessed to their tra-
velling cable, running in unbroken sequence from the bluff
above the valley to the sifting scaffold and the waiting railway-
wagons.
From the tunnel, which is driven into the cliff five hundred
feet below the engine level, the coal is drawn in steel “ skips” up
an almost perpendicular tramway. Dp the cleft at an apparently
impossible angle, and through a natural tunnel, like a chimney,
in the bluff, these ebon freights are drawn. Marvel it is that
anything in the likeness of a cable can be found strong enough
for the sheer hauling, but the rope has never given way, though
the couplings of the trucks have sometimes done so.
Here and there on the track down we have seen runaway


“skips,” which in the furious impetus of their fall, have sprung
clear of the tramway scaffolding and embedded themselves in
the ground. These are generally broken up, or temporarily
chained to a boulder or a tree-stump, to prevent a further drop
into some mining family circle in the valley huts below.
An even more remarkable tramway is now in construction,
by which shale from a mine some miles away is to be hauled
obliquely across and up the cliffs in trucks suspended on a stout
steel wire.
At perilous heights on narrow ledges, the scaffoldings of this
new enterprise may be seen, but except from the Bluff they are
scarcely visible, dwarfed as they are by the incomparable stature
of the cliffs to which they cling.
But interesting as these things are, they are quite subordinate
to the charm of the descent through the rent cliff to the plateau
of the mine and the still lower profundities of the valley.
While 'at the engine-sheds visit the Bluff, one hundred yards
away. Lie down if nerves are shaky, and peer over its border
directly down upon the valley. Look from the cliff verge sheer
down the perpendicular face of grey and weather-beaten rock,
broken by what seem to be green bushes and grass, but are
really great trees and massive fern fronds; down still further—
five hundred feet—to a little green plateau on which nestle the
miniature white spots, the miners’ huts, and across which crawl
some microscopic dots of men. Around this little circle of
human life, apparently sunk deep into the earth, forgetful and
forgotten, stand the great gum trees touched by the sun an hour
or two but loving dark and mist as though they would hide from
nature, man’s little blot upon her side.
Below the green ledge slope gum trees innumerable; down
again another half a thousand feet of giant tumbled boulders,
worn by sunless mountain streams and hid by trees close linked
in millions. A serried multitude of trees stretching away across
the valley, a picked army, equal and unbroken; a blue-green
wave which undulates mile upon mile until it swells against and
climbs upon the feet of the great grey barrier which shelters
and hems in this hermit valley.
It is a fit home for a poet, an ideal artist, or a new hermitical
philosopher, and the smirch of coal dust and the flimsy bark
and iron wigwams seem guilty of clear sacrilege and defama-
tion. Yet looking down from the cliff edge so far, even the speck
of black and the scattered grimy tenements of toiling and prosaic
men, are overborne and shadowed into beauty by the stupend-
ous and benignant features which nature here preponderates
above man’s feeble ugliness.
The downward track runs to the left of the descending tram
line and enters first a little natural amphitheatre. From the


centre of this it declines steeply; it is rough, narrow, stony ; it
z ig z ags over slippery logs, pointed rocks, and marshy places; dips
suddenly, is full of vagaries. But the magic of the place more
than redresses the injuries of the eccentric stairway. It is a
narrow rift in two great rocky walls. The sun fails to reach the
quiet of this place. There is the sound of water perpetually
dripping on luxuriant banks of ferns. It seems to be a
summer palace made by giants for the casual home of a shade-
loving fairy. The darkened cliffs and boulders spangled with
ferns or swaddled in damp moss, are sprinkled by the flying
solitary water drops from loftier layers of fern, and moistened by
slender rills which patiently denude a narrow lane of rock among
the clinging green.
Glancing outwards through the cleft nothing is before you,
everything below, thousands of feet below, dim and distant and
green.
Presently escaping the rocks, you get a glimpse to th.e left and
in the centre of a great stone semicircle, see the Katoomba Falls
plunge silently down. The Three Sisters, a triplet of rock
pinnacles, fringe the ramparts of the valley, and in the fore-
ground stands the Orphan Bock—a pillar of grey stone crowned
by green bushes—a pier on which a bridge from here to heaven
might rest immovable.
Continuing to descend the almost vertical path by slipping,
swinging, jumping, and scrambling, or such progression as
combines these methods, you emerge from the dense shadow and
cool fern-haunted nooks into the open daylight.
On the ledge of green, cleared by the miners, are a few buildings
and some specimens of those curious residences designed by local
talent, in which sacks, earth, logs, and palings ally themselves
with kerosene tins, old iron tanks and scrap iron, in the belief
that they are legitimate and effective building materials.
On one side of this little isolated and almost subterranean
mining settlement rises the stupendous wall of grey rock; its
rugged outlines broken by scattered gums, and natures filagree
work of green ferns and grasses—a harmony in green and grey.
Below, the ti’ee tops form a level bosky lake, a dim, rustling,
land-locked sea of leaves, bearing by day the moving slaadows of
the clouds, and weaving, when the chilly twilight comes, soft
white, and slow expanding wreaths of vapour; the white veils of
the mountains.
This is looking outwards. But the return, the scaling of the
precipice ! Woe to the dilettante or asthmatic tourist ! It is
safe, quite safe, but oh it is not easy.


Fern Gully, and Below the Falls.
This is a view which it would be unwise to miss, for it would
be difficult to find a more novel perch than the rock terrace on
which the Katoomba halls meet the first break in their descent.
The Katoomba Falls are overlooked by a bold rock promontorv
to which the main track directly leads. This headland may be
recognised by the summer-house perched upon it, and the heavy
white wooden railing which guards the cliff edge.
The Falls are to the left of the headland • the track to Fern
Uully,_ Below the Falls, the Orphan Rock and the Katoomba
Mine immediately to the right.
A few steps on a wooden ladder and you stand within the
amphitheatre, which is, as it were, the wide mouth of the funnel
at the narrow end of which lies the mine and the escape into the
valley.
This little amphitheatre is a gem in itself, though it escapes
much notice in the profusion of beauties. It is only one' small
pearl in nature’s jewel case.
It is a circular unroofed chamber, tapestried with nature’s own
inimitable designs in grey and green, in which two colours she
weaves unnumbered lovely patterns, never repeating herself nor
ever failing to touch the truest subtlest lines and tints of perfect
beauty. On one side of the rocky circle, at a place known as the
Witch’s Leap, a streamlet tumbles into the cool, shady hollows,
sprinkling the ferns, and splashing a noisy bubbling pathway out
of sight below. Half the glen is filled with foliage of the trees,
which spring from the steep path below—their leaves unstirred in
this secluded nook—and half with tumbled mossy boulders,
ancient prone and rotting trees, and younger saplings erect,
lithe, sleek and glistening.
Lower down, through the trees, from step to step rapidly down
you pass into the sunless quiet gloom of the narrow chasm.
Massive cliffs rise close each side, and below lie tumbled frag-
ments, as if the cliffs too had had their autumn, and shed their
withered leaves and wasted boughs. From among the mass of
boulders rise straight lofty tree trunks, smooth and branchless,
as if feeling up the precipitous cold rock sides to find the way to
sunshine.
_ Before the Orphan Rock is reached the track to Fern Gully
diverges to the left from this precipitous down-grade, and grow-
ing even steeper, takes you by steps and ladders to the haunts
of ferns. Round boulders swathed in yellow moss, through
groves of tree ferns, basket ferns, ferns of all kinds and every
tint of green, the path runs.
A single tree trunk, with a rustic balustrade, spans a little stream


which tinkles underneath and on a yard or two, then silently
disappears into the void below.
Beyond this, the way leads quickly to the narrow rock plateau
on which the first leap of the Katoomba Balls finds a temporary
check.
Here there is a seat, perched in a spot which none save birds,
or danger-loving tourists would select. It stands on a narrow
ledge crossing the face of the cliff, with two hundred feet of
precipice above and five hundred feet below ; under the spray of
the waterfall, whose white cascades splash ceaselessly at your
feet and where a slip on the wet rock, or a hurried frightened
movement would precipitate into the depths so profound, you
scarcely dare glance down them.
On this aerial station, midway between heaven and earth ;
ledged like some sea-fowl on impregnable coast heights; the
encompassing rock walls on either side exclude the view. Close
behind you the cliff, close beside you the falling liquid column,
in front and far below, the lavish green perspective of the
valley.
THE NECK OF LAND.
About 200 yards after leaving the main Katoomba Eoad a
broad pathway branches to the right from the Katoomba Falls
track. It leads direct to the edge of the cliffs, where stand the
colliery engines. At this point enquries should be made,as for
a short spin through the bush there is no clear track.
Once on the height, however, the Neck of Land lies clearly
before you and the track is easy.
The Neck of Land is a long cliff promontory, running into the
valley and forming a dividing ridge between Jamieson Valley
and Kanirabla Valley. In places it is not more than 60 feet
wide, but it atones for this slenderness by its extreme and
delusive length. You may make the walk, see the best views,
and return between breakfast and lunch time, but it is worthy a
full day’s trip, and one might easily spend more time there
without tedium. At the further extremity of the Neck of Land
the ridge widens and rises and is known as Lone Mountain.
Curving slightly at its end, it joins itself by an abruptly
descending ridge to the smaller undulating backbone on which
the stunted and broken rock pinnacles of “The Burned Castle”
rise from among the close-packed bush.
The waving line of the lesser rounded summits of “ The
Buined Castle” and its neighbours, form also a link between
Lone Mountain and the bold front of the Isolated Mountain.
The link, however, is only such as a loose rope might make,
hanging in a deep curve from the lofty summits of each, and
though linking, yet not marring, the magnificent steepness of
their profiles.


Everyone knows the pleasures of the seaside pier. On the
jetty you walk at a safe height, far out over the restless water
you have hitherto watched only from the verge. The Neck of
Land is a stone jetty of Brobdingnagian proportions, made of
solid rock, two thousand feet high and ten miles long, running
out into the valley. Huge as it is, it is not too large for the
vista it reveals. Fifty miles on either side stretch the green
waves of crowded tree tops. More distant still are the encom-
passing heights of translucent blue.
Kanimbla Valley lies on the right, crossed by a line of deeper
shadow—the Cox Biver, —and showing one bare patch—the
Megalong cattle station—upon its otherwise unscarred mantle of
green.
The tremendous cliffs, through one rift in which descends the
track to the Caves, throw over miles of valley-trees their sharply
outlined shadows. Boundless vistas, giant cliffs, flashing sunlit
spaces, deep shaded valleys of gloom, unbroken silence.
From this high observatory even the cataracts are noiseless,
even tlxe mountain song of falling water is not heard, it is a-
dumb Paradise—the home of voiceless beauty.
Leura Falls, Meeting of the Waters,
Echo Tree.
Through the bush runs a clear wide buggy track to a tall cliff-
point overlooking the Leura Falls. From this main roadway
minor tracks diverge on either side, and as direction boards,
affixed to trees at convenient points, clearly indicate to the most
obfuscated vision whither such pathways run, no description of
ours could make the route much easier.
THE MEETING OF THE WATERS.
is the rather grandiloquent title bestowed on the junction of two
small mountain streams which subsequently, in a state of union,
form the Leura Falls, and together topple over the cliffs and find
their way to lonelier levels 1,800 feet below. It is a grandilo-
quent name, not because the scene discredits aught that a title
phrase could give it, but because a name suggesting miniature
beauty and the poetry of rustic rivulets would be more fit and
true. In a little dell hollowed like a narrow v-shaped channel, the
streams splash down their several tiny cascades, meet under a
fallen tree, which spans the water for a bridge, and thence run
on splashing and bubbling over a hundred miniature cascades to
their final leap. Ferns hang over and shelter them, sassafras and
gums, flowering shrubs, and reedy grasses, surround them with
green fences and emerald walls.


Scattered clumps of trees and bushes break the little shaft
of sunlight penetrating the valley, throwing lines of shadow over
the shining green of moss banks and fern, leaving touches of
brilliance on tiny pools and leaping water, till the scene, perfected,
glitters and shines as if it laughingly defied the skill of man in
prose or color to retain it,
Gliding down slimy rocks, hesitating in deep clear pools,
jumping in hurried frothing semicircles over the stone steps of the
channel, the w r aters reach at last the flat straight, edge of rock
over the verge of which they win the name of the
LEURA FALLS.
Walking from the spot known as the Meeting of the Waters,
the path conducts you to the actual verge over which the stream
plunges, but from the cliff points above, a better view of the
falling slender column can be obtained.
The first leap is not more than 100 feet, but the water
changes as it falls, into feathery spray, collecting again on
rocky ledges below and gathering for another spring, till at last
out of sight and hearing it gains a quiet asylum hidden beneath
the sheltering trees which cover the watercourses in the profound
deeps of the lower valleys.
THE ECHO TREE
{duly labelled) stands on the right of the main track. An old
leafless, wry-limbed trunk. Shouting from its vicinity across
the gully, the opposing precipice with painstaking obedience
repeats its dictated lesson.
This parrot accomplishment in an uneducated cliff would be
thoroughly commendable were it not that the habit of answering
back is a distinctly bad example for children.
This is a very conscientious echo, he returns compliments or
abuse, in any tone or language with complete accuracy in accent,
sentiments and manner. It is the only case of vilification being
retorted without increase in acerbity
He is on duty day and night, Sunday included, works for
nothing and never inserts “gag” when he is given a “piece”
to speak.
CLIFF VIEW.
This is a point of vantage only recently opened up, but the
scenes from it are of the finest. Though in component parts like
many other sights of this locality the valley has the art of never
wearying, and always shews another phase of splendour from
every changed observatory.


For those who lack nerve for the Bluff view, and strength for
the descent to the mine, this peak seems opportunely made.
It looks towards the longer side of Rock and over
the black smudge and the blue-grey dots of the valley, the pit
mouth and the iron-roofed cottages of the miners.
Southward stands Mount Solitary, or the Isolated Mountain,
a series of smoothly rounded tiers of tree tops, till near the
summit a bold scarred face of vertical red cliff completes its
formidable ridge.
To the right, descending abruptly, it leaves a gap through
which is caught a dim far-reaching vista of the farther valley.
Undulating, broken and dented, furrowed by deep impassable
gullies, severed by dangerous precipices, and ridged by wearying
heights, it yet appears (viewed in the distance through this
window in the ridge) but as a waving plain with tiny hillocks
and shallow intersecting gutters. Fifty miles of trees so equal,
so remotely small, they seem to be a mere ruffling of the earths
green surface, a roughened green plush mantle, a crumpled plain
of baize.
To the right of the Gap, on a round-topped, tree-covered
eminence, rise the rock pinnacles of the Ruined Castle, like
crumbling remnant walls of an old citadel; then another gap and
the ridge, rising by steep terraces, joins itself to the headland of
Lone Mountain.


KATOOMBA ADVERTISEMENTS.
GARRISGTON
" '
PROPRIETOR. :
.#
fHE Proprietor of the above Hotel desires to bring under the notice
of the Public of Australia, the many attractions and advantages
the Hotel and neighbourhood offer to all desirous of change, or seeking
health, rest, and enjoyable scenery.
Situate on the Western Line of Railway, 66 miles from Sydney,
and at an elevation of 3,400 feet above sea level, in the very heart of
the Blue Mountains, it possesses the most equable and invigorating
climate, midst most charming and marvellous scenery—all the famed
resorts of the districts being within easy distance. These include those
wonders of the world:- The Jenolan and Fish River Caves,
Govett’s Leap, Wentworth Falls (the Weatherboard), Katoomba
Falls, Leura Falls, The Meeting of the Waters, The Megalong
Zig-zag, etc. The numerous walks and drives in the immediate neigh-
bourhood of Katoomba are unsurpassed. The temperature rarely ranging
above 75 degrees during summer, Katoomba offers to those suffering from
the enervating effects of the coast and interior of Australia the most bene-
ficial change, giving all the advantages of Tasmania or New Zealand
without the dangers and discomforts of a sea voyage.
The Hotel stands on a most beautiful eminence, surrounded by exten-
sive Garden and Grounds, and commands one of the most magnificent and
extensive views obtainable in the Blue Mountains. The establishment has
been renovated and painted throughout, sixty-two (62) new bed rooms
added, and every sanitary appliance that modern science has indicated as
effectual has been adopted, thus making it one of the largest, most comfort-
able, and best conducted hotels in the Australian Colonies.
The Public Dinning Hall (60 feet by 40 feet), Drawing Room, Music
Room, Smoking and Billiard rooms, are unequalled, and the general
arrangements such as to insure the comfort and convenience of its patrons.
Private Apartments may be secured on application, personally or by
letter. The Bridal Suites of Rooms are furnished on the most recherche
style.
Buggies and Saddle Horses always on hire. Post and Telegraph
Office. Letter delivery twice a day. Letters or telegrams instantly acted
upon, on receipt.
F. C. GOYDER.


KATOOMBA ADVERTISEMENTS.
EPWIN SAVERY,
f|| ||iili©F (jratmUr, pi
PARK STREET,
KATOOMBA.
In consequence of the increasing demand for
BUILDING MATERIALS,
in the above neighbourhood, I have been induced to
open a Branch Office and lard in Katoomba, and
having several large contracts in the district, am
prepared to supply
REQUISITES FOR THE BUILDING TRADE.
ESTIMATES GIMEM
for the erection or enlargement of all hinds of buildings.
Head Office
Saw-Mills & Steam Joinery Works,
VIEW STREET,
KOKTH A_TTTTA-TnTE)A-TjM] 7
SYDNEY.


Katoomba
... 8 a. m.
Leave Cave House every morn
Blackheath
... 9
ing at 8.30.
Mount Victoria...
.. 9.30 „
KATOOMBA ADVERTISEMENTS.
THE CARRINGTON
4 Mt SliMw,
KATOOMBA STREET, KATOOMBA,
rF’.&.EiXXTa- the o-A-xsxEixrca-ToxT hotel.
». ....>£ V
The undersigned, who for so long a period
carried on the Hotel business at Katoomba>
is now devoting all his time to the above
stables, and is prepared to run
COACHES, FOUR-IN-HANDS, BUGGIES,
(single and double), with reliable coachmen,
to all parts of the Mountains, also Saddle
Horses, with guide if required.
A Four-horsed Coach leaves the Carring-
ton every morning at 8 a.m. for the Fish
River Caves, on the following time table :
Arriving at Caves at .. 5 p.m. Return Iare, 50s.
DAVID BROW^,
Proprietor


KATOOMBA ADVERTISEMENTS,
Shooting 1
SID
Begs to inform Sportsmen that he accompanies shoot-
in'g Parties; providing tent, blankets, provisions, etc.
when required; an /■ will, if desired, ride with parities
from Katoomha to the Caves, shooting en route.
Visitors provide their oivn horses, and pack-horse
if necessary.
The following is a list of the game obtainable .
Scrub Wallabies, Rock Wallabies, Wombats, Tiger
Cats, Native Cats, Wallaroos,
Lyre-birds, Satin-birds, Cockatoos, Parrots, &c.
Sid has made arrangements at the neighbouring
farms for those requiring good Hare and ’Possum shooting.
Platypus Shooting on the rivers, ivhere there is
also, in season, good fishing for
Perch, Black-brim, Black-fish, Eels, Fresh Water
Herrings, etc.
X ERMS:
15s. per day each person. This includes meals, use of
tent and blankets, attendance, etc.
Single Person, 30s. per day.
Sid will not accompany more than three persons
at a time, as it is impossible to insure good sport for
more than this number.
AddressSlD,” do. F. G. Goyder, Esq., Katoomba.
Hints to Shooting Parties.
Gentlemen wishing for good sport mu be prepared t ■ rough it, and those requiring
grog, must provide their own
A pair of strong boots, with nails in, will be found the most useful. Blucher boots
recommended.
A cartridge-extractor and whistle combined, will save trouble in extracting empty
eases, and the whistle is very useful for signalling in the bush.
A pair of stout leggings, a good knife and belt, are indispensable.
The shot chiefly used is No. 1, No. 3, and No. 6. Chilled shot is the best, and a few
No. 10 cartridges are useful for gentlemen wishing to get small specimens.
Don’t go long distances up country when there is bush country, never yet shot
within reach of the mountain railway line.


KATOOMBA ADVERTISEMENTS.
iißMfii 111 HUM
wir IB IK mm S 3 S Sf' IS W CS® 0 15 0 vVIvID BE Ell II B v
li l
KATOOMBA,
THOS. LOVELLE, Manager.
"I DRAPERS, GROCERS & IRONMONGERS, F
Provision Merchants and General Storekeepers.
ALL GOODS SYDNEY PRICES.
Visitors will find here a varied and well selected assortment of goods,
including Toys, Cutlery, Perfumery, and Every Requisite.
■ use Families waited on for Orders Daily. A good supply of Fresh
Butter and Eggs always on hand.
Branch Establishment:—BLACKHEATH.
LONDON CHARTERED BANK OF AUSTRALIA,
Incorporated by Royal Charter 1852.
KATOOMBA BRANCH.
AUTHORISED CAPITALTWO MILLION STERLING.
Paid-up Capital and Reserves .. .. .. .. £1,189,000
Reserve Liability of Proprietors .. .. .. .. 1,000,000
£2,189,000
London Office:—2, OLD BROAD STREET, E.C.
ranches in Victoria, Jleiv South Wales, Queensland, eto.
Corespondents in the principal cities of the world.
This Bank grants Drafts, issues Credits upon its Branches and Agents;
allows Interest on Fixed Deposits, Discounts Bills, makes Advances on
approved securities, and is prepared to undertake all descriptions of
Banking Business on terms which can be ascertained at the Branch.
G. H. MORRIS, Manager.


KATOOMBA ADVERTISEMENTS.
BALMORAL HOUSE,
KATOOMBA.
PRIVATE BOARDING ESTABLISHMENT.
mks 9 mim
Begs to inform her Patrons and the General Public, that having added
to the above house a large Drawing-room, Private Sitting-room, and Seven
large and well ventilated Bed rooms, besides Ladies’ Bath-room (with
office attached), she is prepared to offer special facilities to Tourists,
Invalids, and others seeking 'change of air and scenery.
For Families, Wedding Parties, and others, every comfort of a
home can be obtained and at reasonable charges.
Terms, etc , on application to Messrs. J. T. Tillock, George street,
Sydney; H. L Dunn, 280 Pitt-street, Sydney ; A. B. James, Morrissett-
street, Bathurst, or the undersigned.
MRS. DUNN
Vehicles and Saddle Horses may be obtained as required-
B. HAMILTON,
MAIN STREET, KATOOMBA,
GREENGROCER, FRUITERER,
GEMERAL PRODUCE DEALER.
VISITORS WAITED OUST ID-A-1 HR NT.
ALL THE FRUITS, &c., IN SEASON, FRESH EVERY DAY.
CORN, CHAFF, POLLARD, &c., SUPPLIED
POTJLTEY and EGGS always on hand.
gMLiI-. ORDERS PROMPTLY ATTETTDED TO


KATOOMBA ADVERTISEMENTS.
P. JiULLAMY A 00.*
Commercial Emporium
Would respectfully remind visitors
to Katoomha that they keep the largest,
■cheapest and test assorted stock of
mm, mm, unm,
BOOTS and SHOES,
Sen*, g©edd.
PATENT MEDICINES,
fraeteif rat an, |lpi--wg, k, k,
In the Township.
COLONIAL PRODUCE, FRESH ROLL BUTTER & EGGS received daily.
Sole Agents for 7he Sydney Morning Herald, Daily Telegraph, Evening
News, Australian Star, Echo, Sydney Mail, Town and Country
Journal, Bulletin, Tribune, Sydney Punch, Once-o.- Week, and the
Young Ladies' Journal. Delivered, carriage free, to any part of
the Mountains.
COMMERCIAL EMPORIUM,
KATOOMBA.


KATOOMBA ADVERTISEMENTS.
KATOOMBA
FAMILY HOTEL.
(Late of COMET INN, HARTLEY VALE),
Having purchased the above Commodious
(Premises, desires to inform- his many
FRIENDS AND THE GENERAL PUBLIC,
that he is prepared to supply
HIRST GI/ASS AC D DIMM DID ATI© A,
TERMS Public Table, per day Bs.
~ ~ per week ... 4Ss.
Private Table, per day .. 12s.
~ per week ... 70s.
Longer periods and Families by arrangement.
Single Meals, 2s.
'Arrangements can be made to provide transit
for persons wishing to view
THE CELEBRATED JENOLAN CAVES.


KATOOMBA ADVERTISEMENTS.
gARRinSTOn stokes,
street, katoomba,
The Cheapest and Best House on the Mountains for
GROCERY, DRAPERY, IRONMONGERY,
And all sorts of Fancy Goods.
BOOTS AND SHOES IN GREAT VARIETY,
All hinds of Colonial Produce ahvays on hand. Orders
promptly attended to.
AUCTIONEER, LAND, AND ESTATE AGENT.
!I£ii3sDsDiniu)ii
PURE MILK SUPPLIED AT SHORTEST NOTICE.
Families Waited on.
Parcels Delivered,
Carts meet all Passenger Trains to Convey Luggage,
Sfc. Apply to
JOHN TTCrFYEr 1


KATOOMBA ADVERTISEMENTS.
Jfflffig BARNDEN,
ACGTIONEEB, lAN®, ESTATE
INSURANCE AGENT,
KATOOMBA BUILDIITGS,
Agent for the LIVERPOOL, LONDON, & GLOBE INSURANCE COIPY.
Has for Sale, several Superior Lots of
Land in this favourite Mountain Besort,
and can afford all information to intending
tourists, as to Houses, etc., to let.
A Begister for Properties to Let and for
Sale, for free inspection.
Agent for the several Mountain Summer
Besidenees, the property of Duncan McKil-
lop, Esq. Terms on application.


KATOOMBA ADVERTISEMENTS.
181 AUSTRALIAN 111 STOCK MSI
(Incorporated by Act of Council, 1853),
Paid-up Capital ... ... , £300,000.
With power to increase to £1,000,000.
Reserve Fund ... £300,000.
Head Office STTIDISrrETr.
London Office:—2 KING WILLIAM STREET, E.C.
Branches throughout New South Wales and Queensland. Agents in all other co'onies,
and in Great Britain, America, India, China, and correspondents in the principal cities
of the world.
The Bank Discounts Bills, Grants Cash Credits, makes Advances on approved security,
allows interest upon fixed deposits, negotiates produce bills and documents, issues Drafts
or Letters of Credit, and negotiates or collects Bills payable at any of the above named
places, or elsewhere, at current rates.
Circular Notes issued, negotiable by designated agents in all the principal cities of
the world.
Branch open daily at Mount Victoria, and Agency twice a week at Blackheath.
KATOOMBA BRANCH:—WILLIAM GARDEN, Manager.
Branches now open at Katoomba, (Agency at Blackheath), Mount Victoria, (Agency
at Hartley Vale), Mitchell, Hockley, and Oberon.
FRANCIS ADAMS, General Manager.
(next post office).
K^TOOIsZCB-A.
Established Four Years.
LADIES’ and GENTS’
English, French, Colonial, and Continental
BOOTS _AHN“ID SHOES
Always on hand.
Repairs Neatly Executed on the Shortest Notice.
The Cheapest House this side of Sydney for Repairing all kinds of Boots & Shoes.
JOHN BETTLES, Proprietor,


KATOOMBA ADVERTISEMENTS.
SLBprQPLE House,
12 ROOMS,
KATOOMBA,
For Visitors requiring (Private .
Situate three ■ mimit.es ’ journey from Katoomba
Station.
IQopffiSß House,
20 ROOMS; (adjoining).
These well-built 'Private (Residences , containing
in all 32 rooms and every modern requisite for
frst=class visitors seeking the pure air of the
Flue Mountains. The accommodation of these
houses is second to none in the district.
The above places are on the main (Bathurst
Toad. ■
SADDLE HORSES and BUGGIES
can be obtained oh the shortest notice for seeing
the best sights in the 0 Mountains, and also to
the Jenolan Caves.
For Terms, apply to the undersigned
BiURD, Pwieto^.
MONTROSE HOUSE, KATOOMBA.
-■ . i


KAIOOMBA ADVERTISEMENTS.
(Late BILES’)
KATOOMBA
DA¥ID THOMSOi
Having purchased this well hnown
Hotel is prepared to supply
SUPERIOR ACCOMMODATION
TRAVELLERS, VISITORS, AND TOURISTS.
Private Rooms for Families, and Sample Room for Commercial
Travellers.
EXTENSIVE STABLING AESTD OOAOH-HOUSE.
Horses and Buggies or Hire.
Letters and Telegrams immediately at-
tended to.
Vehicles to Fish Fiver Caves by arrange-
ment.
DAVID THOMSON, Proprietor.


KATOOMBA ADVERTISEMENTS.
TIEEEIE
Atm t pn| |j®«,
KATOOMBA BUILDINGS,
KATOOMBA.
«HE above businesses are conducted on strictly co-operative
principles, for the supply of
EVERY KNOWN REQUISITE,
at very moderate prices. The Extensive Stock is selected with
the greatest care by the most experienced buyers, and every
article is guaranteed.
FAMILIES WAITED ON DAILY.
Orders by Post Promptly Attended to.
ONLY THE VERY BEST BRANDS OF GOODS
Kept in Stock.
Our Drug Department is under the management of a cer-
tificated member of the Pharmaceutical Board.
PRESCRIPTIONS CAREFULLY PREPARED.
In connection with and adjoining Store is a first-class well furnished
HAIR-DRESSING SALOON,
where all Toilet Requisites and Choicest Brands of Tobaccos,
Cigars, Cigarettes, Pipes, etc., can be obtained.
H. Crawford Brown, Manager.
HOUSE, LAND, AND ESTATE AGENT.


KATOOMBA ADVERTISEMENTS.
PARK STREET,
KATOOMBA,
Only One Hundred. Yards from the Park-street entrance of the
Carrington Hotel.
Beg to acquaint Tourists and Visitors to the Blue Mountains,
that they are prepared to supply VEHICLES AND SADDLE HORSES
for Ladies and Gentlemen at moderate rates.
SPLENDID FOUR-HORSE DRAG.
First Class Sociables (hooded or otherwise), also Good Substantial
Buggies.
Parties desirous of visiting the far-famed Jenolan Caves from
Katoomba, can be accommodated with Saddle Horses (and Guide if neces-
sary) for the new bridle track route, which leads through most magnificent
wild mountain scenery, and which is the shortest route by far to the Caves
from .Sydney—being only a distance of twenty-eight miles from Katoomba.
We also convey parties to the above-named Caves by vehicle, via Mount-
Victoria. Private Parties can be accommodated as per arrangement.
We also convey parties on shooting expeditions.
The undersigned being thoroughly acquainted with the Blue Mountains
from a residence of over twenty years, patrons can rely on seeing the most
picturesque sights, and obtain every care and attention combined with
civility. Telegrams and letters promptly attended to.
Blue Mountain Livery Stables,
PARK STREET, KATOOMBA
Only One Hundred Yards from the back entrance of the Carrington Hotel.


BLACKHEATH,




BLACKHEATH.
73 Miles from Sydney. 3494 Feet above Sea Level. Railway
Ticket —lst Class, 12s. 6d. ; Return , 16s. 6c?.’
Hotels. — Hydora House Hotel (Mr. J. F. Cripps),
Iyanhoe Hotel (Mr. J. J. Daly). See advts
CV£ LACKHEATH is another of the little coteries of villas
which have gathered themselves on the Mountains since
v(cyo the opening of the railway.
It has become a very popular spot with holiday-keeping
families, and the renown of its piece de resistance —Govett’s Leap'
Falls—brings to it a continual stream of travellers.
On the east side of the station, at the distance of a mile and
a-half lies Govett’s Leap, and on the west side is The Mermaid’s
Cave. These are the main attractions, but those who have time
to explore the neighbourhood effectually should also see Hat-
Hill and Perry’s Look Down.
At the latter place Docker’s Ladder furnishes the only means
of access to the bottom of the Grose Valley. A closer, but
somew r hat jeopardous view of the Falls may also be obtained by
taking the bush path, turning to the right from the main road
at the picnic shed. It permits a view of the Fall downwards
from the instant of its turning the fatal rim and in the spray
clouds below on sunny days are rainbow colours of rare beauty.
Anyone with a genius for rambling can find for himself new
look-out points (and tne valley is worth observing from a hun
dred different angles) and he may blunder into dells not yet
officially appointed mountain views, whose sweet, untrodden
beauty, though of transcendent order, still lies in an untarnished
quietude.
The romantic story of the escaping convict, Govett by name,,
who in his delirious flight from captivity, sprang over the cliffs
into the valley, must be, like many a cherished ancient fiction,
reluctantly rejected. The man whose unlovely surname is now
inseparably attached to this, the most renowned sight of the
Mountains, was nothing more than an average surveyor, and it
must be allowed that, so far as well authenticated history goes,
there is nothing to show that any sadder suicide in the shadows of
this gulf has ever been committed than that of an unhappy dog
who once made the dreadful plunge.


GOVETT’S LEAP.
Track. —Close to the Station, on its eastern side, a broad road,
at a right angle with the line, runs to the head of the cliff.
The valley of the Grose is said to be the deepest known chasm
with perpendicular cliffs in the world. Standing at the head of
the mountain attractions, with such a certificate as this, it has,
of course, been the chief butt for artists and photographers. Its
•putative likeness has been produced by all the processes known
to publishers, and many artists have quite vainly striven to put
its portrait upon canvass. But even if the itinerant beauty-
hunter has all the outlines of the famous scene already etched
upon his mind, he should yet make the trip, for the original is
infinitely finer than any copy. Besides, the fall is the deepest
and the cliffs the most stupendous in the Mountains, and who
would see a No. 2 cascade, when another man can affirm that he
has “ done” a No. 1.
The dimensions of the scene are as follows;—The actual fall
of water from the cliff edge to the first touch of rocks below is
520 feet; a height considerably greater than any cathedral spire
or pinnacle in the world, and more than twice the height of the
Sydney Post-office tower.
All the cliffs are at least 3000 feet above sea level at their tops
and the valley is nearly 2000 feet lower.
The actual perpendicular drop, however, in the neighborhood
of the look-out point is about 800 feet, but there are precipices
at the opposite end of the valley, which have a vertical face of
rock from 1000 up to 1500 feet deep.
But figures convey no impression of the real magnitude of the
place, they stir no imaginative efforts to mentally estimate its
laugeness. Description can do little ; for the inadequacy of words
is patent in the long-drawn breath with which a man at his first
view inhales the majesty of it; with which beseems unconsciously
to seek a self-expansion comparable in some way to such a novel
amplitude and splendour.
The central look-out point, styled Breakfast Rock, lies midway
between two crescents. On the right, the enormous curving
wall, constantly moistened by slowly dripping water, is covered
with a smooth film of green, so that it stands like an immense
wall, tapestried with emerald plush, or some impregnable castle
side, green-coated with ivy. Beyond this concave precipice the
cliff-tops lower themselves to where the Govett’s Leap Falls curve
over the straight rock verge and plunge silently down. Often
the wind sways the white column, or breaks it with a sudden
gust, but always it falls softly, melting into spray. From the
valley there is an unceasing roar of water, but the Falls descend


too far to keep their mass intact. No echo comes from reas-
sembling showers of spray, or shining globules splashing there
so far below.
Another cascade, styled with painful accuracy “ The Left
Hand Falls,” lie, as may be inferred, to the left of the Breakfast
Rock. They are not of much volume, and the cliffs, stained with
brown or smoky black, throw double gloom over the constant
shade of the profound hollow.
But the wonder is to look down. Tree tops at 1200 feet are
no longer leaves and twigs, but feathery mounds of unimagined
softness—hillocks of green down, plucked from a humming-
bird—mere points of velvet fluff; and the valley is as if the
centre of the world, collapsing, drew the undulating forest
tops down out of reach of men and sunshine, out of the scene of
human life into a solemn depth of quiet.
Around this chasm the huge cliffs, stiff and straight, have
thrown into the valley sloping buttresses, rising half way up
their sides. Pyramids of tumbled fragments, each one large
enough for a king’s monument, leaning their millions of tons
against the cliffs; stupendous escarpments, covered now by a
fleckless, flawless, coat of green.
Over the scar which once was there, over the pile of jagged
fragments, the broken cliffs, the splintered crags, the tumbled
pinnacles, over the giant cairns, whose sides slope from the valley
centre half way up the sandstone valley janitors, Nature has
spread her emerald enamel. The green bush packing its mem-
bers, branch to branch, without a gap or fissure, spreads like a
verdurous lava lake from wall to wall, declining from one side,
ascending the other, and glossing over with a leafy screen the
marks of that terrific rupture.
So soft and dimpled are the curving mounds of tree tops far
away on the mountain slopes, and profoundly deep in the valley,
they seem but as velvet cushions thrown in to ease the.corners of
this Titan’s cradle.
Imagination plays with these depths and wonderful perspec-
tives, but cannot describe them. Point beyond point the valley
recedes, with its straight edged capes and promontories retreating
in gradual dimness. Even the waterfalls in their precipitation
slipping suddenly over the edge, are as nothing. Their weight
and their impetus are futile ; for the wind blows them backwards
and disperses them at will, and the sun paints rainbows with
their facile spray.
Trespassers in these depths must take the chances of their
spring.


THE MERMAIDS’ CAVE.
Track. —Cross the railway opposite to the Govett’s Leap Load ;
follow the track which then runs to the left, hugging for
about 100 yards the railway fence.
The road, which runs down to and past the Mermaids’ Cave,
leads also to the ooal mine, and the lower you go the liner the
tree ferns become, and the taller grow the noble mountain ash
trees, but do not forget that the road is a never relaxing declivity
and there is no other way to come up, nor are there any new legs
and lungs to be got on the ascent.
At first the valley seems an open one and sunny; it is too
open for ferns. The hill sides of moist peat, sodden and black,
are covered with lush reeds and brown-topped swamp grasses.
But the track soon narrows, descending between tall cliffs, under
whose cool impervious sides the ferns take grateful shelter.
Sassafras, myrtle, black wattle, and tree-ferns fill the hollow,
and among them the red-breasts, the fantails, and finches
incessantly flutter.
The mountain ash runs up its hundred feet of smooth pink
stem then branches and brandishes its scanty foliage; small use
at that height to anyone below, but a noble effort to reach sun-
light despite the sinking gorge and towering boundary ramparts.
One mile down the track a board, which has helped at pistol
practice and suffered thereby in its legibility, directs all
wanderers to the Cave. It is hardly a cave proper, being open
to the sky and too well lit to claim the murky coolness and sad
gloom which is the rightful atmosphere of caverns. It is a
narrow oval chamber, among piles of rock, shady, secluded, and
cool. Under its overhanging walls, stained yellow, and red, and
grey, the ferns find harborage, and in the fissures of its ancient
cracked and furrowed sides they rule their slender lines of green.
A tiny fall of water spouts from the roof and in a graceful arc
pours noisily upon the rounded glistening pebbles thirty feet
below.
Tall saplings rise without a branch to the sunnier levels above,
and underfoot are laid the tangled carpet patterns that the bush
is fond of. Fallen logs, moss covered stones, banks of decaying
leaves, which bending ferns, like swaying ostrich plumes, almost
conceal, translucent pools dammed up by drifted twigs and sodden
strips of bark, and bubbling waterfalls rehearsing for the chorus
of the sea.
Lower down the gully another rivulet splashes down the cliffs,
falling from ledge to ledge as the water drips from step to step
on a motionless waterwheel.


On the other side, under the tree ferns, runs the main stream
bridged by the boles of trees hewn down when the path was cut.
Natural viaducts reaching across the gully; some of them bound
with green moss, like pillars decorated for a festival; some resting
with their branches in the stream as if to stay the water with
their dying fingers.
The woodpeckers know the limits of the tourist’s progress and
when tneir discords grow loud it is about time to turn and face
the homeward climb.


BLACKHEATH ADVERTISEMENTS.
lOTjASI CKHEATH.
newly-erected Hotel is situated on the Govett’s Leap
Road, Blackheath, three minutes walk from the Railway
Station, and is furnished throughout with
Every Modern Convenience,
the Proprietor having spared no expense to ensure for his patrons
EVERY COMFORT THAT A FIRST-CLASS HOTEL SHOULD PROVIDE.
Blackheath, situated on the Western Line of Railway, 73
miles from Sydney, is between Katoomba and Mount Victoria,
the second highest point on the Blue Mountains, being at an
elevation of 3,500 feet above sea level. Within 15 minutes’ easy
walk of this Hotel are to be seen Govett’s Leap, Waterfalls and
Gorge, marvellous scenery, never forgotten by those who, from
all parts of these health-giving mountain resorts, journey to gaze
in astonishment and wonder on
“ The vast, immeasurable abyss,
Outrageous as a sea, dark, wasteful, bold.”
Blackheath, being the most centrally situated town on the
Mountains for Tourists and Travellers, affords them every
opportunity of visiting the sights of Mount Victoria and
Katoomba, returning to the Hotel at the most convenient hour.
THE PROPRIETOR OF THE IVANHOE HOTEL
- WILL—
lak§ iranpniMfi lor Visitors Desirous of liploffeg
The Jenolan or Fresh Water Caves,
and will ensure for his patrons every comfort and convenience.
Private Apartments may he Arranged for
BY WIRE OR LETTER.
ZBIROHIDAIILi SUITES OF ROOMS.
Buggies and Saddle Horses on Hire.
JAMES J. DALY, Proprietor.


BLACKHEATH ADVERTISEMENTS.
Hydora House Family Hotel
BLACKHIAm
(gPpZT* S well-known and deservedly popular Hotel is
2 situated immediately opposite the Blackheath
Bailway Station, and is unsurpassed for its
HOMELY COMFORTS AND FIRST-CLASS CUISINE.
It stands in its own grounds of Twenty Acres,
tvitb beautiful Laeun and Flower Garden, and is in
the immediate vicinity of the world-renoivned Govett’s
Leap, Mermaid’s Gave, Hat Hill, and Perry’s Look
Dozen.
Immediate attention paid to Letters and Telegrams.
PORTER MEETS EVERY TRAIN
SADDLE HORSES, BUGGIES, OR DRAYS FOR HIRE.
PARTIES CONVEYED TO THE FISH RIVER CAVES
BY ARRANGEMENT.
FURNISHED COTTAGES ALSO TO LET.
Apply to
J. TP. GRIPPS,
Manac/er.




MOUNT VICTORIA.




MOUNT VICTORIA.
77 Miles from Sydney. 3422 Feet above Sea Level. Railway
Ticket—lst Glass, 13s. 3 d. ; Return , 17s. 6aJ.
Hotels. — The Imperial (Mr. P. Gr. Whittall). A large and
commodious hotel, one minute from Railway Station-
Accommodation for 134 visitors. Terms, 10s. 6d. per day.
or £3 3s. per week.
Also accommodation at Fern Cottage (Mrs. Howell) ; Railway
Refreshment Rooms (Castner & Co.), and many other
houses.
Fur above , and for Physicians , Banks, Schools, Stores, &c., &c. y
see advts. Hartley advts. also follow this section.
VICTORIA is often alluded to as Katoomba’s
rival, as a mountain centre. They are not rivals, but
complements and correlatives to one another. The
character of their scenes, the local characteristic sentimental
atmosphere, are utterly dissimilar. In the days before the rail-
way, Mount Victoria was an old halting place on the Sydney
Road, and though the town of to-day is of much more recent
date, it is old compared with Katoomba. Katoomba sprang
up for the convenience of visitors ; Mount Victoria and its
neighbours on the plains—Big and Little Hartley—existed be-
fore Mountain holidays, excursion trains, and tourists were ever
thought of.
Even the scenery shares in the older, milder, more familiar
tone. Not that here it is less huge in feature, for the near
heights are among the Mountains’ loftiest, but that it is less un-
approachable, less lonely, and less amazing.
Katoomba overlooks its bush, Mount Victoria nestles amongst
it. There it creates wonder and awe ; here, wonder and affec-
tion.
At “The Mount” a City man forgets he has come to see the
the views, there is such a quaint, ready-made sight in the native
rusticity of the bush village.
The bush comes up close about the place ; the week’s washing
hangs out among the scrub. The houses are indifferent about
keeping a line, they stand which way they please, and their
allotment seems to extend as far on to the road as the fowls and


children choose to wander. On the grassy space between the
roadway and the bush ; dogs, horses, turkeys, pigeons, fowls and
pigs may ramble and prospect for sustenance unhindered.
Brooms, baskets, and boxes, tools, carts, buckets and barrows ;
all the litter of a country household, lie round the unfenced
shanty, open and unguarded. Of course, there are a great many
nice cottages and good houses, as well as the usual churches and
schools, but the searcher for the picturesque takes no note of
modern weatherboard cottages, with their prim verandahs, and
their stereotyped fashions in cast-iron railings.
The joint professions of barber and greengrocer are carried on
within the same bark walls, and the barber may, perhaps, be at
home if he has no outside contract at the time on hand. There
is a bucolic somnolescence in the air, a suggestion that here man
was meant to grow quietly fat and happy in the open sunlight.
The bush is carpeted with grass and tenanted by birds, the
mountain sides are not all unscalable, nor the gullies frowned
into eternal shadow.
Katoomba is sublime, wild and rugged, Mount Victoria is
sublime, gentle and domesticated.
There are so many sights about this district that one or two have
not been specially described. When the cardinal points we treat
■of have been seen, there is yet The Engineer’s Cascade, at the
top of the Zigzag, accessible on foot; Hassan’s Walls and
Mount Wilson within an easy drive.
SIGHTS ACCESSIBLE.
Govett’s Leap. (6 miles). Road or train to Blackheath. See
‘ ‘ Blackheath. ”
The Zigzag. (18 miles). Railway. Return Ist class to Esk-
bank, Lithgow, or Bowenfells, ss. 6d. Morn-
ing luggage train, return passenger train, in
time for lunch.
Mount Piddington, Walking from the Station, take the road which
Fairy Bower, turns to the left, round the corner of the Im-
W itches Glen, perial Hotel. 150 yards from corner of hotel a
Fern Tree Gully. steep water-worn road to the right leads up the
rise of Mount Piddington. Keep in view the
picnic shed on summit At the shed a finger-
post directs to path with chain balustrade, lead-
ing to Fairy Bower, Witches Glen and Fern
Tree Gully.
Mount York. Half-a-mile from Imperial Hotel, along old
Bathurst Road, in direction of Hartley, the
Mount York Road diverges to the right. It
is the third road to the right from the hotel.
About 4 miles to the extremity of Mount York
and the best view.


Jhe Little Zigzag, Two hundred yards from Imperial Hotel, along
on Kanimbla Pass. the old Bathurst Road is the Mount Victoria
Hall. The track to the Pass runs by the side of
the Hall and continues for some distance at a
right angle with the main road.
Mt. Victoria Pass, Is the name given to that part of the old Bathurst
Road, which runs down the side of Mount Vic-
toria. The descent commences at one mile and
ends 2J miles from Imperial Hotel.
V iew of the Grose Blackheath Road, until the Railway is crossed.
Valley and Then first track to the left. There and back
Victoria Falls. about 10 miles.
r Hartley \ ale, (6 miles). Mount Wilson Road, as far as Hartley
Ihe Shale Mine, siding, then to the left, down winding road cut
AN o in the hill side'. Return (7 miles) through Little
Kerosene Works. Hartley and up Mount Victoria Pass.
Ihe Fairy Dell. (1 mile). First turn to the right from Imperial
Hotel, along Bathurst Road. The gully com-
mences at the back of Mr. Rienits’s school.
MOUNT PIDDINGTON
THE FAIRY BOWER.
FERN TREE GULLY, &c.
Mount Piddington is one of the highest points in the moun-
tains, and as it closely adjoins the township it has been much
visited. It is named after the late Hon. W. R. Piddington, by
whose instructions the summit was shaved of trees and the view
thus opened.
On the point of outlook stands a picnic shed, a sort of auto-
graphic album. Those who desire to record their names must,
in future, carry their own timber with them, as every inch upon
the supports and planking provided by the Trustees for the
purpose, is fully occupied. It is well, however, to know that so
many people have been here, for the sight must make a holiday
unique and memorable.
At foot lie the Kanimbla and the Hartley Valleys, and around
the sky line the topmost wavering ridge is broken by the blue
summits of all the highest peaks in the mountains : Mount Hay,
Mount George, Mount Tomah, and Mount Wilson; a lofty and
fantastic horizon formed of sugarloaf peaks, flat table-lands,
rounded summits, waving ridges, and the soft bordering of
distant tree tops.
From the picnic shed a steep path, bordered by chain balus-
trades, leads down the hillside into the Witches’ Glen. On
either side the grey tree stems wade deep in ferns, like herons
knee-deep in green water-weeds, until the i-arrowing gully crowds
out the larger growth and yields possession solely to the gentle
order of Filices.


If you are a pteridophilist, or in other words a lover of Poly-
podiacere, or in plain English—fond of ferns—this will be one of
your especial regions of delight, for from the upper levels down
through the Fairy Bower to the bottom of the Fern Tree Gully,
are ferns of all sizes and all grades of commonness and rarity.
At the Fairy Bower, which is a little chamber with a watery
floor, rock walls and skyey roof, a slender stream falls through
a cleft in the encircling bluffs and splashes into the shady pool
below. This clear as glass reveals, like a case of treasures in a
museum, the collected fragments gathered in its hollow. Under
its transparent lid of water lie ferns and fallen leaves and rotting
boughs, all the bravery of the Bower’s last years decoration,
replaced now by fairer growing fronds and trees and flowers.
Following the path which leads down the glen you have the
choice of Cox’s Cave on the right, or Fern Tree Gully below.
Down the never ending steps, between the barriers of rocks clad
in thick velvet wraps of yellow moss, the Fern Tree Gully lies at
last upon a grateful level, and under the green awning of its
splendid tree ferns the traveller may store superfluous breath for
the ascent.
Under cover of the tall cliffs on either hand the ferns, in
gratitude for the perpetual shadow, have spread themselves from
bank to bank, with only the small concession of a thin clear line
for the stream which passes through to join the Blackheath
Creek.
Tree Ferns spread their heavy green umbrellas to make the
shadow deeper. Chief of the fiowerless tribe and loveliest from
wherever viewed. Like finest cambric from below, but seen
from above as you look down into the valley, their symmetrical
wide spreading arms look like green stars among the otherwise
smooth-patterned bush ; like clusters of some honorable decora-
tion fixed upon the hillside’s breast, or crosses of The Order of
the Mountains,
MOUNT YORK.
Branching to the right from the old Bathurst road, near the
top of Mount Victoria Pass, the track runs along the smooth
summit of this splendid mountain peninsula, and after coursing
for four miles—bush lined on either side—reaches a cleared space
at the extreme end of the headland.
Four miles out into the valley on a wide platform, at an
altitude of a thousand feet is as good a point of observation as
anyone could desire; yet how few take advantage of it.
Imagine the throng who would go if it were a pier run four
miles out to sea and at that dizzy height; yet the ocean has not


more shades of color; its face is a dreary plain; all its harmonies
are like flat colors on a canvass; while here the mountains have
the subtle shades of hue, the lofty peaks, dense shaded valleys
and bewildering inflexions of the actual inimitable model.
Mount York in old days was a name of woe, for the old
Bathurst Road descended into Hartley Yale down its steep side at
a painful grade of 1 in 4.
Lieut. Breton wrote in 1833 that t- One of the objections to
the new arrival proceeding to Bathurst was that he must cross
the Blue Mountains; a journey of nearly sixty miles,” and he
says that at that time the drays going down the Mount York
Pass were used to tow behind them, as an extra drag, a heavy
mass of wood.
At the foot of the hill, of course the log was thrust to the side
of the road, and as a consequence, the road became passable for
only one vehicle at a time. It was not long after this, however,
that Sir Thos. Mitchell and his convict gangs tilled up the gaps
and gullies of the Mount Victoria Pass, and made thereby a
splendid road of easier gradient.
Mount York was left, a bitter memory of travellers and team-
sters, to cover up its ancient track with green, and win whatever
modern patronage it may from the occasional sight seeing visitor.
But it has yet another claim upon the lovers of things anti-
quarian. Down its side travelled our famous trio—Wentworth,
Blaxland, Lawson—the first white trespassers west of the ranges.
They seem to have this time neglected the notching of their
names upon a tree, and there is nothing now to shew the special
holy spot of ground on which they stood. Perhaps they had
been looking at the view from Mount York’s westward point.
If so, and if they saw it when the sun was getting low, no
further explanation of neglect is needed. For then the yellow
rays shine over the ridges and through the gaps of the serrated
mountain sky-line, glance obliquely through the tree tops, and
with instant magic turn the dowdy forest brown to matchless
lucent green.
Then the towers of rock standing out from the main ramparts,
embanked by sloping mounds of trees, catch bright sparks upon
their highest pinnacles, and cast below over the million tree tops,
the purple curtains of the evening.
Down in the valley, not yet reached by the engulphing shadow
of the mountains, lie farmhouses, the centres of brown tracts of
clearing. Round them the few trees left to shelter the dwelling,
the wide paddocks marked by transverse skeleton lines of
fencing and low brown hedges; then, encircling all, the straight
edge of the close ranked bush. The shining line of the creek
glittering here and there at the bends of its sinuous course, and
the brown lines of the tracks winding among the trees, vanishing.


reappearing, and narrowing in the distance. Patches of felled
bush, the dead logs lying as they fell upon the grass, and among
them, cattle feeding. So remote are they you can scarce see
them, only the penetrating monotony of the cow-bell’s irregular
tinkling rises from the valley.
Away to the left are the old white houses of Hartley, and
beyond the deepening misty blue of limitary hills, ridge behind
ridge.
It is a picture daily uncovered; a cup of delight always full;
a landscape poem waiting for a translator.
The Kanimbla Pass, or Little Zig-Zag.
This pass is a steep zig-zag, of no less than 17 angles, cut down
the face of the hill, and leading as directly as any descent safely
can, from Mount Victoria to the Kanimbla Valley, Under big
cliffs and bold headlands you go down slope after slope of rocky
path.
It is remarkable how novel a view of the valley is obtainable
from about half-way down the declivity, at a height say of 400 or
500 feet. Though lacking, of course, some of the tremendous
terror of views from the edges of the loftiest peaks, it is probably
more charming and it certainly seems new.
Prom the extreme altitudes the trees below appear so small;
they look such an insignificant furry carpeting, that they might be
either two or ten thousand feet away; the distance has to the
eye no criterion of measurement; the vanishing purple of the
horizon is not within the mind’s scale of mileage. But lower
down the individuality of the valley trees becomes apparent, and
encompassing ramparts of cliff can be visually appraised in
their magnificence by comparison with the grey tree stems at
their feet.
The dark line which marked the creek now widens and
discovers the waterworn steep earthy sides; it grows clearer too
that the valley is no plain, but an inseparable tangle of mountain
chains and ridges, rise upon rise, and gully after gully; an
infinite varigation of hill and dale, each one grand in itself and
only esteemed little because of the superior bulk and unquestioned
sovereignty of the colossal buttresses of the upper table-land.
Down on the lower levels there are grey patches, cemeteries of
ghostly leafless trunks, decaying monuments celebrating some
past bush fire, and over all these, and over the green champaign,
flit the wandering shadows of the clouds.
There are bright meadows of sunlight, and moving plains of
shade, cast by the white, slow-sailing air-ships of the sky ; a


chequer work of light and shade thrown on the lesser forest by
the greater waving boughs of cloudland.
Down in the valley there is a perpetual whistling and screech-
ing of birds, for this district is full of feathered game, and even
up the painful ascent, when the time comes for the exhausting
climb, the smaller birds and noisy woodpeckers are not entirely
left behind.
It is a pull from the valley to the dinner level, but no man can
expect, without labor and pain, to scale the bastion of the
Kanimbla, Grose, or Jamieson Valleys. Nelly’s Glen, and
Katoomba Mine at Katoomba; Perry’s Look Down at Black-
heath, and the Dairy Bower and Zig-Zag at Mount Victoria are
all passes by which the invulnerability of the valley has been
destroyed. It is no longer sacred from intrusion, in spite of the
huge mountain janitors of its privacy.
The heaped up fragments and tumbled masses of its Titanic
rock enclosure have themselves formed a rough staircase in the
cliff gaps of Nelly’s Glen, and Katoomba Mine; and here at
Mount V ictoria, irresistible and wily man, by travelling sideways
this way and that across the Mountain, has eluded the dangerous
steepness of the fall, and made himself a pathway to the
unpeopled solitudes of the valley.
MOUNT VICTORIA PASS,
is that part of the old Bathurst Road which descends the slope
of Mount Victoria. The decline commences at a point about
a mile from Mount Victoria township. The valley level is
not reached until a mile and a-half of downward pi’ogress
has been made. It is something more, however, than a long,
macadamized incline. It is a slope from which the grandest
views either side are visible, and it is old , and redolent of
old associations. The cuttings in the solid rock, and the em-
bankments guarded by heavy masonry are not the work of
enterprising Progress Committees, or Local Road Boards—they
are convict-made—and they were new when William IV. was
king.
In ante-railway days the journey over the Mountains on
horseback took at least two days. Starting from Emu Ford
the passage of the Nepean River—the first check was the rise
of Lapstone Hill. Springwood, now a summer tourist haunt,
then won unstinted gratitude for its supply of fine spring water!
The Weatherboard Hut, a military station, at the spot now
known as Wentworth Palls, was the next mark of progress and
then the difficult descent of Cox’s Pass, down the side of Mount
York, brought travellers to easy levels once again.


But the dangers of Cox’s Pass, with its perilous grade of 1
in 4, became intolerable, and under the direction of Sir Thos.
Mitchell the Mount Victoria Pass was begun. Gullies were
levelled up and cuttings made, and the close-rammed hills of
debris were bound by solid walls and buttresses of masonry,
which stand now unimpaired.
Along this road all the traffic from the Western districts used
to pass to Sydney. In the wool season an almost continuous
line of bullock-drays and horse-teams made the ascent of this now
quiet and almost deserted Pass. But it has acquired the air
of longevity, and this, added to the extraordinary charm of the
panorama visible from it, suffices to make it one of the “sights”
of the district.
At a point about one-third of the way down, there is a break
in the rock wall, and through this, glancing to the left, one sees
a wide stretch of the Kanimbla Valley. On the right-hand side
and in the direction in which the road trends, is Hartley Valley,
a rich level, whose wide cleared spaces, old hedgerows and
scattered houses, give evidence that here the conflict with the
bush is not a skirmish of to-day.
Mount York, also to the right of the Pass, juts out a lofty
promontory, four miles long, overlooking the valley plain; a
great mountain peninsula, smothered in trees, with here and
there a bare rock pinnacle showing. The bush round here is
full of birds; there are lyre-birds in the valley, and in the spring
the toothsome gill-bird multiplies and waxes fat.
One of the features of the bush in this district is its under-
growth of grass, which seems at once to make the place less
wild and inhospitable, and the green plots fringing the old road
do much, no doubt, to give it the air of an Old-Country highway.
The quaint charm of the scene is not to be easily analysed, but
a factor in it must be the antique-looking houses at the foot of
the hill, and in the village of Little Hartley. Built in the
pseudo-English or Early-Colonial style, these solid square houses
of whitewashed stone or brick recall the days when architects (used
to the smooth fronts of English dwellings) had not yet learned
the heat of summer suns, and thought one small verandah ample
cover from Australian noons. At the foot of the Pass stands
an old house, once an inn. Its squat, substantial shape, low
rooms, small window-panes, and the plain wooden posts to its
long, narrow verandah, are outward marks of ancientry not to be
doubted.
Many a team from Bathurst or from Mudgee, in the old times,
paused at this hostelry, while the teamster imbibed a liquid tonic
to enable him to encourage in the recognised way his straining-
bullocks on the long up-grade of Mount Victoria Pass. It is a
house of call no longer. Its sign is down. Yet still, in a


neighbourly way it seems to admit the old-time right of entrance.
No garden fence or boundary wall cuts it off from the passing-
coach ; its fowls and turkeys perambulate the stretch of turf by
which the house is bounded, and trench at their own capricious
will upon the ancient highway.
At the back is Sugarloaf Hill, and close by a modern red-
brick structure, the Mount Victoria Inn. Past these the road
runs on to Little Hartley, a quaint and quiet hamlet, but this is
the route to the caves and will have other mention.
The Grose Valley, the Mine, and
Victoria Falls.
This excursion runs in an opposite direction to those hitherto
described, taking the tourist across the line eastward and shewing
not, as before, the Kanimbla and the Hartley Valleys, but the
narrower and more profound chasms of the Grose.
It is a somewhat rough track, and runs through bush of a more
barren kind. The ground is stony and but thinly clad with
earth, favouring the tea-tree scrub, plante of low growth,
waratahs, grass-trees, and mountain mosses.
The grass which covers and seems to humanise the bush upon
the western sides of the ridge, is absent here, but eucalyptus
omnipresent as the mountain gumtrees may be comprehensively
rechristened, maintain their reputation for übiquity.
On all sides the gum-trees brandish their crooked pale-skinned
arms, round which the ragged bark clings like a tattered sleeve.
In the distance, they hold in thousands to the steep hill sides on
which the cliffs have cast their purple heavy shadows, and
ambitiously, tier upon tier, they raise their rounded heads to
catch a glint of sunlight.
Lofty and gaunt they stand, with nothing but a sun illumined
crown of leaves to deck them, while some against the sky are
outlined thin and tall like May Poles wound with closely fitting
wreaths of foliage.
On the right of the track, here and there, are glimpses of the
red and brown rock faces of the cliffs of the Grose Valley, and
further and higher rise the lofty peaks of Mountains George and
Hay.
When the four-mile track is ended, and the wonderful deeps of
the glen lie almost below, a zig-zag foot path leads to a little plateau
where the coal mine tunnel has been driven. Coal there obviously
is, for the seam is visible along the face of the cliff to right and
left, but the interest of the place appeals less to the bosom of the
coal miner than to the heart of the artist.


Measurements in feet have nothing to do with the splendours
of this ravine. Possibly the narrowness of the gully adds to the
apparent height of the confronting pyramid of trees and cliff,
but it is certain that no solicitous and labored effort of descrip-
tion can be more true, and more complete, than the summary of
all praise and comment, freely given —sublime !
The slope below the tunnel is rich in tree ferns, and the valley
echoes with the notes of lyre and bell-birds, tinkling like the
single swing of the clapper on a keen toned silver bell: like a toy
bellfry struck at random by a child at play.
Here the Victoria Falls disappear into the gully and join the
waters of the Grose, 2,000 feet below.
It would be hard to find a grander, deeper, narrower gully than
this, or one more perfectly typical of the magnificent Grose
Valley scenery.
HARTLEY VALE.
THE SHALE MINE and KEROSENE WORKS.
There are some men from whom the capacity of appreciation
of natural beauties has been omitted, who are physically unable
to gain, from the contemplation of landscape wonders, the inspir-
ing, heart-filling, silently intense joy which is felt by men and
women of more sensitive organizations. One of these men, who-
had rambled for some inscrutable reason to the Blue Mountains,
remarked : —“I don’t a care fig for nature. She’s tiresome, and
only goes on repeating herself; but I do like to see what
ingenious little man will do.”
Ingenious men have for some time been dragging coal and
shale up apparently impossible places, both at Mount Victoria,
and at Katoomba, and this delightful drive to Hartley Vale—one
of the imperative duties of every sojourner at Mount Victoria—
reveals both nature’s sublimity and man’s ingenuity.
The drive of some 14 miles to Hartley Vale, round through
Little Hartley on the return journey, and up Mount Victoria
Pass, can be done very comfortably in the morning. It is one
of the characteristic scenes of Mount Victoria. Tracts of primi-
tive bush, untrodden gullies, and unsealed cliffs; nature as she
was before man came to tame or mar her, contiguous with and
contrasted by, tilled fields, old houses, and evidences of lengthy
occupation.
In most places where there are noble hills and unfelled forests,
man and his works seem to be held aloof. The primeval beauty
of the scene tolerates no lower companionship, but somehow in
the Mount Victoria district, the quiet country life which labors


on placidly day after day, regardless of natural beauties, exists
side by side with, and does not impair, the grandeur and the
wonders of the scene.
So that in Hartley Vale the accompaniments of shale mining
and the refining of kerosene oil—all the network of train-lines,
the cobweb of pipes, the piles of debris, and the smoking chimneys
—only seem to accentuate the beauty of the lofty green walls
which enclose the valley.
The first part of the road from Mount Victoria is somewhat
rough, but a sharp turn from the Mount Wilson road carries you
to a long smooth winding track, by which the descent to the
valley is made easy.
Trees on either hand; on the left a steep hillside, on the right
a deep gully; and close by, hemming in the gully, tall heights
and rock pinnacles casting purple shadows down the green
abyss.
Grass and scrub, and flowers and trees; words will not
describe them. Even painters fail to catch the charm of sun-
light flashing on a million shining leaves and the delicious fading
shades of green down the long perspectives of the forest and
narrow passes viewed between a thousand tree stems.
Out of the romantic suddenly into the practical hurries the
road. In the valley lies a considerable village : that is to say, a
hamlet of some 300 or 400 persons, every one of whom derives
his living directly or indirectly from the operations of the N.S.W.
Shale and Oil Company. All the houses are not villa residences.
Some are log dwellings, some of the kind euphoniously known as
“ wattle and dab ” (i.e., lath and plaster, mud and sticks), some
are heterogeneous—bricks, iron, bark, mud, tin and timber.
There is a Bank, or at anyrate a room, and outside a signboard
two feet square, which probably constitutes a Bank ; a most
undoubted public-house, a store or two, and for the rest, besides
the cottages, the wide-spreading appurtenances of the Company’s
works.
Neat brick buildings, scrupulously ordered, the refining works,
the kerosene-tin manufactory, hundreds of retorts, in which the
shale roasts for five days, and the corresponding hundreds of iron
tanks which lie. ready to receive the dirty brown oil which the
shale, under torture of the furnace, reluctantly yields. In this
way is evolved from shale—a hybrid between coal and slate—
that priceless domestic necessity—kerosene oil—so invaluable to
Bridget for fire-lighting and other purposes.
Tramway lines and pipes intersect and subdivide everything.
Lines from the tunnel whence the shale is mined, lines to the
coal mine, also conveniently handy in these obliging mountains ;
lines to the refinery ; and, lastly, a line rising almost perpendicu-
larly 500 feet, up which, by a steel wire rope and powerful wind-
ing engine, the trucks are drawn to the upper table-land.


Out of Hartley Yale the road meanders round the foot of
Mount York, and winds through bush so smooth and open that
it resembles an English park. The trees—white gum and pepper-
mint—are rather thickly placed, but the flooring of grass and
bracken, free from underbrush and peopled by hares, is strongly
reminiscent of the deer-parks of the old country.
Upon this splendid flat are many cleared spaces, fenced grass
paddocks, or cultivated fields, with sprawling sweetbriar hedge-
rows, and soon the track turns into the main road, where Little
Hartley spreads its antique but substantial country homes.
The homeward journey leads up the breathless and unending
slope of Mount Yictoria Pass, whose historic interest and
unequalled views claim for themselves a separate and special
section.
FAIRY DELL.
It must be admitted that in the nomenclature of the mountain
views the supernatural plays a large part.
The original Adam who apportioned names to the glens, gullies,
and waterfalls, gasping to find some phrase expressive of his
more than common admiration, made liberal drains on elfin
legends and on demonology.
Those places which are not allotted as suitable locations for the
Fairy tribe, though no less beautiful, are often handed to the
Witches. Bushrangers, local magnates, and ladies of the district
in various places supply the names for mountains, valleys, and
falls, but taking the entire list of mountain views the Fairies
undoubtedly stand first in numbers.
This Fairy Dell at Mount Yictoria is probably evacuated now
by • fairies ; they are driven out by laughing human imps who
range the shallow open gully. The Dell is quite the favourite
resort of children, being not too steep and not too far from home
for unmatured pedestrians.
A little stream runs down a grass-covered marshy valley to
where a broad and massive dam holds prisoned a fine sheet of
water. This is a splendid and picturesque bathing-place. On
each side the valley the easy slopes of bush are full of flowers ;
and whistling birds, like a recalcitrant orchestra of picolos, make
the glen echo with their unconcerted piping. The open ground
is coloured by the brilliant yellow-green of rushes, the pale
purple leaves—tinted like plum-bloom—and the scarlet stems of
the incipient gum.
Further down, the slender stream is once more penned up by a
dam, and forms a liquid mirror for the vanity of drooping ferns
and bending foliage.
O O


The upper and more open portion of the valley is a beloved
playground of the birds; white-breasted and speckled-brown
merrymakers—the laughing jackasses—fly to and fro across the
open reach, and, as they perch, erect their tails and start a long,
subsiding peal of laughter.
These birds are worth watching. Their movements are the
height of oddity, yet gravity and staid decorum are visibly
expressed in every attitude. They appear to mark time with
their tails, steadily raising and depressing them like some
jDompous patronising visiting inspector following with his hand
the rhythm of the school’s musical exercise. Probably the jackass
kills fewer snakes than he ought to do. He has made his reputa-
tion, and is now a Government servant, so he adopts more
leisurely amusements, but he remains a general favourite, like a
good-natured dwarf or harmless “ natural.” His great flat head,
huge beak, squat attitudes, and solemn air double the unexpected
fun of his loud, jolly cachinnations.
Flocks of grey woodpeckers fly from tree to tree, discordantly
chattering; black-and-white magpies inquisitively fly in circles
round a stranger, and from adjacent boughs impertinently watch
him. Their big grey brethren, somewhat less curious, but as
conceited, hop (considering their size and fat) in a wonderfully
active way from bough to bough, turning over the dangling
strips of bark, and poking their beaks among the rotting timber.
These, and a host of smaller fowl, supply the bush its moving
life, while ferns and undergrowth and falling water contribute
each their complement of beauty.


MOUNT VICTORIA AND HARTLEY ADVERTISEMENTS.
Refreshment Rooms,
MOUNT VICTORIA.
PROPRIETORS.
Rirst-class Hotel 0 ccommodation for Visitors
and (ij)ourists.


MOUNT VICTORIA AND HARTLEY ADVERTISEMENTS,
SWINGS FOR CHILDREN,
Shwdk fjgjp, Hutto? oxd 3Wilk.
AN. GOOD BATH.
rm COTTAGE.
Mount Victoria.
|| rib ate ||oat:rit at# mesQten«
MRS. HOWELL, PROPRIETRESS.
Terms: 6s. per Day, or 355. per Week each Person.
SS SITUATED only five minutes walk from the Railway Station.
Visitors will not regret paying this homely Retreat a visit during
their trips to the Blue Mountains, as Mrs. Howell makes it her special
study to provide in the best manner possible for the wants of visitors.
The House is situated on two acres of ground ; one acre is tastefully
laid out in Lawn and Flower Garden.
Cottages Furnished—TO LET—Rent, 60s. to 80s.
Per Week.
Dr. E, H. MORGAN,
glwwiai aui jftinjeira,
MOUNT VICTORIA.


MOUNT VICTORIA AND HARTLEY ADVERTISEMENTS.
"THE school:
MOUNT VICTORIA, BLUE MOUNTAINS.
■^ZJlny-a —9-
A BOARDING SCHOOL FOR BOYS.
H. G. MENUS, Principal.
ASSISTED EFFIOIEHT TEACHERS
eCM M ODIOUS Buildings have been erected with due regard to the
efficient working of the School, as well as to the comfort of the boys.
The healthiness of Momit Victoria is well known. The bracing air
and invigorating climate work wonders in the case of delicate boys ; these
receive every attention necessary. The domestic arrangements are
attended to by MRS. RIENITS, who strives to secure the comfort of the
boys.
In the course of instruction, special attention is paid to Writing,
Spelling, Composition, Letter Writing, and Arithmetic, subjects so
essential to boys preparing for business.
Bookkeeping is included in the course for the advanced pupils. A
special class is formed for the younger pupils. Regular evening lessons
are given. Pupils are at all times under strict supervision. Military
Drill and Dancing form part of the course of instruction. The bearing
and manners of the boys are well attended to.
The School Uniforn (blue and silver), may be obtained at the School
at a cost of £1 12s. There is no hindrance to boys wearing out whatever
clothes they may have.
TERMS :
For an English Education, according to the standard for the Civil
Seiwice Examination, £ll 11s. a quarter, including washing, mending, etc,
payable in advance.
Quarters commence from date of entrance. An Entrance Fee of £2 2s.
is charged to cover expense of plate and linen. One Quarter’s Notice, or
half a quarter’s fee, required before removal of a pupil.
Warn Clothes and Strong Boots are desirable. A Box is preferable to
Portmanteau or Bag, as clothes can be kept tidier. All clothes should be
marked. Each pupil should bring four towels, comb, clothes, hair brushes,
tooth and nail brushes, also brush and comb bag.
EXTRAS :
Mussc—Piano or Organ ... ... ... £2 2s. per quarter.
Latin, French, or German ... ... ... £1 Is. ~ ~
Text Books for these subjects may be obtained at the School. Reference
and other particulars may be obtained on application.


MOUNT VICTORIA AND HARTLEY ADVERTISEMENTS.
TOURISTS’ STOKER
MOUNT VICTORIA.
joxxrar wxe.^om.
HAY, CORN, CHAFF, AND PRODUCE.
Every description of Colonial Produce can he
obtained here.
living in Private Cottages waited on daily, and
can obtain every household requirement at less cost than
they can bring them from Sydney.
M« Ik G. E. DELAIEfj
WHOLESALE AND RETAIL
Family Butchers & Bakers,
MOUNT VICTORIA,
BLACKHEATH, AND LITTLE HARTLEY.
DAIRY-FED PORK, &c„ &c.
Small Goods of every description always on hand.
FAMILIES WAITED ON DAILY.


MOUNT VICTORIA AND HARTLEY ADVERTISEMENTS.
Hartley Vale.
(jH"MIKi' , iUli , ''H|l ,l,,| l|l |, ’| | l|li“ ,, l||r 'illli' 'IIP'' l l||l'" l l||l , ‘ 'll|l''
WIX.X.IAM MUIR
(Late of the Commercial Hotel, Wallerawang), is now in
possession of the above well known Hostelry.
BEST ACCOMMODATION FOR TRAVELLERS.
G-ocd. Ta/lole. Clean ;Etooms.
zbilijljair/ds, &o.
Parties conveyed to Fish River Caves.
Letters or Telegrams Immediately Attended to.
F. BADMAN,
Grocer, Draper, Hosier
And GENERAL STOREKEEPER,
Exchange Store,
MOUNT VICTORIA.
All Kinds of Produce Bought and Sold.
The Newest and Best Assorted Stock on the Mount, and at the
Lowest Possible Prices.
Every Requisite for Visitors. Families Waited on Daily.
A. SLATYER, Manager.


MOUNT VICTORIA AND HARTLEY A DVERTISEMENTS.
"O'sTl'3;
LITTLE HARTLEY.
NICHOLAS DELANEY,
PROPRIETOR,
Who for so long and so successfully carried on
business in the old Rouse, would now draic atten-
tion to the
OFFERED TO
Travellers and Tourists
IN THE
NEW HOTEL.
Being in close proximity to Mount Victoria, he can meet partie
anxious for
Shootino, Coursing, or Kangaroo Hunting.
Special Conveyances to and from Jenolan Caves.
TEHMS VERY MODERATE.
APPLY PROPRIETOR.


I' ■■■•* ■ \
• * V v V ! i', v >■ * ■ • ■
V . ■■■ .i i ■\ ; ' “ ; . a ; _
!/•;' • ■ A 'i /. " 1 ' " ' ; il :
■ '!, v ' ■ ■■ „ v ' / ■ a - ■ 1
;■, ; ... > K y • '■ /
,’* ... ! ’ 1 , : , .■ ' ' ’ < 1


The Zigzag, Eskbank, Lithgow,
Bowen fells.




THE ZIGZAG, ESKBANK,
LITHGOW, BOWENFELLS.
93-97 Miles from, Sydney.
Hotels.— Eskbank : The Imperial (Mr. H. P Corbett).
Lithgow : Tattersalls (Mr. J. Connell).
The Club House (Mr. R. Allen).
The Volunteer (Mr. G Jack).
The Cosmopolitan (Mr. G. Clout).
Bowenpells ; Bather’s Royal Hotel (Mr. J. Bather).
(See advts.)
Take ticket to either Eskbank, Lithgow, or Bowenfells, for all
these places lie close together—practically in the same street—at
the bottom of the valley.
The Zigzag is generally known as the “ Big Zigzag,” to distin-
guish it from its little brother on the other side the mountains.
It is a remarkable engineering curiosity, and the view from it is
of a singular and memorable kind. It is decidedly one of the
Mountain Sights, and if time allows it should certainly be visited.
When the descent has been made, however, and Bowenfells
reached, the limit of the mountain peep-show is reached, and the
showman’s duty is done.
THE ZIG-ZAG
practically commences two miles after leaving the Clarence
siding, the highest point reached by the railway line.
The height is here 3658 feet above the sea level, and the
bottom of the valley is 700 feet lower. A long tunnel and some
deep cuttings precede the swinging rush down the mountain side.
Then round a series of swift curves, over arches, through tunnels,
on precipice ledges, the train runs rapidly down a gradient of
1 in 42.
Here from the carriage windows you look down on the roofs
of the signal-box on the ledge of line below, Burther down in
the valley are more house roofs, scaffoldings of a new mine, and
the beginnings of a coal-black industrial centre.
The hill-side, crossed and recrossed by the Zigzag, is nearly
bare, for every inch of it has been shaped, or hewn, or buttressed.
The original verdure fled when the workmen were first suspended


over 1 its precipitous walls to commence the most difficult and the
most expensive part of the Western line. Where the Zigzag
writes its letter Z is now nothing but a lofty-terraced pile of bare
rock; its solid native mountain strata adapted and amended by
endless masonry; embankments, tunnels, viaducts and cuttings.
From the long perfect curves of the first declivity the two lower
circles of line are clearly visible, but they are so nearly under
one another that a stone might be thrown from the carriage
window on to the lowest section of the track. Down the next
grade the train glides backwards to the Zigzag platform ahd on
to the level “ safety flatthe points are turned, and the last
spin—engine once more foremost—-brings you in sight of the
ebon valley.
Disparagement of this extraordinary work is now made by
persons who assert that by tunnelling, or by adopting another
route, the problem of lowering the line might have been more
cheaply solved. However, it has been made now, and being
there it is worth seeing, whether it is viewed as an engineering
triumph, a unique picture, or a gigantic and costly mistake.
ESKBAWK, LIJHGOW, AND BOWENFELLS.
The mountains have hardly done with their wonders even here.
Bush-covered heights closely surround the grimy triplet of towns,
and the charm of steep hills, green-coated, surrounds the smoky
hollow.
Fresh from the magical beauties of the untainted mid-mountain
valleys or the splendours of the Cave district, this sudden drop
over the edge of the Blue Mountain ridge into a sordid, commer-
cial, smoke-and-cinder-begrimed community, gives the freshness
of keen contrast. The sidings full of coal trucks, the long rows
of wagons on the rail, the holes in the hill-sides and their
disgorged heaps of coal dust, the blackened timber scaffoldings at
the pit mouth, the fuming chimneys and fuliginous atmosphere,
remind the picturesque and leisurely tourist that the world after
all is at work. Round the feet of the hills are scores of miners’
houses, made apparently on school-boy architectural principles—
four walls, a simple pointed roof, two windows in the fagade, and
a door between them. These little homes are mostly erected on
the “shilling a week principle i.e., the landowner, who is also
probably the mine owner, grants the use of the small necessary
plot of ground for a nominal ground rent of Is. per week. The
miner erects his own house, which, in event of desertion, of course
lapses to the proprietor of the estate.
In the centre of the valley are clustered the more pretentious
buildings of the three towns. On a cursory examination, the
place seems to consist of a trinity of Railway stations, a few


Banks, and an unconscionable mass of hotels and billiard
saloons.
However, there are stores (the only considerable stores in the
110-mile interval between Penrith and Bathurst) and other
buildings of good style and dimensions..
It is to be presumed that the attrition of fine coal dust in the
general coal-mining palate is responsible for the apparent endemic
of thirstiness. Coal-mining will have to be put in the same
category as salt beef and red herrings, for there are hotels
ad. in jin., and, moreover, two breweries.
The Lithgow Burton Brewery in full swing; and the Great
Western Zigzag Brewety on the point of starting with plant
capable of turning out per week the generous supply of 150
hogsheads. The latter thirst-fighting factory is situated two
miles from Eskbank, in the cool of a picturesque fern gully, and
draws its water from a cold, clear mountain stream.
While waiting at Lithgow—-provided you have had enough of
climbing, and do not care to scale the hills—the best thing to do
will be to get permission from the Lithgow Yalley Colliery Co.
to visit their Pottery Works. Here you will not see any hand-
painted china ware or festhetically-turned vases, but it is not
uninteresting to find out how your butter-cooler, bread-pan, jam
jars, and little brown teapot are evolved from their ancestral bed
of clay.
Bricks and drain-pipes are being manufactured close by, but
the most interesting department is that in which the earthenware
basins, pie-dishes, flower-pots, little brown jugs, etc., are brought
into being.
The clay is mixed with water by machinery, strained, dried,
squeezed, and cut into “ tin-loaf ” blocks ere it is ready for
manipulation on the potter’s wheel. There are two kinds of
manufacture going on in this factory : there are “thrown goods”
fashioned on the wheel, and “moulded goods” formed by pressure
in a matrix.
Of the two it is more amusing to watch the method of the
immemorial potter’s wheel, and to see, while a perspiring boy
turns the wheel, the master hand of the potter coaxing the
responsive clay into symmetrical attitudes.
He tickles it with his fingers, and forthwith, like a sentient
thing, it rises round his hand and stands a jam-jar. Another
touch and it is a squat, shapeless lump of brown clay, whirling on
the centre of the wheel. He inveigles it up again, and in a
moment it is a full-bodied narrow-necked bottle ; a little wheed-
ling with one finger and it is a broad-mouthed beer-jug; a pinch
of the rim and it pouts into a convenient lip for the easy effusion
of countless “ modest quenchers.”
Articles of great weight, like bread-pans, are made of consider-


able thickness, that they may be able to stand alone till slightly
hardened. They are afterwards turned down on another wheel
until of the desired tenuity.
Few people are aware that their brown-glazed teapots—those
admirable tea-makers —are made in nine pieces, formed in plaster-
of-Paris moulds; yet this is so. The body, spout, handle, and
knobs two pieces each; the cover one. The enamelling and
retorting require a nice judgment. Some vessels are twice-baked
and some three times, but for most, a period of 40 or 50 hours'
“ hard firing ” suffices. “ Hard firing ” temperature is not marked
on any thermometer that we know of, but it is said to be a
summer warmth rather more than is necessary to convert iron
into a liquid.
This Pottery is a branch work of the Lithgow Yalley Colliery
Co., one of the six companies engaged in tearing from the moun-
tains, and continuously pouring into Sydney, an immense supply
of coal.
The output of the Yalley is many thousands of tons monthly,
and both trade and town evince the healthy signs of steady
growth.
At the Bowenfells end of the district there are some good
farms, and the place is evidently the point of fusion of the mining
and agricultural territories. There really seems no reason to the
casual tourist why the district should be overburdened by three
designations. If you alight at Eskbank, and ask “how far
Lithgow is ?” you will be answered by a nod down the street, and
a confused, comprehensive gesture, “ This is Lithgow.” And if,
dismounting at Lithgow, you enquire concerning Bowenfells, an
index finger pointing along the road emphasises the friendly
propinquity of that important subdivision.
However, singly or unitedly, these places boast their adjacency
to Hassan’s Walls, a splendid scenic vantage-point three miles
from Bowenfells.
It is the last effort of the Blue Mountains, and a splendid
effort, before they trail off with some final undulations to blend
with the plains.
Precipices of naked rock, and valley views profound in depth
as they are unstinted in their sweep, form the elements of the
last picture in the long Blue Mountain Gallery of Landscape
Scenery.


ESKBANK, LITHGOW, & BOWENFELS ADVERTISEMENTS.
lmperial Hotel?
IN THE
HEART OH LITHGOW,
Facing Eskbank Station.
H. P. CORBETT, Proprietor.
'pHE above Hotel is well known for the Excellence of its
Accommodation, by Tourists and others, who have accorded
to it their patronage, and the Proprietor can with confidence
recommend it to those in quest of a
IpiFfl-elafi
TERMS MODERATE.
It**
N.B.—Suites of Rooms for Families, Tourists, &c.
RICHARD AUUCN
S tS>ECrS to inform his old Lithgow friends that he
Msl has again settled among them, and will he glad
to see all at the
Main Street, Lithgow,
Which Well-known Hostelry he has j just taken
possession of.
R. ALLEJV asks for a fair share of public support,
and will endeavour to merit it by keeping nothing
but the Best of Everything.
’ sf-*i
JIJST ERECTED, AT RHALR OH HOTEL,
<<] The Finest Skating Rink Out of Sydney. t*>


ESKBANK, LITHGOW, & BOWENFELS ADVERTISEMENTS.
Britomart House,
HVLeREIT STEEBT,
WWOOW.
above, the Leading Establishment of the Town, has
"*** been opened by
F. W, BARBER,
(3 X%)it%v cl Choice CLTt-b SfcocPi-
D R. APERY,
liili awl Myitis
VISITORS
Will find all they require, and
Meceive Every Attention
AT THE
v | fall jipmi .|^a
NEXT THE VOLUNTEER HOTEL.


ESKBANK, LITHGOW, & BOWENFELS ADVERTISEMENTS.
LITHGOW.
JOHN CONNELL
Wishes to inform his old customers and the public in general
that he has again been
“ Called to the Bar,”
and is now in possession of the above well-known commodious
and favourite Hostelry, where every attention will be paid to
Visitors’ requirements. In connection with the Hotel there is
a large and well-lighted Billiard Room, fitted with one of the
best tables • also a Hand-ball and Skittle Alley.
Nothing but the choicest brands of Wines, Spirits, and Beers
will be found in the cellar.
Charges strictly moderate.
Good accommodation for Travellers
Saddle Horses and Buggies for hire,
GEORGE JACK’S
MAIN STREET, LITHGOW.
VTTHIS Hotel has just been built in finished style, well appointed,
* and newly and handsomely furnished. The rooms are lofty,
commodious, and well ventilated.
Visitors will receive the best attendance.
Good Board and Residence.
TEEMS MODERATE.
GEOMGE JACK? Proprietor*
VEHICLES TO FISH RIVER CAVES.


ESKBANK, LITHGOW, * BOWENFELS ADVERTISEMENTS.
GREAT WESTERN Ml] ill
o<#AfSiWj!£>
Proprietors.
CTfiHE above Brewery, recently established, is situated in the
’s k most desirable spot for Brewing purposes, and the
Proprietors are prepared to supply Customers with the
finest description of (Ale & dorter,
BREWED SOLELY FROM MALT AND HOPS.
< Bottled Ales a Speciality—equal to Imported Lager. >
Esther's Royal Hotel,
BOWEWFELS.
WESTERN EXTREMITY OF CELEBRATED ZIG-ZAG
SUPERIOR ACCOMMODATION
y suites, |) qirttemcn, J
JYYNAES EATHER,
PEOPBIETOIi.
Vehicles to meet all Trains on receipt of Letter or Telegram.
GOOD SHOOTING.
Parties can be conveyed to Fish River Caves.


| itrton | inputng | ompitg,
ESKBANK.
Sj^yHLS Company having purchased the
" lousiness so long and favourably
carried on under the ozvnership of Mr.
B. J. Inch, are now extending their
operations, and, in conjunction ivith
Brewing, are
IMPORTING WINES and SPIRITS
Direct from the Home Merchants.
They have secured the continuance of the services
of Mr. Inch as principal Brewer, so that the Puhlic
can depend on an Article Second to JVone in the
Western District.
PHIZES T-A.IKIEIbT _£l.T
BATHURST, BLAYNEY, ORANGE,
&c., &e.
THOMAS IBIEHTITETTH,
Manager.


ESKBANK, LITHGOW, & BOWEN FEES ADVERTISEMENTS.
«|OWO!M SOU
Has the best accommodation on the Blue Mountains.
It is in close proximity to
TfflE CELEBRATED ZIQ-ZAO,
THE IRON FOUNDRY, COAL MINES,
Pottery, Briek-works, and Paint-works,
Tweed Factory, and the
GREAT ROCKY HASSAN WALLS,
The height of which are fully 5,000 feet.
A Porter will be in attendance at the Lithgow
Railway Station.
Hew Sample Hoorn tor SrsveMera.
GEORGE CLOUT.
(Late of Wollongong),
Proprietor.


JENOLAN CAVES.




JENOLAN CAVES.
ROUTES AND COST.
Via Katoomba. —Railway to Katoomba, 66 miles from Sydney.
Thence 27 miles on horseback. This is a very picturesque route,
but a rough one. A guide is necessary.
Railway Ticket — Return, 14s. 9d. Horse hire, 10s. per day.
Guide, 20s. per day.
Via Katoomba and Mount Victoria. —A daily line of coaches
runs from Katoomba, catching Mr. Whittall’s coach at Mount
Victoria.
Through journey —4B miles,—in one day. Return fare, 50s.
Via Mount Victoria. —Railway to Mount Victoria, 77 miles
from Sydney. Thence 37 miles Daily coaches each way are
run by Mr. Whittall of the Imperial Hotel.
In summer other coaches also run at irregular times.
The road is a good one, and the scenery visible from it
throughout the whole distance is exceedingly fine.
Railway — Return, 17s. 6 d. Coach—Return fare c 40s.
Via Tarana and Oberon —Railway to Tarana, 120 miles
from Sydney : 9a m. train reaches Tarana 415 pm. Thence by
coach 16 miles, arriving at Oberon 7.30 p.m. Next day 18 miles,
Oberon to Caves. Visitors should write or wire in advance to
“ J. Wilson, Jenolan Caves,” or “ Oberon.”
Railway — Return, 28s. 9 d. Coach — Return, 355. Dinner,
bed, and breakfast at Oberon, say 7s. 6d.
AT THE CAVE HOUSE,
under the control of the Government, and managed by Mr. and
Mrs. Wilson, the charges are 10s. per day ; children half-price.
(Special charges for periods of a week or longer.) Second-class
accommodation, 4s. per day. Stabling and feed for hoyse (chaff
and oats), 6s. per day.
The charges for candles and magnesium wire may be said to
average about 2s. 6d. a day extra.


THE ROUTE FROM KATOOMBA.
This, tlie shortest route to the Caves, is a bridle track only, and
in parts a very rough one, but the scenery is of the grandest, and
the route begins with perhaps the finest view in the mountains
Nelly’s Glen. (See special description of Nelly’s Glen in
“Katoomba” section). After making the descent of Nelly’s
Glen 01 Megalong Cleft and passing a mile or two of somewhat
rough ground, the track is on the level, and passes througli fine
open bush.
Six miles from Ivatoomba the fence of Megalong Station is
met and followed, and four miles further on is the crossing 0 f the
Cox River. °
. Here the scenery is superb; the grey granite blocks in the
river bed, the deep pools, and foaming cascades all surrounded by
the wildest bush landscape, make the scene a memorable one.
At thirteen miles the Little River is crossed, and the ascent of
the Black Range, an arm of the Main Divide, commenced. Along
the Black Range an old cart track is followed, and from the
summit of the ridge wide reaching views on either side are
commanded.
Here the tiack is at its highest point—over 4,000 feet above
sea level—and a gradual descent begins, till at the last mile and
a half the incline is abrupt and rugged, and leads sharply down to
McKeown’s Creek and the Devil’s Coach House,
THE ROUTE FROM MT. VICTORIA.
From Mount Victoria the route is very picturesque, and the
load, throughout most of the way, very good. Mount Victoria
Pass is the first sight worth noticing, but this being one of the
“ li° ns of the district, it is separately treated elsewhere in this
volume j on the flat the road runs through the picturesque
■villages of Big and Little Hartley, with their quaint old houses.
To the right, on a little eminence, is a square brown stone build-
ing the old Court House, built by convicts and associated with
many stories of the old days. Its bench is not now occupied.
Its two cell doors hang open to the road ' the one policeman of
the district suns himself before the door, while the caretaker—-
propped against the massive pillars—idly watches the passing
coach.
At the river Lett the Bathurst road is left, and soon after the
Cox River, with its lining of sheoaks, is crossed at the Glen Roy
Bridge. Mile after mile of bush then follows; the station of Mr.
Wolseley (inventor of sheep shearing machines) lies on the left:


in the bush, at intervals, are settlers’ clearings, protected by the
picturesque but slovenly “dog-leg” fence. About 19 miles out,
situated in the heart of the bush, is Mr. Kelly’s Half-way House,
where rest and victuals are obtainable. Hear the same spot is a
new house, erected by Mr. Whittall for the convenience of the
numerous passengers by his line of coaches. The highest point
crossed by this route is at Bendo Pinch, 4,632 feet above sea
level. Near the Half-way House the road is on the centre of the
Dividing Range, from one side of which the water drains to the
Nepean and the Hawkesbury, on the other to the Macquarie and
the Darling, so that snow and rain which fall in the middle of
the road have here the singular alternatives of travelling to the
sea at Broken Bay, or journeying tediously to South Australia
by the Darling and the Murray. Beyond the Half-way the road
becomes, for seven or eight miles, somewhat heavy; the
surrounding bush is full of fine timber; wallabies and kangaroos
watch the passing coach from the bush edge ; the scene is one
of untamed beauty, and the air is of the purest. The last five
miles wind down hills of immense height, but the road cut by
“ the unemployed ” in the perpendicular hill sides is a good one,
and it is a rapid and easy journey down to the Grand Arch and
the Cave House.
THE ROUTE TARAWA.
Trains. —9 a.m. and 9 p.m. (mailJ, Western Line.
Whilst the railway journey by this route is the longest, it pre
sents advantages and attractions, in that the traveller has the
opportunity of seeing the Greater Zig-Zag Railway, and passes
at Eskbank and Lithgow, through the Black Country of this
portion of the Colony, and if he has time, the collieries and
pottery at Lithgow are well worth a visit.
The terminal station by this route from Sydney is Tarana.
The Railway Hotel, close to the station, affords good accommo-
dation, and the genial host, Mr. Richard Yates, has a reputation
for doing his utmost to make his guests comfortable, combining
the thorough Australian bushman with the earnest sportsman,
and he can generally find his patrons a gun, dogs, and good
shooting. Sporting visitors to the Caves will not regret selecting
this route if it is only to make the acquaintance of “ Richard.”
The journey from Tarana is via Oberon, a distance of eighteen
miles by road. Coaches meet each train or are timed to leave
soon after their arrival.
The journey is through a delightful country, and between
Tarana and Oberon the traveller ascends a thousand feet.


OBERON
is situated half-way between Tarana and the Caves, and is a small
rising town with two good hotels, a bank (branch of the Aus-
tralian Joint Stock), three churches, and several stores.
The hotel at which the coach stops is the Royal, kept by Mr.
Moore, an excellent host. The accommodation is good, and the
majority of tourists with time at their disposal prefer to break
their journey, and rest for the night at Oberon rather than
to complete their ride to the Caves in one day.
For the information of those interested in mining it may be
well to remark that two important “ claims ” are within easy
distance of Oberon, and would repay a visit. One is the “Lucks-
j\ll Gold Mine,” situate on the spur of the Diamond Ranges, and
distant about six miles, the developement of which is likely to
materially affect the prosperity of the distinct.
The other mine has been working for sometime past with good
results, and is known as the Homeward Bound Gold Mine, and
is within walking distance of the town.
The journey from Tarana via Oberon ro the Caves is 36 miles,
and can be accomplished in about seven hours. The last half of
the journey is most picturesque. This route presents an advan-
tage over the others in one small convenience (a detail not unim-
portant to delicate people), namely that the road to the Caves
pusses the front of the Cave House and enables visitors to alight
at the door of their headquarters whilst at Jenolan.
The winding road by which the final descent is made is three
miles long, and is a zig-zag path cut in the mountain side, just
wide enough for the coach to pass.
Looking upwards the overhanging rocks and trees melt into a
perspective of sky, and the dizzy depths below seem fathomless,
and strike many a timid traveller with wonder and alarm, but
the five steady horses know their work, and are handled by no
amateur whip, and after the first few twists and turns in the
road a sense of delight and relief takes the place of terror and the
journey is over.
The fare from Tarana to the Oaves via Oberon, is 10s. each
passenger.
Intending visitors during the season would do well to wire for
seats in advance, as the coaches are often full, and the accommo-
dation is limited.


POINTS AND WARNINGS.
Be sure to take your oldest and shabbiest clothes and stout
boots.
If you mean to do any really hard scrambling, as in the Elder,
New, and Mammoth Caves, a pair of leather gloves will be of
value.
For cave exploration, india-rubber shoes will be convenient,
but boots will do.
A soft hat is indispensable.
Intoxicating liquors are not kept at the Cave House. Those
whose health is likely to suffer by a few days’ total abstinence
should therefore take their own supplies.
A gun will not be out of place. Spare time can be filled by
shooting the multitudinous wallaby.
Visitors are not admitted to the caves on Sunday. Take,
therefore, what you may need to fill the time.
Only two caves can be seen per day, as the Imperial Right
Branch, Imperial Left Branch, Lucas, Nettle, Elder, and New
Caves each require from two to three hours. The Mammoth six
hours.
If time only allows inspection of a few caves, the order of
enumeration in the following summary is probably the 01 der of
merit:—
SUMMARY OF THE GAVE SIGHTS.
The Imperial Cave, discovered in 1879, is the richest in and
contains most oi the best stalactite formations. In the Left Branch are .
The Architect’s Studio; The Bone,Margarita, Lady Carrington, Wilkinson,
Lucinda, and Diamond Caves ; The Mystery, Katie’s Bower, Madonna and
Child, etc., etc. In the Right Branch are: The Underground River,
Grecian Bend, Crystal Rock, Shawl Cave, Coral Grotto, Lot s M lie,
Crystal City, Grand Stalactites, Selina Cave, and Alabaster Column ; The
Mystery, Nelly’s Grotto, The Vestry, Diamond Walls, Crystal Palace,
Jewelled Casket, Bride’s Veil, Garden Palace, Gem of the West, Fames
Retreat, Queen’s Diamonds.
The Lucas Cave. —Named after the Hon. John Lucas, M.L.C., member
for Hartley at the time the caves were created a public reserve. It
contains : The Cathedral Cave and Broken Column, Exhibition, Shaw 1,
Lurline, Fossil, and Snowball Caves, and The Crystal Fountain.
The Nettle Cave. —Named after the spiteful vegetable which surrounds
its mouth. It contains : The Sculptor’s Studio, The Arch Cave, and Tre
Belfry.
The Devil’s Coach House.— A fine cave, nearly 300 feet in height, but
of very limited extent. It can be explored in half an hour without a
guide.


The Elder Caye gains its title from a fine elder bush at its entrance.
It is a very rough and difficult cave to explore. The Coral Cave is within
it, also the entrance to the New Cave.
The Mammoth Cave.—A mile and a-half from the accomodation-house.
A very rough and dirty , cave. There are two fine chambers, and the
Underground River can be reached by the aid of ropes.
The Carlotta Arch and The Grand Arch.
The New Cave, not yet fully opened to visitors,
The above are the main sights of interest, but an ardent lover of the
difficulties and perils of subterranean exploration might spend three months
in the district without investigating all the inlets to these mid-mountain
recesses—all the dark internal cracks and gaps and tunnels of the limestone
range.
THE CAYES
Once styled the “ Binda Caves,” more recently “ Fish River
Caves ” (owing to the absence of the Fish River ten miles away),
they are now finally christened —after the district in which they
lie—the “ Jenolan Caves.”
“ Jenolan ” is said to derive from one J. E. Nolan, a surveyor,
whose name, ingeniously condensed, is thus by Cave celebrity
unconsciously immortalised.
There is some conflict of opinion as to the date and manner of
the Cave discovery.
By frequent repetition a story has gained credence by which
the date of first discovery is given as 1841, the “find” being
made, it is said, by a party who tracked to this neighbourhood
and captured a burglarious character named McKeown, McEwan,
or Mackewin.
McKeown is generally alluded to by a romance-loving public
as a “ bushranger,” but he was properly a low house-robbing,
back-yard cattle-stealing thief, having none of the dare-devil,
chivalric qualities of the novelists’ gentleman outlaw of the
mountains.
For seven years he carried on his depredations, feeling so secure
in the unvisited mountain fastnesses that he kept a yoke of
(stolen) oxen, and actually performed some simple efforts at
cultivation It is said that during the hunt for his den, which
was in one of the numberless caves of the Jenolan district, the
pursuers first saw and reported the exist 3nce of the great black
hollow in the hill now styled the Grand Arch.
However, another narrative alleges that the district was known
much earlier. We give the following account on the authoxfity of
one who has lived within twenty miles from the caves for nearly


sixty years, and who is the actual possessor of a treasured relic
of the notorious McKeown : to wit, the veritable coffee-mill in
which McKeown ground felonious corn.
He says that;—“As early as the year 1830 the existence of the
caverns was reported by Luke White, a stockman, in the employ-
ment of Mr John Woods of Lowther Park.”
Luke White was a native of London, and is believed to be yet
living in the Clarence River district.
Regarding McKeown, he says “that the fellow was traced by
the hoofmarks of a newly shod horse (his latest appropriation),
and was captured at the Devil’s Coach House in 1835 by two men
named Murkason and Beale, servants of Mr. Whalan, a squatter
on the Fish River. He was lodged in Hartley Lock-up, and
subsequently convicted by a Sydney jury on the charge of stealing
clothes from Mr. Roberts, publican, of O’Connell Plains. McKeown
was transported to Norfolk Island, where he died, but his whilom
companion, ‘Scotch Alick,’ eluded the police and was never again
heard of.”
To the future historian of the mountains we commend the
sifting of the legends of this early era, and the final definite deter-
mination of the strange career of McKeown, professional cattle-
stealer and tiller of the mountain wilds.
In those pre-touristic epochs the Cave district was full of wild
cattle, and at times rambling parties of settlers, bent on beef-
catching exploits, visited these difficult mid-mountain gullies.
On their return beef-laden they of course told their stories of
the wondrous limestone range, and the place by slow degrees
acquired a reputation.
Expeditions of adventurous travellers from time to time came
to the caves, and explored such as could then be penetrated. There
was, however, no road, nor any house. The danger of the descent
of these all but perpendicular mountain sides, and the discomforts
of a night on a rocky slab under the Grand Arch, militated against
the popularity of the caves as a holiday resort. About 1868
Mr. Jeremiah Wilson, who has always taken the most zealous
interest in these caves, and who is the discoverer of most of them,
was appointed Curator by the Government, and received for a
time the small retainer of £4O per annum.
An accommodation-house was, however, lately built by the
Government, and the district of the Caves created a public
reserve. Mr. Jeremiah Wilson was appointed Chief Curator, and
his brother, Mr. Fredk. Wilson, Assistant Curator.
There are now resident guides, and there is house room for
some 50 visitors. The Imperial Cave is illuminated by the electric
light, and the Elder, Imperial, Lucas, and Nettle Caves have been
rendered practicable for women and children by ladders, bridges,
steps, and railings.


A talented “yarner”—who was one of the earliest residents in
the district—avers that the depredations on the caves before they
were taken under the Government aegis, were most unscrupulous.
He alleges that he saw with his own eyes an iconoclastic
Scotchman named Campbell hack down with a tomahawk some
magnificent stalactite pillars, with a view to placing them in the
capacity of verandah-posts before his sumptuous log-dwelling I
Without, however, going to local traditions for evidence, it is
clear that a great number of beautiful stalactites have been ruth-
lessly broken by visitors, and the protection of many of the
remaining ones by iron standards and wire netting is a painful
necessity, sufficiently justified by mankind’s inherent vandalism.
This enclosing in a wire cage of many of the best sights neces-
sarily spoils the strange charm of their natural grouping and the
beauty of the general effect; but for this loss we can only vilipend
and contemn those persons who selfishly and barbarously, out of
their own innate selfishness, insist on defacing these sights by
breaking off specimens, blackening the stalactites by finger tips
or candle smoke, and by their wretched autographic pencillings.
Infinite credit is due to the pluck and determination of the
brothers Wilson and the guides—to Mr. Jeremiah Wilson in
particular,—for the discovery and opening up of new caves is a
labour of extreme hardship and some peril. The narrow crevices
through which the men have originally to wriggle, and in which
sometimes they stick, the dangers of falling stones, unexpected
drops, sliding boulders, deep-water holes, slippery mud banks, are
some of the difficulties which precede the easy passage by steps
and ladders of the string of torch-bearing tourists. Into some of
the holes in the face of the cliff access is at first only possible by
suspension from the cliff-edge. Conceive the joys of hanging at
the end of 50 feet of rope, while men below, hauling on a guy-
line, oscillate your dangling form until momentum enough is
obtained to swing you into the rough aperture. This is the kind
of ingress anterior to the stone steps and iron balustrade.
The limestone belt extends from Mudgee to Goulburn, and is
full of caves ; but none have yet been found at all comparable to
those at Jenolan.
In this belt, too, minerals lie thickly. Silver, iron, copper,
and sulphur may all be found close to Cave House. It is the
percolation of the water through one or other of these which
gives to some of the stalactites their rusty brown, or yellow, or
green colour.
The temperature of most of the caves is uniform throughout
the year, and stands at about 63 degrees. They are therefore a
grateful relief from the extremes of both winter and summer. In
the Lucas Cave—where there is, if possible, less ventilation than
in the others—the atmosphere is slightly oppressive, but not so


much so as to produce ill effects during the two or three hours
needed for its exploration.
The district in which the Cave House is situated is a very-
delightful one, and the position of the house itself is in the highest
degree picturesque.
On a minute flat at the foot of the steepest of hills nestle the
house and out-buildings. So closely do the precipitous tree-lined
walls of the valley approach one another that there is barely room
for the house, and from the back windows the hill-side may be
touched without effort. The heights (of from 500 to 1500 feet)
surrounding shut out the sun, save for a few hours each day, and
the general impression is that of living at the bottom of a funnel.
Through one side of this funnel pierces the dark passage of the
Grand Arch, and before the Oberon-road cut its sloping curves
about the mountain there was no other reasonable outlet from the
hollow. Even now the passengers from the Mount Victoria side
grope their way through the gruesome shadows of the Grand Arch,
and the horses clatter along the bed of the stream which runs
under the same lofty but unlit roof. In the dark the cavern
echoes as the horses knock their hoofs against the boulders in the
stream ; the ringing, hollow sounds proclaim the vastness of the
vaulted roof, but painful groping in the gloom only half reveals
to tried travellers the plank bridges and the narrow, winding,
stony pathway. All these things, however, are undergoing rapid
changes and amendment. By every means the ways for the
increasing swarm of visitors are being lubricated and made
easy.
GEOLOGICAL FACTS.
The summary of the history of the limestone range is a very
interesting and extraordinary one.
Incalculable ages ago in the epoch known as the Siluro-Devon-
ian, a fringe of coral reef was forming near the shore line.
A gradual subsidence of the ground kept the summit of the
reef at that distance below the water level necessary for the con-
tinuance of the work of coral insects, for these creatures live
only near the surface of salt water, and were the reef to sink too
far their fragile lives would be immediately extinguished. This
condition of gradual subsidence must therefore have been present
to enable the reef to obtain its huge dimensions; but the work of
coral making stopped at last and the process of compression and
cohesion into solid rock went on. By the deposition and cohesion
of atoms of carbonate of lime released from the coral by the
action of water impregnated with carbonic acid, and by the


weight through long unmeasured ages of other overlying layers,
and accumulated deposits, the coral bank became solidified and
hardened into the close grained adamantine limestone.
“ The consolidation of coral rocks is caused,” writes Mr. J. D.
Dana in his Coral Islands , “by the presence of carbonic acid in
the waters that bathe and penetrate the sands. This acid is
derived from three sources :—(1) The rains which wash it down
from the atmosphere. (2) The respiration of all animal life in
the waters. (3) The decomposition of all vegetable or animal
debris in the waters or diffused through the sand or muds. This
gas enables the water to take up carbonate of lime from the
grains of the mass to be solidified, or from outside sources, and
then the deposition of the same among the grains through their
attractions produces the cementation.”
The spaces of time involved in all these changes are so great
that no really impressive conception of them can be made or
suggested. Man’s life compared with them is suchahurried instant.
Mr. J. D. Dana says on this subject : —“ Coral-reef limestones
are of slow formation. The rate of increase in thicknesss, where
all is most favourable, not exceeding perhaps one-sixteenth of an
inch a-year, or five feet in a thousand years.”
However, time seems to have been no object in those days.
The coral reefs—fashioned by millions of thoughtless insects—
became a concrete of hard grey rock, and no one thought the
progress slow or Nature idle. Then the earth’s crust, palpitating
violently-—moved and burst and changed its surfaces—tilting up
this mass of rock and raising it—at first, perhaps not far above
the sea, but gradually, or finally at any rate, up to its present
lofty altitude above sea-level.
So that it stands, with all its fossil corals and sea-shells,
thousands of feet above the briny comrade which once laved its
sides, and under which, in lovely coral infancy, it lay submerged.
Caves within the mass were formed, either by original and
structural insterstices, or by the action of the waves after the
elevation of the rock, or most probably and chiefly by the slow
attrition of fresh-water streams, melting and penetrating their
way through the solid limestone ridge,
The water lying in pools in the mid rock soon made a winding
channel for itself, widening and deepening its bed by taking up
the lime into solution. When it attacked the roof it soon found
out the crevices and seams and melted the natural adhesion of
the massive blocks, and finally brought them thundering from
the sides and roof into its ever-enlarging channel. Caves
being ready, the stalactic fittings have yet to be accounted for.
These are formed of the infinitely small quantities of dissolved
carbonate of lime carried by trickling water drops. All rain or
surface water contains a greater or less quantity of carbonic acid,


and is therefore able, in its passage through the earth and rock,
to take up lime. When it reaches the cave roof, and hangs, per-
chance, at the end of an increscent stalactite, its liquid parts
evaporate and leave upon the growing point its trifling contribu-
tion of carbonate of lime. If too heavy to remain a glittering
apex to its icicle, it falls upon the floor and helps to build a
rising stalagmite ; or, if too swift for that, will spread calcareous
sheets upon the floor, or add its mite to some fantastic structure :
for, indeed, the shapes and toys it fashions are not to be
described nor catalogued by any group of words the extravagance
of fancy can amalgamate.
As to their age, no data can be given. Some by loss of their
infiltring and supporting stream may cease to grow from lack of
sustenance. At various times a watery deluge may bring
supplies of lime abundantly, and growth be thus accelerated. At
other spots growing stalactites, whose supplies can only keep
them moist, pass generations without appreciable change.
Centenarians amongst them gain no reverence —quite a boy
stalactite would be as old. Probably they count their years of
growth as we do days, and their old age covers a silent gulf of
time which man’s thoughts cannot conceive or measure.
THE IMPERIAL CAYE.
From its curved roof the mountain’s frozen tears,
Like snow or silver or long diamond spires,
Hang downward, raining forth a doubtful light.
—Prometheus Unbound.
This cave is entered by a steep flight of steps from the Grand
Arch. It is probably the easiest of all the caves in its gradients,
and the least exacting in the matter of spinal distortions. It
contains, moreover, a vast number of very beautiful and curious
stalactic formations. It is lighted by the electric light, and most
of its pathways are guarded on each side by rails and wire-
netting, Its dimensions are such that a whole day is requ
for its examination. It is not possible to describe minutely
the wonders of the place, since nearly every wall and roof and
ledge has its own falls, its hangings and its spinous fringe ; the
main features, however, we can note, and so indicate, perhaps, a
hundredth part only of its strange limestone marvels. Not only
do the actual sights impress, but those which are half hidden
excite imaginative passing pictures of their undiscovered beauties.
Gloomy, intricate and inaccessible hollows, half lighted by a ray
which shoots between encrusted pillars and awakes a transient
glitter from the dripping crystal walls, suggest the countless


hollows, cupboards, clefts and tunnels which, with their treasures,
n,re passed unheeded for lack of time or lack in them of easy
access or especial novelty.
Pushing between the boulders piled forbiddingly,—roughly
heaped, and poised on one another, as they fell from the water
worn roof,—climbing steps or slipping through dark conduits,
scores of nooks are passed, whose existence is only palpable by
the greater denseness of their shadows. The guides have probed
all these, and it must be taken for granted that, though beautiful,
they have no special features. The wonders grow cheap by their
profusion ; time alone permits a pause at one which stands more
huge, eccentric-fashioned, lustrous or pure-hued than are his
multitude of neighbours.
Entering first the Left Branch of the Imperial, you are con-
fronted by the Architect’s Studio, a small but lofty cavern,
containing many massive columns and globular masses of
stalactite, the customary furnishing, no doubt, of an architect’s
studio—when he has one. From the roof, studded with glisten-
ing bodkins, hang heavy pointed masses, joining near the points
into a solid heart-shaped piece, and all the walls are lined by
heavy crusted pendants.
Further on is the Bone Cave, where the relics of ante-colonial
wallabies lie safely preserved in a limestone covering.
The Margarita Cave is next approached. Over its entrance
lies a fold of stalactite like a shawl drawn backwards to reveal
the pillared, fluted wall; indeed so natural and apparently so soft
and flexuous are these limestone shawls and hangings, that it
would seem as if from them the original beauty of tapestry and
curtain decoration was derived.
In the next cave—the Wilkinson—new freaks of stalagmitic
growth are lying. In a white, glittering mound the “snowdrift”
stands, smooth, damp and hard, as if it had seen and envied the
sparkling whiteness of a frosted heap of snow. Round the walls
and from the roof are hanging the long needles, transparent as
a bodkin of pure glass or a solid spike of pure spring water. But
the next chamber has yet stranger sights. In the cave now
known as Lady Carrington’s the fantasies are those of a
sculptor A tiny horse’s head, a woman’s figure on a rock shelf,
and in the centre a rough model of the “Madonna and Child.”
No closely carven features of course, but in pose and outline a
veritable statuette, shaped by centuries of dripping water. The
chamber is such a den as Dickens might have fancied for the
abode of some deft-fingered, careless and eccentric maker and
collector of curiosities. Where the ever completed ornaments are
not, is littered the rough material ; everything is coated and en-
crusted, as if the moths and dust and spiders had their own way;
all the roof is thick with hanging ragged fringes, and all round,


behind the scores of little frosted pillars, are seen the dark
recesses of the unused and dusty cupboards.
In the Lucinda Cave are curtain folds of stalactite, thin
resonant sheets, some white, some lined with well marked
patterns; and a scene like a tiny model of some Indian summer
palace—made in diamonds and alabaster, by a worker in mosaic—
with low walls, tet races and pillars, and from the ceiling scintil-
lating punkah folds, all made in miniature by the strange,
unconscious art of dropping water and atoms of lime.
As to the “ Mysteries,” their name admits their forms to be
inexplicable. That water should climb upwards, stand out
horizontally, or twist into intertwining curls, was thought to be a
“mystery,” and so they named it. Masses of white stalactite,
throwing out tendrils and crooked arms, which cross and inter-
wreathe and blend as intricately as if it was a thicket of brambles
worked in white sugar for a rustic’s wedding cake.
Beyond these sights are others, only to be suggested by similes
—stalwart pillars standing upon pedestals made of a hundred
smaller columns ; folds of white cloth, strips of linen fringed with
brown, ruffs of crumpled cambric, fluted collar work, shelves of
hoar frost, and whitened twigs and grasses : all worked in effigy,
in glistening, smooth stalactite.
From all the roughened and irregular roofs and walls hang
pointed stalactites of all lengths and sizes—some of pure
white, some yellow and discoloured, some delicately tapering,
some roughened by knobs, excresences, and crystals.
Here on a flat shelf is a little sea of petrified waves—a lake
eternally tempest-driven; a scene of motionless unrest. On a spot
where there was never a pool of water nor a breath of wind, are
the frozen wavelets, the wind-driven, stormy mimic breakers.
THE RIGHT BRANCH
begins its list of sights with the Underground River, to which
a stout wire ladder perpendicularly descends through some forty
feet of a natural rock chimney. The descent of the shaft,
candle in hand, is not difficult, but the banks of the river are
of slippery mud, and need careful ambulation. The water is
tepid and absolutely pure, reflecting with perfect precision the
arching roof and downward-reaching stalactic cones.
Returning to the top of the funnel, the next stoppage is in the
Shawl Cave. Though this cavern has no monopoly of shawl
formation, it holds the largest and best specimens of this curious
variety of stalactical construction. Many of these rumpled,
hanging shawls are creased in folds and marked symmetrically in
lines of colour, making, not imitations, but facsimiles.
The guide halts again, and the line of visitors draws up into
a group to learn the name of the next wonder. Here line behind


line, arch behind arch, into an impenetrable dim hollow, the
Coral Grotto retreats in a delicate labirnth. All its diminutive
pillars, arched roofs, and hillocks are crusted and roughened like
coral. It is a bit of Nature’s irony. The rock above was coral
once, and now the dewdrops percolating through, with puny loads
of lime, reform in their own way, in harder, stronger stuff, a copy
of the coral insects’ own original design.
The Crystal City is a ready-made arena for battle and siege,
which would have delighted the heart of Uncle Toby, if he had
not in his sympathetic goodness been loth to batter with his
home-made siege guns, walls of such beautiful design.
Under a low roof, and upon a level plain of rock, stand these
mimic city walls, six inches high. Line behind line stretch these
model fortifications, bulging as if to enclose a suburb, then
curving to join the inner wall—thick, perpendicular, and firm,
banked up by stony counterscarps.
Guarding an empty city, the ramparts wind. They seem to
be part of that Paradise where lay the
“ Towers of a happier time, low down in a rainbow deep ;
Silent palaces ; quiet fields of eternal sleep !”
The Grand Stalactites furnish by their name all the description
which can be of use to conjure up their likeness in the minds of
those who once have seen them. They are of all sizes and all
colours, and the roof which overarches them is a dense mass of
of stalactic folds ; curtain behind curtain fringed with painted
patterns.
In the bend of a narrow passage rises the beautiful stalagmitic
pillar, white as alabaster, know as Lot’s Wife. The column
stands some five feat high, and though sadly obscured by the
necessary wire netting which protects it, is obviously the finest
white stalagmite in the caves. Beyond the model of Lot’s hapless
wife lie the Selina Cave and Alabaster Column. The column
stands some 14 feet in height, and has a diameter of two feet.
Though not so good a colour as Lot’s Wife, it is a splendid pillar,
and a palpable certificate of the cave’s enormous age.
Past the Selina Cave we reach another “ Mystery,” looking,
with its queer, distorted arms, like one of those grotesque man
figures which the Chinese carve from twisted knots and twining
tree roots, a broad contrast to the elegance of neighbouring
stalactites which hang around it like transparent ropes. Nelly’s
Grotto closely follows the “ Mystery,” (for sights are thick in the
“ Right Branch,”) and here a fringe of stalactites, from the convex
edge of an overhanging shelf, reach down to join a corresponding
semicircle of wrinkled, stunted pyramids. Near at hand is a
smooth alabaster shaft, where stalagmite and stalactite have met
so long there is no mark to show the ancient point of union.
In the Vestry is a grand column; and passing on, the light


flashes from the million facets of the crystals on the Diamond
Walls. But jewels grow thick, for the Queen’s Diamonds coruscate
from their lovely jewel-case with the white roof of many arches.
Knobs and bosses of crystals flash and sparkle, and the central
miniature white pillar rises from a mound of dazzling facets.
The Crystal Palace, with its folds of shawls looking as limp
and lissom as any texture ever woven ; the Fairy Bower, the
Bride’s Veil, and the Flowering Column, must be passed rapidly,
for the Garden Palace is in sight. This is a miracle of beauty :
a model, ten inches high—a lovely scene, crowded between two
boulders, like a toy in crystal made for a wilful prince and thrust
on some neglected shelf. The roof of it is an intricate white
convolution, with falls of translucent curtains, bearded and
fringed, All the roof pendants are parallel-sided, hanging like
glass tubes, with a glittering crystal drop at tip of each.
This shining roof overarches two smooth terraces, which lie
like dark and glassy lakes, one higher than the other, Over the
sloping weir, which joins the two, the water seems to be smoothly
curving. It washes a central mass of pure white, and surround-
ing it flows to the lower level. Here are tiny white islands, on
which stand miniature tree trunks and frosted hillocks of grass ;
round these the stirless lake is dark as a bottomless mere. On
the upper lagoon are also miniature islands with white rocks, and
round its rim bare tree stems and reeds stand up through the
shallows.
If it were the effort of a painter men would say it was a sweet
and delicate fancy, but it is a miniature landscape in stone, made
without hands or tools and fashioned without imagination and
without a copy.
At this end of the Cave the sights culminate; each is the
best till the next is seen. The Garden Palace is the favourite
till the Gem of the West is reached, and that gives way in turn
to the last sight of all, the Fairies’ Retreat.
The Gem of the West is a mass of the purest stalactite needles
depending from a projecting ledge. A congress of glittering
thorns of all delicately graded tints, from snowy white through
lucent gray to absolute transparency.
The last, perhaps the best, certainly the most difficult of
access of all the beautiful scenes of the Right Branch, is the
Fairies’ Retreat, which can only be reached by one person at a
time, and progress to which has to be made feet foremost. It is
a grotto of crystals. Roof and sides and the diminishing vista of
its interior, all crusted with smooth, many-sided crystal forms,
flashing back light from their polished facets It is a nest of
brilliants, a tiny cave set thick with bosses of diamonds.


THE LUCAS CAYE.
This cave, whose entrance is near the summit of the ridge
above the Grand Arch, penetrates the hill behind the Cave
House, and in one part runs so near the buildings that no doubt
another entrance might, if necessary, be pierced within 20 yards
of the house. However, at present a long zig-zag over the brow
of the hill leads to the entrance, where in the shadow of a dim
ante-chamber the candles are lighted. This is an old refuge of
wallabies, as the glistening surface of the polished rock testifies,
but from the inner sanctuary they are now cut off by the iron
gate.
The introduction to the Lucas raises great hopes, for the
first chamber, known as the Cathedral Cave, is a very large one.
The roof, 200 feet above, is irradiated by the white shaft of
brilliance from the magnesium light, for otherwise its gloomy
ragged ceiling is too remote for the slender illumination of the
candles.
The lofty vault, with its wide spaces and angular boulders, just
descried in the dark, has the silent gloomy air of the Catacombs;
there is something eerie and subduing in its echoing dark hollow;
a stealthy sence of waiting mystery in its soundless gloom.
Descending, however, to the Shawl Cave, we turn with a sense
of familiarity to the nearer boundaries down which are hanging
white stone curtains, and where, under the lower surface of a
tilted rock, are scores of crinkled folds, and corrugated vallances
of stalactite.
The Exhibition Cave is also a chamber of great size and full of
ghostly shadows. Throwing a shaft of light upwards the dim
vistas of the roof are revealed with ragged brown fringes of
depending points. In the foreground and mid-distance are dim
mounds of rounded boulders, and hanging from the wall a mass
of white stalactites, one of them widening at its end into the
model of a woman’s hand. In this cave is the JBroken Column.
At one time a beautiful pillar complete from roof to floor, and
even now not shorn of grace by violent rupture.
Its symmetrical rounded shaft, still holding to the roof, lacks
several inches no rejoin the remnant of its length which stands
upon the floor below.
The floor has tilted and sunk so that the foot of the pillar,
standing on an immense boulder, is no longer in a plane with the
upper fragment, but leaning a little to one side destroys the hope
of its ever renewing, by new growth, its ancient compact. In
the same cave there is another instance of this slight subsidence
of the floor; a pillar of much smaller size has been parted but
the rift of about one inch is already being repaired, a slender


stalactite has formed in the centre, and will doubtless, centuries
hence, complete the broken shaft.
The light thrown round from one spot to another illuminates
in turn, the shining snowdrift, curtained pillar, convoluted
shawls and draperies, some white as bleached linen others stained
and brown, and all the multitude of pointed stalactites—glistening
lines of daggers arming the wall.
Further are shawls of more funereal pattern, fringed with
black ; then the Jewelled Casket, a little stone basin full of
crystals, perched on the rock top is a stalagmitic figure
known as Bishop Barry, and below it a crumpled pillar
dubbed King Solomon. Here the entire wall is terraced and
pillared with stalactite as if the filtering water resolved to newly
coat, from top to bottom, the inside of the chamber.
A substantial iron bridge here spans a little gulf full of tumbled
rocks, and at this point we are told the depth below the surface
of the hill is 900 feet. In the Lurline Cave which follows, there
are hundreds of stalactites, of which some point obliquely down,
some are stained yellow by sulphur, some give musical tones
when struck, vibrating with a mellow harp-like tone.
The next sight is a bank of rock potatoes, crystal lumps brown
coated ; then the longest known stalactite, measuring from roof
to point nearly eleven feet.
The Snowball or Cauliflower Cave, the Crystal Fountain, and
the Fossil Bone Cave carry descriptions in their names as far as
language can convey a semblance of the strange quaint charm of
these stalactic wonders.
THE NETTLE AND ARCH CAVES.
The Nettle Cave (with the Arch Cave, which opens out of it)
were among the first discoveries, and they lay a long time open
to the public, suffering thereby far more cruelly than the others,
which, discovered in a more civilized era, were protected by iron
gratings so soon as they were found to contain sights worth
preserving.
The traces of depredators in the Arch Cave are only too
numerous. Most of the stalactite shawls have been broken, and
end now abruptly.
The scenes, however, are altogether on a large and novel scale,
and should not be missed. The entrance to the Nettle Cavern
resembles an immense cork pantomime scene—a cleverly-arranged
transformation —the “Abode of the Underground Genii.” Its
rough hollowed walls are stained in many shades of pink, green,
and brown; it is full of dark, cupboard-like spaces in the walls,


shady grottos, fantastic and irregular pillars. Its roof is high, its
recesses wide and weird and shadowy. To the left, on the floor
of the Sculptor’s Studio, stand numerous blocks of stalagmite—
like tall, rough, and half-completed statues, begun by an erratic
genius and then impatiently abandoned. Some life-size, some of
heroic stature, massive pillars, awaiting the fine chisel to add
features to their cumbrous, rough-hewn trunks. Viewed from
inside they stand dark columns outlined against the dim light
from the cave’s entrance : like draped and dusty statues in a long-
neglected palace. Indeed the whole atmosphere of this cave is
that of a ruined castle. Its massive blocks, rows of splendid
columns still unbroken, frescoed walls, dim hollows, and great
gloomy spaces have all the look of dusty age. Remnants of
splendour, coated thick with dust and cobwebs; worn by rain and
wind ; its plaster cracked and honeycombed, its roof fallen in,
and all its ponderous, crumbling strength eloquent of silent ages
of desertion.
The daylight pouring down a stream of brilliance through
ragged orifices in the hill-side serves to illuminate the chief part
of this cave in a romantic, ghostly, yet sufficient way, The fresh
air entering through these same windows is probably responsible
for the aged look of all the walls, the pinnacles and pendants,
Milk-white columns and transparent icicles are fashioned only in
the dark, warm, central, and deep-hidden recesses of the moun-
tain. Here the upper layers of rock, rich in minerals, lend
colour to the filtering drops, and tinge the lower walls with quaint
harmonies in colour. Upon some rounded rock masses the
dripping water has carried from copper veins a coat of green, and
now they stand like willows petrified upon the banks of a
forgotten rivulet.
Round the smooth floor of the Ball Room stand fluted pillars,
made up of tier upon tier of smaller columns, or perhaps they
oan hardly be called columns, but slender walls, having theif
narrow edge outwards—partitions having tiny doorless spaces
of irregular shape between them.
From the belfry roof hang unshapen lumps of stalactite—
formless, smooth masses, weighing probably from 10 to 20 cwt.,
which have fine, resonant bell tones.
Two sound high notes, liquid and clear, and Big Ben gives a
low, mellow musical vibration.
The Belfry is a picturesque chamber. Round its sides, behind
stunted, heavy pillars, runs a dark corridor. The heavy bells
hang in a thick cluster, half-way from the roof to the floor. The
candle-light throws behind them grotesque, uncanny shadows, but
does not pierce the gloom of the surrounding, silent cloisters.
g '—


THE DEVILS COACH HOUSE.
This splendid cavern can be entered from the side of the hill
on which descends the x’oad from Mount Victoria, and, as it is
no more than a magnificent tunnel through the hill, it may be
explored unaided.
The finest view is from the northern end, and it is, perhaps,
the best for scope and gigantic effect in the cave district. It is a
cave, indeed; no doll’s house, with Chinese carven images and
quaint toy figures in crystal; no intricate system of subterranean
bent gaspipes, like the New and Elder Caves, nor a Burlington
Arcade, full of carven marble and alabaster figures, like the
Imperial—but a huge den, ragged and formidable, a shady
summer retreat for a race of Anaks. Its roof, nearly 300 feet
aloft, is scarred by ragged, weather-beaten, yet stupendous
stalactites; through two apertures high up in its southern wall
—two windows fringed by ferns and gum trees—bright shafts of
light flash on the tumbled boulders of its floor.
The walls are tinged with varying hues, pink and bright
yellow, or green films—the drippings from copper veins—veneer
the sombre grey rock.' High up, near the roof, runs a massive
gallery, on which rests the ladder leading to the entrance of the
Arch Cave. On the floor, boulders of marble have their dust and
weather-obscured beauties here and there revealed by the high
polish of wallaby tracks. Opposite the holes where the agile
wallaby for generations sheltered, the rocks glisten with the
perpetual friction of the leather-footed marsupial. Blocks of
black marble, white veined, and gray marble, streaked with red,
are polished to a fine lustre by the unconscious hopping and
sliding denizens of the cave.
The dark shadows cling in the highest arches and furthermost
corners—the stalactites hanging at a dim height above are
diminished from great pointed weights of rock to mere harmless
pendent javelins. It is a majestic silent theatre, with splendid
light and shadow effects—a sombre, huge, but picturesque giant’s
den, full of lurking shadows, cast by its ragged walls and the
massive stalactite decorations of its immense roof.
THE ELDER CAVE.
Climbing the ridge of the hill, on the way to the Elder Cave,
you pass the western side of the Carlotta Arch, a fine natural
window in the cliff. The narrow bridge of rock which spans this
splendid arch is protected by a rail, and from it there is a superb
view of the encompassing mountains and the narrow brown


streak—the Mount Victoria road—which, winding round the
ridges, approaches the valley at every sweep. The Arch, 200
feet high, its upper edge hung with crusted stalactites, forms a
worthy frame for an uncommon scene. The nearest point, 500
feet below, reveals the road and creek ; beyond, the steep knees
of the mountains descend into the Jenolan stream ridge behind
ridge, to where the view ends on the tree hidden side of a
Goliath among the hills.
Passing the Arch the elder-bushes at the cave’s mouth are soon
reached; the iron gate which guards the secret beauties of the
interior opens, and the descent in single file begins.
It is as well to leave coat and waistcoat at the gate, for, unless
you are extremely exiguous, you will have quite bulk enough to
fill the places through which you are expected to insinuate your
body, and the exertion will keep you more than sufficiently warm.
It may be as well to intimate to women (though they are
generally among the most adventurous) and to bulky men, that
the Elder Cave has in it some rough scrambling and severe
squeezing and climbing. If they love quaint sights, easily
obtained, let them wait for the Imperial or Lucas, and not
exhaust themselves by doing the Elder Cave.
The way is full of steep declivities, awkward tunnels, and con-
tracted manholes, guarded all round by grating, sharp stalactite
edges. It is not enough sometimes to travel on hands and knees :
the slit of ingress is so low that, in an absolutely recumbent
position—all dignity foregone—you have to wriggle wormlike, or
sideways in lobster fashion, beneath the super-imposing roof.
After these breathless struggles in the dark, for which crawling
to and fro under the door would be good practice, it is no little
relief to emerge into a chamber which gives reasonable standing
room.
Here the guide fires his magnesium wire and lights up the
scene. From the roof hang combs of yellow stalactites semi-
opaque; down the smooth coated glistening walls glide the glitter-
ing water drops, bent on some new limestone freak, some
infinitesimal begining for a stalactitic eccentricity the completion
of which the year of our Lord 3001 may possibly see. Under
the ledge, glancing between the untrimmed pillars, there is
apparently a rippling stream of diamonds, caught by a charm as
it flowed, and held there glistening for ever.
From a rough ledge in the chamber’s ceiling hang queer shaped
pendants, fin-shaped, or pointed, parsnip-like, or evenly edged,
and pure of hue, glass ropes unfinished, with a glistening drop
ready to fall on the stumpy rounded stalagmite, whose more
difficult task it is to rise from the floor and meet his graceful
partner.
Another plunge, slipping, clinging, and dropping from boulder”


to boulder, and another chamber fretted by rows of pendants of
all lengths and sizes, fringes hanging like bed valances, thin and
resonant, glittering stilettos tapering down to meet their dwarfed
and knobby foster-brother stalagmites, both growing by the same
nutriment, the atom of lime held in the water drop hesitating to
fall.
Throwing the light under a low overhanging shelf of rock there
lies revealed a miniature lake with every .wavelet frozen and
fixed for ever in firm decisive ridges, glittering, too, as if the
sunlight it has never seen, sparkled upon its rigid crests. A tiny
lake eternally blown by unseen winds; a flecked and moving
sui’face caught by a wizard’s charm and held, with all its myriad
crests and edges, perpetually motionless.
Further on a model cemetery, with tiny monuments and
marble pillars bounded by dwarf walls; a curious toy spectacle
for nature to mould with these lime-filled water drops in the
■dark hollows of the mountain’s centre.
From this cave you reach the New Cave not yet made easy for
the general scrutiny but accessible for those who care to see, and
full of its own characteristic treasures.
At the farthest end of the Elder lies the Coral Cave, wherein
for reasons not to be surely known, the stalactites abandon their
smooth forms and model themselves on coral fashions. Encrusted,
rough and sparkling, the rigid limestone arms and bulbs look soft
as snow. Yet all are edged and toothed with crystals, some
white, some bordered brown.
Back at last by another route so cramped you grudge the
chambers their superfluous height, and the exit, and fresh air
once more are gained. Like tired grasshoppers, not meant to
bend, emerging from the underground intricacies of a worm’s
subterranean labyrinth, the line of visitors comes up.
The method of progression through this cave can only be
suggested by similes. Conceive a full-sized soldier ant thrust
into a distorted, crushed and mis-made honeycombe, with instruc-
tions to visit every cell or part of a cell, and to pass through no
cell twice, and you may nearly comprehend the method of
exploration.
THE MAMMOTH CAVE.
This cave is reached by a walk of a mile and a-half, starting
from the Devil’s Coach House, and following the rough bed of
the stream. The way is stony until one of the curious little flat
valleys, characteristic of these ranges, is reached. A little five
acre plain, grassy and level, which, from most points of view,
.seems to have no outlet or escape, save up the breathless
acclivities of the encompassing hillsides.


Wild cherry trees—the celebrated cherry with the stone out-
side—prickly box, and scented wattle, are thickly scattered over
this little mountain Elysium.
A hundred yards from its soft green meadow, over more rocks
and rounded river stones, you reach the spot where, a little way
up the hillside, is the entrance to the Mammoth Cave.
An unpractised eye would not detect the aperture; an un-
practised climber had better not look for it. Old clothes are here
at a premium, for it is convenient at times to slide, and as, in a
great part of the cave, the old river bed is some foot or more
deep in scarcely hardened mud, it is obvious that no man can
reissue clean. Though there are here and there some beautiful
stalactite specimens this cave is usually shewn only to visitors-
who love to light the difficulties of underground exploration. It
is not impossible, but it is dangerous, to attempt to descend to
the present river without the aid of a rope.
No steps or ladders have been made, nor has the entrance been
protected by an iron door, as in the other caves; the distance
from the Cave House and the comparative poverty of stalactite
wonders, causing it to be rarely visited.
Immediately inside the entrance you slide and scramble deep
down into the dark, over chaotically piled boulders, polished
smooth and glassy by the wallabies, who have long made the
outer cave their retreat. Here and there you meet a strong,
cool draught from some invisible aperture, knats make burnt
offerings of themselves in the candle, then a stiff pull and
wriggle prone on the damp earth, and a beautiful chamber is
reached.
Here the stalactites are of exceedingly pure colour, transparent
as glass, or milk white. On a shelf, six feet from the ground,
is a fine bed of rippling stalagmite, like a great corner bracket
hidden under a spangled coverlet,and fringed with a yellow border-
ing cut in glittering angle points.
On the floor lies a thin drift of white, like snow in sheltered
hollows, thawing slowly from its white central mass to thin edges
of transparent grey.
Along the old river bed there is no stooping to do, for the
water has cleared and worn a fine arched tunnel; the flooring,
however, is all of huge blocks, piled in confused multi-angular
heaps, and thick with dark, shiny mud, so that foothold is
treacherous and descent at times rapid.
How long the river has deserted this course and taken to its
present bed, some fifty feet below, cannot be accurately
determined. It is, without doubt, the same underground stream
which can be reached from the Imperial Cave, and which, for
nearly five miles through these hills, pursues its sunless wander-
ings. The water is tepid, and some small fish have been seen in


it. These fish are believed to exist only underground, as no fish
at all are seen in the water after its escape into the creek
below the Grand Arch.
In rare times of very heavy flood the creek rises to such a
height that all the lower levels of this cave are under water;
this, however, has only been known at exceedingly long intervals.
The funnel down which access to the Underground River is
made is a narrow one, with perpendicular sides ; there is foothold
against the walls, but the assistance of a rope is almost vital.
After the first descent a horizontal tunnel, circular roofed and
shaped as if by skilled masons, conducts to another funnel
widening downwards towards the river.
One other chamber in the Mammoth Cave must not be over-
looked. It boasts a dais of yellow-brown, glittering rock, and
might be well called the Queen’s Audience Chamber. At the
back of the dais the limestone stream has formed what seems
a cushion of cloth of gold. The roof is a hollow lofty spire; the
walls are lined from top to bottom with alternating bands
of brown and white, scintillating brilliantly, and down a little
channel at one side apparently run off in a straw-coloured stream
the superfluous yellow diamonds.
THE NEW CAVE.
This cave was only discovered early in June, 1888, and is not
opened for tourists. In fact, it is of all the caves the most
difficult to penetrate, and as yet it has not been explored to any
considerable distance. The stalactites in it are all in their
original purity, untarnished by candle smoke, or inquisitive and
dirty fingers.
The charm of the brilliant whiteness and transparency of the
shining clear icicles hanging close round your head as you lie
face downwards in the narrow crannies, is such that no one enters
but becomes infatuated with the enthusiasm of a prospector, and
is willing to crush his ribs and rip his clothes in the effort to
squeeze through rat holes and discover new beauties.
The discovery of new hollows and caverns holding secret, till
now, all these glass-pure, stainless, and lustrous jewels, is as keen
a pleasure to a man with the exploring instinct as is the finding
of a new wood-louse to an ardent entomologist, or an extra and
unprecedented petal to a man addicted to botany.
Under every ledge or through every interstice may be a way


of ingress to a new chamber or tunnel, full of the most delicate
crystals, and there is little doubt that in time this cave will be
further pierced, and other sights revealed as marvellous as those to
which, in the Imperial Cave, access has now been made so easy.
The brothers, Jeremiah and Frederick Wilson, as well as the
other guides, make continual efforts to develope the already
splendid sights of the district, and it is owing to their persistent
burrowing that the Hew Cave was found. The labour is most
exhausting, for the ramifications of this cave are as capricious as
the journeyings of a mite in cheese.
Clothes are torn to ribbons against the sharp rock edges and
the projecting crystal teeth which line the cramped and tortuous
passages. Thousands of tiny translucent daggers have, unhappily
to be broken ere the entrance can be forced, for the walls and
roofs are stuck as thickly with snow-white ornaments as if
Jenolan had been Nature’s prize design for the world’s wedding
cake.
Beyond the immaculate whiteness and exquisite lustre of the
thousands of tapering stalactites, the glassy pureness of the
thousands of water-tipped bodkins, there is not very much in the
New Ca-ve to particularise. In one place there is, in an interstice
about 12 inches high, a symmetrical little pillar of yellow stalac-
tite standing on a pedestal of protruding, many-sided, and flashing
crystals, and joined to the impending rock roof by a delicate
white stalactite curtain. When men are rich enough in Australia
to build marble palaces they will have to come to Jenolan for
inspiration. Nothing could be more delicately harmonised in
colour, or more truly and artistically proportioned than this little
pillar, the accidental outcome of a century of water drops.
Another wriggle, feet foremost, through a hole which allows
a body but declines free pass to a coat and or waistcoat, brings
the now perspiring human serpent into a space where there is
room to sit up. It is in reality nothing more than a larger
interstice than the others, between the tumbled rocks of a
chaotically piled pyramid of stones, but here the rocks are
cemented by thin white joists and little pillars of stalactite, and
firmly held by a glossy coat which is hard as adamant, but looks
as soft as confectionery sugar.
The walls are covered by very minute sprays of stalactite,
forming horizontally or in many varied twists, at all angles with
the wall, and not as usually in an absolutely vertical position.
These resemble frosted twigs or minute grass sprouts, and most
of the stalactites in the vicinity are curiously bearded and
roughened by slender points and bosses.
It does not take long to see all that is as yet approachable.
The return journey seems a little shorter than the advance,
possibly because it is easier—with your candle pushed on ahead


and your leg against a sturdy stalagmite—to wrench through, head
foremost, than to regard your legs as antennae and to send your
feet before you into the dark, feeling for foothold.
Altogether, the difficulties of the New Cave are extreme, and
until some larger chambers have been reached, or the ways
widened and improved, the average tourist will prefer the more
comfortable sightseeing in the Imperial and the Lucas Caves.


SAN JOSE ADVERTISEMENTS.
SAB JIMS,
iUitx JJJtornilain Smuitoriu
PRIVATE FAMILY HOTEL,
(Established 18*78.)
Altitude, 2,400 feet; Distance from Sydney, only 58 Miles.
THE site commands the grandest view of he Mountains,
and is within 150 yards of Lawson Station, on the northern
side. The Mail and every Train stop at this Station.
The Public Parks of San Jose and of Santa Cruz, containing
many hundred acres, ten principal Waterfalls charming in
character, and Walks and Drives in all directions, are in the
immediate neighbourhood of the Sanatorium,
Cleanliness, comfort, and a good table will continue to be
the leading characteristics of this old-established and popular
house.
J. G. HAY,
Proprietor.
FURNISHED COTTAGES TO LET.
ALSO FOB SALE,
CHOICE VILLA SITES,
On the Easiest Terms of Payment in Australia.
10 per cent, only Deposit; balance in Quarterly Payments extending over
Five Years, without Interest.


OBERON ADVERTISEMENTS.
THE BEST ACCOMMODATION
In the District.
HORSES AND VEHICLES ON HIRE
Picnics Catered for,
Parties ottended upon.
T, J. MOOME,
PROPRIETOR.


TARANA ADVERTISEMENTS.
FA I I I C o*\Cl i I I LV( (J
SRalEi/Oir ovi -tIW Webern £i^e
FOR
i EH¥EE,i-
AND
$ Railway v f^ofeel
FACES THE STATION.
EXCELLENT ACCOMMODATION
ATTEKTIOK.
RICHARD YATES,
' 'V333
Proprietor.




flOSi-%
N COJ-J
00665798


Illustrated Sydney ©News
Ts acknowledged to he
THE CHEAPEST BEST
AUSTRALIAN PICTORIAL MONTHLY.
Thirty-six Pages.
Price, Sixpence.
<1 PICTURES ON EVERY PAGE.I>
Serial Stories by Australian Authors, Popular Subjects
treated by Specialises, and Graphically Illustrated.
News of the Month, Social Items,
Reviews, &c., &c.
IXPETOE T lipWHLY,
Baited dr)d is W hj
JOHN J. HORROCKS,
51 Market Street, Sydney.
And, to be obtained from
All Till! BEST MEWS AGENTS


*
JBB&&U K G. SOTOBR.
... *\ -gHi Proprietor of the above Hotel desires to bring under the
'-. .." S notice of the public of Australia, the many attractions and
*i W~m£' advantages the Hotel and neighbourhood offer to all desirous
I *C * u c^an g e > or seeking health, rest, and enjoyable scenery.
* V ; \ s(■ / Situate on. the Western Line of Railway, 66 miles from
Sydney, and at an elevation of 3,400 feet above sea
‘W‘ lf level, in the very heart of the Blue Mountains. Ad-
■' jacent to the Jenolan and Fish River CaVes,
C Go veto’s Leap, Wentworth Falls (the
TO Weatherboard), Katoomba Falls,, The Meet-
., 1 x ING OF the Waters, The Meoalong Zio-
' Zag ’ Etc
w Buggies and Saddle Horses always on hire. Post and
W gK&iP* Telegraph Office. Letter delivery twice a day. Letters
, ifSjiWt y or telegrams instantly acted upon. v.
♦Grate •**•»■* ~•?
' -'ft 'I?.. u : at-'' 1 '
■\, v
■• 5%
Printed & Published by JOHN O.HORROCKB, 61 Market-St,, Sydney.
