

Hortense
A STUDY OF THE FUTURE.
A ROMANCE
BY
LANCELOT LANCE.


HORTBNSB:
A STUDY OP THE FUTURE.


HORTENSE:
A STUDY OF THE FUTURE.
A ROMANCE
BY
LANCELOT LANCE.
Melbourne:
Sands & MoDougali Limited, Printers, Collins Street.
1906.


CONTENTS.
PAG*
CHAPTER I. 1
CHAPTER 11. 6
CHAPTER 111 16
CHAPTER IV 26
CHAPTER V. 38
CHAPTER VI 61
CHAPTER VII 62
CHAPTER VIII 78
CHAPTER IX 90
CHAPTER X 102
CHAPTER XI 116
CHAPTER XII 127
CHAPTER XIII 136
CHAPTER XIV 148
CHAPTER XV 157
CHAPTER XVI 163
CHAPTER XVII 176


PAOB
CHAPTER XVIII 185
CHAPTER XIX 194
CHAPTER XX 199
CHAPTER XXI 211
CHAPTER XXII 220
CHAPTER XXIII 225
CHAPTER XXIV 284
CHAPTER XXV 242
CHAPTER XXVI 249
CHAPTER XXVII 358
VIII




HORTENSE:
A STUDY OF THE FUTURE.
CHAPTER I.
On this opening morning of our story, the
Edgecumbes, two brothers and a sister, were
standing on the river bank fronting their house,
looking across a narrow waterway shut in by
precipitous mountains whose lower richly-
wooded slopes ended at the water brink.
On the point of one of these slopes was
Deepwater, their home, a low wooden struc-
ture sheltered on two sides by an orchard: a
large clearing ran up the back; and the space
in front devoted to a flower garden, had a
narrow path zig-zagging down a steep bank
to a boat-house built on piles over the water.
Deepwater was a comfortable cheery little
place, and several similar clearings could be
seen scattered along the shores of the water-
way.
A


The Edgecumbes made an interesting group
—two stalwart brothers, and a sister petite and
pretty.
John Edgecumbe, the elder brother, was
essentially of the sturdy yeoman type, florid
and healthy looking; the younger, Alan, the
hero of this story, was tall like his brother, but
of slenderer build.
His face was long and oval, neither dark
nor fair, though bronzed by exposure to sun
and weather. With a forehead rather high
than broad; a sensitive mouth, half hidden by
a dark moustache; an aquiline nose; a chin not
too firm; dark brown hair, worn rather long;
brows pencilled like a woman’s, and eyes —
his best feature—of a dark blue, deep and
steadfast.
It was an interesting, thoughtful face, and
you judged the man to possess an interesting
personality. He was, no doubt, a reversion to
a former type —to some unknown ancestor,
for he was unlike either brother or sister or
any known Edgecumbe.
Mabel Edgecumbe was a slight fair girl,
just out of her teens, bright-faced and Avhole-
some looking.
Of the brothers, John was twenty-eight,
Alan three years his junior. All three were
roughly but comfortably clad.


The Edgecumbes were expecting a visit
from Mary Hodges, the only daughter of a
near and intimate neighbour, who had pro-
mised to spend the day with Mabel. They
had now been watching for some time to see
her put off in her boat,
“Let’s go over and see what’s keeping her,”
said Mabel Edgecumbe presently, turning to
her younger brother; “Mrs. Hodges may be
ill.” “All right,” he replied, “but get your hat
first,” and, stooping, he carelessly picked up a
pebble and sent it skimming along the smooth
surface of the water.
“I shan’t be a minute,” she cried, and ran
off. But she had scarce gone a dozen paces
when she came to an abrupt halt. “What’s
that?” she exclaimed, pointing to a strange
object soaring in the sky above the western
cliffs.
They all looked, and waited in wonder and
hushed expectancy to see what it was. It was
a large object, and when the sun struck it,
it blazed like a living flame. And presently,
as it neared them for it was approaching
rapidly—Alan cried out, “Why, it’s an air-
ship !” And so it proved.
It had a large, shining, cigar-shaped body,
aeroplane wings, and something like a screw
or fan revolving in the rear.
A 2


Within a few minutes of its first appearance,
everyone on the island, young and old, had
viewed it. Never had the islanders beheld
anything so wonderful. But where would it
descend? With the ease and swiftness of a
bird, the air-ship suddenly swooped down and
settled on a patch of green sward not thirty
yards from where the Edgecumbes stood.
A door opened in the side, a man stepped
out, and, looking over at the Edgecumbes, ad-
vanced towards them.
He was a slight, dark, clean-shaven man of
from thirty-five to forty, and he wore a grey
tweed suit and a soft felt hat.
As he approached, the stranger lifted his hat
and bowed courteously. “I suppose you are
astonished to see me,” he began; “but not more
than lam to see you. Whom have I the
pleasure of addressing?”
“Our name is Edgecumbe,” replied the
younger brother.
“And mine, Howard,” bowed the stranger.
After an interchange of warm greetings,
the stranger, Howard, said —
“I should very much like to know something
of your history. You have evidently been here
a long time unknown to the rest of the world.”
A few hours later Howard §ent the follow-
ing message, accompanied by flashed photo


graphs of the island, to a friend in Sydney.
The message appeared in all the chief news-
papers throughout the world on the following
morning:—
“Startling discovery! I have found the
interior of Lava Island —an elongated amphi-
theatre with a central waterway —to be in-
habited by people of European descent, the
survivors and descendants of emigrants who
left ’Frisco in the year 1902 in the ship
Nemesis, chartered by a wealthy Bostonian to
convey a select party of emigrants to New
Arcadia.
“The ship struck this rock on a dark night,
lost her masts, and finally was sucked by the
inflowing tide through a narrow and dangerous
tunnel connecting with this interior waterway.
The survivors saved almost their entire outfit,
and within a short time had made for them-
selves fairly comfortable homes. Now that
communications are opened with the outside
world, some, no doubt, will leave at the first
opportunity; others will elect to remain per-
manently here. All attempts made and
there were several —to regain civilization have
ended in disastrous failure and sad loss of
valuable lives. (Private and confidential)
Congratulate me, old man! I shall gain kudos
over this affair.”


CHAPTER II.
Homfray Howard, the honoured guest of the
Edgecumbes, as he leant back in his chair that
night and puffed at a huge cigar, thought
contentedly over the events of the past day.
“Yes, it had been a great day,” he mused.
And now that it was over it was pleasant thus
to lie back and to contemplate at his leisure in
their humble surroundings, the family group
that had so interested him on his first arrival.
“How simple and unaffected they were, a
natural simplicity, that one generally associates
with assured position allied to culture! And
what a distinguished looking man the younger
brother is! Where can they have got this
breeding and distinction? he puzzled.
Was it due to heredity? It was more than
probable that their father, the pioneer of the
family, whose picture hung on the wall before
him, had been a man of some culture; other-
wise how account for the extensive and well
chosen library that he saw ranged in faded
bindings on the shelves? He had satisfied
himself as to the literary value of the collection;
moreover, he had noted marginal pencillings


in many of the scientific and psychological
works, that betokened the hand of a scholar.
From his demeanour and speech, it must he
the younger brother undoubtedly who was the
student of this family.
Then curiously, Homfray’s thoughts, turn-
ing inward, began to range insensibly along
a fresh line of thought. For Fate, sphinx
like and irrevocable, hovering over this simple
child of Destiny, out of the curling rings of
smoke presently evolved something at first
elusive, that gradually took shape and finally
assumed the guise of a bright and winsome
face that of his young hostess. Then
grimly, too, a spectre appeared to mock him,
a door in the corridor of time unlocked and
opened behind him, and he caught a glimpse
of the past, a page of his life’s history that
fain for ever he would have blotted out, but
could not. It had all happened years ago,
when only one woman existed in the world for
him. But she had proved false. The old
wound still rankled. Deluded fool that he
had been, existing in a fool’s paradise! She
had led him on and on, until one day, looking
into those starlit eyes and taking her hand, he
had told her that he loved her and asked for
her love in return, feeling a glad assurance of
the answer. Then those eyes had grown


insolent and cold. She had actually laughed
in his face. The barb once more turned in the
wound; he shrank from recalling the dead and
bitter past with its cruel memories.
And yet, what if he had vowed himself to a
life of celibacy! Was he not as other men?
Others, he knew, had changed their minds, and
many were the instances of second love re-
sulting in happy marriage. And why not so
for him? As for his former experience; the
type of women in the class to which he be-
longed (although he had long since forsworn
society), as a rule regarded the man as only
a secondary feature in the marriage contract.
They contracted for liberty, but only liberty
for themselves at the expense of the man; to
mate with such, men were chary.
But, as he triumphantly reasoned with him-
self, this was a different type of woman, a
more lovable type; one reared in a different
school. Having led the simpler life, naturally
she possessed the simpler virtues. Such a
woman as this ■would love and cherish a man;
she would consider it her highest ambition to
make him happy. His eyes involuntarily
softened and grew tender as he watched the
trim little figure of his hostess flitting here and
there. “How well she does everything,”
he thought. “What a domesticated little


woman!” and loverlike he dwelt on her mani-
fold perfections.
It was a poor little room and very humbly
furnished, and Mabel Edgecumhe, unconscious
of her admirer’s thoughts, but by the beating
of her heart only too conscious of his presence,
was arranging and attending to the table and
displaying all her household treasures, heir-
looms for the most part, that seldom saw the
light of day; portions of a tea and breakfast
service, knives with blades worn to shadows,
silver forks and spoons, a cracked flower
epergne, and two drinking glasses.
From the kitchen she presently brought cold
mutton and salad, home made bread and
scones, fresh butter and cream, preserves and
honey, a plate of strawberries, and tea and the
whitest of crystal sugar, the two latter pro-
vided from Mr. Howard’s stores. Island tea,
compounded of the leaves of a native shrub
mixed with dried lemon blossom, was, as he
afterwards found, extremely palatable.
Mabel was delighted when her visitor
praised her scones and preserves; in fact, he
praised everything, and cemented the good
impression that his entertainers had first
formed of him. When, after tea, they were
all gathered together sociably in the little
parlour, he recounted for them the stirring


events of history that had occurred within his
memory —everything, in fact, that he thought
might interest them.
He brought vividly before them the men and
women of his world and the manner of their
lives. He showed them, too—and here they
were greatly excited presentments of cities
with living, moving throngs; they heard"the
wonderful sounds of the streets, the voices of
living men and women —they saw the actual
doings of that busy life from which they were
excluded.
Then for Mabel’s special gratification he de-
scribed, so far as a man can, the present style
and materials of women’s dress, and he watched
the girl’s face glow; and in anticipation he
pictured that bright young face alight with
love and gratitude turned on the man who
placed within her reach the means of grati-
fying that very natural desire for dress, for
life, and love.
It was close on midnight when Mr, Howard
indulged in his fourth cigar, which he felt had
been justly earned. He puffed away in
silence for some moments and then he began
to wonder what the whispered colloquy
between the brothers meant, and whether it
bore any relation to domestic arrangements
concerned with their guest. Presently he saw


the younger brother leave the room and return
with a small, rather dirty, canvas bag, which
he deposited on the table, and then looked over
at him.
“Mr. Howard,” the young man somewhat
excitedly began, “our father was a mining
engineer in Australia, and later at the Cape,
where he lost most of his money in a diamond
venture. From there he went to California
and joined the expedition that was wrecked
on this island. Nearly all his spare time he
spent hunting after minerals, and the stones
in this bag he always said were similar to those
he had seen in their rough state at Kimberley.
Would you mind looking at them and advising
us?”
Mr. Howard looked grave. He saw the
excitement in their faces, and he plainly fore-
saw a disappointment. As he well knew (for
was he not the sleeping partner in the great
firm of Howard, Moreing & Co., gem mer-
chants, with agencies throughout the world),
many persons unacquainted with precious
stones were continually making collections
that afterwards turned out to be worthless, or
comparatively so; and, no doubt, this was a
case in point.
He rose from his seat, and, without re-
moving the cigar from his mouth, approached


the table, took up the bag, carefully untied it,
and then as carefully poured a portion of the
contents into a plate.
For a few moments he looked at the heap
of crystals in silence; then he took up first one
and then a second of the larger stones, and
with an instrument which he produced from
his pocket, subjected them to microscopic ex-
amination. And all the while his face was
impassive; but his thoughts ran as he sifted
others from the bag; “What a magnificent
collection! A king’s ransom!” Then he
turned to the eager and expectant faces
around him. “They are diamonds,” he said
quietly, “and many of them are of first quality!
Where were they found?”
“I can take you to the exact spot
to-morrow,” replied the younger brother.
On the morrow, accompanied by the two
young men, Homfray Howard proceeded to
the locality where the diamonds had been
found. There was a formation certainly, but
only a patch that had been completely worked
out, and probably owing to the peculiar con-
figuration of the country no others existed.
[Letter.]
Homfray Howard to John Travers, Bell’s Chambers, Pitt
_ Street, Sydney.
Dear Travers,
I once had flashed through my receiver an
Important and strictly private item of news not Intended


for my eyes; so In these days of tapping messages, when-
ever 1 wish to ensure privacy, and when the matter is not
urgent, I resort to the old-fashioned method of writing my
news, so this I send by a private aerial leaving Lava Island
to-day.
When I made the great discovery here, I had been, as
you know, orchid hunting in some islands to the north,
and seeing this small speck marked on my chart as a
barren and precipitous volcanic rock rising sheer from the
water, and dangerous to shipping owing to the trend of
the currents in the vicinity, I at once made up my mind,
though I can’t say exactly why, to look it up. In ap-
proaching it I saw that the chart description was correct,
but soaring above the rim of what I supposed to be an
extinct crater, you can imagine my surprise when far below
me I saw a central lake and wooded slopes overhung by
a steep escarpment.
At first I did not observe the clearings—for of course
I never dreamt of the place being inhabited —but when I
did, I knew at once I had made no ordinary discovery. I
have had, and still am receiving, a big sheaf of congratu-
lations, not only from friends, including yourself, but from
many outside persons of distinction in all parts of the
world. A good many visitors have called lately—among
them Price, who gave me your message. To satisfy your
curiosity as to the cause of my long detention here, I may
as well say at once that I am engaged to Miss Bdgecumbe.
Of course you know I am staying with them, and I won’t
weary you by a lengthy catalogue of the perfections of
the lady, for you will shortly be in a position to judge for
yourself, as the family intend settling in Sydney. Know-
ing my former —I will allow somewhat pronounced—views
on matrimony, I can picture your amazement at my en-
gagement; but wait a bit! Pay me a visit here before I
leave, and I will introduce you to a charming girl who
possibly may induce you also to change your views. She is
a Miss Hodges, the only surviving child of the original
Bostonian who promoted the New Arcadia settlement
wrecked here. He Is an eccentric but Interesting old
fellow, and he and I have frequent chats together. I am
given to understand that he has property and interests in


the United States, which no doubt he will have difficulty
In recovering, everything long since having passed into
other hands. Now, here is a chance for the employment
of your legal skill on behalf of the father, with frequent
opportunities of ingratiating yourself with the daughter,
though from sundry little observations I would back the
chances of my prospective younger brother-in-law, were
he to enter the lists against you. But pluck up heart, old
chap, for faint heart never won fair lady; so come along
with a clear field before you. Tell me if this prospect is
sufficiently enticing!
I start for home in a fortnight’s time, accompanied by
the younger of my prospective brothers-in-law, and we
shall probably take New Zealand on the way.
I see by the papers that 1 am credited with the dis-
covery of a huge quartz dyke traversing this island, with
payable gold prospects. It is quite true, and as my
interest in it as its discoverer will naturally be large, I
may have a proposal bearing on this to make to you on
my return—that is, if you don’t turn up here in the mean-
time. By the way. If your younger brother, George, is
still out of a billet, ask him to call on me on my return,
I may be able to put something good in his way, but par-
ticulars will keep until you and I have had our conference
together.


CHAPTER III.
Filmy mists were lifting and dissolving on the
Mils. The bright sunlight dancing and play-
ing on the water was reflecting countless
tremulous ripples on the banks and overhang-
ing foliage. It was a morning when Nature
seemed to be in her fairest mood. It was the
morning of the day that would witness the
departure of Alan Edgecumbe from Lava
Island.
The young man as he walked down that
zig-zag track leading to the boat-house where
was stored the frail craft in which now, perhaps
for the last time, he was to revisit old scenes
and nooks familiar from his boyhood, was
conscious of a strange feeling of exaltation.
Towering above Mm were cliff’s with steep
bare faces viewed through a tinted mist; below
were the wooded slopes so often climbed, and
before him was the sparkling sheet of water,
the scene of many sculling triumphs. In that
mood of exaltation that was upon him, never
had he thought his island home so beautiful
as now, and yet that day he knew he must
leave it, perhaps never to see it again.


Pushing off his boat, he pulled with strong
and steady strokes until he had passed several
small bays with white, sandy beaches, where
tourists’ tents and aerials stood; and he saw
that several of the occupants were amusing
themselves fishing and sailing in boats
borrowed from the settlers.
He presently turned his boat shoreward,
heading for a small cove on the further side
of a high, jutting, wooded promontory that
faced the entrance of the tunnel, through which
the late turbulent rush of the inflowing tide
was subsiding into a calm. He had intended
to land on the near side of this headland, hut
had observed an aerial there that by certain
familiar signs he judged was about to leave
the island.
He could not explain the feeling, but he
had an intense desire to be near that aerial,
though he knew the people were strangers to
him; like others, doubtless, on a visit of a day
or two, and now on the point of departure.
Yet the feeling was so overpowering that he
resolved to land on the further side of the
promontory, climb the hill at the back, and
then make the descent on this side, which would
take him directly past the aerial, so that he
might see to whom it belonged.
Rounding the point and pulling hard for


the shore, he presently ran his boat high upon
the narrow strip of beach, for it was full tide,
then tying the painter to a projecting tree
root, he plunged into the surrounding bush
and rapidly made his way up the hill, and
gaining the summit a little breathless from his
efforts, from thence through a narrow slit in
the foliage, looking down he saw that the aerial
was still there. And now, for the first time,
he faltered in his resolve to go down, for, if
the truth be told, he felt just a little ashamed
of himself. It was not in his nature to use
a subterfuge. “Why, then, had he not pulled
openly into the bay instead of sneaking round
and dropping upon these people from behind?”
he asked, regarding himself the while with
scorn. “It was not yet too late to turn back!
Should he do so?” It was a matter that was
not to be decided off hand, and for some
moments he stood irresolute.
“Mo, lie would not turn back!” he resolved
at length; “after all the trouble he had taken,
after coming so far, he would see the thing
through! Yes, he would go down! Why
not?” Again he peeped at the aerial below,
but without any satisfaction, for he saw no
one. And again and yet again irresolution
took possession of him.
“After all, was it worth while to go down?


If he did, what would probably happen? He
would, perhaps, see a couple of tourists, ex-
change good day with them, possibly have a
chat, and then he would have to walk all the
■way round the headland to get to his boat, and
this was an awkward matter at high tide, for
he would have to leave the beach and take a
roundabout track over steep scrubby knolls
and rocks more fit for goats than a human
being; and, besides, as he knew well, he would
have to take the risk of a slip, which would
land him in the water below.
“What folly was this that had come over
him to-day?” he asked of himself over and
over again. He was behaving more like an idiot
than a rational being, and yet at the same time
he had to confess to himself that never before
had he experienced so strange a sensation con-
nected with an aerial (and he had seen dozens
within the past week), “Yes, he must some-
how view it, and see who owned it!”
An uncontrollable impulse kept urging him
to go down, though he could not satisfactorily
explain to himself why he had the feeling; the
feeling was there, and that was all he knew.
At length, resolutely making up his mind, he
followed the beaten track that led down the
hill, and shortly after emerging from the dense
bush that clothed the slope and the small flat


at the bottom, he came suddenly upon the
aerial, also, upon a lady.
When first he saw her, she was stooping,
apparently in the act of strapping a rug, but,
hearing his footsteps, she straightened herself,
and their glances met.
As he raised his hat, but without stopping
to speak, for he was too shy and embarrassed
to do that, on the lady’s face came a look of
puzzled scrutiny and wonderment, as if, per-
chance, his features recalled some face for-
gotten.
He knew as he moved on that he had met
the one woman in the wide world, who, whether
she were for him or not, he would yet seek out,
and love and serve until the end of time.
Instinctively he felt that; and dimly present
too, in his mind, was the consciousness that
from henceforth the whole outlook of life for
him had changed—changed, too, by the mere
sight of a strange woman’s face.
“What was this overpowering emotion?” He
did not think of calling it love, yet he knew
all the same that if she were but to lift a finger
and say, “Come!” he would gladly follow her
to the end of the world. But a curious fancy
crept likewise into his brain, and he put this
question to himself: “Would he be ready at
her bidding to do some base deed?” And yet


in scorn he laughed aloud at the very thought.
Why, he would answer for her with his life.
Such a thought should never have entered his
head! It was the thought and the question of
a pessimist! He was not a pessimist! rather
the contrary! What then was he? He was
a dreamer! that and nothing more! His
brother John was a thousand times a better
man than he —for (scornfully)—John never
complained, although he did more than his
proper share of the farm work; while for him-
self, he hated farm work! He hated the
Island! He hated his life on it! And now his
whole life was centred on this woman whom
he had just passed, and who, had he been asked
to describe her, he would have remained silent,
for describe her he could not; yet she had
graven her image on his mind for ever.
And then, all in a moment, too, he realised
that he might never see her again. And he
vowed that, come what might, he would see
her again, yes, even had he to venture into the
bottomless pit in search of her.
There were possibilities hidden in the nature
of this young man that even he probably had
never as yet fully realised to himself.
When he reached his boat, unheeding a
bleeding cut on his ankle sustained through
slipping on a rock, he hurriedly pushed off.


jumped in, took up the sculls, and pulled
mighty strokes, only to find that, to his
vexation, his painter was still fast to the bank
a thing that had never happened to him
before. Muttering (was it a blessing on him-
self for his stupidity?), he remedied this, and
then once more stepping into his boat, he
sculled out so far into the fairway as would
enable him to look into that bay.
As he looked, he saw the aerial rise, at first
slowly, until it hadP attained a certain height
above the Island, then rapidly it started on its
flight to some unknown destination, and he
watched it until it had disappeared beyond the
Western cliffs. And though he did not know
her name, her nationality, nor where she lived,
he had an inward conviction that he and that
woman would meet again; something.told him
that they would. And he hugged this con-
solation to himself; yes, they would meet
again!
Fate plays curious pranks with mere mortals
at times; to some alloting long periods of a
dull monotony, when life is viewed as stagnant
and unprofitable; then possibly relenting, she
suddenly overwhelms them with stirring inci-
dent, pleasurable or painful as the case may
be, but always profitable.
Destiny held in her hands that morning two


interwoven threads of Alan Edgecumbe’s life,
and at the end of each thread was a woman;
contact with the one awakening in his nature
the strongest emotion of human life; a passion
at once the purest and the loftiest.
With his thoughts still following that un-
known woman in the aerial, the young Islander
turned for home. When within a mile of
Deepwater, happening to glance over his
shoulder, he saw lying directly in his track, and
not a hundred yards from him, a boat. A second
glance assured him that the occupant was a
woman, one sculling so carelessly along as to
suggest that she had no other purpose in view
than the enjoyment of a beautiful and balmy
morning, spent idling on the water —water so
transparent that in its calm depths you could
plainly descry objects on the white sandy
bottom.
He recognised the skiff, for it belonged to
a neighbour; and judging from a recent ex-
perience, the action of the lady excited just
a little suspicion in his mind as to her purpose.
For it was only yesterday that two fair oars-
women, with mischievous glances and smiles*and
by significant act, had provoked him to a con-
test, and accepting, with much apparent show of
effort, he had let them win. Only one woman,
however, could interest him to-day; he did not


feel inclined for further fooling, and if this
lady thought to repeat the tactics of yesterday,
she would —well, she would meet with a sur-
prise! For it was in his mind, now that he
suspected her, to pull steadily for a while until
he was almost abreast of her, then putting on
full speed, to fly past like a rocket, leaving the
bewildered young woman and her boat as if
stationary on the water. That was the sur-
prise that awaited this enterprising young
woman, and grimly he smiled to himself as
he thought of her discomfiture.
The lady on her part took no notice of him;
she quietly paddled along, until such time as
he had caught her up and was sculling his best;
then she, too, suddenly put out her full
strength, and neck and neck they raced for
perhaps three-quarters of a mile without ad-
vantage on either side, until finally, by a
supreme effort, by a short burst of speed, he
just managed to land a winner close to the
opposite bank by the narrow margin of less
than half a boat’s length. It was the hardest
race he had ever rowed in his life he, the
acknowledged champion sculler of the Island!
For a moment he rested on his sculls and
stared over at her, then aware of
the discourtesy, he lifted his hat. The lady
was backing water at the time, but noting his


action, she in her turn bowed, and that bow
seemed to say that she was pleased graciously
to accept this present defeat at his hands; then
with a parting smile, full of mockery, she un-
concernedly sculled out into mid-stream.
Glancing at the far shore where his friends
the Hodges lived, he saw that Mr. Hodges
and Mary had been interested spectators of the
struggle. He had spent the previous evening
at their house, so merely waving a parting
farewell, he turned and made for Deepwater.
*****
The shades of night drew on, and from his
elevated perch in Homfray Howard’s aerial,
Alan Edgecumbe saw Lava Island, like sea-
gull’s wing in distant view, fade and disappear.
All around was space; above him, one by one,
came out the starry orbs. Below was the
illimitable ocean. . . Alan Edgecumbe had
begun his journey towards that new world
which held his destiny.


CHAPTER IV.
Travelling at a high rate of speed, the
friction of the atmosphere against the bur-
nished body of the aerial made so appalling an
uproar that until he became accustomed to it,
Alan Edgecumbe had difficulty in understand-
ing what his companion said to him. Homfray
had frequently to shout. Then again, as from
time to time he glanced through the enveloping
metal transparency at the pall of night sur-
rounding them, it seemed to him that they were
racing with the stars bound to some unknown
destination; and once, what he judged to be
a bright meteor flashing by, Homfray said was
the searchlight of an aerial bound for Lava
Island. Ever before them was a brilliant
track of light created by their own.
About midnight Alan turned into his bunk,
but to sleep was impossible; his brain was in
a whirl of conflicting emotions as he rehearsed
again and again the strange experiences of the
day just closed! And as he lay back, listening
sometimes with almost bated breath, it seemed
that with the shrieking and moaning of the
atmosphere outside, voices were mingled' whis-
pering laments and warnings which, in some


mysterious way, he felt were connected with
his destiny, and fraught always with mys-
terious and romantic possibilities.
By nature, naturally emotional and imagina-
tive, the psychic element, always strong within
him, had full play that night. At last he
became lulled into a state of dreamy trance, in
which his whole life passed in review before
him. Once more he was a boy.
First appeared that dear mother, so gentle
and patient, to whom he had always flown with
his childish troubles. How plainly he saw her;
how well he recalled all her stratagems to lure
him to his lessons. Once (he could never forget
the incident) she told him, as a spur to his
ambition, “that some day when she took him
to a great country, a thousand times bigger
than their Island, she would be ashamed of
him; for all the little boys and girls would
point the finger of scorn at her and say: ‘There
is the woman with a little dunce of a boy!’ ”
This hurt his pride—the thought of little boys
and girls jeering at him.
From that time there was no need of further
stimulus, at least so far as reading was con-
cerned. Very soon “Jadk the Giant Killer,”
“The Arabian Nights,” “Robinson Crusoe,”
“Treasure Island,” and a host of other books
so fascinated his imagination, that frequently


he would steal out of the house, find some
secure nook, and there read on and on until
he forgot the whole world in the thrilling tale.
Often it would be dark when he would creep
home, peering behind bushes, and at every
step expecting strange adventures. Then his
mother would scold him for staying out so late.
What a time, too, that was, when he played
Robinson Crusoe, and stole away at daylight
with a loaf of bread, some cheese, a fishing
line, and a spear. He was away for two
whole days, and wasn’t he glad when they
found him. The life wasn’t half so grand
after all. To sleep on the cold ground, under
the shelter of a rock, fearing every moment
that a black man or a cannibal would seize and
fatten him up for a banquet was not so pleasant
an experience as he had anticipated. Some-
times, too, he would wake in the night and
think of his snug little bed at home, of his
mother coming into the room and kissing him
good night.
When he got home his mother didn’t even
scold him; and weren’t the hot scones and tea
nice after bread and cheese, with only cold
water to drink; for he didn’t spear any animals
or catch any fish, nor did he rescue a man
Friday to live with and serve him.
His mother asked him what he did all the


time, and when he told her, she glanced at ins
father, and they both smiled. That was his
first and last attempt at playing Robinson
Crusoe.
Sometimes when his father found him read-
ing by himself, he would smile, and pat him
on the head and say: “Well, my boy! well
never make a farmer of you!”
What a grand day, too, that was, pig hunt-
ing with Walter? Walter coaxed their mother
to let him go, and Rover soon bailed up a big
boar. It took them some time to get to it, for
they had to scramble up a steep ravine through
thick scrub and lawyer vines which tore his
clothes and scratched his face and hands.
After all, Walter’s gun missed fire. Then
came the excitement, for Walter, in getting
away from the pig, tripped on a log, and the
brute rushed at him. Rover got the boar by
the ear, and he ran up and drove his spear —
the one Walter made for him —into the boar’s
back, and left it sticking there, for the brute
turned on him, and it was as much as he could
do to jump aside, and had not Walter stuck
his knife into the boar’s ribs, he would have
been ripped. Walter said it was a narrow
escape. And when they dragged the boar
home in triumph, and their mother heard about
it, she scolded Walter, but did not scold him;


she only put her arms round him, and called
him her darling boy. But he mustn’t go pig
hunting again until he was older.
Another day, when he and Walter were fish-
ing close to the mouth of the tunnel, they saw
the fin of a great shark making straight for
the boat, and following them. He wanted to
spear it, but Walter said “No”; it would only
provoke the shark to attack the boat, so they
pulled for the shore as hard as they could, the
shark circling round them all the time. Once,
indeed, it dashed for the boat, but Walter
splashed with the paddles, and it drew off.
When they reached shallow water and were
safe, Walter said that he had known a shark
sweep a man out of a boat with his tail. They
did no more fishing that day.
Then how many years ago was it since his
father and Walter, with seven others, sailed
away never to be heard of again? It was nine
long years! Nearly everyone on the Island
had followed their boat to the mouth of the
tunnel, and the last he had seen of them was
Walter and his chum, Tom Hodges, waving
their hands to him. He would have gone, too,
had his father not called him aside one day and
said that he and John must look after mother
while he was away. But he never returned,
and their mother grew paler and feebler and


more silent day by day, until one night (it
seemed but yesterday, and yet it was four years
ago), she called him to her bed-side and said
she was going to father and Walter. Ever
since, he and John and Mabel had lived
together alone.
Many of the books he read —and he had read
every book in their library—inspired thoughts
of a wider life, and he had conceived a dislike
to the dull routine of farming. Frequently
he would climb the hills overlooking their home,
and for hours at a stretch would dream of a
possible new life.
And now his dreams were on the point of
being realised! He was at the portal of a new
life! He had left for ever the Island and a
life he detested!
Above all, he had seen the woman of his
dreams —he had looked into her face! She
was no illusion. She was a creature of flesh
and blood, who now dominated every thought
of his life. In this wider life opening out
before him he would find her.
And, comforting himself thus, he slumbered.
At nine o’clock that morning, in the far
distance, above a billowing sea of white mist,
loomed mountain peaks. In half an hour or
more the mist had dissolved, and for the first
time in his life, Alan Edgecumbe viewed a city


a large and picturesque city, lying at the
head of a noble gulf studded with islands.
Spread over a low isthmus, Auckland faced
two oceans, and pretty wooded volcanic cones
peeping up here and there throughout the city
and its environs, gave it a very charming ap-
pearance. Though in after years he wandered
in many a clime, yet he never saw a fairer city.
About four miles from Auckland, and
almost blocking the fairway of its inner har-
bour, rises the lofty volcanic island of Rangi-
toto, and it was here that Homfray proposed
to surprise an old college chum who was in
charge of the island. Utilised as a National
Park and Zoological Gardens, Rangitoto
Island contained within its mazy recesses of
low forest growth perhaps the finest collection
of wild animals in the Southern Hemisphere.
Hundreds of acres of jungle were entirely
devoted to the larger species of carnivora.
When the two travellers called at his resi-
dence, Homfray’s friend was absent on a day’s
leave. It was, perhaps, fortunate for Alan
Edgecumbe that the day was a holiday and
the island a favourite resort of the inhabitants
of Auckland, for it afforded him an oppor-
tunity of seeing and studying people in the
mass. Whereas, on Lava Island, as a matter
of course, visitors had been comparatively few.


and that only of late, and had belonged, as a
rule, to the wealthy and therefore leisured
class. Here all classes seemed intermingled,
and it struck him as peculiar that the average
woman, on the whole, was taller than the
average man. In all the histories he had read,
men had always been taller than women; and
it was so in his island. This new feature of
civilization he did not then, nor did he ever
comprehend.
Occasionally in the passing and repassing
throngs, he saw faces that, though strictly
speaking not handsome, he yet liked. There
was a fascination in the simplicity and dignity
of their bearing that impressed him and won
his respect. He felt sure they were noble and
cultured women whom it would be a pleasure
and an honour to know. And their clothes
seemed to be in harmony with and to form a
part of themselves!
The best and nicest women he met were
always simply dressed. In a crowd, though
their faces were strange, you could pick them
out by this simple mark of distinction. Others
he saw more richly dressed, but somehow they
were different!
Many of the faces, too, were decidedly
pretty, but were not otherwise highly attractive
to him, though if glances and smiles conveyed


anything, they conveyed the implication that
their fair owners would not be offended if he
accosted them.
An instinct of his nature, however, prompted
him to lightly regard women who held their
smiles and glances cheap, for he could not help
observing that they did the same with other
men.
As a matter of course he saw no one that
day who could be compared for one moment
with his unknown Princess!
And he glanced into many a fair face on
the chance of finding her.
A high wall, constructed of cemented lava
blocks, surrounded the tiger jungle, and,
above this, light trellis work, supported on
slender columns, penetrated the area from
several points, forming commanding positions
whence to view the animals in a wild state
below. The travellers from Lava Island
found their way here, but not seeing any of
the carnivora, they were about to turn away
and resume their journey when a friendly
visitor assured them that the feeding hour was
in twenty minutes time, when they would see
the tigers emerge from their hiding places.
It was a sultry morning, with thunder
threatening, and the sea breeze, heretofore
light, was momentarily increasing in force.
B


Presently an eddy came swirling through
the tree tops, caught a lady’s sunshade a
brilliant phantasy in red wrenched it from
her bewildered grasp, and sent it fluttering like
a gaudily plumaged bird across the area, finally
depositing it, a conspicuous object, in the
spreading branches of a pohutakawa tree,
covered with crimson blossoms, that grew about
one hundred yards from the platform.
No doubt the keepers, later on, would have
rescued the pretty gew-gaw and restored it to
its fair owner; but none happened to be about
at this particular juncture, and this was the
cause of Alan Edgecumbe embarking on a
foolish and dangerous enterprise.
Only a week before a man had fallen from
the platform and had been devoured by the
tigers; but Alan did not know this until after-
wards.
Some few of the visitors appeared im-
mensely amused at the spectacle of a lady
gazing blankly after a lost sunshade that had
sought affinity in a like colour to itself; but a
thrill of genuine excitement passed through
them when they saw a man clamber over the
railing and coolly proceed to slide down one
of the supporting columns.
It was the act of a madman, and a crowd
gathered as if by magic.


The moment he touched the ground, Alan
Edgecumbe knew that he had committed a
foolish act. He could not turn back for the
sufficient reason that the column was too
smooth for climbing up, and he had come down
much quicker than he expected.
He glanced quickly around him, and the
only tree of sufficient dimensions to afford
refuge from a marauding tiger was the
pohutakawa, and for this he at once started
at top speed. When he had covered about
forty yards of the intervening space, “Look
out for the tiger,” was shouted in many voices
from the platform. Turning his head to look
over his shoulder as he ran, he saw, to his
dismay, a huge tiger bounding in his track, and
not twenty yards from him.
“Quick! quick!” they cried, as if exclama-
tions could possibly hasten his movements.
“It’s too late!” some one frantically shouted.
Indeed, many of the spectators closed their
eyes to shut out what appeared to them inevit-
able —the spectacle of a brave man mangled
by a wild beast.
As he neared the tree, Alan Edgecumbe
knew that the brute was close upon him; he
even fancied he could feel its hot breath; so
without halting in his stride he made a de-
sperate leap into the thickest part of the
B 2


foliage, and fortunately struck a branch, to
which he clung for dear life.
The tiger made his spring almost at the same
moment, landed in the tree, missed his victim,
and came crashing through to the ground,
bringing upon himself a shower of branches
and twigs laden with bright flowers; while
from above, disturbed by the shaking of the
tree, came fluttering down the innocent cause
of all this commotion.
Homfray Howard all this time had been
watching his friend’s movements in breathless
suspense. It had all come about so quickly
that Alan was over the railing and sliding down
the column before he thought of remonstrating
or of taking action. And then, of course, it
was too late. The tiger would probably have
again attempted a spring, for his prey was in
sight and well within striking distance.
Fortunately assistance now arrived.
Several aerials, attracted to the scene, hailed
the crowd on the platform to inquire the cause
of the excitement. But before any of them
could act, a lady suddenly swooped down in
a splendidly equipped car which, after a little
skilful manoeuvring, she so placed that by a
moderate leap the young Islander could gain
safety.
By this daring act she endangered her own


life, for the tiger, diverted from his first
victim, was preparing to spring upon her.
“Quick, jump!” she cried imperiously, and in
an instant he was by her side, and up rose the
aerial.
Now that all danger was over, several
keepers appeared on the scene, but the baffled
tiger had slunk into an adjacent thicket. As
they grounded on the platform, Alan Edge-
cumbe stepped out. But when he was about
to express his gratitude to his preserver, to his
surprise, she bent towards him, and whispering,
“Alan Edgecumbe, you and I have met before,
and we shall meet again,” suddenly vanished
from his bewildered gaze amidst a host of
aerials that were circling round the platform.


CHAPTER V.
The aerial with the two friends sped on its
way across the Tasman Sea. Alan Edgecumbe
fell asleep and dreamed. He dreamt that he
was walking by the shores of a winding and
romantic stream, and with him was the lady of
the red sunshade.
They halted before a Park gate, and were
about to enter, when a light tap fell on his
shoulder, and turning to see who it was, a
charming face looked into his —the face of the
unknown woman who had rescued him from
that perilous position in the tree top, and whose
strange words at parting had so mystified him.
She was standing by the side of an aerial
which pointing to she desired him to enter.
What was he to do? One fair lady stood
within the Park gate, pouting; this other,
infinitely more charming and imperious,
claimed his presence elsewhere.
And then the fabric of his dream vanished.
He was now in a great pine forest, with
swirling snowdrifts impeding his every move-
ment, and wolves howling around him.
He could see them behind him, he could see
them on either side and in front of him, and


from dark recesses of the woods their eyes
glared at him.
He heard rifle shots ahead, and whipping up
his tired steed he suddenly came upon an open
space, where, on an upturned vehicle, he saw
a woman heroically defending her life against
a ravening horde that had dragged down and
were devouring the horses of her drosky.
Crack! crack! went his rifle. Crack! crack!
crack! and yet again. The great fanged
wolves upreared and fell around him.
The woman called to him for help, and
seizing a huntsman’s axe, he hewed his way
to her. He cleared a space around them. His
blade drank blood at every stroke. Soon
before his uplifted arm the cowardly pack re-
coiled.
And lo! it was his Princess who had called
to him.
Again the fabric of his dream vanished; he
woke with a start. Homfray was standing
over him, shouting “Wake up, Alan! wake up!
we are home!”
When he looked around him, it was night,
and yet not night, although a few pale stars
were shining overhead. Their aerial had
alighted in a garden, on a lawn of closely
clipped sw r ard.
In the space around were flower beds and


shrubs and gravelled walks. Facing and look-
ing down upon them, was a house with a
pillared portico, approached by a flight of
steps.
It was Idamount, Homfray’s home! Out-
side the enclosure of garden and house were
countless lights. On his ears fell the ceaseless
roar of a great city.
This was indeed civilisation!
Meanwhile two servants hurrying up busied
themselves carrying the luggage into the house.
“Come along, Alan!” cried Homfray at
length somewhat impatiently; and crossing the
lawn, the two friends mounted the steps
together and entered the house. A coloured
servant relieved Alan of his hand-bag, and pre-
ceding him along a passage, opened a door on
the right, which was his bedchamber. It was
a moderately large room, comfortably but not
luxuriously furnished, and was lighted from
the roof.
He hurried through his toilet, for he knew
how tired Homfray was, and then made his
way to the dining-room. This was a very
large and lofty room, with ceilings and walls
covered with frescoes and paintings. It was
lighted by two magnificent uranium glass
globes mounted on cupid pedestals of exquisite
design shedding a soft glow around. The


furniture was in harmony with the room, and
the table to which they speedily drew their
chairs was lavishly furnished with fruits and
flowers.
Whenever an order was given for a certain
dish, a Japanese attendant repeated it on one
of several metal buttons studding the rim of a
small table set in a recess; and when the dish
made its appearance, it did so exactly in the
centre —the table itself being shaped and
coloured to represent an open pearl shell.
Rising from table at the conclusion of the
meal, as the evening was still young, Homfray
Howard, mindful of the natural desire of his
companion to see something of the city, said,
as he stretched out his arms to their full extent
and gave vent to a huge yawn (for he was very
tired and sleepy, poor fellow): “If you care
to take a run into town for an hour or two,
Ulu here” (indicating a Japanese attendant)
“can go with you. lam too dog-tired myself!
but you can’t lose yourself, for the trams run
everywhere. The one at the back of the house
runs every five minutes. All you’ve got to do
is to look at the notice boards; every tram has
one showing its destination. So put on your
hat and I’ll go with you as far as the street.”
Alan disliked the idea of a servant accom-
panying him as if he were a child needing


guidance, besides to go alone would be more
in the nature of an adventure.
“If you don’t mind, Homfray, I’d rather
go by myself,” he answered. “All right, old
fellow, please yourself,” assented his friend,
and making their way through the house,
Homfray opened a door at the back, and a
tram approaching, he saw Alan safely in and
away. “Don’t be late,” was his parting ad-
monition, to which Alan responded by a wave
of the hand.
As he turned into his bed to enjoy a well-
earned rest, Homfray Howard experienced a
slight qualm of uneasiness as he thought of
his inexperienced friend wandering alone about
the city. There were parts, as he well knew,
into which if a stranger ventured after dark
the odds were that he wouldn’t get out without
trouble. “It’s scarcely likely he’d get into any
of those places,” he muttered drowsily to him-
self, as he adjusted his head to the pillow. “But
then, he’s such an impulsive and romantic
beggar! However, it can’t be helped now. I
suppose he’ll turn up all right!” and consoling
himself with this reflection, Homfray Howard
fell asleep.
What were the sensations of the young
Islander as, swiftly borne into the heart of
this great city, he viewed its vastness, its


teeming life, its complexity and yet its
beautiful adjustment of traffic, radiating
everywhere, and ceaselessly whirling thousands
of human lives to unknown destinations?
“This is a world in itself,” he thought,
getting down from the car and walking on
and on through seemingly never-ending streets.
The streets were crowded, yet not one in all
the crowd regarded or paid the slightest
attention to him.
Yes, once or twice bold-faced women smiled
and would have accosted him, but though he
had never seen such women before, he had read
of them; and soon he was able to decipher such
faces in a crowd, for an index was plainly
written on each.
At a late hour of that night he wandered
into a Park, and curious to read the inscrip-
tion on the granite plinth of a weather-beaten
statue, he stopped for a moment in front of it;
and he found that the statue had been erected
during the previous century in honour of
the illustrious navigator. Captain James Cook.
“But for that man,” he thought, as he moved
on, not caring whence or in what direction he
strayed, “this great land of Australia would
now be a French possession.”
“What would have happened to me in that
case?


“Should I be in existence at all?”
And there stirred in his brain thoughts that
have taxed the minds of unnumbered millions
before him: “The mystery of human life.”
Coming to a secluded part of what he took
to be the Public Gardens, he sat down, with
lights gleaming through the trees in front of
him on the water of a beautiful cove of the
harbour.
“All rational beings,” he mused, “are agreed
upon one point: that our bodies are only shells
of matter, the constituent elements of which
are unstable, and have belonged to other bodies
in the past; that it is the invisible Ego, the
Self, the Directing Intelligence, the Thinker
that is the real person. Then, as the real
person is never seen, it follows that the
Invisible-is the Real. But why, as invisible
beings do we inhabit these shells of matter?
and why do we quit them at such short notice?
“The span of a single life in Time,” he
thought, “can scarcely bear the same relative
position that a grain of sand does to a sea
beach.
“We must reason from the visible to compre-
hend the invisible.
“Then, what great law do we find in uni-
versal operation in the evolution of life and
form throughout the universe?


“Do we not find the Law of Sacrifice im-
posed everywhere, and on all things? Life
leaves the lower perishing form only to take
birth in the higher. The mineral is disinte-
grated and sacrificed to the vegetable, which
incorporates the nutritive constituents into its
own substance—a sacrifice.
“The vegetable, in its turn, is sacrificed to
the animal, that it may build up its body; and
at the apex of the animal kingdom we find
Man developing ‘self-consciousness.’
“Man, the Vice-regent of the Logos upon
Earth, responsible for its good government
and order.
“What, then, is Man to sacrifice? Man, that
apex of the sacrifice of a world?
“He must sacrifice the transient to the per-
manent, his lower animal nature to the higher
spiritual nature —that spark of the Divine
within him that confers Immortality.
“For it is by sacrifice alone, by self denial,
by keeping our ideals pure, that we can hope to
mount the ladder that is stretched down to us.
“The beautiful words of Carlyle recurred to
his mind: ‘lt is only with renunciation that life
properly speaking can be said to begin. . .
There is in Man something higher than love of
happiness. He can do without happiness, and
instead have blessedness.’


“Might it not be,” he thought, “that in the
great scheme of Evolution (the evolving and
perfecting of a Universe) we, child-souls or
spirits—the children of a Great Mind —are
the outbreathing of a sacrifice?
“And as child-souls awaiting development,
it is first necessary for us to gain knowledge
and wisdom on the lowest plane of dense matter
—our Earth —(the Universe being the veil of
Manifestation of the Logos) by contact with
matter in body after body, assimilating the
experiences drawn from each closed earth-life,
and thus gradually acquiring a knowledge of
higher planes of existence.
“Man in becoming self-conscious becomes
conscious as well of a discriminating free-will;
he can by his own choice either hasten or retard
his evolution. Retard it by allowing the lower
animal nature to prevail over the higher and
more spiritual part of him (that spark of the
Divine within him that is always seeking to
uplift).
“As we are,” he reasoned, “we are incom-
plete; and in no one life can a man rid himself
of all his faults. He can see others so far
ahead of him in goodness and wisdom that
with his present faculties he knows it will be
impossible for him to overtake them in one
lifetime; and doubtless many an erring and


despairing creature sinks lower in conse-
quence.
“Death of itself is the greatest of earth’s
illusions. There is no such thing as death.
That which we call death is but a change in
life’s condition, a birth into a wider life, an
escape from a prison house. Death, which is
merely an incident in life, cannot alter a man’s
mental and moral character. That must be
carried on with him to the next stage of re-
birth, wherever that may be. Why not re-
birth to a world where the Ego has not
mastered all life’s conditions; for in a single life
no child-soul can acquire all the knowledge and
wisdom that this earth can teach. It would
take many repeated lifetimes to fit it to lead
an entirely spiritual life.
“And would it not be an absurdity to sup-
pose that the Directing Mind of the Universe
—whose children we are, whose chastisements
(our bitter experiences) at some period or
other of our lives we must all admit are salu-
tary, Who has implanted within us these high
ideals, the forerunner of a Higher Wisdom —
should cry halt to incompleteness? Impossible!
Unthinkable!”
As silent and absorbed in thought, Alan
Edgecumbe sat in that beautiful Australian
garden at the midnight hour of this his first


night in civilisation, suddenly a cry for help
rang out on the stillness of the night.
For the moment, startled and uncertain what
to do, he looked about him. Then, with the
knowledge that a human life might be at stake,
he sprang to his feet and ran at full speed in
the direction of the cry, until he neared a palm
grove, where, on a narrow by-path, he saw four
men seemingly engaged in a life and death
struggle, while a fifth man apparently looked
on.
When he appeared on the scene, this man
swiftly advanced to intercept him; and as they
met struck what no doubt he intended to be a
crushing and decisive blow. Fortunately for
Alan, he saw the blow coming, and turning
quickly the blow missed him; then closing with
his assailant he struck him with the full force
of his right arm, delivering the blow just under
the jaw where it joins the neck. The man fell
like a log.
Two of the others now made for him, one
some distance in advance of his comrade.
Closing with the leader, and having the ad-
vantage of reach, Alan Edgecumbe suddenly
caught him by the throat and forced him back;
then, half lifting, half dragging him, ran full
tilt at his companion.
The force of the impact was terrific; both


men staggered for a moment and then dropped
heavily to the ground, and there they stayed.
The fourth man, seeing how matters fared
with his companions, at once took to his heels,
leaving the victim of the outrage on the
ground.
Alan helped him to his feet and inquired if
he were hurt. “No,” he answered, in a half-
dazed voice; and muttering, “The scoundrels
tried to rob me,” he wanted at once to summon
the police. But Alan said “No, let them
alone; they’ve had their lesson already.” And
taking the stranger by the arm, he hurried him
away.
As they moved off, he saw that two of his
late assailants were showing signs of coming
to, so he felt no manner of concern on their
account; judging that probably in a short time
they would get up and scurry off.
The stranger whom he had rescued from the
footpads was a very tall spare man, with a
foreign accent, and as he judged, from sixty
to sixty-five years of age.
He thanked his rescuer most feelingly for
the service he had rendered him, which he said
he would never forget; and, to Alan Edge-
cumbe’s surprise, he gave his name as Admiral
Hung Chang, Commander-in-Chief of the
Chinese fleet, the lights of which, as they


mounted the slope of the gardens, he pointed
out shining not far off in the harbour.
Admiral Hung Chang did not part from his
companion until he had exacted a promise that
he would pay him a visit on the following
morning, when a launch would be at the
man-o’-war steps to convey him to the flagship.


CHAPTER VI.
Alan did not again see Homfray that night,
but at the breakfast table next morning he
recounted his fight with the garotters and his
rescue of Admiral Hung Chang from their
clutches.
“Well, Alan,” said Homfray, shaking his
head, but breaking into a smile as he looked
into his friend’s rather serious face, “you
certainly have a happy knack of meeting with
adventures; the marvel to me is, how you
manage to come out of them so well; any other
man in your place would have had his head
cracked or worse last night, for these gentry
are not particular as to their manner of hitting
a man. Yes, by all means keep your appoint-
ment with Admiral Hung Chang. He is a
most distinguished man. You will have a very
good friend in him. What time did you say
your appointment was for?”
“Ten. Well, that will suit me very well. I
shall be very busy this morning, but to-morrow
we’ll have a good look round together. You’ll
enjoy your morning with the Admiral, I
haven’t the slightest doubt of that, and I
shan’t expect you home to lunch.”


Alan decided on this occasion that it would
be more pleasant to walk than to take the tram;
and indeed he found the walk most interesting.
Everything appeared different from last
night. The crowds were bigger, the buildings
wore n£w aspects, and here and there he had
lovely peeps of the harbour. It was the most
interesting walk, barring that of last night,
that he had ever had in his life. At every
step he. took there was something fresh to be
seen, and by making an occasional inquiry of
a passer-by, he readily found his way.
He arrived at the man-o’-war steps some
minutes before the appointed time; and he was
pleased that he had, for before him was pre-
sented the grandest spectacle he had ever
looked upon. It seemed to him that the entire
water space, from shore to shore, was taken up
with war vessels, flying the flags of different
nationalities.
His heart awoke to a new emotion, and
swelled with pride of race, when, for the first
time, he saw the dear old Union Jack flying
from the ships of the nearest war fleet.
That flag recalled Nelson and the heroes of
the past, and the dear old Motherland
England, the cradle of his race, of which he
had so often dreamt —the little islet set amidst
foggy seas that colonists call Home. And


was not he, too, a part of the Great Empire
of which that flag was the emblem!
Presently a small speck detached itself
from the maze of vessels, and as it neared, he
saw the Dragon flag of China drooping from
the stern. The launch ran into a small cove
or recess at his feet where steps led down to
the water. The boat bumped, the men stood
at attention, an officer jumped out, ran up the
steps, and, saluting him, inquired if he were
Mr. Edgecumbe; and on his replying in the
affirmative, courteously informed him that the
launch was at his service to take him to the
flagship.
They chatted for some moments, then,
stepping on board, away sped the launch.
It w r as an inspiriting sight as they raced
along, to view' ship after ship, all armed with
heavy guns pointing in every direction, until
they reached the Chinese fleet, when the launch
eased off speed and presently glided to the side
of a magnificent battleship, the Yan-foo, the
flagship of Admiral Hung Chang. She was
the most formidable looking and the largest
war vessel he had yet seen, with the exception
of one, and that flew the “Stars and Stripes,”
he remembered seeing and admiring it as they
passed through the American fleet.
The gangway of the Yan-foo was down; he


was received by an officer at the side, who
courteously apologised for not taking him at
once to the Admiral, who, he explained, was at
that moment engaged on important despatches
that required his immediate attention; but
begged him in the meantime to inspect the
ship.
Accompanying this officer, Alan Edge-
cumbe was greatly interested in all he saw.
The ease and celerity with which the great
guns were moved and pointed in any desired
direction appeared to him to border on the
marvellous.
He was introduced to several officers, and
he found them both agreeable and highly
intelligent. They seemed to take the greatest
pride in their ship and their profession, and
most of them spoke very good English; but
the main thing that struck him was their thinly-
veiled hostility to the Americans. “They liked
the English,” they said, “but the Americans —
they hoped he didn’t like them!”
An officer presently appeared, and, saluting,
said that the Admiral was now disengaged, if
he would be pleased to follow him. He was
ushered into a state cabin, and the door was
closed behind him.
At a table littered with papers sat the man
whose acquaintance he had made in so strange


a fashion the previous night. He was in
uniform, and looked every inch an Admiral.
“Welcome, most welcome! Mr. Edgecumbe,”
cried Admiral Hung Chang, starting up from
his chair and reaching out both hands to Alan.
“I am indeed delighted to see you! Pray be
seated!” and he almost forced him into a chair.
“I was indeed sorry not to see you before,” the
Admiral explained, “but one’s country’s
business, you know, Mr. Edgecumbe you
understand!”
He touched an electric bell and a servant
entered with a tray. “You will have a glass
of wine with me,” said the Admiral, as the man
opened a bottle of champagne and filled two
peculiarly-shaped glasses with the sparkling
and effervescing liquor.
As they drank their wine together, Admiral
Hung Chang intimated that he would like to
hear something of his young friend’s history.
“I am very much interested in you, Mr.
Edgecumbe,” said the Admiral earnestly, “not
altogether for the service you rendered me last
night, but, apart from that, I have conceived a
great and sudden liking for you.” He listened
with deep and absorbed attention whilst Alan
modestly gave a brief resume of his life.
“Ah! so you do not belong to Australia,
then,” he cried half jubilantly. “You will be


my son, Mr. Edgecumbe? See, that was my
son!” and he opened out and handed him a
miniature. It was the portrait of a fine-look-
ing young man in Chinese naval uniform.
“He is dead,” said the Admiral, in a low voice,
and a great sadness came into his face. “I
am alone in the world, Mr. Edgecumbe. I
will tell you all some day”; and Admiral Hung
Chang covered his face with his hands, for the
recollection of his loss had for the moment
unnerved him.
Alan Edgecumbe felt that he was placed
in an awkward position. The Admiral was
evidently sincere in his offer; and he was
pondering how best he might convey a refusal
without hurting his feelings, when a notifica-
tion by voice-tube “that important and urgent
despatches required the Admiral’s instant
attention,” gave him the opportunity of rising
to take his leave without committing himself
in any way.
“Good-bye, Mr. Edgecumbe,” said Admiral
Hung Chang with visible emotion. “Yet, no,
it is not good-bye. You will come and see me
again. You must promise that; and you will
think over what I have said”; and he pressed
a jewel case into his visitor’s hand. “It is an
heirloom of my family, Mr. Edgecumbe; you
will accept it for my sake.”


He pressed a button; an officer appeared,
saluted, and then accompanied Alan Edge-
cumbe to the launch. Again they passed
through those formidable lines of battleships
and cruisers; and as he looked up and scanned
each individual ship, he thought, “What a mag-
nificent sight a great naval battle must be”;
and little did he dream when they came op-
posite to the stately Massachusetts , the flagship
of the American fleet, that within the brief
space of a few months, she and the Yan-foo,
after engaging in mortal combat, would both
be reposing on the bed of the ocean.
In a few minutes he was landed on the steps;
the officer saluted, away flew the launch, and
he stood there watching it until it was lost to
sight.
Then, following the curve of the shore, he
presently found himself in the Botanic
Gardens. “What a beautiful place,” he
thought, looking about him, “and I have the
day all to myself.” He wandered along the
winding paths, noting rare trees and plants.
Sometimes he crossed green swards, decked
with statues and fountains, and parterres of
flowers in figured patterns, and ponds where
aquatic birds preened themselves.
Everywhere in this fairest of gardens were
well-dressed and for the most part happy


looking people, who seemed not to have a care.
Once, indeed, he saw a face that painfully im-
pressed him. It seemed to him that behind
that mask of face, a tragedy lay concealed —
that the man as he saw him was probably
oblivious of his present surroundings, walking
as it were in a dream.
In later years Alan Edgecumbe realised that
every life has more or less its background of
tragedy.
And sometimes he dropped haphazard upon
lovers. At his approach, the man would drop
his arm from the girl’s waist, or drop her hand
if he held it. That was how he knew they were
lovers.
And again he would see others converge
from different points, and meet, and meet
without surprise. It was quite a pleasant dis-
traction to come suddenly upon them, without
appearing to see them.
Then all at once he saw the very seat he had
occupied last night; and—yes, “that was the
palm grove, and this the path, and here the very
spot where he had encountered the garotters.”
But no longer was it the scene of a life and
death struggle, for standing there in pathetic
attitude was a little girl, weeping and
forlorn. She was the first child he had seen
that day who was not daintily clad and happy


faced. Indeed it is doubtful if a pawnbroker
would have advanced a shilling on her clothing.
Advancing, he asked, “What is the matter,
little girl?” She looked up into his face, and
reassured by what she saw there, half sobhingly
replied: “Janey run away, and I can’t find the
wishing tree.”
“Janey run away, and you can’t find the
wishing tree,” he repeated, soothingly. “Well,
don’t cry, and we’ll see if we can’t find Janey
and the wishing tree.”
She allowed him to take her hand; but they
did not long prosecute their search, for he saw
a refreshment kiosk, and they turned into that.
He and Molly sat down together at a little
table. “Now, Molly,” he urged, “have a good
look round; you can have anything you
like,” and he anticipated some pleasure in
watching Molly’s performance—for himself he
had a cup of tea and a sandwich.
Molly used discrimination in her choice of a
feast. She was not easily pleased. She had
her fancies. She knew this coloured dainty
from that, and what was fresh and nicest. She
did not take what was pressed on her, but chose
for herself. Feasts, alas! do not last for ever;
even Molly was at length satisfied, and as he
paid the charge, he asked the lady: “Is there a
wishing tree?” “Oh, yes,” said she, smilingly.


as she looked from the well-dressed man to the
shabbily clad little girl by his side. “If you
follow that path it will take you there; it’s not
far away.” Possibly she may have wondered
at their relationship; probably she hazarded a
correct guess. At all events she stood and
watched them until other customers claimed her
attention.
At last Alan Edgecumbe and Molly found
the wishing tree a magnificent specimen of
the pine family, of great height and of
enormous girth. Around it was a circular
track, worn by the feet of devotees and
probably of doubters as well. It so happened
that none were about when they reached it.
“Now, Molly,” said he, “there’s your wishing
tree. Why don’t you wish?” “You must go
round three times,” replied little Molly,
nodding her head at him to emphasise her
statement.
“I suppose, Molly, I can come with you and
have a wish, too?” “You must come,” said
Molly, tightening her grip of his hand by fore-
closing on it with her other. Molly did not
intend that he should lose her.
They walked round once; they walked round
twice; and the third time, he wished and Molly
wished.
“Now, Molly,” he said, when they had


finished the third round, “What did you wish?”
He did not tell her what he wished. “I wished
what you wished,” said innocent Molly.
“But that can’t be, Molly,” he said, shaking
his head at her, and trying to frown, but only
making Molly laugh the more. “You don’t
know what I wished.” “I wish come true what
you wish,” Molly explained, again nodding her
head and smiling up at him. “I trust your
wish will bring me good luck, Molly,” and there
was an inflection in his voice which Molly
caught, for she looked sharply up into his face.
And though she made no wish for herself,
Molly never had cause to regret that act of self
sacrifice for her friend.
It was not long after that when they found
Janey, and Janey was very pleasingly engaged.
Before Alan Edgecumbe said “good-bye” to
Molly, he wrote on a slip of paper his name
and address. “This is where I live, Molly,” he
said, giving it to her, “and I want you to come
and see me very soon.” Molly, of course,
gladly promised to come, and then with a silver
coin as well as the paper in her hand, she ran
off to tell Janey her great news.


CHAPTER VII.
Homfeay was out when Alan returned to
Idamount, but had left word that he would be
back by six.
It was a scorchingly hot afternoon, without
the usual sea breeze, and Alan felt tired and
languid through the excessive heat. First of
all he had an iced drink, and then he went out
into the garden and threw himself full length
on the grass under a tree.
After a short period of luxurious rest, with
his face upturned to the sky he began to
curiously watch through the openings in the
branches for the occasional aerials that came
sailing by; and suddenly the thought suggested
itself: “How cool and pleasant it must be up
there.” With him, to think was generally to
act, where to act was possible.
So borrowing Homfray’s aerial,, it was not
long before he was aloft, enjoying a lighter
and cooler atmosphere, bracing alike to body
and mind. It was simply delightful after the
close muggy heat below. And not the least
part of his enjoyment was the mingling with
his fellow creatures, for as the afternoon


advanced, there were constant accessions to the
ranks of aerials. Many a bright face flitting
by him made him think of his unknown
Princess, and of the possibility of finding her.
“She must be somewhere,” he thought;
“possibly she may he near me at the present
moment”; for had he not watched her aerial
leave Lava Island, and take a direction that,
if continued, would most certainly land her
somewhere in Australia.
What more probable than that her home was
in a big city like Sydney. In any case he
would search for her, and he would never re-
linquish that search, even should it carry him
to the other end of the world.
When John and Mabel came over and were
thoroughly settled down, that would release
him, and then he would start a real hunt for
her. “She was somewhere, and that some-
where he had to find.”
Presently he became interested in watching
several aeronauts practising difficult and com-
plicated manoeuvres—one, figure cutting, at
length so took his fancy, that, somewhat rashly
no doubt, he resolved to try his prentice hand
at the game. He did not consider himself
altogether a novice. He had had occasional
lessons from Homfray on Lava Island, but he
knew that only by constant and steady practice


could he hope to emulate the confidence and
skill that these men possessed.
He made a start. At first, in the simpler
figures, he was successful beyond his anticipa-
tions; then growing bolder, he ventured on a
more intricate movement. And this, but for
his proverbial good luck, had well nigh
brought disaster on himself and on others as
well.
At a critical moment, suddenly he had to
give way to an aerial so erratically steered that
it led him afterwards to think the man must
have been under a vinous influence. But at
that moment there was no time to think, for
swerving to his right at a very sharp angle,
before he could check the speed of his car, he
was within an ace of crashing into an aerial in
which two ladies and a gentleman were seated.
In skimming past them, the man jumped to
his feet, and then as suddenly sat down again.
In that brief glance Alan caught of them, he
saw that the man’s face was white as death,
that he was simply paralysed with fear; and
the man, too, knew that his terror had been
observed. He particularly noticed the man
because he was on the side nearest to him, but
having all his work cut out to avoid a collision,
he just noticed that there were ladies in the
car as well, and that w r as all.


So soon as he could turn, he brought his car
parallel with theirs; and they, probably judg-
ing by his action that he wished to speak and
offer an explanation, slackened the speed of
their aerial, so that the two cars were presently
floating side by side.
“I am very sorry, ladies, that I alarmed you,”
he said, apologetically, lifting his hat and bow-
ing low to them. “I trust you will accept my
apology; I assure you it was quite an accident.”
The man glared at him for a moment, then
sneered in his face, and abruptly turned to
address a remark to one of the ladies. Alan
caught the name—“ Miss Colonna”—but that
was all, though he divined that the remark was
uncomplimentary to himself.
For their part, the ladies, however, paid not
the slightest attention to their companion. They
had evidently quite recovered from their fright,
and both smilingly acknowledged the bow of
the stranger.
“We knew it was an accident,” said the lady
to whom the uncomplimentary remark had been
addressed, “for I saw the man get in your way,
Mr. Edgecumbe.”
He did not think it strange at the time that
she knew his name. Afterwards he wondered
how she knew it, and though he wondered, yet
he was none the less pleased,
c


His apology and explanation being so
courteously accepted by the ladies (the man
for his discourtesy he simply' ignored), Alan
Edgecumbe judged that he had sufficiently in-
truded. “You are very generous, ladies,” he
said, lifting his hat and preparing to turn away.
His how was most graciously returned, hut
a scowl still puckered the brow of the man.
He had made an enemy of that man, he knew,
but he didn’t care a snap; why should he?
What mattered anything now? he had found
his unknown Princess; she it was who had ad-
dressed him by name.
* * * * *
It was in the smoking-room that night, and
he had replied to several of Homfray’s in-
quiries regarding his visit to the Chinese flag-
ship and his interview with Admiral Hung
Chang.
“Do you know a Miss Colonna, Homfray?”
he suddenly broke in at the close of a remark
made by his companion.
He spoke lightly, and as if the inquiry were
of no special importance. If he thought to
deceive Homfray, he failed, for that astute
person felt at once suspicious. “What,” he
wondered, “is he up to now? I shouldn’t he sur-
prised if he has fallen in love; but where can he
have met the lady?”


“Do I know a Miss Colonna?” he repeated,
thoughtfully blowing a ring of smoke toward
the ceiling. And then, after a pause, “Why
do you ask?”
To avoid an explanation was impossible, so
Alan related the incident of the afternoon, but
did not deem it at all necessary to inform
Homfray that he had previously seen Miss
Colonna on Lava Island.
Homfray Howard placidly smoked as he
listened. “Now that you recall the name
Colonna,” he began, “I remember many years
back, when I was a very young man, hearing
a romantic story in connection with Miss
Colonna’s mother. She was a beauty and an
heiress; I think she is dead now. Of course
she had many admirers. Among the most
favoured of her suitors were a Captain Grey
and the present Mr. Colonna.
“So far as I remember, they fought a duel
over her, and Grey wounded Colonna in the
right forearm; whereupon the plucky fellow
shifted his sword to his left hand, and Grey,
magnanimously doing the same, Colonna met
with a second reverse.
“Now comes the strangest part of the story.
The lady, contrary to precedent in such cases,
chose the defeated and wounded suitor for a
husband, although Grey had previously been
considered the more favoured of the two.
Cl


“Grey and Colonna have maintained an un-
broken friendship ever since, and Grey at the
present time is the Admiral of the American
squadron in these waters, and his flagship, The
Massachusetts, is one of two vessels about
which much newspaper controversy is taking
place just now. She is certainly a very fine
battleship, but many experts maintain that the
Yan-f 00, which you visited this morning, is her
superior in armament and protection, if not in
speed.
“To return to Miss Colonna: I know her by
sight, and that is all. The man with her, from
your description, must be Piper, a millionaire,
whose name generally heads most of the
‘Charity Subscription Lists.’ I know the man
slightly, but from one or two little things I’ve
heard about him, I should not feel honoured by
a nearer acquaintance. Miss Colonna, by the
way, has a brother—a great crony of Piper’s
—which may account for the millionaire being
so frequently seen in her society. If you’re
struck in that quarter, Alan, I wouldn’t give
much for your chances, for they’re very swell
people, the Colonnas; and besides you’re not
likely to meet her again.”
With this preliminary caution, the conversa-
tion came round to Molly; and on Alan stating
that he would be responsible for her education


and a start in life, Homfray said he knew a
lady interested in waif children, and that he
would consult with her and let him know what
she considered best to be done in the case.
[Letter.]
Alan Edgecumbe to John Edgecombe, Lava Island.
Dear old Jack,
I am in Homfray’s library and have just laid down
a magazine and taken up a pen, and now am leaning back
in my chair thinking of what I can say to you. No doubt,
you may think it an easy matter for me, after being here
a week to-night, to write a long letter giving plenty of
news. I don’t find it so. I have plenty of news, of a sort,
to send you, but I haven’t the faintest idea how to begin.
. . . Stop! Jack, you have given me an idea! I can hear
you say: “Well, why not make a start from the beginning
of your journey—from the time you left here!” You are
right, so here goes!
Well, that first night was a long night to both of us;
Homfray, poor beggar, never had the chance to sleep,
although I offered my valuable services. He declined with
thanks, and said that at the high rate of speed we were
travelling, and on so dark a night, with the off chance, too,
of meeting an aerial bound for Lava Island, the risk was
too great
Indeed, we did meet an aerial, although to me it seemed
more like a shooting star than anything else. Of course, it
was their search light we saw, and ours must have presented
Just such an appearance to them. Bear in mind too, that
all this time we were almost hermetically sealed inside the
car with not a breath of fresh air, and the uproar going on
outside was dreadful, so it was scarcely surprising that I
did not get a wink of sleep. We had to shout whenever
we wished to speak to each other. Had we opened the top
at the terrific pace we were going, we should have had our
heads blown off, or our heads would have lost us (which-
ever way yon like)!
lean hear you say: “Stop your confounded fooling, Alan!
You’re only humbugging, so as to make your sentence


stretch over an entire page, and this you call news.”
Why, you must know, Jack, this is the art of modern
letter writing, and surely you won’t begrudge me being In
the fashion.
And now about the noise outside! So terrific was it, that
you could fancy all the demons in the universe were let
loose, and in impotent rage, because they couldn’t get at
us, were moaning a sort of dirge, telling what was to
happen to us later. It was most uncanny, I can assure
you, but you will know all about it when your tom comes
to cross, and then you’ll think of my description. Our
Willy Willys, when a howling north-westerly is blowing
down that wooded gorge at the back of the house, are a
fool to it
Well, we sighted New Zealand about 9 o’clock next
morning, and you can imagine how pleased 1 was when
Homfray slackened off speed, and we were able to get a
whiff of fresh air and a look round. We had a good view
of Auckland, which looks a beautiful place, for although
we didn’t call there, it was not more than a mile or so
away, and later when we resumed our journey to Sydney
we passed directly over it.
Naturally, I was disappointed that we didn’t call there,
for we dropped on to an island at the mouth of the harbour
where Homfray expected to see an old friend. However,
he was not in when we called. I shall never forget our
visit to Rangitoto Island, for according to Homfray, I made
a jackass of myself, and I’m afraid I did. It happened in
this way:
There are very fine zoological gardens with tigers
running about in a wild state. You look down upon them
from overhead platforms, and it was while Homfray and I
were standing on one of these, with not a brute visible
anywhere, that a lady’s sunshade blew away, and, like a
fool, I got down to get it for her.
It was sticking in a tree about a hundred yards from
where I got down, and it was only when I got down that
I thought about the tigers. You can guess that I made a
quick bolt for that tree, the only one, as It happened, that
would answer my purpose in case of need.
I never ran faster in my life, I know, and never shall


again. How would you have felt, Jack, had you looked
over your shoulder, as I did, with only about a quarter of
the distance covered, and caught sight of a huge brute of
a tiger (as big as our red poley heifer), making for you at
full speed, and gaining on you at every stride? I was not
exactly frightened, though I can scarcely describe how I
felt. Every nerve seemed to be braced to meet the danger.
I felt that I was racing with death, and that I “would do
my best to win.
It was a near thing, too, for with that lovely creature at
my heels, I just managed to jump into the lower branches
of the tree in time. The tiger sprang after me, smashed
the branches right and left, but fortunately missed me. It
was a stroke of good luck that I shouldn’t care to take the
chance of repeating.
The tiger, now that I have time to think and reflect over
the matter, wore a disappointed look, particularly about the
lower Jaw, that Is, after he had missed me and had come
with a sort of somersault on the ground, for though I am
not what you might call fat, he didn’t know that
While the tiger was speculating whether he could reach
me by a second Jump, a lady In a car suddenly swooped
down to the rescue, almost on top of me. And thereby
hangs a tale, Jack, which must keep until I see you again.
It Is altogether a most mysterious affair, but some flue
night when you’re smoking one Of those huge cigars of
Homfray’s, or rather one out of the box I’m sending you by
an aerial to-morrow, I’ll tell yon all about It. So you see
I’m keeping some Interesting news in reserve for yon.
By the way, when you get the box of cigars, see that
Mabel gets the small parcel that I have directed to her; I
hope she will like the contents.
We had a quick run across to Sydney, though I don’t
recollect much about It, for I was asleep the latter part of
the Journey, and only awoke when Homfray aroused me
and said we were at home.
Ton have always thought me an imaginative sort of
fellow. Jack, and you may remember I once said that to
me It seemed quite possible that “life after all may be only
a dream, and that the awakening from that dream may
come at the moment of death.”


You scoffed at the Idea, and said that it was impossible
that a long life filled with incident could be a dream.
I replied that a dream seemed Just as long, as real, and
as full of Incident, and I instanced the case of certain
Insects whose birth and death fall within the brief space of
an hour. To the insects that hour is a long lifetime filled
with Incident Time, I reminded you, is, after all, only
space filled with incident; mankind measure time by
reckoning from Incident to Incident. I am not at all sure,
even at the present moment that life Is not a dream!
Well, when Homfray roused me, I awoke from a dream.
I was in a new world. Everywhere about me I saw lights.
The very air seemed to vibrate with a peculiar noise, some-
thing like the beat of the surf upon a beach when you are
lying down and listening to it; of course, I knew that it
proceeded from the traffic of the City, for I had read of the
wonderful roar of London heard from Hyde Park.
Idamount, with its pillared portico and broad flight of
steps leading up from the garden where we had Just
alighted, seemed a large and beautiful place, though I have
seen many larger and finer places since.
After a warm bath and something to eat, I ran down
to the town for an hour or two to see the sights. But
Homfray did not accompany me. Poor fellow, he was
quite knocked up; he had not had a wink of sleep from the
time we left the Island.
I met with an adventure down town thpt night, but it
must keep with the other matter, for of course you want to
know all about Australia and the Australians, and how I
like them.
Well, I like Australia and the Australians, so far, though
of Australia I have seen nothing as yet, except a few
square miles of this city, and even that would take a month
to explore.
The Botanic Gardens are perhaps the nicest place to
visit in Sydney. You catch pretty glimpses of the Harbour
and the war fleets.
When tired of rambling about, there is a fine Art
Gallery where you can spend hours Inspecting the pictures
and statuary.
Tired of pictures and statuary, there Is the Wishing


Tree in the lower Gardens. Yon walk three times round
the tree, and at the end of the third time round you make
a wish.
On one occasion I did so, and my wish came true,
though in a sense it was a double wish. It is not every-
body that can get a double wish fulfilled, but I’ll leave you
befogged over the matter. You’E see that tree when you
come up, for one of our first walks will be to the Gardens,
and I anticipate much pleasure, old Sobersides, in showing
you about.
Australia, they say, is at the present time on a wave
of great prosperity, due in a measure to the wise legislation
of what was once termed the Labour Party, who triumph-
antly swept the elections, both State and Federal, many
years back, and have remained in power ever since. Taking
New Zealand as their model State, they have adapted Its
legislation to Australian needs. Hence the present pro-
sperity.
The bogey of Australia is the Yellow Peril. Yesterday,
on board the Manly Beach ferry boat, a young American
naval officer stated in conversation that China, now a lead-
ing World Power, would long since have seized Australia
but for the prestige of the British fleet, or rather, I should
say, of the Empire’s fleet, for the Colonies, including the
Commonwealth, now all contribute largely to its main-
tenance.
We are on the eve of a Great War, he said, in which
China and America will first confront each other; then, if
China wins, and fixes her covetous eyes on the Pacific, it
will be Australia’s turn to bear the brunt.
The great topic of conversation everywhere just now is
the carnival to be held here In a few months time. I
should have liked to have entered for the chief event, the
sculling contest for the Emblazoned Shield, but the entries
closed Just a fortnight before we landed here. They say a
woman, a Miss Pelham, has entered for this race, and that
her sculling is simply phenomenal. She is keeping very
Quiet, and no one seems to know where she holds her
practice trials.
You might ask Mrs. Jones for me, who it was that
borrowed her boat on the day I left. I saw a lady in It


who handled her sculls remarkably well; I have since
wondered if this might not turn out to be the wonderful
Miss Pelham. If so, you will be up In time to see her
row.
I understand Homfray has written to you about the sale
of the diamonds. We are wealthy men now, Jack, even
after taking out Mabel’s share. I think I have given you
all the news.
Oh, by the way, I directed a parcel to Mrs. Hodges, I
hope the old man got his pipe; it was the best I could get
in Sydney. Remember me kindly to them, and tell Hodges
that 1 shall write to him shortly. Down goes the pen.
Jack, for I am sleepy. Good night!
[Letter.]
John Bdgecumbe to Alan Edgecumbe, Idamount, Edgecllffe
Road, Woollahra, Sydney.
Dear Alan,
Your letter, the box of cigars, also Mabel’s parcel,
duly to hand yesterday. The cigars are excellent, and I
hope to have a few left to smoke on the journey up, for I
suppose you and Homfray will very soon have a house
ready for us.
When Mabel opened her parcel, she was in raptures over
the necklet and pendant. It is certainly very handsome,
and must have cost a lot of money. I told her I was
writing to you, and she asked me to thank you and to say
that she would write herself very soon. She also called
you “a love of a duck”—those were her words—but
what she exactly meant I don’t know; it’s some new
fangled expression she has picked up from one of the
modern young women who drop in pretty frequently now
to see her.
Mabel seems to me to be clean off her head since these
new comers have taken her up, for she talks of little else
but dress and the opera and what she Intends to do when
she gets to Sydney, and all that sort of thing. Your parcel
was not the only one she got yesterday. There were no
lees than four others delivered to her, and she, with two of
those young women visitors, were for hours last night


trying on dresses and togging np in all sorts of falderals;
and talking! well I never heard such talking in my life, so
I cleared off early to bed.
Then what do you think Mabel said to me this morning:
“That it was very rude of me not to stay np and see her
visitors safely home!”
My advice to you, Alan, is to be careful of yourself with
these modem young women. I had one up here the other
day, and I quite thought I had made an impression, for it
was Mr. Edgeeumbe this, and Mr. Edgecumbe that, until
before I knew where I was, your sobersides of a brother
Jack was off his head, showing her about, and explaining
the whole place to her. Then the way she looked up into
my face, made me feel—well, I can hardly say how I felt.
I really thought, as I have said, that I had made an
impression.
I promised to take her out in the boat the following
afternoon, and after decorating myself for the occasion, I
pulled down to their camp in Four Fathom Bay (for there
was a party of them), but lo and behold! the birds were
flown, carrying my charmer with them. No more modern
women for me.
If yon should meet that particular young woman (she
was crossing over to Sydney to stay with some friends)—
well, look out for squalls, for she is a regular high stepper,
who will turn you inside out before you know where you
are. When she looks at you from under those long curved
lashes of hers, be very careful what you’re about. Don’t
fall into the delusion that you’re the only young man in
the universe.
As to the sculling young lady, I asked this morning
about her. Mrs. Jones says she has lent her boat to several
people, but she thinks she remembers the lady yon men-
tion, for she borrowed the boat and kept it for two days,
returning It on the day you left.
She was a very tall, fine looking woman, Mrs. Jones
says, but didn’t give her name. She had a black boy with
her, a servant, who looked after the aerial and the tent
while his mistress was away in the boat amusing herself.
Their camp was pitched In the little bay on the other
side of the point.


I’m glad we shall be in Sydney In time for the Carnival,
for now that I know it’s coming off, I shouldn’t care to
miss It.
I am looking forward to seeing that wonderful Miss
Pelham of yours row. Personally, I don’t approve of
women competing In such things—but what will not your
modern young woman do?
Look out that you don’t get a proposal from one of them
some of these fine days, for you’re just the sort of young
man on whom they’d be delighted to try the experiment—
If only out of pure devilment.
That reminds me, I had forgotten that part of your
letter about the tiger. It was certainly a most extra-
ordinary thing you did, and I wonder Homfray didn’t tell
Mabel about it; however, I agree with him that you made
a fool of yourself. I could understand your action had the
lady fallen into the enclosure, but even then I think I
should have hung back and let some other fellow do the
risky business. I fully expected, however, knowing you as
I do, with your high-flown ideals about women and that
sort of thing, that before I saw yon again, you would have
got into trouble over “petticoats,” and you see I’m right.
As for that wonderful Wishing Tree and your double
wish, I think it all tomfoolery, but I’m open to wager a
box of cigars (though, by the way, you don’t smoke), that
the wish you made had something to do with a petticoat,
or else that you had a petticoat with you, and perhaps I’m
right In both surmises.
In ease I win the double event, you can have the cigars
ready by the time I arrive.
Everything here is going on just as when you left.
Bill Jones will take charge of Deepwater when we leave,
for I fully expect to return now and then to have a look
at the old place. An idle life won’t suit me, so I expect
after a time I will do a little farming in Australia, of
course keeping this place on as well.
Now you’ve got all my news, at least all I can think of,
so take care of yourself until we come over, and remember
me to Homfray. Keep clear of the petticoats, Alan! Don’t
forget that if yon want to keep out of trouble.
P.S.—I quite forgot to mention that poor old Johnson


kicked the bucket last night. I was with him when he
died. He spoke most kindly of you, and strange to say had
something of that idea of yours in his mind at the last
about “life possibly being only a dream,” for he said to
me Just a few minutes before the end, “When I look back
upon my life, John, it seems only a passing dream. I see
all the events of a lifetime before me in a flash.
“But what is the use of life,” I said, “if life is only a
dream ?”
“It may be,” he answered, “that we are here as a punish-
ment',” his voice was very weak as he spoke, “and that the
dream is the punishment: for now I see myself as I am.
Perhaps that is the punishment, designed to teach me to
know myself, to teach me humility and charity. God
knows, the lesson was needed.”
He seemed perfectly resigned to go, and if all deaths
were like Ms, I can’t see what there is to be frightened at
In death. It seems to me to be as easy as shelling peas.


CHAPTER VIII.
Alan Edgecumbe saw a good deal of city
life during those first few weeks. He was
made an honorary member of Homfray’s club.
He visited picture galleries and museums, took
trams to the suburbs, made excursions on the
harbour, and in a measure became familiarised
with his surroundings.
But although he looked for her everywhere,
and haunted every possible place where he
thought she might be found, he did not again
see Miss Colonna.
Every day he set out from Idamount hoping
and half expecting to meet her, and every day
he returned disappointed.
After the lapse of a fortnight of fruitless
seeking, he grew a little despondent. “In this
Modem Babylon,” he reflected, “there was
about as much chance of meeting with her, and
of making her acquaintance, as if he lived in
Timbuctoo!”
Moreover, if he did happen to meet her, say,
in the street, or in an aerial, what would
happen? She might possibly bow to him, but
even that courtesy was uncertain, for he was


neither a friend nor an acquaintance, and
although he had met her by a lucky (she might
term it unlucky) chance, it did not follow that
if she saw him again she would take any notice
of him.
For one who was her social inferior (and so
he judged himself to be) Society had rigid
laws that forbade him to seek her out in her
own home. The initiative must, he knew, first
come from her.
Action on his part would probably be deemed
an impertinence.
What was he to do then? The only thing,
he reasoned with himself, was to be patient
and to await events. Something unforeseen
would happen to bring them together.
Patience, however, did not happen to be in the
category of his virtues.
A house on Darling Point that Homfray
judged would just suit the Edgecumbes as a
residence, was now vacant. So one fine after-
noon, after first interviewing the agent, and
obtaining the keys, they went out and inspected
it.
Elmswood was a large and roomy house, not
too large, but comfortable and convenient. The
grounds were spacious and private. Above
all, there was an incomparable view. The
place took Alan’s fancy from the first; and


as the rent was moderate, it was decided that
they should take it on a long lease.
The next consideration was the furniture.
After much visiting and inspecting of ware-
houses, Homfray finally decided to place the
entire order with a large upholstering firm,
who, for a certain sum, contracted to furnish
throughout, sending their own workmen, and
making all necessary arrangements.
Homfray was fortunate also in finding a
lady —a Miss Blakeney—very highly recom-
mended, who, for the very liberal salary
offered, was willing to undertake not only the
chaperonage of Mabel, but also the entire
management of the Edgecumbe household.
Mabel Edgecumbe, with whom Homfray
was in daily communication, now urged her
lover to hasten his preparations, and to come
down to the island without delay, so that they
might return with him.
Alan, it had previously been arranged, was
to remain in Sydney.
The morning of the day on which he was to
leave for Lava Island found Homfray still
very busy over his preparations, and as he was
not to leave until the evening, Alan decided,
on the spur of the moment, as he had nothing
else to do, to take a trip to the Blue Mountains,
returning of course in time to see his friend
off.


It was a typical summer morning, warm, but
with a cool breeze, and as he was in no par-
ticular hurry, instead of taking the usual direct
route, he made a detour by way of Windsor,
Richmond, and the Kurrajong. Then follow-
ing the windings of a deep valley among the
mountains, he climbed at length above their
encircling walls and alighted at Govett’s Leap.
“Who was this Govett, and what had
caused his terrible leap into eternity?” he
wondered, as stepping to the edge of the preci-
pice, he gazed down into the beautiful gorge.
“It had a faint resemblance,” he thought, “to
some of the ravines of Lava Island, but without
the water view.”
A few feet from where he stood a mountain
rivulet leaped from the cliffs, and falling per-
pendicularly some hundreds of feet, assumed
in the final stage the semblance of snowflakes,
a phenomenon he remembered to have
witnessed in several of the minor cascades of
Lava Island.
There were a fair sprinkling of visitors
amusing themselves as best they might.
Imagining himself to be an object of curiosity,
he moved on a few steps and then sat down on
a fragment of rock, so that he might take in
at his leisure a comprehensive view of this
noted beauty spot.


“Is it not beautiful?” presently came a voice
from behind him. The owner of the voice, a
lady, smiled at the start she had caused, for
her approach had been noiseless, and his
thoughts were faraway. He had been think-
ing of Miss Colonna, and wondering whether
he should return to Sydney and make a further
search for her. He had just made up his mind
that he would.
“Yes, it is very fine,” he returned, rising to
his feet and lifting his hat.
The lady was not exactly handsome, he
thought at the first glance, and her age might
be anything between thirty and forty, nearer
probably the latter than the former; but still
there was something engaging and pleasant
about her that quickly set him at his ease.
“And how strangely those crags shine
through the tinted mist ?” she continued. “One
could almost imagine the atmosphere instinct
with subtle forms of life, though I have been
told this appearance is due to the presence of
minute oil-globules exhalations from the
eucalyptus tree.”
“It is certainly a pleasant change from the
coast,” he remarked. “I find the air much
lighter and drier here. It is like champagne.”
“I frequently come here,” said the lady, “but
very soon I hope to be viewing a still lovelier


spot —Lava Island —which perhaps you
know?” Her smile and manner convinced
him that she identified him with his birthplace.
“Yes, I should know something of it,” he
returned, with a smile; “but how did you guess
that?” He looked curiously and inquiringly
at her.
“Why, I recognised you a hundred yards
away,” the lady laughingly replied; and, noting
his puzzled expression (for it was far from
clear to him how people whom he had never
met or spoken to frequently recognised him),
she added, “and it was not due to any air of
rusticity.”
“Confound her,” he thought, “she’s laughing
at me”; so he turned the conversation.
“I don’t think any view complete without
water,” he began. “To my mind, to make this
scenery complete there should be a lake
yonder.”
“I quite agree with you,” answered the lady;
“it is the great lack of Australian scenery.
But, Mr. Edgecumbe, you will excuse my
curiosity.” Here she paused with a quizzical
smile, for at the mention of his name he shot
a quick glance of interrogation at her. “But
really, Mr. Edgecumbe,” she went on, “I
should very much like to know what you think
of us —in fact, how our modern civilisation im-
presses you.


“Of course everything must be so new and
strange to you.”
“Well, not exactly,” he answered thought-
fully, “in this way it is not.” He was saved
further explanation, for at that moment some-
one called out: “Lunch is ready, Clara! bring
your friend with you.”
About fifty yards from where they stood a
picnicking party, scattered in various attitudes
round a white table-cloth spread on the ground,
were impatiently awaiting the arrival of Clara
before commencing operations; indeed, some
had already done so.
He plainly saw that he and his companion
were the subject of merriment, so courteously
declining Clara’s pressing invitation to lunch,
on the plea of an appointment in town, in a few
minutes he was speeding on the return journey.
When close to the outskirts of the metro-
polis, with the greater portion of the afternoon
still before him, he began his quest. Beautiful
faces, and faces likewise made beautiful by
art, constantly flashed by, and he was the
recipient of many a swift glance and flattering
compliment, for to these fair daughters of Eve
this stranger had about him an air of aloofness
and indifference to their charms that excited
interest and curiosity.
But nowhere, wander where he might, could


he distinguish the object of his search. Once
he thought he had found her, and following in
pursuit was led a pretty dance of several miles,
only to meet with a rebuff, for the lady be-
coming conscious of a follower, suddenly
turned in her car, gave him a haughty glance,
and then continued on her course.
After more than one discouragement of a
like nature, he began to slacken the ardour of
his search; and while in this careless mood a
car which he had not taken particularly into
account, took an upward flight and passing
overhead, the lady in the car, bouquet in hand,
with most adroit skill, by a throw beautifully
timed, sent the bouquet fairly into his lap.
For the moment he was so taken aback that
he allowed the flowers to roll on the floor of
the car, and by the time he had picked them up
and glanced around, the only aerial from which
he judged the bouquet could have been thrown,
was sinking with incredible rapidity towards a
clump of pines on a terrace to his right, finally
disappearing in its midst.
“Could it be Miss Colonna?” For the
moment there was rapture in the thought.
But no! on closer examination of the bouquet,
a note that hitherto had been concealed in its
heart fluttered to his feet. Snatching eagerly
at the scented missive and opening it, he read


these words: “Soon shalt thou meet whom Fate
hath so decreed!” There was no signature—
simply that one line.
“What a strange message!” he thought,
“who could have sent it?” -And then all at
once there dawned on him the solution of the
mystery. This strange message agreed with
the mysterious words uttered by the beautiful
unknown who had rescued him from the tiger
in Rangitoto Gardens, New Zealand,
“But why,” he puzzled himself, “this
attempted concealment of her identity?”
Therein lay the puzzle, and one to which his
brain could find no solution.
It was Hospital Saturday, and finding in
his pocket a ticket that entitled him to attend
a mid-air fete, to be held that afternoon, some-
where in the vicinity of the Parramatta River,
he directed his aerial towards this famous
pleasaunce, resolving that if he still met with
non-success, he would relinquish a search that
every moment appeared more quixotic.
It was crowded when he arrived, and the
first thing that struck him and drew his interest
was a very pretty sight—a mimic combat with
flowers used as missiles; and though at first
restricted to a series of single combats, others
joining in, the whole presently assumed the
proportions of a pitched battle between lines
of opposing skirmishers.


The fun waxed fast and furious, and sud-
denly Alan found himself singled out and
assailed from several points, and compelled,
against his better judgment, to join in the
bloodless fray.
But he was no match for his fair assailants,
so many of whom apparently had entered into
a conspiracy against him, and pelted him so
unmercifully that soon he found his car Med
with flowers; and then, amid the loud plaudits
of the numerous spectators, and to their great
delight, whilst endeavouring to beat a retreat,
he was headed off and ignominiously driven
back into the fighting ranks.
To visitors unused to such scenes, this aerial
amphitheatre of spectators above, and the ever-
changing kaleidoscopic mingling of contestants
below, must have presented a unique ap-
pearance.
In contests of this nature, waged with light
missiles whose specific gravity is not great, the
advantage rests with the skilled aeronaut who
can so manoeuvre as to place himself at an angle
above, or directly above, the adversary; it then
becomes a comparatively easy task to hurl or
simply drop the projectile into the opposing
car, or (supreme test of skill) to hit the driver.
Alan Edgecumbe, at first constantly worsted,
gradually became familiarized with the intri


cacies of the game; and gaming confidence
with each encounter, to his unbounded gratifi-
cation, at length succeeded in fairly hitting
with his missile a certain fashionable dame of
ample proportions who throughout had been
his most persistent and bitter antagonist.
And now happened an extraordinary thing.
The lady hitherto so aggressive in movement
and action, instead of, as he naturally expected,
delivering a counter stroke (the retort
courteous), to his intense surprise suddenly
turned and fled from the scene, followed by a
host of combatants and onlookers.
“What did it all mean?” Whilst gazing in
bewilderment at these panic-struck, fleeing
aeronauts, a large dark body, like a bolt from
the blue, suddenly dropped from aloft,
narrowly missed his car, and fell hissing to the
ground, whence a few seconds later there
floated up a crashing sound.
There had occurred one of those appalling
collisions so frequent, alas, in aerial navigation.
He had scarcely time to breathe or even to
glance around him, for as yet he had not fully
realised the terrible nature of what had
occurred, when a second aerial, its machinery
crippled, came sailing or rather wobbling by.
And, oh! horror, in the lady standing up in the
car, with her mute appealing face turned to
him, he recognised Miss Colonna.


He could scarcely define how he knew this,
but somehow he was aware that she recognised
him, although she made no sign; but in her
silent regard of him, he felt that to him alone,
in the whole wide world, she looked for succour.
And she did not appeal in vain.
Without a moment’s hesitation he dashed
after her, and quickly coming up with her car,
he boldly attempted to take her off. He made
more than one attempt, but each effort ended
in failure, for his own aerial was rapidly be-
coming crippled; and once in stretching out to
grasp her so that he might drag her into his
own car, he overbalanced and nearly lost his life.
Meanwhile, the swaying, zig-zagging motion
of the crippled aerial was slackening; the down-
ward momentum, unfortunately, was fast in-
creasing.
A few moments would witness the end, and
such an end! Half despairing, and grown
desperate at the thought of her danger, he made
a supreme and final effort; he forced his car
under hers (with no small risk of being crushed
between the two), and then he attempted to
bear it up.
But the united burden was too great; the
interlocked cars hung for a moment swaying
in space, then, with slowly sinking movement,
splashed into the water, that immediately en-
gulphed them.


CHAPTER IX.
When Alan Edgecumbe came back to
consciousness, his mind was in that peculiar
state of torpor in which it is unwilling to work
actively; so that it was not strange that he
should imagine himself to be in his own room
at Deepwater, and suppose the occasional
sound of a light footfall to be his sister’s. He
was in a measure dimly conscious, too, after
a certain lapse of time, of a gentle presence
hovering over him, of a subtle scent of violets,
and—yes, of the lingering pressure of warm
lips upon his forehead.
“Could it be that he was dreaming?” he
thought, when light footsteps again ap-
proaching, halted by his bedside. “What did
it all mean?” Slowly unclosing his lids, he
saw bent over from behind the pillow and look-
ing down upon him, the anxious face of his
friend, Homfray Howard.
“Is that you, Homfray? Why, what is the
matter?” he asked, struggling to sit up, but
finding himself unaccountably weak.
“It’s all right, old man!” replied his friend,
soothingly. “Drink this; it will do you good.
I’ll tell you everything in the morning.”


The invalid obediently drank what was
offered —a cooling beverage—and settling him-
self comfortably back on the pillow, shortly
afterwards sank into a deep refreshing sleep.
When next he awoke it was morning, with
the dancing sunlight flickering warm beams
across his face and flooding the room with
brightness.
“Where was he?” He looked about him
curiously.
The bed was strange, and the room more
richly furnished than his chamber at Ida-
mount; and through the open casement of a
deep bow-window he saw in the distance below
a fine sheet of water, on which presently a
ferry-boat laden with passengers swiftly
crossed his line of vision.
Recollection suddenly returned to him. He
remembered all that had occurred yesterday;
events in quick succession passed through his
mind.
He saw himself again and again baffled in
his efforts to save her. At length he succeeded
in forcing his car under hers, but was unable
to rise, for the cars commenced to sink.
As he tried to climb into her aerial, and
escape being crushed between the two cars
when they struck the water, she had given him
her hand.


After that was a blank.
“He must have been carried into this house,”
he reflected, although he didn’t remember any-
thing about it. And putting his hand to his
head he felt a freshly-stitched wound. The
other aerial must have struck him then.
But what about Miss Colonna? Was it
possible that something had happened to her?
At the bare thought a chill seemed to strike
to his heart. Jumping out of bed, a temporary
giddiness made him hold fast to the bed-post to
steady himself; but for this and for a slight
soreness near the wound he felt himself again.
Here were all his things from Idamount; his
trunks, too, open. Homfray must have heard
of the accident and sent them. At all events
he would dress and see what had happened.
He was fast getting into his clothes when
Homfray Howard opened the door and stood
there staring in surprise. “Hello! old man,”
he cried, “is that how you feel? I’m glad to
see you looking so well. See what I’ve
brought you. Aren’t they beauties? Guess
who sent them?” and he held something
tantalisingly aloft.
It was a beautiful bouquet of choice rose-
buds intermixed with Parma violets, with the
dew still clinging, to show that they had been
freshly gathered.


By a sudden movement, Alan snatched them
from his hand, and first crushing them to his
face, he carefully placed them on his dressing
table. “She had sent them. She was safe.
He would see her again; perhaps even within
the next few minutes.” New life entered
into him. How joyous and happy he felt all
at once.
Homfray, with a peculiar expression on his
face, took a seat on the bed, then pulling out
his cigar case, he lit a choice Manilla, and
between the puffs watched his friend dressing,
which he proceeded to do with more than usual
attention to details.
“Whose house is this, Homfray?” asked
Alan presently, elevating his chin while trying
to fasten a stiff collar that apparently had a
fractious stud-hole. “And how did I get
here?” He paused, waiting for Homfray’s
reply. All the same, he had a shrewd idea
where he was, but he wanted Homfray to
definitely supply the information.
“Well, if you’ll restrain your impatience for
just two seconds, I’ll tell you all I know,”
answered Homfray, throwing away his cigar
which drew badly, and deliberately lighting a
fresh one.
“You know I expected you home about
five? Well, I had everything ready to make a


start after tea, and I was getting just a bit
impatient, when to my surprise Mr. Colonna
sent me word that you were at his house, that
you had met with an accident —nothing very
serious—but he would like me to come out all
the same.” Puff, puff, puff, and Homfray
blew three curling rings of smoke towards the
ceiling.
“Well, on my way here, I heard the news-
boys shouting particulars of the accident, so
I bought a paper. That was a very plucky
act of yours, Alan, getting under her car and
trying to hold it up. The papers give you
great praise for that, and for your coolness
and presence of mind.”
At this point Homfray again paused to blow
fresh rings of smoke, and to consider what
next he had to say. “Yes, and Miss Colonna
showed great pluck, too, for that matter,” he
resumed. “Very few men would have stuck to
you throughout as she did, for you were un-
conscious all the time, and they say half full
of salt water into the bargain.
“Now you see the advantage, Alan, of what
I have always maintained” (Homfray was on
one of his pet fads) “that all young girls
should be taught to swim.
“But that’s by the way. Well, when I got
out here, Mr. Colonna of course at once took


me to your room — this room and you were
lying on the bed there with the doctor sewing
up the cut on your head. It’s lucky for you
it wasn’t a quarter of an inch deeper.
“You were half conscious, I thought, but
you didn’t seem to recognise me. The doctor,
however, said you were getting on famously,
that you might perhaps be a little weak or
giddy in the morning when you first got up,
but there was nothing to prevent your getting
up, provided you kept yourself quiet during
the day.
“Well, here you are, old man, as jolly as a
sandboy, I’m glad to say, though why sand-
boys should be so particularly jolly I don’t
know, and never heard of anyone who did.
“By the way, Miss Colonna took it in turns
with me to sit up with you during the night.
You don’t remember that. Perhaps you re-
member the draught I gave you? You slept
like a top afterwards, and never moved until
about an hour ago, when Miss Colonna roused
me.
“I was lying down in the next room, and she
seemed very anxious for me to go to you. She
said you were restless, and she thought you
were about to wake.
“I expect she was a little bashful after what
had taken place, and didn’t want you to see her,


or perhaps she remembered that ladies, as a
rule, don’t look their best after being up all
night.
“At all events she seemed in a great hurry
to scuttle off. I wonder did she give you a
kiss?
“Oh! you needn’t blush and look so indig-
nant. I don’t suppose she did anything of the
kind. But if she did on the sly, who’s to blame
her? You deserved it, and she deserved it;
and no one a bit the wiser.
“Oh! indignant again? What? about to
throw your host’s brushes, when you’ve got
your own?
“Really, Alan, joking apart, you’ve got a
very bad temper. It’s fortunate that mine’s
so good.
“Ha! so you’ve broken your sleeve link?
That’s the penalty one pays for losing one’s
temper.
“Now, let me see,” and Homfray paused
meditatively. “Yes, all sorts of inquiries
were made after you during the night, and I
was sorry that I couldn’t let your old friend
Admiral Hung Chang see you. He seemed
in a great way about you. But the doctor’s
orders were imperative; no one was to be ad-
mitted into your room but Miss Colonna and
myself.”


“Weren’t there some people killed, Horn-
fray?” asked Alan, having replaced the broken
sleeve link with a fresh one from his trunk.
“Yes, there were two women killed, and it’s
a wonder there were not more.
“No blame, however, attaches to Miss
Colonna. Something went wrong with their
steering gear; and the crowd was so thick they
could not help running into somebody.
“And now, young man, you’ve had my
budget, and it’s about time you were finished
dressing. What does all the elaborate titi-
vating this morning mean?
“Come on! I’m almost famished, and I think
breakfast’s not far off.
“Oh, by the way, I half promised Mr.
Colonna that you’d stay here for the week I
was away.
“When I explained that I was going down
to Lava Island and returning in about a week’s
time with your sister and brother, he positively
insisted on your staying here; said that he’d
keep you for a month if he could.
“He’ll be offended, I know, if you refuse.
“Well, that’s settled; and now all you’ve got
to do is to call a few times at Elmwood and see
how Miss Blakeney is getting on.
“She’s engaging servants just now, but will
be a fixture herself in the house from to-
morrow.
D


“It won’t take you many minutes to go out
and return, and I know she’d like it. So come
along.”
Outside, the servants were arranging the
breakfast table under a shade tree on the lawn,
for Mr. Colonna had a fancy for having his
meals in the open in the hot summer weather.
The old gentleman met the two friends as
they were emerging from the house. He was
a fine-looking, white-haired, clean-shaven man
of between sixty and sixty-five.
He received Alan Edgecumbe most im-
pressively. “Nothing that I can ever do, Mr.
Edgecumbe,” he said, speaking in his most
courtly accents, as he led his visitors apart, “no
thanks that I can convey to you, will ever wipe
from my remembrance the service you have
rendered me and mine.
“My house and any influence that I may
command are from this moment at your dis-
posal.
“I beg that you will not pain me by refusing
to remain my guest for the brief space of time
your friend, Mr. Howard, has so kindly
promised to spare you to us.”
“You are most kind, Mr. Colonna,” replied
Alan, greatly touched, “and for my part I beg
that you will not again allude to the matter of
obligation. Any slight service I may have had


the good fortune to render your daughter has
already been more than amply repaid.”
Alan Edgecumbe could not altogether re-
press just a slight feeling of nervousness at
the thought of the impending interview with
the lady of the house.
For one thing, he had never been properly
introduced to her, and then there was this
dreadful accident in which he had tried to save
her life; all this made the position an awkward
one for him. She would shortly appear —in
fact, she might be here at any moment he
thought, glancing towards the house almost
apprehensively.
And what should he do when he first saw
her? Should he advance to meet her, or wait
until she came up to him?
All at once the flutter of white garments
issuing from a glass door opening on to the
lawn put an end to further self-questioning.
Miss Colonna wore a blush rose in the bosom
of her dress. That was about all that Alan
Edgecumbe could remember afterwards of her
dress, for his heart started beating so rapidly
as he watched that graceful white-robed form
coming towards him that he fancied he could
hear it.
The lady walked veiy slowly at first as if
she too participated in Alan’s nervous and self-
D 4


questioning mood; but as she neared the group
she advanced more quickly.
Alan Edgecumbe instinctively moved for-
ward to meet her, and they met some distance
apart from the others.
She gave him her hand, and there was a deep
flush on her face, as she said: “Oh, Mr. Edge-
cumhe, I’m so glad to see you up again, and
looking so much better. And I,” and with
lowered eyes and sinking voice, “Oh, how can
I ever thank you for what you did for me
yesterday?”
“Miss Colonna,” he interrupted, with deep
emotion, “I hope this will be the last occasion
for any allusion on either side to the matter of
obligation. Please understand me clearly. I
claim not the faintest merit for what I did or
for what I attempted to do yesterday. I
simply did what any man would have done
under similar circumstances.
“And if it comes to a question of obligation,
my friend, Mr. Howard, has only just now
assured me that you saved me from drowning.
Miss Colonna, will you not be generous and
let us cry quits? Shall it be a bargain between
us?”
“On one condition alone, Mr. Edgecumbe,”
said the lady, looking up at him with tears in
her eyes. Alan, too, was afraid that she might
see the moisture in his.


“Well, what is the condition, Miss Colonna?
Whatever it is I agree to it.”
“That you will be my friend, my true friend,
Mr. Edgecumbe”; and she looked straight into
his eyes.
“Miss Colonna,” he said, after a pause of
silence, for he was deeply moved, “you have
conferred the very highest honour on me.”
And now he relinquished her hand that, without
knowing it, he had been holding all the time.
The interview between Alan Edgecumbe
and Viola Colonna afforded to the observant
Homfray the highest gratification. “Ah!”
muttered that gentleman, sententiously, to him-
self, “We shall see what we shall see. Alto-
gether a very pretty little romance.”


CHAPTER X.
It was breaking dawn. Alan Edgecumbe
turning restlessly over on his right side exposed
his face to the light stealing in through his
chamber window. He opened his eyes. The
grey dawn, like a ghostly mist, filled the room.
He could just make out the shadowy outlines
of objects. He lay back there resting, but
thinking, thinking all the time.
So this was his last day; absolutely his last
day! It had come to that —his very last day!
And harking back, he mentally recalled every
incident of the past few days.
Had they been happy days? Yes! the
happiest he ever remembered. And did he
love her as much as ever?
Was she still his lode-star as always she had
been in his dreams? Yes, and more!
“How quickly, too, time has flown,” he
thought.
“John and Mabel will be up to-morrow, and
to-morrow morning I shall have to say good-
bye to her.”
It seemed scarcely possible that a week had
flown by since that morning in the garden when
she asked him to be her friend.


And yet somehow it had passed, and now
it seemed, too, as if he had always known her,
as if always she had been a part of his life.
He could not picture his life complete without
her.
What delightful camaraderie had been
established between them. Of course she
called it friendship. And those walks and
those talks in the garden.
He accompanied her every morning on her
rounds when she fed her numerous family of
feathered pets. What a sweet intimacy this
privilege of friendship conferred upon him!
She had asked him all about his life, his
thoughts, and what he did. Had he never
longed for a different life?
And he had tried his best to open out his
inmost self to her; and he knew she listened
sympathetically.
But one thing he had not told her. He had
not told her that he loved her. That he dared
not do as yet. . . .
And she, too, had given him a part outline
of her life —and, yes, it was only yesterday
morning (how proud and happy he had felt!),
they were sitting in the little summer house,
when she said that he was her only friend— at
least her only man friend. He was glad of
that. Had she admitted any other man to her
confidence, how should he have felt?


There was another man—that fellow, Piper.
But he did not regard him seriously, for she
disliked him.
She had told him so in confidence.
And yet the beggar was always here; and her
father and her brother encouraged his visits.
The fellow was handsome, too, in a way; and
no doubt very rich. But she didn’t care for
that; she preferred his society to Piper’s.
And Piper knew it and was jealous, and
hated him in consequence. He could see that
from the first.
For his own part he couldn’t understand how
a man could hang about a woman annoying her
with his attentions when she gave him plainly
to understand she didn’t want him.
Had he been so treated, he would have gone
right away and never come back again. The
fellow wanted kicking.
At first he had looked forward to the
evenings that were to be spent with her. Now
the evenings he liked least of all, for they
brought hosts of visitors, and it was hard to get
in a word edgeways with her; it took all her
time attending to them. Besides some of her
lady friends always fastened on to him. One
or two of them were certainly very nice, par-
ticularly Miss Irene Blakeney, the younger
sister of the Miss Blakeney who was now in
charge of Elmswood.


But he didn’t see so much of her as he did
of Miss Keene. Miss Colonna, he felt sure,
tried to bring Miss Keene and him together.
It was really too bad of her.
Why, it was only last night she purposely
brought her over to where he sat, and then left
them together, looking back with a mischievous
smile when she had got some distance away,
as much as to say: “Consider yourself a very
lucky fellow. There is a nice girl I’ve brought
to talk to you. You ought to be very happy.”
It was really too bad of her.
Miss Keene, after all, wasn’t a bad sort of
girl. She knew all about Lava Island. But
where the dickens could she have learnt so much
about him?
She could tell him things that he thought
were only known to himself.
And Mary Hodges, too. Whoever could
have put her up to teasing him about Mary ?
Only last night she said positively that she
had seen him somewhere before; but where she
wouldn’t say. He didn’t remember ever seeing
her before.
And now, about the picnic to-day. One
blessing, Mr. Piper wouldn’t be at it; in fact,
he hadn’t been asked. How the beggar would
grind his teeth when he found he’d been left
out in the cold.


What a day, too, it would be if he could only
get Miss Colonna all to himself. After all, it
could be managed. Just a little skilful
manoeuvring, that was all.
He would take jolly good care a hundred
Miss Keenes didn’t keep him from Miss
Colonna on this his last day. No more
tite-a-tites between himself and Miss Keene.
A clock striking somewhere in the house
suddenly broke in upon his musing. One —
two —three—four—five—six. By George, it
was getting late. He jumped out of bed and
proceeded hurriedly to dress himself, for they
were to have an early breakfast and make an
early start.
In the small but select party gathered for a
picnic on the Como lawn that morning, the
sexes were about equally balanced.
As he took his seat by Miss Colonna in a
compartment of the Como aerial, which they
would have all to themselves, Alan Edgecumbe
had cause to congratulate himself on his skil-
ful manoeuvring, for he had stalled off more
than one competitor for this very seat.
Success produced in his mind an outward as
well as an inward satisfaction that betrayed
itself by a tendency to view all mankind
benevolently. But this benevolent mood un-
fortunately did not last long.


Almost on the point of starting he remem-
bered something. In excursions of this kind,
in the hurry and bustle of departure, it
frequently happens that some trifle is forgotten
which might have contributed materially to the
comfort of some of the party.
He suddenly remembered that he had pro-
mised Miss Colonna to take a certain book with
them, and that the book was now lying on his
dressing-table, where he had put it last night
so that he should not forget it.
What a confounded idiot! Was there ever
such a blockhead? These were only a few of
the many objurgations that he made against
himself. Then he thought for a moment.
Yes, he must get it; she might ask for it.
“Excuse me. Miss Colonna,” he said, hastily
jumping down from the car; “I shall be back
in a moment.”
But that moment was pregnant with fate
for him. He found the book, but lost his
seat.
During the brief interval of his absence, a
young and distinguished naval attache of a
foreign Embassy, seeing the vacant place at
once took possession, and now from the coveted
seat of honour beamed complacently down
upon him. Alan wished he could have
strangled that attache. What impudence in


the fellow! It wouldn’t do, however, to make
an unseemly altercation. That would be rude-
ness to his hostess, who had organised the picnic
solely on his account —in honour of his last day.
Whether the new adjustment of seats met
with Miss Colonna’s approval or not, he hadn’t
time to judge, he was so angry and put out;
besides her car almost immediately rose and
commenced to wing its flight.
“Quick, Mr. Edgecumbe,” called out a tall,
fair girl, standing up and beckoning to him
from the second car; “quick, or we shall be
late.”
There was no help for it; he hastily
scrambled in. The car rose and followed in
the wake of its leader.
The tall fair girl who had hailed him was
Miss Keene. “Now, this is certainly most
delightful,” said she, settling herself in a cosy
nook apart from the others, and sweeping her
gown aside with a triumphant movement so
that he might sit beside her. “I shall have
you all to myself, and you can tell me more
about that lovely island of yours, Mr. Edge-
cumbe. I am dying to know all about it.
Isn’t it nice to be here all to ourselves?” She
was hardly aware that his delight scarcely
equalled her own.
Their acquaintance, though not of long date.


had ripened, on the lady’s side, into something
more. With her it was a case of “love at first
sight”; an absorbing passion that thrilled
through every fibre of her being.
From the first moment of their meeting her
heart had gone out to this romantic, true-
hearted young man. She knew he was all
that; and she was now resolved to bestow on
him both herself and her fortune.
She knew she could make him happy, as well
as being happy herself. It delighted her to
think of the happiness she could bestow on him.
He was a little shy and diffident at present, no
doubt, but then she would rather have that than
the self-assurance she saw in other young men.
“Now, let me see,” she continued, puckering
her pretty brows, but glancing demurely up at
him from beneath long-curved lashes, “we were
interrupted last night” (yes, he remembered
it very well, for he had made an unsuccessful
effort to escape and join Miss Colonna) “just
as you were telling me of that accident.
“You were picnicking, you know, and your
boat capsized close to the mouth of that horrid
tunnel. Oh, how frightened I should have
been for your safety, had I been there.”
She was naturally interested in all his move-
ments, and in all that concerned his former life.
By her ready tact and sympathetic attitude


she had, from time to time, drawn from him
incidents of his career. Carefully piecing
these together, with the private information
she already possessed, she became confirmed in
the favourable judgment that she had formed
of the character of the man to whom she in-
tended to intrust her future happiness.
“There is here, at least, no shameful past,”
she thought, “no previous love affair.”
She did not altogether approve, however, of
the relationship between him and Mary
Hodges. They had grown up together these
two, she reflected, and the girl was undeniably
pretty —that she had gathered, not from him,
but from private sources of information.
But there could not possibly be any
formidable rivalry between them, she mused
to herself; and a wave of delicious emotion
surged through the heart of this romantic
young woman as she thought of the possible
phases of felicity there must be in a union with
the man one loved.
It was the Ultima Thule of life. Love cul-
minating in marriage. The only happiness
possible. It was real life. All else was
simply anticipation or contemplation.
They were passing over the Blue Mountains,
travelling parallel with the railroad. Presently
below him Alan Edgecumbe beheld “Govett’s


Leap.” That small dazzling streak of white,
set amidst picturesque surroundings, and
viewed from aloft, with the sunlight striking
full upon it, looked very charming this
morning, he thought.
He had good cause to remember the day
when first he saw it, and all that had happened
to him on the return journey. That day and
that tiny silver thread of water would always
be linked in his mind with her.
Speeding on in continuation of their
journey, they were soon beyond the influence
of the mountains, and looking down upon vast
plains, with fields of ripening wheat; upon
orchards and vineyards surrounding number-
less homesteads that dotted the landscape as
far as the eye could reach.
It was a rich scene of plenty—Australia, as
all her well-wishers would see her.
Through these cultivated plains wound tiny,
sparkling threads of water, supplied by
numerous bores and dams, fed from sub-
terannean sources. New and extensive areas
besides were in process of being cleared, sub-
divided, and planted; and our young islander
could not but note that in the majority of the
lesser areas, grain, fruit, and vine culture pre-
dominated,
“Our paternal Government allows the


workers employed on these new areas the first
choice of settling on them,” remarked Miss
Keene, noticing his interest in all he saw; “that
is how we interest labour in the soil, Mr. Edge-
combe, and prevent its congestion in the large
centres of population.”
Acting on the suggestion of a member of
the party, the picnickers descended on a well-
known sheep station, “Avoca,” where, after
witnessing various phases of station life, they
accepted the warmly proffered hospitality of
the proprietors, and it was with regret that
good-byes were said and the return journey
commenced.
Nothing noteworthy occurred until, when
once more over the Blue Mountains, Alan
Edgecumbe caught sight of the sea. All his
life had been spent close to the salt water, and
he now hailed it with delight. “I should feel
quite lost if I lived far from the sea,” he said,
pointing to the now rapidly expanding blue
streak before them, and at the same time
inadvertently placing his disengaged hand
upon Miss Keene’s as it rested on the seat
beside him. For a moment he was quite un-
conscious that he had done so.
It was most extraordinary the effect this
simple act of forgetfulness on his part pro-
duced on the lady. A quiver ran through her.


her face flushed and paled by turns, she drew
a deep breath, her lips moved, and she appeared
to be on the point of broaching some subject
that was near her heart. But that irresolution,
that hesitancy on her part, lost her the oppor-
tunity, for suddenly becoming aware of his
mistake he hurriedly apologised and released
from its enforced but willing imprisonment the
pretty fluttering white hand.
A shade of intense disappointment passed
over Miss Keene’s face. To-day, and this was
foreign to her wont, she had been singularly
thoughtful and abstracted, and yet not un-
happy. She could never be unhappy with
him, she thought. . . And yet . . and yet.
“The sea,” she said at length, turning to
him after a long pause of silence and reflection,
“always exercises a strange influence over me,
Mr. Edgecumbe. Its calm and its restlessness
somehow remind me of human life. I think
there must be in all of us a deep-seated rest-
lessness —at least I have it—an impulse ever
urging us on towards change; a desire to pene-
trate that which lies beyond. And who can
say where life, where destiny will lead him? .
. . And yet, perhaps, it is best that we should
not know what the future holds in store for us.”
Her voice, low and vibrant, thrilled strangely
through the rarefied atmosphere.


He was silent, for his thoughts had been
elsewhere; but now he roused himself to listen
to her.
“What would you do, Mr. Edgecumbe,” she
presently resumed, “if at the present moment
you had a sealed book before you, and by the
simple act of opening it, you could read your
destiny; would you open it?” She paused,
with some anxiety, waiting for his reply.
“That would require some reflection, Miss
Keene,” he replied, thoughtfully. “I think
my first impulse would be to open it, but if I
had time to reflect, I don’t know that I should.
“What would you do under the circum-
stances, Miss Keene?”
“I know I should long to,” she answered
softly, “but” —a little pause—“but I don’t
know that I should dare to after all. For,
Mr. Edgecumbe”—here she glanced timidly at
him —“if perchance I were to discover there
a revelation of future happiness, I should still
be restless until that happiness were attained;
whereas if it were ill fortune that threatened
me, its anticipation alone would serve to em-
bitter the joys of the present.
“Life, after all,” she continued, “is at best a
period of waiting and hoping, of striving and
struggling to attain a happiness that may never
come. . .


“And yet I know there must be—there is—
great happiness—there could be great happi-
ness for me if only I were sure that—that” —
She abruptly paused, glanced tenderly into his
face, and the sentence remained uncompleted.


CHAPTER XI.
ComOj the hospitable mansion of the
Colonnas, was brilliantly lighted. The guests
scattered throughout the large reception room
(formed by throwing two apartments into one)
were, as well as thousands elsewhere, in other
drawing-rooms, witnessing the closing act of
a drama at that moment being performed on
the boards of a fashionable Opera House in
Sydney.
Many of the guests, doubtless already
familiar with this particular scene, were hold-
ing little whispered conversations under cover
of fan and programme. But Alan Edge-
cumbe, to whom everything was new and
piquant, sat with his whole mind absorbed and
concentrated upon the stage, lost to all outside
influences, including the lady by his side.
She, for her part, found her inclination more
directed to the study of the absorbed individual
than to the course of the play, for, while the
play was commonplace and familiar, the indi-
vidual represented to her a new type, unlike
that of the ordinary young man of the period
with which she was familiar.


She had as well a natural desire to penetrate
the personality of a member of the family in
whose daily circle her elder sister was about
to occupy a prominent position.
She had met this young man on three separate
occasions this week at her hostess’s house, and
again to-day with the picnicking party that
had visited the western plains.
So far as her limited opportunities had ad-
mitted, she had judged him to be not exactly
practical in the everyday affairs of life, to be
rather a dreamer of dreams.
Possibly he was not even a man of average
culture, for how could he be under the peculiar
conditions of his birth, and after passing his life
amidst the wilds of a solitary and almost un-
known island?
And yet, withal, he had attracted her
strangely from the first. She was conscious
of the charm of a distinct and vivid personality.
He had the merit and the novelty in her eyes
of an unread book, that possibly might prove
to be the masterpiece, alike desired by pub-
lishers and readers.
Irene Blakeney was a rising painter, whose
latest picture, accepted by the Royal Academy,
had been pronounced by leading art critics to
be the greatest painting of the year. Indeed this
very evening before leaving home, a message


had been handed to her from London
announcing that her picture had been pur-
chased by the Trustees of the National Gallery,
on behalf of the nation. Although no longer
in her first youth, she was perhaps the most
distinguished-looking of all the guests
gathered that night within the precincts of
the Como mansion.
Her charm lay not so much in beauty of face
and form as in that of expression. You
judged from the face that this was a noble and
a cultured woman. She had many admirers,
so said those of her friends who knew her best,
and could have married well. Why she re-
frained from marriage no one could tell, and
she was not a woman to be questioned.
She and her sister, left penniless and poor at
an early age, had fought their way through
long years of poverty, until now, speaking
comparatively, they were in safe waters —the
one with Fame fluttering its wings before her,
the other about to occupy a responsible and
honourable position in the Edgecumbe house-
hold.
At the close of the play, Alan Edgecumbe
turned to Miss Blakeney, but he did not speak,
for he saw that she was listening to the con-
versation of some young women graduates of
the University, who had selected as a subject


for discussion one in which they might easily
range beyond their depth.
“God is the Universe,” he heard one say
(quoting Hegel); “God is everything, and
moves and is revealed in all existing things,
yet is never seen; God is the Absolute Ideal of
the Absolute Spirit which in eternal self-
movement proceeds from Itself and becomes
Nature; and then again, reverting to Itself,
becomes a self-conscious Spirit.”
Another (quoting Spinoza) expressed her
belief in the existence of an unconditioned
Essence, Eternal and Self-subsisting, which
forms the groundwork of everything else.
After much mutual play of words (chiefly
quotation), a third broke in to relate a curious
experience:
“You know Flora Hayes?” she asked,
looking from one to the other.
“Yes,” assented the first speaker, a tall girl
with a broad low forehead, flaxen hair, and
large, bright blue eyes. “You mean the rich
Miss Hayes, who devotes all her wealth to
charity, and whose one servant sits at the table
with her.”
“Yes,” and she’s an old friend of mother’s.
You know how faddy mother is. Were it not
for father and the rest of us, she’d give every-
thing she has away, too. Well, mother often


visits Miss Hayes, and declares she possesses
some occult power. She can throw herself,
it appears, into a state of dreamy trance, and
while in that state, lying back in her chair
with the window open, she can describe the
aura or invisble body of every person passing
along the street.
“The aura of a human being,” she says, “is
like an oval-shaped luminous cloud through
which you can see the dense body, and that on
this aura the thoughts and emotions and the
character of the person are impressed. Its
size, beauty, and luminosity depend entirely
upon the stage of evolution attained by the
individual.
“It is large and magnificently radiant in
those whose mental and moral character is
highly developed, but small and coarse and
irregular of outline, and dull of colour, in those
of a lower stage of evolution. Every thought
of the individual reflects the image of that
thought in his aura , so that you can at once read
the character of the person.
“Into this aura or invisible body of man’s
own making, his consciousness escapes at death.
And this thought-body resulting from the past
life persists, undergoes certain purificatory
changes, and then becomes, as it were, the
mould for the new personality presently to be
bom into earth life.


“Thus man by his thoughts and desires in one
life builds for himself the new body that will
represent his characteristics in the next.”
“After all,” interrupted the ‘second speaker,
“one’s real life is lived in thought; one’s mental
and moral character, whether noble or ignoble,
is evolved by thought. It is the predominant
thoughts of a lifetime which shape the
character that is carried on by the Ego to its
next re-birth. The difficulty with most
thinkers is where that re-birth takes place.”
“As to that thought-body you speak of,” re-
marked a fourth, a thoughtful-looking, dark-
featured girl, beautifully dressed, “everyone
knows we are surrounded by a vast atmosphere
of elemental essence; call it ether if you will.
This possesses a peculiar vitality, and has the
power of responding to and taking shape under
the impulse of thought vibrations, just as
figures are shaped by sound vibrations.
“Clear, precise thoughts have each their own
definite shapes, and can be directed at will
towards any person we desire to reach. A
thought of sustained anger or hatred will pro-
ject a barbed flash of red; whilst love, accord-
ing to its quality, assumes the most beautiful
forms and colours.
“A loving mother’s prayers hover like
guardian angels around her child. So that we


are ever sending out angels or devils into
space. In fact, we crowd our world with them.
“Science,” she went on, “has long been aware
of a magnetic atmosphere or aura radiating
from the human body, and what is termed the
health aura extends only a few inches from the
body when vitality is low.”
And so the conversation or discussion was
carried on; Alan Edgecumbe listening all the
while with the greatest absorption of interest.
Presently he turned to his companion. “Do
you believe, Miss Blakeney,” he asked,
earnestly, “in thought-forms and re-birth, and
that our character is imaged in an aura or in-
visible body?
“You heard that lady say just now that the
Innate quality,’ the mental and moral charac-
teristic with which a child is bom into the world,
is the indubitable proof of past straggles, of
past triumphs, or of past failures.* This
means, of course, that we are re-bom time after
time, and that the predominating desires and
thoughts of one lifetime shape for the indi-
vidual his mental and moral characteristic in
the next.”
“Have you read,” Miss Blakeney replied,
“Edward Carpenter in Towards Democracy ,
• Reincarnation, p. 89. A. Besaut.


in the ‘Secret of Time and Satan’? No! well
tell me what you think of this.”
“The art of creation, like every other art, has to be
learned;
“Slowly, slowly, through many years thou bulkiest up
thy body.
“And the power that thou hast (such as It Is) to build
up this present body, thou hast acquired In the past In
other bodies;
“So In the future shalt thou use again the power that
thou now acquires!.
“But the power to build up the body includes all
powers.”
******
“Beware how thou seekest this for thyself and that for
thyself. I do not say, Seek not; but, Beware how thou
seekest.
“For a soldier who is going a campaign does not seek
what fresh furniture he can carry on his back, but rather
what he may leave behind;
“Knowing well that every additional thing which he
cannot freely use and handle Is an Impediment to him.
“So If thou seekest fame, or ease, or pleasure, or aught
for thyself, the image of that thing which thou seekest will
come and cling to thee—and thou wilt have to carry It
about.
“And the Images and powers which thou hast thus
evoked will gather round and form for thee a new body-
clamouring for sustenance and satisfaction.
“And if thou art not able to discard this image now,
thou wilt not be able to discard that body then; but will
have to carry it about.
“Beware, then, lest it become thy grave and thy prison,
instead of thy winged abode and palace of Joy.”
******
“And seest thou not that except for Death thou couldst
never overcome Death?
“For since by being a slave to things of sense thou hast
clothed thyself with a body which thou art not master of,
thou wert condemned to a living tomb were that body not


to be destroyed. But now through pain and suffering, out
of this tomb shalt thou come; and through the experience
thou hast acquired shalt build thyself a new and better
body.
“And so on many times, till thou spreadest wings and
hast all powers diabolic and angelic concentrated in thy
flesh.”
“And the bodies which I took on yielded before him,
and were like cinctures of flame upon me, but I flung
them aside;
“And the pains which I endured in one body were
powers which I wielded In the next.”*
“They are wonderful words,” he said, “the
most wonderful I have ever heard. But you,
yourself, Miss Blakeney, how do you regard
life and religion, and the part we play therein?”
“Your question is a difficult one, Mr. Edge-
cumbe,” responded the lady. “We all have
individual beliefs, and sometimes only a hope
inspired by a lifetime of thought and ex-
perience. How then is it possible to place in
a convincing form our beliefs and hopes before
those who have not had the same thoughts and
experiences?
“I may say, however, that I believe in the
continuity of life, and I believe that man is
continually drawn to earth-life by desires, but
at length is set free by knowledge and
sacrifice.
• Meiacar nation, p. 39-40. A. Besnnt.


“I believe that true religion spells love; and
that love entails the sacrifice of self for the
best needs of others.
“I believe that through this love we
gradually gain a knowledge of a higher love,
boundless and all embracing, into which we
shall finally become merged, but each with his
own separate thread of memory.
“We are slowly climbing an evolutionary
ladder, each rung of ascent being won by a
sacrifice. But the sacrifice does not necessarily
involve pain.
“The higher natures, conscious of an up-
lifting force, ever seek to uplift—to uplift the
lower.
“It is in this uplifting that we find the secret
of the Universe.
“The sacrifice of the Logos for the emana-
tion of the Universe must mean the uplifting
of all; hence the tendency of the highest
natures to self-sacrifice, for by sacrifice the
Universe is maintained, and by sacrifice man
reaches perfection.
“And now let me cite you from the new
sayings of Jesus:
“ ‘The Kingdom of Heaven is within you;
and whosoever shall know himself shall find it.
Strive therefore to know yourselves, and ye
shall be aware that ye are the sons of the


Almighty Father, and ye shall know that ye
are in the city of God.
And ye are the City. Love is religion—
everything. Love which seeketh not its own.
Love that beareth all things, believeth all
things, hopeth all things, endureth all things.
Love never faileth. Now abideth faith, love,
but the greatest of these is love.’ ”
“And how if we regard life as a dream
whence death is the awakening?” he ventured
to ask, “for who can tell if it be not so?”
“Even were it so,” she replied gently, “all
the more reason why we should lead our lives
aright, and guard and guide our thoughts in
that dream of life. Think, Mr. Edgecumbe,
of the awakening—of the knowledge of self —
viewed in the light of the ‘might have been?’ ”
“It might well make even an angel weep,”
he answered, with a grave smile.
Just then there was a transformation scene.
Signora La Rocco, the Hungarian Nightin-
gale (singing from the boards of an Opera
House in London) appeared on the stage
before them. Though at that moment
thousands of miles away, the singer entranced
them with her wonderful voice; and the words
of her ballad were so clearly intoned that it
was hard to believe that the celebrated canta-
trice was not herself present in the flesh.


CHAPTER XII.
In the large assemblage of society people
gathered that evening in the Colonna mansion,
so prominent an individual as Alan Bdge-
cumbe could not fail to attract observation and
criticism.
In fact, he was much observed and discussed.
This no doubt was due in part to his con-
nection with the romantic island so lately dis-
covered in the South Pacific, but chiefly to his
daring rescue of their hostess of that evening.
The story was so thrilling and romantic, the
meeting in mid-air, after an appalling aerial
collision, of a man and a woman, both young
and personally attractive, one playing the part
of rescuer, the other that of the rescued. The
world in such cases naturally expects a
romantic sequel. Lives thus strangely brought
together should be linked indissolubly.
Yet strange to say, in the case under review,
Miss Colonna’s name had not so far been con-
nected in the good old-fashioned way with her
rescuer’s. This was very simply accounted
for.
Throughout the period of his stay at Como,


numerous visitors had called on his lovely-
hostess to offer their congratulations on her
miraculous escape from a terrible death.
The Colonnas entertained largely, and as it
so happened, on the very first evening of his
convalescence, Miss Keene, a friend of the
family, had displayed a marked predilection
for the society of the chief actor in the drama;
so much so indeed as to leave no manner of
doubt in the minds of most as to her ultimate
intentions.
Up to the present time it was well known
that Miss Keene had constantly and openly ex-
pressed her detestation of the gilded youth
who surrounded her, and carrying precept into
practice, had unmercifully snubbed the inferior
sex on all possible occasions—at least all those
who dared openly either to express their
admiration, or to desire closer intimacy with
the heiress of Tiverton, for Tiverton was the
name of the ancestral home where she lived,
unvexed by guardians or by trustees.
Thus it came to be recognised as a logical
sequence that a match was on the tapis, and
that in due course of time the fair heiress of
Tiverton would lead to Hymen’s altar the stal-
wart hero of the aerial catastrophe.
As for the idea being entertained that a
young man in his position would refuse so


advantageous a match, if mooted at all, the
opinion was scouted as preposterous.
Many therefore were the meaning glances
and whisperings exchanged when it was seen
that the fascinating Miss Blakeney had him
under her spell, and that for two whole hours
at least to-night they had sat together seem-
ingly engrossed in each other.
It was the more surprising, too, for never
previously had Miss Blakeney displayed any-
thing beyond the mildest interest in young
men.
What did it all mean? Something must
surely be the matter. Miss Keene and he must
have had a misunderstanding. Of course it
had occurred at the picnic to-day.
This was the universal comment.
“How painful it must be to that poor girl
over there,” whispered a dowager to a friend,
glancing first at Miss Keene and then mean-
ingly over at the two on the couch. “You take
my word for it, Betty, this will bring things
to a crisis to-night; mark my words if it
doesn’t.”
The situation was undoubtedly painful to
Miss Keene, for she could not but be aware by
many significant signs that her name and his
were being freely bandied about. And more
painful still, he appeared to be happy and
K


absorbed in the society of another woman,
whom she had to admit was personally more
gifted than herself.
A pang shot through her heart —the deepest
pang that a woman can feel—to find herself
scorned by the man to whom she has betrayed
her woman’s weakness.
“To-night,” she vowed, “she would end all
uncertainty. . . . To-night she would make
an opportunity and disclose her love. She
would then know the worst.”
As good fortune would have it, the oppor-
tunity came without any effort on her part.
Her hostess asked her to convey a message to
Miss Blakeney to the effect that the song to
which her name was attached was now due.
Miss Blakeney, on receipt of the message,
at once rose, and Miss Keene with a half sigh
of happiness dropped into the vacant seat.
For some moments Alan Edgecumbe
watched the tall, lissome form of Miss
Blakeney gracefully wending its way through
the crowded room to where Miss Colonna sat,
the centre of an animated group.
He was, however, quickly recalled to him-
self by the voice of his fair companion. “I am
beginning to think, Mr. Edgecumbe,” she said,
half playfully, but with an undercurrent of
seriousness, “that you are fickle and capable


of basely deserting old friends. For two
whole hours to-night you have not so much as
glanced my way, or any way for that matter.
“How deeply and pleasantly you must have
been engaged.”
“Ah, but you know. Miss Keene,” he replied,
with a smile, “religion is an inexhaustible
topic.”
“Oh, so religion was the subject of your con-
versation. . . .”
Yet how relieved she felt; an added lustre
came to her eyes, a touch of carmine to the pale
cheeks.
“I thought perhaps” (and she threw a mean-
ing glance at him) “that it was on a more
mundane, a more interesting subject.”
Yes, there was hope for her. There was
distinct hope for her.
“How close it is to-night, Mr. Edgecumbe,”
she said, fanning herself with unnecessary
violence. “I feel almost stifled here; let us
go out on the terrace for a few minutes.”
He at once rose to accompany her.
As they made their way through the crowded
rooms, many were the curious glances cast at
them, for it was now generally accepted that
a duel was in progress between the two ladies
concerned.
Most hoped that Miss Keene would win, for
E 2


she was a favourite with her own sex, whereas
mingled with their admiration of Miss
Blakeney was not a little awe, and perhaps
some jealousy as well.
“Did I not tell you so, Betty?” triumphantly
whispered the dowager.
“She’s going to bring him to book outside.
“I’ll make a wager that she proposes to him
to-night.”
Miss Keene, as if fully aware of the atten-
tion they had drawn on themselves, as if
conscious that her choice was under review,
quietly linked her arm through his, and with
head erect and defiant eyes, moved away with
the stately bearing of a queen.
The night was balmy and the sea breeze cool
and refreshing as they emerged on the terrace,
and for some time they paced to and fro in
silence; Miss Keene the while clinging con-
fidingly to his arm.
Presently, and perhaps in unconscious
response to her thoughts, he halted, and the
lady, unlocking her arm from his, stood facing
him.
“Do you know why I have brought you out
here to-night, Mr. Edgecumbe?
“I have brought you here”—her voice was
low and tremulous with emotion—“so that we
might be away from prying eyes and listening


ears, for I have something to say to you—some-
thing that, perhaps, you have already guessed.”
He did not speak, but looked at her in
deepest surprise.
Since their entry upon the terrace he had
been turning over in his mind the peculiar
position in which he stood with regard to Miss
Colonna.
He had not thought at all of the lady
clinging to his arm, but of that other with
whom during the evening he had scarcely ex-
changed a dozen words.
The withdrawal of Miss Keene’s arm, her
strange manner, and still stranger words,
suddenly brought him to his senses.
“Mr. Edgecumbe, since first we met,” she
continued, “I have not in any way tried to
conceal the nature of my feelings towards you.
I know”—here he moved as if to interrupt her
“that from your standpoint a woman’s
affection, her love for a man, is something to
be borne in silence, to be jealously guarded,
to be unrevealed until he chooses first to speak.
“But, Mr. Edgecumbe, we live in a pro-
gressive age, where there is equality between
the sexes, and it matters not who shall first
speak.
“There is no reason why a woman should
conceal her preference. . . ,


“Mr. Edgecumbe Alan!” —she lingered
softly on his name “I have not concealed
mine.
“You must know I love you. I loved you
the first moment I saw you.
“If not just yet,” she pleaded (for he was
again interrupting in the hope of sparing her),
“can I not hope that when you learn to know
me better, a time may come when my love, my
steadfast devotion, will, if not wholly, in part
at least, win its recompense?”
She was greatly agitated, tears stood in her
eyes, and with clasped hands she gazed appeal-
ingly up into his face.
He felt the awkwardness of the position.
Unwittingly he had led this woman to imagine
that he was free. How could he spare her?
How could he spare her pride? How could he
spare her pain? Oh, what a blind idiot he had
been!
“Miss Keene,” he replied, with troubled
voice, “I was quite unaware of this.
“I have always thought of you as a dear
friend, and I shall always regard you with
the feelings that one true friend has for
another.
“Let us forget what has passed between us
to-night, and in its place”—and he took her


unresisting hand in his “let us pledge a
friendship that shall survive all time.”
He waited for her answering pressure. . .
And at last it came.
*****
A few days later the intelligence reached
him that she had left for Europe.
It was years before they again met.
And shortly after their next meeting she
married John Edgecumhe.


CHAPTER XIII.
Our present chapter opens on a fine clear
morning about two months after the arrival
and settlement of the Edgecumbes in Aus-
tralia.
A stranger to Sydney on this particular
morning, standing on the South Head just
as the rays of the sun were peeping over the
ramparts that form Sydney’s eastern
boundary, and watching the reflections of
golden light as they played on the ripples of
the waterway within, would no doubt have
wondered to himself at the meaning of the
strange spectacle there presented.
From Watson’s Bay—following the curves
of the shore line to the entrance of the Parra-
matta River, and thence continuing along the
northern foreshores of the harbour —a line of
craft, both large and small, stately liners,
launches, yachts, houseboats, and tiny skiffs,
made a continuous fringe; while abreast of
Lady Macquarie’s Chair and Garden Island
a noble line of battleships and cruisers—the
naval squadrons of the powers —lay peacefully
anchored; the most powerful in point of


numbers and armament were those of China
and America.
As the morning advanced, song and laughter
rang across the waters. Hundreds of happy
expectant groups were discussing breakfast,
al fresco ; while the many floating restaurants
had much ado to satisfy the needs of the
thousands of hungry, clamouring, and im-
patient customers that besieged them.
Landward, the electric roadways—surface,
underground, and overhead were pouring
thousands and tens of thousands of visitors into
the city.
The embankments that ran along the fore-
shore, as well as the immense bridge structure
spanning the waterway, were soon thronged
with dense masses.
From every point of view, passenger aerials,
laden with human freight, were converging on
Sydney. By noon it was estimated that over
one million of visitors were within the
boundaries of the city. . .
It was the third and closing day of the
World’s great International Carnival,
These carnivals, annual in their occurrence,
were held alternately on the territory of one
or other of the Powers, and were becoming in-
creasingly popular with the general public
who flocked to them in great numbers.


The convincing ground for the present year
happened to be Australia, and great was the
excitement among Antipodeans when it became
known that for the first time in two decades
they would have a champion to represent them
in the final heat for the great Emblazoned
Shield —a trophy, the contest for which was
the most important event of the Carnival.
Out of nine competing nationalities, four —
China, America, England, and Australia
had representatives in the final heat for the
Shield. The fact that Australia’s representa-
tive was a woman, gave additional interest to
the event.
This was Miss Pelham, a lady as dis-
tinguished in science circles as in the athletic
world. It was she who had rescued Alan
Edgecumbe, and who by her strange subse-
quent proceedings had so deeply stirred his
imagination.
Betting on the race ran high. China and
America in particular were backing heavily
their respective champions.
Each of these Powers had so far secured an
equal number of wins. The fine form of their
scullers for many years past had virtually left
the race between them.
China, moreover, had won the Shield last
year in her own waters. This had occasioned


much heartburning. .America’s representative
would undoubtedly have been victor had it
not been for a foul, which America’s partisans
declared to be intentional on the part of Ah
Sing, China’s great champion sculler; but the
umpire disallowed their protests.
At this stage, it may be of interest, in the
light of subsequent events, to remark that for
many years past exceedingly embittered re-
lations had existed between the two Powers,
China and America.
The ill-feeling was caused in the first
instance by America prohibiting Chinese sub-
jects from entering and settling in American
territory. Celestial retaliation was at first
confined to the boycotting of American goods,
but later, when she felt herself strong enough,
China, in retaliation, enacted very stringent
immigration restriction laws, directed against
American subjects.
Both Powers claimed World supremacy;
each feared to attack the other.
Matters, however, had advanced to a stage
when neither Power could retreat from its
position. It was felt that, at no distant date,
the arbitrament of the sword must be appealed
to.
Indeed a spark at any moment might kindle
a conflagration that would be far reaching in


its effects, and probably involve other Powers
in the struggle —a struggle that could only end
in the complete subjugation of one or other
of the principal combatants.
As an illustration showing how far racial
hatred had gone, it will be sufficient to mention
that the presence of an American at any time
was offensive to a Celestial.
The attitude, moreover, of the Chinese
during the carnival did not tend to improve a
situation already embittered.
Above the waterway, under a canopy of
Dragon flags, and guarded by a file of winged
Celestial warriors, flaunted the Emblazoned
Shield. This, in itself, was not a matter of
offence, though possibly an infringement of
good taste.
The chief trouble lay in the offensive bearing
not alone of the soldiery guarding the trophy,
but of the vast masses of the lower classes of
Chinese citizens and visitors. Of these,
probably more than a quarter of a million were
present. Whenever an American drew near,
the Shield was pointed to, and remarks were
made in an audible and jeering tone, not
flattering to American patriotism and prowess.
As a natural consequence, there were several
severe conflicts between parties of sailors be-
longing to the Chinese and American fleets in
Port Jackson.


These conflicts were only prevented from
assuming alarming proportions by the presence
of the military, aided by officers in uniform
from the fleets.
Little, indeed, did the brave men of either
nationality, as they glared defiantly at one
another, think that the morrow would witness
a bloody termination to an ancient feud, and
that for many the light of day would be for
ever quenched.
* ♦ * * *
Here we must digress. Mabel Edge-
cumbe’s wedding was shortly to take place.
Irene and Adele Blakeney—the latter now
an indispensable adjunct of the Edgecumbe
household —were to act as her bridesmaids.
A meeting between Alan Edgecumbe and
Miss Pelham was brought about through the
kind offices of a friend, Admiral Hung Chang.
It happened in this wise:
One evening on his return to Elmswood
from a visit to his friends at Como, Alan Edge-
cumbe found a note from the Admiral, asking
him to call at the flagship on the following
afternoon.
On his arrival on board the Yan-foo, he
found the Admiral pacing the quarter-deck
with a lady in whom he recognised the charming


incognita, the heroine of his tiger adventure.
Of course an introduction followed.
This meeting with Miss Pelham, Alan Edge-
cumbe ascribed to chance, but the lady did not
so regard it.
Events now moved quickly with them.
Within a week of his introduction, he became
so interested in Miss Pelham’s training for the
great Shield Race, that he accompanied her on
several of her practice trials on the Parramatta
River, and she complimented him by saying
that he was the best oarsman she had ever met.
0 0
The hour for the starting of the Shield Race
drew nigh. The Edgecumbe party, grouped
on a platform commanding a view of the
course, looked down with amazement at the
surging mass of human life around them.
It was with a feeling of almost awe that they
listened to the deep muffled roar the com-
mingling of tens of thousands of human voices.
Cheers, volleying and swelling like peals of
musketry, along the shores of the estuary,
greeted the start of the great Shield Race. All
eyes were directed towards the same point.
When the scullers appeared in sight, at first a
mere jumble of boats and men, cries were
heard: “America leads! Go it. Stars and
Stripes!” Later a veritable babel of Chinese


acclamations told how the Yankee champion,
who had got first to the front, had been
overhauled and passed by China’s representa-
tive.
As the scullers neared the platform on which
the Edgecumbes stood, Alan recognised the
well-known form of the Australian oarswoman,
slightly in rear of the two leading scullers, for
now there were only three left in the race.
The English representative had been obliged
to abandon the contest. By a deplorable
accident his boat had been swamped.
Miss Pelham, though rowing a superb
stroke, was not spurting as were the others.
To those in the secret of her trial form, it was
manifest that she was husbanding her powers.
The mile post —it was a three mile course —
was quickly passed. The scullers appeared to
be maintaining about the same relative posi-
tions —the Celestial leading the Yankee, and
Miss Pelham less than a boat’s length in rear of
the latter. The two former were rowing
thirty-nine to the minute. The Australian
oarswoman, though rowing only thirty-two,
was still holding her ofrn without apparent
effort.
Her easy confident bearing (for now and
again she glanced over her shoulder at the
leaders, as if to gauge their powers), coupled


with the almost ridiculous ease with which she
had disposed of her opponents in the opening
heats, inspired her supporters with the utmost
confidence.
The odds freely laid against her were as
eagerly accepted.
The mile and a half post was gained. Then
came about a sudden and unexpected reversal
of positions. Amidst frantic applause from
tens of thousands of Antipodean throats
cheering that was echoed and re-echoed from
point to point throughout the city, and thence
far into the country the Australian oars-
woman, by a masterpiece of sculling, by a
magnificent rush, drew level with and passed
the Yankee. Then she challenged the leader,
caught him up, shot to the front, gave him her
wash, and then calmly settled down again to
her former stroke of thirty-two to the minute.
The Yankee sculler on his part, in response
to the shouts of his countrymen, replied with
a determined spurt. He caught and passed
Ah Sing, but was unable to make any im-
pression on the leader, who momentarily
quickened her stroke to meet his onrush. Bar
accidents, she had the race well in hand.
But a race is not won until it is lost.
An entirely unforeseen and most mysterious
influence suddenly came into play that com-
pletely upset all calculations.


It all happened within the space of a minute.
There was Ah Sing (he already led the
Yankee) gaining on Miss Pelham at every
stroke, notwithstanding her utmost efforts.
Soon he had forced his boat on an equality, and
amidst a silence, broken only by his country-
men, assumed the lead.
It is not too much to say that a chill of most
profound disappointment settled on at least
three-fourths of the assembled multitude. No
one could account for the seeming collapse of
the Australian oarswoman, or for her complete
loss of previous form.
What did it all mean?
And yet brooding in the very atmosphere
was a hushed expectancy as of something
further to follow.
Suddenly loud yells and cries of terror
directed all eyes to a band of winged Celestials
who had been observed following the boats,
ostensibly for the purpose of shouting en-
couragement to their countrymen.
They were seen to be in headlong flight.
Grown desperate at the prospect of Ah
Sing’s defeat, the Chinese had been directing
air currents from their enormous wing-attach-
ments upon the leading boats, causing them to
hang in the water, and of course materially
checking their speed.


But keen eyes had observed their movements,
and a jet of corrosive fluid spurted amongst
them accounted for their cries and for their
rapid disappearance from the scene.
The all-absorbing question now was: “Could
Miss Pelham recover the lost lead?”
Some of the fainthearted among her sup-
porters affirmed that after her great efforts
they could plainly detect signs of exhaustion.
But how fared it with Ah Sing?
Whether it was that in the late spurt he had
exhausted his powers, shot his last bolt, or that
the sight of his redoubtable foe creeping up
caused his heart to fail; be that as it may, he
momentarily faltered in his stroke, and for ever
lost his chance of the “Yellow Jacket” with
which had he proved victorious he would have
been invested on his return to his beloved
China.
Inch by inch, foot by foot, Miss Pelham
doggedly fought her way. The interval
between boat and boat gradually lessened.
The advancing prows were once more on a
level. Presently the nose of one pushed in
front and then drew rapidly away.
The Yankee sculler, aware of the dastardly
trick played upon him, redoubled his efforts,
quickly caught up All Sing, and assumed
second position.


In this order was the race concluded, and a
mighty shout acclaimed the winner of the
“Great Emblazoned Shield.”
There was an instant rush made by her sup-
porters. The Australian oarswoman was up-
lifted, boat and all, on a dozen stalwart
shoulders and borne to the Governor General’s
marquee, where in the name of the Common-
wealth of Australia, she was congratulated on
her splendid triumph. Her brows were en-
circled by the crown of victory, a work of art
encrusted with brilliants.
The Silver Sculls was the closing event of
the day, and was won by the ladies’ eight of
England, with the American crew a good
second. In connection with this race, of which
the two premier positions were secured by the
ladies’ eight of England and America respec-
tively, it was decided after consultation
between these two crews that this sculling con-
test should become an annual affair between
them.
Thus further was cemented the good rela-
tions already existing between the two great
branches of the Anglo-Saxon family.


CHAPTER XIV.
On a silken couch, in the boudoir of her float-
ing palace, The Osiris , in an attitude of repose
that ill concealed the beauty of her form, lay
the stalwart oarswoman, the heroine of the
“Great Emblazoned Shield Race.”
Grown weaiy at length of congratulations,
and of the sycophancy of her numerous ad-
mirers, she had betaken herself to her house-
boat, with strict orders that no one should be
admitted. Here, restored to her usual physical
vigour by a warm bath and change of clothing,
in meditation free, she calmly reviewed the
situation.
Presently she rose and stood before a full-
length mirror let into a panel of the cabin wall.
The mirror revealed a peerless form, tall, but
with beautifully-proportioned limbs; a classic
profile; a broad white brow, from which the
dark chestnut hair was gathered back in a
simple knot behind; a full white throat, and
swelling bust. As she moved, her easy gliding
motion displayed a grace, a harmony of parts,
most pleasing, most alluring to the eye; whilst
her robust vitality bespoke a modem Juno.


Strong in her passions, calm in repose, un-
scrupulous where necessary to the attainment
of her ends, she was yet generous withal.
With her, to love was to love passionately—
to demand return. She scorned all con-
ventionality, all the narrow bounds of custom.
But while prepared to surrender all, she
would exact all.
Such a woman was not lightly to be en-
countered, nor when encountered easily to be
put aside.
As calmly she contemplated herself, the
thought of her late triumph brought a flush
to her brow, an added brightness to her eyes.
How those eyes gleamed, those inscrutable eyes
of violet grey!
How splendid in its noble proportions the
queenly form!
Then her mood softened as her mind re-
curred to an incident in the contest; when on
nearing the two mile post her eyes, ranging the
crowd, had momentarily caught a glimpse of
him, of the one being whom in the wide world
she loved better than herself, and for whom,
willingly, nay glorying in the act, she would
have laid down her life.
“And what is the good of it all?” mused she,
half aloud, while a shade passed across her face,
“if I am denied the one thing I want —the


one thing that alone could make me entirely
happy?”
She turned, and hastily seating herself,
rapidly wrote a note, and sealing it, struck a
silver gong.
A swarthy page, in quiet livery, entered and
silently stood before her. “For whom is this,
Jumoo?” She poised the note on her finger
tips and eyed him steadily.
“Massa Edgecumbe,” returned the page,
grinning from ear to ear. “I just see him; he
with gen’man, lady; he not see me!”
Jumoo was accustomed to carry notes, and
from his mistress’ face correctly divined its
destination.
“Now take this to him, wait for a reply, and
mind you hasten back.” Jumoo bowed, took
the note, and quickly disappeared.
When he had vanished, she rose, threw her-
self full length on a lounge, and strove to calm
her now excited feelings. She keenly felt his
neglect. Had he cared for her, he would
voluntarily have come to her.
And in this hour of her triumph, too, why
had he not come?
There was humiliation in the very thought
of his forgetfulness of her.
Jumoo returned breathless. Knowing full
well by experience his mistress’ moods, he had


acquitted himself well. He had not loitered
by the way, although, with Alan Edgecumbe’s
half-a-crown clasped tightly in his pocket,
there was much to tempt him. He had been
sternly faithful to duty, and now anxiously
awaited his dismissal.
“Well, Jumoo, what message have you?”
asked his impatient mistress.
“Massa Edgecumbe, he read letter, he say
come at once,” answered the lad, drawing a
deep breath.
“You are a good boy,” she said, kindly
patting him on the head. “You can go now; I
shall not want you further.”
Jumoo’s face beamed with smiles at his
mistress’ praise, and bowing low, he left the
cabin.
Presently a bell tinkled; a visitor entered
the ante-chamber, and pausing a moment,
tapped lightly on the door.
“Come in,” she cried, softly.
The door opened and Alan Edgecumbe
entered the cabin.
“Oh, you’ve come at last!” and with a charm-
ing pout, but without rising, she carelessly ex-
tended a hand in welcome.
“I really couldn’t get to you before, there
was such a crowd,” he began deprecatingly, as
he bowed over and warmly pressed her hand,


but did not take the position that the sudden
swishing aside of her skirts assigned him.
“I was just on the point of coming to see
you,” he went on, “when I saw Jumoo.”
“Oh!” she cried, looking up at him with a
most peculiar intentness of gaze. “Is that
quite true?”
“Yes, it’s quite true,” he returned, laugh-
ingly.
“And now let me congratulate you on your
magnificent race —against treachery, too.
“I heard competent judges say” (he had not
dropped her hand, so he must have felt sure
of a pardon for late omissions) “that it was
the finest exhibition of scientific sculling they
had ever witnessed. A triumph of which you
can be justly proud.
“And think what you’ve done for Australia!
The crowds simply went mad.
“When I saw the form in which you were
sculling, I said to myself: ‘What sort of show
should I make against her to-day?’
“You could have given me a couple of
lengths at least, and then beaten me.”
This was in allusion to their practice trials
together, when as often as not he defeated her.
She was manifestly highly gratified at his
praise, for she now sat up with animation, and
smiled graciously upon him.


“Nonsense,” she protested, magnanimously,
“you could defeat me at any time.
“But” (with a deprecating and mocking
smile) “why are you standing on ceremony,
to-day?
“Aren’t you going to sit down and have a
chat?”
“I really can’t stay a moment,” he protested.
“I have an old friend outside who is dining
with us to-night; besides,” looking down upon
her, with a half smile, “you need a rest! Good-
bye! I’ll see you again very soon.”
She made no further effort to detain him.
He pressed her hand and left her.
Hortense Pelham, for fully an hour after he
had left her, never stirred from that couch; she
stared blankly at the wall before her.
And it had come to this! All her scheming,
all her plans, had resulted in what?
In nothing! absolutely nothing!
He did not love her! she felt assured of that.
He loved that other woman!
And it had come about through her own
foUy. She had held aloof, thinking to spur
his curiosity and interest in her. And the other
woman had simply stepped in and taken her
place. It was hard, very hard; it was
more than hard! And now what was before
her? Absolutely nothing. Life was a per-
fect blank!


And then her anger stirred. She would
prevent that marriage! Ah, but could she do
so? Long she cogitated, and presently the
faint flicker of a smile stole over her face.
Yes . . . there were means!
And there she sat, thinking and thinking,
but strive as she might, her mind would drift
back to the past. Old memories came crowd-
ing themselves before her.
She had always desired to be great. She
was now great.
She had wished for power. She now held it.
She had wished men to love her; and men had
loved her, and committed follies for her sake.
But she herself had never loved. The charm
had ever been in the pursuit, and her object
once attained, she no longer cared. The
realisation of her ambitions had brought her
neither happiness nor content.
And now the one thing she craved for, the
one thing that was absolutely necessary for her
happiness, was denied her. The one man, to
win whose love she would have dared a
thousand deaths, loved another woman.
It was bitter, very bitter. Why was it so?
Why did she love him ? She could not tell. It
was fate. It was the happening of the in-
evitable.
Why was she bom? She was bom to love,


for love to her was the “elixir” of life. With-
out love, life was barren.
And was she to tamely submit to be passed
by? to have her rightful place usurped by
another?
And now long-forgotten words—the words
of that mystic—occurred to her. Was it
possible that they might come true after all?
those words that, at the time, she had regarded
merely as the offspring of a disordered
imagination—the hallucinations of a good man
who was a fanatic.
She had sought him out in the wilds of a far
country. She had passed a whole fortnight
at the foot of that mountain, day by day, being
denied to him. He would not see, he sent her
word, one who came out of idle curiosity.
Then she bribed his servants, through whose
urging he at length relented.
“Could it possibly be true what he had said:
“That in a remote Past, she, then in high
position, had loved a* man who was bound to
another woman. That she had gratified her
desire by the committal of a great wrong. She
had tortured the other woman, and had heaped
benefits upon him she loved.
“And still she had not won his love.
“And now in this present cycle of her life,” he
had said (although she might not know it), “she


would again meet the man she had loved, and
would again be subjected to temptation; but
it would be within her power,” he told her, “to
make expiation for that former wrong by de-
voting herself, her wealth, and her high talents
to the uplifting of humanity, the uplifting of
her fallen, weaker, and erring brothers and
sisters.
“In this self-sacrifice for the good of others,
this putting away of selfishness,” he assured
her, “not only would she find her true happi-
ness, but she would hasten on her own evolu-
tion as well —the evolution of her true self.”
Hortense Pelham rose slowly to her feet,
and gazed long and earnestly into the depths
of her mirror.


CHAPTER XV.
A gaeden fete, in honour of Mr. Colonna’s
friend, Admiral Grey, Commander in Chief of
the American fleet rendezvousing at Sydney,
was in progress in the spacious grounds of
Como. A brilliant group of guests was
gathered on the terraced front. Foreign
visitors of distinction mingled with the elite
of Sydney. The navies of the Powers were
represented by officers in gorgeous uniforms,
adding picturesqueness to the scene; those of
America were conspicuous alike in point of
numbers and by the splendour of their dress.
The only Power unrepresented was China.
It was taken as a matter of course that the
two must not meet, must not be invited to the
same entertainments.
The Americans, as especial favourites, were
in danger of being spoiled by the multiplicity
of attentions showered upon them. They were
the lions of the hour, and no one grudged them
this distinction, for it was felt that they would
first face the common enemy, whom all alike
feared.
Antipodeans would acclaim the victory


should the arms of their trans-oceanic cousins
prevail in the impending conflict with China.
That conflict could not now be long delayed.
International complications had reached a
stage whence there was no retreat save by
recourse to the sword.
The evening papers, just to hand, contained
authoritative information of the withdrawal of
the Chinese Ambassador from the United
States. War, it was said, would probably be
declared on the morrow. Everywhere through-
out the world was to be heard the din of warlike
preparations.
Which Power would take the initiative?
Which Power would strike the first blow?
The consensus of opinion favoured China,
for it was well known that her armaments were
perfected, that her mood was aggressive.
Apparently the most unconcerned of all the
guests to-night were the Americans. The
officers, cigar in mouth, moved carelessly about
the terrace, listening to the strains of a con-
cealed band, chatting, laughing, flirting; dis-
cussing every topic but the one that most vitally
concerned them.
They were fully conscious, however, that on
their heads would, almost to a certainty, first
break the storm of war. The struggle in which
they must shortly engage would be fought


against overwhelming odds. In the harbour,
that gleamed so brightly from the terrace, there
floated forces that were numerically superior to
their own, and that grew in numbers every
hour.
In a large marquee on the lawn, Alan Edge-
cumbe found himself fraternising with a young
American naval officer, to whom he had been
introduced.
This was Lieutenant Garfield, a slender man
of middle height, and of a pronounced
American type, with clear cut incisive face,
and eyes that looked straight into yours, as if
to read your thoughts.
He was the inventor of a new type of war-
aerial, a form of burning lens that projected
a beam of light of such intensity that it was
said to shrivel and burn up everything in its
path. Detractors there were—men high up
in the service—who prophesied of its future,
“that if employed in actual warfare it was
likely to prove more destructive to friend than
to foe.”
The American naval authorities, however,
had hastily despatched Lieutenant Garfield in
his experimental ship, ironically termed the
“Cigar Lighter,” to strengthen their forces
in Australia.
“To our next merry meeting, Mr. Edge


cumbe,” said the Lieutenant, presently, lifting
to his lips the glass of wine, with which for
some time past he had been toying, and tossing
it off. Before, however, replacing the empty
glass on the table, he gave his companion a
searching look, and added: “If the dream I had
last night comes true, our futures, Mr. Edge-
cumbe, will in some way be connected.
“Do you believe in dreams i Mine was a
very strange one. I’ll tell you of it later.”
“I can’t say that I do,” returned Alan Edge-
cumbe, “though no doubt some dreams do come
true. For myself, I dream every night, I
think, but then I forget what I dreamt in the
morning. My dreams, I know, are generally
a good deal jumbled. At one moment lam in
one place; the next I am somewhere else.
Nearly always I am seeking something or
somebody, or taking part in something con-
nected with my waking life. I frequently
find myself in most ridiculous and impossible
positions, as if I had a second self, or double.
I have sometimes wondered if we have not
really a double self, that while we are sleeping
tries its hand at the game of life, and makes
just as great a hash of it as we do.”
“You mean,” said the Lieutenant, laughing,
“that the one chap, which is you, runs the day,
and the other fellow the night. I have.


however, heard it declared by highly cultured
men and women that we have a double or astral
self into which consciousness escapes during
sleep. Well, in my dream it must have been
the other fellow that was playing the game.
“It was in connection with this very ring,
at which I have seen you looking curiously
more than once to-night.” He glanced thought-
fully and even lovingly, so Alan thought, at a
beautiful ring fashioned of several filaments
of gold, set with diamonds and opals, looped
in the form of two separate initials, that
sparkled on the engagement finger of his right
hand.
“Of course you guess, Mr. Edgecumbe,”
went on the Lieutenant, “that I am engaged.
Well, this ring that concerns my dream my
fiancee placed on my finger less than a week
ago in ‘the States.’
“First, I dreamed that I saw Ella, seemingly
under the influence of some silent grief, and
when I pressed her to tell me the cause, she
never answered, or even appeared conscious of
my presence. Then somehow she vanished,
and I saw you with my ring in your hands.
You were examining it, and when I asked you
how you became possessed of it, you also dis-
appeared. Then I awoke.
“That was the night before last.


“Last night the dream recurred, with this
difference that Ella had the ring. On her face
was still the same sad expression that I had
observed before, and again when I attempted
to address her there was no response.
“Then I grew angry, and chid her for con-
cealing her sorrow from me, and suddenly she
burst into tears and vanished. I awoke with
the most peculiar sensation, and a feeling that
I had really seen her.
“I don’t know why I should confide in you,
Mr. Edgecumbe, but somehow this dream has
affected me more than I care to think about.”
That night Alan Edgecumbe dreamed, and
in his dream Miss Colonna, Miss Pelham, the
Lieutenant, his betrothed, and the ring were
all inextricably mingled.


CHAPTER XVI.
There was great excitement at the Elmswood
breakfast table next morning when Alan
rushed into the room holding a paper aloft.
“War!” he cried excitedly. “China has de-
clared war against the United States! Great
battle expected off the Heads!”
There was an instant rush from the table to
see who could first reach the lawn, which com-
manded a view of the hostile fleets. John
Edgecumbe and Miss Blakeney arrived there
first, for Mabel, realising that she would be
outpaced by her long-legged brothers, clung to
Alan’s coat-tails, and thus they lagged behind
and brought up the rear.
It was a perfectly still morning, and the
harbour was alive with boats filled with sight-
seers, and dense masses of people thronged the
points and vantage positions abutting on the
harbour. Procession after procession of the
larger craft were wending their way leisurely
down the thoroughfare, making for a point
outside the Heads, whilst overhead the atmo-
sphere was thick with aerials waiting for a
movement of the fleets below, for all were bent
on witnessing the expected battle off Port
Jackson.
p*


A noble sight the two fleets presented. Huge
battleships and formidable-looking cruisers
floated peacefully side by side, their decks and
turrets bristling with monster ordnance and
quick-firing guns, and everything on board as
spick-and-span as human art could make.
Soon, a stately line of fourteen magnificent
ships—America’s war fleet —got under weigh,
and, led by the armoured cruiser. New York,
with the Massachusetts battleship, flying an
Admiral’s pennon, in the centre, proceeded at
slow speed down the harbour. Overhead was
an attendant flotilla of nineteen war-aerials,
among which, owing to its novel construction,
the “Cigar Lighter” was clearly distinguish-
able.
Twenty minutes had scarcely elapsed from
the departure of the American fleet, when the
Chinese array of twenty-three battleships and
cruisers, led by the flagship Yan-foo (said to
be the most powerful warship in the world),
followed in wake of their redoubtable foes,
whilst overhead and preceding the naval vessels,
floated an exceedingly powerful flotilla of
forty-seven war aerials.
Now was noticeable the disparity of forces
between the belligerents, and many hearts grew
heavy with dread at the thought of the ap-
proaching conflict, and many a prayer was


offered up for the triumph of our Yankee
cousins.
The inspiriting strains of “Yankee Doodle,”
however, and the cheering of the sailors on
board, told with what confidence the Americans
themselves anticipated the issue of the im-
pending struggle.
To retrogress, it may be mentioned that in
aerial warfare many early-century misconcep-
tions had been removed. When first intro-
duced, it was a matter of common statement
that naval warfare would be a thing of the past,
and the fleets obsolete. To theorists it ap-
peared an easy task to destroy ships by simply
dropping charges of high explosives on their
decks. In practice, however, it was found to
be no such easy matter.
In actual warfare, ships, capable of
manoeuvring at forty knots speed, were armed
with special guns to cope with these midgets
of the air; and shells that maintained velocity
and direction in the upper strata of the atmo-
sphere were no light foes to be encountered.
More often than not, it was the aerials that
were worsted, for they carried but few and
light guns, and their sides were easily pene-
trable. Besides, their delicate machinery was
liable to be disabled by the smallest projectile.
All war fleets, moreover, had attendant air


flotillas, so that one of these, before it could
hope to come to the assistance of a naval ally,
would have to encounter and overcome a like
antagonist to itself.
It will, perhaps, be thought strange, that on
the eve of war, a great Power like America
should allow its fleet in the waters of a neutral,
to be outmatched by the forces of a probable
foe.
In the present instance, however, owing to
the strategy of the Chinese, it so happened that
up to within a few days of the Declaration of
War, the naval and aerial fleets of com-
batants in Australia had been almost on an
equality—China, perhaps, slightly superior.
During the morning and night, however,
antecedent to the Declaration, a formidable
addition of naval, and particularly of aerial,
war vessels had dropped one by one into Port
Jackson, until by the morrow—the day of the
conflict—the Celestials were in overwhelming
force.
Admiral Grey was about the last man to be
daunted by the superior strength of an enemy.
In fact, under any other conditions, the interest
for him would have vanished from the ap-
proaching fight. A victory under present con-
ditions would, indeed, be glorious.


When the hostile fleets had attained an offing
of about twelve miles from Port Jackson
Heads, a sharp skirmish occurred between aerial
outposts. The main bodies advancing in support,
when within striking distance, charged through
the opposing lines. The naval squadrons,
meanwhile, were manoeuvring for position.
To the spectators, the aerial onset was a
horrible mingling and clashing of flame-lit
objects—objects breathing fire, and shaking
the air with their terrific explosions. But,
saddest sight of all, amidst the debris falling
and splashing into the ocean below, were human
bodies—or what once bore humanity’s sem-
blance; some in the last agonies of dissolution;
others disembowelled, or hurled in fragments
far and wide. Indeed, ghastly trophies of the
fight w r ere, on more than one occasion, pro-
jected on to neutral vessels.
When struck by a high explosive shell, an
air-ship would present an aspect similar to that
of a fireball, or sheet of flame, from which shot
out in all directions, innumerable tiny specks—
fragments of men and material; thence would
ensue the usual finale; first, a splash on the
broad bosom of the ocean, followed, at inter-
vals, by others, singly and in showers.
Absorbed in watching the interesting


spectacle before them, and mechanically pre-
serving a prescribed distance from the com-
batants, the spectators, of whom many
thousands were present, had hitherto escaped
the unpleasant consequences sometimes attend-
ant on the position of neutrals who follow
closely the details of a battle. Shells had
certainly passed shrieking through their ranks,
and many narrow escapes had been recorded,
but what of that? No one would retire while
his fellow stayed, for, had he done so, every-
where, after the battle, he would have been
unmercifully chaffed for his pusillanimity.
Suddenly a mass of flame leaped forth from
where the throng was densest. ... A
deafening explosion, like a thunder clap, rang
through the rarefied atmosphere. When
the smoke had cleared away, that, which all
feared, was seen to have resulted. A terrible
disaster had occurred. Two aerials were miss-
ing, blown to atoms, whilst a number of others
bore unmistakable traces of serious injury, and
their occupants, at least those not mortally in-
jured, were shrieking wildly for help. Before
assistance could be rendered one air-ship at least
was seen to plunge bodily into the ocean, where
it was immediately engulphed.
Meanwhile, on both sides, the aerial fight
was being hotly contested. Time and again.


the combatants returned to the charge; on each
occasion, alas! with sadly diminished numbers.
But soon it was seen that the fight was nearly
ended; the last scene of the drama in process of
enactment.
China had lost the day aloft. Of forty-seven
war-aerials brought into action, only seven sur-
vived.
The Chinese Admiral met an honourable and
heroic death, facing the hated foe. Signalling
to his shattered array, he executed a last,
brilliant, but hopeless charge into the enemy’s
ranks.
The battle raged afresh. Soon not a
Celestial aerial remained on the field of con-
flict. All had been annihilated save one, and
that one, in rapid flight, had pursuers on its
track.
The “Cigar Lighter,” Lieutenant Garfield
in command, had been particularly prominent
during the action, and had covered itself with
glory. Nothing could resist its attack.
Wherever its burning beams were focussed,
there perished an unhappy foe shrivelled and
burnt beyond recognition. During the hottest
period of the fighting, an American cruiser was
destroyed by its agency. Such are the inci-
dents of modem warfare.


The American loss in this memorable en-
gagement aloft was heavy. Out of a total of
nineteen war-aerials, nine were utterly de-
stroyed, and three were put out of action,
besides many casualties among the remainder.
Meanwhile, the naval forces had been en-
gaged fighting to a conclusion, as desperate
an engagement as any placed on record. The
hostile cruisers came first into collision, and the
cuirassed battleships joining in, there was pre-
sented to the onlookers a spectacle of unrivalled
magnificence.
The air was filled with the deep boom of
artillery, whilst, added to showers of bursting
shells, the ocean between the fleets was torn and
flung upwards by the meeting of surface and
underwater networks of advancing torpedoes.
The gun fire became incessant and deadly.
Soon the superstructures of vessels commenced
to show abundant signs of the terrific nature
of modern shell fire. Armoured sides, decks,
and shields afforded scarcely any protection
against the larger shell.
In many instances, guns, mountings, and
shields were driven as shrapnel through the
ships, creating fearful carnage.
The decks became human shambles. Frag-
ments of men and material soaked in human
blood were strewn everywhere. The very
scuppers ran blood.


As fast as one gun detachment was de-
stroyed, another took its place. Now and
again, a big ship, struck by several torpedoes,
would suddenly disappear, whilst others would
drift out of action, battered beyond recognition
of nationality. Those of their crew still alive
were probably too stupefied by the fumes of
exploded shells to hoist distinguishing colours.
Presently the fight assumed a new aspect.
Several linked torpedoes of the largest pattern,
dodging the defending torpedoes, found a weak
spot below the armoured underwater deck of
the American flagship, Massachusetts.
For several moments it was thought that this
fine ship was destroyed. However, on the
subsidence of the cataract of water that was
upheaved several hundreds of feet into the
atmosphere, it was seen that she still floated.
But her hull was strained, and many of her
bulkheads and hull sub-divisions destroyed, so
that the interior of the ship speedily became
flooded with water, and it seemed probable that
in a few minutes this costly battleship would go
to the bottom.
Admiral Grey, however, was equal to the
emergency. Calmly flashing orders to his
consort battleships to co-operate in the move-
ment, he suddenly launched his ship at full
speed at the Yan-foo, as she passed broadside


on. This movement drew such a fierce and con-
centrated fire upon the Massachusetts that it
was a matter of wonderment that anything
above the water line remained intact.
As it was, the destruction on board was
appalling; hardly a man between decks sur-
vived.
Fortunately the conning tower, from which
the ship was fought, remained comparatively
uninjured. Here, Admiral Grey was at his
post, wounded sorely, yet every faculty on the
alert.
Swiftly and in silence, save for the rush of
water at her prow, the gallant ship neared her
prey.
The Yan-f 00, too late, attempted a turning
movement.
With a crash, and rending sound, like that
of a melting glacier sliding down an Alpine
valley, the Massachusetts struck her opponent
amidships.
The force of the impact was so terrific that
it carried her right through the Yan-foo
literally cut her in two. The severed halves
fell asunder, capsized, and sank.
But the prayer of the dying Chinese Admiral
was granted. He did not die unavenged.
The Massachusetts’ last moment had come.
On the very spot where her victim had sunk, her


stern suddenly uplifted, and, with a last cheer
from her crew, the stately battleship plunged
to the bottom of the ocean, carrying with her
America’s greatest Admiral—the Nelson of
the twentieth century.
The day was virtually won. The Chinese
line was in confusion. The ram, torpedo, and
shell, at close range, played fearful havoc on
all sides. In vain the Chinese ships eluded the
powerful beaks of their opponents. The
action closed with the surrender of seven
Celestial ships. Two fast cruisers alone
attempted to escape. Their destruction by the
aerial squadron was the closing event of the
day.
Obeying the signal of his naval superior to
chase, and if possible destroy the escaping
enemy, the American Aerial Commander
started in pursuit—the “Cigar Lighter” lead-
ing. Coming well within range, and disre-
garding the heavy fire opened upon him.
Lieutenant Garfield succeeded in focussing a
beam upon the leading cruiser. The line of
hissing flame was indicated by the boiling and
agitation of the water, until the ship came
within its influence, when she at once caught
fire and blew up. Almost at the same moment
a shell from the second cruiser struck and
destroyed the “Cigar Lighter.”


A strange incident occurred in connection
with the lamented death of Lieutenant Gar-
field. Alan Edgecumbe throughout had been
an absorbed spectator of the fight. He was
deeply moved on witnessing the tragic fate of
his new made friend. The dream narrated by
the Lieutenant the previous night at once re-
curred to his memory.
He witnessed the destruction of the “Cigar
Lighter”; he saw the vivid flash, and heard the
tremendous explosion that followed; and whilst
mournfully watching the splashing of frag-
ments, many of them at great distances apart,
into the ocean around him, he suddenly heard
the ping of a small piece of metal that struck
and rebounding from the car, fell at his feet.
It was still hot, but picking it up, with a start,
in the scorched and blackened fragment he
recognised the fatal ring round which had
clustered Lieutenant Garfield’s dreams.
Some months afterwards, whilst in the
United States, he searched for and found the
betrothed of Lieutenant Garfield. She was a
Miss Roosefelt, and was in deep mourning.
He reverently placed in her hands the sad relic
of her late lover.


CHAPTER XVII.
Alan Edgecumbe did not usually take him-
self seriously to task; but to-day he felt he
must do so. He felt the nearness of a crisis
in his life, and he made up his mind resolutely
to face it. This impending crisis had not taken
him altogether unawares. He had seen it
coming for some time, but had put the thought
aside as something unpleasant, that would
probably adjust itself.
With him it had been a case of dallying
without action. But now he must both think
and act. And it was time, too, that he did act,
for all the thinking in the world without action
would scarcely get him out of the predicament
he had got into. It required action, and very
decided action too. And he was about to take
that action.
Alan had greatly loved his mother, and
probably through his love for her had come that
natural veneration which he entertained for all
women.
Personally, he had never wronged a woman;
he would spare a woman’s feelings at any cost.
He would rather a thousand times a woman


hurt him than he her. Hitherto he had refused
to formulate a position where he could hurt a
woman. But now he had to face a position
where it was necessary to hurt a woman—that
is to say, not by bodily wound, but through her
feelings; to wound her amour propre. It was
not a pleasant task; and was made the more un-
pleasant by the fact that she was his friend
and benefactress —one'who had heaped favours
upon him, who had singled him out and dis-
tinguished him from other men, who had over-
whelmed him with kindness upon kindness.
And holding that vantage position over him,
why, he kept asking himself, had she forced
him, against his inclination and judgment, into
the impossible position of her lover, or rather
placed him in situations that bore out this public
view of their intimacy? Whereas she knew as
well as he that the only ties which bound him to
her were those of gratitude and friendship.
Why had she done this? Being unable to peer
into the lady’s mind, no explanation of her
action was forthcoming.
And now, after all her kindness to him, he
had to act harshly towards her. It was very
unpleasant. But it must be done, and quickly,
too, or he would be irretrievably compromised
with her; and then “good-bye” to Miss Colonna.
It was absolutely necessary that he should free


himself from Hortense Pelham, and now was
the time to make a start. . . . And here
was the chance before him. Here on his
dressing table was her invitation to a picnic
somewhere in the country. He knew what
that meant. It meant that she would mono-
polise him all day—and all day with her meant
every day. . . .
Yes, he must do it. He would refuse this
invitation, and in the future, no matter if she
thought him ungrateful, he would hold himself
aloof from her —he would just see her occasion-
ally in a friendly way; that was all. . . .
“Now, if a man loves a woman,” he further
reasoned to himself, “the least he can do is to
be loyal to her. . . .” And he was loyal to
Miss Colonna; yet somehow he had let himself
drift into a position that looked like disloyalty;
and yet was not exactly disloyalty.
But then he alone knew that. The outside
world no doubt judged differently, seeing them
so muck together. Besides, people could not
help remarking how others at once gave place,
seemed to melt away from her, whenever he
appeared on the scene.
That was the worst part of it. It was just
as if he had a right to the monopoly of her
society. She, too, publicly treated him as if
he had that right.


Was ever man placed in so awkward a
position?
Then he wondered if she had heard these
rumours, linking his name with Miss Pelham’s.
If she had, apparently she paid no heed. She
was not a woman to listen to idle gossip. . .
She would not be the first to break that bond
of friendship between them unless he proved
unworthy. She had never changed to him..
She made him welcome at all times, and quietly
ignored the cold politeness of the others.
The studied courtesy of her father and
brother, so different from the old free cordiality
simply meant, so he took it, their endurance of
an obligation that was distasteful to them.
This changed demeanour of theirs he credited
to Piper. That scoundrel was still always
at the house, nominally to see her father and
brother.
But he knew better. It was in the hope of
seeing her, and forcing his society on her. She
was barely civil to him, and, thank goodness, it
was not from her side of the house he was made
welcome. . . .
And now, what was his best plan of action?
Should be go to her this morning and tell her
that he loved her?
It would perhaps be best. Yes, he would go.
It would end this present intolerable position.


If she accepted him (which was very im-
probable), that would free him from Miss
Pelham.
If she refused him (which was almost a
certainty), that also would free him, for he
would go straight away, and, perhaps, never
come back.
Yes, it was about the best thing he could do.
He would summon all his courage and tell her
everything.
No doubt she would refuse him, and she
would be vexed as well; but surely she would
not deny him the old time sweet privilege of
her friendship because he loved her and dared
to tell her so. Surely she could never be so
ungenerous. Whatever fate befel him, he
would be honest and tell her everything.
Meanwhile it may be wondered what the lady
of Como was doing on this particular morning,
and whither her thoughts tended?
She was engaged in the flower decoration of
her rooms—a daily task of love. And now,
that task completed, from the window of her
sitting-room she was looking up and down tfye
sunlit river, and beyond to the great city where
he lived.
“I wonder if he will come to-day?” she mused,
and as she mused she heard his footsteps enter-
ing the house.


How well he knew where to find her, she
thought, as, opening the door, he stood on the
threshold for a moment. Turning, she looked
at him, and read his face. Her woman’s
instinct told her why he had come.
“Oh, Mr. Edgecumbe,” she cried, as she came
forward to meet him, and gave him her hand.
“I’m so glad you’ve come. I’ve got something
very particular to show you this morning—a
strange plant from Africa, sent by a dear
friend on the Lualaba. It is now in full
bloom.”
“How kind of fortune,” he thought, “this
was just the opportunity he sought. In the
garden, among her flowers, among her birds
and pets, somehow she always seemed nearer
to him, seemed to take him into her confidence
—in fact, be all to him that he could wish. If
only he were sure she loved him!”
From the house they passed into the terraced
garden, following a winding shelly path until
they came to the wondrous African plant that
was ablaze with brilliant scarlet blossoms.
“These,” said Miss Colonna, bending over
the shrub and lovingly touching the blooms,
“will have changed to pink by noon; by night-
fall to black; at midnight they will be pearly
white. But the strangest thing about them.


Mr. Edgecumbe, is that each colour alteration
is accompanied by a change of perfume.”
“How wonderful!” he exclaimed. He more
admired, however, the beautiful woman bend-
ing over the flowers than he did the blooms, but
he was not yet rash enough to tell her so, though
he longed to.
“How lovely she is,” he thought to himself,
noting the while the perfect curve of the side
face, the rounded arm, the well formed
shoulder, the swelling bust. How was he to
broach the subject of his love? And it per-
plexed him that she was always so open with
him, that, as a matter of course, she turned to
him for the numberless little attentions that it
was his pride and delight to render. But she
took it all in the way of friendship.
They wandered on, now looking at this,
again at that, admiring many things, discussing
many topics, but avoiding one; at least she did,
for whenever he ventured to change the con-
versation, to pave the fairway to his confession,
always with charming adroitness she foiled his
efforts by starting some new discussion, or ap-
pealing to his judgment.
He brought himself to task several times,
and mentally asked this question of himself:
“Was it through a desire to spare his feelings
that she so delicately put aside any allusion that


might bring about an avowal of his love ?” She
liked him; yes, there was no question of that.
It was a question of how much? Now, what
topic could he start that would give him an
opening?
Presently he spoke of his approaching de-
parture, and while doing so, she came to a halt
beside a rose bush.
“And when do you leave?” she asked, bend-
ing to pick a bud.
“To-morrow, or the next day, I’m not quite
sure,” he replied. “I’ve delayed longer than
was my intention.”
“I think everyone should travel who can
afford to do so,” she said, breaking off the bud.
“World travelling, Mr. Edgecumbe, is an
education in itself. Contact with new peoples,
the contemplation of Old World monuments,
of new civilizations, broadens, enlarges one’s
views of life.”
It had been her intention to offer him the
bud she had just plucked, but apparently she
changed her mind, for she proceeded to pick
others —sufficient, in fact, to fill a vase. Her
floral gathering complete, as they walked slowly
along she arranged her bouquet.
“If one could only tell what was ahead,” he
said, seizing, as he thought, an opportunity.
“If I could only foresee. Miss Colonna, what


even the next few minutes hold for me.” His
voice was low, and it was also tender. He
strove to peer into her face, that as it so
happened was bent tantalisingly over her task —
a task that seemed well nigh interminable, for
she pulled the flowers asunder and re-arranged
them many times, but seemingly never to her
complete satisfaction.
Once she glanced up swiftly, and that glance
sent the most delicious sensation imaginable
through him. Only a flash, but what en-
couragement! But he lost the opportunity,
for his courage failed him at the critical
moment.
They walked on now for some time in silence,
and then she abruptly halted. On the bank
above them, but out of reach, grew a cluster of
“forget-me-nots.” Before he could offer to
get them for her. Miss Colonna had clambered
up the bank; her hand touched the flowers; the
next moment he just managed to catch her in
his arms. Her foot had slipped, and but for
his timely aid she would probably have sus-
tained a severe if not dangerous fall.
“Oh, Alan,” she cried, struggling to free
herself, but something in her voice, something
in the flushed pleading face, reassured him, and
he did not release her. He was master of the
situation, and his courage returned to him.


“Miss Colonna! Viola I you know I love you!
Is there any hope for me?” he pleaded, striving
to look into her now averted face, that she held
away from him. . . .No answer.
Then all at once she turned in his arms, blush-
ing divinely. She drew herself back. “Now
listen,” she said very softly, placing a hand on
each of his shoulders, and looking up into his
face with those steadfast eyes of hers. “Alan,
do you remember our first meeting? You do,
I know. Well, I thought then that I should
like to know you. Do you recollect our second
meeting, when you so nearly ran us down ? Well,
I felt then and afterwards that there was more
than mere coincidence in that meeting. When
next I saw you I was too terrified to think, yet
somehow I had a feeling that you would save
me. And you did save me, dearest. Again,
the night I watched you lying back so white
and still, I knew I loved you. Shall I make a
little confession? That night I kissed you.
You don’t remember that. . . . Now, sir,
you may kiss me.”


CHAPTER XVIII.
It was close on Miss Colorma’s luncheon
hour when the betrothed lovers parted that
morning. It was arranged between them
that he was to call in the evening to interview
her father, whom, in the meantime, she would
have prepared for the reception of his news.
And, oh, the rapture of that first parting,
for was there not mingling with it the know-
ledge that very soon they would meet again.
And might it not be true, as pessimists main-
tain: “That first kisses and first caresses are
always the sweetest?” But why should it be
so? Let readers of this romance judge from
their own experience; no doubt among them
there are pessimists.
Elate with joy, intoxicated with happiness,
he left her, but where his footsteps led him he
neither knew nor cared. One thing alone
possessed him; he was conscious of but one fact
—She loved him! She loved him!
At a late period of the afternoon he found
himself on one of the harbour bridges; thence,
making his way into the city, he became merged
in its busy life. Everywhere around him was


rush and hurry. It was the closing hour of
shops and offices, and he experienced some diffi-
culty in forcing a passage through the crowded
thoroughfares.
In this wonderful hive of human life, he
could but note that “purpose” was written
on almost every face. What were they all
thinking of? he wondered. Some, no doubt,
had the worries and anxieties of business still
in their thoughts, hut the majority must surely
be thinking of home. Many, doubtless, had
happy homes and a loved one awaiting their
coming. And how much a real home must
mean! He, too, one day would have a home.
. . . And then he suddenly came to a full
stop.
A flower girl, pale and careworn, half
child, half woman, intent on her purpose,
suddenly crossed the street, and thrusting
her flowers almost into his face, pressed
him to buy a “button-hole.” She had singled
him out from the crowd. Her unerring
vision, her woman’s intuition, had read his
type of face. In imagination she saw an
opened purse, with probably no demand for
change; Would she prove right? She saw
him smile as he glanced down at her. He asked
her to choose a bouquet for him. She looked
up and down, and afterwards wondered at her


own shyness. She was not usually shy. And
for the first time in her life she felt a difficulty
in choosing a flower. Ah, but she would choose
him the best. At last she picked out one and
handed it to him. Again he smiled down at
her; then pressing a sovereign into her hand, he
darted away before she had opportunity for
speech.
That poor girl had not had much happiness
in her life, he thought. And so far, he was
correct, for her life had not been a bed of roses.
Yet, notwithstanding a hard life, led amidst
sordid surroundings, it was not all sordid with
her. For when he left her, deep down in the
undying soul of the girl-woman stirred faint
promptings of the mysterious and the un-
known.
There awoke in her nature a dim compre-
hension that life possibly after all might not
be the base and sordid thing that she had
judged it; that there might be even for her
a life, were fate only kind, that might have
in it the true and beautiful. And momentarily
the craving possessed her for such an ideal life.
What she craved for was impossible. She
craved for love. How she could love that man!
she thought. Love, alas, was not for her. He
was not for her. Why was it so?
Yet she knew —she knew only too well —that


were he to come back, and did he so desire, what
would she not do for him? He passed on, and
it might be thought that he had passed out of
her life for ever.
But it was not so, for that night the thought
of him came suddenly upon her in a moment of
weakness that was fraught with doubt and peril
—peril to her undying soul. This brought her
strength. And ever after, the thought of him
recurred, and served to keep her pure amidst
surroundings only too vile and sordid.
And passing on, how was he to know that
he had influenced her life; that by a trivial act
of kindness —it could hardly be defined a kind-
ness —he had saved her undying soul from
becoming smirched that very night ? How was
he to know when only dimly he comprehended
that there were invisible forces concealed
within a mystery influencing the pulsating life
around him.
At the intersection of two streets, a poorly
dressed child —a little mite—pressed an evening
paper into his hand, and was rewarded like the
flower girl. She was richer that day than ever
before in her life. Someone else was made
happy, he thought.
Then followed a period of careless wander-
ing, with further attempts at giving happiness,
until at length feeling the needs of the body he


entered a restaurant and satisfied the cravings
of hunger. Regaining the pavement, he
suddenly bethought himself of the Public
Gardens. It was quiet there. He wanted to
be alone with his thoughts. He had some
little difficulty in finding the entrance gates,
but once within, the rush and swirl of the city
was behind him.
The dusk of evening was closing in, a thin
veil of mist dimmed the further view; there was
mystery and enchantment in this wonderful
garden. And it chanced that as he crossed over
to a fountain he involuntarily shivered, why he
could not tell; and the old foolish saying crossed
his mind: “Someone is walking over your
grave.” And yet, what a ridiculous fancy.
How had it originated? and who had ever
proved it true? Was it possible, however, that
ill fortune was about to befal him? He could
not quite rid himself of the thought, though he
knew it to be foolish.
So absurd, too, was the thought of ill on this
the happiest day of his life. Why, it was not
so many hours back that she had promised to
be his for all time. She had said, with her
hand clasped in his: “That come what might
her love could never change; that in the Mael-
strom of Time, of Ages rushing by, in the
Spirit World, they should still be linked.”


What then need he fear? And soon from
the pleasure he derived in walking through the
mazy retreats of this delightful pleasaunce,
he forgot the thought.
Presently, finding a convenient seat whence
he could observe the movements around him,
he sat down. Some of these movements were
by now familiar to him, for he had been fre-
quently here.
It was a favoured haunt of lovers, and
naturally he had sympathy with all lovers. It
was pleasant for an onlooker to watch them.
He had not long to wait.
From opposite directions he saw a couple
meet the girl apparently of the poorer
respectable class, but dressed with taste; the
young fellow, probably a clerk. First, there
was a short pause for greeting and for mutual
inquiries; then they turned into a secluded
path.
Within a few minutes he saw another couple.
This was a bold wooer, for he held her arm, and
when they turned a corner of the shrubbery,
there followed a more endearing movement.
They imagined, no doubt, they were un-
observed.
And finally, for the garden was thinning
now, he saw another phase of lovers; the woman
with upturned, pleading face, the man stern


and cold. They parted almost at once; the
girl with tears, the man almost insultingly re-
pellent. He felt inclined to get up and kick
him. What did it all mean? Had they
quarrelled? . . Possibly there was tragedy
in it.
And then he got up to leave the grounds, and
as he walked along he passed the place now so
familiar to him, where first he had met his old
friend Admiral Hung Chang. He paused for
a moment and looked about him, and thought
of that kind friend and of his tragic end.
That other and nearer friend, Lieutenant
Garfield, too, was in his mind, whose mutilated
ring he had promised himself that he would
restore some day to the poor girl in “the
States.” It would not be difficult to find her,
he thought, for Lieutenant Garfield’s name
would be known far and wide, and Ella —he
called her by that name—would also be widely
known because she had been his betrothed wife.
Then with the stars tremulous in the dark
blue vault above him, and ghostly shadows
among the trees, he left that garden; and it was
long ere he saw it again.
A swift launch, hired and taken from the
Circular Quay, soon landed him on Como em-
bankment. He took the nearest upward path
leading through the grounds to the house.


Presently above him, showing but dimly in the
semi-darkness, he caught the glimmer of a
white dress coming down the path.
She was coming to meet him.
He walked more slowly now, purposely to
lengthen out this new and delightful feeling
of anticipation. And yet, within a brief
period he had to ask himself the question.
Why it was he lingered? Had there been a
thousand demons, or a sea of fire between
them, he knew full well that he would have
rushed to meet her. Why then did he linger?
Nearer and yet nearer approached that white-
robed figure. . . . They met; and with his
arms around her, and her lips pressed to his,
anticipation became merged in reality. And
what a reality! It was the culmination of all
that life could offer. It was a supreme
moment —a landmark in a lifetime.
And then, suddenly, with his kisses still on
her lips, he became aware that she had been
weeping.
“Why, what is the matter, my own?” he
asked, with soothing tenderness in his voice,
and his face pressed close to hers.
She did not reply, but after a while quietly
withdrew from his arms, and they stood facing
each other.
“Dearest,” she breathed, “did I not say I


loved you; and yet we must part, part perhaps
for ever, and this very night, too. And you
must not press me for an explanation. There
is a cloud over my life, dearest, and I only knew
it since you left me.”
He stood dumbfounded before her, his whole
being in throes of sudden disruption. “You
surely cannot mean that, Viola,” he cried out
in an agony. “Part! part perhaps for ever!”
“Dearest,” she breathed again, “I have been
sorely tried. Do not make it harder for me.
I know that you suffer” —she almost broke
down at this point—“but remember that I shall
always love you. Now, say ‘good-bye,’ and
leave me; I can bear no more.” He caught
her in his arms, wildly murmuring her name.
And these two fond lovers, united by a
mutual confession of love, for a brief period
clung to one another, and kissed each other
again and again; then he left her.
She stood on that spot for some time after
he had gone, and then, with a sigh, turned to
walk back to the house. As her white-robed
figure crossed the lawn, a face that had been
peering out into the blackness of the night was
suddenly withdrawn from an upper window.


CHAPTER XIX.
With a mind bordering on distraction, Alan
Edgecumbe said “good-bye” to Miss Colonna
that night, and on the way home to Elmswood,
he strove to reflect on what might be the cause
of their separation. The more he pondered,
the longer he reflected and turned the matter
over from every point of view, the deeper grew
the mystery.
Without an explanation from her, there was
no solution. Why had she asked him not to
press her for an explanation, when a few simple
words from her as to the nature of her trouble
would at once have placed him in the position
of knowing, and trying to combat it? That
was his difficulty; he knew nothing, absolutely
nothing; and his honour, to which she had ap-
pealed, forbade him pressing her for an
explanation she had denied him voluntarily.
Whatever the nature of the trouble, there
must be some way out of it, he reasoned.
There was Piper, of course; he had thought of
him at once; but Piper she had always professed
to despise. As regards pressure brought to
bear by her father and brother, from what he


knew of her character and disposition, she was
about the last woman in the world to allow a
father, or in fact anyone, to dictate to her in
the choice of a lover or a husband.
Again, so far as he knew, Piper was the only
enemy he had in the world, and she had never
shown him the slightest favour. Nor could he
imagine any position where Piper could so
dominate her as to cause her to break off her
engagement with him.
And yet, notwithstanding everything, and
while still professing to love him, she had
parted from him without pretext or visible
cause.
It was most extraordinary. It was alto-
gether a mystery. During the interval
between their meeting of that morning and
to-night something had occurred to separate
them.
What was it? All he could gather from her
was, “that a shadow had fallen on her life since
she had seen him in the morning.” That was
what she had said. But there was no clue in
that towards solving the mystery. And the
worst of it was, he could do nothing; absolutely
nothing. . . .
Yes, he could do something. He could go
right away. And he would go, too, this very
night. Probably before long she would send
O 2


for him; and in the meantime, travel would im-
prove his mind and help him to forget his
trouble.
Yes, that was what he would do. Had she
not herself said that world travelling was
an education in itself? And he desired to be
more worthy of her than now he felt himself
to be. Yes, he would start to-night. And
how fortunate, too, he further reflected, that
Mabel and Homfray were away on their
honeymoon in New Zealand, and that John
was paying a short visit to Lava Island, for it
left him free. He was eager now to get
away.
On his arrival at Elmswood, he at once
started operations, and soon had completed all
necessary preparations for a hurried departure.
His aerial, by a famous maker, stood packed
and ready on the lawn, and he was about to
give final directions to the servant in charge of
the house, when a note was handed to him. It
was from Miss Pelham. “Would he call that
evening without fail ”
What should he do? Should he go or not?
. . . After all, she had been good and kind
to him. Why shouldn’t he go and say “good-
bye” to her? She had always been his friend;
he had never had a harsh word from her, and
above all, he must never forget that to her he


owed his life. It would be the basest ingrati-
tude on his part to leave without saying “good-
bye” to her.
Yet, somehow the feeling clung to him all
the time that it would be unwise to go near her.
Yet he decided to go.
His mind was still in a turmoil; he could not
forget the agony of that parting. He felt he
needed distraction. Yes, he would go, for
evidently she wanted to see him particularly;
but he would only stay just a few minutes, then
make some excuse, say “good-bye,” and con-
tinue his journey. Of course she wouldn’t be
pleased, but he couldn’t help that.
Within ten minutes from the receipt of her
note, he was admitted into the Pelham mansion
—a massive pile overlooking the city and the
sea, with a dpme-shaped structure rising in the
centre. It had been built by her father, the
leading electrician of his day, whose many un-
finished inventions, his distinguished pupil and
daughter had brought to completion, with great
profit resulting to herself. She was reputed to
be immensely wealthy, and rumour credited her
with being eccentric as well.
He had scarcely glanced round the noble
room into which he was ushered, when Jumoo
appeared; and Jumoo’s face wore that ex-
pansive smile with which he always greeted his


friend, Massa Edgecumbe. He brought a
message from his mistress. “She was busy in
the laboratory, would Mr. Edgecumbe kindly
go to her there?”
He had never before been asked into the
laboratory, and his curiosity had been excited,
for on the occasion of one of her entertain-
ments, a young guest, a slight acquaintance, had
whispered to him “that queer things happened
in that laboratory”; but what the queer things
were he did not say, probably he only repeated
current gossip.
And now, with Jumoo ushering him into the
laboratory, we take our leave of Jumoo; but
before he disappeared to an unknown fate, at
some hour of that night—or rather, was it not
early the following morning?—he performed
an act of service to Alan Edgecumbe that the
young Islander never forgot, and would have
rewarded later. . . But where was Jumoo ?


CHAPTER XX.
He looked around him. The laboratory was
not, as he had always supposed, one large
chamber, but was subdivided. The part into
which Jumoo led him was situated about the
centre of the building. Scattered about the
room, which was very large and lofty, was a
multiplicity of scientific apparatus. But
comfort was likewise studied, for there were
luxurious lounges, and a table littered with
magazines and the current papers of the day.
Never perhaps had Miss Pelham appeared
to greater advantage than she did that night.
Nearly as tall as he, she was yet so beautifully
proportioned that you only saw the grandeur
of the woman.
She was dressed as if for a full reception.
Diamonds blazed in her hair, sparkled on
marble neck, glittered on rounded tapering
arm, flashed on sandalled feet, and shone
resplendent on the low-draped full white
bosom.
Her draperies, following the curves of her
unequalled figure, fell in folds to the floor,
rustling as she moved.
“I shall be free in about two minutes,” she


said, as they exchanged the usual warm greet-
ings. Then, motioning him to a lounge, she
busied herself for a short time attending to
several tubes that she explained were employed
by her in compressing certain gases into solids,
and vice versa.
He listened for a while in dull wonderment
to the muffled sounds of swiftly revolving
machinery proceeding from a near room, with
occasional blasts as from fierce roaring flames.
They must come from her electric furnace, he
thought.
“And what do you think of my ‘Holy of
Holies’?” said she presently, smiling across the
room at him. He felt grateful to her, for, so
far, she had not alluded to his absence from the
picnic that morning.
“It is a fitting abode for a magician,” he
laughingly remarked, directing his gaze up-
ward to where a mystic, pale blue flame burned,
apparently unsupported, in space; then watch-
ing her narrowly he saw her touch the cog-
wheel of a small motor.
Instantly part of the wall before them sank
out of sight, disclosing an oval space or small
chamber entirely devoid of furniture, but with
a peculiar cavity or opening in the centre of
the massive flooring.
As curiously he gazed, from this cavity


suddenly shot up so appalling a flame that for
the moment he experienced a sensation of fear.
Curling and hissing, it leaped round and
round the narrow chamber, licking the walls,
and even the atmosphere as if fed from gaseous
elements; opalescent, blue, and several shades
of red showed in that terrible glare. But the
roar, the indescribable atmospheric vibration
that accompanied the flame and appeared
to shake the whole structure, was like nothing
he had ever heard or dreamt of. It was a
veritable Inferno.
Then presently the wall of the chamber slid
back into its old position. “When I desire
death—annihilation—that is the instrument I
shall employ,” said Miss Pelham, glancing over
at him; “or else this,” and she held up a small
piece of light coloured cord, and crossing over,
gave it to him. Knowing nothing of its nature,
he examined it and returned it to her in silence.
“For all that it looks so harmless,” said she,
“it is the most powerful explosive in existence.
To my mind, future warfare will be revolu-
tionised by it, and the Power first utilising it
will reap an immense advantage. I could
have sold the secret of its manufacture to the
Chinese Government for an immense sum,”
she went on, “but as it would have been em-
ployed against our friends the Americans, I


refused to treat with them until the close of the
present war.”
Every now and again, and yet always with
an inclination that way, he found his eyes in-
voluntarily wandering to the table whereon
rested a peculiar-looking crystal wand, set in
a superbly chased handle, fashioned of the
alloys of several metals, with cabalistic devices
engraved upon it.
The fascination of the thing grew upon him,
and he felt his gaze returning again and again
to it. And every time he looked it scintillated
in so peculiar a fashion that in his mind it was
as if something diabolic possessed it. He could
not help fancying that a word was gradually
forming in its depths. When first it blazed,
he was sure he saw the capital letter D form;
then at intervals other letters, until finally the
complete word “Destiny” was spelled out. It
was most uncanny, and the thing seemed to
glare malignantly at him.
Miss Pelham, who meanwhile had been quietly
observing him, now said, half smilingly, “I see
you are interested in ‘Destiny,’ Mr. Edge-
cumbe. Are you not curious regarding your
own?”
“It can only be a matter of speculation,” he
answered, with his gaze still fixed upon the
crystal.


“Why not try a little experiment?” she
suggested. “Take up the crystal. Don’t be
afraid of it. It won’t hurt you,” with a half
scornful, half playful smile.
He did so, yet with a show of reluctance,
for he still had some uncanny feeling regarding
it. “Now concentrate your mind upon some
familiar place or scene,” she said, reassuringly.
He thought of a certain place, and yet was
aware all the time that perhaps some trickery
was intended. To his profound amazement
the wand at once broke into brilliant illumina-
tion, glowed with prismatic colours dazzling to
his vision.
Then, after an interval of time that he could
not judge, he foimd himself enveloped in a sea
of whirling mist, through which in vain he tried
to battle his way. . . .
Suddenly the mists dissolved, and . . .
yes, there was Lava Island —there was his old
home, Deepwater. It was night, with a beauti-
ful moon shining overhead; lights gleamed here
and there throughout the settlement. He
heard the barking of dogs, he even recognised
the familiar baying of a favourite hound that
he had given to Mr. Hodges. And he heard,
too, the strains of dance music proceeding from
Mr. Hodge’s house across the water. . . .
Now, he was standing quite close to it, and


dancing was going on in the front parlour,
which was decorated with tree ferns and
greenery; and there was his brother John
among the dancers.
Presently he saw Mr. Hodges step from the
doorway into the garden, feel in his waistcoat
pocket for his pipe (a meerschaum he had sent
him as a present, he recognised it by the
shape), then tapping it smartly several times
on the fence to expel the ashes, he refilled it, lit
a match, and began to smoke.
Alan Edgecumbe now remembered an un-
answered letter, the last Mr. Hodges had
written to him. He had not answered it, for the
sufficient reason that in it Mr. Hodges ap-
peared to assume that he was fond of Mary,
and urged him to return to Lava Island as his
guest.
“Mary,” he said, “was acting in a way he
didn’t like with a young stranger. If you’ll
come back quickly, Alan,” ran the postscript,
“you’ll soon put his nose out of joint.”
How was it possible to answer that letter
without offending and hurting the feelings of
his old friend? and therefore, although it pained
him to do so he had let it remain unanswered.
Through the open doorway he saw Mary
Hodges sitting in a corner with a stranger
whose face he rather liked. The young man


—for he was not yet thirty, he judged—was
fanning her, and must have made some request
that she refused, for he got up apparently in
a huff and left the room. Mary’s face some-
how seemed changed, he thought; she was paler
and not looking bright.
His old playmate (yes, and at one time half
sweetheart as well) had usually been so light-
hearted. Was she in love with this stranger,
and unhappy because her father objected to
him? What possible objection could Mr.
Hodges have to him? He seemed a very
respectable and nice young fellow.
For his own part, he didn’t feel a bit jealous.
He would like to see Mary happy. Mary
meanwhile, thinking herself secure from
observation, presently thrust her hand into the
bosom of her dress, and still watching her, he
saw her draw forth an amulet attached to a
slender golden chain that he had sent her as a
birthday gift.
Mary glanced apprehensively around and
then pressed his token to her lips.
Alan Edgecumbe’s conscience pricked him.
. . . And now, where was he? . . .
He was looking into the reception room at
Como, ablaze with lights and thronged with
guests. But where was she? Ah, there she
was; sitting on that low couch, and almost


hidden by a group of guests. . . • But —
he drew a deep breath and drew himself up as
well —who was that bending over her? It was
Piper! The wand dropped from his hand.
When next he looked around him he was still
in the laboratory; Miss Pelham was seated close
by him on the couch and smiling at him, while
he was shaking all over. And the wand; it
lay just where it had dropped from his hand
on the table, and he half drew back from it
with a sudden aversion.
“Drink this,” said the lady, with tender
solicitude, holding out a glass of wine to him.
“You are not quite yourself to-night. This
will put you right.”
He drank; his blood became fired. It ran
merry riot through his veins. He was himself
again. His self-possession and his courage
returned to him.
“Try a final venture, and this time surely
you’ll find happiness,” she said, half-playfully,
and stretching out an arm she lifted and re-
turned the wand to him. But she did not
quickly recall her arm, it lingered for a while
on his shoulder. That arm, exposed to his gaze,
from shoulder to tapering fingers, was, as she
well knew, faultless. And she remarked, too,
that his gaze lingered on the arm, and from
thence wandered to the snowy shoulder.


Who could fathom her thoughts?
Happiness; that word seemed to ring
through his brain, as for the last time he
glanced into the fatal crystal. . . . And
as before, whilst gazing into its depths, his
vision became blurred. Again he was
struggling in that whirling sea of mist.
Suddenly, as before, it dissolved.
And what was this? It resembled a beauti-
ful scene he had viewed a few nights back at
the opera. And who were these two, quite close
to him, seated in an aerial that was sailing over
a charming landscape?
They must be lovers, possibly they were
married, he thought, for she leant back on him
in a fond manner, and he, while one arm en-
circled her, with the other, from time to time,
would point out objects of interest. He could
not see their faces, for their backs were turned
to him, and yet there was something familiar
about them.
In the far view rose lofty snow-clad
mountains, with glistening summits under the
bright morning sunshine; below gleamed two
tinted lakes.
He saw, too, the purple sea that laves Italian
shores, while in line, Etna, Stromboli, and
Vesuvius blew out darkening clouds of smoke
into the sparkling atmosphere.


Who can these lovers be? he wondered, as
presently they turned their faces to him. And
then for the second time that night he dropped
the wand, for in those two he had recognised
himself and the voluptuous beauty by his
side.
The light in the laboratory waxed dim; her
perfumed breath swept his cheek. . . And
all in a moment she was in his arms, whispering,
“You are free; you are free; you are mine.”
Yielding at first, he returned her caresses. But
suddenly disengaging himself from her cling-
ing arms, he sprang to his feet and glared
wildly around him.
Mechanically he put up his hand to his
fevered, throbbing forehead. . . Was he
dreaming? . . A gentle voice had called “Alan 1
Alan!” He had heard his name distinctly
called twice. And her face —Viola's face —so
vaguely outlined as he had seen it in that
ghostly flame, had been sad beyond ex-
pression.
What did it all mean? Was he going mad?
Could it be true, after all, that she was not
false. Yes, his Viola was still true to him.
It was this crystal that was false. And this
woman, too, beside him, was false. She had
simply been tricking him all along, and he had
been her dupe.


Miss Pelham sat there, without movement,
silently regarding him. What were her
thoughts? Did she know them herself?
“Hortense” (she had asked him to call her
thus), he cried hoarsely, turning to her; “it’s all
a mistake.” He held out his hand to say good-
bye to her, resolved never again to go near her.
She made no response to the proffered hand,
and had he been wise, had he not been half
dazed, her attitude, as well as that fixed in-
scrutable gaze of hers, might have warned him
that she was in a dangerous mood. But simply
recognising that she would not say good-bye
to him, on the impulse of the moment, he rashly
ventured to touch her hand; that was all he
remembered.
Stars were paling in their radiance, and a
tender glow suffused the eastern sky, when
Alan Edgecumbe, speeding on his journey,
paused for a moment over the Blue Mountains
to glance back at the city that held all that was
dear to him on earth. And as he looked, a
sudden flash of flame shot up, as he imagined,
from some point near the city, followed by a
rushing swaying cloud of white vapour that
ascended into the heavens and there dissolved.
Shortly after, there was the sound of a heavy


explosion, but paying no further heed, he con-
tinued on his journey.
* * * * *
Early that morning a fearful explosion,
followed by the rocking of houses, the
trembling of the earth, brought thousands of
the inhabitants of Sydney from their beds into
the streets. The wildest rumours became
current. But soon the truth leaked out. The
splendid mansion of Miss Pelham had blown
up, involving in its destruction its hapless
mistress —the splendid athlete—the great
woman scientist of Australasia.
Not a trace, not a fragment of human re-
mains, was ever found, and gradually the
mystery surrounding her death became for-
gotten. A great war was in progress, and
popular excitement ran high. Every day came
the news of American victories over China.
The war, it was said, would soon he prosecuted
on Chinese territory; soon that arrogant Power
would be humbled and brought to its knees, and
an indemnity exacted that would cripple China
for half a century at least.


CHAPTER XXI.
After a period of restless wandering in many
lands, Alan Edgecumbe at length found him-
self in the great Motherland, in the heart of
the city that is the metropolis of an Empire,
the greatest the world has ever seen, upon
which the sun never sets.
Strolling idly one morning through Tra-
falgar Square, he casually bethought himself
of the National Gallery. He could at least
spend an hour or two profitably there.
Entering the building, and viewing with
interest this picture and that, he at length came
to an abrupt halt before one which excited his
interest and curiosity, and before which he
made a lengthened pause. The longer he
gazed upon it, the deeper grew the mystery and
fascination of the picture.
Its inner meaning somehow appealed to him.
It set his imagination to work. He felt oddly
drawn to it. It held him spellbound before it.
It brought vividly before him the most beauti-
ful episode in his life. It recalled that brief
but pitiful love dream in the garden of Como.
Had not he, too, drunk from the Fount of
Happiness? Should he ever again drink from


it? he wondered. Should he ever again be
happy? It was not likely. It was now nearly
twelve long months from their parting, apd
neither line nor message had he received from
her. He was a wanderer on the face of the
earth. All savour had vanished from life.
The bitter memory of that parting was still
with him; it was like a nightmare vision that
might never leave him.
And yet, had he not been selfish in his suffer-
ing? he asked himself. She, too, must have
suffered; of that there could be no doubt.
Had he acted wisely in leaving her? Why had
he left her? He left her because she bade him.
And all this time she had borne her suffering
alone. She might have needed him, and he,
many thousands of miles from her, had not even
taken the common precaution of leaving an
address by which she could communicate with
him. Oh, fool! What a fool he had been!
And now this very picture seemed to plead
for her. An inner compulsion urged: Why
not return? Why not? He felt himself
yielding; he fixed a wavering resolve. . . .
Yes, he would go back. He would start this
very day; nay, within this very hour.
And the picture that had wrought this trans-
formation, though he knew it not, was the work
of his friend, Irene Blakeney. It never


occurred to him to look for the name of the
artist, but before he paid his next visit he knew
without looking.
The Blakeneys left Australia shortly after
his departure, and had made their home in
London. Irene had always had the conviction
that the true field for her talent lay in the great
metropolis of the Empire.
And fame had come to her.
In that one picture lay fame. But she
would never paint another, for as he stood
before it, she, Irene Blakeney, helpless and
pain-stricken, was lying on her bed, with eyes
fixed towards the Beyond where fame is not.
With the crowd surging and pressing upon
him, he turned away from the picture, and was
moving towards the door of the Gallery, when
a light touch fell on his arm. Turning to see
who it was, he found himself face to face with
Adele Blakeney, his sister’s one-time com-
panion and friend.
“Oh, Mr. Edgecumbe,” she said, hurriedly,
as they shook hands, “you are the very person
I wished to see. My sister, Irene, is very ill;
indeed, I’m afraid she’s dying. She has
mentioned your name several times. I’m sure
it would relieve her to see you. Will you
return with me now? it may be too late other-
wise.”


It came as a great shock to Alan Edgecumbe,
the sad news of his friend, Irene Blakeney.
Her friendship at all times had been at his
service, and had materially helped him in many
ways. It had been a beautiful friendship that
between them, based on mutual affinity and
esteem for each other. The element of
jealousy had not entered in, had not touched
it. It was human love without the mingling
of personal desire; each esteeming the other,
desired alone the welfare of the other. They
had, for the time being, drifted apart, but only
under the compulsion of circumstances for
which neither was responsible.
“Her sister,” explained Miss Blakeney, as
they hurried from the budding, “had caught
her illness through nursing a sick girl friend.”
Miss Blakeney, he thought, looked far from
strong herself; doubtless she had been nursing
her sister. Hailing a disengaged motor cab,
and helping his companion in, she gave the
requisite directions a number somewhere in
Chelsea—and they were soon bowling along
with smooth and rapid motion.
The cab came to a full stop in a side street,
opposite the gate of an old-fashioned garden,
behind which was a red brick house with high
gabled roof. He helped his companion to
alight, and dismissing the cabman, he followed


her up the gravelled path that led to the front
of the house.
They entered without knocking, and from
the entrance-hall proceeded up a stairway to a
landing where Miss Blakeney, opening a side
door, ushered him into a sparsely-furnished
room lit from the roof evidently Irene’s
studio, for on an easel he saw an unfinished
picture.
Miss Blakeney crossed to an opposite door,
opened it noiselessly, and held a whispered con-
versation with the nurse, then she beckoned to
him to enter.
Alan Edgecumbe entered that chamber
reverently, and stood by the bedside of his
dying friend. She was lying back on her
pillow with her eyes closed, and her unbound
wealth of dark hair silhouetted her face—the
beautiful face that he remembered so well.
The full realisation, however, came to him at
that moment, that he was looking upon one not
long for this world.
As he bent over her, her eyes opened and she
looked at him; and gradually a sweet recog-
nition and a smile dawned in her face. She
feebly disengaged a thin hand from under the
bedclothes, gave it to him, and glanced at her
sister. The mute appeal was understood,


Adele and the nurse at once left the room,
closing the door softly behind them.
Clasping hands and gazing each into the
other’s eyes, these two both realised that it was
their last meeting on earth.
“Yes, I wanted to see you, dear friend,” she
breathed, in a very low voice. “It’s such a long
time since I saw you. But I shall be better
able to speak presently,” and she raised her head
so that he might readjust her pillows and give
her some of the restorative that was on a small
table by the bedside. He filled a wine glass
with the cordial and held it to her lips. She
slowly drank, and then settled herself back
again upon the pillow.
“Remember, dearest friend,” she continued,
and her voice was now much stronger, “I
guessed your secret long ago. You love her,
and she loves you. But you are parted and
you are unhappy. Is it not so?” She paused,
with a gentle glance of deprecation. He
simply pressed her hand.
“I want you both made happy again,” she
went on. “Now listen!” He bent still nearer.
“I think all will come right if you have patience.
You have a bitter and unscrupulous enemy in
Mr. Piper. It is he who parted you. Up to
the day I left Australia, I kept my eyes and
ears open, for you and Viola were my friends,


and I desired your happiness. Being con-
stantly with her, I soon saw that she was very
unhappy. I found, too, that your name was
tabooed in that house; and I guessed the cause.
“I suspected Mr, Piper. I made a point of
studying that man, and I made a few inquiries
as well. It was he who planned those dis-
astrous speculations that nearly ruined Mr.
Colonna. And I’m afraid, too, he holds some
dreadful threat over the brother —some shame-
ful disclosure. You know how dearly Viola
loves Conrad. Mr. Piper loves Viola —if such
a man can be said to love—and he hates you.
“I had that to work on. Now, if that man
could put pressure on both father and son, was
it not extremely probable that through them
he would bring pressure to bear upon pour
Viola?
“That is how I reasoned. That is what I
suspect. Now, you are wealthy, dear friend.
Can you not use your wealth so as not to alarm
their pride?
“Any trustworthy firm of solicitors could
arrange that part for you. Some remote
Italian ancestress could leave Viola money;
that is merely a suggestion; you may find a
better way. I’m sure that finally all will come
right.
“And now I feel so relieved. I did want to


see you again. I’m happy, very happy; but
oh, so tired.”
She suddenly fell back on the pillow, looking
very wan and still. The effort to speak had
been too much for her.
She was evidently passing quickly away, so
he thought. He looked down at her with a
great pity and tenderness. The very depths
of his nature were stirred to compassion for her.
She, this dear friend, had done all this for
him. She possibly had restored his darling
to him. It might be that through her he should
again win happiness. And it would all be due
to her. And there she lay dying before his
eyes, and he could do nothing for her.
In the overwhelming pity and gratitude of
his heart, he bent over and kissed her, and let
his kiss linger on her cheek. It was the act of
a devotee to a saint.
Was it the purely human element, the woman
within her, that responded to that kiss? Who
can tell?
In that death hour; nay, in that her death
minute, with his kiss upon her cheek, she came
back from the portal of Death; a new light in
her eyes; a wonderful radiance on her face; a
sigh escaped her lips, as she murmured: “So
happy! Good-bye!”
Then she seemed to catch her breath, and he


was glad that at that moment her sister returned
to the room. Her hand he had retained all the
time in his, for she seemed happiest so; but now
it gave a little flutter; she smiled up at him;
and then, with a choking sigh . . . that
was the end.
Alan Edgecumbe held himself in hand, and
tried to preserve at least an outward composure
as he left that room, but when he reached the
garden he covered his face with his hands and
cried like a child.


CHAPTER XXII.
Acting on the suggestion made to him by
Irene Blakeney on her death bed, Alan Edge-
combe had placed the prosecution of the affair
in the hands of an eminent firm of London
solicitors. At first they demurred.
It was a transaction involving the transfer
of a very large sum of money under peculiar
and difficult circumstances, and required very
delicate handling; yet possibly stirred to help
him by the touch of romance in the affair, they
finally consented to act, and hoped to bring
matters to a successful issue without exciting
the slightest suspicion on Miss Colonna’s part
as to the bona fides of the fortune left her.
Then had come the crucial test of the venture.
What if after all she made no sign? he asked
himself over and over again. He tried to
comfort himself with the reflection that she
was no longer in poverty, but independent of
her father and of any pressure he might bring


to bear upon her through his financial em-
barrassments. But a considerable period had
now elapsed, and she made no sign; and the
waiting period dragged heavily.
Then he began to doubt her loyalty; and
doubting, in a weak moment he sought dis-
traction in pleasure. Pleasure scarcely needed
the seeking, for everywhere, in varied hue, but
always in attractive guise, it flaunted itself
across his path. And though at first lightly
stepping on the brink of pleasure, soon he
was well nigh drawn into its vortex. A great
temptation befel him.
A beautiful society woman, herself possibly
seeking distraction, became enamoured of him,
or imagined that she was. He was flattered
by her distinction of him, and presently they
found themselves looking over the verge of a
precipice.
But he drew back. The memory of two
women who believed in him nerved him to draw
back. And drawing back, he likewise drew
her back, angry and mortified; but the day
came when she blessed him.
He left London, and making his way to the
fair capital of the north, to the capital of the
race which has ever proved itself to be as the
stiffening in the backbone of Empire; there he


remained until one morning he received two
letters. That night he left for Australia.
[Letter.]
Homfray Howard to Alan Edgecombe, Hotel Cecil,
London.
By ordinary pneumatic tube express I am sending you
to-day a letter which some correspondent, not favoured
with your address, has forwarded to Idamount, care of your
humble and esteemed brother-in-law.
The ealigraphy of the address, evidently feminine, greatly
exercised Mabel’s curiosity, and she questioned me very
closely as to any knowledge I possessed of the identity of
your fair correspondent. To tell the truth, dear old boy, I
had seen similar handwriting before, but you may rest
assured that I carefully suppressed the fact from my
sterner—I was about to say weaker—half, but alas! the
golden age has flown, never to return, when a man could
so designate his wife.
If at any time, dear comrade, you should contemplate
entering Into the holy estate of matrimony, as a benedict of
standing, one of vast experience, I am in a position to give
sound, wholesome advice on the subject Notwithstanding
the fact that advice Is never followed unless it agrees with
one’s inclinations, I will yet offer mine.
By all means, before the fatal day arrives, have a
covenant legally drawn up and executed by the lady, grant-
ing you permission to retain at stated times possession of
your own thoughts, and at least one room In the house that
you can cal! your own—your sanctum, in fact, where, when
world-worn or harassed by the cares and responsibilities
inseparable from running in “double harness,” you can
retire to study, or, mayhap, to contemplate at your leisure,
world problems as presented to man previous to, and subse-
quent to, marriage; or, tell it not in Gath! to smoke.
Talking of smoking, I have to do mine surreptitiously,
for Mabel has placed a ban on the gentle weed. At inter-
vals, however, which I may remark are not infrequent, by


locking doors, opening ventilators, sprinkling perfumes (on
which, by the way, I spend a small fortune), and by the
literary aspect of a few half-opened books and periodicals
on the table, I manage to convey the impression that I have
been intellectually engaged. Several times of late, how-
ever, I have been on the verge of being discovered.
“I want you, Homfray!” suddenly calls a voice from out-
side the door, and Instant admittance is demanded. Then
follows a most significant sniffing (your humble servant
all the while trembling in his boots), and remarks are made
on my predilection for a certain perfume. Our cards, too,
are now printed: Mrs. Mabel Bdgcumbe Howard! Joking
apart, dear comrade, I am very happy, although at times
I miss you sadly.
You will not, perhaps, be surprised to hear of an interest-
ing event to shortly happen in the Howard household, and,
mind you, we fully expect you to be here for the christen-
ing. I shall, in truth, need your support under the some-
what trying ordeal of family responsibilities. We should
be greatly relieved, however, if we could only forecast the
sex of the expected stranger.
What a wild field of Inquiry this opens out to scientists?
It would be much more practical and beneficent than tell-
ing us the age of the stars or predicting the date of the final
catastrophe that will hurl us Into the never-never. For
instance, exact information on this point would have pre-
vented several little jars between Mabel and myself over
the nomenclature of your coming nephew or niece. In the
long run, of course, I had to surrender on all points. And
now to other matters.
We see very little of John since he’s taken to experi-
mental farming on an estate he has bought somewhere in
the western country; and, when we do get a glimpse of him,
it’s all fertilizers and Irrigation. I shall be glad when you
come back, and won’t we have some rare old chats together.
Mind, I expect to hear all sorts of news, and of adventures
as well; for as adventures are to the adventurous, and as
I know of old, both your happy knack of meeting with


them and your remarkable facility for getting out of them
with a whole skin, I anticipate with much pleasure their
recital.
Mabel sends lots of love, and this is her exact message
to you: “Tell Alan he’s been away twelve months now, and
I say he’s to come back at once!” I re-echo her sentiments.


CHAPTER XXIII.
All round Mm he saw a vast glaring waste
of sand, with here and there an oasis of date
palms. He was passing over the great desert
zone of Northern Africa. He was returning
to Australia.
And then, for perhaps the twentieth time that
day, he took out her letter, pressed it to his lips,
and read it. In it she urged Mm to return to her
at once. “The shadow that had darkened her life
and which had parted them had lifted,” she
said. “She would explain all when they met; she
was his; she had always been his,” she wrote.
And now he was hastening to her side; and
never again would he leave her. He built
many beautiful “castles in Spain” that day, but
never in his experience had the speed of Ms
aerial seemed so slow to him.
The afternoon advanced, and presently a
great chain of mountains loomed in the furthest
distance. He looked out from the car and
scanned the plain in front and below him. Ha S
What was that? It looked like a dead camel.
But there was a second object lying close to the
larger. Was it a body? Yes, and a woman’s
body, too; he could tell it by the dress.
H


He brought the car to a halt, and almost
before it had touched the ground he had leaped
out and was bending over the apparently life-
less body of a young Arab girl, lying with her
face pressed into the sand. Was she dead?
He did not think so, judging from her appear-
ance; she had probably swooned from thirst,
he thought, or possibly from that and hunger
combined.
He lifted her up very gently, shielding the
poor face from the scorching sun and then he
felt her pulse. There was just the faintest
movement. Carrying her to the aerial, he
placed her on his own bed. Her face was
drawn with suffering and the jaws clenched,
and it was with difficulty that he forced them
open; then down that parched and blackened
throat he poured drop by drop from the con-
tents of a flask he carried with him.
A little shiver presently ran through her, and
repeating the stimulant —Yes, she was reviving.
She opened her eyes and momentarily gazed
in a bewildered and frightened manner about
her. He spoke gently to her, and suddenly
looking up into his face she became reassured;
she knew then that he would not harm her.
Her recovery was rapid, and presently she
strove to express her gratitude to him. She
touched his sleeve; “Arab! English! brothers!”


she said in broken English, with a pathetic little
attempt at a smile. “English and Arabs!
brothers!” he smilingly repeated after her,
touching her sleeve in turn.
Thus was the entente cordiale established
between them. Then he placed grapes and
food before her; and whilst she eagerly de-
voured the former, he busied himself collecting
her scattered belongings, for humanity dictated
that he should convey the maiden to the tents
of her people.
His task completed, in reply to his inquiry as
to where she lived, she pointed in the direction
of the mountains that he had viewed from aloft,
but which were invisible from the low level of
the ground.
They started on what proved to be the most
momentous journey of his life. From Zillah’s
disjointed statements he gathered, that she and
her father, returning from a distant village to
their home beyond the mountains, had been
attacked by robbers, and that her father had
been killed whilst defending his goods. The
camel she rode, being very swift, had out-
paced the pursuing band, until after travelling
for three days and nights without water, all at
once it succumbed. How long she had lain
there, she did not know.
It was late that afternoon when they arrived
B s


at her home, an Arab encampment lying in a
deep valley surrounded by lofty hills.
Through the gathering gloom he could just
discern at the further end of the gorge the dome
of a palace-like structure, which Zillah said
was the abode of the sorceress of the tribe —
a beautiful princess, who by her incantations
wrought most astounding magic. She further
informed him that since the princess had taken
up her abode among them, her tribe had waxed
very powerful; they had conquered other tribes;
and amassed huge quantities of spoil in goods
and cattle.
“She was sought,” continued Zillah, “in
marriage by their chief, Abdullam, a great
warrior, famed for his strength and skill in
arms.”
Alan Edgecumbe was most hospitably re-
ceived, and as a storm threatened, he was
pressed to stay the night. “Their Chief,” said
his entertainers, “was expected every hour from
a successful foray, and if His Highness would
only consent to delay his departure until the
morning, he would then be received in a manner
befitting his high rank”; for in the eyes of these
“Children of the Desert” the stranger’s stature
and bearing, combined with so well furnished
an equipage, surely bespoke him a chieftain
of note.


The storm quickly broke, and raged with ex-
treme violence for several hours; lightnings and
thunderings were incessant, the earth trembled,
and rain descended in torrents. During its
height, a messenger arrived from the castle with
a peremptory order from the magician for him
to visit her without fail the following morning,
when she would suitably reward him for the
service he had rendered to a member of the
tribe.
Excusing himself on the plea of haste in
resuming his journey, and sending a costly
present with the messenger, he retired to rest,
with the firm determination to push on at break
of day, when no doubt the weather would have
moderated.
In the middle of the night he was pounced
upon, and that so suddenly, that before he could
make any effective resistance he found himself
a captive, and his limbs bound tightly with
cords. Despite his struggles and threats, he
was uplifted in the arms of several stalwart
tribesmen and deposited in a rough mountain
cart that immediately set off at a rapid jolting
pace down the valley in the direction of the
castle of the sorceress.
To his repeated questioning as to their motive
in capturing him, his guards for some time
made no reply, but at length the offer of a large


ransom should they release him at once, brought
out the gruff, but not unkindly response: “That
it was by order of the Princess, though in
opposition to the wishes of their Chief, who,”
they said, “had protested in vain against this
breach of hospitality to a stranger, one, more-
over, who had not only broken bread with them,
but had rendered a service to a member of the
tribe.”
Whilst anathematising his bad luck, and
mentally picturing the consternation his non-
arrival in Australia at the hour and date flashed
by him, would occasion to those he loved, Alan
Edgecumbe was fain to console himself with
the reflection that after all his detention would
be brief; for cupidity alone, he judged, was the
sole cause of his seizure and present detention
by the magician. No doubt on payment of a
large ransom he would be immediately released.
That could easily be arranged; and yet all the
while he had an uneasy feeling, which in vain he
tried to combat, that ransom was not alone the
cause of his seizure.
His reflections, however, on this point were
suddenly cut short by the halting of the cart
before the massive pile which had so excited
his curiosity in the gloaming of the previous
evening.
The gate flew open and the cart rolled into


a paved courtyard. The cords which bound
his limbs were cut, and under the escort of two
armed tribesmen, he passed up a flight of steps,
and thence into a sleeping apartment. The
door was shut and barred from without, and
he found himself alone, the victim of a strange
adventure. As he glanced round the
luxuriously-furnished chamber, a strange feel-
ing crept over him; and he felt that no ordinary
experience was about to befal him.
First of all he closely examined the outlets
of the room. A window looked out on the
courtyard, but it was strongly barred, and
peering through, he "saw an armed sentry pacing
below. The other outlet was by the door. He
might possibly batter that down; but then
the noise was sure to attract the attention of
the guard, and what could he, an unarmed man,
do against so many? It thus seemed as if
escape were impossible. Listening, he could
not detect a sound.. What had he best do? he
pondered. Again, he wondered, why had the
sorceress caused him to be seized against the
wishes of the tribe? There must be some
strong underlying motive that impelled her thus
to act contrary to the tribal wish. And yet,
what besides plunder and ransom could be her
motive? Altogether he felt very uneasy; for
the thought kept obtruding, though he did his


best to put it from him: “What if she were to
detain him at her court?”
The love, the loyalty, the purity, the de-
votion, and other noble qualites that formerly
he had attributed in the abstract to all woman-
hood, did not, he found after a very limited
experience of the concrete, extend to all the
sex. In fact, at the present moment, he was
strongly inclined to deny the sorceress the
possession of any feminine virtue. He had a
presentiment that the coming interview with
her would not be a very pleasant one for either
of them. Presently he looked at his watch. In
two hours it would be dawn. What should he
do? Should he keep awake or try to get a
little rest? She may be near me now, he
thought; but surely she must be asleep.
Again he listened; and again not a sound.
This, added to his own inclinations, decided
the matter. He threw himself, dressed as he
was, full length on the bed, and after a time,
hearing nothing to distract him, he fell asleep.
But even in his dreams the sorceress was
a cause of anxiety. For he dreamt that
he was being dragged before her, that he
defied her, and dared her to do her worst;
while she, threatening him with death, ordered
him to be loaded with chains and thrown
into a loathsome dungeon; where nightly


she visited him to gloat over his suffer-
ings. . . . And now came the dream
beautiful. He was in Australia. He was
stealing unawares upon his dear love, Viola
Colonna. She, on suddenly beholding him,
gave first a quick little start of surprise, and
then, with a glad cry of welcome, flew into his
arms.


CHAPTER XXIV.
His dream was rudely dispelled. He awoke
with a start; a rough hand was on his shoulder.
The thought of violence at once occurred to
him, and with one bound he leaped from the
bed to the floor and grappled with the intruder.
A brief but furious struggle ensued. The
follower of Allah —the stalwart warrior—the
skilled man-at-arms —in vain endeavoured to
throw his antagonist, to shake off that grip
which, fastened on his throat, caused his tongue
to protrude and his eyes # to start from their
sockets. All his efforts were useless; he found
himself borne backward, and with terrific
violence hurled to the floor, where gasping for
breath he yet glowered unflinchingly on the
foeman whose prowess he had just experienced.
“By Allah, Infidel!” he muttered, when he
had regained sufficient breath to sit up, “thou
art a strong man, meet to be a warrior of the
Prophet. See! I was but wakening thee to
partake of food,” and he pointed to a table
spread with choice viands. But apparently he
was still suffering from the effects of the fall.


for he passed his hand several times over his
eyes and brows, as if he were in pain.
Alan now felt ashamed of his hasty action,
for, he reflected, had the man intended to do
him an injury he could quite easily have
despatched him whilst he was sleeping. He
might need a friend at the court of this
mysterious magician; and probably the warrior
before him —a man of rank by his address and
clothing—was turned from a possible friend
into a bitter enemy.
But there was little time for reflection, for
suddenly he bent forward and listened. What
was that noise? It was the rush of armed men
and the clank of steel upon the flight of steps.
Was he about to be murdered? Then in a
moment, with brandished weapons, there came
a rush of men into the room.
Looking about him for a weapon with which
to defend himself, Alan hastily snatched up a
heavy chair, and was backing towards the wall
prepared to sell his life dearly, when the
thought suggested itself, that by a determined
rush he might win the door, for amid the jumble
of men closing round him there was no room
for the free play of their arms.
Instantly he sprang forward and dealt the
leading man, whose sword-point was already
dipping to the level of his throat, a crushing


blow. The man toppled backward, and his
weapon, driven from his grasp, rebounded from
the opposite wall, and clanged to the floor.
Another, but this time a back-handed, sweeping
stroke, made a second man recoil against his
fellows; but that blow deprived Alan of his
only means of defence, for he now held only the
fragment of the chair in his hands. His intent,
too, to make for the door, and thus effect his
escape, had been foreseen and frustrated.
Half a dozen tribesmen blocked the entry of
the room, while others, menacing him from
either flank, enabled one of their number to
dash behind him. Thus he was completely
suiTounded; in fact, caught in a trap. For a
moment, with sword points—a glittering circle
—closing round him, his life hung in the
balance.
“Back!” was suddenly shouted in the
peremptory voice of his first acquaintance, who,
meanwhile having risen to his feet (and if the
truth be told, had rather enjoyed the fracas of
the past few moments), pointed to the door.
The effect of this stern monosyllable and
corresponding gesture was magical. Instantly
weapons were lowered, and visages that a
moment before had been stamped with fierce
passions—the overpowering lust to shed blood
—were subdued to a sullen submission to


authority. The Chief again gave the word of
command; the disappointed warriors, facing
about, trooped from the room.
A Believer’s sword would not this day drink
the blood of an Unbeliever. It was the will of
Allah! Allah must be obeyed!
Abdullam—for it was that renowned
warrior—now came up to his late antagonist,
and offering his hand in token of good
will, gazed for some moments admiringly
at his stalwart frame and powerful limbs.
“I have seen many Infidels,” he exclaimed,
“but never one with thy strength and
stature. She—our Prophetess—will convert
thee to the true faith, and thou shalt have high
rank and an abode in Paradise. Allah needs
men like thee!”
So far from having made an enemy, the
young Islander had gained a friend; for what
these brave and hardy warriors most admire in
man is strength, combined with high courage
and personal prowess. This Infidel had not
only conquered him—Abdullam—the strongest
and most renowned of his tribe, but, with only
a chair for a weapon, had held in check a dozen
of his followers; indeed, had disabled two of
them, who had to be helped from the room.
Abdullam informed his new-made friend
that his instructions were to bring him into the


presence of the sorceress, but that he had plenty
of time to refresh himself, and need not hurry.
So while the Infidel breakfasted, to impress
him with a sense of the power and importance
of the sorceress, the Arab entertained him by
recounting several of her most notable achieve-
ments.
On one occasion, he said, a powerful
neighbouring tribe had committed depredations
and carried off several of their women. He,
Abdullam, had headed the punitive expedition,
but, falling into an ambuscade, had lost a
number of his men. The enemy pursued them,
and pressed closely on their heels until they
gained a defile which guarded the valley in
which stood the castle of the sorceress. Here
the Princess met them. She had drawn a line
across the narrowest part; they passed safely
over, but the foe pressing on met with an un-
accountable reverse. One by one, as they
touched the line, they fell dead, until their
bodies were piled several deep. The remnant,
dismayed by the fate of their companions,
called a parley, and sued humbly for peace.
They could not face her magic, they said. It
was too strong for them. They would restore
the captives and pay an indemnity in goods
and cattle.
This tribe, said Abdullam, afterwards


became incorporated with theirs, and ever after
were the staunchest supporters of the sorceress.
“On one occasion,” he said, “several of the
incorporated tribes plotted to murder the
Princess, hoping by so doing to regain their
independence.
“A band of five hundred warriors, armed
to the teeth, broke into the courtyard of the
palace at dead of night, whilst all approaches
were guarded to prevent escape or help arriving
from outside.
“Immediately on entry of the storming
party, a wonderful light flashed, and through
the shattered gateway the conspirators in the
open saw the charred and blackened remains of
their late companions strewing the stones of
the courtyard. Not one survived to narrate
the manner of their death.
“The Princess herself shortly after appeared
on the battlement with lightnings playing round
her head, and in an imperative voice commanded
them to remove the bodies of their late brethren.
From that hour,” said Abdullam, “none
questioned her authority.”
Alan Edgecumbe shrewdly suspected from
these accounts of Abdullam’s, that the sorceress
must be some clever European adventuress,
who, for purposes of her own, utilised an ex-
tensive knowledge of electricity to overawe


these descendants of Ishmael, who still, in many
respects, followed the primitive lives of their
forefathers.
Abdullam now thanked him for his kindness
to the Arab maiden, and on his refusal to accept
high rank under him, promised his good offices
with the Princess should she wish to detain him
at her court.
But Alan saw plainly that for some cause the
Arab was uneasy over the coming interview,
but whether on his, Alan’s, account or for some
private reason of his own, he was unable to
judge, and he did not think it wise to question
him on the subject.
Breakfast despatched, Abdullam called his
attention to his dilapidated garments, which had
almost been torn off him in the struggle, and
the Arab, pointing with a smile to a curtained
recess, said there were garments there ready for
use.
Costumed in the flowing habiliments of a
chieftain of rank, Alan’s appearance met with
his new friend’s heartiest approval.
Following Abdullam from the room, he had
scarcely gone a dozen paces when the Arab
abruptly halted. They were in a long corridor
with doors opening on either side.
“Hist! Infidel!” he muttered, with a warning
gesture, and fierce suspicious eyes, “before we


go further: Hast thou a wife or maiden whom
thou lovest in that distant land whither thou
was hastening?”
“Yes,” replied Alan, “a maiden whom I love
is even now awaiting my coming; she will grieve
should I not quickly return.”
“Ugh! that is well!” returned the Arab,
significantly, “thou shalt be free this night!
By Allah I swear it! Come!”
Passing through several richly-furnished
apartments, they at length entered a chamber
where, in obedience to a secret signal, Abdullam
left him.


CHAPTER XXV.
It was most strange. Not the absence of the
sorceress—his first glance round the room had
convinced him of that —but the room itself.
Again there crept over him the same uneasy
feeling he had experienced the night before.
This room recalled Miss Pelham’s laboratory
as he had last seen it on that eventful night,
now twelve long months past. A dawning
suspicion awoke in him. Hortense Pelham and
this mysterious sorceress; was it possible there
could be any connection between the two?
Were they one and the same person?
Was he fated to meet her again? Surely
not. It could not be. He had read the pub-
lished accounts of her death. Yet, now he
remembered, there had always lingered in his
mind a doubt or suspicion as to the cause, but
never as to the actual fact of the death
itself.
With so much explosive on hand he had
thought it possible that her death was acci-
dental, but then with the memory of certain
events that still rankled in his mind, he had had
a strong suspicion that it was premeditated.


What if she were not really dead after all?
What if this sorceress, whose prisoner he was,
turned out to be Hortense Pelham? How
could he meet her after what had occurred
between them? How, too, dared she meet him?
As to the blowing up of her house, was it
not, from his knowledge of her, just what the
haughty beauty might have done in one of her
eccentric moods or in a fit of anger (and he
could imagine she had been very angry), with
some ulterior purpose in view?
And that purpose, could it in any way be
connected with him? Was not his capture last
night and present detention, against the de-
clared wishes of Abdullam and his tribe, strong
evidence connecting Hortense Pelham with
this African Princess and sorceress?
And if it so happened that she were alive,
what could she want with him?
A flush of anger and of another emotion
burned on his cheek. But (drawing himself
up) he knew how he would act in case she
sprang this possible surprise upon him.
He would know how to meet her. He now
knew her character; he knew her for what she
was; he knew her to be an extremely dangerous
and unscrupulous woman, who would stick at
nothing so that she might gain her ends.
He would have none of her. He would


hold no parley whatever with her; their old-
time friendship was a thing of the past, it could
never be resuscitated. It closed that night when
she gulled his senses, and by a yet more das-
tardly trick, for ever lost his respect. He
steeled himself against her.
And now in the midst of his reflections, an
almost imperceptible swaying of a screen
facing him drew his attention, and he wondered
if he were under observation from behind it.
As curiously he gazed, a jewelled arm was
suddenly thrust through, and—significant fact,
confirming his suspicions—on one finger was a
valuable ring that he remembered presenting
to Miss Pelham as a token of gratitude for the
great service she had rendered him in Rangi-
toto Gardens, New Zealand.
Whilst reflecting on the part he might shortly
be called upon to play in the drama that he felt
was impending, the screen was pushed aside,
and, veiled as a Turkish woman, the sorceress
stepped forth. When within a few paces of
him, she flung aside part of her disguise, and
they were face to face.
It was Hortense Pelham who stood before
him; lovely and imperious as of yore.
“You,” he could not help exclaiming, as their
eyes met. Involuntarily he drew back a step.
“Yes, me,” half mockingly, and with an arch


smile at his visible discomposure. “And have
you no welcome for Hortense Pelham, whom
you thought dead?”
Although in part prepared to see her, he yet
in vain strove to conceal the emotion occasioned
by this strange meeting with one whom he
vaguely felt to be the “evil star” of his destiny.
This smiling beauty, this attractive personality,
was more like the Hortense Pelham of old,
the sympathising friend, the loving alluring
Hortense, whom, when she chose, no man living
could long resist; against whom no man’s anger
could long hold out.
The memory, however, of that long past
night; the thought of what had occurred that
could never be revealed to human soul; the
memory, too, of her he loved, to whom his
loyalty was pledged, served to steel him against
her. He felt his anger stirring—“shameless
that she was!”
“It is indeed a fitting time and place for an
explanation between us,” he coldy replied.
“Let us go back to that night when, under the
guise of friendship, you played with, and used
as your tool, the inexperienced but trusting
friend who believed in your friendship, who
would have gone through fire and water to
serve you, but whose dream of friendship you
so rudely dispelled by your despicable act.


Hortense Pelham, I now as heartily despise
you as once I honoured you. In my eyes you
are a disgrace to your sex; and my greatest
regret is that we ever met; willingly I will
never look upon your face again.”
She drew herself up with superb scorn,
looking him full in the face. He, forgetting
that he was under detention as her prisoner,
turned and made as if to leave the room; but
an invisible barrier, cold as death, interposed,
between him and the door. His limbs turned
cold and rigid. He could not move a step; he
stood motionless as a statue.
The sorceress approached him, and he saw
her raise her arm. He caught the glitter of a
jewel in her hand. She looked straight into
his eyes. “You did not mean those words?”
she asked, peremptorily.
“I did not mean those words,” he repeated.
“You do care for me then?”
“I do care for you.”
Then she touched his forehead. Instantly
the tension of his limbs relaxed. A delicious
sensation crept over him; he was gazing into
a sea of whirling mist; he was wandering he
knew not where ... in reality he was
following her.
*****
“Hist! Infidel! waken!”


Alan Edgecumbe awoke in pitch darkness,
with these words whispered into his ears, and
at the same time conscious of the grip of a hand
on his shoulder.
“What is it? Who are you?” he gasped.
“It is I, Abdullam!” came in the same hushed
voice. “Hist! rise, but speak not!”
Striving to collect his scattered senses, Alan
was yet aware that he was in danger, and that
Abdullam was here to aid him to escape. With
the Arab’s firm grip on his arm, he rose from
the couch whereon he lay, and together they
groped their way from the room; then along a
corridor, and thence from chamber to chamber.
. . They made but one halt, and that for a brief
second, and his heart stood still, for he heard the
regular breathing of a sleeper. But at last
they gained the courtyard of the castle in
safety, and instantly a sentry challenged,
Abdullam gave the countersign; the pon-
derous gate swung back; and with the pure
fresh air of Heaven on his face, Alan Edge-
cumbe realised that once more he was free.
By daylight they had gained a mountain
defile, and here, masked by a thicket, was his
aerial, and Zillah, the Arab maiden, whose life
he had saved, in charge of it.
The Arab helped him into the car, and then
grasped his hand. “Abdullam hath kept faith


with thee. Depart in peace. Infidel!” he cried;
“yet sometimes call to thy recollection thy
friend, Abdullam, the Arab! Bismillah!
Peace be with thee!”
“Farewell, Abdullam! Farewell, Zillah!”
and there were tears in his eyes as he bade these
true friends “good-bye,” for he knew that in
all human probability he should never see them
again.
The maiden gazed up at him with moistened,
grateful eyes, and as the aerial rose,
“Bismillah!” she cried, “May Allah keep thee
and speed thee on thy way!’
A minute later, as they gazed aloft, the Arab
and the maiden saw a shaft of sunlight strike
a dark object that, high in the heavens, was
winging its flight with inconceivable swiftness
towards the now glowing east.
ijf
Above the broad bosom of the Indian Ocean,
in the growing twilight of the closing day,
glimmered an aerial. Like an aerolite it cleft
the ambient ether; and seated in it was Alan
Edgecumbe, his face pale but calm.


CHAPTER XXVI.
Across the southern slopes of lofty mountains,
beyond the confines of New Italy and the
wastes of the Great Sahara, the pitiless sun beat
fiercely down upon that far-off African valley,
upon the castle of Hortense Pelham, bathing its
battlemented towers in a deep blood-red glow.
The escape of Alan Edgecumhe fell like a
thunderbolt upon the sorceress. At first came
a sense of stupefaction, that was quickly suc-
ceeded by a burning, fierce desire for vengeance.
Abdullam was not to be found. Fearing the
anger of the sorceress, he had retired to a remote
mountain fastness, there to await the abatement
of her wrath; and thus, perforce, she had to
start alone in pursuit of her recreant lover.
But pursuit under the circumstances was hope-
less, and this she realised after two days and
two nights’ flight through space.
So when midway over the Indian Ocean, she
turned, and regaining her castle, buried herself
in her chamber, where for nigh the space of a
week, she abandoned herself to the wildest
paroxysms of grief and remorse.


Her past life; its fleeting triumphs, bitter
heart-burnings, its many tragic incidents, and
stupendous closing failure, passed in pano-
ramic procession before her. Now to the
agonising full she realised how great was that
moral lapse which had poisoned her life.
And how could she face the future? But
would she face it? Victim of a misplaced
attachment, had she not by her own act, with
her own hands, heaped coals of fire upon her
own head? Had she not by giving reins to her
ungovernable passion, lost that self-respect
which is the true bloom of womanhood? And
now, perforce, she must needs lie in the bed
which she herself had made.
She groaned aloud, and clenched her hands
in the excess of mental and physical anguish.
Only those who have suffered, those who have
seen their most cherished hopes and ambitions
fade one by one, and melt away, can—and that
but faintly—understand how this woman, with
her peculiar organisation, felt amid the wreck
of all her hopes. How intense the agony of
self-abasement. And oh, the utter barrenness
of life!
With many, alas! the hastening of the end
which, perchance, may give rest and peace, is
the only recourse.


It is the closing scene of Hortense Pelham’s
brilliant, but, alas, misdirected career, that we
now introduce to our readers.
It was early morning. The sorceress was in
her laboratory. Overhead burned the mystic,
pale blue flame, whose everlasting fuel was
supplied by the oxygen of the atmosphere.
Around her were grouped the paraphernalia of
modern science; besides her own patented and
unpatented inventions.
One of these, still in an unfinished state, was
to have made man practically independent of
flying machines. She left this to posterity to
complete; all details were given, and it required
but a toucli here and there. Her days of
scientific investigation were closed. She, her-
self, perchance, might need all her powers in
that new life which was soon to come; whence
none has ever yet returned to tell us what is
there.
Ever and anon from that chamber —so soon
to prove her death-chamber —leaped forth the
hissing flame that had proved so terrifying to
Alan Edgecumbe. In such a flame, death, to
human beings desiring death, was instantaneous.
No feeling of pain was experienced; no residue
of ashes remained; for in the thousandth
fraction of a second the body was reduced to
its constituent atoms, and the residue, if any.


sent, a whirling impalpable powder, into the
wide spaces of heaven.
The sorceress had resolved on her own death.
She had prepared herself to face unflinchingly
the Great Hereafter. Her shroud would be
the crackling flame; her funeral cortege the
four winds of heaven.
She was seated at a table engaged in trans-
mitting her last message on earth. She had
ascertained the exact position of Alan Edge-
cumbe’s chamber in Elmswood, Darling Point,
Sydney. She had calculated to the minutest
fraction the distance separating the two rooms,
and, now, on his wave-machine that stood in
its nook so many thousands of miles away, she
was recording her last farewell to him on
earth.
She had settled in her own mind that on his
return to-night from visiting his dear love,
Viola Colonna, he would receive it. She may,
perchance, even have thought that, disembodied
and hovering near, she would note its effect on
him. Her appointed task came to an end.
With a deep sigh she withdrew her finger from
the transmitting button, and with a wan smile,
rose and gazed around.
“Alan” (thus ran her message), “how sweet
still sounds that name to Hortense Pelham.
When you read this message to-night, the


sender will be no more. She has doomed her-
self to die. Her last thought will be of you;
her last wish that her spirit may be nigh you as
you read; her last hope that, as you read this
story of her life, you . . you . . will
forgive. Make sign that you forgive!”
HER STORY.
As a child, I had lofty ambitions: I felt
that I was different to others. I felt that
mentally and physically I was bom to rule;
that all others must give place; that I must be
first in all things first in beauty, first in
physical and intellectual achievements. Thus I
grew up, flattered and pampered by the world;
my beauty a theme, my intellect acclaimed.
I was the only child of a distinguished and
wealthy savant —one who had made and left his
mark on science. My mother, alas! died whilst
I was yet an infant. Had she lived, or had I
had a brother, or even a sister, my life must
have been different; I might have been a good
woman.
At an early age I became interested in my
father’s experiments. He took me into his
confidence, taught me all he knew, and soon
my fame was world wide. And, yet, voluntarily,
I now close my life; and why?


With man’s coarser nature it is hard to
explain a woman’s why. Love is mostly a
woman’s why. It is mine.
Men (all men but you), I have despised.
Men are but pitiful creatures at the best. To
a woman of assured position, of acknowledged
beauty, with abilities —and I had all these —the
world is at her feet. It requires but a souppon
of flattery, a little seeming devotion, and men
are but as puppets, as wax, in her hands. With
them, through them, she can rule.
I have ruled, and but for you, would have
forced my way still higher up the ladder-rungs
of Fame. I should have been a power in the
land, and if denied dominion in my own, then
in that other where you found me.
But . . . you came into my life. It
was destiny, and destiny we ca.nnot control.
Love. Men speak of love; but what is man’s
love compared with woman’s? Before we met
I had never really loved; I had simply dreamed
of love; responsive love that fired my blood,
that thrilled my being through, filling it with
strange ecstasy.
In my dreams I wove fancies, even fashioned
you, and in my waking moments wondered if
we—my love and I—should ever meet.
Sometimes in night visions I seemed to have
harked back to another life—to have met and


loved a real person. The night before we met,
I dreamed of you; I even saw you in the very
spot where afterwards I found you.
Can you not guess the rest? Can you not
guess what followed to a woman of strong un-
curbed passions; she whom you called shame-
less? Had you loved me, Alan, I should have
been a great woman (I have always felt that
I could be a great woman); I should have had
a great career, and you would have been proud
of me. But you did not love me; and I —l was
mad, Alan! mad for love of you!
Your indifference goaded me beyond en-
durance. The thought that another woman
would possess you set my brain on fire. I saw
that I would lose you; that you would marry
that other woman unless . . (here part of
the message was blurred) . . When on that
fateful morn I found you gone, I vowed to
be revenged. I formulated a plan. That
plan was this: In my many vagaries, in my
many wanderings, I once had saved an Arab
force—the weaker side—from annihilation.
To cut my story short, I was entreated to
become their Princess, their magician. It
suited my adventurous mood, my love of power,
to fall in with their wishes. I became a queen,
and ruled my subjects with a rod of iron,
spending a portion of each year with them. I


built this stately pile; I enlarged my kingdom;
made my power felt.
To go back: It was my hand fired the train,
flashed the current that destroyed my house, and
caused my death to become bruited abroad.
It amused me to read the obituary notices of
my own death. It suited my purpose.
I came here; I vowed that I would wait; that
I should yet strike a blow that would bring you
to my feet. But destiny was again too strong
for me.
I have always fought with destiny in the
belief that destiny was against me.
Some strange chance —call it what you will
—directed you into my kingdom. Failing
other measures, I gave orders for your
detention.
Shall Igo on? Shall I unveil what further
passed? Shame on me, I cannot. (Here
again a portion of the message was blurred).
Alan, with my last breath I bless you!
In this my last hour on earth, I repent . . .
bitterly repent!
A few minutes later, Hortense Pelham
paused before a small electrical motor that
regulated the furnace and pressed a button.
Then with firm, calm tread she entered the
death chamber. She came to a halt close to


the cavity or opening in the centre. And as
she did so there came a strange trembling of
the massive flooring, a vibration of the sur-
rounding walls. Instinctively she drew her-
self together. The tension of the atmosphere
grew insupportable, the roaring of pent-up
flames filled her ears.
Hortense Pelham proudly raised her head
aloft. “Alan! forgive! forgive!” she cried.
“I come! . . . I co . . . !” With
that bitter cry still on her lips, in that awful
swirl of flame, she passed away.


CHAPTER XXVII.
Aftee his adventures in Africa, and his
escape from Hortense and her magic, Alan’s
voyage proved uneventful. He naturally
suffered somewhat from the strain he had
undergone, and was looking worn and anxious.
It was with pleasurable anticipations, however,
that he alighted one morning from his aerial
on the lawn in front of the Colonnas’ house,
in Sydney. It was a beautiful morning in
spring, and his heart was beating fast as he
hastily leapt from his car and crossed the
lawn.
Alan was tolerably well acquainted with the
ways of the household, for he had passed a
week there once in familiar intimacy after
his accident with Viola in the aerial.
He hoped to give Viola a pleasant surprise.
Surely Piper must ere this have abandoned
his suit as hopeless.
As he hasteried on to the terrace he might
well have wondered that no one was astir on
such a lovely morning; not even a gardener
was to be seen trimming the lawn.


He was too preoccupied with his thoughts,
however, to notice this, or to see that the
windows were shuttered, and it was only after
he had rung the bell that the unusual aspect
of the place began to strike him. The bell,
too, he then thought, sounded in the strange
way that is supposed to betoken an untenanted
house.
After an interval, during which his im-
patience rose, he heard the unusual sound of
bolts being withdrawn.
It was not the Colonnas’ butler or any other
familiar face that greeted him when the door
at length was opened. His impatient request
to see Miss Colonna was met by a stony stare.
Was Mr. Colonna not at home then?
The man, who was quite obviously not a
domestic servant, but who had the air of a
waiter or a clerk out of employment, replied
that the house was unoccupied, and that he
had only been sent out the day before as care-
taker.
What could have happened? Where were
the Colonnas? Alan could extract no in-
formation from the man; either he knew
nothing or would tell nothing.
There was no help for it, he must seek
information elsewhere. So leaving his car in
charge of the man, he took the first tram into
1 2


Sydney in search of news. He might catch
Homfray at his office and learn from him the
explanation of the mystery.
As he turned into the suite of offices occupied
by Homfray’s firm, his brother-in-law met
him.
“Hullo! Alan,” he cried, “I saw the number
of your aerial posted this morning among
the arrivals, and was just starting to look
you up.
“It’s deuced hard luck on you, old man, for
of course you’ve heard the bad news.”
“In heaven’s name, Homfray, don’t keep me
in suspense. Let me have the worst.
“Don’t tell me—Viola can’t have married
Piper.”
“Well, not so bad as that quite, but bad
enough.”
Taking Alan into his private office, he
locked the door, and this was the story he had
to tell.
Shortly after Alan’s departure, and while
Homfray himself was away at Lava Island,
the blow had fallen.
Piper had put on the screw, and Colonna
was ruined.
The shock was more than the old man could
bear; to be disgraced at the close of a long
and honourable life was too much.


The morning after Piper foreclosed, Mr.
Colonna was missed at breakfast, and when
his room was visited he was found lying on
the floor unconscious, and, but for a slight
twitching of the limbs, devoid of all outward
signs of life.
Forty-eight hours later life was extinct; the
shock had proved too great.
On the old man’s seizure, search was made
for the son; he was found to be missing.
Piper, it was believed, had a strong hold on
him. He had left Sydney suddenly and
mysteriously.
After the funeral, for which Homfray
arrived only just in time, Viola went to stay
with some friends at their country house near
Sydney. But the strain had been too much
for her also. She was now lying in a private
hospital to which she had been taken, and was
in a most critical condition.
Her life was almost despaired of. There
was just one hope left. In her delirium,
Alan’s name was always on her lips. His
presence might serve to turn the tide.
Such was the bitter news Alan had to hear
as he sat with bowed head and features tense
and drawn.
“Why was I not told of this before, Hom-
fray?” he cried at length, in a voice strangely
hoarse.


“You must remember, Alan, that I only
returned to Sydney ten days ago, and, on
inquiring for you, we found you had left
London, bound, it was believed, for Sydney.
No further news could be heard of you. You
evidently did not come straight on; we could
not make you out.
“Thank God, old chap, you are here at last.
Not a moment is to be lost; we must go and see
Viola. In her delirium she asks for you
incessantly.
“You must pull yourself together; you will
find her much changed, and you must be pre-
pared for a great shock.”
As they rode to the hospital in Homfray’s
motor, Alan broke the silence with but a single
question.
Rousing himself at length, as from a stupor,
he asked Homfray if the Colonnas had heard
nothing of a bequest to Viola of a large sum
from Italy?
“Yes, that is the pity of it all, Alan.
“I was just going to tell you. A few days
after Colonna’s funeral, and just after Viola
was seized with brain fever, the family solici-
tors received advices that Viola was the heiress
of a rich uncle who had just died in Italy, and
that considerable sums of money were at her
immediate disposal—enough, they say, to have
satisfied all Piper’s demands.


“Since then, of course, everything has been
in a muddle. Piper had the impudence to go
to the hospital and inquire for Viola. Luckily
I met the brute on the steps, and had the satis-
faction of relieving my feelings a little. I
don’t think he is likely to show up again. I
asked if his work of ruin was not yet complete?
He had killed the father, I told him, and ruined
the son, and for the life of the daughter, now
at death’s door, he was answerable. Did he
dare, I asked him, to follow her to her very
death bed with his persecutions? He made no
sign of answering me, but slunk away like a
beaten hound. No, I don’t think Piper will
give any more trouble.
“But here we are. Now, Alan, you must
pull yourself together; remember everything
yet may go well.”
When the nurses were told that it was Miss
Colonna’s fiance who asked to see her, they
said he might go in. It was just possible that
his presence might have some elfect upon her
wandering brain. It was scarcely likely, but
it was worth trying.
So Alan Edgecumbe was ushered in to the
sick room by one of the nurses.
Tenderly Alan bent over the poor face of
her he loved, so wasted and flushed by fever.
Her eyes, bright and restless, were turned


upon him, yet knew him not. Her arms were
tossing impatiently from side to side. Ever at
short intervals there broke from her Ups pitiful
and agonizing cries of distress, “No, father, I
can’t do it! Will no one tell Alan to come?
Alan! Where is Alan? Why doesn’t he
come?”
Gently he imprisoned one of the truant
hands and held it in his firm, cool grasp. Yet
there came no recognition, no answering
pressure.
At intervals the same despairing cries
assailed his ears, “Send him away, father, send
him away! Alan! Where is Alan?”
Still he clasped her hand, now less unyield-
ing, and presently he spoke to her in soft and
tender words of love.
But the eyes gave no response, the fingers
as before returned no answering pressure.
Yet she was becoming calmer; her hand seemed
to rest more passively in his.
Now, gently, with the hand that was free,
he stroked her burning forehead. This seemed
to soothe and give her rest. Her cries ceased.
Once only she murmured softly her lover’s
name, but still without recognition.
Was it from the effect of a lover’s voice and
touch, or was it because the fever was abating
—had almost run its course? However that


may be, at length the tide had turned; her poor
bewildered brain grew calm, her limbs relaxed,
her fingers lay motionless in his; her eyes, too,
ceased to wander, and presently the eyelids
gently closed. Like a child, she was asleep.
The nurse stole softly towards the bed and
beckoned Alan from the room.
From that day Viola began to mend, hut
her recovery was a slow one. It was many
days before Alan was admitted to see her;
many, many days, nay, weeks, before she could
leave her room. Slowly, very slowly, her
strength returned, and it was not till the
summer was nearly over that she could be
moved.
Then the family doctor sought out Alan.
“In this case, Mr. Edgecumbe, or rather
Dr. Edgecumbe, I should say, you can do more
than all the College of Physicians. You saved
Viola when we all failed. Love no doubt plays
the deuce with us poor mortals, but love after
all is the Master Physician, and you have
proved it; I leave the case in your hands.
“A change of scene is all that Viola wants.
Take her with you to your Pacific island, Lava
Island don’t you call it? The muggy weather
will be over down there now. It will be the
very place for you both.


“I see you are looking serious. Is it Mrs.
Grundy you are thinking of? A marriage
so soon after a funeral might, you think, be
too much for a young lady’s nerves.
“Well, I shall have to speak to Viola very
seriously. I shall tell her that sip has to get
away at once, and that I trust her only to your
hands. So you may get the license, Edge-
cumbe, without delay.”
Here our story closes. As the good doctor
had urged, there was a wedding. One sunny
morning in autumn, Alan and Viola were
quietly married, and later the same day they
left in an aerial, bound on their honeymoon for
Lava Island.
Sands & McDougall Limited, Printers, Melbourne.
