

HOTEL
WINDSOR.
SPRING STREET
MELBOURNE


HOTEL
WINDSOR
SPRING STREET
MELBOURNE


The Curfew Tower
Windsor Castle


THE HOTEL IDEAL
/ ~very name of Windsor is inspiring, as it brings to
the mind the great ancient castle where English
royalty have for centuries sought peace and comfort.
Just as the Windsor Castle is characteristic of the English race,
so does the Hotel Windsor typify the dignity of the city of Mel-
bourne. Built in the old English style of massive architecture and
erected in its ideal position in Spring Street, flanked by Parliament
House on one side, and the Treasury Buildings on the other, and
overlooking the beautiful Treasury Gardens, it fulfils one of the most
necessary requirements of a fashionable hotel —a pleasing location.
The Windsor is most conveniently situated, with electric trams
in both Bourke and Collins Streets, each within two minutes of
the Hotel. The principal theatres of the city are close at hand and
the Hotel is within easy reach of the leading business establishments.
A HOTEL WITH PERSONALITY
The Hotel Windsor is imbued with the dignity of the Hotel
Cecil in London and the old Waldorf-Astoria in New York; at the
same time radiating a personality peculiarly its own. It is exclusive
yet possesses a warm atmosphere of friendliness, and provides
luxuriousness without undue expense. A popular Hotel in the


sense that it is well liked by all its patrons and so has gained a
clientele that is its best advertisement.
A HOTEL WHICH IS A HOME
It is a home, however temporary, for country, interstate, and
oversea visitors. Parties of tourists, delegates to conventions, over-
sea cricket elevens, and others select the Windsor because the Hotel
has gained a reputation for providing special service and facilities
to people visiting Melbourne.
FACILITIES FOR FUNCTIONS
The Windsor is also chosen for functional luncheons and
dinners, its large and attractive banqueting hall being as much
appreciated as the excellence of the catering and efficiency of service.
Because of the palatial atmosphere of its reception rooms the Hotel
is greatly favoured by social leaders for afternoon teas, parties and
other functions. It is also regarded as an ideal place for weddings
and social receptions.
A FAMILY HOTEL
It is a family Hotel, in which respect it is unexcelled, providing
as it does entirely self-contained flats consisting of private entrance
hall, sitting room, three bedrooms, and bathroom; while there are
HOTEL WINDSOR


smaller suites consisting of entrance hall, sitting room, double bed-
room and private bathroom.
It is a residential Hotel, favoured by people living in the city,
not only because of the comfort and convenience which it offers,
but also because of its situation in the quietest part of the city.
UP-TO-DATE APPOINTMENTS
In 1920, the Hotel was entirely reconstructed and modernised,
with the result that the appointments are now equal to those which
the traveller may find in any fashionable hotels of the leading centres
of the world. There are two hundred bedrooms and suites occupy-
ing the four top floors. Each bedroom has its own telephone, hot
and cold running water; most of them have private bathrooms at-
tached. The larger family suites
open on to balconies which have an
extremely pleasing outlook, and all
the rooms are furnished in good
taste.
LUXURIOUS
, LOUNGES
The main lounge on the ground
floor is an impressively beautiful
HOTEL WINDSOR


apartment, the decorative scheme is harmoniously artistic, and a
number of paintings add greatly to its beauty. The lounge element
predominates, and with its comfortable arm chairs and settees is
most inviting. Adjoining this is another lounge known as the Blue
Room, which is equally attractive and comfortable.
Among the many conveniences provided are theatre booking
facilities, a library, bookstall, and tobacco kiosk, telephone boxes,
and the services of a stenographer are available to visitors at all
times.
THE CUISINE
In this regard it may confidently be claimed that in liberality
of catering, excellence of cooking, and readiness of service of a
courteous staff, the provision made for its guests by the Hotel
Windsor is of premier class in the highest sense of the term.
The dining salon is of the spacious hall-like type of those of the
leading hotels of Europe, and possesses that restful atmosphere which
helps so much to the enjoyment of a good meal.
PERSONAL ATTENTION
Not the least important of the attractions of the Hotel Windsor
is the personal thought and attention given to all its guests. This is
HOTEL WINDSOR


a phase of hotel life which is always appreciated and which relieves
the embarrassment of strangeness.
In brief the Hotel Windsor provides not only for all the con-
venience and comfort that a hotel can offer, but also possesses the
atmosphere of a home of the best class.
HOTEL WINDSOR


Hotel Windsor
Blue Room


Corner of Lounge
Hotel Windsor


Dining Room
Hotel Windsor


Outlook from Bedrooms
Hotel Windsor


Private Sitting Room
Hotel Windsor


Hotel Windsor
Bedroom


TARIFF
Room and Breakfast from 13 /6 to 15/- Day
Inclusive Tariff from - 21/- to 22/6 Day
(According to size and location of room)
ROOMS WITH PRIVATE BATHROOMS
ATTACHED
Room and Breakfast - 17/6 to 18/6 Day
Inclusive Tariff - - 25/-to 26/- Day
All Rates Quoted are Per Person
Special Reduction to Visitors Staying One Month or Longer
Children under Twelve Years Half Rates
Private Suites de Luxe, Tariff on Application
Breakfast (8 to 10 a.m.) - - - 3/6
Lunch (1 to 2 p.m.) - - - 5/
Dinner (6.30 to 8 p.m.) - 8/
Early Morning Tea - - - l/-
Morning Tea in Lounge - - - 1/6
Afternoon Tea - - - - 2/-
Light Suppers are Served in the Lounge from 9 p.m. to 1 a.m.
All Communications to be Addressed to
"THE MANAGER”


HOTEL WINDSOR


Hotel Windsor
Entrance Vestibule




