

No. 7.]
Health of Mm Males.
Salus Populi Suprema Lex Esto.
HOUSE POISON:
LECTURE DELIVERED BEFORE THE HEALTH
SOCIETY OF NEW SOUTH WALES
On the 2 2nd August, 1878,
AT THE
FREEMASONS’ HALL, YORK STREET SYDNEY
HENRY BURTON BRADLEY,
Hon. Secretary of the Society.
The Hon. Sir W. M. Manning in the Chair.
isghwg :
PRINTED FOR THE HEALTH SOCIETY,
JOHN SANDS, GEORGE STREET.




n3*t 7
No. 7.]
[Oct,, 1878.
Health tract aof : |lcic Jsoutlr Males.
Salus Populi Suprema Lex Esto.
HOUSE POISON:
A LECTURE DELIVERED BEFORE THE HEALTH
SOCIETY OF NEW SOUTH WALES
On the 22nd August, 1878,
AT THE
FREEMASONS’ HALL, YORK STREET SYDNEY
HENEY BUETON BEADLEY,
Hon. Secretary of the Society,
The Hon. Sir W. M. Manning in the Chair.
PRINTED FOR THE HEALTH SOCIETY,
JOHN SANDS, GEORGE STREET.


THE HONORABLE SIR WILLIAM MONTAGU MANNING.
THE HONORABLE THOMAS HOLT, M.L.C.
A. T. HOLROYD, M.A., M.B.
%E-umuxzxi
CLEMENTS LESTER, Australian Club.
jJsjtowmg JStmhxg :
HENRY BURTON BRADLEY, 64 Margaret Street.
OBJECTS OF THE SOCIETY :
1. The diffusion among all classes of plain information on
the subjects of Health and Disease, particularly as these are
connected with cleanliness, ventilation, and infection.
2. The prevention of adulteration of food and liquors.
3. The removal of noxious influences by means of legisla-
tion, and by a legitimate pressure upon the executive authorities.
“ Prevention is better than Cure ”


a-a w 4- -1
fflpli %m ®Bto.
The following lecture on “House Poison,” was delivered at
the Freemasons' Hall, on the 22nd of August, by Mr. Burton
Bradley, the Honorary Secretary to the Health Society of New
South Wales. The Hon. Sir William Manning, the President
of the Society, occupied the chair: —
Mr. Bradley said :
“ It will be readily admitted that, when the enemy is at the gates,
it is high time to bestir the sleeping citizens, how much more so
when the enemy is within the walls, under the dwellings, armed
with a weapon of such potency as shall pierce, nay, is piercing,
unseen and unheard, floors and ceilings, invading parlour and bed-
room, slow poisoning the child in the cot, the strong man resting
or seeking rest from his day of toil, to fit him for to-morrow’s
duties ! You have apprehended ray meaning, and know that it is
the domestic nuisance of every house to which I invite your
attention this evening, at the instance of the Health Society of
New South Wales.
“ I cannot hope to say anything new upon the general
principles of a subject frequently dealt with by abler pens,
nor can I expect to make an agreeable hour for educated ears
from the materials with which I must unavoidably deal; but inas-
much as some of the conditions of our drainage differ from those
of most civilized places, I shall hope to make suggestions of
practical value, which may cover the defects of my commonplace
observations, and, with regard to the impossibility of making an
unpleasant subject agreeable, I must ask you to accept my


assurance that, so far as may be done without obscuring ray
meaning, I will avoid offence.
“ At the outset I must lay down the statement that every
home, whether in city, suburb, or country, nay, every human
being, makes its own nuisance—that the mansion at Woollahra
may be as guilty, in the matter of poisoning its inmates, as
the den upon the rocks; that the' country house, the cottage
at Burwood or Manly, where families repair for change of
air and health, may be as full of peril as the dwelling of the laborer
in the city. And if it were not so, our concern, even the selfish
concern, of every one of us, is almost as great, because disease,
generated in the hovel, finds its way by infection to the inhabitants
of the mansion ; the water from kitchen and washhouse, with
other nuisances, the decomposed results of our food necessities,
thrown out from or retained about our dwellings, suffered to run
into the neighbour’s land, or down the street or road in the
country, or in the city dedicated to the public sewer, all bear
their share of this house poison, and it is my duty to-night to point
out to you the special avenues by which this foul fiend assails
your health.
“Bya perversity for which I cannot account, the city sewers
have been constructed, as you know, between the fronts of
the houses, instead of between the backs of them, so that of
necessity, yet against every law of architecture, and, I may add,
every sanitary law, the nuisances of every family are conveyed,
under their dwelling, into the public sewer in the middle of the
street. It is not my purpose on this occasion to deal with
the sewerage systems. We all know that the one which we have
adopted is abominable. I shall limit my observations to the
manner in which our domestic communications are made with the
public sewers, pointing out some of the defects and consequences
of them.
“ The first thing which strikes us as remarkable, in connec-
tion with matters of this nature, is the readiness with which people
dismiss from their regard anything offensive which they have put
out of sight, depending, it may be, upon that principle which


among us lawyers finds expression in the saying, ‘ Omnia
prczsumuniur recte essee acta' which, for to-night, I will freely
translate as follows : —‘ I have every confidence that my house-
drains are skilfully planned, constructed of proper materials, and
honestly put together, by steady, sober, conscientious workmen ;
that they are properly trapped, and properly ventilated. 5 We arc
familiar with the phrase ‘ The height of presumption but I ask
does not our presumption about house-drainage surpass all heights
yet attained ? In order to answer this question, let us examine
the matter more closely, and as we proceed I promise you that
we shall find the evil construction and condition of our drainage
to be a more widely-spread,evil than those who have not looked
into the subject could imagine.
“ Besides the various classes of dwellings of the rich and of
the poor, the factories and hospitals, whose arrangements
naturally vary, there are the old houses and the new ; in
the former the house-drains were commonly made of brick
or stone, porous, ill-set, and liable to constant leakage of
fluid contents, and occasionally of entire contents, into the sur-
rounding earth; we have grown too wise to accept such drains
now, and insist upon constructing the drains of our modern houses
of glazed earthenware pipes—the specifications doubtless provide
that these shall be sound, and without flaw, shall be laid with a
certain inclination, bedded, and cemented at the joints, and con-
nected with the public sewer in a workmanlike and substantial
manner, and with the best materials. How far this prescribed
work is performed there must be many within hearing capable of
testifying by their own experience. I, for myself, express my
belief that five per cent, is a large allowance of admission of
faithful effectual work.
“ The defects of such work meet us in every detail, the
pipes are frequently the subject of cracks in the burning, they
are bent and distorted at the junctions, the inclination given
to the line of pipes is that which suits the workmen, a hard piece
of rock is got over, instead of being cut through, joints are
imperfectly stopped, and when stopped luted only with clay, and,


as a natural consequence, the excavation is rapidly filled up, and
all is put out of sight—and ‘ out of sight, out of mind ’ —until the
lapse of a few months discloses an unpleasant odour. Everybody
has been paid before this takes place, and there is naturally
little suspicion that the very costly job, in which so much scientific
arrangement of the last modern appliances was engaged, has
been in fact nothing better than a sham, a dangerous nuisance.
“ In addition to such consequences as I have described of unfaith-
ful work, there are perils of another kind, and to these, I believe, a
very large number of our best houses are subject, even in the rare
cases in which all the underground work has been faithful. These
perils spring from all the internal arrangements of the house, which
communicate with the sewer, every closet, bath, fixed washing-basin,
sink, is an avenue by which the sewer gases, probably at all times
in some degree, but at some times in a very dangerous one, enter
our dwellings. During the day time open doors and windows
prevent the draft upon the sewer, but at night, when the house is
shut, and particularly in winter, when the difference in temperature
between the external air and the air of the house is considerable,
by reason of the use of fires, there is no doubt but that most
houses are suction pumps, working through their various pipes
upon the main sewer, whose gases, specially dangerous during
sleep, are literally laid on to the house, and largely compose the
atmosphere which the dwellers inhale.
“ Exposure to such influences gradually devitalizes the constitutions
of our people, even when they escape the more sudden seizure of
typhoid or low fever, and they fall into a condition in which any
epidemic disease finds them open to attack, a condition in which
cholera, for instance, would decimate the city. lam j ustified in believ-
ing that the sad and severe lesson which we have lately learned with
regard to typhoid fever will render it unnecessary for me to labour
this part of the subject. We do not know that sewer gases will
generate typhoid fever, but we do know that, when generated,
they are a wonderfully prolific means of circulating the poison
germs of that terrible scourge of which we read that the victims
are, in a very large proportion, the young and persons in the


prime of life. ‘Persons under 30' (writes Professor Murchison)
‘ are more than four times as liable to enteric fever as persons
over 30.’ I will not detain you longer on this view of the subject
of the influence of imperfect drainage arrangements than to quote
from a book of authority on hygiene (Blyth and Tardien, 1876)
the belief ‘ that discharges of typhoid, when undisinfected and
thrown upon the earth, infect the soil itself, and that the contagion,
indeed, may gather new force there; and that in a porous soil,
saturated at its lower part with water, it may remain active for
indefinite periods / and to inquire whether, in view of such a peril,
it does not become the duty of all to see that our fair Australian
soil shall no longer be polluted with such dangers.
“ The motto of this society, that prevention is better
than cure, leads me to the observation that in all the
respects of which I have been complaining, we have been
transgressing natural laws; and that, as I have said on a
former occasion, these laws find us out and work our punish-
ment; the laws of our being, which command us to put away
from us certain hurtful things, are as inexorable as the law of
gravitation, by which, at the same time, our buildings stand
firmly upon the earth, and we are killed if we fall from a height
upon it.
“ I will assume that you agree with me, and proceed to
examine, therefore, some of the causes which seem to me to
operate powerfully to produce and continue the state of things
which we deplore, and the first I believe to be the position of the
public sewer in the middle of the street, by reason of which, in
order to reach the sewer, the drainage of every house being carried
beneath the house is liable to leak from any one or every one of
fifteen or twenty joints which occur under the house itself.
This is a peril which might have been avoided in the original
construction of our Sydney sewers, and may still be avoided in all
still undrained suburbs and country towns, which may be com-
pelled to drain towards the back instead of under the houses.
It is obvious that with such a system as we have, we have laid it
‘ upon our heads/ as the Orientals say, to make our pipes and


connections perfect, in fact, as nearly as possible hermetically
closed. The condition of our own private drainpipes becomes
doubly important from the fact that each house has not its own
carriage and eventual disposal of its sewage, but that being a
branch of a large system, a fault in our own pipes lays on, as it were,
to our dwelling the gases of the main sewer also, as surely as the
main sewer receives our drainage, and more surely, inasmuch as a
fault in our pipes may deposit the filth under our floor, while from
the opposite end of that fault the main sewer gas is laid on. It is
found in practice that the best houses in elevated places, having
defective private drainage, are fed with the sewer gases from their
lowlier neighbours.
“ The next cause to which I will ask your attention is
this, namely, the rage for cheapness which, combined with
the love of display, limits the architect and pinches the
builder in regard to everything which is out of sight, and, in
addition, whether these prevail or not, a fertile cause of slovenly
and careless work of this sort is want of proper inspection during
its progress. Contract work, without a vigilant clerk of the works,
is too commonly imperfect. An architect cannot sit over a drain
all day to see that this, on which so much reliance is placed for
the life and health of the occupants of the house, is not made a
fertile fever bed; but I am convinced that such intelligent
supervision is necessary, and that where expense is considered, a
little may well be spared from internal or external decoration for
the purpose of securing faithful work in that which will soon be
out of sight—difficult and expensive of repair—and, in the course
of repair, of all things most dangerous and disgusting to the
occupants of the dwelling. It is quite true that my own dwelling
may be in all sanitary respects unimpeachable, and yet that I may
be, with my family, poisoned by my next door or farther neighbor;
still the beginning must be made somewhere; the public mind
will gradually realise the value of health, will gradually become
convinced of the nastiness of inhaling, drinking, as it were, the
foul products of decomposition, and a better general condition
will be attained.


“ Let us assume, then, that all which is out of sight has
been properly constructed; and let us lay down some rules
for the superstructure. Firstly, let us determine that no
closet shall be in any dwelling; that all sinks, bath-pipes, and
fixed washing places shall not be attached by closed connections
with any sewer, but shall open some inches above a properly
trapped orifice; let the domestic connection with the sewer be
ventilated by a pipe or shaft carried up above every opening of
the house ; but when all has been done let every one remember
that no matter how perfect any human work may have been in its
original design and construction, it cannot be relied upon for ever;
that attention must be paid to metal pipes, which are liable to
corrosion by sewer gases, that every sign of dampness may mean,
and every bad smell must mean, something at fault; that persistent
headaches, sore throats, and that indisposition which does not
assume a distinctive character at once, as well as that which
does, all point to something wrong in the condition of the
dwelling where they prevail, or at least call loudly for
inquiry.
“ At the risk of being tedious, I must ask you to recall
the fact which modern sanitary science has discovered, viz.,
that a large proportion of the premature deaths, and a very
large proportion of the sickness suffered by mankind, are
due to preventable causes within their own control; and that
of this vast catalogue of misery, an amount which would astonish
you, is due to ‘ filth diseases/ diseases generated, encouraged, or
at least disseminated by the perverseness with which we keep about
us, in one form or another, that which in a due course of nature
our bodies have thrown off. Let us remember that a connection
with a sewer may be a very fatal, as in some respects it is a very
convenient arrangement, that where foul water will run down, sewer
gas will as certainly come up, that all traps are liable, in cases of
pressure, to be forced by the gases, so that on our ventilation pipes
we must mainly rely, as upon safety valves, for the escape of the
sewer gas when much accumulated. Let us see that in cases
where old drains have been taken up, or repairs effected, the whole


saturated earth and materials be removed (undoubtedly these
should be subjected to the healing influences of the vegetable
world, or to the purifying action of fire), and let us not content
ourselves with a feeble remitting of matters of so great importance
to a general hope that everything will be right, when we carefully
choose our own wall-papers and tapestry, expend critical research
upon the collection of articles of vertu, and insist upon our taste
in concerns which, compared with those which we have been con-
sidering this evening, are wholly immaterial, but let us apply to
this important matter some of the acumen and vigilance which
mark our daily business lives in our several avocations.
“ I would not appear before you asascatterer of charges which rest
upon no better foundation than surmise, and therefore I have con-
sulted an eminent architect and an eminent builder ol this city, and
by their kindness I am enabled to state to you the actual existence
in their respective experiences, in this city, of a few out of many
cases of dishonest construction and imperfect work, leading, by a
long train of annoyance, to an ultimate greater expenditure than
would in the beginning have ensured, under a proper supervision,
sound works and healthful dwellings. To illustrate some of these
cases I have had diagrams prepared on a scale of sufficient
magnitude to render them intelligible by any one of you who
may like to approach the platform. Before examining these
diagrams, however, I would mention that house poison may be
present in deleterious, or even in fatal proportions, in dwellings
whose drainage may be unimpeachable; I allude to the large
class of buildings run up by speculative builders, on foundations
reeking with the deposits of refuse collected from all quarters to
fill up the excavations and level the sites—buildings in part con-
structed with the sodden and unwholesome materials of old
dwellings, nor should I escape condemnation were I to omit
that other large class of houses which, erected upon so-called
reclaimed lands, command all the advantages which a paternal
Government has provided for those who build upon the foecal
territories abutting upon Woolloomooloo Bay and Darling
Harbour, from whichl am told fever is never absent.


“ I would gladly believe that much of the evil from which the dwel-
lers in cities suffer is due to ignorance, rather than to dishonesty,
simple, and as my lecture may fall upon the ears or come before
the eyes of some who are actually engaged in the works of whose
importance I have been speaking, I would entreat them to con-
sider that a bad or badly laid drain-pipe may be as surely the
cause of death as a badly laid railway-plate, that a careless or
negligent discharge of one duty resulting in death may lead to a
committal, aye, to a conviction for manslaughter, and that, not-
withstanding the comparative difficulty in the two cases in respect
of evidence of culpable negligence, the moral guilt remains the
same. I mean that every honest working man should refuse to be
a party to a foul job, should refuse to accept money —a bribe, in
fact—to perform what, warned by my|words, he must know to be
a trap for the life of some fellow creature; in this happy land
starvation tempts no man to such employment, in this happy
land every workman may (sober) look forward to be a master in a
few years, in this happy land, again I say, every workman seeks
to educate his son for what he considers a better position in the
social scale. Do not then, workmen of Australia, lay your founda-
tions and those of your children in the blood of your fellow citizens.
“ I will not doubt that an improved feeling is spreading
among our people in regard to matters of sanitation, and I am
convinced that the more our tenants consider these things, the
more attention will be given by landlords, architects, and builders
to the soundness of the out of sight part of their work. But there
is one element of improvement wanting more than all, the very
hinge on which all the others turn, and that is the teaching in all
our schools of plain lessons on the laws of life and health. The
generation of boys and girls now at school might in two or three
years learn as much as would make the evils from which we now
suffer impossible. Why do we suffer typhoid fever, diphtheria, scarlet
fever, and other ‘filth diseases?’ simply because we hug ourselves in
our own nasty dirty habits ! ‘lf the Prophet had bid thee do
some great thing, wouldst thou not have done it ? How much
rather then when he saith to thee wash and be clean.’


“ A stranger walking along our streets, may admire on
either hand, buildings of architectural pretensions, and sup-
pose that all things correspond—what, however, is the case 1
Under all this outward show filthy broken drains emit their
poisons, fluid and gaseous; and in the rear a congeries of
filthy sheds and reeking back yards add their quota to
the general unwholesomeness of the whited sepulchres; in
Sydney every thing (except holidays) gives way to business—
thus the extension backwards of the shops absorbs gradually the
yards which used to separate the houses at the rear ; all thorough
ventilation is lost, and the position of the unhappy shopman or
woman whose station is most rearward is always objectionable, and
at times almost pestilential.
“ I now proceed to a few particulars ot faulty drainage.
Case i : A property in Cumberland-street, comprising a store
with four dwellings at the rear, the houses supposed to be
drained into one drain carried under the store to the
public sewer; the cellar of the store was found full (several
feet deep) of sewage deposit, and on uncovering the drain it was
found to be laid up slopes and down hollows on the rock to avoid
cutting a proper regular fall, the pipes placed only, and not a joint
made good. Case 2: A gentleman’s residence, at Darlinghurst,
worth was fitted with p-inch pipes running the wrong
way,—that is to say, instead of falling from the house the fall was
to the house ; this laid back the sewage and filled a stone drain
near the house,‘causing dreadful annoyance in the house and
about the grounds. Case 3: A bank in Sydney, where the soil-
pipe of a closet up stairs, instead of entering the drain, discharged
itself under the joists of the ground-floor, saturating the soil and
poisoning the house. Case 4: A private residence in the suburbs,
where a long drain was laid without any fall, not a single joint
made, and leaking from every opening, saturating the soil. I am
informed by the builder who has furnished me with these cases
that in hundreds of instances wherein he has been called upon to
examine the occasion of bad smells in houses, the evils have been
due to errors in the plumbing works in connection with baths; so


that, humiliating as the reflection may be, we who fancy ourselves
cleaner than our ancestors by the morning’s tubbing, are really
worse off than they were, for we pump sewer gas into our bed-
rooms all night long, an evil which they at least avoided. Let us
look at the diagrams which our good friend the architect
has prepared, here in case s—in5 —in Sussex-street, we have
an instance of a pipe which has been laid with a part of
the joint broken off, an original defect of construction, probably
arising from the end of the pipe which enters it being inconvenient
to adjust, so a piece is knocked off the flange at the bottom, where
it is not seen, and the pipes inspected superficially from the
surface seem in proper position, in this case the sewage matter
of course passed out into the adjacent earth instead of being
carried on to the sewer. Case 6 : In King-street, shows an
instance of broken joints, where the pipes have been laid without
defect in themselves, but by reason of their course being partly
over soft earth and partly over rock, the pipes laid on the earth
have sunk, breaking the joint at the rock, and, as in the last case,
the sewage is seen escaping into the soil under the dwelling.
Case 7 : In George-street, shows pipes laid in soft ground between
portions of rocks, sinking in the soft spot, and the sewage matter
escaping into the soil. It would not be difficult to multiply
examples of a like kind, in which either fraudulent construction,
negligent construction, or ignorance, has resulted in the introduc-
tion of the enemy, sewer gas, the house poison, into the dwellings
of this community, exclusively of that class of defects resulting
from the action of time and circumstances, but I think that I have
said enough to make out the case with which I started.
“Is it open to us to look forward for the remedy of the evils whose
existence I have made out ? I think the remedy must be sought in a
greater prominence being given generally to matters of sanitation.
I think that we are entitled to call upon our Government, and our
Legislature particularly, for a comprehensive dealing with the
entire subject. I think that we want a Minister of Public Health,
a Board of Health, Medical Officers of Health, and local Boards
throughout the colony, legislation for health, and education for


health. The Minister for Health might combine the duties with
those of Minister of Public Instruction. I cannot, in conclusion,
better convey to your minds at once the importance of sanitation
being taken up with a strong hand, and the impression which
healthful education is calculated to make upon the future of this
colony than by reading a minute which I drew up on the 24th of
November, 1877, for this Society, and then handed to the Minister
for Justice and Public Instruction :
“ ‘ The continued prevalence of a large amount of preventable
sickness, and the incidence of premature deaths from preventable
causes, in all civilized communities, have led the sanitarians of
the mother country to make great exertion during the last thirty
years in the cause of a reformation of this unwholesome state of
things. Statesmen—notably the Earl of Derby and the Earl of
Beaconsfield —have lent their influence and assistance to the
movement, in recognition of the great principle that the chief
wealth of a State is in its people; and the Imperial Parliament,
under pressure of these reformers, have passed twenty-three
statutes, aimed at the conservation of the public health of Britain,
during that term.
“ ‘ The researches of the sanitarians disclosed that an enormous
disproportion in the death-rate of different portions of the same
cities and towns existed—a disproportion springing from the
greater or less activity of insanitary causes. “In London the
average of fever was \ case to 690 people, but in certain alleys the
proportion rose to 1 in 20, and there were parts of Liverpool
where the fever cases were 1 to every 7 or 10 of the population.”
“‘lt is said that the 1 law of life for man is written in his
organization ; that in the physical and mental organization of man
we have a guide to the conditions of health, the causes of disease,
and the best methods of prevention and cure. Believing, there-
fore, that it is of supreme importance that man should be
instructed in all his relations, in order that he may live in harmony
with them, the Council of the Health Society commend to
the consideration of the Minister the value which plain information
of our relations to natural laws must possess for those who, created


subject to those laws, must obey them at the peril of sickness and
death as a consequence of disobedience.
“ ‘ The study of man’s organization has hitherto been chiefly
reserved for those whose interests lie rather in the treatment of
disease, when it has supervened upon insanitary conditions, than
in the prevention of the causes of disease, and hence a wide-
spread ignorance prevails which exercises its influence in a twofold
form unfavourably to the people—firstly, by subjecting them to
avoidable sickness and premature death; and secondly, by a
stolid resistance of the efforts of the few better informed for
amendment.
“ £ The Council of the Health Society believe that the preven-
tion of disease and the treatment of disease are distinguishable by
broad lines • and hence, disavowing any desire of imparting a
smattering of medical science by means of the elementary schools,
they very firmly believe that a very large and valuable amount of
teaching of the conditions by which health may be preserved and
disease averted, is capable of being afforded by plain easy
lessons to children of very tender age ; that first, second, and third
reading books may be written, the earliest in words all, or nearly
all, of one syallable, which would convey the knowledge of
ascertained facts—such as those relating to light, heat, air, water,
diet, clothing, ventilation, cleanliness, exercise, repose, habit,
overcrowding, &c. ; and they contemplate the imparting this
knowledge by a statement of the facts, as facts, and not by a
teaching of the principles, the observation of whose consequences
has led to the recording of those facts, until, in the case of senior
scholars, or of those of that class training for the medical pro-
fession, physiology comes to be studied as a science, as it is
obvious that while all have to live under those laws which, except
in the consequences of their infraction, are to so many a dead
letter, a comparatively small number of the pupils of the State
schools will be able to continue their studies to such an age,
and for such a time, as should enable them to draw their own
deductions from an accurate knowledge of the principles of
science.


“ ‘ Professor Lankester, speaking in the year 1870, on the
subject of teaching health laws in schools, observed :—“ As long
as this subject is slighted and neglected in all our plans and
systems of education, so long will the miseries that arise from
premature disease and death occur, and so long will poverty and
physical debility obstruct the progress of mankind/’
“ ‘ The Right Hon. Dr. Lyon Playfair writes :—“ Health is the
normal state of obedience to law disease the penalty of its
infringement. In consequence of this disobedience our kingdom
has Ixo,ooo lives ruthlessly sacrificed every year, while 220,000
people are needlessly sick all the year round ! And why ?
Because neither our rulers nor our people will become acquainted
with and obey natural laws.”
“■‘lt is in the hope that the Government of this colony will
make provision for this most needful teaching of what, from their
importance, not less than from their subject, have been aptly
called “ Life Lessons,” that the Council of the Health Society have
ventured to put forward their views at such length, under the
impression that “ every community living in bad sanitary condi-
tions and habits tends to its own extermination.” ’
Here is the golden opportunity for our present Administration,
the public mind is prepared for legislation—a vital subject, free
from all class interests, presents itself for their handling. The
valuable precedents of the mother country light the way. Who
shall doubt that the statesman who shall do for New South Wales
what the Earl of Beaconsfield and his colleagues in sanitary
reform, have done for Great Britain, will achieve for himself an
undying fame ?”




<3 *
r\ '
»• .
1508
01779145
