

8218
CURWEN EDITION
net cash
How to Read Music
and Understand It
Staff Notation and Tonic Sol-fa
By the late JOHN
CURWEN. Completed
and Edited by
J. SPENCER CURWEN
Fellow of the Royal Academy of Music, and Warden
of the Tonic Sol-fa College
HALL'S BÒK STORE
ONS LTD., 24 BERNERS STREET, W.l
Inc., Sole Agents for U.S.A.


Some Important Text-books
COMMONSENSE ON INSTRUMENTAL SIGHT-READING (8345).
Bv Colin Taylor. With Foreword by Dr. George Dyson. From a review in R.C.M.
Magazine'. 4 Mr. Taylor’s book is as admirable in its brevity as it is rich in good
counsel; it is, in fact, full of uncommon sense. It has a Foreword by the Director
and a useful graded list of suitable music.’ Price 1/6 net cash.
DO YOU ACCOMPANY? (8344). A text-book on the art of accompaniment
by Cyril Winn, with a Preface by Dr. Geoffrey Shaw. Special attention is given
to wants of teachers in schools. Price 2/6 net cash.
GUIDE TO ELEMENTARY HARMONY, A (8348). By Eric Thiman.
Designed for students working for a Diploma examination, this book lays stress
on the actual practice of composers rather than on ’rules’. Price 4/- net cash.
SONG TEACHING (8332). By Lucy Welch. A general handbook for teachers.
The choice and teaching of songs through the various stages of the child’s develop*
ment are discussed in detail. Price 6/6 net cash.
TRANSPOSITION AT THE KEYBOARD (8334). By leuan Rees-Davies,
A.R.C.M., L.R.A.M. Mr. Rees-Davies, out of bis wide experience as a lecturer
and teacher, has prepared a work which he confidently hopes will make proficient
transposers. The work contains useful hints and many exercises. It also deals
incidentally with Sight Reading, Practical Harmony, and the Fundamentals of
Improvisation. Price 6/- net cash.
ORCHESTRAL CARDS (7043). A set of 15 cards, 12 in. by 9 in., in manilla
envelope, illustrating and describing the various instruments in the orchestra.
By Maurice Jacobson, Mus.B. (Lond.), A.R.C.M., Hon. A.R.C.M. One side of
each card gives an accurate picture of the instrument or group of instruments,
and the other gives concise details of its history, structure, use, compass, etc.
Price 6/- net cash.
For Recorder Students
FIRST STEPS IN RECORDER PLAYING (8347). By Stephanie Champion,
Instructions for beginners, with exercises and pieces. Includes a section on the
elements of musical notation by Maurice Jacobson. Price 1/6.
INSTRUCTIONS FOR RECORDERS (8346). Descant. Treble and Tenor,
by Stephanie Champion. A comprehensive instruction book with exercises, studies
and pieces compiled to meet each difficulty as it occurs. The work includes a
complete chart of fingering for all the shakes. Price 3/-.
LONDON: J.CURWF 24 BERNERS STREET, W.l
New York: Agents for U.S.A.


How to Read Music
and Understand It
(Curwen Edition 8218)
Staff Notation and Tonic Sol-fa
By the late JOHN
CURWEN. Completed
and Edited by
J. SPENCER CURWEN
Fellow ol the Roya. Academy oi Music, and Warden
of the Tonic Sol-fa College
Sixtieth Thousand
London: J. Curwen & Sons Ltd., 24 Berners St., W.i
New York; G. Schirmer Inc., Sole Agents for U.S.A.
Made in England




PREFACE.
Thi larger part of this little book was written by me, unde*
Mr. Curwen’s direction, shortly before his death. It is a
summary of his other writings, following the lines laid down
by him, and based upon the teaching method which he
elaborated. The manuscript, as far as Chapter XIII, and
Chapter XX, was revised by him, and he made alterations
and additions to it. After his death I added the subsequent
chapters, the scope of which had already been discussed
and arranged between us.
“How to Read Music” is less elaborate than others of
Mr. Curwen’s books. It is intended for those who are
enquiring about the Tonic Sol-fa method, and have no time
to study his longer works. A large variety of musical
information is given which is brief, but not, it is hoped
superficial.
J.S.C


TABLE OF INTERVALS,
RECKONED FROM OR TO G AND C.
In reading difficult music the Tonic Sol-faist will find it oon-
renient to be in possession of a mental model for all the intervals
Bach models are supplied in the following table;—
* A distinction is drawn by theorist* between a diatonic and a chromatic semitone.
The two notes of a diatonic semitone have different names (as B-C, FJ-G, Ac.); those
of a chromatic semitone the mm names (C-Cf, B-82, Ac.).
Bote U> JteaJ J fuse.


HOW TO READ MUSIC, AND
UNDERSTAND IT.
I
MUSIC IN MODERN LIFE.
Music is occupying every year a higher place in the routine of
modem life. Not only is it becoming more and more of a social exer-
cise, but it is made the agent of religion and philanthropy. And by
music in this connection we especially mean singing;
for the cultivation of instrumental music must
always be the privilege of the comparative few.
Singing;
its claims.
There are several reasons for this. The many lack both the time
and the patience needed for learning an instrument, even supposing
they can afford the cost of one. But the instruments of vocal music
are the gift of nature; they are always with us; and to learn to use
our voices is far less labour than to learn to use an instrument.
Singers with strong voices can seldom venture to practise more
than two or three hours a day, while pianists, violinists, etc.,
frequently practise eight hours, year after year. We are speaking,
of course, of professional players, but with amateurs the same
proportions hold good. Far be it from our purpose to disparage the
study of instruments. The pianoforte is already so popular that it
needs no advocacy; but it is much to be desired
that stringed and reed instruments should he more
widely practised, and family orchestras become more
Family
orchestras.
general Instrumental music, however, is beside our present
purpose, for in the series of papers now begun we shall confine
ourselves to teaching the student to read music, and shall not deal
with the mechanism of any instrument.
B


The lessons to come are, however, addressed to all who wish to
cultivate music, whether instrumental or vocal not merely to
gingers. For no one should begin the study of an instrument
without first learning to sing. “ The hideous results of first
attempts at performance on the violin, and a good many instruments
besides,” says Mr. Hullah, “ are generally due to a single cause,
and that cause a remediable one —the still all but universal practice
of teaching Music and performance on an artificial
instrument, together. By teaching music, as distinct
from musical performance, I mean inducing that
"’egin with
Singing.
sympathy of eye and ear which enables its possessor to know what
a succession of musical symbols brought under the eye should
represent to the ear; or vice versa, how a succession, and even
a combination of sounds, addressed to the ear, may be recorded and
presented intelligibly to the eye: in fewer words, to enable the
musical student to know the sound of what he sees represented in
musical characters. Now, not only can this be done, but it can be
best and most easily done, through an instrument God has given to
every human creature—the voice. All musical education should
begin—the earlier the better—with singing, the rational practice of
which involves the acquisition of a number of principles and facts
and—more important still—the early formation of a number of
habits, which lie at the root alike of musical science and skill.
This rule having been followed, the beginner on whatever instru-
ment would find a great deal of work apparently before him really
behind him.”
There are a large number of persons who would like to learn to
sing, but are deterred by what they call “having
no voice.” It is true that people exhibit very
different aptitudes for music, and it is also true that
“ Having no
voice.”
the later in life the study is begun, the more difficult it is. But as
a rule, to which the exceptions are very few, every one who can
speak may learn to sing. Lengthened experience and observation
leads us to doubt the musical incapacity of persons who have
attained middle life without giving any attention to the subject,
and absolutely to disbelieve the musical incapacity of young persons
and children. People differ, no doubt, in the time and patience
required to awaken and train the ear; but those who are incapable
of being made to distinguish a high note from a low, or to imitate a
given sound, are no more commonly met with than those who are
nolour-bl'nd or have no sense of smell. There is, of course a great
2
now TO BEAD MUBIO


difference between persons as to natural quality of voice, the quick-
ness of ear which detects the slightest discord, and above all in that
“soul for music” which is the highest endowment of the artist.
But in spite of this it may still be said that every one may learn to
sing.
Singing may be studied for many purposes. The majority
cultivate it as a refining and satisfying pleasure;
and as the world every year gets busier, so
the soothing and elevating influence of good
Object of
the Study.
music is more and more felt. Others, again, use thei» gift as a
means to useful ends, in church music, or in the thousand purposes
of philanthropy and popular advancement. One use of singing is,
however, seldom remembered —that is, that it pro-
motes health. Indirectly it does this by giving a
flow of spirits, and chasing away weariness and
A healthy
exercise.
despondency. But it does this also directly by the exercise which
it gives to the lungs and to the vital organs. We cannot sing
without an increased action of the lungs, and this causes the heart,
and all the organs of digestion and nutrition, to work with renewed
vigour. The singer brings a greater quantity of air in contact with
the blood, and hence the blood is better purified and vitalised.
Healthful and highly oxygenated blood gives energy to the brain,
and thus the mind, as well as the body, shares the benefit of the
exercise. Singers know well that singing makes them hungry,
and from these considerations the reason of their hunsor is clear.
3
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


II.
NECESSITY FOR AND INTRODUCTORY NOTATION.
When we notice how universally young and old, rich and poor,
enjoy music, and thou reflect how few comparatively are able to
read music, and to gratify their natural taste for an ennobling art,
we cannot but be struck with the thought that something is out of
joint. Either the thing itself is very difficult of attainment or else
the means of attaining it are unnecessarily hard and troublesome.
Now there is no royal road to music. The training
°* ear 6 y o voice takes time under any and
every system; but experience has shown that the
1
staff notation presents fictitious and discouraging difficulties to the
beginner, and that if a simpler notation be used at first, progress in
the end will be quicker and far more solid. It may be supposed
that this is a personal opinion of my own, but it is not so. Dr.
Stainer, the well-known organist of St. Paul’s Cathedral, in a
recent paper read before the Musical Association of London, dealt
with this point. He said he honoured the enthusiasm of those
teachers who say that the notation itself is very easy, but that the
fact remains that you cannot go into any ordinary choral society
without finding that the number of people who can read music is
discreditably small. The only way in which he could account for
this state of things was that the thing itself—that is, the notation
—is difficult. I do not say that the staff notation is so difficult
that the diligent student, with plenty of time at his disposal, cannot
master it. To say this would be absurd, because hundreds have
done so. But a system to be generally used must not require a
special amount of perseverance and thought and time. If it does,
only the few wiR accomplish it, and this is the case with the staff
notation. It is true that an enormous number of people wall tell
you that they “understand the old notation,” but this “under-
standing” is a very uncertain quantity. The majority have picked
up a little knowledge, and with the help of the pianoforte, can get
the notes they want. Without this help a singer of
this sort has no certain ground to stand upon; he
goes up or down with the notes, but how far up or
Singing by
guess-work.
down is a matter of guess-work. His sense of “what ought to be”
guides his voice, and after trying a piece over several times he
4
HOW TO BEAD MEBIO


manages to have it correct. In a chorus he follows the few
independent “readers” within hearing. As to rhythm he has the
same general notion, and the same want of an exact consciousness
of the value of the signs.
It is an abuse of the word to call this “reading.” No one is
considered to read a language who is constantly
mispronouncing the words and stopping on his way;
and it should be the same with music. Not until
Keady
reading.
we can read music fluently, like a printed book, are we entitled to
say that we understand the staff notation.
It is not the fault of the staff notation that it places difficulties in
the way of the beginner. That notation was never designed as a
teaching instrument. It gives a picture of the key-board of the
pianoforte or organ; but the method of the singer
is not that of the player. “I believe,” says Dr.
Stainer, “ that in ninety-nine cases out of every
Singera and
players,
hundred, the first impulse of a singer is, to consider the relations of
the sounds to the key-scale and to each other.” On the other hand,
the first thing the player wants to know is, whereabouts on his
key-board the notes stand. Evidently the singer, especially in his
early steps, needs to be told forcibly and directly the key-relation-
ship of every note he is called upon to utter. And any contrivance
which does this for him will be an invaluable help. Speaking of the
notation which will be used in these lessons to introduce the learner
to the staff notation, Dr. Stainer says, “In it the relations of the
seven sounds of the scale are so plainly evident alike to eye and ear,
even when chromatically altered, that the correct singing ol
intervals becomes a matter of comparative ease.” Let it not be
supposed that the use of this auxiliary notation
delays the progress of those who are anxious to
learn the staff notation. Being capable of express-
An auxiliary
notation.
ing music of every sort, it may be used independently of and concur-
rently with the staff notation, but it also serves the purpose of a
key to that notation; and the pupil who approaches the staff nota-
tion through an introductory course of these exercises will learn far
more of music in the same time than one who begins at once with
the staff. This fact has been proved over and over again. In the
instructions and exercises which follow, then, the tonic sol-fa nota-
tion will be used at first, to explain the first principles in the nature
of music. A staff notation version of the exercises will be given,
but the learner should take no notice of this at present. It is
5
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


intended for future use, and to help those who already know some-
thing of the staff notation. The lessons will lead up to the staff
notation, and its signs will in due time be explained. When the
course is ended, let Us hope that the student will be able to read
that notation, and sing from it with fluency.
6
HOW TO HEAD MUSIO


III.
THE FIRST STEP IN SINGING.
We are writing with some reference to solitary students. It is
to be hoped that many who study these chapters will have the help
of a teacher, either in class or privately, in their first attempts. By
all means let them have this, if circumstances favour. But in our
lessons we shall always have in mind those who cannot obtain help,
and who plod on by themselves, correcting their own mistakes, and
finding their own way back if they wander from the straight road.
There is no help like that of a living teacher, especially in an
imitative art like music. But a word may be said
tor solitary study. It creates a habit of careful-
ness and of proving everything. Facts and rules
Self
help.
to which the student has himself worked his way are burnt into
his memory, while the easily-received discourse of a teacher is
too often forgotten. Those who wish to teach themselves to sing
(and the thing can certainly be done) ought to have some means o(
correcting their own first attempts, and for this purpose they may
use a pianoforte or harmonium. Any one who knows the places of
the notes 0 B A can sound them after the student’s voice in the
following exercises. Smaller instruments may be helpful to some
extent.
The whole structure of modem music and of harmony is based
on the fact that in every tune there is a certain
central or key sound, on which all the other sounds
are attendant, and this (except in minor tunes, to
A pivot
sound.
be afterwards explained) we call Doh.
This Doh may be a different sound in one tune from the Doh of
another tune. But whatever the sound of Doh,
the other tones of the tune stand always in the
••Doh.”
same relation to it.
High tones are those which reach towards what is commonly
known as the squeak. Low tones are those which reach towards
the growl. Doh may be high in one tune and low in another.
Soon we shall show how to fix the height or lowness of Doh; al
present it is enough that the learner should be able to sound a high
tone of his voice, a middle, tone, and a lota tone. Let him practise
to do this
7
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


The relations to Doh, which the ear and voice have to recognise
and learn are few and simple. Only let the first steps be carefullj
taken, and all the rest is easy.
Ex. I.—The student sings a tone in the lower part of his voice to
Doh, and immediately after sings a tone at a certain
distance (called a fifth) above it. Let him call th’ v
Soh.”
new tone Soh. This exercise may be verified on the pianoforte
thus; —
The imagination of the solitary student may be made to help his
ear and voice, if we describe Soh as brighter than Doh. When we
represent them by colours we make Doh blue and Soh red. When
we represent them by shapes Doh is a strong square,
standing on one of its sides, and Soh is the same
standing on one of its corners. When we represent
The aid of
imitation.
them by band-signs Doh is a firmly-clencbed fist, and Soh is an
open band witb tbe thumb pointing upward. But the pattern must
be beard first. Imagination can only help to fix the relation on the
memory when it has once been heard. The effort to make the two
tones sound well together, or “ in good tune ” with one another,
will he helpful.
The student will not be perfect in this exercise until he can take
any sound as Doh, and strike from his own feeling, without the
help of a teacher or the piano, the Soh above it. The pitch of the
Doh on the piano is of no consequence. It is the relationship of the
Doh to the Soh that he must think of. After the first pattern, in
no case should the Soh be sounded on the piano until after the
student has attempted to sound it. If this is done before, the value
of the exercise is nil.
Ex. 11. The student now must learn a tone between Doh
and Soh called Me. Let these exercises be sunc
“ Me.” , •„ , b
and verified: —
8
HOW TO BEAD MUBIO


To help the imagination let us call Me the c dim tone. In the use
of hand-signs we represent it by an open hand with the palm down,
as if asking for quiet.
Ex. 111. Now let the following exercises be sung. If the
student has learnt the sounds of Soh and Me in relation to Doh, the
help of the piano will not be necessary. The staff notation, there-
fore, is not given. Change the pitch of Doh each time:
a. Doh Soh Me Soh Doh.
b. Doh Me Soh Me Doh.
c. Doh Me Doh Soh Me.
d. Doh Soh Doh Me Soh.
Try now to conjure up in your mind an image of Me and Soh and
Doh. See if your ears cannot distinguish them, as
your eyes distinguish the faces of your friends.
Think of them wholly apart from any of the notes of
the piano, and only as related to each other.
Easy
recognition.
The “ nearest relation of three tones ” has now been established
in voice and ear. Tones thus related are called a major common
chord. The musical scale is made up of three such
chords. It is probably harmony rather than melody
A Chord.
which has fixed the musical scale of civilised nations.
Our scale has survived others because it provides the largest num-
ber of major chords in close connection with the key note.
Ex. FV.—The student now recognises and sounds the new Doh’t
Me'a and Soh’a that are repeated above and below
those already learnt. The upper Doh is distinguished
by a dash at the right-hand upper corner, thus—
Upper and
lower replicates
DohK The same with Me l and SohK On the other hand, the lower
notes have a dash below—as Doh { Me { Soh t . The following exercises
are to be sung. The staff notation is given for the first two: —
Doh'
So
Me
Doh
Soh.
9
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


These exercises may be multiplied to any extent by the use of the
diagram at the side. Lot the notes on it be sung in every variety
of order.
In future exercises instead of Doh, Me, and Soh being written in
full, their initial letters d, n, and s will be used.
So far we have dealt only with Time. The sounds we have sung
have only differed from each other in being higher or lower, or in
their relationship to the governing sound Doh. There are, however,
other respects in which sounds can differ, the chief of which are
Accent, or stress, and Time, or duration. In speaking these words
“awful thunder resounds,” we make some syl-
lables heavy and some light; we give stress to some,
Accent.
and pass lightly over others. Music is in this respect like speech,
with the exception that its accents occur regularly, while those of
speech are irregular. In speech, a word like “thunder,” with
stress on the first syllable, may be followed by a word like
“resounds,” with stress on the second, and this may be followed by
a word like “triumphant,” with stress on the middle syllable. In
music, on the other hand, whatever accent is adopted is adhered to,
as in poetry —
“ Softly sweet in Lydian measure.”
or
“ Awake my soul, and with the sun.”
Rule. —A note that bears stress or accent has a perpendicular line
before it (|), one that bears only a weak stress or accent has a colon ( ;).
Ex. Y. — Sing the following, first to Doh, and then to the words,
noticing how the verbal and musical accents correspond:—
|d :d |d :d |d d ||
Wei - come, brave north - eas - ter.
;d Id :d |d :d |d ||
To arms, to arms, ye brave.
In these cases the strong and weak accents are alternate, but in the
following cases two weak accents follow each strong accent.
1 : : I : : 1 : : II
Laugh-ter we find a ne - cess - i - ty.
: I : : I : : 1 II
I sprang to the stir - rup, a - wav.
10
UOW TO BEAD MUBIO


: : I : : I : II
There is not in this wide world.
The distance from one strong accent to the next is called a
measure. The distance from one accent of any sort
to another is called a pulse. When the accent is
thus strong weak, strong weak —it is two-pulse
“ Pulse" and
“measure.”
measure; when it is thus—strong weak weak, strong weak weak—
it is three-pulse measure. A tune may begin at the second or
third pulse of a measure, as well as at the first. See the above
examples. Sometimes a measure is spoken of as a bar, but we
prefer to reserve that word for the perpendicular lino which
separates measures. A double bar denotes the close of a tune
or section.
When a tone is continued from one pulse into the next wi
mark the continuation by a horizontal line ( —).
When a pulse is divided into halves, we place
a dot in the middle of it ([ . :).
We now give some exercises which embrace these new points.
“Key C” or “Key D” mean that Doh is a low tone of voice.
“Key G” or “Key F” mean that Doh is a middle tone of voice.
Ex. VI. xey C. Slowly,—and quickly.
( d :n s :s d.n:d.n s 'n :s d 1 :d' d'.s:d'.s n I
fd:d n :n d.d:n.s n Id :n n:n n.n:n.nd |
The above exercise is in two parts—that is, the two lines of
notes are intended to be sung together. The brace at the begin-
ning >) binding the two lines together shows this. The
student, if he has no companion, may sing first one line and then
the other.
Ex. VII. key D. Slowly, — and quickly.
( d.n:n d.n:n s:s n n.s:s n.s:s d 1 :s d 1
f d ;d d :d d.n:n d n :n n :n n.s:s n 1
The above exercise introduces a slight independence between the
parts which must be carefully observed.
Ex. VIII. key G. Slowly,—and quickly.
( ;si d :n.d|B| :d n:d s :n d :s t .d n:d s :8 ( d
r :»i ni :ni.nj ni.Hiini S| :d s, ;si rii 3i|.B| d.d:d n, :s ( n.
11
AND UNDE lIS TAND IT.


IV.
THE SECOND STEP IN SINGING.
Every practice should be preceded by exercise in full and
deep breathing. The singer must learn to let out breath
gradually. Let a tone be then sounded in the
Breathing medium part of the voice, and held on as long as
exorcises. c „
it can possibly be done. The rush of superfluous
breath should never be heard. It spoils the tone, and makes ii
hoarse, instead of ringing and clear. What is known to voice
, trainers as “attack” should also be studied. Each
Attack ” .
tone must begin with a sharp and definite
impression on the ear. There must be no jerk or strain, but, on
the other hand, there must be no squeezing of the voice. Try to
make pure tone at once. It cannot be pure tone if, holding your
hand before your mouth, you feel a rush of air. The syllable koo,
used to commence tones, has a wonderful efiect upon the voice.
It causes the vocal cords to open promptly, and strengthens them.
With this should be alternated the broad Italian syllable laa.
Let the following exercise be used for voice training, and sung
before every practice:—
KEY C.
d n s d 1 d 1 s n d
First let it be sung to laa, and afterwards to koo, in the latter
case striking each tone four times. The effect
Comic, but yj com i c but the great value of the exercise
useful. , . °
makes it essential.
Two new tones must now be studied Hay and Te (initials
r and t). Ray stands between Doh and Me, and
Bay and Te. between Soh and the Doh above. The exercise
which follows may be verified by reference to the piano:—
12
HOW TO BEAD MUBIO


The imagination may help the self-teacher if he tries to think
of Hay as the Rousing, or, when low in pitch, the Prayerful tone;
and of Te as the Piercing tone, or, as it is often called, “the tone
sensible.” In our manual signs the open hand with spread fingers
and palm facing outwards represents Ray, and the fore-finger
pointing upwards represents Te. Note that Soh Te Ray l form a
major common chord, having exactly the same “ nearest relations
of three tones ” which Doh Me Soh have.
The following is an exercise upon the tones now learnt. It
should be sung frequently:—
Chord Exercise.
KEY P.
|jd :S| jn :d |r : t| jd :s ( js ;n jd :n |r ;si | s, |
11 si :r 1 1| :si |s, ;n |d :si js, ;s jn :d |d :t, jd 1|
We return for a moment to the subject of Time. In music of a
quicker speed than that we have noticed, two two-pulse measures
are often turned into one four-pulse measure, in
the middle of which is an accent neither strong nor
weak, called, therefore, medium. Analogous to
this in speech are the words “ momentary,”
Four-pulse
and six-pulse
measures.
“planetary,” &c. Similarly, two three-pulse measures are turned
into one six-pulse measure, having in its middle part a medium
accent. Analogous to this are the words “spirituality,” “immu-
tability,” &o. The sign for a medium accent is short upright
line.
A silent pulse is indicated by the absence of a
note; the space in front of its accent-mark stands
empty.
A pulse is divided into quarters by placing a
comma (,) between the accent mark and the point
which divides it into halves.
Silent
pulses.
Division of
pulses.
The exercises which follow include the new points just explained.
In practising them the student, if he has no teacher, should
correct himself by using a metronome, or time measurer, such as
is sold at the music shops. The ticks of an old-fashioned eight-
day clock will serve for this purpose. Bach tick
begins a pulse, so that a two-pulse tone lasts
Tima
13
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


during two ticks, while half-pulse tones are two to a tick. Time
is to many singers the most troublesome part of musical study,
and accuracy in first exercises is highly important.
14
HOW TO HEAD MUSIC


V.
THE THIRD STEP IN SINGING.
Possibly the student is beginning to wonder when he will reach
the explanation of the staff and its notes and symbols. Let him
rest assured that the course he is pursuing is the
quickest and surest for this very purpose. We
delay the introduction of the staff, not from any
More haste
less speed.
wish to ignore it, but in order that it may be intelligently
comprehended. We are now implanting the principles of music
in the student’s mind, and he will quickly apply them to the staff
when the proper time comes for explaining it.
Two new tones must now be recognised and remembered — Fah
and Lah. Fah comes between Me and Soh, and
Lah between Soh and Te. The character of the
Fah and Lah.
tones should be studied in the following exercises. The piano
gives Lah much too sharp, and destroys its proper “touching”
effect. The self-teacher will find the true tone better, by thinking
of a tone higher than Boh and lower than Te, which is “ sad and
mournful ”in effect. Fah, when sung slowly, is commonly called
among Tonic Sol-faists “ the desolate or awe-inspiring tone.” In
using the manual signs we represent Lah by the hand hanging
down from the wrist, like a weeping willow, and Fah by the fore-
finger pointing downwards. Fah Lah Doh 1 form a major common
chord, like Boh Me Soh and Soh Te EayK
Doh'
Te
Lah
Soh
Fah
Me
Ray
Doh
THE BCALB
15
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


Let the student try to fix in his mind the impression made by
these two tones, Fah and Lah.
The Scale. — We have now a key tone with its six related tones,
forming the Scale. The student should learn these names in order
by heart, so as to repeat them ascending or descending. (See the
diagram on previous page.) He will naturally feel that of the
seven tones Boh, Me, and Soh are the strongest and boldest.
They are the tones which a bugle or trumpet gives when blown;
they are to be met with prominently in martial and rousing music.
The other scale tones are less bold, but each has its special
character, which the pupil should try to fix in his mind. These
tones of the scale are in no way connected with any notes of the
piano, or any other instrument. The piano has eighty or ninety
notes. Any one of these may bo a Boh, but besides these we may
conceive of an infinite number of other Bohs, with six attendant
tones starting into existence, the pitch of which is entirely relative
to that of Boh. Whatever may be the case with instruments, no
one key is more easy to the singer than any other, nor has one key
any more importance than another in the usage of composers or
in the theory of harmony.
To call a certain key the “ natural key ” is therefore a licence.
The Ke of C * s highly convenient to have some generally
y ‘ understood standard of pitch, so that we may
C 1 know exactly at what part of the voice we are to begin
® every tune. The key which has been fixed upon is that
A which is sounded on the white digitals of the pianoforte
G and organ. The Boh of this key is called C, and the
F other notes follow each other, descending in the way
E indicated in the margin. The sounds of these letters
D are the same as those of the scale already learnt,
C thus: —
Id 1 It :1 |s :f In :r )d ||
C BAGFEDC
and a convenient way of remembering the descending order is to
note that after 0 come the words lag and fed. These notes C, B,
A, &c., unlike the Sol-fa syllables, are absolutely fixed. C, for
example may be Boh, Bay, Te, according to the key we are in;
and conversely, Boh may be C, F, D, &o. But C, theoretically at
least, is always one sound, though Boh may be a hundred different
sounds. The modem Continental practice is to call C always
16
HOW TO BEAD MUSIO


Doh, whatever the key. This plan is called the
“fixed doh,” to distinguish it from the older
“ movable doh,” a system which has prevailed in
England for two or three hundred years, and is founded on the
scientific basis of key-relationship. It will be an advantage if the
student, hy help of a tuning-fork, can fix the absolute sound
C 1 in his memory, so as to be able to pitch tunes without external
help. In doing this he sounds the C 1 and then
runs down the “ standard scale ” to the “ pitch- 0 *
tone ” wanted for the key. This last he sounds at
greater length, and then changes it carefully into Boh. The
exercise which follows is in two parts, and may be used in the
same way as the previous ones.
The words written between the two lines are to be sung to the
music, but not at first. The notes must be learnt by Sol-faing
them and afterwards singing them to a uniform vowel like La.
The third and last stage is to sing the words. This plan allows
the attention to be fixed wholly at first upon the notes, while
17
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


afterwards it is free to be fixed upon the meaning and expression
of the words. The second part in this exercise must be sung by
a low voice, either male or female.
Time. —We now revert to the subject of time. We have shown
that a silent pulse is indicated by the absence of a note in it.
A silent half-pulse is shown in the same way.
There are other divisions of pulses—for example,
the three-quarter pulse tone followed by the one-
Divisious of
pulses.
quarter (d,,d); the half-pulse tone followed by two quarter tones
(d .d,d); Ac.
These three exercises are difficult, but they should be persevered
in till perfect. All good singers possess a highly cultivated sense
of rhythm, and the want of sharpness in this respect gives
deadness to a musical performance.
The Taatai Syllables. —A set of memory-helping syllables has
been invented by M. Paris, which has the same use in learning
time as the Sol-fa syllables in learning tune. The self-teacher
will find them very valuable in the analysis and memory of
difficult rhythms. The first stroke of a beat or
pulse is called taa, the middle stroke of a pulse (if
there is a new stroke in the middle) is called tal
The study of
time.
18
HOW TO BEAD MUBIO


This pulse |d || or this :d II would be called taa, and this
Id. r [1 taaxai. The first stroke of a silent pulse or part of a
pulse is marked bj a slight hissing sound saa or SAI. The first
and third stroke of the quarter pulses are called ta, te ; the second
quarter fa, and the fourth quarter fe ; so that a new stroke on all
the quarters would be called “tafatefe.” Two quarters and a half
are tafaTAi. A half and two quarters are called TAAtefe. Three-
quarters ana a quarter drop the t and name themslves TAA-efe.
Two pulses also drop the x and are xaa-aa. Thirds of a pulse are
named xaaxaites, and so on. The one thing to remember is that
these taaxai syllables are not of the slightest use unless the
learner forms the habit of pronouncing every pulse in the same
time —that is, of saying taa xaa neither quicker nor slower than
TAAtefe taaxai and tafatefe than taa. This habit formed, the
syllables will become very valuable helps to the memory.
Examples of the Time Names.
Syncopation is the interruption of that steadily recurring accent
which is the ordinary characteristic of music. It
consists in anticipating a strong accent by taking y
it upon the previous soft accent. The following is a simple case
of syncopation, and should be practised :
19
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


Ear training. — The student should now accustom himself to
recognise the Sol-fa names of any sounds he hears by chance from
organs in the street, boys whistling, or strolling
comet or violin players. No better practice can
be had. It is this faculty which gives musical
Practice in
the etreeti.
mtelligenca, and distinguishes the musician from the singer or
olayer by rote.
The perpendicularly arranged scale tones given below should
bo constantly used for exercises in singing. The teacher points
to one note after another, and the pupil is required to produce
them.
DOH 1
TE
LAH
SOH
FAH
ME
RAT
808
20
HOW TO BEAD MUBIG


VI.
THE FOURTH STEP IN SINGING.
The reader who turns back to the scale tones, as represented
on the opposite page, will see that between n and f and
t and d 1 there is little more than half the vertical space
that there is between the other notes. This is to express the
musical fact that the real distance, in point of pitch, between
these tones is little more than half the distance between the
others. The order and succession of the scales is
so natural to us, that we do not at first feel this
Semi-tones.
discrepancy; but when the attention is called to the point it will
generally be perceived. A most important point it is, for the
scale tones derive their individuality from the positions of these
little steps, or semi-tones, as they are called. We have already
noticed the satisfying and conclusive character of Doh; the
martial and trumpet-like character of Soh will be apparent to
most people; while the tone Lah, thrown into a prominent place
in a melody, leaves a sad and pensive impression on the mind.
It is this separate “ mental effect ” of the seven tones that gives
character to a melody.
But a new effect is possible. After singing for some time with
one fixed sound tor Doh, the ear welcomes a shifting of Doh on to
some other fixed sound; and it likes this effect best if it can be
smoothly managed, without breaking the flow of the music. The
ear of the listener is pleased to find the Soh melting into a new Doh,
or the Lah into a new Me. The old tones seem to have put on a
new clothing, bright and warm and fresh. This device of
“ transition,” as it is called, is used in the simplest music, as well
as in the most complex. In every instrument there is only a
certain limited range of sounds at the composer’s command, and
ho seeks to approach these from every point of view, to clothe
them in every colour, and to make his changes as pleasantly
Unking as possible. The “mental effects” of the tones is the
tasis of transition, and the singer who carries these effects in
mind will not be likely to go wrong.
The simplest transition, or shifting of Doh, and that which is
used nine times out of ten in music, consists in turning Soh into
21
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


a new Doh. Let us examine tne effect of this
theVoh'key° c^an S e upon the position of the notes. We can
best make the comparison by writing the new Doh
on the right hand alongside of Soh, and then adding the rest of
d' f
t PI
1 r
s d
fs t,
f
n 1,
r s,
d f.
the notes above and below. Remember that the
pitch is shown by vertical distance. If, therefore,
any two notes are on the same level, their pitch
will be the same. On this principle, where is the
discrepancy ? Manifestly between Fah and Te ;
the old Fah must in fact be lifted up a little to
make the new Te. This new note we call Fe.
(See the diagram at the side, which is called a
“ modulator.”) Listen to the following:—
To prove the complete change which the “Fe ” effects, try to
sing Fah in place of it, thus: —
The character of the passage is entirely altered. Transition
which is effected by changing Soh into Doh we call Transition to
the “ first sharp key,” or key of the dominant.
The next common transition is made by turning Fah, into Doh.
Again, let ns set Doh against Fah, this time on the left hand, and
add the other notes, observing the place of differ-
ence. Evidently it is at the place of Te, which
must be lowered a little to make a new Fah. Thii
Transition to
the Fah key.
new note we call Tavo (written To). Sing this exaronle:—
22
HOW TO BEAD MUSIC


s d
t
f tl
n 1
r s
d f
t| n
li r
S| d
Sing the notes d 1 ta 1 s several times over by
themselves, and you feel that they are really, in
mental effect, i fm. In the same way sing the
notes I s 8 fe 8 in the previous exercise, and you
feel them to be r d d ti d. It would be truer to
mental effect, and to the science of music, if they wore written
as they really sound. This we can do by means of a “bridge'
tone.” We call the note at which the transition is made by
two names —that of the old and that of the new key. Thus *d (
f d, <feo., the small note indicating the old key, and the larger note
the new. The two exercises, written in this better method, would
appear as follows: —
KEY F. KEY C.t.
I:d In :s Id :n r.n:f |n : n l r 1 :d' Id 1 :t d 1 1—
f:d |d :t| 11 ( ;si S| d : d f f.s:l |s :s d 1—
IST F. f. KEY B[j.
|jd :d :f |s : dl s |f ;n jr j|
In the first example the word “key C” over the place of change
shows the key which is entered, and the “t ” shows the name of
the new sound not in the old scale, which is introduced. It is
placed on the right hand side to show that the change is in the
direction of the dominant or Soh key. In the second example,
“ key Bb ” gives the name of the new key, and “ f ” at the left hand
shows that the change is to the Fak or subdominant key.
The sign b means “flat,” and when attached to any note of the
standard scale, lowers it nearly half a step. The
sign £ (to which we shall presently come) means
and $
“ sharp,” and raises a note of the standard scale by nearly half a step.
Composers use yet another effect which is derived from the
pleasure which the ear takes in transition. They introduce a F»
or Ta, or some other note which heralds a
transition; and then instead of making the change
Chromatics.
23
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


of key, they contradict their intention and revert to the old key.
This effect gives a pleasurable surprise to the ear. If Fe is the
new tone in a sharp transition, it is manifest that it Fdh follows it
immediately the old key is reaffirmed, and Fe blotted out. So
when Ta is the new tone if we pass on to Te we reassert the old key.
This treatment is called chromatic, and is thus distinguished from
transitional. It is far more rare in music than change of key.
The following are examples :
Let the student now take a sheet of paper and write the scale
perpendicularly, with its semitones indicated by
placing Me Fdh and Te Boh close together. Let
him add the Soh key on the right side, with its dis-
Writing
the scale.
crepancy at Fdh, Let him then add another Boh key to that already
made, and he will see that however many Soh keys he adds, one
after another, exactly the same change takes place. The same is
the case with the Fall keys, which may be added side by side on
the left hand, each requiring a flattening of Te. Sometimes we
come upon a transition in which the intermediate keys are
skipped over, and a new key is suddenly entered which requires
three or four or more new scale notes.
The silent quarter-pulse is indicated, as in the other cases ol
silence, by a vacant space. Thirds of a pulse are
marked by inverted commas (~
Time,
We now give some
Progressive Time Exercises.
xbt D. Bugle Call, “ II»y up, or Litter down.”
j|d ,<Ld:d .d Jd ,s ( :d ,S| |n ,n,n:n’.n |n .d :n ,d |
24
HOW TO HEAD MUSIC


|| s ,s,s:s ,s |d' .8 ;d' .s |d ,d,d:d ,d |d : jj
key F. Bugle Call, “ Defaulters.”
| is, ,S| |d,s,.n :d,3|.n |s .s,s;s .s, jd,s,.n :d,s,.n :d ||
key G. Bugle Call, “ Salute for the Guard
jjd :d ~d |si :si ~S| |d :d ~d |d : |
|jd ,d ;n ,d |n ,s :n .d |B| :s, ~S| |s, : ||
key F. Mazzinohi, “ Tom Starboard.”
|:s jn.,f:r ~n:d.S|jd : :r |n.,f:s ~n:l,s.f,njr : |
|;s |n.,f:r ~n:d.S|Jl| : :t, Jd .r :n.s,f:n.r |d ; ||
key A. Bugle Call, “ Quick Time.”
| is, |d In :d :n |d :d |d :si |
| |d |n :d :n jd I : |j
kbt GK ** Men of Harlech.*’
|j d :-.,t||l| :-.,t t jd :r |n :1 |s.n:— |r :-.,njd : |J
key C. J. R. Thomas, “ Lily Bells and Roses.”
|,n:n.f|s :-.s :1 ,s |d' : :d' jt.f :1 :f |n . j
|.n:n.fjfe :s :I.s |d' :d' j t .d 1 ; 1 :-.t|s
Before practising each exercise, answer to yourself the following
questions, “ What is the measure two, three,
tour, or six-pulse ? ” “On what pulse of the neS lon, ‘
measure does the exercises begin—first, second, second half of
second P ” <to. Then, by tapping with a pencil on the table, fix
25
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


what you consider a natural speed for the exercise, and adhere
rigidly to this from first to last. It will be better practice if yon
taa-tai the Time Exercises, and then sing them on one tone to the
syllable “la,” before you use them to the Sol-fa syllables.
Progressive Tone Exercises.
The following exercises are double chants, arranged in two
parts from well-known composers. The limits of this work do not
allow of a large selection of attractive pieces for the learner; but
the educational purpose of these chapters will be best served by
these exercises, each of which contains some new point, and each
of which should be mastered by the pupil before proceeding to
the next.
26
HOW TO READ MUSIO


27
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


VII.
THE FIFTH STEP IN SINGING.
Hitherto we have spoken of Boh as the central pivot of the scale
the note around which the other notes are placed, and from
which they derive their character. But the old
Greek and Latin music indeed, the vernacular
Old “Modes.”
music of all countries—made use of other tones of the natural
scale, such as Ray, Lah, &c., as pivot tones, which thus stamped
their own characteristics upon the music. Nor is it correct to
speak of these old “modes” of using the scale as extinct. They
are still used in places where modern harmony has not found its
way, and where melody, chiefly unaccompanied, forms the staple
of musical performance. They may be heard in Persia, India and
China, and in the highlands of Scotland and of Wales.
The question may be asked, how are we to know whether a tune
is in the Ray or Lah or any other mode, as the same seven sounds
will be used in it as in the Boh mode f The
Old “Modes”
recognised.
answer is, look to the first and last notes, and to
any pauses in the course of the tune, as between
the lines of poetry, and notice if any one note is prominent.
Notice especially the tone which is at the distance of five steps
above what you think is the mode tone. This tone will be its
“ dominant,” will be related to it as Soli is related to Boh, and
will have a powerful influence in deciding the mode.
Let us take as an example the following tune, “ Bangor,” a
traditional tune of the Welsh Church, which may
still be heard sung as it is written below: —
‘ Bangor,’’
28
HOTf TO BEAD MUBIO


Notice, in this tune, how Bay and its dominant (five notes above)
Lah, are prominent.
As an example of the Lah mode, let us take the
old version of the Scotch song, “ John Anderson,
my Jo! ” The ending is as follows:
“John Ander-
son, my Jo!”
These old modes have an historical interest, because without
nndorstanding them we cannot understand the subject on which
we now enter, the Modern Minor.
Very early in the history of harmony the mode which chcoses
Boh for its key-note was accepted as the most satisfactory. A
chief reason for this preference is that the third
tone above Boh is separated from it by two whole
steps, while the third tones above Bay and Lah are
Major and
Minor modes.
only distant a step and a little step. In other words, Boh is a
major mode, having a major third above its principal tone, and
Lah and Bay are minor modes, having a minor third above their
principal tone. Another reason for the establishment of the Boh
mode as the key to the scale was that the position of Te, a little
step below Boh, was felt to be exceedingly satisfactory and
convenient in harmony. The Lah and Bay modes, on the contrary,
had no such “ leading tone,” but only Soh and Boh, a full tone
below. The effect of a minor mode, as a change from the major,
was felt, however, to be very pleasing in music, and composers set
to work to harmonise a minor mode. For many reasons they
selected the mode on Lah, and rejected the other modes almost
entirely. But while the gloomy sound of the Lah mode was
capable of beautiful effects in contrast with the bright aud clear
sound of the major, composers soon found out its defects, not
Torn the melodic point of view, but from the harmonic. They
■'nod to combine the advantages of the major mode with those of
29
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


the minor, to graft on to the minor improvements which suited
their purpose as harmonists. The first of these improvements
1
f
rf s
r' f
n
dl-
- r
1 d
se ti
(s)
(ba) 1,
f
n S|
r fi
"I
d
was the raising of the note below Lah (Soh) so
as to form a “ leading tone,” which we call
Se. This raising was not invariable, for the
old Soh was still allowed in certain cases. The
raising of Soh, however, left an awkward gap, as
the student will see by looking at the modulator,
between Se and Fah; and as a gap of this sort was
the special abhorrence ef early harmonists, who
liked everything to be smooth and easy to sing, Fah
was in its turn raised also, forming a new tone which
we call Bay{ written Ba). Still, however, the use of Ba
was not invariable. Fah even now more commonly
occurs in the minor mode than Ba; although the
same cannot be said of Soh, which is much less
frequently met with in the minor than Se. The
diagram at the side shows in the left hand column
the minor mode, and in the right hand the major
key, which has its Doh at the same pitch as the
Lah of the minor. The alternative notes, Soh and
Ba, are in brackets. The remaining discrepancies
are shown by the horizontal lines to be at Doh
and Fah.
This modern minor mode, developed historically from the old
mode on Lah, is characterised by pathos and solemnity. Its
effect on the mind is, however, influenced by the
speed of the music; when this is rapid the effect
is quaint and even jovial.
Mental effect
of the Minor.
The alteration of Fah and Soh into Ba and Se is, as we have
seen, a direct imitation of the major mode, and is designed to
make the effect of harmony satisfactory. When Ba and 8e are
frequently used in a passage, the only distinguishing tone left to
define the minor mode is Doh (see the diagram). Musicians who
have founded their theory on intervals only, have been led to
regard the minor mode as a variation of the major scale. The
two scales which are given side by side in the
diagram they regard, in short, as one, except that
the minor has its third tone flattened and its sixth
Conflicting
views.
and seventh notes variable. If the sound of Doh in the right-hand
column were G, they would call it the “key of G major,” and the
30
HOW TO BEAD MUBIO


left-hand column the “key of G minor.” We regard this view as
historically wrong, as well as practically inconvenient. It leads
singers into mistakes through forgetting the modifications of the
minor, and it requires them to treat Fah when it occurs in the
minor as a tone out of the scale, instead of an integral part of it.
When we come to the staff notation we shall find that it supports
our view, and that to give the same signature to a major and
its tonic minor would introduce great complexity.
The scales which we regard as related are the
major and the minor mode which springs out of
its sixth tone. The diagram at the side shows the
major key and its relative minor. The use of this
term relative minor by musicians expresses the
musical fact that the relation of the two scales
given at the side is far more intimate than that of
the major and its tonic minor. In actual compo-
sition the change to the relative minor or major
is overwhelmingly more frequent than to the
tonic minor or major. The student who regards
Doh as the key-tone of the major, and Lah as the
centre of the minor, will be in little danger of
confusing the two.
d'
t
1 1
se
: ¥>
n n
r r
d d
t.
1.
For purposes of harmony a set of names is used which is
common to both major and minor, and the student
should now be made acquainted with them.
They are given at the side. Ba
and Soh, being incidental tones in
the minor, have no names. Thus it
will be seen that Lah is the tonic
of the minor, and Doh of the major;
Me the mediant of the major and
Doh of the minor, &o. The mean-
ing of the names is for the most
part obvious. The way in which
the fifth tone above the tonic
dominates over it will be appreciated
when we consider harmony. The
mediant is half way between the
tonic and the dominant, and the
sub-mediant is a similar distance
Names for toner
DOHI—LAH 1 —LAH Tonic.
TE SE Leading note.
| Sub-mediant.
SOH —ME Dominant.
FAH —HAY Sub-dominant.
jjqjj | Mediant.
RAY — TE| Supertonio.
DOH —LAH| Tomb.
below the tonic to that which the mediant is above it. Soper
31
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


tonic (above tonic) and sub-dominant (under dominant) show the
place of these tones, and the leading tone leads by the smooth
ascent of a little step to the tonic. In the Tonic Sol-fa notation,
when the music is in the minor mode, we write after the words
“key C,” “ key 87,” &c. (which show the place of Boh) the words
The use of the
Uinor Mode
illustrated.
“Lah is A,” “Lah is G,” &0., to show the place cf
Lah. The following exercises illustrate the use ol
the minor mode in music, alternating with its
relative major, and employing Ba and Se.
key B|j. Lah is 0.
|:li jn :r Id :t| jl t \— :d |s :f In :r |n 1— |
|:li|li:d In :r jd :n is :f jn :r Id :ti 1 1| [— j|
32
HOW TO BEAD MUBIO


These exercises all exemplify change of mode. Notice the
imitations between major and minor which they contain. Read
the first six notes of the first exercise as tonic, dominant, sub-
dominant, he., of the minor. Now read the next six notes in the
same way as major, and they will be found to bear the same
names. Seek for other imitations in each of the exercises.
Besides changing the mode, we may change simultaneously the
key and the mode, which produces a delightful effect. The most
frequent change of this sort is to the minor mode
of the first flat key. The student who constructs
a modulator will see that the new notes required
Changes of
Key and Mode.
for this, expressed in the old key, are Ta and the sharp of Boh,
which we call Be. Properly expressed Ta is the new Fah, and Be
the new Se. The following is a fragment of a tune which passes
into the “first flat minor”
SET G.
| :s, jl| :t| jd :ti jd :r jr :f jn :r |r :de |r |
or, f.C.
| :si |l| :tj jd :t| jd :r jn ; f d'jt :1 jl :se jl jj
a
33
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


The following passes into tho “first sharp minor”: —
The student must distinguish between the use of Fe, Be, Be,
and even Se, as chromatic notes which do not change the key, and
transitional notes which effect a change. It is, however,
impossible to do this with certainty without understanding
harmony and the habits of chords. As a general rule, the
presence of a contradictory note in the same or another part
immediately after the accidental (Boh after Be, Soh after Se, & c.)
shows there has been no transition. We shall consider transitions
of two, three, and more removes later on, when treating of the
staff notation.
34
ROW TO BEAD MUSIC


VIII.
THE STAFF NOTATION.—TUNE.
The student who has mastered the first four steps in singing may
now commence the study of the staff notation, if he has any special
occasion to do so —as, for instance, if he wishes to join in singing
with friends who are using the staff notation, or if he wishes
already to begin studying the large stores of music which are only
to be found in that notation. But if such reasons do not press upon
him, it is better for his own growth in musical knowledge and
power to defer the study of a complex and indirect notation like that
of the staff, till after he has gained some knowledge of harmony
and musical form. The simple Sol-fa notation has now become a
language of music to him, and an instrument of musical thought.
To turn aside, at so early a stage, to learn a new
musical language and a new mode of musical
thought would be an interruption to the steady flow
Preliminary
counsel.
of progress. It is true that much instruction is to he got from
studying an old familiar thing in a new language and from a new
point of view. But it must be an “old” and “familiar” thing
which you thus study. The thing itself must first be firmly and
clearly established in mind and ear before you begin to throw it into
new lights or call it by new names. Thousands of students have
thrown away the study of music itself altogether, because their
thoughts were puzzled and their efforts discouraged by having the
staff notation thrust upon them too soon. We therefore strongly
recommend students who have no pressing occasion for the staff
notation to study this and the next five chapters later on.
But we do not slight the staff notation. When the sense and
meaning of a Bible passage have been studied in our mother-tongue,
it wonderfully helps our thoughts and clears our conceptions to
study it also in French or German or Greek. Each new language
throws its light into some neglected comers of thought. Moreover,
the advanced student will find the staff notation necessary not
only for the pursuit of extended studies, but also for companionship
with other students. It will be a pleasure to him to find that
nothing he has learnt in his Tonic Sol-fa studies will have to be
unlearnt; but that every piece of Sol-fa knowledge he has gained
is a key to unlock something in the staff notation.
35
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


Some there are who, naving learnt to sing by means of the Tonic
Sol-fa notation, have no desire to go further. But a large number
wish to go on and become familiar with the staff
notation. All real students should endeavour to
widen their knowledge in this way, using their
Making
progress.
knowledge of Tonic Sol-fa as a key to the staff.
The purpose of a staff is to uphold and support, and five lines
placed one above the other are used to support the
notes of the scale, the spaces between, as well as
The Staff,
the lines themselves, being utilised for notes. Thus, from a line to
the space above it is a single step of the scale (Doh
to Ray, Fah to Soh, &c.), from a line to the next
line above it is two steps (Doh to Me, &c.). In
speaking of lines and spaces we must reckon from
the bottom; the lowest is the first line, &c.
The best way to learn any set of symbols is not to look at them
but to write them. We shall therefore give
exercises in writing the staff notation. The student
Writing.
can buy ruled music paper at the shops on which to work his
exercises.
Observe and compare the following, which is given in both
notations. • On the principle of introducing one thing at a time, we
at present mark the place of Doh by a square. Notice that a bar
across the staff divides the music into measures, as in the Tonic
Sol-fa notation, hut that no accent marks are given for pulses or
parts of pulses within the measure. The double bar denotes
the end.
Write the above, (a) placing Doh on the middle line of staff
(h) placing Doh in the second space.
When the notes follow each other in stepwise order, it is easy to
read them on the staff. But the singer must learn to read notes
which skip, and he must do this without the slow process of counting
the intervening notes. To do this let him remember the—
First Rule for Reading. —lf Doh is in a space, Me and Soh are in
the next spaces above, and if Doh is on a line, Me
and Soh are on the next lines above. Thus Doh,
Me, and Soh are eimilarly placed; they are either
On lines and
In spaces.
all three on Sues or all three in f»acoa.
36
HOW TO BEAD MtJBIO


Bead aloud without counting from note to note, the Sol-fa names
of the notes in the following exorcises.
Write the above exercises in the Tonic Sol-fa notation. Write
them in the staff notation, placing Boh on the third line and in the
second space respectively.
Write the following in the staff notation, placing Boh on the
first line:—
||d :s |n :d |s :n |d :n |s ;n jj
Second Rule for Reading. —Octaves are dissimilarly placed. If
Boh, Me, and Soh are in spaces, the octaves of any of them are
n the fourth line above or below; if they are on Octaves
lines, their octaves are in the fourth space above or
jelow. Let the student examine the following, and learn to
measure with the eye the leap of an octave.
Write the above in the staff notation, the first with Boh on the
first line, the second with Boh in the second space.
When the music goes above or below the bounds of the five-line
staff, additional lines are added, which are made
just long enough to hold the note or notes required.
Leger lines.
They are called leger lines. The following is to be road;—
Third Rule for Rending.—Ray is recognised as next above Boh ,
Te as next below; Fah as next above lie, and Lah
as next above Soh. Notice that d f are dissimilarly
placed, and d f| similarly placed.
Bay, Fab
Mid Lab
37
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


Fourth Rule. —Alternate notes of the scale an
always similarly placed. Bead at sight the Sol-fa
names of the following;—
Alternate
notes.
Write the following in the staff notation, Doh on the second
line: —
|:s |f :r |t, :si |d :r Jn :d |f :1 |s :t t |d JJ
Fifth Rule. —An interval of seven notes (one note short of an
octave) is similarly placed. Bead the following;—
Write the following in the staff notation, Doh in the first space:—
||d :d' jr :1 |s :s, |f :n |t, :1 js :t| jd :d |j
38
HOW TO BEAD MUBIO


IX.
THE STAFF NOTATION.—TIME.
Hitherto we have only used one kind of note in writing the staff
notation—black, with a line or tail attached to it.
A variety of notes is used, each indicating the time
Notes.
it occupies in relation to those around it. The following is
a list:—
A Beevb —(a note seldom used).
A Semibreve—half as long as the Breve
A Minim —half as long as the Semibreve.
A Crotchet —half as long as the Minim.
A Quaver —half as long as the Crotchet.
A Semiquaver —half as long as the Quaver.
A Demisemiquavee —Half as long as the
Semiquaver.
A dot placed at the right side of a note head lengthens the note
by half; two dots so placed lengthen it by three-
quarters. Bead and sing this exercise:—
Tims marks.
Taking a crotchet as the standard of a pulse, write the following
in the staff notation, Boh in the first space:—
|jd jar:d.rjrt |s :-.l|s.f:r.n|d :si |d j|
Each note has a corresponding rest, which marks a silence as
long as the sound of the note. These are the notes
with their equivalent rests above them:—
Bests,
39
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


In the last two cases we have a dotted rest, which possesses the
same value as a dotted note. Notice that the semibreve rest is
used in a general way for a whole measure silence, whether there
be more or less than a semibreve in the measure.
Those who have difficulty in distinguishing between the rests
may bear in mind the following mnemonics: As a heavy piece of
wood floats with only its top just level with the
surface of the water, so the longer semibreve rest
Mnemonics.
hangs underneath the line; while, as a light piece of wood floats
buoyantly upon the surface, so the shorter minim rest stands upon
the line. To remember which way the crotchet and quaver rests
turn, bear in mind that “c” the first letter of the word crotchet,
like its rest, faces to the right; and “q,” the first letter of the word
quaver, like its rest, faces to the left.
Write the following in the staff notation, using
a quaver instead of a crotchet to represent a pulse.
Exercise.
Doh on the second line: —
|j d |r :d :rjn :r [d :jn |f :n :f|s :f jn : |
| |d':- |t :1 :t|d':- :s Is :-;f|n ;r :d]S|t I ( ;t||d ;d |d :||
The slur is a curved line which unites two or more notes
that are to be sung to one syllable of the words. It is also used in
instrumental, and sometimes in vocal music, to
denote that the style of performance is to be smooth
Slur.
and unbroken. When two or more quavers or semiquavers are to
be sung to one syllable, it is the custom to join them together, as
in the following example:—
When the tails are thus joined there is no need for a slur, unless
there are some minims or crotchets in the same group, which of
course have no tails to he joined.
Write the following in the staff notation, each
pulse a crotchet; Doh in the first space:—
Exercise.
||n :n jrld : js :s ,f|n jl ~1:1 41s : j
40
HOW TO READ MUBIO


|j f.,f:f ~f 1n : .djn.d: .nls.n; js Id 1 : ||
As all the divisions of notes in the staff notation are by twos and
tours, there is no direct symbol for triplets. They
are denoted by the figure 3 being placed over three
notes, which would otherwise be halves. Example:—
Triplets or
thirds.
Translate the above into the Tonic Sol-fa notation.
Time signatures show the kind of measure —in other words, the
arrangement of the accents. As the staff notation only marks the
beginning of each measure, it is necessary to
indicate how the internal accents fall, and how
many beats or pulses each measure (or bar) contains.
Time
signatures.
The time signatures consist, for the most part, of two arabio
numerals placed one above the other on the staff, at the beginning
of each piece of music. The following are the commonly used time
signatures:—
The key to these is this. The upper figure shows how many pulses
there are in the measure, and the lower indicates the note which
represents a pulse. In this scale of pulse-notes:—
1 (rarely used) stands for a semibreve.
2 stands for a minim.
4 stands for a crotchet.
8 stands for a quaver.
Thus the signature | means “three crotchets to a measure”;
§ moans six quavers ; | means three minims. The two last, which
are among the most common signatures, denote two varieties of
“common time,” for which the letter o stands. The first sort is
four-pulse, four crotchets to the measure, and might be (and rarely
is) written J. The second sort, with a line through the c, is called
“ alia breve ” time, and denotes that there are but two accents in
the measure, and generally that the music is intended to be sung
quickly.
41
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


In the Tonic Sol-fa notation a pulse is always recognised as tha
distance from one accent-mark to the next. But it should be
noticed that in the staff notation different units are
employed for a pulse. A piece of music in four-
pulse measure may be written, according to the
Indication
of pulses.
taste of the composer, and to his idea of its character, in four
crotchets to the measure, four quavers, or four minima; a piece in
three-pulse measure may similarly be written in ij, J, or g time.
The general rule is that minims are sedate and slow in appearance,
and suit sacred music; while crotchets, and especially quavers, look
giddy, and suggest dance music. Hymn-tunes are commonly
written in £or \ time; but recent compilers and composers have
adopted the crotchet as the pulse-note, and write the tunes in J or f
time. In some tune-books, to save space, the time signature
is omitted altogether. The time can then only be seen by looking
at a measure.
Find by examination of one or more measures,
the time signatures of the following:—
Exercise.
42
BOW TO BEAD MUBIO


After writing down the time signatures of the above, translate them
into Tonic Sol-fa notation.
Besides the common time signatures already noticed are two
others, which in Tonic Sol-fa we call twelve-pulse
and nine-pulse measure. The first may be regarded
as four-pulse measure with an abundance of
triplets; and the second as three-pulse measure of
Twelve-pnlse
& nine-pulse
measures.
the same kind. Evidently we can express a passage in either of
these two ways. Subjoined are examples of § and y time; —
Showing the accents. A Tonic Sol-faist will soon perceive the
meaning of the way in which the staff notation is written so as to
show the internal accents of a measure. For
example, if we wish in six-eight time (six-pulse
measure) to write this note, with its prolongation:—
ll* II
Accent*.
43
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


the student might reason thus: “ The note is six quavers long; *
minim is equal to four quavers; I will dot it, and it will equal six
quavers.” He might then write the note thus:—
But this would be wrong, because it would not show the arceni in
the middle of the measure. The correct way of writing the note
is this;—
The tie or slur shows that no second note is to be struck, but only
the first prolonged, and the second crotchet shows the duple
accent.
The following passage further illustrates this point. Compare
the pulses, as shown in the Tonic Sol-fa version, with the
arrangement of the accents in the staff notation:—
KEY C.
||d 1— : : jn* :r' :d' 1— :r' rn 1 j
| j s l .f l :rt l .ri:n l iM« l 1— jj
44
HO W TO BEAD MUSIO


X.
THE STAFF NOTATION. CLEFS
A Clef determines the absolute pitch of notes. A note like that
at the side means nothing to the m, ucian: it may
bo several different sounds. But ths clef, literally
“key,” fixes the exact position of a note in the
region of musical sounds. The clefs now used in Q and F Clefs.
popular music are two the G or Treble Clef,
represented at the side, which makes the line round
which its tail curls represent G above the middle 0
of a pianoforte: and the For Bass Clef, which
makes the line between the two dots it bears
represent the F below this middle C.
Older music and instrumental full scores use,
however, a different clef for all voices except the
bass, and for certain instruments. This is the
0 clef, whose cross-bars mark the place of the
middle 0 of the pianoforte. This is the sound
which a man makes in imitating the C of a tuning-
fork, and an octave below the sound which a woman makes
in doing the same thing. The 0 clef is movable, and can be
placed on any line, although it is now only used in three positions,
as below: —
The line between the cross-bars, wherever they may stand is middle
C. The reason that this clef is adhered to by musicians is that it
shows the absolute pitch of the notes. The convenience of singers,
to whom a multiplicity of clefs is perplexing, has, however, borne
down theoretical arguments, and publishers do not now think of
issuing popular vocal music in the 0 clef. For the bass the F clef is
used, and the O clef for all parts above it. This involves the error
»f writing the tenor part an octave higher than it really sounds.
45
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


ence the objections of theorists. When the
parts are written in this way the music is said to be
Full Sc e
in “ full score,” and the lines stand as follows:
Some composers have endeavoured to form a compromise between
theory and convenience by placing the 0 clef in the
third space, thus placing the notes as in the G clef,
but using the different sign to show the octave.
A
compromise.
The theoretical objection to this procedure we shall now understand.
A glance at the diagram at the side will show that,
hy a fortunate accident, the F and G clefs meet
at the middle C which occupies the first leger line
above the bass staff, and the first leger line below
the treble staff. This gives us a considerable range
of pitch; in fact, with the help of leger lines
and a few other signs, pianoforte music of the
widest range can he expressed on these two staves.
Vocal music can also he written in two, four, or more parts upon
them; when this is done, the music is said to
b'a in “short score.” The soprano and contralto
Short Score.
parts are written on the upper staff, and the tenor and bass
parts on the lower. To distinguish the parts, the higher one
on each stave has its tails turned upwards, and the lower
one its tails turned downwards. Sufficient space is left between
the staves for the tails of the alto and tenor notes to clear
each other, and the place of middle C is shifted, according as
it appears as a leger line above the bass staff, or below the
treble. When two parts have the same note, if this be a
crotchet or any tailed note two tails are given to the one head,
46
HOW TO BEAD MUSIO


turning different ways. In the case of a semibreve, which has no
tail, a double note is sometimes used, resembling one note linked to
another; or the two notes are placed side-by-side on the same line
or space.
This central position of middle C, standing as it does between two
staves, has led some theorists to argue backwards, and say that
middle 0 is the centre of the clef system, from
which both the other clefs are deiived. To place
the 0 clef in a space would on this theory displace
Theory and
practice.
both the F and G clefs, and destroy the whole argument about
“the great stave of eleven lines,” Convenience, however, makes
short work of consistency, in these days of amateur singing for
the million.
Write the following four-part chant in Tonic Sol-fa notation.
The square marks show the place of the Doh which
bears no octave mark (called unmarked Doh).
Exercise.
J. BARNEY.
Write the following in the staff notation in full score, unmarked
Doh in second space of treble staff, and on fifth line of bass staff:—
!n r:d t, 1, s, :d.r n:r d
8| 1 — S) IPli.fi S| fl 1 — ri| l-.fj S| I S| H|
d t| :d.r n d d :d d :t| d
d i— Si ,1] n, : ft ; di :1| S| :si dj t
47
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


XI.
THE STAFF NOTATION.—KEY SIGNATURES.
Hitherto for the purpose of confining the pupil’s attention to
one thing at time we have merely used a mark to indicate the
place of Boh on the staff. We now proceed to explain the way
in which the key is indicated.
The staff is always supposed to be in the key of C. Por this
reason, key 0 is spoken of as “ the natural key,”
arid is treated as the centre of the tonal system.
The staff notation is in fact a representation of
The “Natural
key,”
the finger-board of the pianoforte, organ, &c.
If, then, we see a staff like that above, we understand it to be in
key 0, and of course in this case 0 will always be Boh, D will
. d'(C') f
t (B) n
f ta
■ 1 (A) r
r s (G) a
fe— t.
a, f(F) 1
t, n(E) i,
i. r (D) t|
.. d(C) ~
Modulator.
always be Ray, A always Lah, and so on. But we
have seen in our Tonic Sol-fa studies, that C is not
more used as a key than P, G, or D. How, then,
shall we manage to express other keys than 0 on
the staff ? To understand this we must recall what
was said about transition in Chapter YII. The
student will remember that every time we change
Soh into a new Boh, we have to raise the old Fall
by a semitone to make a new Te: and that every
time we change Fah into a new Boh, we have to
lower the old Te a semitone to make a new Fah.
If now the student regards the middle column
of the modulator at the side as being in key
C, he will see that in changing Soh into a new
Doh we pass into key G (make Boh into G), and that we must
make our new Te by raising P a semitone. This raising of
a note by a semitone is expressed in the staff
notation by a sign called a sharp (#), placed on
The Key
of 0.
48
BoW TO BEAD MUBIO


the line or in the space which it is desired to affect. Turning to
the unmarked staff given on the previous page, we shall see that
F is on the fifth line of the treble staff, and on the fourth line of
the bass. On these lines, therefore, we place the sharp when we
wish to make the new Te for key G. When a piece of music
begins in G it is usual to place this sign immediately after the
clef. When standing here, it is understood to sharpen every Fto
the close of the piece.
Now suppose that we pass from 0 into the Fah key, lowering
the old Te to make a new Fah (see Modulator).
We are now in key F; in other words, Fis Boh.
The flattening is expressed by a sign called a flat
The key
of F.
(tt); and as Te of the old key is B, this flat must evidently
stand upon the third line of the treble staff and the second line
of the bass staff.
We noticed in Chapter YII that the process of sharpening Fah
and flattening Te was repeated each time we removed to the next
key. The subjoined diagram explains this. At
either side, on the extreme left and right, are given
the notes of the Standard Scale, 0, B, A, &c.; and
Extended
Modulator.
by looking at them we can at once see what notes of the Standard
Scale we need to sharpen or flatten for any key-signature.
The Extended Modulator.
49
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


But there is an easier way of finding the lines and spaces on
which the sharps and flats of a signature stand. Remember
always the place of C in the second space of the
bass staff and the third space of the treble staff.
Then reason in this way: “We sharpen Fah
An easy
rule.
(pointing to F sharp), changing it by that act into Te. From
this Te we proceed to sharpen the Fah of the new key (pointing
to 0 sharp), and so on until we have the number of sharps
required for the signature.
In the case of flats, starting from key C we flatten Te (B), which
is now Fah. From this Fah we proceed to flatten the new Te,
changing it into Fah, and so on until we have the number of flats
required for the signature. The staff at the head of the diagram
shows the commonly used signatures, with the place occupied by
Doh. Those which lie beyond on either side are 0 sharp and
C flat respectively. The staff standing at the foot of the diagram
shows the signatures as they are placed on the bass staff.
The student should learn by heart the number of sharps or
flats in each signature. The sentence, “Go Down And Enter By
Force,” gives the order of the sharp keys in the initial letter of
each word. Thus G has one sharp, D two, A three, &o. Repeated
backwards, it gives the order of the flats.
It follows from the above reasoning that the
singer can invariably find the Doh, at the begin-
ning of a piece of music by remembering that
To find the
Doh.
The last Sharp to the right is Te,
and The last Flat to the right is Fah.
In writing the notation be careful to put the flats and sharps
on the right octave of the note required. The
diagram will be a guide in this matter. The key
A caution.
signature is usually printed at the beginning of every score.
Sometimes, however, it is omitted in all scores after the first.
From the instructions given, write, without reference to a book,
(a) the signature of five flats on the G clef; fb) the signature of
five sharps on the F clef.
Pupils are often puzzled, in translating from the Staff Notation
into the Tonic Sol-fa, to know what octave marks they should
use. They can, however, never go wrong if they
remember that anv Doh which springe from
Octave marks.
50
HOW TO BEAD MTJBIO


an unmarked note of the Standard Scale is itself unmarked. The
unmarked notes of the Standard Scale are given below :
Thus the Doh of key B, standing on the third line of the treble
staff has no octave mark. But the Doh of key 0, which stands
one tone higher, in the third space of the treble staff, has an
upper octave mark. The tenor and bass parts are, however,
written in Tonic Sol-fa an octave higher than they really sound,
in order to avoid the constant use of octave marks. Thus, in key
0, the Doh on the line between the treble and bass staves is
unmarked when it occurs in soprano and contralto parts, but has
an upper octave mark if it occurs in the tenor or bass. The
following are illustrations of this rule:—
51
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


XII.
THE STAFF NOTATION.—TRANSITION.
We have already, in Chapter VII, explained the musical fact of
transition, or change of key. We have shown how beautifully it
alters the “colour” of the sounds with which th»
ear is being filled. We have explained that it is
Transition.
one of the commonest musical effects, hardly any piece, even a
hymn-tune or a popular song, being without this pleasing and
natural device. There will be no need to explain over again to
the student who has mastered the fact of transition, what is the
natural sequence of keys: how a Fe denotes the sharp or
dominant key, to the right of the modulator; and how a Ta
denotes the flat or sub-dominant key, to the left of the modu-
lator.
When, in the course of a piece of music the key is thus changed,
the usual plan in the staff notation is to keep the old signature,
Change of
xey in the Old
Notation.
and alter the new notes one by one as they occur.
This is accomplished by the help of sharps and
flats, and a sign called a “natural” (fy), which
destroys the action of a previous sharp or flat, and
restores the note to its place in the key of the signature. The
mode of using “accidentals,” as they are called, will be seen, from
the subjoined: —
In the first case the raising of Fah into Fe is effected by a sharp,
the note on which it occurs (D) being “natural” in the key, and
therefore capable of having a sharp or flat applied to it. In the
second case our Fe comes upon the note A, which has already been
flattened by the signature, and needs therefore only to have
the action of a flat suspended by a natural. In the third case the
Ta is expressed by a flat, as A, the note on which it occurs, is
natural in the signature. But in the fourth case 0, the line on
which Ta elands, is already sharpened in the signature, and we
52
HOW TO BEAD MUBIO


must therefore restore it by a natural, not a flat. A natural,
therefore, raises a note which has been flattened by the signature,
and lowers one which has been sharpened.
An accidental sharp, flat, or natural holds good for the whole of
the measure in which it is placed unless contra- cc ja enta i s
dieted, however often the note it affects may occur.
It also holds good for any octave of the note. An accidental does
not hold good for the next measure unless it is repeated, except
that if an accidental is placed against the last note of a measure,
it is sometimes understood to be continued, especially if the note
is tied across the bar.
Sometimes, especially if the key changes with a change of time
and movement, the whole signature will be changed.
But the general custom is not to change the
signature till the end of the movement.
Change
of signature.
Translate into the staff notation, treble clef, a minim to a pulse,
the following exercise :
IST D.
||n |s :f |n jn |fe :s |s :fe js |
|js jf :n |1 |ta :-|l:s|s :f jn |j
KET 0.
|js jr :f jn jfe :s js :s |I : fe js |
jjd 1 js ;ta jl |t jd 1 :r' jd 1 :t jd 1 jj
The student must carefully distinguish between accidentals that
are of real effect, and those which are merely put in as a caution
to the singer or player. Thus, in the following chant, the only
accidentals strictly required by rule are two: —
53
aND understand it.


But some composers, to avoid the possibility of mistake, would
mark the return to the old key by a cautionary natural and sharp
to Fah and Te respectively:—
Those who are not aware of this custom may possibly become
confused. The singer must bear in mind what notes have already
been sharpened or flattened by the signature, and then he will see
that in key G, a natural to 0 and a sharp to P mean ordinary
notes of the scale.
When the music is in keys which contain a number of flats and
sharps we encounter a new difficulty. Let ns
suppose that we are in key E (four sharps),
A difficulty.
and want to write Be, the sharp of Bay. If the reader looks at
the signature given at the side, he will see that
Bay (P sharp) is already sharpened in the signa-
ture, and, being once sharpened, we cannot again
use a sharp to it. We therefore use a new sign
called a “double sharp” (x), which raises by a semitone any note
already marked with a sharp. Do not imagine
that as a sharp raises a note a semitone, a doable
Doable sharps.
sharp has twice the power, and raises it a whole tone in the key.
This is not so. The sign can only be used for notes already
sharpened, and these it only raises half a tone. Here is an
example:—
But how is a double sharp to be contradicted ? Suppose we wish
to write Bay after Be when Be is expressed by a double sharp P
We must destroy the effect of the double sharp by a natural; but
as a reminder that the note is still sharp in the signature, we
follow the natural by a sharp:—
54
HOW TO BEAD MUSIO


The opposite difficulty is encountered in keys which have many
flats in the signature, leading to the use of a
double flat, for which there is no special sign, two ou ' s ' 9 ®atl-
flats being used instead. The following is an example:—
In singing the staS notation from the movable Doh, as all who
have followed these instructions and exercises will do, the task is
easy so long as the music does not change key rapidly and
remotely. But for sudden and distant transitions,
the singer must he ready with his rules. It is a
mistake to imagine that it is a defect in the
movable Doh system that makes it require thought
Sadden
and distant
transition.
and care at these places of change. The difficulty is in the music,
not in the movable Doh. Singing with reference to the key (in
other words, by the movable Doh) is the most intelligent and
reliable way of reading the staff notation. Singers who do not
adopt this plan, but use the fixed Doh, by no means escape the
difficulty which the movable dohist finds. They are indeed
plunged into greater difficulties and uncertainties.
The following rules may be given for recognising accidentals,
and finding the Doh when the key changes:—
Fe means the first sharp key, and should be called
7'e unless it is immediately contradicted by Fall.
Bales.
Ta means the first flat key, and should be called Fall unless
it is immediately contradicted by Te.
8e means the relative minor, and requires no alteration in
the sol-faing.
55
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


De means the relative minor of the first flat key, and should be
called Be.
Be means the relative minor of the first sharp key, and should
be called fife.
These are the common transitions into related keys, and will
carry the student through hymn-tunes, chants, and simple music
generally. Bear in mind that when the transition is a short one,
say for two measures or less, it is the custom to sacrifice the real
truth of notation, and not to shift the syllables, but to use Fe, Ta,
Be, Be, &o.
In music of a light and playful character, such as dances and
operas, great use is made of ornamental chromatic tones, which do
Ornamental
chromatic
tones.
not change the key, but have a sort of piquancy as
substitutes for the ordinary tones of the scale.
The singer must learn to distinguish these from
the real signs of transition. Here, for instance, is
a passage from Sullivan’s “ H.JI.S. Pinafore,” which actually
begins with one of these ornamental chromatics, and has several
afterwards. Yet it is all in the key of E from first to last: —
The Fe in measures 1 and 2 is contradicted by Fah in measure 3;
the Be in measure 3 is contradicted by the Bay in measure 5;
the De in measure sis contradicted by Boh in measure 6; and the
phrase ends with a characteristic cadence in key B. All the
chromatic notes, not excepting Se, are used in this way. The
rule for recognising these ornaments is, look on. If an accidental
is repeated through several measures, wherever the same note
occurs, no doubt the key is changed. But if it is not repeated, or
contradicted, it is an ornament, or a very brief transition.
56
HOW TO BE An MUBIO


XIII.
THE STAFF NOTATION.—HOW TO FIND THE KEY.
Without a knowledge of harmony it is impossible to be perfectly
rapid and certain in the power of deciding the key at a glance from
the staff notation. But the reader may ask,
“ Cannot I learn to Sol-fa from the staff without
first learning harmony?” Certainly this can be
done to a very great extent. There are at the present
Knowledge
of harmony
a help.
time thousands of readers of the staff notation in England, many
of whom began by learning the Tonic Sol-fa notation, but only a
small proportion of them understand harmony. Eules of general
application may be given, which will prove useful, as they have
proved useful, to so many before.
The harmonist reads the key most quickly by watching the bass,
and looking for the movement from dominant to
tonic (S| dor pi I), which defines the key. He also
watches for characteristic melodic shapes and
phrases. For example, if we see this phrase:—
Hints for
reading.
The signature seems to say that it is Fah Doh Lah Fah Doh, and
there is no Te in the phrase to decide the key. But it is ton times
more likely to be d 1 snd s in key D. If those notes were played
to us on an instrument, without our seeing the notation, we should
all say at once they were d 1 S n d S. And this interpretation
would most probably be right.
The rules we have given in the previous chapter serve for
changes of key which are gradually made, and in which the singer
has time to change the De's into Se’a, and the Fe's
and 2'ct’s into Tt's and Fah’s. But what is he to do
when the change is sudden and distant, and when
three or four, or even more notes of the scale are
Sadden
and distant
removes.
key with
altered, so that to attempt to Sol-fa in the original
chromatic notes is hopeless ?
The first change of this sort for -which the singer must be pre-
pared is to the tonic minor —that is, to the relative minor of th*
57
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


third flat key. (See extended modulator, p. 49.) An examina-
tion of the modulator and of the minor scale will show that the
notes which give the sign of this change are certainly Ma (the new
Doh), probably La (the new Fah), and perhaps Ta (the new Soh.)
Here, for example, is a passage of this sort;—
The Ma, which the eye sees at a glance to be repeated through
several measures, and the La denote the “ tonic minor,” and Ma
is to be called Doh. But look at the eighth note of the phrase.
We Sol-fa the first three notes of the measure in which it stands
fi rt| ; but what is the fourth note ? Already it is raised by the
signature half a tone, and it is therefore Se without the need of a
sharp. The singer must beware of unmarked accidentals of this
sort. This is the commonest case in which they are found.
Occasionally we meet with passages in recitatives (or in classical
music which uses freedom of transition) which seem to be nothing
but a wilderness of sharps or flats or naturals. Nearly every note
is altered; the signature is not the slightest guide to the key; and
we are apt to despair of finding it. The passage given below is in
a key far removed from that of the signature.
58
HOW TO BEAD MUSIC


To the singer who trios to sing “by interval” or by “absolute
pitch,” such a passage is very distressing. We
will show how simple it really is in the Tonic Sol-fa
notation t—
xkt Gjj.
|: Jijn :n In :n |s :-.lls ; ji|f ;s )) ;t jd 1 : .d|d.dj
| . Ji|r t» In :n js :-.lls , jnjf .3 I :t Jd 1 : .d|d.d||
“ How easy! ” the reader will perhaps exclaim;
“ but how am I to decipher the key from such a
labyrinth of flats ? ” We will give a simple rule.
Let the order of the flats be recalled. The
diagram at the side will remind us that the order in which we
place the fiats is this: —
% E b. A b. D b, Gjj, Qj, Ffr,
We have already learnt that the last flat is Fah. If, then, we see
both B flat and E flat marked in a piece, it is evident that E flat
is the guiding flat, not B flat, which is covered by the more
advanced E flat. In the same way A flat is further off from the
natural key than E flat, 0 flat further off than G flat, &c. (see
diagram). In other words, to adopt a convenient if not a very
correct phrase, “ E flat is a flatter note than B flat,” and so on,
through the whole series of flats. The rule for deciphering the
key is therefore apparent. It is—
Find the flattest note, and call it “Fah.”
Let us apply this rule to the musical phrase just given. The eye
glances at all the flats, and sees that of the three (D flat, 0 flat,
and G flat) the flattest is the C flat. (See order of flats given
above.) Call this Fah, and the puzzle is solved.
In respect to transitional value, naturals in keys
with sharp signatures are the same as flats, and
must be searched for in the same order. See the
following example :
Natural! in
sharp
•ignatnrei.
59
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


Let us take the same order as we did with the flats :
Btf, Btf, At}, Dt}. Gt}, Ct}. Ft}.
Now, instead of supposing ourselves in the “ open " key of 0, we
suppose ourselves in an extreme sharp key, and have to consider
how far in the direction of the natural key the music obliges us to
go. Examine the naturals, and we shall see that of the three used
(01}, Ftf, and Gt}), the most natural, according to our index is
P natural. Call this Fah, and the key is found. What it is, we
leave the reader to say.
The transi-
tional value
of sharps.
We now take the case of sharps, the rules for
which the reader will almost have guessed. The
diagram shows the order of the sharps to be :
On the same reasoning by which we established the fact that the
last flat is Fah, we have also established the fact that the last
sharp is Te; and hence, in a passage which bristles with sharps,
we must pick out the one which stands furthest to the right on
the above list, and that will be Te. Here is a passage in
illustration :
Proceeding by rule, the “ sharpest note ” in this passage is A
sharp, which, if called Te, would give us key B. But look again
The A sharp is contradicted in the note next but one by A natural
an octave higher. It is, therefore, only an ornamental Fe, and we
must look back tor the “next sharpest” note, if the expression
may be allowed. This is D sharp; call it Te, and the whole
passage sings naturally in key B:
KET E.
(:s Is :n :s Id 1 :d' |t :n' :r' Ir 1 :d' \
/I I i
|:1 js ;fe :s If 1 :t j d* : ( : jj
Remember, then, the rule for deciphering sharps:—
Find ten sharpest note, anp call it “Te.”
60
SOW TO READ MUBIO


Ine transitional value of naturals in keys with
ital signatures is the same as that of sharps The
following passage serves in illustration :
Naturals
in flat
signatures.
Here, taking the same order as we did with the sharps (P, 0, G,
D, A, E, B) we pick out the one which stands furthest to the
right upon the list, and this is manifestly B. Taking this note as
te, the key is found to be C.
The passages we have chosen are simple in one respect —that
they do not change key in themselves. The passage above, for
example, might pass on into key B, or key A. But our rule holds
as good for these changes. Every time a further sharp or flat is
encountered, call it Te or Fah, as the case may be, and the passage
will become clear.
In order to apply the rule of “ sharpest and flattest notes,” the
singer must commit to memory the order of the flats and that of
the sharps.
It remains to say a few words on Ba and Se in the minor mode.
There is no sign in the staff notation by which Ba can be
distinguished from Fe. Both notes are represented
by raising Fah a semitone. This is done by a
Ba and Se,
sharp or a natural or a double sharp, according to the key we are
in. Se, also, requires a different sign according to the key.
There are thus four ways in which Ba Se may be represented,
according to the key we are in:—
61
and understand it.


In the above cases the music is in the key represented by the
signature. But in the course of lengthened compositions we enter
the minor modes of related or of distant keys, and this gives ns
other varieties of Ba and Se, three of which are appended—
In the first case neither Ba nor 8e requires any mark at all, and
in the other cases only Se requires one. These are not impossible
cases, but are such as may be me' with in extended and difficult
music. It is important that the singer should be prepared for all
these various appearances.
In conclusion, let us repeat wnai we have already said, that the
difficulties here enumerated are m the staff notation itself, and
The true
source ol
difficulties.
are not proofs of the weakness of the movable
Boh. What the movable Boh does is to clear up
perplexities, and give certainty to the singer.
Those who have followed and learned these lessons
will have no need of the help of the pianoforte or other instrument
to guide them to each note, but will sing independently and
surely, and it is to be hoped will prove in their own experience
the value of the system on which they have been trained.
62
HOW TO BEAD MUSIO


XIV.
EXERCISES IN FINDING THE KEY.
We supplement the instructions given in the last chapter by a
set of quotations from the works of reputable composers, which
will serve to test the student’s grasp of the foregoing rules. The
problem is to discover the key, The maze of
contradictory signs will perplex the eye at first, but
let the rule of “ sharpest” and “ flattest” notes be
To discover
the key.
borne in mind, and the secret will be discovered. The whole ol
these examples are in one key throughout. Before beginning to
write or to Sol-fa let the pupil look to the end of the phrase for the
distinguishing note of the new key :
63
aNB understand it.


Sometimes, when a passage does not contain either a Te or a
Fah, the rule of sharpest and flattest notes will not give the clue.
For example, in the following;—
The key must be decided by the melodic shape already noticed.
What it is in this instance we leave the reader to discover.
In the following examples the key changes during the course of
the phrase. But the change is so abrupt and decided that we may
safely ask the reader to search for the “flattest” note and name
the new key :
64
now TO BEAD MUSIO


In the following example there are two changes of key, and,
in connection with the second, the student must read what was said
about Ba and Se on p. 61: —
65
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


XV.
EXPRESSION.
Expression is the clothing of music in life and warmth; in
beauty and proportion. The mere notes of a composition are cold,
mechanical things; it is for the singer or player to breathe passion
into them by skill of voice or touch, acting upon
the impulse of his mind and feeling. It is now the
custom for composers to add marks of expression to
Taste and
feeling.
their works. This was not done in the old music, in which
expression was left entirely to the taste of the singer. Even now
that expression marks are so plentiful, they must be regarded
merely as suggestions, and the tasteful singer and player must not
be satisfied without adding a “reading” of his own to that of
the composer.
Given a song or an instrumental piece, expression will be infused
into it by the proper use of Force, Speed, and Break of Continuity.
Increase of force will denote passion, vigour, life. Decrease of
force will express tenderness, languor, sorrow. Quickened speed
shows reviving hope, joy, and triumph. Slackened speed changes
The
materials of
expression.
the spirit of the music to solemn and sad, to grave
and majestic. Break of continuity shows musical
and verbal phrases; it gives shape to the melodies,
and it makes emphatic words start into prominence.
These, roughly speaking, are the materials of expression. Change
of resonance has been described in a former chapter, and the
Portamento , or gliding from note to note, is but rarely effective.
Mark) of Expreesion,
Name. Sign,
Mezzo (meteoj , medium m.
Piano (peeahno), soft p.
Forte (forlay), loud ./.
Fortissimo, very loud ff.
Pianissimo, very soft pp.
Crescendo (creshendo) , getting louder eret. — ~
Diminuendo (dcemeemoendoJ, getting softer dim. ~
Decrescendo, same as Diminuendo decree. ~
66
HOW TO BEAD MUSIC


Marks for Single Notes.
Pbhbsuki Tows (<), rapid eret. on single tone.
SroazANno (sforttanndo) , >, or «/., rapid dim. on single tone begun loud
Rapid Swill ( a ), like pressure tone.
The degrees of force of which a tone is capable may be thus put in
order as follows; —
Let this tone be slowly sung in this manner, the voice growing
from the softest to the loudest tone. Then let the expression be
reversed, beginning with the loudest and ending with the softest
The latter exercise is the more difficult of the two.
Continuity of Tones,
Legato. —When the tones are to glide gently and easily one into
the other, without intervening break, the word legato (legahto) is
used, or the sign / —s ties together the notes in question.
Staccato. —When, on the contrary, the tones are to be separated
one from the other, the word staccato (stakahto) is used, or the
notes have a round dot (•) over them. If the staccato is to be very
strongly marked a pear-shaped dash (•) is placed over the notes.
Tempo, or Speed.
This is loosely indicated by the use of Italian terms. The
invention of the metronome in recent years has to some extent
rendered these terms unnecessary, as the composer can now indicate
the exact speed at which he wishes his music to go. But the old
terms are still used. Many composers prefer to give a general hint
only, leaving the precise interpretation to the executant. Besides,
these terms have more musical meaning than the mere figures of
the metronome; they suggest the spirit of the music and the style
ef performance as well as the rate of movement. The following
table gives the tempo marks in graduated order, beginning with the
slowest and ending with the quickest.
67
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


I.—SLOW.
Italian term. Literal meaning.
Largo (lahgo). M. 40—60. Broad, large.
Grave (grahv). ~ Heavy, grave.
Adagio (adahgio). M. 60—72. Slowly.
Lento (lehnto). ~ Sluggish, tardy,
Larghetto (largetto). M. 70—80. Rather large.
n.— MEDIUM.
Andante (andantay). M. 80 —84. Going, moderate.
Andantino (andanteeno). M. 88— 96. Diminutive of andante.
Moderate (modderahto). M. 80—84. Moderate, sober.
Allegretto (allegretto). M. 104. Diminutive of Allegro.
ni.—QUICK.
Allegro (alleggro). M. 120. Cheerful, brisk.
Vivace (veevahchay). Sprightly, lively.
Vivacissimo. Superlative of vivace.
Presto (pressto). M. 140. Quick, nimbly.
Prestissimo. M. 160. Superlative of presto.
N.B.—Musicians are not agreed as to the meanings of Larghetto
and Andantino. Some use them as meaning a little faster and some
as meaning a little slower than Largo and Andante respectively.
IV.—CHANGES WITHIN A PHEASE.
Meaning.
Accelerando. Getting faster.
SSS.}
The Metronome. —This is a contrivance for measuring time for
the purposes of music. Metronomes are of two kinds —the first
formed by a swinging pendulum, the second by ticking clockwork.
The pendulum can he adjusted so as to give any number of swings
or ticks in a minute, from forty to two hundred or more. By
help of the metronome a composer can now fix the exact rate of
movement which he thinks proper for his music. He has only to
mark at the beginning of each movement the number of pulses ho
wishes to be sung in a minute, and the conductor or singer by
68
HOW TO BEAD MUBIO


means of the metronome can exactly reproduce his intentions.
Thus: M. 40 ; M. 120; M. 96. As in the staff notation several
notes are used as units of measurement it is necessary to give the
note on which the calculation is based, and to say at the beginning
of a movement —
s) 6O; J■= 120 ; J. =96; &o.
Embellishments, or Ornaments.
1. The Appogiatura (apodgiatoo’ra). A single small note
immediately preceding a principal one; either a whole tone or a
semitone above or below it. The appogiatura appropriates the
accent and half the time of the note to which it is attached.
2. The Aeciaecatura (atchakatoo'rah). —A single small note, Jt
group of two notes, immediately preceding a principal note. It
does not deprive the principal note of any portion of its time-value
and must be sung as lightly and rapidly as possible, so that the
accent may fall on the principal note. The mark through the tail
of the quaver shows that the acciaccatura, not the appogiatura,
is intended.
69
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


The Mordent consists of three notes: (1) the principal note, (2)
a whole tone or a semitone above it, and (3) the principal note again.
The sign of the mordent is BC; it is placed above the principal note.
The mordent must be sung as rapidly and lightly as the acciaccatura,
the accent falling wholly on the principal note.
The Orupetto, or Turn, a group of three or four notes, indicated
by the sign ~ placed above the principal note. The common forms
of the turn are best indicated by examples:—
70
HOW TO BEAD MUBIO


Tfu Trill, or Shake, a rapid alternation of a note with the next
aboye it in the scale;—
71
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


XVI.
GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF EXPRESSION.
Expression is spoken of by many musical artists as entirely a
matter for the impulse and spontaneous feeling of each performer.
Such persons tell us that rules are impossible. As well, they say,
may we command a person to love, as lay down rules for expression.
This line of argument is both true and untrue. It is true that
feeling is the basis of all expression, but it is also a
fact that there are general principles which can be
formulated, while the artistic faculty may be trained
General
principles.
and brought out by a course of guided practice. We shall endeavour
here to indicate the principles of which we have spoken.
The first point to be remembered is the “attack” of the tones.
The voice should commence every tone, whether loud or soft,
suddenly, and without any preliminary gurgle or
“ feeling about.” The voice must speak promptly,
like a pianoforte key; but there must be no jerk
The “attack”
of the tones.
upon the notes, and no waste of breath to spoil the tone. The
syllable “ koo ” has a remarkable power in promoting this clear and
prompt attack. Sing up and down the scale many times to this
syllable. The exercise sounds ludicrous, but it is very useful.
The next point is to gain control oyer the voice
by singing this exercise oyer a great many times
to the syllable la: —
Control over
the voice.
72
SOW TO BEAD MUBIO


The Staccato and Legato have been already described. The follow-
ing exercise is to be practised daily, also to la ; —
The key may be varied to suit the voice of the singer.
It is the custom of all good singers to swell the voice as they
hold a long note. It is as if they wished to show the firmness of
their grip. Poor singers nearly always let the tone
fall away. Of course this effect must not be ex-
aggerated, so as to sound as if the singer were
Swelling
the voice.
squeezed after each note had begun. The strengthening of tone
must be slight and very gradual. Practise this form of tone in the
following exercise:—
The rule for prolonged notes is even more applicable when a tone
of the scale is restruck or repeated. Practise the following to la :—
An ascending scale passage is nearly always delivered with a
crescendo. For example:—
73
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


while a descending passage is nearly always sung with a diminuendo.
A descending imitation, as in the following example, is sung with
diminishing force; —
Here there is a phrase of five notes twice imitated at lower parts
of the scale. The comma above the staff shows the “ limbs ”of the
sequence or imitation. Each repetition of the phrase will naturally
Ascending and
descending
imitation.
be sung softer than the last. But if we reverse
the imitation, and make it rise instead of fall, we
shall instinctively make each phrase louder than the
last: —
There is no rule of expression more general in its application
than this.
The phrasing of the words is a point of the utmost importance in
good singing. Melody has phrases of its own, apart from words.
Look at the throe-fold phrase in the last example.
Speech, too, has its phrasings, which are no less
strongly marked than those of music. The com-
The phrases
of melody.
poser endeavours, whenever possible, to make the verbal and me-
lodic phrasing correspond. If for example, we had to sing the words,
0 coma, come away, for fresh breaks the day
74
HOW TO READ MUSIC


to the notes of Vincent Wallace’s song, just given, the elocutional
phrases would exactly correspond with the natural melodic breaks.
But look at the actual words. If we observe the melodic phrases,
and take breath between them we shall sing,
Then many tears* were shed but yet* the young lips smiled, &c.
Every one feels the absurdity of this. The proper elocution of
the lines is this;—
Then many tears were shed,* but yet the young lip smiled, &o.
What are we to do in such a case of contradiction ? The rule is
simple: Sacrifice the musical phrasing always to the
elocutional phrasing. The meaning of the words is of
paramount importance, and even music must give way to that.
It is not our business here to teach elocution, but every singer
must study where to take breath in the songs he or she sings. As
a rule, take breath only after an important
word, unless you are at the end of a distinct clause.
Let us take three verses of Longfellow’s “ Psalm
Breathing
places.
of Life,” and mark all the possible places at which a break or
pause or breathing place can be made with good effect. We shall
mark these places by an asterisk:—
Tell me not in mournful numbers*
Life* is but an empty dream,*
For the soul is dead* that slumbers,*
And things are not what they seem.*
Life is real, * life is earnest,*
And the grave is not its goal*
Dust thou art,* to dust retumest •
Was not spoken of the soul.*
Not enjoyment* and not sorrow*
Is our destined end or way ;•
But to act* that each to-morrow
Find us farther than to-day.*
Every song must be marked in this way for verbal phrasing, and
the musical phrasing made to conform to it. Our songs are full
75
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


of contradictions between words and music. Nine persons out of
ten, in singing “ Scots wha ha’e,” follow the musical phrases, and
make the breaks thus;—
Scots wha ha’e* wi Wallace bled,
Scots wham Bruce* has aften led.
Gut if the elocutional pause be adopted, how it throws out the
force of the words I
Scots* wha ha’e wi’ Wallace bled,
Soots* wham Bruce has aften led.
Very few persons are good elocutionists, but all appreciate the
difference between good and bad reading. It is for the singer to
deyelop this in the delivery of ballads and vocal music of all kinds.
76
lIOW TO BEAD MUSIC


XVII.
THE COMMON THINGS OF HARMONY.—CHORDS.
We entitle this chapter “the common things of harmony”
because we do not propose to do more than speak of the broad
outlines of the subject. Modem harmony—it is of
no use to disguise the fact —is a complex thing.
The unceasing efforts of composers to provide new
A complex
study.
delights for the ear have enlarged enormously the number of
combinations of notes; and on the heels of the composers tread
the rule makers, with their hoards of definitions, maxims, and
exceptions.
The ambition of intelligent students to learn harmony is natural
and right. It is emphatically the secret of music, the
hidden source revealed only to patient search and
reflection. On hearing a sweet movement of chords
The secret
of musio.
every reflecting person wants to know the rules by which the
combination is made, and it is this question that is answered by a
study of the laws of harmony.
Harmony is entirely a matter of key-relationship. Whatever
instrument the composer writes for, he has to
consider its compass and most effective region; but
the rules which govern the combination of notes
Key-relation-
ship.
depend upon their place in the key. Hence we shall find the Sol-fa
initials a most convenient shorthand for speaking of chords.
The method of studying harmony which will here be adopted is
experimental. Harmony is often taught as a mere manipulating
of notes, which the student is taught to move like
a set of chess-men. We, on the contrary, shall
appeal at every new point first to the ear, and
afterwards to those signs and names which represent
The right
method of
study.
and recall what the ear has heard. Pianofortes and harmoniums
are now so common that we may safely assume that the reader has
access to one, and has the means at hand of getting these simple
phrases played to him.
77
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


Let these combinations of notes be played deliberately, with a
pause between each, and repeated until the ear can distinguish the
three tones of which each is composed. Then let the following bo
played and studied; —
What is the difference between these two sets of examples P
Does not the second set sound clouded and rather harsh, while the
first set is more bright and clear ? Let us determine
the reason for this. Count the semitones between
the notes of the first series of examples, and we
Experimental
chorda.
shall find, counting from the bottom, that from the first note to the
second (say d to n) is four semitones, and from the second to the
third (say nto s) is three semitones. Now look at the second
series and we shall find that the opposite is the case, the semitones
counting three and four respectively. In other words, there is a major
third* (four semitones) at the base of the first set of combinations,
and a minor third (three semitones) at the base of the second set.
Both combinations are called in harmony consonant chords, common
chords, or triads, but the first are called major chords and the
second minor chords, because of the position of their lowest third.
These chords are the foundation of harmony. Let us analyse
them. Listen first to the thirds of which they are partly made ;
•In counting any interval in music all the notes forming it a n reckoned
thus—d to m is a third (d r m), d to • is a fifth (d rm f s), dtot is a
seventh (d r m f a 1 t).
78
HOW TO BEAD MU3IO


Notice the sweet, honied effect of these thirds. Pick out the
major from the minor thirds, and notice that they are the purer and
sweeter of the two. Now listen to the fifths which the lowest
and highest notes of each chord form;—
The effect of this is hard and hollow (and very ugly), but
nevertheless it is firm. Bare fifths (without the sweetening of the
third) are almost forbidden in harmony. They are
allowed only under strict limitations. The ear
prefers a union of sweetness with strength such as
Thirds and
sixths.
the perfect chord supplies. The effect of thirds and fifths may bo
further compared by listening to the following, which are allowed
in harmony:—
The student must now impress upon his mind the idea of a chord
with its three constituent notes. The lowest note is called the root,
because from it the chord springs. The next is the third, and the
highest is the fifth.
When the notes stand in their closest order (as in the examples at
the beginning of the chapter) the chord is said to be in its root
position. In this position the chord always consists
of two “thirds,” one above the other. The chord
takes its name from its root. Thus the first series
The names
of chords.
of chords given above are named after Boh, Fah, Soh, and Boh
respectively; while the second set are named after Bay, Lah, and
Me. We shall use capital initials, thus, D, F, S, M, D, E, L in
speaking of chords, in order to show that we are not speaking
merely of the sol-fa notes of which they are composed, but of the
combination of which the initial is the root.
79
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


Notice next that at whatever distances the constituent notes of a
chord may be arranged, it is still for purposes of harmony, the same
chord. See examples marked a.
The examples marked h show how the constituents of a chord
may be repeated, or doubled. This, again, does not change the
chord though it modifies' its effect. The rules
for doubling are—double the root in preference to
the fifth; and the fifth in preference to the third.
Bales for
doubling.
The third, indeed, can only be doubled under strict limitations.
The fifth may also be omitted. Listen now to the first lino of the
Old Hundredth tune: —
Notice the firm grand effect of the chords in their root position.
Name the chords according to the plan just described; say which
constituents are doubled; and find one case in which a constituent
is omitted. Listen now to the second line
80
HOW TO READ MUSIO


Again name the chords and say which constituents are doubled in
each. Repeat the two lines, and say from memory as you listen
the root of each. Try to associate a mental effect
or character with each chord. It will be found that
the chords bear the same general character as their
Mental effects
of chords.
roots; thus Dis firm, Sis bright and clear, Fis sombre and
terrible, Lis plaintive. Learn to recognise each chord when you
hear it among others.
o
81
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


XVIII.
THE COMMON THINGS OF HARMONY.—CHORD
POSITIONS.—COMMON DISSONANCES.
The consitutents of a chord may not only be placed at various
distances from one another without altering its name, hut the
constitutent that is in the bass may vary. Hitherto
we have had the root always in the bass. We
may also have the third, and sometimes the fifth.
Chord
positions.
Listen to the first lino of the old tune “ Nottingham ” :
Try to discover the oases of “ inverted ” chords, or those which are
turned over so as to have some other note than the root in the bass.
They are the 2nd, 3rd, and 6th, chords. What are
their roots ? They are Doh, Ray , and Doh res-
pectively. Our symbols for inverted chords are
Inverted
chords.
these: Asuming the root position to be called Da, when the third is
in the bass we speak of Di, and when the fifth is in the bass Dc.
Other books on harmony speak of Di as the first “inversion” {or
turning over) of D, and Dc as the “second inversion.” The three
inverted chords in the above example are named Di. Ei and Di.
82
HOW TO BEAD MUSIC


listen to the following:—
What are we to make of the 2nd and 4th chords f Put their notes
in the closest order, two thirds over each other. Which note then is
lowest ? In the second chord, Soh ; in the fourth chord, Doh. The
chords are therefore S and D, with the fifth in the bass—that is, Sc
and Dc. Name the chords throughout the example, and follow with
the mind’s eye the progression of parts, associating feeling with
symbols. Listen to the first line of the popular part-song, “ 0 who
will o’er the downs ” :— s
What is tho root of the fourth chord ? Try Doh ; try Lah. Neither
will do, because the other notes do not follow either of these at the
distance of a third. Try Fah. This is right— Fah, Lah , Doh. The
symbol of the chord is Fc. Name the other chords, especially the
sixth.
83
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


Listen to the following chant: —
Make a pause in playing upon the chord marked with an asterisk.
What is the impression left by this chord ? Is it conclusive and
final, or is it suspense and movement to some other conclusion?
Repeat the experiment until you feel that S, or the dominant
chord, is a chord of suspense. Then play the next chord, and
satisfy yourself that D is the natural home for which S seems to
yearn, and to which it points.
Notice the second half of the chant, and see how the treble part
stands still while the others move. This “bonding together” of
chords is a source of beauty and strength in harmonj’. It gives
smoothness and flow. Listen to the following:—
84
HOW TO READ MUSIC


Here we have the same bass and chords, hut a different melody
Notice how much less strong the passage sounds in this form.
Listen to the following chant: —
Here we encounter a bunch of novelties. Look first at the last
chord but one. It is our old acquaintance S with the fifth omitted,
but with a new note, Fah, added. Instead of piling
two thirds, we pile three together, and thus get up
Novelties.
to Fah. This is the commonest and simplest form of what is known
in music as a discord. What distance, in the language of interval
is Fah from Soh ? A seventh. We call the chord, therefore, seven
Soh, or the dominant-seventh, and its symbol is ’S. We have now
tour notes to deal with instead of three, and this gives us four posi-
tions or three inversions of the chord, all of which are exemplified
in the little chant just given. Find ’Sa, 7 S h, ’Sc, and’S d in the last
example, and name the other chords. We have remarked on the
bonding together of chords as an element of beauty. Notice in the
last example another element, that of contrary motion. This is
most prominent when it is between outside parts, as in the treble
r n f , contradicted at the same moment by the bass f n r; and in
the treble nfn, contradicted by the bass dti d. Dwell on these
phrases until the elegance of contrary motion becomes apparent.
To make a discord, we must always have two notes next each
other in the scale sounded together. In 1 S we have Soh and Fah
together. The general rule—so general that the
beginner should regard it as absolute—is that a
dissonant note must always “resolve” or pass in
A general
rule
85
AND UNDERSTAND-IT.


the next chord to the note below it. Notice how in the last example
every Fah in the various positions of 7 S goes on to Me, There is,
however, another very general rule that the ear must he
“prepared” for a dissonant note hy hearing it in the chord
preceding the dissonance. This is not the case in the above example,
because 7 S is a privileged discord. It is so well known that it is
allowed to take liberties, and its Fah is seldom “ prepared” before-
hand. But listen to the following;—
In the second chord we shall find on packing the notes in closest
order of ascending thirds, that we have the chord R with a seventh,
doh, added to it. Notice how this doh is “ prepared ” in the
previous chord. When we see a strange combination of notes it is
well to notice which are “prepared,” and “ resolved,” and to treat
them as foreign to the chord. Look at the last chord but two.
Here the introduction of the third of the chord of S fi.e., ItJ is
delayed or “suspended” for a pulse, Doh appearing in its place.
From Soh up to Doh is a fourth; hence this discord is 4 S. Notice
how smoothly the doh goes to te in the next pulse.
The example contains two other common things in harmony.
Look at the bass, fifth pulse. What is the Fah i The bass moves
from Me to Soh, and the intervening note is taken on the way.
It is called a passing note. Passing notes are always taken in this
way stepwise between two chord notes.
Look now at the last pulse but one, tenor part. What is the
Soh ? It is not a passing note, for it leaps. It is a note of the
chord that is sounding in the ear, and hence it is called a BYE-TONB
or HARMONT-NOTK.
86
HOW TO HEAD MUSIC


The last common thing in harmony which we shall notice is the
Cadence. In music this term marks the fixed order which the clos-
ing chords of a phrase take. The two principal Cadence
cadences in music are the D and S, or Tonic and
Dominant Cadences. We asked the reader at an early part of this
chapter to pause and listen to the suspensive effect of the dominant
chord. That is a dominant cadence, the essence of which is the
chord progression DS. The tonic cadence may be seen at the end
of any of the chants given above. Its essence is the progression
SD. But the Tonic cadence is often made more strong by including
three chords, FS D. These three are the pillar chords of the scale;
they comprise all the seven notes, and heard in succession, in the
above order, they seem to sweep away all doubt, and to proclaim
the key with broad and solid affirmation. Listen to this perfect
close or cadence in the first clause of the following chant, which
comprises in its second clause another cadence, the plaoal cadence.
the essence of which is the progression F D.
Here we pause in our description of the “common things” in
harmony. The student who masters these facts will have learnt
enough to enable him td analyse many simple pieces, such as hymn-
tunes, and to see the construction of the harmony. To explain the
rarer forms of discord and the laws of chromatic harmony would
carry us beyond the limits of this work. As has been often pointed
out,' “ a little knowledge” is not a “dangerous thing,” providing
it is exact and sound so far as it goes. It is superficial knowledge
alone that is dangerous : a little thorough knowledge is useful and
good, because it creates the appetite for more. This we hope we
have given in the two preceding chapters.
87
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


XIX.
EXERCISES IN HARMONY ANALYSIS.
We now give a few chants, &c., by well-known composers, all of
which the student who has mastered the two foregoing chapters
will he able to analyse. Let the chord symbols be employed, and
the positions marked as already described. A passing note may be
marked with a small p, and two passing notes 'lp, The staff
notation is not given, as the Tonic Sol-fa is of so much value to
the learner in harmony.
key A. Anon.
!d n:f s rt|:d d :t, d
S( d 111 S| : S| S| IS| S| *S| S| :
n d :d d ti r :d r :r n
d 1| ;f i Hi si f| ;n, s, *.S| d
key B[j. Dr. Aldrich.
Sd 1| :r ti nd:r d :t ( d
ni dj :f ( ri si pij :f t ni :ri pij
Sj 1| ;1| tj > — ti d :11 S| !S| S| ?
d, f| :r, s, m li ;f| si ;si d
key A. Sir John Goss.
!d n :r f: — n r:d d :t| d
S| S| :si f| : S| 1 ( :si f| :f t ii| :
n d :r d ti l|.t| :d r :r S|
d d ;t li s, f, ;ni ri :ri d,
key F. Dr. Cooke.
!s n;d 1 f s.f;n r:r d
d ti ;d d li s, :d |d :t| d
n s :n f f r :n.fjs :s .f n
d Si tli fi r ti :d Isi :si d
88
HOW TO BEAL MUBIO


KEY G. PuRCELL.
!g f :n r : n r:d d :t| d
d 1,.t,:d ti s, 1, ;n,.f| s, :s, s,
n f : s s n f :d r :r n
n r :d S| d ft :l.i si :st d
key C. Pelham Humphreys.
id 1 d 1 :d' t t d 1 :d' d 1 :t d 1
\ n n :n r s n :s r :r ni-
ls s :s s r 1 d 1 id 1 s :s s
( d n :d s / s I :n.f s :s d
key A. Dr. Aldrich.
Spi r :n f: — n r :d d :t| d: —
s, si :s■ f| : 3, 1| :1| Sj :si S| :
d t, :d d d f :f .n r :r n :
d S| :d 1) sj f, :fi s, :s, d (
key D. E. Prout.
f d n :s d 1 s n :1 r :s n
\s, d :t, d r d :d d :t, d
j n s :s s: — t d 1 :1 s :s s :
[ d s :f n s 1 :f s :s d
KEY A. , R - Bacon
/ n r :d t, It s, :d .r n :r d
\S| a, :pi|.fi S| : ft ni :ni.f| Si :fi rit
j d ti :d.r n d d :d d :t| d
( d 8| :1| Hi ft d| :1 1 s ( :st d
lEY -p Dr. Clarke- Whitpeld.
is r:f n st,:d.r n :r d
d d :t| d d s, :s, d :t, d
n 1 :s s s f :n s :f r
d ft :s d n r :d s, is, d
89
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


key D T. H. Sheik,
!:d n :f |s :s f :n |r
:d d :d |r :d ,t| 1| .t, :d It,
:n s :f .n |r :n f :s Is
:d d .t| :1| |t t :d r :n .f Is
key C. German.
/ d 1 :s 11 :1 s :f In :
\ n :s If :f r :t ( |d
is :d |d' :r' s :b Is
( d :n If -.n r.d ti ;s ( Id
key G. Dr. Steooaix.
!f :n Hi .t, :d d :r |d
1, :si |fi :fi a, ,d :ti id :
d :d |d :d r n :f In
I, .ti :d |fi :Ii si :*i Idi •
90
HOW TO BEAD MUSIO


XX.
THE VOICE AS AN INSTRUMENT.
Until a recent period, voice-trainers relied solely upon empiricism
for their practice. Their ears told them when the tone emitted by
their pupils’ voices was good, and the distinction
between the various registers or qualities in the
same voice was equally a matter of observation.
Voice
Training.
They know little or nothing of the structure of the apparatus of the
voice, and could not say why or wherefore in the rules they gave
and the methods they enforced. Moreover, knowing so little of the
delicate formation of the vocal organs, they wore led to encourage
singers to strain them beyond their proper strength an act which
ended in speedy exhaustion, and in a gradual deterioration of the
vpice. It may be said at once that the voice is never injured by
moderate and controlled use. * On the contrary, like all physical
organs, such use is of benefit to it. Young children may be taught
to sing with advantage, provided that excess be avoided. Their
organs are pliant and flexible, and they will be better singers in
after years if they learn early to shape and modulate
the tone of the singing voice. Biit shouting is, of
course, more injurious to children than to adults.
Moderate
exertion.
and the voice that has been made rough and ragged by over-exertion
in childhood seldom regains its smoothness and rotundity. The
objection which some people have to singing in chorus arises from
the prevalent habits of choirs. If the voice be gently used, chorus
singing will do it no harm, but if the singer shouts so as to be
heard above his fellows, as so many do, of course the harm is
considerable. Those who wish to cultivate and strengthen their
voices should sing much and often; and chorus singing affords
most valuable practice, which those who are wise will not lose.
Voice-training naturally divides itself into three departments—
chest, larynx, and mouth; in other words, the
control of the breath, the proper use of the registers,
and the production of good tone.
The Subject
divided.
The apparatus of breathing is a wind-chest, having at the back
the backbone, at the sides and in front the ribs and breastbone,
and at the bottom a- muscular floor called the
diaphragm. This diaphragm is a membrane which
stretches across the body, separating it into two
parts, with the heart and lungs above and the
The
breathing
apparatus
91
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


stomach and bowels below. The lungs, which fill the greater pari
of this wind-chest, are like two great sponges, full of cells
containing air. The windpipe, which comes down from the throat,
has a number of branches—the bronchial tubes—which run into
these elastic sponges, the lungs. We need not describe the muscles
which are needed for the act of breathing, but the singer should
remember that such muscles exist, and that they require exercise.
In men the lower ribs and diaphragm move chiefly in the act of
breathing, but women make more use of the upper ribs. Were this
not the case, it would be impossible for women wearing tight dresses
to sing as they do; for clothing, unless it be the loosest, impedes
the muscular action. It is said that a man who can inspire 130
cubic inches of air when dressed in ordinary clothing will inspire
190 when divested of clothing.
The amount of muscular action which suffices for speaking is not
enough for singing. The singer has longer tones to sustain, and
must breathe deeper than the speaker. Fortunately the lungs are
expansive. A pair of lungs which, when filled with the ordinary
effort, hold 230 cubic inches of air, can be made to hold, by means
of a deep inspiration, 330; that k, nearly half as much air again.
The singer has also to learn to economise breath—to hold it in and
spend it gradually. The nose should be used for drawing in breath
rather than the mouth. At first let each practice be prefaced by
muscular exercises in holding and slowly emitting
breath, so as to increase the capacity and restraining
power of the lungs. Let the student try to hold on
Muscular
exercises.
a single tone as long as he can, stopping at the point just short of
exhaustion, so as not quite to empty the lungs.
The instrument of voice which we all have in our throats is called
the larynx. Every one can feel the lump in the throat, which is
larger in men than in women and children. It
stands on the windpipe, and in ordinary breathing
The larynx.
the air passes up and down through it freely. But when the voice
is to be produced, either in speaking or singing, it is nearly closed
by two elastic cushions with sharp edges, which are called, rather
Inappropriately, the “vocal cords.” These rise into the open space,
one from each side, and so nearly join their edges together that
only a thin slit is left, through which the air from the lungs passes.
There is only one way in which sound of any sort or kind can be
produced, and that is by vibrations imparted to the air. The
vibrations which produce the voice take place through the air from
92
HOW TO BEAD MUSIC


the lungs being forced past the elastic edges of the vocal cords.
They are first driven upwards, and then their elasticity causes them
to rebound, whereupon they are driven upwards again—all this
taking place with infinite rapidity, so that the successive puffs ol
air link themselves into a musical note. The production of sound
will be more fully explained in a subsequent chapter; meanwhile
we can only say that the pitch of a sound produced
from the vocal cords is according to (a) the thickness;
(6) the tension; (c) the length of the vocal cords.
Fitch of
sound.
To understand these vocal cords, let us look down upon them
from above. The invention of the laryngoscope of Signor Manuel
Garcia enables us to do this. The laryngoscope
(larynx-seer) is a simple mirror, which has a handle,
and resembles a spoon. It is placed right at the
laryngoscope
back of the mouth over the throat. Besides this there is a reflector,
which a person operating upon himself
holds in front of his mouth and within
view of his eyes. On the first mirror is
shown the inside of the throat; the second
receives a reflection of the first, and thus
the whole machinery of the larynx is
exposed to view. The operation is more
difficult than it" seems; for it is not
easy to adjust the mirrors and keep them
in place while singing, and the wide-open
OPEN FOR BREATHING
mouth that is necessary takes all pleasantness from the tone.
First, we may look down and see the glottis, or slit
between the cords, open as in breathing. The
voice is now silent. Second, we may see the Ups or
Different
registers.
vocal cords vibrating in their whole breadth and thickness, and
producing what some voice-trainers (but
not all) call the “chest register,” but
what we propose to call the “ thick
register,” because it is produced by the
whole thickness of the cord vibrating.
The reader will hardly need to be told that
the voice never originates either in the
"chest” ortho “head,” as the nomen-
clature of some writers and voice-trainers
would lead us to suppose. It has its
THE WHOLE LIPS VIBRATING.
origin always in the vocal cords in the windpipe. Third, we may
93
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


THE THIN EDGES
VIBRATING.
see the thin edges of the vocal conjs
vibrating alone, and producing what
is sometimes called the “ falsetto ” or
“throat” register, but which we shall
call the “ thin register,” because of its
being produced by the thin edges of the
vocal cords. By means of the laryngo-
scope, the naked eye may clearly see the
fluttering of the vocal cords in the thick
register, but in the thin register the
vibrations are too rapid to be seen. The
cords appear to stand close together.
The point at which the vocal chords naturally change from the thick
to the thin is just below the tone G, that note which stands on tho
second line of the treble staff. Most commonly the change takes
place at For E. This break, is at the same point of absolute pitch
in all voices, whether of men or women. The voices
of men and women are an octave apart in pitch; the
compass of tenor and soprano, of contralto and bass,
The break
in the voice.
are, roughly speaking, the same an octave apart. But it is not so
with the registers, which are governed by absolute pitch. This break
into the higher register is therefore at the very top of the bass voice,
in the higher portion of the tenor voice, in the middle of the contralto
voice, and at the bottom of the soprano. There is a break in the
female voice an octave higher than the one we are speaking of, but
it is of another kind, and will be spoken of presently.
The.physical cause of the break is probably this: as the voice
ascends in the thick register the cords are stretched more tightly at
each note. When this process of tightening has been carried as far
as tho cartilages will bear the strain, the register is changed, and
the thin edges of the cords vibrate, producing a higher sound with
less effort. As the voice ascends, the process of tightening once
more commences, and goes on until again the cartilages have
reached the utmost point of tension. Beyond this point the voices
of men do not go, but women have a still higher register. How is
this produced? The cords cannot be made either
thinner or tighter. When we come to consider the
rules of vibration, we shall find that there is only
A
peculiarity.
one way remaining in which the pitch can be raised, and that is by
thortening the cords. For the pitch of a vibrating string depends
on three things—its thickness, tension, and length. The thinner,
94
HOW TO BEAD MUSIC


tighter and shorter a etnng is, the higher note does it give; and the
thicker, looser, and longer it is, the lower is its note. Accordingly
it is by shortening the cords that the highest register of women’s
voices is produced. We therefore propose to call it the “ small
register.” It is sometimes called the “head voice,” and may bo
hoard from high sopranos, being easily distinguished
from the other registers by its thin violin-like
quality. Madame Seiler, perhaps the most accurate
vo j ce
observer of the voice, was long before she was able, by the
laryngoscope, to see this highest register produced in her own
voice. But at last she succeeded, and here is
her observation: “With the F sharp on the
fifth line of the' treble staff the vocal ligaments
An
observation.
suddenly closed firmly together to their middle, with their fine
edges one over the other, leaving free only a third part of the
whole glottis, close to the front of the
larynx. The foremost part of the cords
formed an oval orifice, which with each
higher tone seemed to contract more and
more, and so became smaller and rounder.
The fine edges of tho cords in this orifice
were alone vibrating, and the vibra-
tion seemed at first looser, but with every
higher tone the ligaments became more
stretched.” The throe figures which
follow show the production of a tone in
THE TONE E-FLAT AS
PRODUCED BY THE SLACK
THIN EDGES.
each of the three registers we have described. The observer is
supposed to be looking down upon the vocal cords from above them.
In what, then, does the difference between good and bad, pleasant
and unpleasant voices, consist ? We
have seen how 'much the production of
tone depends upon the tension of the.
cords. And we all know how different
sorts of wood, of iron, of indiarubber,
&c., vary in their elasticity, or power ol
bending from their natural shape and
quickly returning to it. We may well
suppose, then, that one quality of good
vocal cords is tcnsi6n. Some singers,
THE TONE E-FLAT AS
PRODUCED BY THE TIGHT
WHOLE LIPS.
even without training, can carry their registers higher than others
by virtue of the natural strength of the cords. But the vocal
95
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


A SMALL PART OF THE THIN
EDGES VIBRATING.
cords also overlap when they are at rest,
and if their edges are ragged, they
imperfectly stop the sound, and the voice,
whether in speech or song, has no clear
“ attack.” Again, the ragged edges give
rise to high and dissonant vibrations,
which result in a thin, harsh tone of
voice. Professor Tyndall notices this fact
in his lectures on sound, and attributes
the harshness of his own voice to a defective overlapping of the
cords. Fortunately for the singer, however, the lungs and the
larynx are not the only factors of the voice. It is the shaping of
the mouth more than all that determines the quality of tone
produced; and the physical part of voice-training, besides strength-
ening the lungs and bringing the cords under the will of the singer,
consists in learning to strengthen the good and suppress the bad
elements of which every sound is made up.
The mouth, the third and last agent in voice production, can be
put into a great variety of positions, so as to enlarge, or lesson, or
alter its cavity. It is, in fact, the shaping of this cavity that pro-
duces the different vowels or qualities of tone. If
we can imagine the vocal cords sounding without
The month.
the mouth above them, it is true that they would give sounds of
different pitch, but the quality would be throughout the same. It
is the mouth alone that makes the distinction between “oo,” “aa,”
and “eo” and the rest of the vowels. In voice-production the
cardinal rule is “throw the breath forward.” Do not let the tone
strike the back of the mouth, or attempt to rise through the
nostrils, but try to direct it upon the soft pad which
stands immediately above the front teeth. With
all their disagreements, voice-trainers one and all
The cardinal
rale.
Bay that tone is bad if it strikes the back of the mouth. Yet in
many parts of England it is such a common practice to speak
and sing at the back of the mouth that the habit is formed in-
sensibly, and it is very difficult of cure. Speaking and singing go
together, both as regards quality of tone and clearness of utterance.
A soft, round, and full voice, a distinct articulation, show their
beauty both in speech and song, and this is an important fact
'or singers to bear in mind. Next to “singing forward” comes
resonance, which consists in shaping the cavity of the mouth so
as to produce the best tone. It is an established scientific fact that
96
HOW TO READ MUSIC


every tone of the voice is a compound of several tones, which can
be separated and heard by acoustical instruments. The higher part
of this mixture of tones is hard and dissonant. It gives definite-
ness and brightness to the voice, but not volume or roundness. By
shaping the mouth the lower tones of the mixture can be enforced
and the higher ones disregarded, and this is what every singer must
learn to do. But in singing, as in speaking, we do not always want
the greatest depth and volume. We sometimes need clearness and
piquancy. No one would speak the words
The dear one is dying
in the same quality of tone as
The brooklet is dancing,
and voice-trainers distinguish in singing between these “clear” and
“ sombre ” resonances of the mouth.
The following table shows at once the compass of the various
voices and of the registers. On the left hand side
are the notes of the treble and bass staff, with the
dotted lines to the right of them, showing the
Compass
of voices.
average compass of the four voices, soprano, contralto, tenor, and
bass. Next, again, to the right are the pitch-names of the musical
notes already given; and the brackets accompanying show the
average extent of the various registers. The line on the extreme
right denotes the registers, getting thicker as it descends, the dotted
line showing the tones which are optional, or can be produced in
either register. Of course the singer must learn to change from
register to register with the least perceptible effort or change of
tone. In this the art of singing largely consists. The soprano and
contralto are the high and low voices of women and boys, just as
the tenor and bass are the high and low voices of men. There is an
octave in pitch between men’s voices and those of women and
boys. It must be understood that this division of voices is only a
rough one. Voices differ in compass just as the human face differs.
Sopranos which cannot sing high are known as mezzo-sopranos,
and baritone is used to describe a voice between tenor and bass.
The real contralto and bass voices are less common than the tenor
and soprano. But an improved system of voice-training would
result in the discovery of many new voices, and in the natural
enlargement of compass in both directions. Mezzo-sopranos and
H
97
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


baritones are often untrained or lazy specimens of one or other of
the four principal voices; and every singer should discover tor
himself, or by the help of a teacher, to which class his voice really
belongs, or may be made to belong by gentle and natural training.
98
HOW TO BEAD MUSIC


XXI.
THE PHYSICS OF MUSIC.
How far is modem music based upon natural laws, and how far
upon conventional and artificial rules invented by menP We
shall endeavour in this chapter to answer this question. First as
to the propagation of sound.
Sound reaches the ear through vibrations imparted to the air or
some other conductor. For every sound two things are necessary:
(1), The setting up of vibrations, and (2), The
presence of air, or some other medium, to carry
Sound,
those vibrations. Wood, water, and most other substances will
conduct sound ; but in a vacuum, although we can see the
vibrations, they produce no audible result.
What are these vibrations ? They are commonly called “waves
of sound,” but the term is misleading. They really consist of
vertical strata of air in alternate layers of com-
pression and expansion. A vibrating body, such
Vibrations.
as the vocal cords, a violin string, or an organ pipe, starts one of
these spheres or circles of compression each time that it gives a for-
wardswing, and starts a sphere of expansion every time that it gives
a backward swing. In one respect the motion of vibrating air is
like waves of water —the particles do not move with the sonnd,
but only pass the vibrating pattern on from one to the other.
Watch a cork floating on the waves. It rises and falls
perpendicularly, but it does not move forward with the waves as
they are driven by the wind. What the cork does, that the
individual particles of water do. It is the shape that moves
forward, not the water. So when the wind blows over a field of
ripe com the ears bend as the gust moves over them, and it seems
as if they were being carried away. But each individual ear,
after dipping to the wind returns to its place. Thus it is with the
particles of which air is composed.
A musical sound is formed by regular vibrations; a noise by
irregular vibrations. There is no further difference between
the two.
Tones differ in three points: loudness, pitch, and quality.
They may differ in all these three points, or in any two, but they
99
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


can differ in no other respects. The loudness ol
a tone depends on the extent through which the
particles of air oscillate. Watch a tuning-fork.
Loudness
and pitch.
The eye can see that the harder it is hit the wider are the
vibrations; while as the vibrations become less wide the sound
dies away. The pitch of a tone depends on the rapidity of the
vibrations—upon how many occur in a given time. The ear
requires that the vibrations or impulses shall be of a certain
rapidity before it perceives a musical note. The flapping of a
pigeon’s wing, it it became infinitely more rapid, would result in
a musical note. The flapping of a bee’s wing is sufficiently rapid
to make a humming sound.
Quality is the third and most subtle distinction between tones.
Until the discoveries of Helmholtz, the German philosopher, the
source of quality was not understood. He finds
that the pleasantest tones —such as those of the
Quality.
human voice,a violin, Ac.—are really compounded of several sounds
Sing the note 0, for example, and there accompany the note
several higher sounds much softer, but giving to it “ body ” and
character. Tones which do not give off these higher sounds—
such as those of the flute, a tuning fork, Ac. are neutral
and wanting in colour. These upper sounds are known as
harmonics, partials, or overtones. They are formed upon a
regular principle, and may bo roughly represented in notation aa
follows, the lowest note being the prime, and the others th>
harmonics.
The series is infinite, but we have stopped at a practical limit.
It must not for a moment be supposed that these tones are equal
in loudness. Usually the first harmonic above the prime is only a
quarter as loud, the next a third of that, and so on. But the
100
HOW TO BEAD MUSIO


cause of the difference between a given note, say —
when sounded on a trumpet, a flute, a human
voice, the bagpipes, <fcc., is the varying proportions
of loudness and faintness in which the harmonics
mix. If the highest dissonant harmonics predominate, the tone
is harsh; if the lower and consonant ones only are heard, the
tone is dull. The best clang or colour results from a mixture
of all the harmonics.
How the human ear registers and reports to the brain all the
various tones and qualities of tone that it hears, is
a subject still wrapped in mystery. Helmholtz
has a theory that the internal ear contains an
The
human ear.
infinite number of little hairs, the ends of nerves, each of which
is responsive to a given pitch, and that the sounds
in the air play upon this instrument somewhat
after the manner in which we play upon a
pianoforte. But this is largely conjecture.
The common diatonic scale is made up of tones
whose vibrations bear a regular proportion to each
other. The figures at the side are the lowest in
which this proportion can be expressed. Notice
that the vibrations of two notes an octave apart
are as 1: 2; and two notes a fifth apart, as 2: 3 ;
of two notes a fourth apart, as 3: 4; of two notes
a major third apart, as 4: 6; of two notes a minor
third apart, as 5: 6. Thus is the scientific
simplicity of the scale shown.
DOH' 48
TE 45
T.ATT 40
SOH 36
FAH 32
ME 30
BAY 27
DOH 24
101
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


XXII.
HOW TO STUDY A SONG.
“ TTtZI you oblige ns with a song ? ” The question has been
addressed to most of us; and who has not felt, when thus
appealed to, that it is ungracious to refuse to
contribute to social enjoyment and mirthP Yet,
notwithstanding all the fuss that is made about
A common
request.
singing a solo, very modest gifts and accomplishments are enough
to enable a singer to give real pleasure to a circle of friends.
An ordinary voice, naturally used, distinct pronunciation, and
some power of expressing emotion, form an ample stock-in-trade
for the domestic vocalist.
In these remarks we leave out of account the power of reading
from notes, and the question of voice management. These
branches of study are distinct, and some progress in each must
have been made before a solo is attempted.
The most sweeping charge we have to bring against amateur
singers is that they are too often stiff, inanimate, and wooden. It
is in elocution more than in singing that they are
deficient. They either do not feel their songs, or
they manage very thoroughly to conceal their
A sweeping
charge.
feelings. They do not “let themselves go,” but are rigid and
cold. They want thawing and a touch with a hot iron to make
them start. Now, by nature we are all good elocutionists.
Listen to a child pleading with its mother in long drawn and
tenderly inflected notes —“ Do, please do! ” Hear the sharp staccato
“No, I won’t!” which the determined young rebel jerks out as he
stamps his foot and “looks his part” most thoroughly. As we
grow up, this natural freedom of voice and gesture gets overlaid
by an artiflcial repression; yet, when suddenly caught or strongly
moved we forget our stiffness and become natural again. The
great thing in singing a song is to let the feelings have full play
in the voice, the face, and even the gesture of body and limb.
Exaggeration in these points is an error; but then exaggeration
is not nature —it is as artificial as the restraint we have just been
condemning.
102
HOW TO BEAD MUBIO


In studying a song, when the notes have been learned, begin
always with the words. Try to separate them from the music.
Bead them over until you perceive not only their
grammatical sense, but the mood and purpose of
the poet in writing them. It they contain historical
Studying a
song.
or local allusions, find out the meaning of these. Learn what
phase, temper, circumstance or condition of life, high or low,
serious or comic, they illustrate. Who is supposed to sing them P
A mother, a lover, a sailor, a soldier, a robber, a patriot, a
blacksmith, a milkmaid, or a child P In what mood is the utterer
of the words ? Is he or she desponding, timid, sentimental, mock
heroic, saucy, angry, tender, fierce, indignant, boisterous, con-
tented, comic, or sorrowful P Notice especially if the scene and
the mood change, as they often do, during the poem. All this
observed, read over the words several times, with all the
elocutional expression you can command. Try to feel and see and
sympathise with your subject vividly and strongly, and let the tone
of your voice and the play of your countenance be in keeping.
Next sing the music, keeping up the elocutional expression, and
trying to “look your song,” that is, to be what you are singing.
“The great secret of the singer’s power over the hearts of her
hearers,” says Mrs. Mudie Bolingbroke, “ lies in her total for-
getfulness of self and surroundings, and in entering heart and
soul into the conceptions of the composer. Thus
many professional singers, possessing interiorvoices
but great emotional powers, have so carried away
The great
secret.
their audiences as to completely disarm criticism; whilst others,
with voices far more highly cultivated and higher intellectual
capacities, have, by allowing their attention to be divided while
singing, failed to produce any effect.
The artistic singer, who wishes to leave a marked impression on
his listeners, seeks in every song for some culminating point—
some phrase or passage where the music and words seem united
in the most intense feeling and expression. Upon this passage he
devotes study and care until he is satisfied that listeners will
notice and remember it.
Our second indictment of amateur singers is because of their
indistinct pronunciation. What in vocal music can possibly be
more important than that the words should be distinctly heard P
We should have placed this point first, but for the tact that it is a
103
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


Indistinct pro-
nunciation.
branch of the larger subject of expression. For of
what use is feeling and emotion and life if nothing
but a tuneful mumble reaches the listener’s ear?
How can he tell if the expression is true if he has no means of
judging what the words are about, or what language is being
sung? Clear pronunciation is the shortest way to success as a
singer. People will forgive much if they can hear the words.
The voice may be a poor one, the manner homely, but if the minds
of the listeners are addressed through the poetry they rise at once
to the singer.
Speech of course is made up of consonants and vowels. It has
been said that consonants are the intellectual and vowels the
emotional elements of speech. Consonants give
clearness and vowels give music to the voice. In
singing, the vowels are important, because all tone
Vowels and
consonants.
is sustained upon them. We cannot hold on a consonant such as
“k” or “m”; the very act of pronouncing them shuts off the
voice. But though consonants cannot sustain tone, they separate
rowels from one another; and the way to be very distinct in
speech is to exaggerate the consonants. The common cause of
chick and confused utterance in singing is neglect of consonants.
In such a line as
We kiss’d beneath the moon’s soft beam
the only sounds that would reach the ear from one of these
indistinct singers would be—
We key benee the moon sorf beam.
A singer who was a shade more distinct than this would
seem to say
We kiss beneath the moon sorf beam;
while only from the most highly-trained vocalist should we hear
the final “d” of “kiss’d,” and the separate sounding of the final
“s” in “moon’s” and the initial “s” in “soft.” The singer who
wishes to be distinct should practise exaggerating the consonants
until the tongue and mouth have been brought under complete
control, so that the farthest listener can follow the thought and
ideas of the poet whose words are being intensified in meaning
and emotion by their union with song.
104
TOW TO BEAD MUSIO


It is important to realise how the shaping of the mouth may
change the “colour” of the vocal tone. In singing, as in speaking,
the same voice may be icy clear and thin, or
thick and sombre, according as the lips and
chamber of the mouth are placed. It is on this
change that the dramatic singer relies for expressing
Changing
the colour
of tones.
varying emotion—gaiety or grief, playfulness or despair. Often
we hear singers who use only one resonance, and sing—
in just the same clear and cheerful tone of voice as —
while, on the contrary, some singers use a uniformly sombre
resonance, however playful their subject.
Poems which change from gay to grave in their course need
careful study. The contrast must be intensified by the aid of
resonance, look, and style. For example, take the following
words, by T. Hood :
’Twas long, long since, in the spring-time,
When I and my dear love met,
And so sweet was that early meeting
That its memory’s lingering yet.
She was young, and lovely, and loving,
And her eyes were as pure and as true
As the beautiful litjtle forget-me-not
Peeping up through the silvery dew.
105
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


And all through the year and the spring-timt
To the fall of the golden leaf,
We loved with a love that was sunshine,
Tet cast not a shadow of grief.
But ah! in the dreary wintei
I stood by a narrow grave;
And I saw within it a sweet face dead,
I’d given my life to save!
But I knew my tears could not waken
The life in that peaceful clay,
So I laid down my heart beside her
And silently wandered away.
The first verse is a pleasant retrospect, neither gad nor jovial.
The memory warms the affections as the tale proceeds, and the
second verse betrays more feeling. This rises to its greatest
height in the third verse, where the voice becomes tense with
passion which is as yet untouched by regret or grief. The thread
of this emotion is now rudely snapped. The sun goes in; the air
is chill and wintry. The resonance becomes sombre and clonded;
a pause prepares the listener tor the catastrophe which is at hand.
This fourth verse is lugubrious throughout. In the fifth and last
verse the first burst of grief has given plaee to self-command and
resignation, however hopeless and blighting. The voice becomes
weaker, as in calm after storm, and the last words, though sad
are tender and subdued.
In this way we advise singers to study and map out the
emotional character of the words they have to sing. A parting
word may be spoken on minor matters. Do not allow yourself to
fall into the common habit of making an unpleasant face while
you sing. Practise before a looking-glass a few times, if you are
in danger of falling into this habit. Avoid the affected dialect
that is used by some public singers. We have heard the words —
The end of that mirth is heaviness.
The end, the end, the end is heaviness.
sung as follows:
Thea enda ofa thata mirrath isa heaviness,
The enda, the enda, the enda isa heaviness.
106
HOW TO READ MV aw


All this is very objectionable. In the next place, train the
musical memory, and sing without book as much as you can.
This leaves you free to look at your audience,
which is a great secret in moving them. Get a
friend to accompany yon whenever yon can, rather
than accompany yourself. In whatever way the
Parting
counsel to
singers.
pianoforte is placed, do not address yourself to the wall, but to
the audience. Choose songs which do not try the extreme notes
of vonr voice, and learn a few songs thoroughly rather than many
indifferently. Last of all, we repeat, strive to be unconscious of
self, and conscious only of your subject and your words. Think
of your audience, and not of yourself, feel deeply and truly, and
though your voice be but an ordinary one, you will not fail
to carry the delights of music to the hearts of your hearers.
107
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


XXIII.
COMMON FORMS OF VOCAL MUSIC.
We often hear the various forms of vocal and instrumental music
spoken of, and it is well to have a clear understanding of the
meaning which underlies the names which are used. Let us
speak here of the forms of vocal music, which are less complex
than those of instrumental music.
Perhaps the shortest musical form in existence is that of the
“ Gloria Tibi,” which is sung before the reading of the Gospel in
the Church of England Service. It consists of
about eight pulses only, yet is complete and
satisfactory in itself. Then we have the single
Short musical
forms.
chant, which consists of two notes of indefinite length, each
leading into fixed musical cadence of three and five pulses
respectively. A double chant is, so far as musical form goes,
nothing but two single chants placed in succession. The Kyrie is
a third short form, consisting usually of sixteen pulses. Next in
order comes the Hymn-tune, a very common form
indeed. This may be of three, four, five, six, or
eight lines, according to the poetry to which it is
Hymn-tunes.
set. It may bo in any kind of measure. In the hymn-tune we
may discover in miniature those principles of reply in melody and
harmony, of variety in cadence and key, of unity as a whole, which
govern all the larger musical forms. Examine any hymn-tunes
at hand, and it will be seen that the composer seeks for some
imitation in time or tune which gives to his lines a likeness
which appeals to the memory, and yet a diversity which appeals
to the imagination. Take the two opening lines of a well-known
German hymn-tune:—
The ear is pleased with this, because of the likeness which it
recognises between the two lines. They are in part the same line
in different keys, the second being a fifth higher (in key 0).
Take as a second example a hymn-tune by Dr. Sullivan.
108
SOW TO BEAD MUBIO


Here, without leaving the key, we have imitation between the
Ist, 2nd, and 3rd lines. The 3rd line is a little altered from
the exact pattern, to prevent monotony. If this line had been —
the imitation would have been exact, but the effect would have
been less pleasing. “ Variety in unity ” is the principle of all
form and composition, whether in music, painting, or sculpture.
The Part-song springs (in musical form) out of the hymn-tune.
In its simplest form a part-song consists of four lines, just like an
ordinary hymn-tune. Scarcely any composer,
however, is content to write a part-song of this
Part-Bongi.
unadorned character. He repeats the words of the last line,
breaking them up into short phrases if they will bear it; and he
often alters the harmony and the accent, so as better to set oft
the subsequent verses. The essence of the part-song is that it
repeats new words to the same music. This is the broad feature
that distinguishes it froi~ the glee, with which, in ordinary talk,
it is often confused. The words of the part-song may be sacred
or secular; for men’s or for mixed voices. New matter may be
introduced in verses subsequent to the first, but the opening music
will always reappear. The part-song comes from Germany, but
it has reached a development in England which more than rivals
the work of the Germans. Mendelssohn, indeed, led the way, but
Henry Smart and Giro Pinsuti have worthily followed him. One
thing in the part-song is exceedingly rare—that is, change of
measure. In this again it differs from the glee.
The Glee is a form which recent composers have forsaken in
favour of the part-song. The last of the great English glee
writers was Horsley, who died in 1858. Several successful
109
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


imitations of the old glee have been made by living
men, but the school of glee writers—Callcott
Glees.
Danby, Webbe, Bishop—has passed away. The glee is entirely
an English form, foreign composers never having attempted it.
The words are secular or sacred—“cheerful” or “serious” as the
old expression was—and the music may be for mixed or for male
voices. The part-song is always intended for a chorus, that is for
several voices to a part; but the glee was always designed for a
single voice to each part. Many glees, however, gain in effect by
being sung in chorus; others seem too delicate in phrasing for
such treatment. The glee writer sought always for a change of
sentiment in his words, and this as complete as possible, so as to
suggest a change of speed and measure as sudden as from the
adagio to the scherzo of a symphony. This change of movement
is a characteristic of all but the shortest glees. The composer
always sets new music to the words throughout; never repeating
old music to new words, as in the part-song.
The Madrigal is also an extinct form of composition. The
school of madrigal writers belonged to the sixteenth and seven-
teeth centuries, and was scattered through Italy, the Netherlands,
and England. To understand the essence of the
madrigal, the reader must grasp the meaning of
Uadrigals.
two abstruse-sounding words—Homophony (one sound), and
Polyphony (many sounds). When the parts move all together, as
in a simple hymn-tune or part-song the style of the composition is
said to be homophonio. For example:—
But when the composer’s one design is to make the parts more
with as much independence as is consistent with harmony—to
make his composition not a melody with harmonies underneath,
but a bunch of intertwining and imitating melodies then the
style of harmony is said to be polyphonic. For example:—
110
HOW TO BEAD MUBIO


The madrigal belongs to the polyphonic style, which was the
prevailing manner of composition in the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries. The words were generally pastoral
and often playful in character. Short pieces in
this style ending with a “ fa la la ” retrain were
called “ Ballets,” and were probably at one time
used in dancing.
The
Polyphonic
stylo.
The polyphonic style was stiff and unyielding. Very little
individual expression of the words was possible while the
composer’s attention was absorbed in devices of imitation. The
anthems of the polyphonic period are, in musical structure,
exactly like the madrigals. Sebastian Wesley exclaims in regard
to one of the finest specimens of the madrigal (Orlando Gibbons’
“ Silver Swan ”), “ What a fine anthem it would have made 1 ”
That is to say, the same music might have been set to Scripture
words. The remark is perfectly natural and true.
The Motet may be described as an anthem composed in the
polyphonic style.
The Anthem as developed by the English school of cathedral
composers has gradually thrown off the shackles of strict
111
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


polyphony while preserving all that is good in the
style, and ever avoiding the imbecility and weak-
Authems.
ness of pure homophony. As regards musical structure, the
anthem has much in common with the glee. It generally includes
change of movement, and it never presents old music to new
words. Anthems always have an organ accompaniment, whether
this be a mere repetition of the voice parts or independent in
figure and rhythm. The longer anthems also include solos,
passages sung by each half of the choir in turn (called decani and
cantoris), choral recitatives, &o. The great majority of anthems
are set to Scripture words; but some both old and new may be
found set to metrical psalms and hymns.
The simplest form of solo is the ballad, whose music is
generally unpretentious. The aria, usually preceded by a reci-
tative, is a larger form. The recitative moves free
from the restraints of sections and periods and
key relation. It darts from key to key, the words
Solos,
Duets, &c.
being timed as nearly as possible in the natural quantity of speech,
without slurs. Arias are generally in two or three movements.
The duet (two), trio (three), quartet (four), quintet (five), sestet
(six), and octet (eight performers), are other forms of vocal
concerted music.
In the Canon we have imitation in its strictest form. Here
is a familiar example:—
The second part is the first four pulses behind-hand. The most
familiar form of the Canon is the Bound, which may be defined as
a perpetual (t.«., unending) canon in the unison.
The Fugue is the most intellectual form in which vocal music is
composed. It is artificial and complex in a high degree, and
purely polyphonic in style. Briefly stated the essence of the
Fugue is a subject or short phrase of melody which
is started at the beginning, and is “ worked ” or
The Fugue.
played npou right to the end. From first to last there is no pause
112
HOW TO BEAD MUSIC


and the parts unceasingly remind the ear of the subject, by
playing with it in every way that the ingenuity of composers
has devised.
The Chorus is a word that conveys no distinct meanings
Oratorio choruses are largely fugal in character, as •
are those in cantatas, masses, etc. The Chorus
nearly always has an instrumental accompaniment.
Choruses.
113
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


XXIV.
HINTS FOR MUSICAL STUDY.
There is a great deal of enthusiasm for music nowadays, but
only a very small proportion of those who sing and play attain to
any real critical grasp of the art. The great majority
do not rise above a smattering of knowledge and a
mediocrity of skill, whether instrumental or vocal.
Understand-
ing Music.
The chief reason for this is that so few persons approach the
subject in a scholarly, purposeful way. Music, tor most people, is an
amusement—a thing for the ear and not for the mind. They come
to it tired, get pleasure from it, and are content. All this is very
well. Let us be thankful for the softening and soothing influences
of music, and rejoice in the largo numbers who come within its
power.
But, happily, all are not content with this. There are some who
like thoroughness in all that they do ; who are determined to under-
stand as they go along, and in matters of taste and style to strive
at least to be equal with the best. It is for such—for musical
students, in short—that we have been writing; and wo now address
to them a few parting words on the best way of reaching excellence.
Our first point is one that will, we fear, somewhat discourage
solitary workers. Music in its essence, is to be learned by listening
and practising more than by reading. Study is important, as
giving certainty, but the ear must experience before the mind can
properly grasp a musical fact.
Those who are out of the reach of first-class singers and players may
fairly say that to tell them to listen to Sims Beeves or Joachim is
useless. It is like recommending a consumptive warehouseman to
Imitation
and
sympathy.
winter at Madeira. This is unfortunately true, but
there is no escape from the fact we have stated.
Musical taste comes from imitation and sympathetic
listening rather than from books. Fortunately good
concerts are now so cheap and common that there must be very few
persons who cannot occasionally listen to a fine performer of fine
music. And this much of comfort wo will offer to those whose
114
HOW TO HEAD MUSIU


musical privileges are few and far between. Thousands of people
listen in a vacant way to music, and receive hut little training from
it; while the student whose faculties are sharpened by earnestness,
and whose study has prepared him to receive and retain impression;.
Hears and remembers far more than the listless, uneducated concert-
goer. Set a painter to walk through a room containing a picture
and to give it a glance as he passes. Then set an ordinary
untrained person to do the same thing. The painter will remark
a dozen points of colour, composition, and drawing, while the
untrained eye will perhaps remember nothing at alh It is the
same with music.
In listening it is well to remember that the art of expressing
feeling through tone is the same with the voice, the violin, indeed,
with all instruments. Malibran, when some one
asked her how to learn expression, said “ Listen to
my husband’s (De Beriot’s) violin.” Fine expression
Learn by
listening,
is often to be heard also from flute, oboe, and clarionet players. Of
course, however, the voice of a great singer is the best model of what
singing should be.
Let this principle of letting study keep pace with ear-experience
follow the student in all the course of his work. Let him regard
the notes of a piece of music as mere dry bones, to be covered with
the warm and throbbing flesh of worthy performance before their
meaning can bo perceived—a mere sot of signs for recalling and
enabling us to reproduce living sensations. Lot him sing much, and
’however poor his voice, lot him try always to sing with feeling.
Although, as we showed at the beginning of these chapters, nearly
every one can sing, yet the number of rich and expressive voices
is not large. No doubt improved attention to voice development
paid from youth upwards will make good voices more common in
the future than they are now. At present we can only regret the
paucity of musical voices, in some parts of the country especially.
Those who do not care to sing, should learn to play some
instrument. To feel music properly we must perform it; however
unpretentiously.
And it to feel music we must perform it, so to understand it we
must compose it. Composition is the highest branch of
the art; it admits us, as we have said, into the secret
Composition.
of music. No one can thoroughly appreciate and understand a
115
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


Fugue, for example, who has not tried to compose one. .The study
of composition should begin with harmony anaylsis in the way we
have treated it. Then should come simple exercises in constructing
chords, the method of “sounds and rules hand in hand” being
always followed.
The systematic training of the ear is highly important. An
educated musician as he listens to harmonies realises
the notes and name of each chord. He “ sees with
his ears.” To possess this faculty in its full develop-
Training
the ear.
ment—to watch with the ear, for example, the play of tone
colour in an orchestral band, is the fruit of years of patient study.
But the power must be developed gradually, and must begin with
noting down simple melodies, then the plainest concords, and
learning to recognise one by one the various discords. The student
should form the habit of trying to name to himself the sol-fa notes
in melodies he may casually hear in the street, &0., imagining also
chat he sees the measure and time of each note. Those who can
command a friend to play to them a course of exercises, while they
sit with back to the pianoforte and write down the notes should
do so.
Those who follow a well-laid path of musical study will have
their reward. Parts of their work may be hard and puzzling, but
the pleasure which comes from the difficulties mastered and know-
ledge gained will be theirs. Musical knowledge
is of especial value in modem life. Every one,
whether he likes it or not has to listen nowadays
The reward
of study.
to a great deal of music sung or played. To those who through
study are able to listen intelligently, music gives a heightened
pleasure. It appeals to the fancy, and to the soul through the
mind. But musical pleasure is not merely passive; it is active.
How great is the delight of joining in a chorus, or an instrumental
duet, or trio I How great also is the pleasure of giving enjoyment
to others through voice, or lip, or hand 1
116
HOW TO HEAD MUSIO.


XXV.
A VOCABULARY OP MUSICAL TERMS.
Note.—A table of vowel sounds is given at the bottom of ever/ pig
rhe accent is borne by the syllable preceding the dash
Abbandono, con (ion d-bdn-dS-no),
with self-abandonment.
Accelerando («< - tshel - e-ran'-do ),
more and more quickly.
Accelerato ( dt-tshel-e-rd'-to ), in-
creased in rapidity.
Acciaccatura (dt-chiak-dioo'-ra), a
short appoggiatura.
Accolade ( ako-ld'-de), the brace
connecting the staves.
Adagio ( a-di'-jib), very slow and
expressive.
Adagio Assal or Molto [d-dd'-jio
ds-td-e, or mol'-to), extremely slow
and expressive.
Adagio Cantabile e Sostennto (d-
-dd'-jio kan-tii'-ln-le e SOS-ten-od-
to), slow, sustained, in a singing
manner.
Adagissimo { d-dd-jit’-imo ), slower
than adagio.
Ad libitum (ad lib’-it-um ), Latin,
at will or discretion.
Affettnoso (df-fet-00-b'-zo), with ten-
derness and pathos.
Afflizione con [af-jie-tsib'-no), in a
manner expressive of grief.
Agilita, con (a- j'U'-i-td), with
lightness and agility.
Agitata (dj-t-td'-to), with agitation.
Al, Alla (al alia), to the ; in the
style of. As Al Fine, to the end;
Alla Mast a, in the style of a
march.
Alla Breve (al-ld breve), a quick
species of common time used in
church music.
Alla Capella [al-la kdpel'-ld), in
the church style.
Alla Stretta [dl-la etrit'-ta), in-
creasing the time.
Allargando ( dl-largdn'do ), with free,
broad style.
Allegretto ( dl-11-gret'-to), cheerful.
Not so quick as Allegro.
Allegro ( al-le'-grb), quick, lively.
Sometimes modified by the ad-
dition of other words, as follows;
Allegro Assai ( dt-sd-e ), very quick.
Allegro con moto (kon mo’-to), with
a quick, lively movement.
Allegro con Spirito ( spe'-rt-io ),
quick. With spirit.
Allegro di Molto (dt mol'-to), ex-
ceedingly quick.
Allegro veloce ( ve-lo'-tshi ), quick,
to absolute rapidity.
Allegro vivace (vi-va'-Uhi), with
vivacity.
Allegrissimo ( dl-XegrU-time ), su-
perlative of Allegro.
Amabile ( d-md'-be-le), amiably.
Amoroso ( dm-or-o'-zb ), lovingly,
tenderly.
Andante ( dn-ddn'-ti), “going”
easily and rather slowly.
Key to Vowel Sounds. —a, ale ; a, add; a, arm; e, eve; e, end; i, ios
», ll; 6, old; 8, odd; 6, dove; 00, moon; 6. lute ; u but
117
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


Andante Affettuoso ( df-fet-00-b'-zb ),
slow, with much pathos.
Andante Cantabile ( kan-td'-bil-e ),
slow, and in a singing style.
Andante con Moto, slow and with
emotion.
Andante grazioso {grdt-ze-b'-zo),
slow and gracefully.
Andante Maestoso ( md-ie-tb'-zo ),
slow and with majesty.
Andante non troppo, slow, but not
in excess.
Andantino ( dn-ddn-te'-nb), a little
slower than Andante moving
gently.
Animate ( dn-X-md'-to ), with anima-
tion.
Anima con {kon dn'-t-md), with
soul, with fervour.
A piacere (d pi-d-tshi’-re), at
pleasure ; faster or slower.
Appassionato {dp-pde-te-b-nd'-to),
with fervid, impassioned emotion.
Appoggiatnra (ap-pod-jid-tu'-rd\,
a forestroke.
Ardito ( dr-de'-tb), with ardour,
Arco {dr'-kd), with the how. Used
to contradict Pizzicato.
Arioso {dr-t-b'-so), In a melodious,
singing manner.
Assai ( aesd-e), very,more; as Adagio
aseai, very slow.
Attacca snbito [dt-idk’-kd eoo'beeto),
attack the new movement im-
mediately.
A tempo (a iem'-pd), after a change
in speed, to return to the original
rate of movement.
A tempo giusto ( Jood-to), in strict
and equal time.
A tempo ordinario { or-din-d'-rib),
in an ordinary rate of time.
Andace {d-00-dd'-tshe), bold, fear-
less, impudent.
Basso Primo ( bated pre'mo), First
Bass.
Basso Secnndo ( sa-koon'-do ), Second
Bass.
Bene Placito (blue pld-tehe'-to), at
will.
Ben Marcato {ben mdr-kd'-tb), in a
clear, distinct, strongly marked
manner.
Ben pronnnziato (prb-noon - tse -
d’-tb), pronounced clearly.
Bis, Latin; twice. A passage in-
dicated by a stroke to be per-
formed twice.
Bravura ( brdv-oo'-rd), with vigour,
with boldness.
Erioso ( bre-b’-zb), with spirit.
Erillante [bril-ldn!-te), in a showy,
sparkling style.
Burlesco ( boor-le'-skb), with comic
humour.
Cadence, English. A close in me-
lody or harmony. Also an orna-
mental passage at the end of a
piece of music.
Cadenza ( kdden'-zd ), Italian. An
ornamental series of notes at the
close of a piece of music.
Calando (kdldn'-do), becoming softer
and slower by degrees.
Galore ( kdl-b'-re ), heat, warmth.
Cantabile ( kan-td'-81-e), in a
smooth, melodious, graceful, sing-
ing style.
Canticle, English. Devotional song.
Canto, the highest part in a piece of
vocal music.
Cantor, Latin. Cantore, Italian.
(kan-tb’-re), A singer.
Cantoris ( kan-tbr'-is), Latin. A
term used in cathedral music, to
distinguish the singers on the left
side, where the Cantor or Pre-
centor sits.
Key to Vowel Sounds. —a, ale ; a, add ; a, arm ; e, ere ; e, end ;I, ice,
1, ill; t, old; 8, odd; ft, dove ; 00, moon ; ft, lute ; u. but.
118
HOW TO BEAD MUBIO


Canzonet (kanzdnef), English. Can-
zonetto, Italian. A short song.
Capriccio (ka-pnt'-sKio), in a fan-
ciful style.
Celerita (cheler'-ltd), with celerity,
quick
Cavatina (karate'-nd), an air of one
movement only, sometimes pre-
ceded by recitative, of a dramatic
character, and generally employed
in Opera.
Chorus, Latin. Coro (kor’-o), Ita-
lian. A band or company of
singers
Comodo (kdm-mo'-dd), with com-
posure, quietly.
Con (kon), with.
Con brio (kon bred-d), with life,
vigour, brilliancy.
Con fuoco (foo-b'-ko), with fire.
Con moto (kon mo'to), w-ith motion,
or a spirited movement.
Con Spirito (kon spe-rl-to), with
quickness and spirit.
Coi, Col, Coll’, Colla, Collo, with
the.
Corale ( kor-d'-le), the plain chant.
Crescendo (kres-shen'-do), becoming
louder. Sometimes expressed
thus <•
Da Capo, or D.C. (da hd'-po), from
the beginning.
Da, from. Dal, from the.
Decani (de-kd'-ne), Latin. A term
used in cathedral music, to dis-
tinguish those singers who are
placed on the right side of the
building (entering the choir from
the nave), where the Dean sits.
Decresccndo (de-kre-shen'-do), gra-
dually decreasing in power of
tone.
Dell’, Della, Dello (ddll, ddlld,
ddl-lo), of the.
Detache ( ddtd'-skd), French. Mak<
each syllable short and accent
equally. French term for staccato.
Deliberate ( da-le-be-rd'-io ), adj.,
Deliberamente, adv., deliber-
ately.
Demi, English. A half.
Diminuendo ( de-me-noo-ln'-do),
diminishing the force.
Di Molto (de mol'-to), much or very.
Dolce { ddl'-tshe ), in soft and sweet
style.
Dolorosa (ddl-or-o'-td), Dolente
( dolen'-td ), with an expression of
pain—dolorously.
Duet, English. Duetto, Italian. A
composition for two performers.
E (a), Ed (ad), and.
Eco, Ecco (eko), Italian. Echo,
English. A repetition or imita-
tion of a previous passage, with
some modification of tone.
Eguale (d-gtca'-lej, equally, even,
alike.
Elegante ( el-e-gdn'-ti), with ele-
gance.
Energico { ener'-jlkb ), con energis
{lcon ener'-je-d), energicamenu
(ener-jlkamen'-it), with energy.
Enharmonic, English. Proceeding
by quarter tones.
Espressivo (es-pres-e’-vo), or con
espressione, with expression.
Etude ( a-tude ), study.
Extempore ( eks-tem’-por-e ), Latin
unpremeditated.
Facilita ( fa-tshXl'-X-ta ), made easier,
Facilmente (facKlmdn'-te), easily,
with facility.
Fermato (fer-ma'-td), with firm-
ness and decision.
Feroce ( fe-ro'-che), fiercely.
Fervente (fer-ven'-te), with warmth
Fine ( fi'ne ), the end
Key to Vowel Sounds. — a, ale; a, add; a, arm; e, eve; i, end; 1, tee;
I, ill ; 5. old ; 5, odd; ft, dove ; 00. moon; n, lute ; u, M.
119
AND understand it.


Forte (for'le), loud.
Fortissimo ( for-ted-ei-mo), very
loud.
Forza (Jorl-ta ), force, vehemence.
Forzando (fort-tan'-do), forzato,
with peculiar emphasis or fos,e.
Fngato (foo-ga'-to), in the fugue
style.
Furioso (foo-rio'-td), with rage,
furiously.
Gajamenta ( ga-ya-men'-ta ), Gai,
Gaio, Gajo, with gaity.
Giocoso (jio-ko'-to), humorously,
with sportiveness.
Oimt&mente(Joo-stamen'-te), justly,
with precision.
Gnisto ( joo'-eto), in just and exact
time.
Glissando (gli-tdn'-do), in a gliding
manner.
Grande ( grdn'-de), great.
Grandioso (gran-dio'zo), in grand
and elevated style.
Gravamente (gra-ve-men'-te), with
gravity, dignified, and solemn.
Grave (gra'-ve), a very slow and
solemn movement.
Grazia, con (kon grat'ie-a), grazio-
samente, grazioso, in a flowing,
graceful style.
Gnsto (goo-eld), gustoso (goosto'-zo),
con gusto, with taste, elegantly.
II (il), the; as il viohno, the violin.
Impetuoso (eem-pe-too-o'-zd), adj.,
impetuosamente (eem-pa-too-o-
za-men'tl), adv., with impetuo-
sity.
Impromptu (t mpromp'-teu), Latin.
An extemporaneous production.
Improvvisamente (eem-pro-ve-za-
men'-te), extemporaneously.
Innoceutemeute (een-no-tshen-ti -
min'-te), innocente, con inno-
oenza, in artless, simple style.
Intrude ( eenlra'-da), Introduction.
La, the ; as la voce {la vo'-tehi), th«
voice.
Lagrimoso ( ld-gre-mo'-zo ), in a
mournful, dolorous style.
Lamentabile ( la-men-ta'-bi-le), la
mentoso, plaintively, mournfully.
Languente (lan-gwen'-ll), lan-
guido, with languor.
Largamente (largamln'-le), very
slowly.
Larghetto ( lar-glt-td ), a slow and
measured time; but less slow
than Largo.
Larghissimo ( lar-ghee'-l-mo ), ex-
tremely slow.
Largo (Idr'-go), a very slow and
solemn degree of movement.
Le (la), the ; as le rod (la vd'-teha),
fern, pi., the voices.
Legatissimo (le-gd-teee'-ee-mS), very
smoothly connected.
Legato ( le-gd'-to ), bound or tied,
in a smooth, gliding manner.
Leggiero ( led-je-e'-rd ), with light-
ness.
Leggierissimo (led-jer-ees -ee-md),
with the utmost lightness and
facility.
Lentando (len-tdn'-dd), with in-
creased slowness.
Lento ( lan-to ), in slow time.
L'istesso tempo ( leestee'-eo tempo),
in the same time as previous
movement.
Ua (md), but; as allegro ma non
troppo, quick, but not too much so
Maesta, con (md-es-ld), maestoso
(ma-ee-td'-zo), with majesty and
grandeur.
Marcato (mdr-ka -to), in a marked
and emphatic style.
Meno (ini'-no), less; as ment forte,
less loud.
Key to Vowel Sound*. —a, ale; ft, add ;a, arm ;e, eve / ft, end j!, toe ;
T, ill ; 6, old; o, odd ; 6, dove ; 00, moon ; ft, lute ; i, hut.
120
HOW TO BEAD MUSIC


Mesto ( mes'-ib ), mestoso [nies-tb' -
zb), mournfully, sadly, patheti-
cally.
Mezza voce {med-dzd vb'-tshe), in a
gentle, flute-like voice.
Mezzo {med-dzo), half; as mezzo-
piano, rather soft; mezzo-forte,
rather loud.
Moderate {mb-der-a'-tb), adj.,
moderatamente, con modera.
zione (mb-der-df-se-bne), with a
moderate degree of quickness.
Uoderatisslmo (mb-der-a-le-simb),
in very moderate time.
Mol to {mol'-to), very, extremely;
as mollo allegro, very quick.
Molta voce, con {mbl'-td vb'-tshe),
with full voice.
Uorendo ( mbr-en'-db), gradually
subsiding, dying away.
Mosso (mbs'-sd), moved, movement.
iteno mosso, slower, less motion.
Moto or con moto {mb'-to), with
agitation.
Nobile (nb'-bi-le), nobilmente
{no'-bil-men'-te), with nobleness,
grandeur.
Non, an adverb of negation, gener-
ally associated with troppo, as:—
Non troppo allegro, non troppo
presto, not too quick.
Non molto, not very much; as non
mollo allegro, not very quick.
Non tanto {non tdntb), not too
much; as allegro non tanto, not
too quick.
Nnovo, di, newly, again.
0, or; as Jlaulo o violino, flute or
violin.
Obbligato ( bb-ble-gd'-tb), a part to
he performed by some particular
instrument in conjunction with
the principal part, and indispen-
sable to the harmony and proper
effect.
Obbligati ( bb-ble-ga'-te), pi., two
or more indispensable parts to be
performed by different instru-
ments in conjunction with the
principal part.
Ordinario {ordinal-id), usual; as a
tempo ordinario, in the usual
time.
Passionatamente {pds-siondtdmin'•
te), passionato (pas-sio-na-tb),
in an impassioned manner.
Pianissimo (pe-d-nes'-simb), ex-
tremely soft.
Piano ( pe-a'-nb), soft. The oppo-
site of forte.
Piano piano, or piu piano (pgeu
pe-a'-nd), more soft, or very soft.
Fit {pgeu, almost like the English
pew), an adverb of augmentation,
as piu forte, louder; piu lento,
slower.
Piacere, al {al pyd-ts’,.a'-rt), at
pleasure in regard to time.
Piii mosso (pgeu mos'-so), with
more motion.
Pih tosto {tbsto), or piuttosto,
rather; meaning “in preference,”
as allegretto o piuttosto allegro,
rather quickly, or in preference,
quickly.
Pizzicato ( pet-se-kd'-tb), pinched.
Applied to a way of snapping the
strings of the violin, &c., with
the fingers.
Placido (pld'-tshidb), calm, quiet.
Pins ( ploos), more. Plus anima,
with greater animation.
Poco {pb-kb), a little.
Poco meno ( pb-kb md'-nb) some-
what less.
Poco piii mosso, a little faster.
Poco a Poco, by degrees, gradually
Poggiato (pod-jga’-td), dwelt on,
struck impressively.
Keg to Voted Sounds. —a, ale; a, add; &, arm; e, eve ;e, end; i, to*,
i, ill; 6, old ; 8, odd; 6, dove; 00. moon; u, iuk; u. hut.
121
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


Poi, (pb-e), then; adagio, pox allegro,
slow, then quick.
Pomposo (pbm-pb'-zo] % in a grand
and pompous manner.
Portamento { por-td-men’-tb ), sus-
taining the voice, gliding from
note to note.
Precipitamente { prd-ishl-pl-ld-
mln-tl), precipitate { prd - Uhl-
pe-td'tb), con precipitazione (kon
prd-tshe-pe-td-tsib'-nd), precipi-
toso (prd-tshe-pe-to’-zb), in a
hurried manner.
Prestamente (pres-td-tnen -te),
hastily, rapidly,
Prestezza (prls-tlt'-zd), with haste
and vivacity.
Prestissimo [prls-tes -simo), ex-
ceedingly quick, quicker than
presto .
Presto (pres’-tb), very quickly.
Primo (pi/-mo), first; as primo
tempo, return to the original time.
Quasi (qud'-se), in the manner or
style of; as if ; almost; as quasi
allegretto, like an allegretto.
Quieto ( kice-e’-tb ), with calmness
and repose.
Rallentando { rdl-lln-tdn'-do ), more
and more slowly, generally with
decrease of force.
Rapidamente (rd - pe-dd-mm '- te),
con rapidita (£on rd-pe'-dx-td),
rapido (rd-p X-db), rapidly, with
rapidity.
Battenen'do, restraining or holding
back the time.
Rawivando (ravivdn’-do), reviving,
re-animating, accelerating; as
rawivando il tempo, animating or
quickening the time.
Recitando, (retsh-X-idn-db), decla-
matory, in the style of recitation.
Recitative ( retsh-X-td-te'-vo ), a
species of musical recitation.
Religiose, in a solemn style.
Rinforzando (rxn-forts-dn'-do), lin-
rorzato (rxn-foris-d'-tb), rinforse
(rtn-fort'-so), with additional tons
and emphasis.
Risolutamente ( re-zo - 100-id-men’-
tiy, risoluto (re-zb-loo'-to), risolu-
zione, con (kon re-zb-100-tsxb' -nd),
in a bold, decided style.
Risolutissimo ( re -zb - 100-tl-sXmb),
with extreme resolution.
Ritardando ( re-idr-ddn'-db ), ritar-
dato [re-tar-da'-to), a gradual
delaying of the pace, with cor-
responding diminution in point of
tone.
Ritenendo (re-ten-en'-db), holding
back in the time—slackening.
Ritenuto (re-te-noo’-to), slackening
the time. The effect differs from
Ritardando, by being done at
once, while the other is effected
by degrees.
Scherzando ( skert-zdn’-db ), scher-
zante ( skert-zdn'te ), scherzo
f skirt’-zo), scherzevolmente
(skert-ze-vbl -men’-il), scherzo-
samente [skert-zb-sd’-men’-te),
scherzoso (skert-zo’-so), in a light,
playful, and sportive manner.
Segno (sd-nyo), a sign; as dal segno,
repeat from the sign.
Segue (segwe), seguito (seg’wxto),
now follows; or, as follows. As
segue il coro, the chorus following.
Sometimes means in similar or
like manner, to show that a pas-
sage is to be performed like that
which precedes it.
Semplice [sem-ple’-chi), semplice-
mente [slm-ple - chi-min'- tl),
semplicita, con ( kon sempU'-ehl
td), with simplicity, artlessly.
Sempre ( semprl ), always; as sempr*
staccato, always staccato, or de-
tached.
Keg to Vowel Sounds. —a, ale ;a, add; a, arm; e, eve; e, end; I, iee ,'
I, ill; 6, old; 8, odd; 5, dove; 00, moon; 4, lute; n, but.
122
HOW TO BEAD UJJBIO


Serioso (sorxd , zo) y in a grave and
serious style.
Senza (sen'-tsd), without.
Siciliana (se-ehe-ltd'-nd), a move-
ment of slow, soothing, pastoral
character, in six-pulse time, re-
sembling a dance peculiar to the
people of Sicily.
Sforzando sforzato
[sfor-tsd'-to), imply that a par-
ticular note is to be performed
with emphasis and force.
Sincopato (sin-ko-pd'-to) y to connect
an unaccented note with the
accented one which follows.
Slentando (slen-tdri-do) y a gradual
diminution in the time or speed of
the movement.
Smorzando (smor-tsdn'dd), smorzato,
diminishing the sound, dying
away by degrees.
Soave («d-d-ttf), in soft, sweet,
delicate style.
Soavemente (sd-dv-e-men'-td), with
great sweetness.
Solennemente (sdlennemen'-ts) y so-
lemnly
Solennita, con (kdn 9dlen’*xtd) y with
solemnity.
801 l (sb’le), pi., implies that two or
more principal parts play or sing
together, i.e. y one voice or one
instrument of each part only.
8010, sing., a passage for a single
voice or instrument, with or
without accompaniments.
Sonoramente (sdndrdmen te ), so-
norita, con [kdn sondr -ltd),
sonorously; with a full vibrating
kind of tone.
Sostenuto (sdsienoo'-to), sostenendo,
with tones sustained to their full
length.
Sotto { solid ), under; as sotto voee y ii
a soft, subdued manner, in an
undertone.
Spirito, con (kdnspe'-ri-to), spirito-
samente ( spe-rx-to-zd-men '-
spiritoso (spe-rt-td'-zo), with
spirit, animation.
Staccatissimo {stak-kd-tes’ •sXmo) t
very detached.
Staccato (stdk-kd'~td) y distinct,
short, detached. The tones sepa-
rated from each other by short
rests.
Suave [siodvd) y suavemente [sood-
vdmen-te) suavita, con (kdn
soodwe -td) y the usual form la
toave , with sweetness and delicacy
of expression.
Stringendo (strinjan -do), pressing
onwards, accelerating the time.
Subitamente, subito (soobeetamin' -
te, soobeto ), quickly; as volti
subito, turn over quickly.
Tace ( tdche), silent.
Tacia, si ( se tdch'-ia), let it be silent.
Tanto (tdn'-td), so much; as non
tanto, not so much.
Tardo [tdr‘-do) y slowly, in a dragging
manner.
Tasto solo ( tasto solo), indicates that
certain bass notes are not to be
accompanied by chords.
Tempo, A, or In [a or in tempo), in
time. An expression used after
some change in the time, to in-
dicate a return to the original
degree of movement.
Tempo a piacere ( tempo a pydchd' -
re), the time at pleasure.
Tempo commodo ( tempo kommo'-do),
at a convenient and moderate
speed.
Tempo giusto {tempo Joos-td) y in
exact or strict time.
Key to Vowel Soundt. —a, ale ; a, add ; a, arm ; e, eve ; 8, end; !, iee ;
I, iU ; 6, eld ; 5, odd; d, dove / 00, moon ; fc, lute ; u, but.
123
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


Tet-po ordinario (tempo ordindr'-e-o),
at an ordinary and moderate rate.
Tempo primo (tempo pred-mo), re-
turn to the original time.
Tennto ( tenoo'-io ), held on, the tones
sustained for their full time.
Timoroso ( lemorb'*so ), with timidity,
awe.
Tosto (tod-to), swift, soon.
Tranquillo ( trdnkoo? •Id), tran-
quillamente ( trnnkooel- lamin'-
d), tranquillita, con (kon trdn-
koolt-lxtd), with tranquillity.
Tremolando (tremoldn 1 -do), tremolo
(irem'-olo), a tremulous effect
produced by rapid reiteration of a
sound.
Iroppo (trop'po), 100 much ; gene-
rally preceded by the negative
non; as adagio non troppo, not
too slow.
Tutti (ioo'te), the entrance of all
the instruments or voices after a
solo.
Fuita forza, con (kon tod-td fortsd ),
with the utmost vehemence; as
loud as possible.
Un, uno, nna, (oon, ootid, oond ), a.
as un poco , a little.
Un poco ritenuto (oon pokb re-
tenoo'~to), gradually slower.
Va (rd), goes on ; as va crescendo,
continues to increase in loudness.
Veloce, or con velocita, (velo'-ehe,
kbn veW'-chita), in a rapid time.
Sometimes signifies as rapid as
possible.
Velocissimo (valdtsh?-semo), with
extreme rapidity.
Vigoroso (vty-o-ro -«d), vigorosa*
mente [vig-d-rd-sd-men- te), boldly,
vigorously.
Vivace (ve-vd'-tshe), vivacemente
(ve-vd-tshe-meri-le), quick and
lively.
Vivamente, vivacita, con (rdr«-
men'-ie, kon ve-vd' -tshUa), with
briskness and animation.
Vivacissimo (ve-vdt-shed •s\ms), with
extreme vivacity.
Voce (vo'-tshe), the voice.
Volti subito (volte soo'-bitb), turn
over quickly.
Volante in a light and
rapid manner.
Key to Vowel Sounds. — a, ale; a, add; a, arm; ©, eve; i, end; i, ice
, i U; 6, old; o, odd ;6, dove ; 00, moon ;u, lute ;u, but.
124
HOW TO BEAD MV 810


XXVI.
PRONOUNCING LIST OF THE NAMES OF LEADING FOREIGN
MUSICAL COMPOSERS, PERFORMERS, AND WORKS.
All who are interested in music are obliged constantly to pronounce German,
French, Polish, Italian, and Spanish names, and many who do so possess
little or no knowledge of these languages. For the help of such persons this
list is compiled. It does not go deeply into the ». inn ties of pronunciation ;
the method is rough and ready only, but it is adequate to the purpose. By
referring to this list the reader will be able to pronounce the names in it with
sufficient approximation to correctness to satisfy educated persons. It is a
question whether it is adrisablo to give the true natire pronunciation of
all names. For example, the Anglicised pronunciation of the name of Mozart,
with the accent on the last syllable and the ordinary English “z” is so
universal, that to pronounce the word as the Germans do, with the accent on
the jint syllable and the German sound of “z" M6-tsart, would be
affected. We have, in fact, to steer our course between correctness and
pedantry. Many names, in the pronunciation of which English people
are not likely to go wrong, are omitted from the following list, and French
names are generally excluded because the attempt to convey a phonetic
rendering of them in English pronunciation only ends in caricature. The
only signs used in this list are a for the broad a as in arm, 6 for the long o as
in old, and i for the short ias in 111. The syllable in italic bears the accent.
Art, Franz. Frants Abt.
Albani. Ahl-iaA-nee.
Alwens (German). Alyens.
Amati. Amatee.
Andre (German), jfndrai.
Anoot, Madame. Ango.
Arditi, Luigi. Ariretce Lu-ee-jee.
Astholtz. Ast-holts.
Adber. O-bear.
Acdibert. _ Owe-dee-bair.
Acdran. O-drang 1 .
Bach. Bach*.
Bachb (English). Batch.
Balfe. Balf.
Babri. Barry.
Batiste. Bah-(«j(.
Baumbach. Bowmbach (as in cow ;
German cb).
IUfiRMEiaTEH. Bowcr-raye-ster.
Beethoven. TJ.uI-ho-fen.
Beiinkb. Bamkay.
Behrens. Bair-ens.
Bellini. Belfcsnee.
Benoit. Renti ah.
Bbko. Bairg.
Bebiot, de. Do Say- rBeo.
Berlioz. Baireeo.
Bektini. Bair-f«-nee.
Bischoff. Bishoff.
Bisfham. Bisp-ham.
Bizet. Bee- zay.
Blumenthal. Bloomental.
Boccherini. Bok-air-ee-nay.
Bochba. Boxa.
Boehm. Boom s .
Boieloieu. Bwalldeeoo.
i This ii the French nasal “ n." Pronounce quickly and an approximate sound
will he realised.
•The German sound of “Ch” is not easily imitated by English people. It is the
sound which occurs in the Scotch “ loch.’* The speaker makes as if to sound k. but
instead of entirely closing the aperture between the back of his tongue and his palate,
be allows a little breath tu pass.
•The German modified “o,” which is sometimes written as “5" and sometimes
as “oe,” has no counterpart in English. It may be roughly described aa an “o”wlth
the sound of “e ” in it.
125
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


Boito. 800-«-to.
Bordese. Bor-rfai-zai.
Bohottrki. Bow-rojf-shkee.
Bottesini. Bot-te-z«-nee.
Bourgault - Ducoudrat. Boor -
goli-Duioocfray (French u).
Brahms. Braams.
Breb, J. Van. Van Bray.
Breitb6pf und llartel. Bright-
kopf oond Hairtel.
Bruch, Mai. Max Broo-ch.
Bucalossi. Booka/olseo.
11 Li low. Beeoolo.
Bull, Ole. (Olay—Norwegian.)
Busoni. 800-io-nee.
Campana. CampnAnah.
Capocci. Capelshee.
Caruso. Cah-roo-zo.
Chaminade. Shara-ee-nadd.
Cherubini. Kerrooiwnee.
Chsve. Sheeny.
Chopin, AAop-aing 1 .
Chwatal. Shvatal.
Coenen. Koeneu.
Conconb. Konconai.
Cornelius. Core-nay-lih-oos.
Courvoisikr. Coorvtuareeay.
Cramer. Kra-mer.
Creators. Cray-ay-toe-ray.
Cui. Ke lu-ee.
Curschmann. JToorjAman.
Cusins. Kew.sins.
Czeknt. JsAainiee.
Czibolka. Tseeioo/kah.
D'Albkrt. Dahl-behrt.
Dancla. Danklah.
Dannreuther. Diinnroyter.
David (German). Dah-veed.
Dbbusst, Achillb Claudk.
' bus-see, Ah-kell Flood.
Delibes. Daileeb.
Dbr Freischutz. Dair Fry shoots.
Desoumbs. DaizoArm.
D’llardelot. Dard-low.
Diehl. Deal.
Dikmer (French). Dyay-may.
D’lsdt. Dan-dee (with nasal
French n).
Don* Giovanni. Donn Jotonnee.
Donizetti. DonneelieGee.
Dotzauer. JAHsower (ow as in hoio).
Dkktsohock. Dryshock.
Dubois. DubuiaA (French u).
Dupont. Doo-pah.
Dusskic. 800- shek.
Dvorak. D/orshack.
Kisenhofer. Eye-zen-h5-fer.
Eisteddfodau. Eye-steth-rorf-eye 1 .
Eisteddfod. Eyc-i.'-'M-voii 3 .
Exoel. (g hard.)
Esriquiz. En-ree-kay.
Euard. Ay-rahr.
Ernani. Airwdnee.
Esposito. Es-poz-ee'-toe.
Etoile du Nord. Ait;<■ a/ du Nore.
Fanino. Failing.
Faure. Foe-ray.
Faust. “ Fan ” as in “ how.”
Fetis. Fay-tee.
Fidelio. Feed.iileeo.
Fischer. Fisher.
Flotow. Flo-to.
Fra Diavolo. Fra Deedrolo.
Francke. Friinkay.
Franz. Frants.
Fuchs. Fail.
Gade. Giidai.
Ganz. Gants.
Garcia. Garr-tshcea.
Gazza Ladra. GiUssl Lairs..
Geibel. Gy-hel (long i).
Genes. Soft g; accent on second
syllable.
Gxhmer. Gher-mei.
Getaert. Gevairt (hard g; Flemish
name).
Gioout. Zhee-goo.
Giovanni. Joe-vahn’-nee.
Glazounoff. Glah-zoo-noff.
Gluck. Glook.
Godard. Go-dah.
Goetz. Goets
Gordiqiani. Gordee-ja-nee.
Gottschalk. Got-shalk.
Gounod. Goo-no.
Gkaun. Like ground without the d_
iThi. is the French neirl “n.” Pronounce quickly and an approximate sound
Will be realised.
’The "th” as in thine, not as in (Ain.
126
HOW TO READ MUSIC


Grieg. Greeg.
Grisar. Greezar.
Grobe. ffro-bai.
Guglielmo. Goo-glee-el-m 5.
Guido. Gwee-do.
Guilmant. ffie.'-mong (g hard).
Guikaud. Ghee-row.
Guubert. Goom-bairt.
Guno’l. Goon-gle.
Gurlitt. door- lit.
Gte. Jye.
Haletv. Ah-lay-vee.
Hauptmann, (asinAow).
Haydn. High. An.
lleilwig. Ilile-Tlg.
Henschel. Heusbl.
Hermann. 1/airman.
llehold. Ay-rol.
Herr. Hair.
Herne. Hair-ray (laatyowelligbt).
Herz. Ilairts.
Herzog, //airtsog.
Hey. High.
Holmes. (French) Ol'-mess.
Hcf.ffer Huiffer (approximate).
Hummel. J/oowmel.
Humperdinck. Iloom-per-dink.
Jadassohn. Tud-(lass-zone.
Jaell, Yell.
Jahn. Yaan.
Janotha. Yano-ta.
Jensen. Yensen.
Joachim. 10-a-cbim (German eh).
Jomf.lli. Yomellee.
Jong. de. De Yong.
Joseffy. Yoe-rr/f-fUi.
Jungmann. Yoongman.
Jurgens Yoor-gens.
KalliW'DA. Kahlleevoda.
Kif.sewetter. Keezaivetter.
Kocian. A'o-tsi-un.
Kohler Koeler.
Koschat. Ko-is-shat.
Krebs. Krebbs.
Kreisler. Kry-sler.
Kr utzer. Kroytser.
K lu.rz. Kroyts.
Kriessmann. Krees-man.
Krug. Kroog.
Kubelik. Koo'-bay-lik.
Kuoken. Kiken (approx.).
Kuhe. Kuo - ai.
Kuhlau. Koo ow (oui as in how).
Kullak. Kool'-lahk.
Kuntze. Koontmi,
Kjerulp. llalfdan. Tscher - ooli
Half-Ann.
Lablachb. La-blash.
Lachner. Lachner (German cb).
Lamoureux. La-moo-reuti.
Lamperti. l.ara-pair-tee.
Laubach. Lowbach {lew as in allow,
how, &C.J.
Latignac. Lah-veen-yak.
Lf.erbukb Wely. Le/aybur Vay lee.
Lemoine. Lem«’««.
Leon cay allo. 1 .ay-own-kab-uo Wo.
LtsoiiEiiTZKY. Leb-sheb-tit-skee.
Libre. Le be.
Lisle, K. De. Leal, 11. de,
Liszt. List.
Lobe, Xobai.
Loboesanq. Lob-ge-zang.
Loischhohn, l.eth -horn.
Lowe, or Loews. Lervay (r not
sonndedj.
Lohengrin. XoA-en-green.
Lorenz. Xorents.
Low (German). Lery l .
Lucia. Xootsha.
Luigini. Loo ee-jee- nee.
Lulli. Lool'-lee.
Lutz, Meyer. Loots, Myre.
Lvoff. Loo- off.
Macironb. MatcbiroAnay.
Maelzf.l. Mel-tsel.
Marches!. MarAayzee.
Mario. Mab-ree-owe.
Martha. Marta.
Mascagni. Mass-AaA-nyee.
Massanet. J/ojrnay dast word light).
Mattel Tito. Tertoli Mat-tay-ee.
Mazzinohi. Matseengbee,
Mazzoni. MatsoAnee.
Mehul. May- bool.
Meistersinoer. Mice-ter-zinger.
'The “r ’* not rolled. Approximate only.
127
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


Mendelssohn Babtholdy. Men-
delzon Bartoldee.
Merkel Mairke\.
Mesbaoee (French). Mess-sab-zbay.
Meyerbeer. Mire-bair.
Mionon. Mee-nyon (nasal n).
Mohuino. Moe ring l .
Molioue. Mo-leek.
Monteterdb. Mon-tay-rare-day.
MosChbleb. JiosAailess.
Mobkowski. MosAe^akee.
Mozart. Jfo-tsart.
Muller. J/i/ler (approximate).
N aoeli. iN'utgliai'.ee.
Naumann. Newman (as in now).
Neukomm. Noykoram.
Neumann. Noymann.
Nicolai. Nikolaee.
Nieces. Neeks.
Obbrthur. Oherime 1 .
Oppenbach. Offenbach (German cb).
Pacini. Pah-eAee-nee.
Paderewski. Pahdebre/skee.
Paer. Pah’-air.
Pacer. Power.
Peer Gynt. Pair Gint (hard g).
Pbpusoh. Pay'-poosh.
Peroolesi. PairgoAmai.
Perosi. Pay-roh-zee.
Peters (German). Paiters.
Petscheb. Petshke.
Piatti. Peedtce.
Piernb. Pih-air'-nay.
Pinsuti, Giro. Pinsootee, Tsheero.
Plaidy. Ply-dee.
Poniatowsei. Pobnceahfo/skee.
Fraeobr. Frayget (hard g).
Puccini. Poo-cbee’-nee.
Eachmaninopp. Each (guttural ch)
mab-nee-noff.
Eadecke. Eadekay.
Eapp. Eafl.
E ahead. Eab-mow.
Eandeoobe. Eandedger 3 .
Eeoer. Fay- gehr.
Ebichardt. Eyechart (German cb)
Eeinecee. JJyeneke.
Eheinbeuqer. Eine-bear-ger.
Eichter. EeecA-ter (German ch).
Eiemann. Eeeman.
Eies. Eees.
Eiohini. EeegAeenee.
Eiooletto. Eeegototo.
Eille, L. de. Eeeyai, L. de.
Eoeckel. Eeckel,
Eossini. Eoseeenee.
Hoc bier. Eoobeeay.
Eousseau. Eoosoo.
Ebbinstein. Eooiinstyne.
Eudersdoepp. Eoorfairsdorf.
Eummel. Eocmel.
Euy Ulas. Eooee Blah.
Saintis. Santee (approximate).
Sainton, Sanytong 4 .
Saint-Saenb. San-(shorta,nasaln)-
san (long a, nasal a).
Salieri. Sall-yeA-ree.
Salome. Sal/oAmay.
Sarasate. SahrahsaAtay.
Sauer. Zow (as bow) er.
Scalchi. Skalkee.
Schakwenka, Xater. Shartwnki
Ksafair.
Schira. SAeerab.
Schneider. 6'Anye-der.
Schubert. 6'Aoo-bairt.
Schumann. A’Aoo-man.
Schytte. Shee-tay.
Seiler. Zyler.
Semikamidb. Semeerameedai
Setcik. Sev'-tsik.
Sbyfried. Zigb- freed.
Soambati. Sgahmbahtee.
Sibelius. See-bay'-lih-oos.
'The German modified “o, M which is sometimes written **s,” and some imos ai
“oe,” baa no counterpart in English, It may be roughly described as an “o ” with
the s jund of “ e ” in it.
*Tbe “ ture ** pronounced quickly, and without any sound of “ • ** before the “ u.*'
The pronunciation is only approximate.
s Tne name Randegger is German and as such would be pronounced with hard
r*e. But the Italian pronunciation carries soft g’a, and this is adopted by Signoi
Randegger.
♦This is the French nasal “ n.” Pronounoe quickly and an approximate sound
will be realised.
128
HOW TO BEAD MUSIC


Silas. See lah.
Siloher. Zillcher (German ch).
Sindiso. Zm-ting.
Smetana. &n«A-tah-nah.
Sontao. ZBntag.
Spohr. Spoar.
Stabat Mater. Stabat Mater.
Steinbach. Shtine - bach (gut -
tural ch).
Stobch. Storch (German ch).
Stbakoscb. Stra-kosh.
Strauss. Strouss (like houee).
Stunz. Stoonta.
Subpb. Zoop-pai.
Sybndsen. Zrendzen.
Tamaono. Ta-mon-yo.
Tahcredi. Taniratdee.
Tannhausbr. Tiinnhoyzer.
Taubert. Tote-bairt (aa in town).
Tausio. Tow (as in how, cow) zig.
Thalbero. Kibairg.
Thatbb. Tyre.
Thibaut. Tee- bo.
Thomas (French). Toma.
Thoms. Toe-may.
Tosti. Toss-tee.
Tours, Berthold. Bairtold Tour.
Troyatorb, 11. II Trovalorai.
Tbuhn. Troon.
Tschaikowskt. Tshyiojfskee.
Tschibch. Cheersh (English ch).
Vacoai. Vak-ka-ee.
Verdi. Fairdee.
Viardot-Garcia. Veeardo - Gar -
tsheea.
Vibuxtbmps. Veeootong (French
nasal sound).
Viotti. Vee-ott’-tee.
Voot. Fogt.
Wagner. Fay-ner.
Weber. Father.
Weinoartnbr. Vine-gart-ner.
Weiss. Vice.
Werner. Faimer.
Wichtl. Vich-tl (German ch).
Widor. Frrdor.
Wieck. Veek.
Wieniawskt. Veenee-awkee.
Wilhelm. F«V/.helm.
Wilhelms. VilAWmee.
Wilhem Vill-hem.
Wohlfahrt. Vol-faart.
Wolpp. Vollf.
Yeats. E-«aA-e (accent on middle
syllable).
Zaubbrflote. TrouyAbairfloetai.
Zerbini. Tsairheenee.
Zimmermann. Tiimwrrmann.
Zinoabelli. Tsing-gar-rei-lee.
Zollner. Tiell- ner*
Zumstbeq, 7'soom-staig.
ADDITIONAL NAMES.
Bispram. Bis-pam.
Calyb. Kahl-veh.
David. Dahveed.
D’Hakdblot. Dard-loh.
Franck, Cesar. Fron Sayzar.
K
Kjerulp. Chyhair-ulf.
Lanob. Lahng-eh.
Plancon. ITahn-song.
Ponchiei.li. Polm-kee-ycF-ee.
Waldteufbl. Vahid- toi- fell*
129
AND UNDERSTAND IT.


INDEX.
Tk OB
Accent 10
Aodaccatura 69
Accidentals 63
Affected habits in
ringing 106
Anthem, The 113
Appogiatura 69
Attack 12
“ Bangor ” The nm« 28
Bass Voice, The 98
Break in the Voice 94
Breathing Exercises 12
Breathing Places 76
Breve, The 39
Bridge-tones 23
Bye-tones 86
Cadences 87
Canon, The 112
Cautionary Accidentals 53
Change of Mode S 3
Chest Register, The 98
Chords 77
Chorus, The 118
Chromatics 23,34
r Key of 16
;taims of Binging 1
Clefs in Staff Notation 45
Colour in Vocal Tone 105
Common formsofVoc&l
Music 108
Common Scale, The 101
Compass of Voices 97
Composition, Musical 116
Consonants 104
Continued Tones 11
Contralto Voice, The 98
Crotchet, The 39
Ltrmi-semi-quaver, The 89
Diaphragm 91
Difficulties of Staff
Notation 4
Discords 86
Doh 7
Dominant 81
Double Flats 66
Double Sharps 64
“ Dread Jehovah ” 17
Ear-training 30
Education, Musical 3
Elocution in Singing 76
Embellishments 69
Expression 66
Expression, General
Principals of 73
Extended Modulator 49
Fah 16
Falsetto, The 94
Family Orchestras 1
Fifth Step in Singing 38
Finding the Doh 50
Pint Step in Singing 7
Fixed Do 17
Flats 49
Four-pulse Measure IS
Fourth Step in Singing 31
faob
Fugue, The 113
Full Score 46
Glee, The 106
Grupetto 70
Guess-work 4
Halves 11
Harmony Analysis
Exercises 88
Harmony; Chords 77
Having no Voice 2
Hints for Musical Study 114
Homophouy 110
How to study s song 102
Hymn-tunes 108
Imitation 108
Intervals 78
Intooductory Notation, An 4
Inversion of Chords 82
Key, Exercises in finding
the 63
Key, How to find the 67
Key Signatures in Staff
Notation 48
Koo, The use of 13
Lab 16
L&h Mode, The old 29
Laryngoscope, The 93
Larynx 92
Leading-note 81
Leger-Unea 37
Listening 116
Madrigal, The 110
Major Mode, The 29
Marks of Expression 66
Me 8
Measures 11
Mediant 31
Mental Effects of Doh,
Me, and Soh 8
Mental Effects of Ray,Te 13
Metronome, The 68
Minim, The 39
Minor Mode, The 29
Minor Mode Exercises 32
Modern Minor, The 29
Modes, The Old 28
Modulator 20
Mordent 70
Motet, The 111
Mouth, The 96
Movable Do 17
Natural, The 52
Natural Key, The 16 1
Notes and their values 39 1
Octave Marks in Tonic
Sol-fa 51 :
Ornamental-Chromatics 56
Hart-song, The 109
Physics of Music, The 99
Polyphony 110
Positions of Chords 86
Pronunciation 104
Pulses 11
Quality of Tones 100
Quarters 16, 18
f A6S
Quaver, The 39
Bay 13
Bay Mode, The 18
Reasons for learning
Staff Notation 36
Registers 96
Relative major andminoi St
Resonances 97
Bests and their values 39
Scale, The 16. 16
Second Step in Singing 13
Self-help 7
Semibreve, The 39
Semiquaver, The 39
Semitones 31
Shake, The 71
Sharps 48
Short Score 46
Silences 13, 18, 34
Singing and Health 8
Six-pmse Measure 18
Soh 8
Soprano Voice, The 96
Staff Notation 86
Standard Scale IT
Study. Hints for Musical 114
Studying a Song 108
Style in Singing 103
Sub-dominant 31
Sub-mediant 81
Supertonic 81
Sympathy 114
Syncopation 19
Taa-tai {Syllables, The 18
Te 13
Tempo, Marks of 68
Tenor Voice, The 98
Thick Register, The 98
Thin Register, The 94
Third Step in Singing 16
Time Exercises, Pro-
gressive 34
Time in Staff Notation 89
Time Names, The 18
Time Signatures 41
Time Signature Ex. 43
Tonic 31
Tonic Minor, The 67
Transition 31
Transition in Staff No-
tation 63
Transition, Rules for
Recognising 66
Trill, The 71
Triplets 41
Tune Exercises, Pro-
gressive 36
Tune in. Staff Notation 86
Turn, The 70
Vibrations 99
Vocal Cords 93
Voice as an Instrument,
The 91
Voice-production 96
Vowels W
HpOO i* Road J/iOU m-nd U*drr»Uind U


LIST OF TEXT-BOOKS, ETC., FOR THE
TONIC SOL-FA COLLEGE
EXAMINATIONS
Name of Certificate.
PRACTICAL.
Elementary
Intermediate
yd Grade Staff Notation
Matriculation
Advanced
Curwen
Edition Text Books, etc.
8259 The Standard Course
6049 Elementary Studies
8258 The Standard Course
6090 Intermediate Studies
8248 Prima Vista
6186 Staff Reading Tests
8259 The Standard Course
8288 Matriculation Studies
62x1 Text Book of Elementary Staff Notation
8259 The Standard Course
6003 Advanced Sight Tests
PRACTICAL AND WRITTEN
School Teacher's Music Certificate 8290 The School Teacher’s Music Guide....
8276 S.T.M.C. Studies
WRITTEN.
Elementary Theory ~
Intermediate Theory ,
Matriculation Theory
Harmony Analysis, I, 11, 111
Musical Form, I, 11, 111
Musical and Verbal Expression,
Musical Composition, I, II
Musical Composition, 111
Musical Composition, IV
Counterpoint, I, II
Orchestration
Musical History and Literature
8235 Musical Theory, Book I
8236 Musical Theory. Book II
8266 Text Book of Harmony Analysis....
8237 Musical Theory, Book 111
8238 Musical Theory, Book IV
Staff Theory Course, Books I and II
Staff Notation
Figured Bass
8266 Text Book of Harmony Analysis....
8237 Musical Theory, Book 111
8238 Musical Theory, Book IV
8265 Text Book of Harmony
8265 Text Book of Harmony
8265 Text Book of Harmony
8263 Text Book of Counterpoint
8229 Manual of Orchestration
8260 The Student’s Musical History
8261 The Teacher's Manual
Preliminary and ist and 2nd Grade Staff
Notation Theory 6284 and 6285
yd Grade Staff Notation Theory 8257
8215
London : J. Curwen & Sons Ltd., 24 Berners Street, W.l
New York : G. Schirmer Inc., Sole Agents for
U.S.A.
611/7/40


CURWEN
2
7
EDITION
Works by
T. MASKELL HARDY
Text-Books
HOW TO TRAIN CHILDREN’S VOICES (8221). For
school teachers, with a chapter on ladies’ voices.
VOICE PRODUCTION EXERCISES FOR CHILDREN
(6270) Pianoforte edition, also Sol-fa, voice part only, in-
tended for use in connection with ‘How to Train Children’s
Voices’.
PRACTICAL SUGGESTIONS FOR THE TEACHING
OF VOCAL MUSIC IN SCHOOLS. A series of three
text-books for teaching music in schools. The whole dealt
with in a practical manner by an experienced teacher. Book I,
Infants (8339),800k 11, Juniors (8340), Book 111, Seniors (8341).
Books of Songs
SONGS FROM SHAKESPEARE’S PLAYS, THE, Part I
(6335). Part II (6336). Two books of about eighteen songs in
each, with the songs arranged as in the plays, with notes about
their origin and history. Collected and edited by T. Maskell
Hardy. Pianoforte and Vocal editions.
SONGS OF THE COUNTRYSIDE (8623) Ten songs
describing country life. Dainty words and tuneful melodies.
FOR MY GRANDCHILDREN (8641) Ten children’s
songs. Traditional Rhymes and other words.
London: J. Curwen & Sons Ltd., 24 Berners Street, W.l
New York: G. Schirmer Inc., Sole Agents for U.S.A.
669/8/57


CURWBN
EDITION
English Folk-Songs for Schools
Collected end Arranged by S. BARING GOULD, MA., end
CECIL J. SHARP. BA.
Curteen Edition 6051
Dedicated by permission to their Royal Highnesses Prince Edward
and Prince Albert of Wales
The fifty-three songs in this book have, with three exceptions, been
taken down from the Ups of country singers, and have been
especially chosen for use in schools. They meet the Suggestions
of the Board of Education.
CONTENTS
•The Wriggle Teggie Gipsies, O!
•Lord Rendal
The Old Man and hit Wile
The Shepherd'! Daughter
•The Two Magicians
Cold blows the Wind
The Golden Vanity
‘Floweta in the Valley
Ballads
The Conte of Berbery
Henry Martin
Henry Martin (lad version)
Lord Bateman
The Outlandish Knight
Lord Thomas and Fait Bleano*
Henry V and the King o< Francs
The Golden Glove
Songs
•Blow away the morning dew
The Seeds of Love
Hares on the Mountains
Creeping Jane
Poor Old Horse
•High Germany
Sweet England
•Dabbling In the dew
•The Three Huntsmen
•Just as the tide was a-flowing
•The Merry Haymakers
•Strawberry Fair
•Sir John Barleycorn
This old man
The Simple Plonghboy
•Sweet Nightingale
•The FOl
•The Country Farmer’s Son
•The Cuckoo
•The Jolly Waggoner
•Let Bucks a-hunting go
•The Evening Prayer
•The Saucy Sailor
The Loyal Lover
Outward and Homeward Bound
The Dark-eyed Sailor
Near London Town
The Carrion Crow
Infants’ Songs
•Sly Reynard The Tailor and the V
A Frog he would a-wooing go ‘Robin a-Thrush
•The Frog and the Mouse ‘One Michaeimaa Mm
•The Old Woman and the Pedlar The Foolish Boy
Coek-a-doodle doo I ‘Mowing the Barley
‘ Also baaed separately, price jd. each
Price, Staff Notation, with accompanimei
Vocal Edition, both notations, a/6
Words only, I/-
LONDON: J. CURWEN 8C SC
New York: G. Set
3 1508 00497067


The Treasury Sight-Reader
by MAURICE JACOBSON, b.mus. (lond.), a.b.c.m., hon. a.b.c.m.
As the name implies, the ‘Treasury’ sight-readers contain a wealth of
fine tunes. Every field of music has been explored, from Plamsong and
Folk-song to the vocal and instrumental works of the great Masters, not
excluding oratorio and opera; and only thoroughly singable tunes have
been used. Considered alone as an anthology of great melodies which
have stood the test of time the ‘Treasury’ has no little value.
The examples are graded so that the pupil’s progress is made stage by
stage along the soundest educational lines. Adequate material is provided
for each new step, and later examples throughout the series incorporate
earlier work.
SYNOPSIS OF THE SERIES
Book 1 (f>359): Junior; 130 Exercises. KeysEflat, E, F, G, D and C Majors.
Stepwise notes s, to d l —easy tonic chord leaps —o, o' I cJ, J,
r— i A3
J J' notes and rests —ties—« < <
Book 11 (6360): Junior; 14a Exercises. B flat major—r* m 1 f l — stepwise
notes S| to f l —tones of the scale approached and quitted by leap —
more difficult JTj — octave practice, beginning on m 1 t, r, ending
on ni| s —semibreve rest — beginning on second beat in , 4
Book 111 (6361): Intermediate; 167 Exercises A flat and A major— key
signatures studied —f| m, r, d, —f 1 d l — fe stepwise contradicted by
b and ty—l fe 9—l d 1 ml —beginning on f—three-bar rhythm—s —
notation of music with words added—quaver rears in S J J —beginning
on various weak beats — J • . “ell
Book IV (636 a): Senior; 157 Exercises. More difficult le—ta contra-
dicted by li and # —notes of ray and soh chords by leap— l fr,
<JI 1 I r, s | t| r f—sequences—phrasing—beginning on fifth quaver
of • bar, 4 and t —Syncopation J rJ> J J J
j* 1 j 1 ri i 1 1 n m
Jo Jf m o •#> *mo 99
Book V (6363): Senior; 220 Exercises. All major and minor keys modal-
diatonic (advanced) and chromatic intervals—modulati
time divisions including J J t So
-,3*ii 1 t «
j U»l, , 1 • s 4 J-
