

£{ow Jtfowen Was discovered.
>o<-.
The Cruise of the Santa Barbara, 9 tons, in search of a
Northern Port in the year 1859.
By JAMES GORDON.
Having been tempted in the year 1859
to go to Rockhampton by the reports ot
the goldfield in that neighbourhood—which,
as is well known, turned out a complete
failure —<l became acquainted with Henry
Daniel Sinclair, captain and owner of tno
Santa Barbara, nine tons, who. In conse-
quence of the papers having stated that
Sir Charles Cowper, Premier of New South
Wales, had offered a reward for the <lis-
covery of a now port north of Rockbamp-
lon, said he wished to try for this reward
if he could make proper arrangements tor
this purpose. He then asked my friend,
Benjamin Poole, and myself, to join him
in the venture, which we agreed to do on
certain conditions. These were Gut we
should all assist to the best of our ability
lu money and work In fitting out the ves-
sel with stores, &c., fOr a three months’
cruise, and that we should all share
equally in profits which might arise from
the trip, either by finding a suitable har-
bour or in any other way ; my Idea being
that If we discovered -i good harbour in
the North there would be a good oppor-
tunity to take up country for cattle or
sheep runs, as It was understood that all
country North of Rockhampton could no
selected for these purposes at that timn.
Accordingly agreements were made to this
effect, and we set sail and proceeded down
the Fltzfoy River on the Ist September.
1859, H. D. Sinclair being In command of
the vessel, and Thomas seaman, Ben.
Poole, and myself being considered either
passengers or sailors, according to taste.
Following is my the voyage
September 1. —Sailed from Rockhampton
at 3 a.m . had a fine run down the Fitzroy,
and anchored for the night hear entrance of
river. Weather gloomy, wind north-east.
September 2.—Went to Curtis’ Island
Pilot Station, where we commenced repair-
ing the boat, which was Very old and likely
lo give trouble.
September 3.—Wind northerly. Busily
engaged repairing sails and cleaning fire'-
arms.
Septetabef 4.—Wind N.E., still fine.
September s.—Sailed for the north, hav-
ing got two Datives to go with us.’ To-
wards the afternoon wind came strong
again from the north, and obliged us to
come back to cur old anchorage again
about 10 at night. Natives Very sick, and
begged to got ashore to sleep in the b’usn.
oeptember 6.—Got the darkies aboard,
and made an early start again, wind light,
and anchored at Cape Keppel. There the
darkies again went ashore and bolted.
September 7—Very light winds, and after
o deal of backing and filling reached one
of the Keppel Islands, where we anchored
in three fathoms ; nice sandy beach, and
water in a native well. Saw more natives,
who bolted on our approaching them.
September 8. —Calm. Getting more wood
and water. After deepening well, busy
cooking.
September 9.—Wind still (northerly.
C ’.plain making new sails, and Ben and 1
v ent all over the island. There is plenty
of water, also some good soil, and feed
sufficient to keep two flocks of sheep. Saw
several natives’ camps, . but the darkles
kept out of our sight, though no doubt we
were watched.
September 9.—There was a report in
Rockhampton of European woman living
on the island, but we saw nothing to lead
us to suppose such was the case.
September 10. —An idle day with us, but
th£ captain very busy bending new sails.
September 11. —Weather fine and steady
breeze ; so got under weigh, and reached
Keppel Island, north-east, in the evening.
There the natives were assembled on a
small hill close to our anchorage, where
they flourished their spears, and danced
and yelled—in fact, gave us an excellent
specimen of the savage war dance, which
amused us all very much. We then put


them, but they would not venture near it-
September 12. —Wind from the north*
east. Made a start ; after we got away
some fifteen or twenty miles it commenced
to blow very hard, and we nearly lost our
boat. We then bore up and returned to
Keppel Island. We also lost our harpoo.i
10-day, which the captain stuck into a
large porpoise. This is very unlucky, as
we trusted to It to get us fresh food oc-
casionally, and also oil, which we require
very much for reading in the evening, there
being only a limited supply of candles on
board.
September 13.—Pulled round part of the
island, which seems to be well grassed
and fit to carry sheep and goats ; also
went fishing, and with our usual lucik
caught nothing. At last the breeze sprang
up and we set sail, determined to go north
if there was any possibility of doing so.
In a couple of hours the wind headed us
again, and we were obliged to come back
to the Island. While employed in cook.ng
a damper we had a severe squall, with
thunder and lightning, so got on board as
quickly as possible, leaving the damper
In the fire, in case we might have to up
nchor and run for it. No occasion for
his, and got the damper afterwards.
September 14.—Sailed again, though the % .
rather was still squally, this being lh~
season of equinoctial gales.
September 15. —After being tossed about
all night, and weary with watching, we
managed to run into Port Bowen before
daylight in the morning, where we anchor-
ed in eleven fathoms.
September 16.—0 n looking about us after
daylight we find this to be apparently
a large and capacious harbour, surround-
ed by hills of considerable elevation, but
the country is principally of a sandy and
rocky nature. The entrance to it is about
two miles wide, and partly surrounded by
small islands covered with oines, which
gives it a very pleasing appearance. As
to whether this Is a good or safe harbour
I am, of course, not in a position to ex-
press an opinion. We set sail again about
8 a.m., and about noon we were off Cape
Townsend The remainder of the day calm.
September 17—We had light baffling
reach I hought we would never
th- whlrf y lB i andB. Towards evening
the wind improved, and about 10 p.m. we
anchored on the west side of Percy Island
No. 1. The weather was heavy and thun*
dery.
September 18.—This morning, about 1
o'clock, we were waked up by the wind
howling, and before we had time to shift
our position, found ourselves dead on a
lee shore, and the wind blowing great
guns. Under these circumstances, there be-
September 20. —Captain busy with sails
and still a heavy gale blowing from south-
east.
September 21.—Weather getting more
moderate. Busy getting food and water.
The turtle comes into the harbour every
day, but w r e cannot catch him.
September 22-—Captain and Tom are
busy cleaning ship's bottom. Ben and I
busy washing clothes in the forenoon,
then we went after cockatoos, of which
we shot several. The island is very
rocky and sandy, but fit to carry a num-
ber of sheep or goats.
September 23.—Finished all the neces-
sary repairs, filled up wood and water,
and also procured pumpkins, the seed
having been sown by some kind person
Shot more black and white cockatoos, of
which there were abundance in the island!
and birds of different varieties, including
swamp pheasants and pigeons. We were
on the point of setting sail in the even-
ing. but the captain discovered it w r as a
Friday, so put it off until to-morrow. He
says he is not superstitious, but, like all
sailors, he does not like setting sail on a
Friday.


September 24. —After breakfast we set
sail once more for the North with a fair
wind, which lasted all day and night.
September 25.—At 9 a.m. passed Linno
Island, after which we saw many more of
the Cumberland Islands, which seemed
to be larger and more numerous than laid
down in the chart ; on mainland high
ranges and native fires. In the evening
tide running six knots, and obliged to
anchor on the side of a large island la
a very awkward place.
September 26.—Started after breakfast,
when we got away from the island, and an-
chored in a better place. After dinner
made a fresh start ; good progress, and m
the evening pulled up at a small islam.
where we found plenty of shells, and also
tracks of turtles and fine specimens or
coral.
September 27.—At 2 a.m. we got under
weigh, after having a job to get up me
anchor, which was foul of a rock. Wind
from south-east. Native fires on Cape
Gloucester. Anchored on the west side of
Middle Island for the night, where there
are plenty of fish, turkeys, and tracks of
turtle.
September 28. —On reaching Cape Glou-
cester we sailed into Edgecombe Bay, and
as our chart shows that none of it has
been surveyed with the exception of the
headlands marked by Captain Cook, wc
are in hopes of making some discoveries
here.
September 29.—At 6 a.m. ft light breeze
from the south-east, got under w r ay, and
stood in for Wickham River, as it appears
4n the chart, when it came to blow from
the north-east, and the sea making heavy
we were compelled to haul off, there being
evidently a bar across the mouth. As we
coasted saw several more creeks, which
seemed to communicate with the river, and
a large body of water inside. Proceeded
some distance up the bay, and anchored.
Channels and sandbanks in the bay lead to
the belief that a large river or rivers may
empty themselves into this bay.
September 30.—Weighed anchor, and
commenced working further up the bay ;
grounded on a bank, and anchored. Left
Ren on board, and went exploring for
fivers in the small boat. Got near head of
bay, and fancied that the Santa was under
way, which gave us all a fright. Return-
ed some distance, and found all right, then
went several miles up a large creek or
river on the north side of the bay ; deep
water and wide, but no good country as
fax as we could judge. Saw a native ; he
gave us a necklace of shells, for which he
received a match-box in exchange. He
told us where there was water, so deter-
mined to go there to-morrow.
October I.—At daylight Ben and I went
ashore to obtain water showed us yester-
day. When we arrived four natives were
3 G. 77
awaiting us armed with spears and nul’a-
nullas. We did not much like their ap-
pearance. and they would not lay down
their arms- We gave them two bouilli
tins to bring us water in. and in order to
see how they shaped. They retired a short
distance, and pretended to bring them back
full, but we discovered they were empty.
Then they went a little way behind a rock,
and filled them with salt water, and emp-
tied it as we did, which showed of rascality
and treachery ; and as we moved away
they laid hold of the boat and attempted
to drag her into a small inlet, when we
raised our firearms, which they evidently
knew well, and they let go. We then
pushed off, and Immediately more natives
fully armed rushed out of the bushes, and
commenced howling and dancing, and ran
into the water after us like madmen. This
fully convinced us of their intentions, and
we considered ourselves fortunate in not
going ashore, as Ben and I would have
gone for water had only a few natives
made their appearance. In the evening
aboard the captain was savage that we did
not fire upon them, and wished to return
with us ashore again, but we declined.
Water is now becoming a serious con-
sideration, as we have only (half-a-casn.
left out of our complement of two small
casks, which only last a few days with
care. We are now on an allowance, and
if we don’t find water to-morrow must pro-
ceed on our homeward voyage or fight it
out with the natives. This would not be
pleasant, as the natives here have the re-
putation and appear to be determined
characters, and I am sure they did not
show any cowardice to-day : in fact, they
seemed to have made sure of us, and show-
ed their game too quickly, or they wouift
probably by this time be walking into us
without pepper or salt. Their self-
satisfied look when they laid hold of our
boat showed this.
October 2.—The three of us started
again before daylight to search for water
in some of the creeks on the south side or
the Bay ; had a pull up of some six miles,
and as a strong north-easterly had set In.
ran some risk in crossing the bar at the
mouth of the creek or river, as it is nearly
a quarter of a mile wide, and a strong tide
running in it. On ascending a small hill,
found the river was apparently running
for some miles through a perfectly level
country. Had not much prospect of get-
ting fresh water, so we concluded to go
only a short distance up, and reserve our-
selves for the pull home at night, when we
hoped the north-easterly would have gone
down, otherwise we could not get back In.
our old tub of a boat. While waiting at
mouth of river we fortunately saw
cockatoos at no great distance, and fancied
there might be water there. Found no
surface water there, bit an old weli


a puil up a winding creek or river, but
bad to walk only a short, distance
to top of small hill, where we had a lair
view at low, level country, Interspersed
with mangrove swamps, and no go u d iur
anything. The hills there rise to a con-
siderable height, some of which are lightly
timbered, and seem to he the commence-
ment of good country. We saw a groat
many tracks of natives, from which and
the number at fires we see we suppose
Anativc), whi. h I dug out with my hands,
and found a plentiful supply of brackish
water, which was a cause of Joy to us, ae>
it made us Independent of natives at pre-
sent. The wind having gone down, at
about 10 p.m., we started on our return to
the Santa Barbara.
October 3. —After starting last night we
had a tremendous pull, as the tide was
against us, and we had also considerable
difficulty in getting through the breakers.
We had also difficulty in finding the
Santa Barbara on account of the
darkness, consequently did not ar-
rive there till 4 in the morning,
all very much fagged and exhausted. Had
a few hours’ sleep, and set sail for the
fresh water we found yesterday. The cap-
tain tells us while we were away the na-
tives made a raft and attempted to come
off to the vessel, but after firing a few
shots at them they retired dancing and
yelling. We found good anchorage for the
Barbara inside the mouth of the river,
but not much water on the bar ; it bears
south-west by south from North Point
of Cape Upstart. Some eight or ten miles
Inland from this place there seemed to bo
a commencement of beautiful country, but
along the south shore only mangrove
swamps and low-lying scrubby land.
October 4.—Got in the remainder of our
wood and water, and then started, in boats
to explore the river, but did not proceed
far. as there was only Tom In charge of
the Santa, and we felt uneasy after the
attack of yesterday. In fact this threatens
to destroy the object of the expedition, as
we cannot proceed in the boat with less
than three, and one Is not sufficient to
protect the Santa Barbara. Besides this
we have a miserable stock of firearms ;
In fact, there Is only Ben’s double-barrel
and a single barrel fit for service. There
Is a rifle also, with a damaged lock, which
we sordetlmes fire by means of a match
or fire-stick. The natives here have not
made their appearance to-day, but from
the fires in all directions we fancy they
must be numerous. As the wind was un-
favourable we remained Inside to-day and
took thle opportunity of planting some
pumpkin seeds ashore. We are sorry to
see fine country in the distance, and not be
able to reach It owing to the smallness of
our party. Were there six or eight In-
stead of four of us we could go anywhere
and set'the natives at defiance. We tried
to geU out this morning, but found there
was not sufficient water to take us over
■the bar, so came to an anchor some dis-
tance up the bay. There seemed to be a
passage at Abbot’s Bay which wc mean to
try to-morrow.
October 7.—Moved the Santa a little
nearer with the morning’s tide. Sinclair,
Bon, ami I then went In a boat In erdor
to ascend a hill and see the countiy. Had
them to be very numerous, but we did
not see any of them. As we were returning
■we heard some shots, which we replied to,
and hurried back as quickly as possible ;
on the way we saw natives running into
a mangrove swamp opposite the Santa. Wo
found they had again ventured to attack
her, seeing there was only one man
aboard. It seems as soon as it was low
water they crossed the sandbanks, drag-
ging a canoe with them, and were able
to approach on a bank within a hundred and
fifty or two hundred yards oT the vessel.
Then they commenced dancing and yelling,
numbering about thirty, which put Tom
In a great funk. He fired shots over their
heads to frighten them, and also to give us
the chance of hearing the report if near
enough, but this made no Impression upon
them ; he then loaded the rifle with ball
and fired it off with the help of a fire-
stick. and he thinks one of them was hit
, at all events, there was a great commo-
tion among them, and hearing the report
of our gun about the same time, thev
speedily decamped. They are treacherous
scoundrels, and we think Thomas deserves
great-credit for acting in the way he did.
Ben and I afterwards went ashore and saw
the tracks of both the natives and the
canoe, so there Is no mistake about ths
matter, and we consider we have had
another providential escape. We arc now
not to try the passage, but resolved r«»
leave Upstart Bay as quickly as possible.
,nnd sorry w« did not do so earlier, as it
has really nothing to recommend It, We
sailed some distance down the bay this
evening.
October B.—Up anchor again at 4 this
morning ; wind light and foul. Landed
near Cape Upstart in afternoon to bake
a damper and look for water, but found
none.
October 9.—'Decided to get inside the bay,
and then we had a foul wind. Saw several
turtle, W 3 have been moving all night,
but have made no progress. We now mean
to steer for Holborne Island to look for
turtle there. I hope we shall be fortunate
otherwise this trip will be a bad spec.
October 11.—We have been sailing all
night, but the wind is right in our teeth.
Holborne Island In sight, and only sixteen,
miles off ; it is very hard to say when we


Ehall reach it ; wc are weary watching two
nights. •
October 12. —This morning about 1
o’clock It wae blowing hard, and a heavy
sea running, which unfortunately swamped
the boat, and before we could get her
properly secured, the upper works were
carried away, which I fear will render her
of no further service. We made up our
minds to run for Cape Gloucester, and got
under shelter of land about 6 a.m. An-
chored at the small island where we were
before. After breakfast went ashore to
look for water and refit ; dug three wells
and found only salt water. As we knew
of no water nearer than Percy Islands, have
resolved to go there and then home, unless
we can fail in with water to-morrow in
Edgecombe Bay. We have examined the
turtle tracks in the Island* ; they are very
numerous, but we cannot make out any
fresh tracks, and fear this is not the proper
season for finding them or their eggs,
which they bury in the sand for hatching
purposes.
October 13.—Steered for the passage be-
tween Gloucester Island and the mainland;
in passing along saw some native fires,
and bore down for them. They pointed out
where there was water, and wished us
to land, which we declined. Whilst w.i
were talking to them three canoes, with
three men each, came round the point, an 1
we wanted to make use of them if pos-
sible in procuring water. At first they
were very shy. After a time they came
alongside, holding up their bands in the
usual way to show they had no weapons.
Gave them tomahawk, &c., also tins to
fill, which they brought off with water.
We then gave them billies and a bucket to
fetch water, and they worked so well we
had the casks nearly full by evening. For
this they received another tomahawk, also
some shirts, and various other articles.
Towards evening a number came aboard ot
.us. and we were all very friendly. We are
inclined to form a good opinion of them;
at the same time we put no great con-
fidence in them, and we intend to keep a
watch all night, especially as we notice all
the men, to the number of fourteen, have
crossed to near where the Santa Is lying,
and have left the canoes on the other side
of the passage. These men arc smart and
intelligent.
October 14.—Early in the morning, while
the captain and I only were on deck,
shells full of water were brought alongside
by two darkies wearing the shirts we gave
them yesterday, and one proceeded to the
bow and the other to the stern of the
Santa, but whilst going there I noticed
there was something in their backs, con-
cealed under the shirts wo gave them, and
fearing treachery, I called out to 'Ben and
Tom to come on deck at once, which they
did. We then asked the captain to lift
up the tail of the .shirt of one of these
fellows to see what was there, and on doing
we discovered one of the tomahawks
we gave them yesterday, and at once they
both jumped overboard and swam for the
. shore, this clearly showing their kind in-
tentions towards ua. However, as Bobby
Burns says, “ The best-laid schemes of
mice and men gang aft agley,” and in this
1 particular case it was lucky for all of us
that It was so. The captain was very In-
dignant at this treachery, and wished to
shoot the blacks while in the water, but I
persuaded him not to do so. In reality
they deserved to be shot for their ingrati-
tude, but at the same dime I could uot
help admiring their courage in acting as
f they did. fVaen these two reached, the
shore the whole mob gave a few yells and
disappeared in the scrub. We took their
boat aboard, which came in handy .for fire-
wood. We then proceeded on our voyage.
October 15.—'Found when getting up wo
were anchored nearly two miles from shore,
which was too far, and would occupy too
much time with our rascally boat, conse-
quently we stood over the Bay, Intending
to return again towards the evening ; ran
across Double Bay, and had a good view of
the country.
Passed a couple of islands near the coast,
and inside the third we discovered we were
in a most splendid harbour* where ships
could remain in perfect safety. The har-
bour is formed partly by islands and part-
ly by an elbow of mainland. Inside, we
found the water perfectly smooth, though
there was a strong north-easterly blowing
and a nasty sea in the Bay. -This has put
the captain and all of .us In good spirits,
as we have found what we wanted, and we
have decided to claim country In this
neighbourhood and remain some days In
order to make a survey of the place. There
is abundance of fish in the harbour, some
of which we caught.
October I<s.—tAll hands ashore, and com-
menced a survey of the island, which tho
captain has named Station Island (after-
wards named Stone Island). It is some
five or six miles In circumference, and we
were all very tired towards evening when
we had finished the survey. Saw a great
many native tracks, also several acres of
ground resembling a garden, completely
dug over by the natives, which was a
greater mark of industry than we were
prepared to give them credit for. The
ground in this place was full of a vege-
table resembling nuts In shape and flavour.
October 17.—A1l hands ashore again. In-
tending to complete the survey, but before
we had been an hour ashore saw a canoe
putting off to the Santa, which was a sig-
nal for us all to hurry on board again. Tho
natives would not then approach
us, but as we saw we could
not leave the Santa with safety.


Mr. Dalrymple, who travelled overland, ac-
companied by several squatters and others,
with moba of horses and cattle. These
events all happened about the middle of
April, 1861.
Previous to the settlement at Port Deni-
son our application for runs was returned
to us, drawing our attention to a new law
being passed with regard to the stocking
of runs, and this we were not In a posi-
tion to comply with, consequently we lost
all Interest in these lands. Under all the
circumstances of the case, I consider our
party has even now a just claim for tne
reward, which was offered in good faith
by Sir Charles Cowper, and approved of
by Sir William Denison and the first Go-
vernor of Queensland, and I consider if we
don’t receive this award we are unjustly
treated. We spent a lot of time and money
on this enterprise, and ran at the samn
time a risk of our lives, and for doing so
we have not up to the present time re-
ceived a single penny.
I may mention that during our voyage of
exploration we found the country along the
coast generally bad, but at several places
wo saw indications of goo ■ country in tho
distance. We regretted much that we were
not able to examine it more minutely ow-
ing to the smallness of our party. The Is-
lands have a much more inviting appear-
ance than the mainland, there being less
scrub, and the soil is of a .better descrip-
tion. The natives are numerous both on
the mainland and islands, and as far ae
wo have experienced they are very treach-
erous.
W lln Villi
3 1508 00810230 8
- - - - : - ... . . . - - ,
tainted by tile BtilbaMe Newspaper Cbhifabyi Limited, BriebaPes
