

_ 'T • ” pom . i /v, ■
M} rerHeftiCh -rtrtDt* ;s
P/)wp/Utri- no* -r '*
TRACTS FOR THE PEOPLE, No. 4.
FOB GRATUITOUS DISTRIBUTION.
HOW VICTORIA HAD HER NOSE CUT OFF
TO IMPROVE HER FACE,
Victoria was a young lady who had experienced a rapid
change of fortune. She had been snubbed in her earlier years
by an elder sister, but had come unexpectedly into an immense
fortune, and had become a glittering princess in society. Young
and uncontrolled by parents or guardians, she spent her money
lavishly, and the bulk of her fortune was soon gone, although
with prudence she still had a fine income.
Her friends, who had taken part in her extravagance, deter-
mined to hold a consultation, for her health was failing, and,
unfortunately, some disagreeable symptoms had shown them-
selves upon her nose. In fact, dissipation had produced its
usual effect, and no cosmetics had the least effect upon those
dreadful pimples.
The doctors came from far and near, all anxious to be employed
as family physicians. Some suggested that her nose was too
long, and that it interfered with her breathing. One of her old
medical men who had attended her when she was “ suffering a
recovery,” said that it might be so, for a great authority in
England had said that in extreme cases a very small piece might
be cut off the point of the nose with advantage, although the
organ itself was of infinite value to the human system. Then
came a Scotch doctor, who had no idea of being shut out of the
house, and suggested that there might be no harm in


taking off about half the nose, which would not interfere with
the bone.
In vain her best friends protested that it would spoil her
beauty and impair her health, and that nature was the best
judge on such subjects. Victoria had been spoilt by flattery,
and had been lately plied with the addresses of a fascinating
apothecary, who had taken advantage of her youth. So she
submitted to the operation, which was performed under the
direction of the Scotch doctor by a French surgeon famous for
his politeness.
The young lady having naturally a fine constitution, did not
suffer much at first, but began soon afterwards to feel shortness
of breath. Four or five years passed on, and alarming symptoms
appeared, palpitation and hysterics. The clever apothecary gave
her sugared pills, and admired the beauty of all her features,
except the nose, which he undertook to re-embellish. He said
that the nose was a foreign projection on the face, intended to
act as a ventilator, but that it was too much exposed to the air,
and caused wind on the stomach. If the young lady would only
have it taken off entirely, and the air-holes stopped, breathing
would be conducted without disturbance through her mouth,
which was not exposed to outside influences.
Her father’s old doctors protested that the heart and lungs
would be injured by such a cruel experiment, for the nose and
mouth were so formed that the more air you took in at the one,
the more you put out at the other—by mutual action and
exchange; while you could shut the one and open the other as
you chose, which was a great convenience.
It was all in vain. A dose of goos sherry wine was given
to her instead of chloroform, and another large slice was
taken off her once beautiful nose. Of course, the bad symp-
toms were aggravated, although her strength was kept up for
a time with strong doses of mutton broth ; but the play of
the nostrils was gone, and the young lady, like a broken-winded
horse, took to roaring.
The case excited great interest in the medical world. The
poor young lady had to stay very much at home, for she


received few invitations, and her elder sister cut her out in
society.
Meanwhile, the apothecary was installed as medical adviser,
and fooled her to her heart’s content. He induced her to
believe that roaring was natural—that it was owing to her
having so much heart, and that if she would only allow him to
protect her he would do the roaring for her. So it went on,
until you could hear the poor creature panting from Parliament
House to the Eastern Market. It so happened, however, that the
enterprising apothecary, after a time, lost his place in Miss
Victoria’s household, on account of his having administered a
powerful emetic to the servants in their evening meal.
People of Victoria, the case is yours ! You came into a great
fortune, which led you into dissipation, and your nose showed
the usual bad effects. You allowed your tariff, which wag
founded on natural principles to be tinkered, forgetting that
the external prominence of foreign trade was the very breath
of your nostrils ; that action and reaction took place by means
of exchange, which made all the imports received in return for
your exports as valuable for promoting local industry as
if they had been made in the colony, for they were exchanged
for articles made by yourselves. You were employed in
turning the great natural resources of Victoria to the best
account, and what you produced cheaply furnished you with
those things which other countries from their position could
produce more cheaply than you could yourselves. The current
of trade and industry circulated freely, the nose of our fable
representing the external, the mouth the internal, commerce of
the country. You went out of your way to maim and disfigure
the beauty of your face, and you became a bye-word among the
nations. You now breathe heavily, and the irritation which
this produces makes you all the more impatient. You have
suffered enough from quacks in spite of your natural vigour,
which alone has enabled you to bear it. You have followed
the example of the United States—where the cost of living has
been nearly doubled by means of high protective duties, which
have made them not independent of, but dependent on, foreign


manufacturers—instead of following the example of England,
which has quadrupled her commerce and extended her marine
over every sea within the last fifty years.
Freedom of exchange had been the breath of your nostrils
and the life-blood of your industry ; but you went out of your
way to spoil its symmetry, and at the end of five years of
semi-protection, in 1871, under the guidance of the apothecary,
you did your best to complete the mischief by inflicting on
yourselves, another half-million of protective taxation, in-
geniously contrived so as to enhance the price of a vast
number of commodities to the extent of an additional million,
as has been shown in Tract No. 1.
Instead of an income-tax upon the wealthy,, this was a far
heavier charge upon the poor. Interference with industrial
freedom has the same effect upon the commonwealth as
the mutilation of the natural organ has upon the body..
Thinking that you were wiser than Providence, you inter-
fered with the breathing apparatus which God had given
you ; and if you doubt the truth of our argument, you have
only to tighten your fingers on your nose for a brief space, and
you will at once see that foreign air and internal respiration
are indissolubly connected.
Published by direction of the Provisional Central Committee, to whom all
communications should be addressed. Box No, 221, Post Office.
STILLWELL AND KNIGHT r PRINTERS, COLLINS STREET EAST.
