

HOWTO DEFEND:XHE COLONY:
BEING THE SUBSTANCE OF A SPEECH
DELIVERED IK
THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
ON TUESDAY, 20th DECEMBER, 1&59.
JOHN DXINMORE LANG, D.D„
ONE OF THE REPRESENTATIVES OP THE OUT OP SYDNEY
ON THE MOTION OF HENRY PABKES, ESQ., M.P.
FOR THH
ORGANIZATION OF A COLONIAL MILITIA.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
JOHN L. SHEREIFE, GEORGE STREET.
PRINTED BY F. MASON AND CO., 105, YORK STREET.
1860,




EXPLANATORY NOTICE
In the “ Votes and Proceedings of the Legislative Assembly,’ for Tues-
day, 20th September, 1859, there appears, for the first time, the following
notice of a Motion for the 4th October: —
1. Mr. Paekes to move, That this House, having had under its consideration the subject
of the defence of the Colony, resolves as follows :
(1.) That having regard to the present complications of Foreign Governments, and the
hold which great Maritime Powers have in the seas of chis Hemisphere, it is impolitic and
unsafe to neglect the means of preparation at our command for protecting the Colony in the
event of its being attacked by an enemy.
(2.) That the maintenance of regular troops in the Colony for its protection is unwise
in policy, and cannot be effective without becoming an excessive burden on the public
revenue.
(3.) That the true principle of military defence, and the only course which would en-
sure effective resistance in extreme circumstances, is to habituate the subjects of the Queen,
in this Colony to the use of arms, and to foster among all classes a loyal and patriotic spirit
of reliance on their own valour and military organization.
(4.) That any opinion herein expressed is not intended to apply to the movements of
Her Majesty’s ships of war in the Australian waters.
(5.) That the foregoing resolutions be conveyed in an Address to the Governor-General,
with a request that His Excellency will be pleased to bring them under the consideration of
the Executive Council; and also transmit a copy of the same to Her Majesty’s Principal
Secretary of State for the Colonies.
On Friday, 23rd September, I gave notice of an Amendment which I
should move on the Resolutions of Mr. Parkes, to the following effect
Contingent Notice of Motion ;
1. Dr. Lang to move, “as an amendment on the motion of Mr. Parkes ,” That the following V
series of Resolutions be substituted for the series to be moved by that Honorable Member.
(1.) That, considering the present aspect of affairs in the European world, there is much
reason to fear, that Great Britain will sooner or later be involved in war with one or other,
if not with more than one, of the great If aval and Military Powers of Europe.
(2.) That, in such an event, the whole of these Australian Colonies—comprising a
rapidly increasing population of upwards of a million of souls—although isolated from the
rest of mankind by surrounding oceans, and having no conceivable interest or concern in
any European contest, will, nevertheless, as part and parcel of the British Empire, be im-
mediately involved in all the hardships and calamities of war; as their reputed wealth and
defenceless condition would render them a primary object of aggression to any great naval
and military Power at war with Britain.


(3.) That, in such circumstances, these Australian Colonies would become one of the
principal theatres of the war, while our hitherto Pacific Ocean would become the chosen
battle-field of the navies of Europe.
(4.) That the occupation of the Island of Hew Caledonia by the French, rather as a
great Naval and Military station, than as a French Colony, in the Pacific, evidently points
to this anticipated contingency in the great game of European politics.
(5.) That so long as Great Britain retains these Colonies in a state of political depen-
dence, as part and parcel of her vast Empire, she is morally bound to defend them against
all their enemies, both by sea and land; more especially in wars undertaken for her own
political objects, and in which her remote Colonies of the Southern Hemisphere can have no
possible interest or concern.
(6.) That the cost of defending the Australian Colonies, in the event of a European war,
in which Great Britain should be one of the belligerent parties, would entail upon the
Mother Country an enormous expense, while it would materially diminish her means of
defence in other localities of far greater importance to her own population.
(7.) That, in such circumstances, it is alike the interest and the duty of Great Britain,
as a great commercial and professedly Christian nation, to obviate all these alarming possi-
bilities of the future, by giving Her Australian Colonies their entire freedom and indepen-
dence —and by constituting them, under some form of Federal Government, and under such
conditions as would be mutually satisfactory—a Sovereign and Independent Australian
Empire.
(8.) That the benefits of a material character which Great Britain derives from these
Colonies, under the existing system of political dependence, consist principally, if not exclu.
siyely, in their affording an eligible market for the products of her native industry, in their
being a field for the supply of raw produce for her manufactures, and in their affording an
eligible outlet for her superabundant population.
(9.) That all these benefits would not only be continued to Great Britain, and perpetu-
ated for all future time, but would be indefinitely increased and enhanced, notwithstanding
the severance of the present ties of political dependence; while the ties of a common interest
and mutual affection, arising from their common origin, and their community of language,
of laws, and of religion, would not only bo unimpaired, but would grow with their growth,
and strengthen with their strength.
(10.) That the foregoing Resolutions be conveyed in an Address to the Governor-
General, with a request that His Excellency will be pleased to transmit a copy of the same
to Her Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for the Colonies.
Immediately on this Notice of Motion having been given, something like
a scene occurred in the Assembly, of which the following record is given in
the Votes and Proceedings of the day; there having been a large display of
gratuitous patriotism and loyalty on the occasion, on the part of several
honorable members who professed to have the exclusive possession of these
political virtues, together with a series of offensive charges of disaffection,
disloyalty, and something amounting almost to treason, which they united
in preferring against myself.
5, Question of Order :—The Revd. Dr. Lang giving notice of his intention to move
certain Resolutions by way of amendment upon the motion standing in the name of Mr
Parkes first on the Hot ice Paper for Tuesday, October 4, —
And exception being taken, by Mr. Murray, to the length and argumentative character
of the Notice, and especially to the suggestion for the Separation of this Colony from the
Dominions of Her Majesty, contained in the seventh section thereof, —
And Mr. Murray requiring that the Oath of Allegiance be read,—


And the Clerk having, by direction of the Speaker, read the thirty-third section of the
Constitution Act and the Oath of Allegiance therein prescribed to be taken by Members of
this House, —
And the Speaker stating that, in his opinion, there was nothing in the Notice in con-
travention of the Oath of Allegiance or of the rules of this House,
The matter dropped.
Some idea may be formed of the treatment which my Notice of Motion
received from the ultra loyalists of the House, from the following Notice of
Motion on the subject, which was given by Captain Russell, on Tuesday,
the 27th September:—
6. Oapta'n Russell to move, That whereas the proposition submitted to this Honorable
House by the Member for West Sydney, on Friday last, is repugnant to those feelings, which
happily pervade all classes of Her Majesty’s subjects in these Colonies, and is scandalous
and derogatory to the character of the whole community,—Resolve, that the said Resolutions
be torn by the Clerk of the Assembly, and swept from the floor of the House.
As my object had been sufficiently attained by getting my Amendment
placed upon the paper, accompanied with a, declaration from the Speaker
that it contained nothing unparliamentary or improper, I then begged
leave to withdraw it, which was given accordingly; well knowing, as I did,
that I should still have an opportunity of virtually submitting my amend-
ment when Mr. Parkes’ Resolutions should be discussed. It is gratifying
to find, however, that there is such an amount of pent-up loyalty in this
community, ready, like the pent-up unemployed capital in the Sydney
Banks, to be developed and put in action on all suitable occasions. In further
illustration of this pleasing fact, the honorable member for Newcastle gave
the following notice of an additional contingent Motion on the 28th Sep-
tember :
Contingent Notice of Motion :
1. Mr. Hodgson to move, as an amendment to Mr. Parkes ’ motion, That there be inserted
between Resolutions 4 and 5, the Resolution following:—That in calling the attention of
Her Majesty’s Government to the importance of a constant and eflectual provision for the
protection of the Ports and Commerce of these Colonies from the aggression of Her Majesty s
enemies, this House desires to give expression to its affectionate loyalty to Her Majesty’s
Person and Government, to its high appreciation of the honorable position of Now South
Wales as a part of the British Empire, and to its readiness to share in all the duties and
responsibilities which, whether in peace or war, can justly devolve on Her Majesty’s Aus-
tralian subjects.
Captain Russell’s fiery zeal had subsequently cooled down, it would seem, \
I presume under the late rains on the Hunter ; for the Notice of Motion
which he had given on the 27th was afterwards silently withdrawn from the
paper.
The discussion of Mr. Parkes’ Resolutions did not take place till the 20th
December, when they were passed seriatim after a long debate, in the course
of which the following Resolution was substituted, on the motion of the
honorable the Premier, for the second of the series submitted by Mr.
Parkes: —
That the regular troops in the Colony ought to be supplemented by a National Militia
composed of Citizens of the Country.


The majority in favour of Mr. Forster’s amended Resolution consisted of
41, the following 10 members forming the minority :
Mr. Parkes Mr- Dailey,
Mr. Wisdom Mr. G. Lang,
Mr. Wilson Mr. Pemell,
Mr. Hoskins Mr. Copper, I Tellers.
Mr. Robertson Mr. Windeyer, f
Mr. Robertson Mr. >V mdeyer, >
The following was the final state of the Vote in favour of the Resolutions
with Mr. Forster’s Amendment: —
Ayes, 42.
Mr. Forster, Mr. Plunkett,
Mr. Black, Mr. Loder,
Mr. Samuel, Mr. Scott,
Mr. IVott, Mr. Laidlaw,
Mr. Hawkins, Mr. Macleay,
Mr. M'Arthur, Mr. Cape,
Mr. Clements, Mr. Morris,
Mr. Piddington, Mr. Asher,
Mr. Russell, Mr. Wisdom,
Mr. Murray, Mr. Hoskins,
Mr. Hamilton, Mr. Cummings,
Mr. Robertson, Mr. Flood,
Mr. Windeyer, Mr. Wilson,
Mr. Parkes, Mr. Hay,
Mr. Gray, Mr. Campbell,
Mr. Flett, Mr. Roberts,
Mr. Wild, Mr. Broughton,
Mr. Hyeronimus, Mr. Oxley,
Mr. Byrnes, Mr. Garrett,
Mr. Cooper, Mr. Lord, lm„ii„ r „
Mr. Hodgson, Mr. Lyons, f ieuers '
Noes, 8.
Mr. Gordon, Mr. Oakes,
Mr. Rotton, Mr. G. Lang,
Mr. Jones, Mr. Dickson, > Tellfi ™
Mr. Arnold, Mr. Weekes, j
Mr. Hodgson, after making an ultra-loyalist and bellicose speech, with-
drew his proposed Amendment. I did not choose to record my vote on the
occasion, being equally opposed to a military force and a national militia.
But I embraced the opportunity, which the discussion afforded me, of
delivering the following speech, which, at the request of certain influential
persons who cordially approve of the course indicated in my Resolutions, is
now published in a separate and amended form, with the important series
of quotations, of which I read the greater number in the course of my
address, from the speeches and writings of some of the most illustrious
patriots and statesmen of the mother country, inserted in full. The
subject is now fairly before the public, in all its breadth and importance;
and if we arc really to have a general war in Europe, as is strongly
anticipated, the public will soon find that I am entirely in the right. If
I have been before my age in this matter, as I have been so often already
in other matters of importance, I shall not be so long.
Certain Colonial wiseacres pretend to laugh at the idea that the French would
ever think of attacking us, in these remote regions, in the event of a war.
But, surely, the French know better themselves what they would be likely to
do in such a case, (Vide page 9); and Lord A. Churchill, a member of the
House of Commons, who has visited these colonies very recently himself,
gives it as his deliberate opinion, that in the event of war , the Australian
Colonies would certainly be attached by the trench. J. H. L,


SUBSTANCE OF A SPEECH, Ac.
Me. Speaker,—
I am entirely in accordance with the honorable mover of the
Resolutions now before the House, as to the premises on which they are
based, viz., the present very serious complications of the great powers of
Europe, and the danger likely to accrue to these distant dependencies of
the British Empire, from the more than probable result of such complica-
cations. I believe lam quite correct in stating that it is the general
impression among intelligent persons in the mother country—whether we
refer to that numerous class in the religious world who are eagerly studying
the record of ancient Scriptural prophecy, and looking forward with fear
and trembling to those calamitous events to which it points; or to those
who merely look to the signs of the times in the political world, and consider
attentively the present aspect and prospects of Europe—l believe it is the
general impression among such persons that we are now on the eve of a whole
series of political and social revolutions of a character and magnitude
unexampled in the previous history of mankind; and that the war in Northern
Italy that has recently been brought so unexpectedly to its close, is merely
the commencement of a whole series of such wars as will ere long be waged
on the battle-field of Europe, with armies far more numerous, and powers
of destruction far more tremendous, than have ever before been arrayed in
mortal combat in the history of our world. In particular, it is the general
impression among intelligent persons in the mother country that the strong
feeling of hostility towards England, which is now almost universally pre-
valent in France, may result at no distant period in a French invasion of
our father-land; and considering the grievous wound which the greats
Northern Autocrat and his people sustained so recently at the hands of
England in the late Russian war and the siege of Sebastopol, there is much
reason to fear that there may be a combination or union of these two tre-
mendous powers of evil against the United Kingdom. Such then are the
probabilities of the future to which we are warranted to look forward,
and against the possible eventualities of which we are bound to provide.
And whether the provision which it is incumbent on us, as parties deeply
concerned in the matter, to make against such an emergency, is such as the
honorable member for Sydney East has recommended in his Resolutions


and the honorable member for Newcastle has pressed upon the House with
so much eloquence and earnestness, or one of a totally different character, such
as I am prepared to suggest, I shall leave it to the House and the public to
determine. At all events there is no question as to the premises on which
the honorable member for Sydney East has based his Resolutions, whatever
may be thought of these Resolutions themselves; for it is undeniable that
the actual complications of the great Powers of Europe render the present a
crisis, even to these remote Australian colonies, of which we cannot possibly
over-estimate the importance.
On a former occasion, when some such question as the present had come
up for discussion in this House, I recollect having stated it as my opinion—■
and that opinion I still retain, regarding it, as I do, as a fundamental principle
or axiom of colonial government—that so long as Great Britain retains her
colonies in a state of political dependence, or, in other words, as part and
parcel of her vast empire, it is her bounden duty to protect them from all
aggression from without; (hear, hear;) and I weuld now lay it down as an
additional axiom of colonial government, of which I shall leave honorable
members and the public generally to ascertain the truth for themselves, in
the exercise of their own common sense, that in the event of such a war as
it is feared is now impending over the mother country, either with France
alone, or with France and Russia combined, it is simply impossible for
Great Britain adequately to protect her upwards of fifty different colonies,
scattered, as these colonies are, over the whole face of the earth, and to make
adequate provision for her own defence at the same time. (Hear, hear.)
The thing is utterly impossible, and the idea of its being practicable under
any conceivable circumstances, is perfectly absurd; and it only exhibits
something like an utter want of common sense on the part of the honorable
member for Newcastle and those, if there are any, who take part with him,
to make an ostentatious parade of their loyalty on such an occasion, and to
talk as if we were abandoning the mother country, forsooth, in merely
endeavouring to provide for our own safety in a crisis, both probable and
imminent, which is sure to involve certain, at least, of the numerous colonies
of Britain, and our'own in the very first instance, in unheard-of calamities,
if it should unfortunately occur.
Let it not be forgotten, as an important element in this question, that
Great Britain has, in addition to her vast Indian Empire, upwards of fifty
colonies ; of which those of Australia and New Zealand, in this Eastern
section of the Southern hemisphere, constitute only one portion or group.
Now, in the event of a war with France, thu European Power which, of all
others, is the likeliest to be arrayed against our father-land, there can be no
question but that these Australian colonies would be the very first object of
attack, and that our hitherto Pacific Ocean would thenceforth become the
chosen battlefield for the navies of Europe. “On the thirty-first of October
1849,” says the Edinburgh Reviewer of July, 1858, *• the Legislative As


sembly of the French Republic passed a law ordering that an investigation
should be instituted into the whole state of the navy by a commission of
fifteen members of the Assembly itself, to be elected by ballot from the
whole number. The commission thus appointed comprised, amongst other
eminent men, Admiral Hernoux, Vice-Admiral Laine, and Captain Charner,
of the Marine Service; the Duke of Montebello, M. Daru, and M. Lacrosse,
who had been, or were about to be, Ministers of Marine; and M. Jules de Las -
teyrie, M. Lanjuinais, and Baron CharlesDupin, of parliamentary celebrity.”
This commission had accordingly been in existence two years, when the
famous coup d'etat of the 2nd December, 1851, annihilated both it and the
Government under which it had its origin. Fortunately, however, one or
two copies of the printed but unpublished Report of the Commission,
which, for obvious reasons, the Imperial Government forthwith suppressed,
happened to reach England, and were there made the subject of a very
interesting critique in the Edinburgh Review. The Report unquestionably
exhibits the strong feeling of hostility towards England that was then pre"
valent in France, and the policy to be adopted by that country in the event
of a war with England. Now, as we learn from the latest intelligence from
Europe, that the feeling of hostility towards England, which was certainly
prevalent in France ten years ago, is now more widely diffused, far deeper,
and far more intense, wo can easily ascertain the policy that will unques-
tionably be pursued by that country in the event of a war with England, by
simply referring to the Report in question.
“ We must first establish,” said M. Collas, the Secretary of the Commission, “the number of
ships of the line that France can and ought to put to sea the day that war is declared. On
this head we have a certain basis. Our adversary is known. It can only he England." M.
Collas proposed a scheme, expressly adapted in time of peace, “ to prepare for the moment
■when all the possessions of England might he attacked at once, and especially her trade at the
outset of the war.”
Admiral Hernoux said that “ the only use of frigates henceforth was to harass the com-
merce of the enemy, especially in the Indian seas to which Admiral Laine very judiciously
added that “ although the frigates sent for this purpose to India might be in jeopardy, yet
that was no reason to forego harassing the commerce of the enemy, especially as they might
give support to the native population whenever it was disposed to revolt against England.” The
Keport also proposed that they should keep afloat a sufficient number of cruizcrs (in the
words of M. Collas) —“ to display the French flag at all times in ail the seas of the globe ;
* * * and, on a declaration of war with England, to strike, her possessions everywhere
at once, as soon as the declaration of hostilities was made known.” Particular reference is
made to the purposes which such cruizcrs might be made to serve in the Pacific and Indian
Oceans ; for “ if war broke out,” says the worthy Secretary, “ these ships, perfectly armed
and equipped, would be apprised of it by the steam communications through Suez and Panama
—and before France and England could send a fleet to sea, they would, commence the destruction
of the commerce of the enemy all over the globe.”
And in order to effect this desirable object, the destruction of our commerce, “ it is par-
ticularly recommended to the Commission that the French Navy should consist in future
of numerous fast-sailing vessels, of moderate dimensions, rather than of a few large and
heavy-armed ships.” “ Telocity” says M. Maistiat, one of the witnesses examined, “is the


natural weapon against an enemy better armed and more vulnerable on different points. It is
the natural and indispensable weapon of the party weakest in resources, least powerful at
sea, and most daring by national character. (f) It is, therefore, the natural weapon of France. ’
Now, as we have just had evidence sufficient, from the European press,
that the present feeling throughout France is precisely the same as that in
which this Report originated, wo are perfectly warranted to anticipate
the issue which, in the event of a war with England, is there so plainly
indicated. In one word, I maintain, as a conclusion which the common
sense of all intelligent persons must admit is clearly deducible from the
premises I have established, that in the event of a war between England
and France, these Australian colonies will be the very first object of attack,
while the neighbouring Pacific Ocean, on which European warfare has
hitherto been unknown, will be transformed immediately into the chosen
battlefield for the navies of Europe. And can we he blind enough not
to perceive the systematic preparation that has Been making, for years past,
for just such a contingency, by our illustrious ally, the French Emperor ?
The first group of islands in the Pacific Ocean that was taken possession of by
France was the Marquesas, a group far to the northward and eastward from
these Australian colonies. It was soon ascertained, however, that this
group of islands would not serve the particular purpose for which French
colonization in the Pacific was intended to be subservient; and, therefore,
the Marquesas were abandoned, and the Protectorate of Tahiti established
considerably nearer our shore. But even Tahiti was found to he at an
inconvenient’distance, and to be otherwise unavailable, from its want of safe
and easily defensible harbours, for the purposes to be served by the French
occupation of certain groups of islands in the Pacific; and it is now given
out on reliable authority, vouched for by an honorable member of this House,
that Tahiti is also to be abandoned; and that having taken possession of the
large island of New Caledonia, which is actually within four days’ sail of
our shores, the French Emperor is about to concentrate his naval and mili-
tary forces in these seas in that very eligibly situated island—which, in my
humble opinion, Great Britain ought never to have allowed to become a
French possession ; as it was not only discovered by our great circumnavi-
gator, Captain Cook, but as it possesses, according to that illustrious
navigator, some of the finest harbours, together with the finest timber for
naval purposes, to be found in any island in the Pacific. Situated as that
isl md is, so very close to the Australian land, and swarming, as we are told
it is, even already, with troops, and forming, as it does, the head quarters
of the French navy in the Pacific, what possible object, I would ask, could
Louis Napoleon have had in taking possession of New Caledonia,
hut that it should serve as a sort of dog-kennel in the event of a war
with England, from which his armed cruisers could be sent forth at any
time, and with the utmost facility, to prey upon the coasts and commerce of
Australia? Let honorable members only think how splendid a prize these


colonies must seem to be to the nations of continental Europe, but especially
to the French; perfectly aware, as we may rest assured they are, of the vast
amount of our exports, and knowing perfectly also, as they cannot fail to
do, after so many friendly visits to our shores, our utterly defenceless con-
dition. Why, Mr. Speaker, the exports from the whole thirteen British
American colonies that declared their independence in the year 1776, with a
population of three millions, did not exceed one million sterling. But theexport 9
from the two Australian colonies of New South Wales and A ictoria, with a popu-
lation scarcely exceeding three-quarters ©f a million, amount to the seemingly
fabulous aggregate of eighteen millions sterling; the annual export of this
colony, including the inland export of stock to Victoria, amounting to six
millions, while that of the neighbouring colony, including its much larger
export of gold, exceeds twelve millions, It stands fo reason, then, that in
selecting the proper point for attack upon the colonies and commerce of
England, in the event of a war between that country and France, so long-
headed a man as we have every reason to believe the Emperor Louis Napo-
leon to be, would fix upon the place where his gallant colonels would be likely
to obtain the largest possible amount of plunder, and his naval captains the
largest amount of prize-money. He would never think of sending them to
such poor miserable colonies as the fishing settlement of Newfoundland, or
the agricultural settlements of Nova Scotia, Prince Edward s Island and
Cape'Breton. AVhat could they expect in such bleak places as these, in the
event of a war with England ? In such an event the politic Emperor
would most certainly send them to arrest as much as possible of the eigh-
teen millions of the exports of New South Wales and Victoria on their way
to England, and thereby to enrich themselves with our magnificent spoil.
At all events it is perfectly evident there never was so tempting a prize
held forth to the cupidity of an unprincipled man as these two defenceless
colonies of New South Wales and Victoria, with their three-quarters of a
million of population and their eighteen millions sterling of yearly exports,
would unquestionably present to Louis Napoleon and his fiery military. I
say defenceless colonies; for what could the honorable member for New-
castle mean when he told the House that Great Britain was both able and
willing to protect us all in the event of a war, and that if we wanted more
men to defend us in such an emergency, she wonld be sure to send them ?
He has evidently as little faith in a colonial militia as a means of defence
as I confess I have myself, and he forms, it seems, but a very low estimate
of the value and availableness of colonial rifle corps when he tells us it
would be impossible to raise more than five thousand riflemen even in
England at present. We have been told through the press, on the highest
British authority, during the last few weeks, that in the event of a war with
France, it would be by no means impracticable tor the ruler ot that country,
with the present appliances of modern warfare, to land an army ot two
hundred thousand men at suitable points of ingress on the coasts of Eng-


land. And as steam has placed the military powers of the continent on pretty
much the same level with England, in the matter of crossing the Straits,
the contingency is one that may very possibly he realised in the event of a
war. Now what is the state of things in Great Britain in the prospect of
such a contingency? Why, in a passage I shall read presently from a
debate in the House of Commons on the 25th of July last, I find it stated
that the whole disposable force which Great Britain has to oppose to a
French invading army of two hundred thousand men, with other three
hundred thousand to hack them as a body of reserve across the Channel, is,
including the militia—which the honorable member for Newcastle, whose
opinion I am quite willing to receive on such subjects, does not value very
highly—only a hundred and ten thousand men altogether, not including, of
course, the eighty-five thousand she is obliged to maintain for the preserva-
tion of her empire in India. In such circumstances to ask Great Britain to
send us more men to defend us, against the contingency of an invasion of
this country in the event of a war with France, when she has so few, com-
paratively. to defend herself against the five hundred thousand troops of
Louis Napoleon, were surely anything but the part of a patriot or lover of
his country, of one who glories in the name of Briton, and esteems it his
privilege as well as his bounden duty to promote the honour and welfare of
his father-land. (Hear, hoar.) In fact, nobody but a real enemy of Great
Britain could ever think of making so heartless, so inhuman a proposal as
that of asking more troops from England in such an emergency. I would
therefore ask, in the words which the great dramatist puts in the mouth of
King Harry—
Who’s he that wishes more men from England ?
My cousin Newcastle ! No, my fair cousin,
Wish not a man from England.
(Laughter.) Let them rather remain, every man of them, at home, to
protect the hearths and altars of our father-land, and let us by all means do
the best we can for ourselves here, as Divine Providence points out to us,
whether in peace or in war—for that is the question.
Certain honorable members seem to have a strange idea of the meaning
of words when they talk so indignantly of what they call our abandoning
Great Britain, forsooth, in the event of a war. Why, the military protectior
of her colonies costs Great Britain, even in time of peace, three millions
and a quarter per annum, and how much more it would cost in time of war,
who can tell? And is this the measure of our patriotism? —Is this the sort
of affection we cherish for Great Britain—to be instrumental as a colony in
binding down for all time coming this intolerable burden on the shoulders
of our overburdened, over-tithed and over-taxed fellow-subjects, at home?
Entertaining the opinions to which I have just given expression, it may
perhaps be supposed that I should support the resolutions of the honorable
mover; seeing that we have only so small a number of British troops among
us as there are at present in the colony, while there is so little likelihood ot


bur ever getting the additional number that would be necessary to enable
us to meet an invading force from New Caledonia. In the event of a war
with France and an aggression upon this country from New Caledonia, we
could not expect fewer than from two to five thousand men to be landed on
our shores, if not at Watson’s Bay, at least at Botany Bay ; and these troops
would of course march up to Sydney in a few hours thereafter, to take
forcible possession of our noble city, and to subject us to some enormous
pecuniary contribution to prevent it from being forthwith destroyed. In
such circumstances, I repeat it, it might be supposed that I should vote
fer the honorable mover’s Resolutions, and recommend the formation of a
colonial militia. But I have no faith, as 1 have already observed, in a
colonial militia; and although the honorable mover congratulated
himself on the speedy formation and great value of an Australian force of
this kind, by referring to the case of the Americans, and their heroic
achievements, both before and during their war of independence, I must
remind my honorable friend that the two cases, which he seems to consider
perfectly identical, are altogether different. The American colonists were
accustomed to war from the very first. The Puritan colonists of New Eng-
land, wherever they settled in that country, had regularly to defend them-
selves, in loopholed block-houses, against the Indian tribes in their
respective neighbourhoods ; and they had no sooner succeeded in putting
down the Indians than they came in contact with the hostile French colonists of
Nova Scotia, Cape Breton, and Canada. In such circumstances it was
almost a matter of necessity for the American colonists to accustom them-
selves to the use of fire-arms, and to learn the art of war. Some of the most
distinguished of the revolutionary leaders, and in particular. General
Washington himself, had in this way been regularly trained to war long
before the war of independence, in their frequent encounters with the
French on their northern and western frontiers. Besides, the nature of the
country in America, abounding as it does in all sorts of game, is totally
different from that of this country. Who ever hears of any person carrying
a gun to shoot game of any kind in the interior of this colony ? We have
nothing to shoot —neither ’coons, as the Americans call them, nor anything
else. Their forests, on the contrary, are full of game, both winged and
quadrupedal; and it was therefore a species of necessity for the American
colonist of the olden time to learn the use of firearms wherever ho happened
to settle in the great wilderness, while not a few of them, in their protracted
border wars with the French, became —as in the siege and fall of Louisburg,
where one of them was ennobled for his bravery—men of martial spirit and
men of renown. But our colonial population has had no such experience in
the use of firearms —no such military training, in the face of rver watchful
enemies. What then would be the probable result, in the event of Louis Napoleon
landing from two to five thousand troops from New Caledonia —for I should
not imagine that he would make the attempt with any smaller number, on


some suitable part of this coast; which, in accordance with their own plan, as
developed in the famous Report of the Naval Commission of 1849, would,
in all probability be done immediately after the declaration of war ? Why,
they would inarch up to Sydney in a few hours, and, without the least
likelihood of their encountering any such opposition as would retard their
onward progress for a moment, they would take the city by a coup de ?nain
in spite of all the gingerbread defences of our harbour, and place us all
forthwith entirely at their mercy. When honorable members consider how
very speedily the large French armament was transported from Toulon to
Civita Yecchia in the year 1849, when Rome was taken possession of, after
a memorable siege, by the republican army under Marshal Oudinot, and
when they take into consideration the rapidity with which large bodies of
troops were conveyed, partly by steam and partly by land, to Northern
Italy, during the recent war in that country, they 'will no doubt admit that,
in a very short time after the declaration of war with England, a large
French force might be landed on these shores, either direct or from New
Caledonia, and the threat embodied in the famous Report of 1849, be com-
pletely realised. In one word, I maintain, without fear of contradiction,
that these Australian colonies, and that of New South Wales in particular,
are in imminent danger of a hostile aggression from without in the event of
a war between England and France. I maintain, moreover, that our present
condition is one of utter defencelessness, in the face of such an invading
force as might easily be brought against us by the French. I maintain,
also, that in such circumstances it is hopeless for us to rely on imaginary
succour, either in troops or in naval armaments, from the mother country, as the
whole disposable force of England will then be required at home. And I
confess I have no faith in an extemporized colonial militia, raised among a
population totally unaccustomed, not only to the art of war, but to the use
of firearms, and arrayed against a regular army of veteran troops.
In such circumstances it appears to me that the only safe and rational
course for us is the one shadowed forth in the series of Resolutions, of
which I gave notice some time ago by way of amendment on those of the
honorable mover, and which, it will doubtless be recollected, were assailed
with a perfect storm of opposition from certain quarters in this honorable
House. In particular, the honorable member for Newcastle has taken great
liberties with my name in connection with these Resolutions, which hono-
rable members will bear in mind, merely recommended a speedy, peaceful
and amicable separation from the mother country, on the basis of our entire
independence, as being a measure of imperious necessity in our peculiar circum-
stances ; virtually stigmatising me, if not in so many words, as an unprin.
cipled mover of sedition, an unpilloried demagogue, an enemy of our
common country, an arch traitor. I shall take the liberty, however, to shew
that honorable member and the House generally, that if I am anything of
the kind—an enemy of our common country, forsooth, and a veritable


traitor—l am in remarkably good company, the very best indeed in
England, the elite both of the House of Lords and of the House of Com-
mons. (Hear, hear.) But it is no great wonder that an honorable member who
has been living half his life in so remote a region of primeval barbarism
as the Darling Downs, should be greatly behind his age when he cornea
down with all the benevolence imaginable to enlighten the civilised world
in this honorable House. I repeat it, there are men of the very highest
character and standing in both Houses of the Imperial Parliament, who
have given public expression, even in Parliament, to precisely the same
sentiments—in regard to the relations that should subsist between the mother
country and her full-grown colonies, especially in tire prospect of war—as
those for which I have been denounced and hunted down with every species
of contumely and reproach in certain quarters of this honorable House. In
a debate, for instance, in the House of Lords on the 15th Juno, 1854, (re-
ported in the Times of the following day,) on the Duke of Newcastle s
motion for the second reading of the Canada Legislative Council Bill, the
Earl of Ellenborough spoke as follows :
“ We made such progress last year in the work of concession to Canada, that the question
now was, not whether we would stop in our career, still less whether we should attempt to
go back, but whether we should not, in the most friendly spirit towards Canada and tha
other North American Colonies, consult with their Legislatures on the expediency of taking
measures for the complete release of those colonies from all dependence on the Crown and
Parliament of Great Britain. He recollected having a conversation with Mr. Huskisson in
1828, during the time that Statesman held the seals of the Colonial office, in which ho inti-
mated most distinctly that the time had already arrived for the separation of Canada from
this country ; and Mr. Huskisson had even so maturely considered the matter that he men-
tioned the form of government which he thought it would be for our interest to have estab-
lished in Canada, when our connexion with the colony should cease. * * * What was
the use—what the practical advantage of continuing our connexion with the Colonies ?
The connexion might be of some small use in time of peace; but, on the other hand, con-
sider the danger arising from it in matters relating to war. * * It was certain that in
the event of war occurring between this country and the United States, on grounds totally
unconnected with the Colonies, they must, from their connexion with us, be drawn into the
war, and their whole frontier would be exposed to the greatest calamities. Under these cir-
cumstances, it was a matter worthy of serious consideration whether we should not en-
deavour, in the most friendly manner, to divest ourselves of a connexion which must prove
equally onerous to both parties. Now, in case of war, could wo hope to defend the colonies
successfully ? * * * Considering the increased strength and appliances at the command
of the United States, it would hardly be possible to defend Canada with any hope of success
* * * Under these circumstances, he hoped that, at an early period, the Government
would communicate with the leading persons in the Legislative Assemblies of the North
American Colonies, with the view of ascertaining their opinion on tha subject of separation.
We should consult with them in the most friendly spirit, as if they were members of one and
tho same family in ■which we felt a deep conesm.”
It would seem that the Duke of Newcastle (for it appears there is some,
thing in the very name of that place calculated to produce such kindred
spirits as his Grace and the honorable member for the Australian New-
castle,) presumed to administer to the right honprable Peer what Lord


Brougham designated a “severe rebuke” for these anti-British and anti-
patriotic sentiments, as he was pleased to characterise them, (precisely as
the honorable member for Newcastle had done to myself,) expressing his
hope and belief that such opinions were not shared by any other member of
their Lordships’ House. The debate then proceeded as follows
Lord Brougham wished to say one word, after the severe rebuke which had been given by
the noble Duke. He had the misfortune of coming within the description of persons against
whom the noble Duke had so powerfully and indignantly declaimed—namely, those who,
while desiring a separation of Canada, as a colony, from the Mother Country, did not wish to
throw the colonists over or to abandon them. And why should the noble Duke denounce so
vehemently this opinion ? It was by no means novel. It had been entertained and expressed
by many eminent men. It was an opinion shared in by Lord Ashburton and by Cord St.
Vincent ; and those who hold the doctrine of separation did so, not because they were dis-
posed to 'undervalue the importance of Canada, but rather because they highly estimated
the importance of that country. They believed that after a certain period of time-after
what was called “ passing the youth of nations,” that of a qplonial life—the best thing that
could happen to a country in colonial connexion with an old State was, that without any
coldness or alienation of any sort, but with perfect amity and good-will, and on purely volun-
tary grounds, there should succeed to that colonial connexion a connexion between two Free
and Independent States.’ 5
» Whether Canada,” says Mr. Huskisson, in a Committee of the House of
Commons on Canadian affairs, in the year 1828, the very year to which Lord
Ellenborough alludes as the period of his conversation with that Eight
Honorable and lamented gentleman on the future separation of Canada
« Whether Canada is to remain for ever dependent on England, or is to become an inde-
pendent state—not I trust, by hostile separation, but by amicable arrangement—it is still
the duty and interest of this country to imbue it with English feelings, and benefit it with Eng-
lish laws and institutions.”
But neither Mr. Huskisson nor Lord Ellenborough was the first English-
man to advocate such an idea as the one to which these illustrious men
have thus given expression. My fellov countryman, Adam Smith, the
famous author of the Wealth of Nations, put forth this very idea, well
knowing all the while how extremely unpalatable it would then prove,
nearly a century ago. The following are his words
To propose that Great Britain should voluntarily give up all authority over her colonies,
and leave them to elect their own magistrates, to enact their own laws, and to make peace
and war, as they might think proper, would be to propose such a measure as never was, and
never will be, adopted by any nation in the world. The most visionary enthusiast would
scarce be capable of proposing such a measure with any hopes at least of its being adopted.
No nation ever gave up the dominion of any province, how troublesome soever it might be
to govern, and how small soever the revenue which it afforded might be, in proportion to
the expense which it occasioned ; such a sacrifice, though it might frequently be agreeable to
the interest, is always mortifying to the pride of every nation, and, what perhaps is of still
greater consequence, it is always contrary to the private interest of the governing part of it,
which would thereby be deprived of the disposal of many places of trust and profit, of many
opportunities of acquiring wealth and distinction, which the possession of the most turbulent,
and to the great body of the people, the most unprofitable province seldom fails to afford.


And yet, if we would do so, we might settle with them such a treaty of commerce as would
effectually secure to us a free trade, more advantageous to the great body of the people,
though less so to the merchants, than the monopoly which we at present enjoy. By thus
parting good friends, the natural affection of the colonies to the mother country, which our
late dissensions have perchance well-nigh extinguished, would quickly revive. It might dis-
pose them, not only to respect for whole centuries together that treaty of commerce which
they had concluded with us at parting, but to favor us in war, as well as in trade, and, in-
stead of turbulent and factious subjects, to become our faithful, affectionate, and generous
allies; and the same sort of parental affection on one side and filial respect on the other
might revive between Great Britain and her colojiies, which used to subsist between those of
ancient Greece and the mother city, from which they descended.
The celebrated Jeremy Bentham also, about seventy .years ago, embodied
the same sentiments in a pamphlet which he addressed to the French
National Convention, entitled Emancipate your Colonies ; and the famous
French Minister of State, Turgot, and our own Dr. Arnold, were both
precisely of the same opinion, as I could easily show if it were necessary to
quote their language.
Again, in a debate on the military defences of the colonies, which took
place in the House of Commons on the 25th of July last, the right hon
Mr. Adderley rose, (as is reported in the Times of the 26th July) ;
Mr. Adderley rose to call the attention of the House to the military defences of the colonies
—and to the source from which those defences were supplied. He had moved for certain
papers on this subject, which had not yet been circulated, and he must therefore rely in a
great measure upon the returns which had been produced on the motion of the hon. and
gallant member for Aberdeen. He appealed to the hon. member for Birmingham whether he
did not think it a question of importance whether this country should be required not only
to furnish from its limited population troops for the defence of the colonies, but also to sup-
ply the greater part of the cost of maintaining those troops. The plan pursued was not only
needlessly expensive to this country, but the result of it was that not one single colony be-
longing to this empire was in an adequate state of defence. England had granted self-go-
vernment to her colonies, and had abrogated all those commercial laws by which she once
sought to advance her own interests by interfering with colonial commerce. The natural
corollary of these changes was that we should have called upon the colonies to undertake
their own defence. Instead of that, however, our expenditure upon them for naval and mili-
tary purposes was no less than £3,250,000 per annum. Of this vast sum the colonies them-
selves paid only £337,000, or but one-tenth of the whole. Deducting the charge for such
military stations as Gibraltar, Malta, the lonian Islands, the Mauritius, and Bermuda, the
expenditure incurred for our colonies, properly so called, was £2,500,000. Deducting, how-
ever, the amount contributed by the inhabitants of the military stations, the sum borne by
the colonies proper was reduced to £220,000, leaving the proportion of the entire cost defrayed
by colonies like Australia and Canada for their own defence at only one-tenth. * * * *
We had now in England, Inclusive of militia, 110,000 troops, in addition to which wo had in
India 85,000 Europeans. But in the whole of our colonies, scattered over the entire surface
of the globe, we had but 42,000 soldiers, or rather, after deducting the number quartered in
the purely military stations, we had but 22,000. Our colonies were consequently in a very
insecure position ; and, in the event of war, any great maritime Power would be able to
deprive ns of some of them. Moreover, if a general war should break out, we should probably
have to call home the colonial garrisons ; and then the colonists, having been taught to lean
upon the mother country, and having by her system had everything like a military spirit
crushed out of them, would be wholly incapable of defending themselves.


The subject was then taken up by Lord A. Churchill, a son of the Duke
ef Marlborough, who had himself visited these colonies since the era of the
gold discoveries ; and I would particularly recommend to the consideration
of certain honorable members the following extract from his Lordship’s
speech: —
In the event of war the Australian colonies would certainly he attached by the French, and
thus though no parties to the rupture they would be called upon to suffer for the misunder-
standings of the mother country. This would be rather hard upon them, and he thought-
we ought rather to protect them fully by a large and efficient force, so that they might not
be exposed to danger on the occurrence of hostilities, or else we ought to give them their inde-
pendence, which would free them from attach in any such case *
Mr. Marsh also, formerly a member of our colonial Legislature for New
England, but now a member of the House of Commons for Salisbury, said
The sea-board of the Australian colonics was so vast that it was almost impossible that
troops could be provided to defend it. Such troops would be of very little use against ex-
ternal attack. -
In the course of the same debate, Mr. Sydney Herbert, the present Secre-
tary for war, observed, in accordance with the same liberal spirit towards
the colonies :
* After such an oninion—evidently given as a matter of course, to which every intelligent
at once assem and emanating, too, as it did, from so high and unexceptionable
pcr ®° n thoritv—we shall surely be spared any further repetition of that sheer nonsense and
waddle occasionally put forth by the Sydney Herald, the Melbourne Argus, and
childish twaddleoccaaionany puu ./ liability and exposure to hostile and maraud-
anyof t£e^rea e t’Powers of Christendom, in the event of these Australian
cnfnniea'becominK Sovereign and Independent States. In that event should we not be still
the allies if no longer the dependent colonies, of Great Britain, agreeably to the suggestion
cf that neat man X)r Adam Smith ? And has not Portugal, that comparatively msigmfi-
f hut little larger than Scotland, been able to maintain her independence,
such an alliance for two hundred years past? Besides, to suppose that
T or the Czar of Russia, or the President of the United Sta tes, the
h 4 1 rosnecti velv of the three greatest Powers of Christendom, next to Great Britain, would
r ion or suffer an? hostile or marauding attack to be made upon us, in the event
cf fc our becoming Sovereign and Independent States, is to suppose that these eminent men
° f selves individually no better than certain of our own illustrious ancestors, the sea-
? • robbers of Scandinavia. Have any such predatory attacks been ever
made bv any Power in Christendom on the various States of South America, rich as these
made by any ro mineral wealth, and inviting as they are also for such attacks
weakness and anarchy? So far from anything of the kind being cither
from their ... . . 0 j tliese quarters, our representative, or ambassador, would
alike with open arms in Paris, in Petersburg!!, and in Washington, and he would
be hailed in all those three capitals with the liveliest demonstrations of joy.
Nav I am confident that if we were only Sovereign and Independent States,
I’ fro™! wishing to attack or annoy us in any way, would be glad to dispose of his colony
nf New Caledonia to us, to be formed into a separate Australian State in our confederacy,
of New Caledonia io u, 11 « cost him % h at further use would ho have for so costly
«° r nnnenda(re f if our ports, like those of the United States, were thenceforth to be as free and
ninja’s they are to Great Britain ? There can be no doubt that New Caledonia is
°? 6n i maintained chiefly if not exclusively, as a Prench watchhouse against England
fn frePacific Agaln in?he’ eventofa war with Prance, Mr. Addorloy;is of opinion that.
the nresent defenceless state of our colonies, wo should be likely to have some
eonsiden g JP thc enemy . Now, as New South Wales would be the first object
nuTk the question S whether should we prefer being a Sovereign and Independent
of attack, the qu > j England and Prance, or a mere dependency of Louis
State, ta pe«e and Seating ovlr Government House,’and all the other accompani-
Napoleon, with^ the trmoior , QWn part x would deprecate and
detesUh n e idea of Sur becoming a colony even of the United States, if such a thing wore
practicable 1 , just as much as being a colony of either Franco or Russia.


The Government of the mother country sends troops to the colonies for the purposes either
of defence or of internal police. So far as the first object is concerned, they have some sort
of claim to ask her to bear a share of their military expenditure, inasmuch as she arrogates
to herself the settlement of all questions of peace and war, and their interests may suffer as
the result of the policy which she chooses to pursue.
But there was one speaker on this memorable occasion who deserves
particular notice, as being himself a veritable colonist born and bred, I
mean Judge Haliburton, of Nova Scotia, the well-known author of Sant
Slick. lie is now a member of the House of Commons, and in allusion to
the contingency hinted at by Mr. Adderley, of the possible entire withdrawal
of the Imperial troops from the colonies, that gentleman observed—and the
circumstance is doubly remarkable, as it was the first speech Mr. Halibur-
ton had ever delivered in that honorable House:—
If the troops were withdrawn, what did they want with the colonies ? Lot them give the
colonies under those circumstances their independence. They did not ask or want it, and
would receive it with regret, but the colonists were men of English extraction, and would
say, “ If you are come to the condition of Rome, and you must gather your 1 egions from the
extremities of your empire, give us our independence and leave us, and we will say God
speed and protect you as in the olden time.” But when hon. members talked of the militia
and governing the colonies, England did not govern, but misgoverned them ; England did
not manage their affairs, but mismanaged them And again, “ What had the colonies to do
with an European war ? Their ships were plundered on the high seas, their sailors wore im-
pressed in their towns, and the enemy’s ships were in all their coves and their creeks
watching for their homeward-bound ships. The quarrel was not one of theirs. When this
country undertook to govern the colonies, and when it made laws suitable for itself, well and
good ; but Parliament ought, at least, to ask the colonies whether the same laws were suited
to their condition. * * * If Great Britain were to withdraw her legions let the colonies
have fair notice. He was glad that the right hon. gentleman had given so proper an an-
swer to the question put to him, and that his answer would go out to the colonies. If this
country were to withdraw her troops, let there be an understanding how and when they were
to be withdrawn.
The last authority to which I shall refer in proof of the thorough patriot-
ism as well as propriety of the sentiments to which I have given expression
on the subject of our relations with the mother country, is a work I hold in
my hands, printed this present year. It is entitled “ Colonial Administra-
tion of Great Britain, by Sydney Smith Bell, of Lincoln’s Inn, Barrister-at-
law, one of the Judges of the Supreme Court of the colony of the Cape of
Good Hope”. “It should not be overlooked,” observes this writer—
It should not be overlooked that sound reason and principle support the assertion, in re
gard to all colonies, but especially in regard to colonies founded by a government so popular
in its elements as that of Great Britain, and by the inhabitants of a country enjoying such
liberal institutions as those of Great Britain, that sooner or later they will achieve their in-
dependence of the mother country. They will do it the sooner, if circumstances should
rapidly increase their population and wealth, and the later, if circumstances should concur
to retard these events. But not more certainly does a young man leave his father’s house so
soon as he has attained the strength of manhood, and gained its knowledge and experience*
and go forth into the world to be the founder of his own fortune, than will a colony shake
jtself loose from all trammels imposed upon it by the mother country, whether for wise or
or selfish purposes, so soon as the colony feels itself powerful enough to contest the con-


tinuance of these trammels. Turgot, the French philosopher, said of colonies generally
“ They are like fruits, which cling to the tree only till they are ripened and, he added
prophetically of our North American colonies, “ So soon as America can take care of itself, it
will do what Carthage did,” make itself independent of Great Britain, as Carthage did of
Tyre. * * * Again, that certain countries are to continue British colonies, and that
Great Britain is to trade with these countries, neither are identical propositions, nor parts of
one and the same proposition. We may retain our colonies and yet lost their trade, as Spain
lost the trade of her colonies, notwithstanding the most strenuous efforts to retain it; and
we may emancipate our colonies, and yet retain their trade. * * * If Great Britain should
emancipate all her colonies to-morrow, there is not the slightest reason to apprehend that
this would immediately make the least change in her mercantile transactions with the colo-
nies ; nor would it do so ultimately, so long as Great Britain should, independently of *olo-
nial considerations, maintain her present mercantile position and character, and give the
colonists good articles, at reasonable prices. * * * If America, or any of the powerful
maritime states of Europe, were to go to war with us, every one must feel that our colonial
possessions would be our weakest, and, therefore, most assailable point, scattered as they ar e
at such prodigious distances from the seat of the imperial government, and entirely depen-
dent as they are upon the imperial government for protection against foreign invasion.
After shewing that not a few of the British colonies are already fit fo 1
their independence, and that neither the mother country nor the colonies
would in any way lose by the change, Judge Bill sums up his able and
interesting work in a chapter of which the following (for I shall not trou-
ble the House with reading any part of it) is the title, Suggestions why
cither the colonies should be at once emancipated, or a readiness to eman-
cipate them, when required, should be avowed and declared by Statute.
To those honorable members of the House of Commons whose speeches I
have quoted, I can now refer triumphantly in proof of my position, that we, the
British colonists of Australia, can have no possible interest or concern in the
wars of Europe. But these wars, whenever Great Britain shall be a principal,
will certainly involve us in the greatest calamities so long as we are mere
political dependencies of the mother country. Let that dependence cease
and determine, and the enemies of Great Britain, Lord Churchill assures us,
will never think of attacking us.
I trust I have now said enough to prove that the Resolutions I placed
upon the paper some time since, by way of amendment to the series now
before the House, were altogether undeserving of the character so gratui-
tously bestowed, both upon them and upon myself, by certain honorable
members. The sentiments which these Resolutions embodied, in regard to
the relations of such colonies as these to the mother country, I have now
proved, I trust, to the satisfaction even of the most incredulous before, have
been held and advocated by some of the most illustrious names in the litera-
ture and the history of our country, by patriots and statesmen of the highest
caste, by the first members of the House of Lords, and the most distinguished
of the House of Commons. For holding and advocating such views, none
of these great men have ever been denounced as enemies of the State, as
cherishing hostility to the institutions of their country, as guilty of
treason, (Hear, hear.) If, therefore, 1 have deserved such a character for


holding and advocating precisely the same sentiments, I repeat it, I am
in remarkably good company, and have no reason to be ashamed of my friends,
(Hear, hear.) Besides, if I know my own heart, I can state with perfect sincerity
that there is no man, either in this House or out of it, who glories more than
I do in the name of Briton, or who would do more or go farther, if a fitting
occasion should arise, in support of the real honour and glory of our father-
land. (Hear, hear.) But having paid much attention to the history of
colonization, both in ancient and modern times, and having satisfied myself
that the wonderful success of the colonies of ancient Greece—which at
length made the native tongue of a mother country not so large as Scotland
the language of almost the whole civilised world—washwing entirely to their
being founded on the basis of entire freedom and independence, I could never
have imagined that the advocacy of that system for the colonies of Britain,
especially in the prospect of a ruinous war with which they could have no
concern, would expose me to a charge of disloyalty, or to a want of natural
affection for the land of my birth. (Hear, hear.) Honorable members have
doubtless heard of the famous saying of Lord Brougham, The schoolmaster
is abroad.” I confess I have begun rather to doubt the truth of that saying,
from the treatment which my Resolutions met with on their first announce-
ment, from six or eight honorable members of this House, who, I regret to
find, are still far behind both the politics of their country and the literature of
their age. (Laughter.) If that functionary, the schoolmaster, is really abroad,
I think it high time that he should open a class for adults, for the special
benefit of these honorable members, to enable them to bring up their constitu-
tional lee way; and if such a class were opened, I would recommend the
honorable Premier to take a few private lessons also, as I recollect he ex-
pressed himself somewhat strongly on my resolutions when they were first
announced. (Hear, hear, from Mr. Robertson, and general laughter.)
As to the particular object of the resolutions now before the House, I
mean the formation and establishment of a Colonial Militia, it appears to
me that such a measure is altogether uncalled for and unnecessary. Leaving
out of the question our political dependence on Great Britain and its possible
results, where is there a single enemy in this hemisphere to injure or annoy
us, and I see no likelihood whatever of our being troubled from the other ?
In such circumstances the attempt to form a Colonial militia —to place the
country in the attitude of war without a supposable enemy in the case—
appears to me very much like the conduct of the blustering Irishman at one
of his own country fairs, who, seeing no prospect of the customary row,
threw off his coat and trailing it behind him through the fair vowed that he
would fight any mother’s son of them who should tread upon the tail of it.
(Laughter.) But the subject is too serious a one to be dismissed with a
joke, and it is not in that spirit lam disposed to treat it. I look at it in the
light of the Divine command, “ Thou shalt not kill”; and as that command
teaches me that no war can be either just or necessary that is not strictly


defensive, I cannot admit either the necessity or the propriety ol our putting
ourselves in a posture of defence when there is no supposable enemy to
annoy us. The high authorities I have quoted are all agreed in maintaining
that we, Australians, can he of no possible service to the Mother Country in
the event of a war, but should rather prove a burden and a drag to her •
and are we prepared, I would ask, for such is the real meaning of our creating
a military force, are we prepared to proclaim war on our own behalf either
against France or Russia, or any other Power whatsoever ? Besides, the
formation and establishment of a Colonial militia is not merely unnecessary,
it would be a serious waste of valuable time and labour and money to the
Colony, and it would most certainly exercise a demoralizing effect, as is uni-
formly the result of the presence of a military force in any locality, upon
our entire community. I shall now bring my somewhat desultory remarks
to a close by thanking the House, which I do most cordially, for the for-
bearance it has shewn me, as well as for the opportunity it has afforded me
of setting myself right with the public under the charge of disaffection and
disloyalty that was recently preferred against me on account of my harmless
resolutions. I trust we shall have no repetition of such folly on any future
occasion. (Hear, hear.)
POSTSCRIPT.
There is one very important aspect of our relations with the Mother-
country, in which the independence, or complete emancipation, of the Aus-
tralian Colonies generally, or of those on the eastern coast of this continent
in particular, would be of the utmost importance, not only to the commercial
interests of Great Britain herself, but to the cause of humanity, of civiliza-
tion, and of Christianity. The rapid extension of British commerce among
the islands of the Pacific is daily bringing us into closer and closer intercourse
and connection with numerous, and in many instances, very interesting
tribes of uncivilized men; among whom it would be comparatively easy,
and of incalculable benefit to all concerned, as well as to the civilized world
generally, for any Sovereign Power of British origin, having its Head-
quarters on the Western Pacific, to establish Protectorates and to set up
regular governments on the basis of European civilization.
The case of the Fiji Islands offering the Sovereignty of their entire group
to Great Britain, while the Imperial Authorities are hesitating as to whether
they will accept the offer, is a case exactly in point. Great Britain cannot
accept that Sovereignty, without pledging herself on the one hand, to an
expenditure of an indefinite amount, and without being virtually-bound, on


the other, to protect the whole group from aggression from without, in the
event of any European war in which she might herself be engaged. But if
Australia were Sovereign and Independent, she could annex to her confe-
deracy any such group of Islands in the Pacific, and form them into a
separate State, with a regular government precisely similar to her own,
without risk of any kind, and for the merest trifle of expense, considering
the vast importance of the object to be obtained.
In this way a whole series of Australian Protectorates, to be transformed
in due time into Sovereign and Independent States of the great Australian
Confederacy of the future, might be established in the Western Pacific, with
incalculable benefit to the interests of commerce, of civilization, and of
Christianity. In short, there is an empire of a perfectly legitimate cha-
racter to be won for Australia in the Western Pacific, and it is there, more
especially, where true glory waits her.
But how could Great Britain render any such service to the civilized
world ? How can she form Protectorates, plant colonies, and set up regular
governments in the various groupes of the Western Pacific ? The thing is
altogether out of the question, for the very satisfactory reason assigned
above. She cannot do it herself; and so long as we are merely her colonies,
she will virtually, like the dog in the manger, prevent us from doing it for her.
Seneca informs us, that the City of Miletus, an ancient Grecian Colony of
Athens, but, like all the other Greek Colonies, Sovereign and Independent
from the first, actually founded no fewer than 380 colonies throughout the old
world; thereby extending the laws and language and general civilization of
the Greeks, the first people of the ancient world, over the most distant
regions. But how many colonies, 1 would ask, would Miletus have founded,
had she been unfortunate enough to have been herself a colony of Great
Britain ? Why, precisely the same number as we are likely to plant in the
Pacific, so long as we are nothing else, that is none at all.
In regard to the principles on which an Australian federation should be
formed, and the Colonies or States it should comprise, it were well to bear
in mind that the Teutonic race, of which we, Anglo-Saxons, are a portion,
have in all times and countries been exceedingly averse to federation or the
creation of any great central authority. The Swiss Cantons, for example
are a most imperfect and unsatisfactory type of federation; some of them
having actually reserved to themselves, as for instance, the Canton of Berne,
the right of making war or peace on their own account! And so also were
the Seven United Provinces of Holland. Nay, it was only with the utmos
difficulty that the original thirteen American States were kept together,
and the present Federal Union actually formed after the War of Indepen-
dence and the temporary pressure from without which it implied had ceased.
It is very questionable, therefore, whether an Australian federation, to
include the whole of the pr sent colonies, could be formed at all, in the
absence of such pressure from without. The far greater extent of territory


possessed by certain of the colonies, as with others, and the
exorbitant pretensions to which this would give rise in particular cases,
Avould, I fear, form an insurmountable obstacle in the way. For example.
Victoria would insist upon Melbourne being the seat of the Federal Govern-
ment; to which, I conceive, this colony, with the splendid dominion in
prospect for Eastern Australia in the Western Pacific, could never assent.
But why should there not be two federal systems established—one, with
Victoria as the central figure, supported by Tasmania on the one hand, and
South Australia on the other: and another, comprising the whole coast line
of Eastern Australia, from Cape Howe to Cape Yorke, into whatever
number of colonies it may eventually be subdivided, with Sydney for its
capital? For my own part, I would greatly prefer having one general
federation of all these Australian colonies; but rather than concede the
point of having the scat of the Federal Government elsewhere than on the
Pacific, which I consider a sine qud non for Australia, I would consent to
have two.
the ENt».
mason, *»D CO., STEAM MACHINE PRINTERS ,105, YORK STREET, SYDNEI .
