

HOW TO GET TO SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
BEING
INFORMATION
FOR
LABOURING EMIGRANTS
RESPECTING THE ABOVE
Dolong.
By HENRY CAPPER.
[Price Sixpence .]
PRINTED BY C. REYNELL, LITTLE PULTENEY STREET
LONDON:
CAPPER ANDGOLE, No. 5 ADAM STREET, STRAND;
SOLD BY I. MENZIES, EDINBURGH ; D. ROBERTSON, GLASGOW ; G. PHILIP, 51 SOUTH
CASTLE STREET, LIVERPOOL; A. B. DUCKHAM, FALMOUTH; F. NICHOLSON,
PLYMOUTH ; BALLE, EXETER ; AND BY ALL BOOKSELLERS.


INTRODUCTION.
This little work is intended to assist persons of the
labouring class in obtaining a correct knowledge of
South Australia, to show those who are eligible how
to get there , free of expense , to direct those who
are ineligible and have small means in the cheapest
and best mode of engaging their passage j and also
to explain the distinction between the terms Australia
and South Australia.
5 Adam street. Strand, 28th October, 1839.


INFORMATION
RESPECTING
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
DISTINCTION BETWEEN THE TERMS
AUSTRALIA AND SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
Australia is the largest island in the world —so large as to
be called the Southern Continent —and has commonly been
known as New Holland. This large island is situated in the
South Pacific or Indian Ocean, and is nearly two thousand
miles from east to west, and one thousand seven hundred
miles from north to south, and its circumference nearly eight
thousand miles. The greatest part of the country in the
interior is yet unexplored.
It contains three distinct colonies, viz.— l. New South Wales
<to which Port Phillip is a dependency) on the eastj % Western
Australia, or Swan River, on the west; 3. The New British
Province of South Australia in the centre, and, as its name
implies, on the south.
New South Wales, of which Sydney is the capital, and now
very generally called Australia, was established in the year
1.788 as a penal settlement, or receptacle for banished convicts ;
since that time no less than fifty-two thousand persons
who have been convicted of crimes of every description have
been transported, from England alone, to New South Wales j
by the last returns, the population was about seventy-
seven thousand souls, of which number twenty-seven thousand


were convicts, twenty-nine thousand emancipists (that is,
persons who had served their time as convicts, or had been
pardoned), and about twenty-one thousand were free.
South Australia, of which Adelaide is the capital, is
quite a different place to New South Wales; Adelaide being
full one thousand miles from Sydney. South Australia is pro-
tected from the introduction of convicts by an Act of Parlia-
ment, which, among other peculiar advantages, declares, ct That
vo person or persons convicted in any court of justice in Great
Britain or Ireland, or elsewhere, shall at any time, or under any
circumstances, be transported as a convict to any place within the
limits hereinbefore described,” that is, within South Australia,
This colony, therefore, is free from the contamination of a
convict population, and to the sober, honest, and industrious
labourer and his family, presents a far more favourable field to
better their condition than the older settlements of New South
Wales or Van Diemen's Land. The father of a virtuous
family, therefore, who wishes to emigrate, should consider
well the high social and moral condition of this free colony as
compared with any other settlement.
SITUATION—DESCRIPTION—SOIL—RIVERS-INSTI-
TUTIONS—RELIGION—EDUCATION.
South Australia is that portion of Australia or New Holland
which extends between the 132 d and 141st degrees of east
longitude, and between the Southern Ocean, with the islands
adjacent, and the 26th degree of south latitude, being an
extent of country nearly double that of the British Isles, and
containing an area of nearly three hundred thousand square


miles, or one hundred and ninety-two millions of acres. It
is between three and four months’ sail from England, about
five weeks’ from the Cape of Good Hope, the same distance
from Calcutta and Bombay, and, according to the season,
from four to eight days’ sail from Van Diemen’s Land from
eight to twelve days’ from Sydney, and from twenty-five to
thirty days’ from New Zealand, being so much neai ei to
England than those places.
The outline of the sea coast of South Australia (about
thirteen hundred miles) is very irregular, being broken by
numerous gulfs, bays, and inlets, the principal of which are
Gulf St Vincent, Spencer’s Gulf, Port Adelaide, Port Lincoln,
Encounter Bay, Boston Bay, Coffin’s Bay, Anxious Bay, Streaky
Bay, and Fowler’s Bay.
The principal settlements at present are as follows •
Adelaide, the capital of the province, is situate about six
miles from Port Adelaide in Gulf St Vincent, and contains,
with its neighbourhood, about ten thousand souls.
Kings cote, in Nepean Bay, Kangaroo Island, a settlement
of the South Australian Company’s, containing about three
hundred souls.
Port Lincoln, in Spencer’s Gulf, the most recently esta-
blished, contains about two hundred souls. This is said
to be one of the finest harbours in the world.
Port Adelaide is situated on an arm or inlet of the sea in
Gulf St Vincent it is about seven miles in extent, sheltered
from every wind, and is a harbour of the greatest security for
vessels not exceeding 500 tons.
The general appearance of South Australia from the sea is oi
a far more inviting aspect than any other part of this vast con-
tinent, presenting an endless variety of beautifully verdant
valleys and finely wooded plains.


All accounts agree in representing the colony of South Aus-
tralia as most luxuriant and fertile. The land in the neigh-
bourhood of Adelaide is unequally wooded, and between
Adelaide and the Port there is very little, but on the Mount
Lofty range of hills, within eight miles of the town, there are
thousands of acres of timber, principally of the stringy bark.
Mr James, in his work called Six Months in South Australia ,
speaking of the land, says —“ There is an abundance of good
soil all over the Cowandilla plains, stretching from the foot of
the mountains to within a mile or two of the mangrove swamps
on the edge of the salt-water creeks. In short, there is more
good soil than will be required for many years to come. ,f * *
t( Over the hills the soil and vegetation is still finer, and the
author visited a tract of country between the mountains and
the mouth of the Murray, that seemed to contain nearly one
hundred thousand acres of excellent rich soil, in many places ready
for the plough
Between Adelaide and Cape Jervis are the extensive plains
of Aldinga, Onkaparinga, and Cowandilla, each of which are
nearly one hundred square miles in extent, bearing immense
quantities of grass, and from which abundant crops of hay have
been taken. In the spring and fall of the year these plains are
most luxuriant lands for grazing. The more inland parts of
the country are spoken of in still higher terms for beauty and
fertility j the richness of the soil, the luxuriance of the grasses,
the magnificence of the timber, the abundance of the lakes
and streams, are uniformly spoken of by all the writers on this
colony.
The land is watered by numerous streams and springs, and
although many of these disappear in the summer, they are
valuable on account of the sheets or pools of water which they
and which are capable of supplying any deficiency.


The principal river is—
The Murray, which has been traced from the plains below
the mountains of New South Wales to Lake Alexandrina, a
distance of one thousand miles, flowing in extensive reaches of
three or six miles in breadth. For the last two hundred miles
of its course it is described as “ a deep broad stream, the water
like a canal, beds of reeds, sometimes a quarter of a mile broad
on each side, and behind them a belt of trees, all within a steep
bank, which may at times form the winter bank of the river.”
The distance from Adelaide to the Murray is about forty-five
miles, and the river carries to the sea a sufficient quantity of
water to supply the whole country, and is so level as to admit
of its abundant waters being turned into canals for the purpose
of supplying any deficiency of water, or of rendering the inland
communication easy and expeditious.
Lake Alexandrina alone covers a surface of about two thou-
sand square miles; besides the Murray, there are also the
rivers Hindmarsh, Gawler, Glenelg, Flaxman, and the
Torrens.
Adelaide, the seat of Government, is situate upon the
latter river about six miles from the Port, and is divided
into two parts by the river. The town occupies about one
thousand acres, besides the streets, squares, and public walks.
North Adelaide contains about three hundred acres j in the
centre is a large square, named Wellington square. South Ade-
laide occupies about seven hundred acres, the centre being
named Victoria square. There are also four other squares, and
twenty-two principal streets, running at right angles, and
varying from sixty to one hundred and thirty feet wide.
There is a reserve of ten acres as a Park round the town,
upon which the Government House is now built; a quarter of
a mile west of the town a piece of ground is set apart for a


botanical garden, and the sites for Government stores, hos-
pital, public schools, and cemetery, are also reserved.
The town is prettily studded with large gum trees, and for
some miles to the north and south there is quite a sufficiency
for fire-wood and shelter for cattle.
Adelaide already rivals many of our country towns. Domestic
comforts, and even the luxuries of social life, are spreading
their way. The reed-hut has not only given way to the cottage,
but the cottage is fast giving way to the commodious house, upon
the spot which scarcely two years since was the dwelling place
of kangaroos and emus. Now, the natural results of prosperity
may be seen in its Chamber of Commerce, Mechanics’ Institute,
Natural History and Agricultural Societies, its Banks, Clubs,
and Joint-stock Companies.
The means of religious and educational instruction has been
carefully attended to. An association having been formed in
London, in connection with the Society for the Propagation of
the Gospel, to assist the colonists in providing for themselves
the means of public worship and religious instruction according
to the doctrines of the Church of England. T.he Rev. Mr
Howard has been appointed minister of the church and colo-
nial chaplain, and a commodious stone church has been erected,
and a Sunday school in connection, opened under the superin-
tendence of Mr and Mrs Howard.
The Wesleyan Methodists have a numerous congregation in a
neat chapel built by subscription, and their Sunday school
attached.
The Independents. The Congregational Missionary Society
have appointed the Rev. T. Q. Stow to be minister in Adelaide,
and the Rev. R. W. Newland, who was pastor of the Indepen-
dent church at Henley, in Staffordshire, for twenty-two years,
has also proceeded to the colony with a large family, where he


intends to devote his energies to ministerial labours among his
fellow colonists.
The Baptists. At present Mr Peacock officiates in this
cause, as also does Mr M'Laren. The school-room of the
South Australian School Society is used as a place of worship
by this body.
The Roman Catholics are establishing a church in connection
with their brethren in New South Wales and Van Diemen s
Land.
The Quakers are also assembling most numerously in t e
colony, and a large meeting-house, built in this country, has
lately been sent out to be erected at Adelaide.
Education.— A school has been established by an institution
in London, called “ The South Australian School Society,”
whose objects are to promote Infant, British, and Labour
schools, and to render their influence subservient to the
advancement of true religion, the promotion of civilization,
and the general welfare of the inhabitants of the colony.
SEASONS, CLIMATE, NATURAL PRODUCTIONS, ANI-
MALS, BIRDS, FISHES, AND REPTILES—NATIVES
—PROTECTION OF THE COLONY.
South Australia being situated at the opposite side of the
globe has the effect of reversing the seasons in relation to ours
when it is summer with them it is winter with us. The
months of December, January, and February, form their
summer quarter, and the months of June, July, and August,
their winter.
It is much hotter there in summer than in England; but is


not at all debilitating, the air being generally tempered by a
cool and delightful sea-breeze. The sky is usually clear and
brilliant, and they are not subject to those sudden changes of
heat and cold that we have in England.
Throughout the summer hardly a week occurs without the
most refreshing showers. By a register kept during the entire
year of 1837, it rained one hundred and fifteen days, and was
fine and clear two hundred and fifty ; and this may be reckoned
a fair average of a series of years. The climate for eight
months out of the year is as salubrious as can possibly be
wished for, and is at all times particularly favourable to
children, not any of those diseases to which they are so liable
in England being known there. The invigorating in-
fluence of the climate generally, on the human constitution,
renders it more fit for invalids, and especially for Europeans,
than any other place.
The natural productions of South Australia cannot be fully
described in this little work, therefore a brief sketch will
only be given of the most prominent. Timber stands first in
natural produce, of which there is much variety. Blue gum is
found in almost every district; sometimes fourteen or sixteen
feet in girth, and sixty feet high. It is used for beams and
flooring in house building. White gum is also abundant; it is
a tough wood, and makes good flooring and weather boarding.
The stringy hark is the most useful to the colonist; the bark
being of a fibrous texture, and parting easily from the wood,
renders it very useful in building huts, &c. The wood itself
is of good quality, splits and saws well, and is generally used
for fencing and paling. There is also the forest oak, myrtle,
box, pine , wattle, tea tree, and many others. The foliage of the
trees is of a dark sombre green j the trunks for the most part


bare and scraggy, and a curious feature is that they shed their
bark at the fall of the year, but not their leaves.
There are great varieties of shrubs and flowers, and the
grasses aud herbage are most valuable productions, affording
rich food for sheep and cattle.
Limestone, of good quality, is in abundance 3 and theie is
also slate, iron, stone, and a kind of stone resembling the
Portland has been found and used in building. Brick earth
is very plentiful, and is now being worked by several sets of
brickmakers.
This colony is highly favoured in its exemption from fero-
cious animals, —the native dog being the only one known. T.he
kangaroo is the largest animal, of which there are five species
viz. the forester, frequently weighing 1501b5., the wallaby,
the brush kangaroo, and the kangaroo rat and mouse the flesh
of the two first is wholesome, very nutritive, savoury, and
easily digested. The skin makes good leather. There are also
several species of flying squirrel, two kinds of opossum, the
bandicoot, and many others.
The feathered tribes are very numerous, and many of them
remarkable for their singular character and beautiful plumage.
The emu, the largest bird in these regions, is scarce, but the
black swan, wild ducks, 'pigeons, snipes, plovers, quails, land-
rails, and moor-hens are numerous. r l he wild turkey is abun-
dant, as large as an English goose, and of a most delicious
flavour. The parrot and cockatoo tribes are most numerous,
and of beautiful plumage.
The inlets, bays, and waters of South Australia abound with
fish, most of which are excellent eating 5 the best kinds are
the snapper, mackerel, rock-cod, bream, mullet, whiting, rock and
bed oysters, and many others not known in this country.


The reptile tribe is not numerous. Snakes are sometimes
met with, and also scorpions, centipedes, and tarantulas, but
the sting or bite of these is seldom known to prove fatal.
No danger is to be apprehended from the natives, as they
are a tractable and inoffensive race when treated with kindness.
One tribe, with their wives and children, are settled in
Adelaide ; their employment is fetching wood and water, for
which they are paid in biscuit, of which they are very fond, or
by some little article of clothing. The natives belonging to
other districts are getting more familiar at every visit; there
have been a few outrages committed by some of them, but
which have generally been provoked by the settlers; these
outrages might have been prevented, and may be in future,
by the settlers showing a good example of kindness to these
poor children of nature. It is much to be deplored that they
have already been tempted to drink spirituous liquors; and
it should be the endeavour of every one, by setting an example
of sobriety and temperance, to endeavour to improve their
moral and social condition, and cultivate their good will.
The protection of the colony has not been overlooked ; there
is an efficient police, both horse and foot, and it is expected
that the colonists will unite in a body, by forming a militia,
for their mutual protection, A party of sappers and miners
have gone out to erect some fortifications, and to assist in
organizing a colonial militia.


HOW TO GET TO SOUTH AUSTRALIA —REGULA-
TIONS AND PROVISIONS ON BOARD SHIP —
ARTICLES OF OUTFIT- RECEPTION IN THE
COLONY.
The Act of Parliament, erecting South Australia into a British
province, declares that the whole of the funds arising from the
sale of lands and the rent of pasturage, shall form an emi-
gration fund, to be employed in affording a free passage to the
colony from Great Britain and Ireland, for poor persons,
“ provided that they shall, as far as possible, be adult persons
of both sexes, in equal proportions, and not exceeding the age
of thirty years.”
By the above extract from the Act of Parliament, it will be
seen that a free passage is given to “poor persons," that is, to
those strictly of the labouring class, such as labouring mechanics
employed in erecting buildings, agricultural labourers or shep-
herds j and they must be going out to work for wages. This should
be particularly borne in mind, as, unfortunately, there are too
many poor persons who from misfortunes may excite our com-
passion, but have not been brought up, or accustomed to
work, as labourers.
Persons answering the above description, and conforming
with the regulations issued from time to time by the Coloni-
zation Commissioners, can apply, if in London, at the office
of the South Australian Commission, No. 6 Adelphi terrace.
Strand; or in the country, to the agents appointed in most of
the principal towns. A copy of the present regulations for
labourers wishing to obtain a free passage, is given at the end
of this little work.
Those persons who do not come within the above description,
and having limited means at their command, may obtain a


steerage passage at about 20/. each person, and their children
usually at the following rates: —under one year of age, no
charge; one year of age, but under seven, one third of the
charge for grown persons j seven years of age, and under
fourteen, one half the charge for grown persons j fourteen
years of age and upwards, the full charge.
The emigrant who has sufficient capital to purchase a section
of land, of eighty acres (which is the least quantity sold, and
will cost him 80/.) is entitled to obtain a free passage for two
males and two females, and could therefore nominate, if he
has a grown up family, his two sons and two daughters for this
indulgence, but they must be above fifteen years of age, and
in equal proportions of the sexes. The purchaser of land
cannot, however, obtain a free passage for himself or his wife,
or receive any assistance towards the same.
Passages of the description before mentioned, as well a&
cabin and intermediate, may be secured in fine first class
vessels (which are generally appointed to sail on the first and
fifteenth of each month), on application (if by letter, post paid)
to Messrs Capper and Gole, agents for passages to South
Australia, No. 5 Adam street. Strand, London, who will give
any information which may be desired, with reference to
ships sailing for this colony, and full particulars of the dates
of sailing, rates of passage, freight, insurance, and transact
any business relating thereto.
All the ships sailing to South Australia and carrying steerage
passengers are either wholly or partially engaged to the Com-
missioners, consequently have the advantage of the excellent
arrangements entered into with the ship-owner for the pro-
tection and comfort of the emigrants.
The charter party of the Commissioners, among other things,
provides that the number of passengers on board shall be ten


per cent, less than the number allowed by the Act of Parlia-
ment, that the ship be provided with all articles which are
necessary for the comfort of the passengers, or cleanliness of the
ship; that the deck shall be kept dean for the use of the
passengers} that the married couples shall have berths or
sleeping places in two tiers, one above the other, each accom-
modating two persons, man and wife, the children occupying
the same berths as their parents, or swung in hammocks } the
single men also sleep in hammocks in a separate space for their
sole use ; and the single women also have a place exclusively for
themselves 5 that a space be set apart for the emigrants baggage,
at the rate of twenty cubic feet for each adult, and a pro-
portionate quantity for children ; and that the master causes
such luggage as may be required by the passengers to be
brought out of the hold every fourth week during the voyage,
for the purpose of allowing the unpacking or exchange of
articles ; that the provisions and stores be equal in quality to
samples exhibited at the office of the Commissioners’ surveyor,
and that there be a quantity on board equal to six months'
consumption; and the Commissioners or their officers have
the inspection and approval of the ship —of the master, officers,’
and crew—in short, of all the preparations for fulfilling every
condition of the charter party; and as a further security, a
moiety only of the amount of passage money is paid to the
owners on the ship’s final departure, and the remaining moiety
payable, on the presentation to the Commissioners in London
of a certificate from the emigration agent, in South Australia,
countersigned by the Resident Commissioner, showing the
proper delivery of the emigrants, and a certificate of the
surgeon, declaring that they were well treated during the
voyage,
On the voyage the emigrants are placed under the care of


the surgeon superintendent, who is empowered by the Com-
missioners to see that the articles of agreement before alluded
to, between the board and the ship-owner, are properly carried
into effect, and to whom all complaints must be made. One
of the emigrants is usually appointed to assist the surgeon in
seeing the rations served out, keeping order between decks,
and to report generally upon the conduct of the rest to the
surgeon.
Emigrants provided with a passage in the Commissioners’
vessels, upon being appointed to a particular ship, have an official
order to be in London by a stated day, and will be received at
a dep6t the board have provided for their reception, where they
are kept without any expense to themselves until the ship
is ready.
The Commissioners furnish a supply of religious and in-
structive books, &c,, by each ship, for the use of emigrants on
the voyage, and which, on arrival in the colony, are added to
the library for the working, classes. If the emigrants exceed
150 in number by any ship, a schoolmaster is appointed
to teach the children, and such of the adults as are inclined to
receive instruction, in the first rudiments of reading and
writing. It is thus intended, by forming schools in each
emigrant ship, to prepare the children of the labouring classes
for the colonial system of education described in a former
chapter.
All emigrants will be supplied with mattresses and bolsters
gratis, but must be provided with blankets, coverlid, towels,
&c., and the necessary utensils required on board, such as
knives and forks, spoons, tin plates, tin mugs, &c.; and, if
possible, should provide themselves with an iron kettle, a
couple of saucepans, fryingpan, teapot, and tin pail, for use
on the voyage; and as these things will not be very difficult to


carry, they will be found most valuable on reaching the colony;
so indeed will as many articles of cutlery, cooking utensils, &c.
as their means will allow them to provide.
Each person will be allowed to carry, free of expense, as
much baggage as will measure twenty cubic feet, and not
exceeding half a ton in weight; all above that quantity must
be paid for. The charge for freight varies, but for the Com-
missioners’ emigrants it is generally (by contract) at the rate of
455. per ton measurement, and 255. per ton dead weight, and
five per cent, primage.
Mechanics should take as many tools used in their respective
trades as possible; indeed, every person should be provided
with a saw, plane, hammer, chisels, augers, &c. A sufficient
stock of clothing for a four months’ voyage is absolutely neces-
sary, indeed of the greatest importance, as washing linen is
not possible during the passage, except by those persons
who are economical with their water, and save it for that
purpose, or have the means of catching rain water sufficient
when opportunities occur.
Females would do well to take out the materials for those
articles of clothing which are not wanted for immediate use,,
and make them up on the voyage, as the amusement would
help to dispel the sameness and langour consequently attending
their passage to the country of their adoption. The following
estimates will assist emigrants in the purchase of their outfits,
and be a guide to parishes or individuals inclined to furnish
their servants or others intending to emigrate with what is
actually requisite.
At the same time it should be remembered that calicoes,
brown holland, fustian jackets, camlet, fine canvass, and any
other articles of that description, will always be most valuable
to those who can take a little extra stock.


FEMALE.
£ s, d.
2 gowns, or 18 yards of printed cotton, at 6d. - - - 09 0
2 petticoats, or six yards of coloured calico, at 6d. - - 0 3 0
2 flannel ditto, or 6 yards of flannel, at Is. - - - 0 6 0
12 shifts, or 30 yards of long cloth, at 6d. - - - 0 15 0
6 caps, or 3 yards of muslin, at Is. - - - 03 0
6 aprons, or six yards of calico, at 6d. - - - 0 8 0
6 handkerchiefs, at 6d. - - - - 0 3 0
6 neckerchiefs, at 9d. ; - - - - 0 4 6
6 towels, at 6d. - - - - -030
1 pair of stays, at ss. - - - - - 0 5 0
6 pair of black worsted stockings, at Is. 3d. - - 0 7 6
2 pair of shoes, at 4s. - - - - - 0 8 0
1 bonnet, at 3s. - - - - - 0 3 0
An assortment of needles, pins, buttons, thread, tape, &c. - 0 5 0
21bs. of soap, at 6d., and 21bs of starch, at 6d. - - 0 2 0
.•£4 0 0
MALE.
2 fustian jackets, at 7s. 6d. - - - - 0150
2 pair ditto trousers, at 6s. - * - - 0 12 0
2 pair duck trousers, at 2s. 6d. - - - - 0 5 0
2 round frocks, at 2s. 6d. - - - - - 0 5 0
12 cotton shirts, at 2s. 3d. - - - - I 7 0
6 pair of worsted stockings, at Is. 6d. - - - 0 9 0
2 Scotch caps, at Is. 6d. - - - - 0 3 0
6 handkerchiefs, at 6d. - - - - -0 3 0
6 coarse towels, at 6d, - - - - 0 3 0
1 pair of boots, at 10s. - - - - -010 0
1 pair of shoes, at 6s. - - * - 0 6 0
41bs. of soap, at 6d. - - - - -020
£5 0 0
Female - 4 0 0
.. >;••••■♦ £9OO


Brought over - £9 0 0
1 pair of blankets, at 10s. - - - 0 10 0
2 pair of sheets, at ss. - - - - 0 10 0
1 0 0
Sum required to fit out a couple - - a£lo 0 0
Each family should provide a good strong linen or sacking
bag, large enough to hold a month’s supply of clothing. All
other articles should be packed as closely as possible in a
strong deal chest or box, and marked with the owner’s name;
these are placed in the hold of the ship, which is opened once
a month, in order that the passengers may exchange the
clothes they have worn for clean ones.
The steerage passengers are generally put into messes of six,
and are victualled according to the following scale per head:—
Biscuit 1 lb. Beef
Flour... J lb. v Daily. Preserved Meat lb. f Twice a
Water... 3 qts. ,J Raisins 5 lb. C week.
Rice ... | lb, \ Butter 3oz. J
Potatoes Jib. s. F ° ur we^ nCS a Pickled Cabbage J pint p er
Tea J oz. / Salt 2 oz. \ wet q c
Pork ... J lb. Mustard i oz. 3
Suet ... 1 oz. / ..
f Three times a
Peas ... pint s week.
Coffee... oz. %
Sugar... J lb. *
In case of illness, barley is to be served out; and when the
potatoes are expended, life, of rice to be substituted for Slfes.
of potatoes.
In vessels leaving a Scotch port, 7 oz. of molasses per week
are to be substituted for 6 oz. of the sugar, and half a pint of
oatmeal per day for the rice and potatoes.
Women receive the same rations as men ; children to receive
rations in proportion to the charges made for their passage,
* Prime new Irish East India Beef and Pork.


except that those under 7 years are to receive each 3 oz. of
sago, with 1 oz. of sugar, in lieu of beef; children under 12
months to be provided for by their parents.
The usual supply of medical comforts is also to be put on
board, for use in case of sickness, in the proportion of—for
every 100 passengers, counting the children, at the rates stated
above—l cwt. of oatmeal, lOlbs. of arrow root, 501bs. of
preserved beef, 400 pints of lemon juice in stone one-gallon
bottles, and 400fbs. of sugar to mix with it; 60f155. of Scotch
barley, 12 bottles of port wine, 12 bottles of sherry, 300 gallons
of Meux, or Reid, or Barclay, or Whitbread and Co.’s stout,
in half hhds., 40 gallons of rum, and 10 gallons of brandy.
The medical comforts are issued as the surgeon may deem
proper. Women who may be nursing are allowed a pint of
porter each day; and if the water should be bad, which it
frequently is, and cannot be avoided, an allowance of spirit
and water is issued daily to all who do not receive porter, at
the rate of one-eighth of a pint of spirit to each adult,
mixed, before being issued, with at least half a pint of water.
Fresh meat and soft bread are supplied until one day after
passing the Downs, and whenever opportunity offers. Any
mess will have a right, at any time during the passage, to draw
part of its allowance, and the remainder on arrival in the
colony—provided that notice to this effect is given to the
master in writing, which should be done through the surgeon.
The following articles are provided for the use of the
emigrants on board :—One wooden mess bowl, one wooden
platter, one bread basket, one tin quart pot, with bar hook for
boiling water, two three-gallon hawse buckets—for each mess
of six persons.
Filterers, flour scales and weights, pewter, wooden, and tin
measures, a coffee mill and coffee roasters, swing stoves and
head pump with broom, deck scrapers, and all other articles


necessary for the comfortable accommodation of the passengers
and cleanliness of the ship.
On arriving at Port Adelaide the emigrants are con-
signed to the care of the emigration agent, who pro-
vides them with a small house, rent free, or in case of many
arrivals about the same time, a part only of a house may be
assigned them; but in either case, every attention is paid to
their comfort, as far as circumstances will admit. They are
then directed how to obtain employment, and furnished with
every needful information. All persons are strongly recom-
mended to adopt the course pointed out by that officer,
disregarding the opinions of designing persons, and to proceed
at once to carry into operation their intended objects. After a
few weeks the emigrants are required to leave the Commis-
sioners’ habitations to make room for new-comers. Should
they not, immediately on arrival, be hired by private settlers,
the emigration agent finds them some Government employment,
at adequate wages.
That the spirit which actuates the promoters of the colony
in their philanthropic purposes is such as to merit the confi-
dence of the labouring classes will be seen in the following
passages from the Colonization Commissioners’ Instructions
to the Resident Commissioner, for his guidance in the colony.
“ During the early infancy of the colony, the most important
part of your duty will be to take care that no labouring
emigrant falls into a state of destitution. For this purpose
you are authorised to provide a maintenance for all such
persons, and their families, until they shall have obtained,
or whenever they shall be without, employment, at wages ade-
quate to their support; requiring, in return for such
maintenance, that they shall labour upon the public works.
«* * *
“ In adopting a scale of maintenance for emigrant labourers


without employment at wages, you will take care that the
provisions or money furnished by you be not such as to hold
out any inducement to labourers to be careless about obtaining
employment from private capitalists. * * * *
“ The Commissioners are decidedly of opinion that it would
be inexpedient to adopt any regulations which could have the
effect of placing the emigrant labourers under personal restraint.
They should be induced, not compelled, to remain in the
colony. By kindness and conciliation, by attention to their
wants and to their wishes, by the ties of sympathy and con-
fidence, and by the initiation of such economical institutions as
may be calculated to encourage orderly and industrious habits,
and thereby to promote their physical well-being, and to
advance their social and moral state, the working classes should
be attached to the country of their adoption. * * * *
“ The economical institution which seems best calculated to
promote habits of frugality and industry, and to bind the
working classes to the colony by the ties of interest, is a
savings’ bank, founded on the principle that no deposits shall
be withdrawn except in cases of death, until after a residence
of some fixed period, say three years, in the colony. * * * *
“ The same consideration which renders it expedient to
establish savings’ banks, renders it also desirable to encourage
the formation of benefit societies and mechanics’ institutes.
At the earliest possible period after the establishment of the
colony, means should be devised for laying the foundation of
economic, scientific, and other institutions, which being in part
supported and managed by the working classes, will exercise
them in the art of self-government; and, while preparing them
for the reception of their representative constitution, will have
the immediate effect of making them feel that they belong to a
colony of a superior order, and of rendering them proud of the
distinction of being founders of South Australia.”


REGULATIONS FOR LABOURERS WISHING TO
EMIGRATE TO SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
1. The Act of Parliament declares that the whole of the
funds arising from the sale of lands, and the rent of pasturage,
shall form an Emigration Fund; to be employed in affording a
free passage to the colony, from Great Britain and Ireland, for
poor persons,—“ Provided that they shall, as far as possible,
I>e adult persons of both sexes in equal proportions, and not
-exceeding the age of 30 years."
2. With a view to carrying this provision into effect, the
Commissioners offer a free passage to the colony (including
provisions and medical attendance during the voyage) to
persons of the following description ;
3. Agricultural labourers, shepherds, bakers, blacksmiths,
braziers and tinmen, smiths, shipwrights, boat-builders, wheel-
wrights, sawyers, cabinet-makers, coopers, curriers, farriers,
millwrights, harness-makers, boot and shoe-makers, tailors,
tanners, brick-makers, lime-burners, and all persons engaged
in the erection of buildings.
4. Persons engaged in the above occupations, who may apply
for a free passage to South Australia, must be able to give
satisfactory references to show that they are honest, sober,
industrious, and of general good character; and they must
therefore Jill up the annexed form, and transmit it, properly
attested , as directed in the form itself.
5. They must be real labourers going out to work for wages
in the colony, of sound mind and body, not less than 15 nor
more than 30 years of age, and married. The marriage certi


ficate must be produced. The rule as to age is occasionally
departed from in favour of the parents of large families.*
6. To the wives of such labourers as are thus sent out, the
Commissioners offer a free passage with their husbands.
7. To single women a free passage will be granted, provided
they go out under the protection of their parents, or near
relatives, or under actual engagement as servants to ladies
going as cabin passengers on board the same vessel. The
preference will be given to those accustomed to farm and dairy-
work, to sempstresses, strawplatters, and domestic servants.
8. The children of parents sent out by the Commissioners
will receive a free passage, if they are under one, or full 15
years of age at the time of embarkation. For all other children
31. each must be paid, in full, before embarkation, by the
parents or friends, or by the parish. It will be useless to apply
for a relaxation of this rule.
9. Persons who are ineligible to be conveyed out by the
Emigration Fund, if not disqualified on account of character,
will be allowed to accompany the free emigrants on paying to
the Commissioners the bare contract price of passage, which is
usually between 17/. and 20/, for each person of the age of
fourteen or upwards. The charges for children are as follows :
—under one year of age no charge ; one year of age but under
seven, one-third of the charge for adults ; seven years of age
and under fourteen, one-half the charge for adults; but if the
parents be of the labouring class, the children will be taken out
on the terms stated in Art. 8.
10. All emigrants, adults as well as children, must have been
vaccinated.
* As a general rule, each ehild is considered as extending the age one
year.


11. Emigrants are for the most part embarked at the port of
London; occasionally they are allowed to embark at ports in
the Channel, when vessels touch at such ports; but the regu-
lations of the Board do not admit of their embarking at other
out-ports, unless for the purpose of accompanying land-owners
by whom they may have been selected.
12. The expense of reaching the port of embarkation must be
borne by the emigrants; but on the day appointed for their
embarkation they will be received, even though the departure
of the ship should be delayed, and will be put to no further
expense.
13. Every adult emigrant is allowed to take half a ton
weight, or 20 measured cubic feet of baggage. Extra baggage
is liable to charge at the rate of 2 1. 7s. 3d. the ton.
14. The emigrants must provide the bedding for themselves
and children, and the necessary tools of their own trades : the
other articles most useful for emigrants to take with them are
strong plain clothing, or the materials for making clothes upon
the passage. In providing clothing, it should be remembered
that the usual length of the voyage is about four months.
15. On the arrival of the emigrants in the colony, they will
be received by an officer who will supply their immediate wants,
assist them in reaching the place of their destination, be ready
to advise with them in case of difficulty, and at all times give
them employment at reduced wages on the government works,
if from any cause they should be unable to obtain it elsewhere.
The emigrants will , however, be at perfect liberty to engage
themselves to any one willing to employ them, and will make
their own bargain for wages. This arrangement, while it leaves
the emigrant free to act as he may think right, manifestly
renders it impossible for the Commissioners to give any exact


information as to the amount of wages to be obtained; they
can merely state that hitherto wages have been very much
higher than in England (see page 31).
REGULATIONS TO BE OBSERVED ON BOARD SOUTH
AUSTRALIAN EMIGRANT SHIPS.
1. The surgeon superintendent has the entire charge of the
emigrants on board, and it is expected that every one will im-
plicitly obey his orders, and cheerfully acquiesce in any arrange-
ments he may see fit to make, which circumstances may require,
and which may not be provided for by the following regulations.
The surgeon superintendent has full power, in case of any
infringement of the following regulations, or of general miscon-
duct, to withhold any indulgence, or to stop any portion of an
emigrant’s rations; and, in extreme cases, and in conjunction
with the master, to inflict severer punishment if the nature of
the offence require it. All disputes are to be referred to the
decision of the surgeon superintendent.
2. An assistant superintendent is appointed from amongst
the married emigrants, to act under the direction of the surgeon
superintendent; under whose orders also the assistant superin-
tendent’s wife will be required to act as matron.
3. 4. Empowers the surgeon to appoint constables and
nurses.
5. All emigrants, whether adults or children, who are able
to read well, are to be employed daily in instructing those who
cannot read well, under the direction of the schoolmaster, when
one is appointed, otherwise under that of the surgeon superinten-
dent and his assistant. It is to be understood that all , except the


on deck and aired; afterwards to be rolled up and stowed
away.
12. At half-past seven, all except the cleaners are to muster
in messes to be inspected, under the direction of the surgeon
superintendent, by the headmen and by females appointed for
the purpose, as to cleanliness. Whenever the weather will
permit this muster must take place on deck, where all are to
remain until breakfast time.
13. In the meantime the hatchways, and, weather permit-
ting, the scuttles also, are to be kept wide open, so as to admit
as much air as possible, and the ’tween-decks (including the
spaces under the lower berths, the boards being removed
for the purpose) is to be well swept. This practice of venti-
lating the ’tween-decks, the emigrants being in the meantime
on deck, is to be carefully observed (whenever the weather will
permit), for at least half an hour before and after each meal
throughout the day; and at all times the emigrants should pass
as much time as possible on deck, and everything possible
done to admit the fresh air below.
14. Breakfast at half-past eight: but to be delayed until the
directions contained in articles 10, 11, 12, and 13, have been
fully complied with*
15. At half-past nine, clean the decks, ladders, hospitals, and
water-closets, sprinkling them with chloride of lime. The decks
are to be cleaned by dry holy-stoning or scraping, and to be
swept after every meal.
16. The bottom boards of the berths must be removed, dry-
scrubbed, and taken on deck, every Monday and Thursday
morning.
f- 17. The coppers are to be cleaned daily; and the constables
are to inspect them every morning, and report thereon to the
surgeon superintendent.
\ 18. From eleven till twelve o’clock, school (see Art. 5).


very young children, must be engaged daily, either as teachers or
pupils.
6. The sleeping berths are arranged in three divisions entirely
separate from each other, viz., one division for the single women
aft, one for the married persons and children under fourteen in
midships, and one for the single men forward. The married
men will, under certain circumstances, to be decided by the
surgeon superintendent, be allowed to enter the division be-
longing to the single men ; the married women having a
similar privilege of entering that belonging to the single women ;
but, with these exceptions, all are expressly directed not to
enter any division in which they do not sleep.
7. The emigrants are to be divided into messes, consisting as
nearly as may be of six adults. The messes are to he numbered.
8. Every mess is to have a headman (to be appointed by the
surgeon superintendent), who will be responsible for its order
and regularity; and whose duty it will be to report to the
surgeon any misconduct or neglect, and to attend at the
serving out of rations ; at which the surgeon or assistant
superintendent and two of the constables in rotation must also
be present.
9. The male adults of each mess, or of two or more messes
(according to the number of emigrants, and as the surgeon
superintendent may direct), shall in rotation, under the head-
man or headmen, act as cleaners and sweepers in their respec-
tive divisions for the day. The single women are to clean their
own division. The assistant superintendent, the hospital assis-
tants, and the constables, are to be exempted from this duty.
10. All are to be out of bed, and washed and dressed, by
seven in the morning ; the women and children washing between
decks in their respective divisions; and the men on deck, or,
in case of bad weather, in the single men’s division.
11. At seven the beds are, weather permitting, to be carried


19. Dinner at one. Half an hour’s thorough ventilation
before dinner, and the same, with sweeping out ’tween decks,
after dinner.
20. From three till four o’clock, school.
21. Tea at six, and the galley-fire immediately extinguished.
Half an hour’s thorough ventilation before tea, and the same,
with sweeping out ’tween decks, after tea.
22. Children to go to bed by eight j all to be in bed by ten.
No one to be allowed to sleep on deck.
23. A well-secured lamp (to be lighted at sunset, and extin-
guished at day-break) is to be kept burning all night at each of
the three hatchways, and, when required, in each hospital.
These lights are not to be removed, and none others are to be
allowed.
24. The married men, in rotation, must keep a watch in their
part of the ’tween-decks during the night. There must be at
least two in each watch, and the night must be divided into
three watches; the first from eight p.h. to midnight, the
second from midnight till four o’clock ; and the third from four
to seven a.m. The business of the watch will be, to prevent
irregularities—to assist any persons taken ill—to attend to the
lamps, hatchways, deck-ventilators, and scuttles, seeing that
they are open or shut, according to the weather and the sur-
geon’s directions —and to make any complaint that may be
necessary to the surgeon superintendent.
25. On every Sunday, at ten, the emigrants are to be mus-
tered in messes, the surgeon superintendent passing along and
inspecting them, to see that they are personally clean, and have
on clean linen, and clean and decent apparel. These regula-
tions are then to be read aloud by the surgeon superintendent,
and the headman of each mess is to question the members
of the mess thereon, in order to ascertain that the regula


tions are understood. Afterwards Divine service is to be
performed.
26. Washing clothes will be allowed every Monday and
Friday, or on such other days as the surgeon superintendent
may appoint, having regard to weather and other circum-
stances ; but no washing or drying of wet clothes is, on any
pretence whatever, to be suffered between decks.
27. The heavy luggage is to be kept in the hold, but the
emigrants are to have access to it every fourth week. As
stated in their embarkation orders, they ought to come on
board furnished with canvass bags, in which to hold the month’s
supply of linen. No luggage is to be allowed to remain in the
space between the berths, which must always be kept clear.
28. The water-closets between decks are to be used by the
sick in the hospitals only.
29. No smoking is permitted between decks; and the
emigrants, when smoking on deck, must keep to the lee side of
the ship.
30. No gambling of any description is allowed.
31. No one is allowed to have either spirits or gunpowder in
his possession. If either of these articles is discovered, it must
be thrown overboard.
32. Copies of the scale of victualling will be affixed in
conspicuous parts of the ship, for the information of all.
33. No emigrant must leave the ship after embarkation,
without a written permission from the surgeon superintendent,
countersigned by the master.
34. The above regulations have been drawn up with the
view of promoting the comfort, health, and safety of the
emigrants; and it will be the interest as well as the duty of
every one, not only to observe them carefully and cheerfully on
his own part, but to do his best to influence others to act in the


same manner. If cleanliness and airiness be neglected by any,
some infectious disorder will probably break out; such dis-
orders are generally much more serious at sea than on land,
and all will be exposed to the risk. The possession of gun-
powder too, or carelessness in the use of lights or in smoking,
may endanger the lives of all on board.
These remarks are more particularly directed to parents, in
the hope that they will set their children a good example by
carefully observing the regulations themselves, and that they
will see that their children obey them also. The want of fresh
food makes it very difficult to preserve the health of young
children during a long voyage j and, in ships in which clean-
liness and airiness have been neglected, the number of young
children who have died has sometimes been very great indeed.
On arrival in South Australia, the surgeon superintendent
will report to the governor what has been the conduct of each
emigrant on the passage; those who shall have conducted
themselves well may, of course, expect the best offers of
employment, while any who shall have been careless, dis-
obedient, or quarrelsome, will naturally be avoided.
WAGES.
In June last wages were stated as follows Bricklayers, Brick-
makers, Carpenters and Joiners, Blacksmiths, Wheelwrights,
10s. and 12s. per day ; Ploughmen and Agricultural Labourers,
Bs. and I Os. per day; Sawyers, 15s. per day; Shepherds, 50 1.
a year and their rations; Labouring Men, 6s. and 7s. per day ;
Women Servants, 20/. a year; and a great demand existed for
persons of the above description.


if
NOTICE.
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN RECORD.
On account of the increased demand for, this Journal, together with the
more regular supply of information from the Colony of South Australia, the
Proprietor has determined on publishing the above journal, m future, on the
FIRST and FIFTEENTH of every Month.
A
Will be published on the Ist of November, price bd. stamped, No. 26 of
THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN RECORD.
The object of the above journal is to offer to the Public, in an interesting and
condensed form, a record of all occurrences and transactions m the Colony ot
South Australia, and the aid of information and advice to those persons who
may be desirous to emigrate. ~ , , ... ,
All Communications and Advertisements to be addressed (if by letter, post
paid) to “ the Editor of the South Australian Record,’ at the Office, No. 5
Adam street, Strand.
PASSAGES TO SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
STEERAGE, INTERMEDIATE, and CABIN PASSAGES
„ _may be secured in FIRST CLASS VESSELS, sailing for South
Australia, on or about the FIRST and FIFTEENTH of every Month, on
application (if by letter, post paid) to CAPPER and GOLE, No. 5 Adam
street, Strand, London.
Messrs CAPPER and GOLE beg to state that they undertake the pur-
chase of Goods of every description, suitable to the above Colony, and will be
happy to afford every information with reference to cost of Passage, Freight,
Insurance, date of departure, and every other particular relating to the voyage
and future prospects of the intending Emigrant.
All letters must be post paid ; and orders for goods, cabins or berths, must be
accompanied by a remittance.
The following Works have lately been published by Capper and Goi.e, No. 5
Adam Street, Strand, and may be had of all Booksellers.
CAPPER’S SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
Third Edition, price 3s. 6d.
CANADA AND SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
A Commentary on that part of the Earl of Durham’s Report which relates
to the Disposal of Waste Land and Emigration. In three papers, delivered at
the South Australian Rooms. By Thornton Leigh Hunt.
Price Is. bd.
FIVE VIEWS IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
Price Is. 6d. each, or 6s. 6d. the set.
Printed by C. Reynell, 16 Little Pulteney street.
