

HOW EUROPE
ARMED
FOR
WAR
1871-1014.
1/3 NET 1/3




HOW EUROPE
ARMED FOR WAR
(1871 - 1914)
BY
J. T. WALTON NEWBOLD, M.A.
LONDON : BLACKFRIARS PRESS LIMITED
74 SWINTON STREET . . LONDON, W.C.
AND AT MANCHESTER


TO MY FRIEND AND COMRADE,
Dr. KARL LIEBKNECHT,
AT WHOSE INSTANCE
AND IN CONJUNCTION WITH WHOM
A MORE AMBITIOUS WORK
WAS PLANNED
FEBRUARY 1914.


PREFACE
This little work makes no claim to be an exhaustive analysis of
the armament problem with which it deals. Nor is it written from
the viewpoint of an anti-militarist agitator so much as from that
of a keenly interested student of the economics of naval and mili-
tary power. It endeavours to discover and to delineate the part
which the engineer and the chemist have played in the perfection of
war material, and the reactions which the manufacture of muni-
tions, to meet an ever-growing demand, has had upon the metal,
machinery and associated trades in industrial communities. Amid
all the vast literature of naval, military, imperialist and pacifist
writers one looks in vain for any thorough treatment of the war
industries in relation to the development of the war system. There
are a few pamphlets, but none of these are satisfactory. Very few
militarists seem to have any appreciation of the dependence of the
fighting services on the industrial system, whilst their opponents
display an equally displeasing aversion to a closer acquaintanceship
with what they regard as the unclean thing. Personally, I un-
grudgingly avow a keen interest in all the wondrous machinery of
war, behind, and inseparable from which, are the workshops and
shipyards, ever the finest embodiments of modern production.
There is romance in the war machines—the greatest triumph of
human ingenuity and the crowning tragedy of its murderous
application.
It is within the last half century that nations have laid up vast
armaments for war in time of peace. Formerly they collected and
trained men, accumulated money, but did not furnish themselves
with gigantic supplies of munitions. Perhaps that is why this
aspect of militarism has no literature. Never before was the
soldier or the sailor a mechanic. Only to-day is he becoming a
machine-minder, an operative. It is a memorable revolution, for
it alters the whole nature of war.
Let us understand this new develppment. Before we put for-
ward proposals for abolishing or limiting or controlling armament
manufacture, let us examine the system. That is what this little
book tries to do and nothing more ... at present.


A considerable part of this book has appeared in the
Forward, whose editor has kindly given me full consent to include
the articles in my text.
The material in the following pages has been gleaned in every
case, except in the last chapter, from sources sympathetic to the
existing order, and all of it material published before the war. I
have consulted scores of trade and professional papers, naval
authorities—propagandist and otherwise —over the whole period;
military journals, handbooks and standard works; financial direc-
tories —British, French, German, Austrian and Italian; the
prospectuses and company reports of the most important armament
firms at home, and some of those abroad.
I have also had invaluable advice, criticism and suggestions
from a number of friends in financial, engineering and journalist
circles. To them, as well as to Mr. Maisky, Dr. Lancelot Eden,
and, not least, to my wife, for indispensable assistance in research
and translations, I wish to take this opportunity of recording my
thanks.
J. T. W. N.
February, 19x6.


CONTENTS
PAGE
The Dawn of the Steel Age 7
Armstrong, Krupp, and Schneider 13
The Re-armament of France and Germany 17
Britain's Troubles Begin 20
Military Armaments in the Early “Eighties" 24
Naval Armaments in the Early “Eighties" 26
The Endowment of Our Armament Firms 31
Science and Military Armament 42
t Behind the German Navy Law 48
Ten Years of Changing Policies 53
Sir Philip Watts and His Dreadnoughts 56
British and German Dreadnoughts 60
The Battle of Beardmore and Brown 65
The Struggle for wSea Power : Last Phase 72
The Navies of other Belligerents 75
Military Equipment—l9o4-1914 82
The Coming of War 91
How the War found Britain 94
How the War found Germany 98
War not the Way Out 102




HOW EUROPE ARMED
FOR WAR
The Dawn of the Steel Age
The writer does not ascribe to any one of the belligerent nations
or Governments exclusive or even preponderating responsibility for
the outbreak of the Great War, but rather attributes the catas-
trophe to the intense rivalry which has been steadily becoming more
pronounced between the highly-organised European States, each
seeking to attain world dominion as a means to the most effective
exploitation of natural resources.
He sees in the State as it generally exists to-day no more than
the collective will and action of the wealth-controlling classes to
further their ambitions and to safeguard their interests. It seems
to him that the purpose of the modern State was summed up in a
sentence when Mr. Asquith informed the leaders of the Railway-
men in 191 1 :
His Majesty’s Government will place the whole civil and
military forces of the Crown at the disposal of the railway
companies.
The whole civil and military forces of the State, of every State,
are at the disposal of landlord and capitalist interests. The whole
Governmental system is organized, primarily, in the interest of
property. The State is the Propertied Interests. It has come into
being, has continued and been strengthened as they have realised
that they are more powerful, more capable and more comfortable
when acting in association than when each provides for himself
what are the necessities of all.
The State exists to-day to relieve our rulers of those responsi-
bilities which they would, otherwise, have to undertake for them-
selves, and to supplement their energies with the combined effort
and wisdom of the nation.


The propertied classes have a legal system to harmonise their
and to prevent that friction which would interfere with
their enjoyment of wealth. They have a judicial, a police, and
punitive system to protect their property from harassing attacks.
Thev established and maintain a poor law system and all the
machinery of social welfare to guard themselves from the incalcul-
able forces of anarchy and degeneration. They it was who con-
structed public roads and instituted public lighting and cleansing
and who have gone on to lay down tramways to and
electric oower, who instituted—those inconsistent h ree 1 raders
the postal and telegraph services, the coast-guards, the po ice,
and foreign countries, the State railways. They have developed
our chain of educational services, and gathered information from
the ends of the earth in the service of Capitalist efficiency. >
have organised the State within and without.
The State, i.e., the organised property owners, maintains and
perfects a consular and diplomatic system which
country in the interests of its masters at home Behind this sys
tern are the Fleets and the Armies, and the only influences whic .
restrain any modern State from unbridled arrogance are fears of
the consequences of a too great exercise of force.
During the last fifty years two new State systems, those o
Germany and Italy, have arisen, and one, that of Turkey, has
well-nigh collapsed. The Franco-German War was decisive in
bringing about a final settlement of those problems which had con-
front Europe ever after the great compromise and organised
injustice of the Vienna Congress in 1815. It completed the
organisation of Western Europe, accomplished the unification of
Germany and Italy, and inaugurated a lengthy period of peace,
banished military operations from the whole of Europe no ' th
west of the Danube. The revolutionary movements had been
crushed out or rendered harmless all over the Continent as wel as
m 1 But° the Continental settlement brought with it a new period
of anxiety and stress for the diplomats and propertied classes m
this country. , .
From the battle of Trafalgar in 1805 until some years
conclusion of the Franco-German War, Britain had remained in
undisturbed control of the oceans. For more than seventy years
she continued absolute mistress of the seas, an(T as late as 7 .
had a Fleet larger than the combined Navies of Europe. She was
absolute in all waters, and. whilst the Continental nations struggted
for mastery or wasted their wealth and energies m strife, the
was no one to dispute her in all the markets of the world. Her
manufacturers and traders, her shippers and shipbuilders were
without a serious competitor in industry or commerce. They ha
a monopoly, to all intents and purposes, of the neutral markets.


Pursuing steadily the lines which British policy has kept during
modern times of acquiring no territory on the Continent of Europe,
and thus doing nothing which would permanently alienate any
nation from her, she was content to confine herself to the absorp-
tion of non-European tracts which awaited colonization or develop-
ment, that extension of prosperity, wealth and contentment which,
our school books tell us, are to be found everywhere beneath the
British flag. By different methods, but with almost invariable
success, she pacified and persuaded the natives, directing their
wayward steps within the spreading area of her mighty Empire.
Under conditions such as these there is nothing to marvel at
that her manufacturers and commercialists were staunch Free
Traders; that they did not clamour for Governmental support; that
they did not agitate for great fleets of cruisers “ to show the flag,”
or to exert pressure upon obdurate native States.
Meanwhile, be it remembered, the official caste had not been
forced to open its doors to the new plutocracy of the industrial
revolution. The Army and the Navy remained the close preserves
of the aristocracy and the landed interest, of the Court and the
nobility. There was no room for the sons of the manufacturer
upon the quarter-deck, or in the mess-rooms of the best regiments.
The armament of our land forces was still so unimportant as to be
allowed to remain a Woolwich and Enfield preserve. The wooden
Navy, now giving place to ships of iron, did not offer any great
incentive to the iron and steel makers, and artillery for the Fleet
was still largely made at Woolwich. Assured of a monopoly of
the world’s ship-construction, our builders had no cause to press
urgently for a subsidy in the form of warship orders.
Moreover, the supremacy in the world of capitalising still
remained with the manufacturing and trading interests. The
financier was only just beginning to make himself felt as a powerful
factor and was still regarded askance as an element in the system
somewhat alien from British traditions and suitable rather to deal
with the spendthrift Governments and dubious industrial enter-
prises of the foreigner than to be recognised as a reputable member
of our ruling class.
The effect of the Central European struggles between 1859 and
1871 was not adversely felt in this country, and certainly con-
tributed much support to the retrenchment policy of Gladstone.
Whilst Italy and France were engaged with Austria, Prussia and
Austria with Denmark, Italy and Prussia with Austria, and France
with Germany, and whilst Russia was still recovering from the
Crimean War, British statesmen had little reason to expend heavily
on either Army or Navy, and could afford to listen to the teachings
of Cobden and Bright. These years were the hey-day of Liberalism
and Free Trade. They were years for Britain of small outlay on
armaments, of profound external peace, and of steady trade and
[2]


prosperity. But the age that began with Trafalgar was drawing
to a close.
This country has, thanks to her vast resources of minerals, her
settled form of government, and immunity from the ravages of
war and civil disorder, attained and kept a position of pre-eminence
In manufacture and commerce. Her peculiar advantages of situa-
tion near to but detached from the Continent, at the gates of
Europe, and on the threshold of the Atlantic, together with the
wisdom of her statesmen in refusing to entertain a policy of territo-
rial expansion on the Continent, have all enabled her people to
continue without interruption the accumulation of wealth and to
make their country the great workshop of the world.
In all that pertains to the mechanical arts the British long
maintained a leading place. They were the chief coal raisers of
the world and developed an enormously productive iron and steel
trade. They took the initiative in the adoption and construction
of railways and supplied much of the capital required for the laying
down of tracks all over the American Continent, in Asia, Africa,
and elsewhere. As a maritime nation, they, naturally, tended to
monopolise the sea transport services and the construction of
merchant shipping for all purposes and for all owners. Far and
wide over the earth British goods were borne in British cargo boats
and by British freight trains, carrying British influence and earning
British profits far beyond the range even of the guns of the
omnipresent British Navy.
Thus came it about that when the peoples of Europe returned
from the wars and began to develop their manufactures and to seek
to sell their wares on the markets of neutral countries as well as at
home, they encountered a long established and powerfully
entrenched trading connection everywhere they went. They
hastened to reinforce themselves with protective duties at home and
to call upon the State to assist them in winning their way into the
foreign trade. In whole industries the British were virtual mono-
polists, not because of superior organisation, but because they had
hitherto had no competitors. Moreover, British products were
cheap, well made, and had a reputation not easily acquired by new
comers.
But for the exhaustion entailed by the disastrous Civil War in
the “ sixties ” the United States would have become a keen
competitor with this country at a much earlier period than she had
done, and would not have fallen into the economic dependence which
she so long endured, and from which she is only now emancipating
herself.
The close of the Unification period released the Germans for
other purposes than the mere pursuit of war, and the new Empire,
filled with enthusiasm and aroused to passionate energy as a result
of its three victorious wars, could devote unlimited attention and


effort to the development and organisation of its industries on the
sure basis of its magnificent geographical situation, splendid
natural transport facilities, and enormous natural wealth.
Meanwhile, the increasing importance of machinery in industry,
its continuous tendency to specialisation and complexity, the
necessity of combining strength and tensile qualities in the metal
used, and the great extension of heavy transport requiring driving
mechanism, steel tyres, strong axles, and durable rails, all gave
a great impetus to the metal trades. The exigencies of commerce
necessitated the greater use of steel and increasing experiment in
its production. On the other hand, the growth in the size of field
armies made necessary a rapid increase in the quantity and strength
of ordnance armament, of ammunition, and man-killing devices.
The levy en masse , the improved musket, and the better powder
demanded the invention and improvement of quick-firing artillery
with which to stay the onrush of these vast bodies of well armed
men. Machinery was becoming as urgent in war as in peace.
Bronze guns were no longer sufficiently strong to resist the explo-
sion of improved powders, and iron was almost useless. Ordnance
manufacture required the supply of exceedingly tough steel. No
less important was the metallurgy of shell manufacture.
War at sea, as evidenced in the experience before the batteries
of Kinburn, in the Crimea, and the encounters of ironclads in the
American War, had rendered obsolete “ old wooden walls,”
installed the tyranny of the armour plate, and instituted the ding-
dong rivalry of iron shot and iron plate, steel shot and steel plate,
with all its far-reaching results on the chemistry of steel and of
rending explosive.
It was war which gave us the intensive study and incessant
experiments in steel and metals which have resulted in the wondrous
power and use of machinery and constructional materials. War is
so important that no expenditure is or can be too great to perfect
the weapon that will afford momentary security. Industry owes
much to the bye-products of armament manufacture just as, in the
case of motor transport, war owes much to industry. Steel war-
ships were followed by the widest adoption of steel for merchant
ships, and this development soon resulted in closer association
between steel makers and steel users. The steel makers, in their
turn, searched the geological formations of Sweden and Sardinia,
of Algiers and Bosnia, of Bilbao and Morocco for the richest iron
ores; they came to Kirkintilloch for the raw nickel to strengthen
German and French gun steel; they went to Spain for manganese
and to Chili and Peru for copper.
It was in the “ seventies ” that men began to rear the world of
peace and of war on a platform of steel bedded in the solid and
liquid mineral wealth of every Continent.
The whole fabric of civilisation has now come to rest on steel


and that on coal, iron, and the other minerals. Remove the
mineral basis and our complex society tumbles to the ground. They
who control minerals to-day control life.
These two great revolutionary changes, one political and the
other economic, which happened to coincide with the Parliamentary
triumph of Gladstonian Liberalism, were destined completely to
disturb the course of British political development at the same
time that they did not become sufficiently evident to impress their
meaning on the minds of advanced thinkers and popular leaders.
Hence comes it that a whole political party continues, so far as its
rank and file are concerned, to be dominated by the ideals of that
earlier time and to be inspired by the international codes of honesty
and justice breathed in the speeches of Bright, Cobden, and
Gladstone. In a condition of puzzledom they still endeavour to
reconcile the Liberalism of Asquith with that of their earlier leaders,
not realising that the whole structure of British society and of the
world has undergone a profound change and that new circumstances
have proved too difficult for their politico-economic gospel.
Since Marx wrote Das Capital, even while the pioneers of
Modern Socialism were spreading the new economic faith and
founding the present Socialist sections, the world of the Industrial
Revolution was giving place to another in which this country was
to be no longer the one workshop of the world and in which
Capitalism was to become super-national in its operations. The
great industrial magnates were entering the spheres of government
and finance and were thrusting forward their private schemes with
all the forces of the State at their disposal.
In the underworld of industry new demands upon production
had prompted men to new inventions and fresh discovery.
Capitalism was resorting to new methods, harnessing new energies,
calling science and education to its aid, systematising itself, dis-
covering itself, and attaining consciousness of its power and its
purpose.
In conquering the State it was destined to realise that the
national defences could be made as lucrative to itself as they had
ever been to landlordism. Everywhere, and for everything, it was
necessary to have machinery and motive power. Hence, the
control and development of mineral, chemical, and metallurgical
resources became the most important of all the branches of
Capitalist activity. Here, the needs of peace and war were to meet
in the middle “eighties.”


Armstrong, Krupp & Schneider
Before we begin to trace the course of armament policy in Europe
subsequent to the Franco-German War, it would, probably, be as
well if we said something first about the three chief armament firms
of Britain, Germany and France; the three great industrial under-
takings upon which these Powers, as well as Italy, Austria and
Russia, not to speak of Japan, Turkey and the South American
Republics, have so much depended.
For all that Krupp has been acclaimed as King of Cannons,
High Priest of Destructive Armaments, and his works at Essen
imaged, much as the ancients thought of Vesuvius, as the Gates
of the Underworld, the mighty armourer stands by no means as
the oldest maker of guns still doing business.
In reading through the Report of the Panmure Commission on
the “ Manufacture of Iron and Brass Ordnance in Various Conti-
nental States,” issued by the War Department in 1856, there is to
be found, in the sections devoted to their journey and enquiries
in Prussia and other German States, not a single reference to
Krupp of Essen. Krupp had, indeed, made his first gun in 1847,
and presented it to the King of Prussia. He had exhibited one
or two field pieces, and Avas conducting experiments with much
energy, paying for them out of the profits he had obtained on the
sale in London of his patent for iron spoons and from his large
trade in locomotive tyres. He was beginning to attract a little
attention from the King of Wurtemburg and the Emperor Francis
Joseph, but his little steel works on the Ruhr were not considered
worthy of mention in this report.
In 1857 Armstrong had become installed at the Royal Arsenal,
his first gun had been accepted the year before, and now a new
Royal Gun Factory was being erected at Woolwich and an ordnance
works at Elswick established (in which he was not then interested
but which was managed by his partners in the hydraulic and steel
works adjoining) for the extensive manufacture of guns on his
model and under his supervision for the re-armament of the land
artillery of this country. In active operation from 1859 to 1862
a great number of guns was turned out of both works, when the
agreement was terminated by the War Department owing to


military dissatisfaction with the breech-loading gun, and the
Elswick Ordnance Company, presided over by Sir w. G.
Armstrong, and also managed by Captain (later Sir) Andrew Noble
and Mr. (later Lord) Rendel, began to make guns and later to build
gunboats and other ships, noteworthy either for extraordinarily
heavy guns or many smaller ones, for foreign countries and also
for this country. Armstrong and the Rendels invented the gun-
boat, a whole flotilla of which of exceptional clumsiness, armed
with one enormous muzzle-loader, they built for China just before
their new breech-loader and their new light quick-firing guns
rendered them obsolete. .
No sooner had Armstrong had his new heavy breech-loading
gun accepted by the Admiralty than he began speech-making m
public on “ the overwhelming demand for breech-loading guns.’
He sold several no-ton monstrosities to Italy, and the hue and
cry which followed in the Press resulted in the Admiralty ordering
some yet more powerful 17-inch guns for our own Fleet. Ulti-
mately, so many of these monster guns burst or cracked that both
the Italians and ourselves abandoned them. Then the Government
requested Vickers to make guns for them—an invitation Vickers
had been arduously soliciting for four years previously—and the
price of guns dropped considerably.
To judge from the sympathy Sir E. J. Reed, an ex-chief
constructor at the Admiralty, bestowed on his former Department
at having - “ fallen into the hands of Sir William Armstrong s
firm,” it was not a very happy arrangement —for the Admiralty.
Armstrong was a genius. His firm built a very powerful
cruiser, “The Esmeralda,” for Chili, and when she was completed
he stated in public with much indignation that there was no warship
in our Fleet could overtake her, escape from her, or fight her
successfully. He pointed to the peril of our commerce from such
ships. .
The Admiralty soon took the gentle hint and bought most ot the
guns and mountings of the new improved “ Esmeraldas ” from
Sir William Armstrong’s firm. Then he went one better and built
a finer cruiser, the * * Piemonte,” for Italy. Once more the adver-
tisements were flung before the world, and South American States
tumbled over themselves, each other, and Japan, to have improved
“ Piemontes ” from Elswick.
Britain also had some “ Piemontes,” built elsewhere, indeed,
but armed with guns of his newest types !
There was a time when Argentina and Chili, hurriedly arming
against each other, had cruisers building alongside one another in
the Elswick yard.
Lord Sydenham, who has just been elected to the Armstrong-
Whitworth Board, once described Armstrong’s finest battleship,
designed on Armstrong’s principle, as “ the worst designed


armour-clad ever built.” Lord Sydenham is an unrivalled naval
expert. There is an even more curious development than that.
For the best part of thirty years Sir William Armstrong- and
Sir Joseph Whitworth, both manufacturers of guns, led an absolute
cat and dog life, depreciating- each other’s guns. There was,
however, one thing on which they were agreed, viz., that armour
was a waste of good money much better expended on guns. They
both made guns; neither of them made armour. Ten years after
their doughty onslaught on armour, their two companies were
amalgamated, and the first step taken by their successors was to
lay down a magnificent plant for making armour plate !
Old Alfred Krupp was a shrewd industrial magnate of colossal
energy and business capacity, otherwise he would never have won
through his thirty-year struggle to keep his firm from ruin. He
saw his opportunity, undoubtedly, in the efforts that Prussia was
making to develop a powerful army and armament, and seems to
have set himself as determinedly to prevent Spandau becoming a
great State arsenal, as was intended in 1856, when all the gun
and explosive departments were being grouped there in new works,
as even the Sheffield colleagues of his firm’s later days endeavoured
to ruin Woolwich. The fact that there was no great national
cannon foundry in all Germany, owing largely to the small State
system there prevailing before 1866, and to the absence of any
powerful competitors amongst the numerous gun makers of Augs-
burg, Nuremburg, Berlin, Slihl, and elsewhere, as well as German
dependence on the outside supply of Sweden and Belgium, gave him
his opportunity to make himself indispensable to Prussia. His guns
were highly successful in the Danish War against the Danish
frigates, and in the campaign of Kdnigratz against Austria.
With the financial aid of Wilhelm 1., Krupp furnished the requisite
armaments for the war against France. The successes of this war
resulted in an enormous demand for his guns from all over the
world. His own Government placed excessive reliance on him,
and set out at once on a vast re-armament. Krupp still and for
more than twenty years to come abstained from naval construction,
but manufactured naval guns. His chief and only real rival was
Hermann Gruson, of Magdeburg-Bulckau, whose speciality was
machine and quick-firing guns and gun turrets. Gradually Krupp
increased his holdings in coal and iron mines, and allied himself
with various explosive makers. For many years he maintained an
almost complete monopoly of the neutral market for land artillery,
even as Armstrong and Whitworth did for naval ordnance.
The development of French armament industry was radically
different from that which took place here and in Germany. France
had been organised into a highly centralised State system by the
Ministers of the great Bourbons, by Mazarin and Richelieu, by
Colbert and Sully, This great bureaucratic system had prepared


for war on an externive »»•«, Iron was not produced
ss 1
that time with wh.ch to hght the uu the French
Italy, to en S a S® ™ d erect ed great gun foundries at Douai,
Bmtrges S These were .ater supp.e-
.the Revolution and the
Fi -%€r„ y st a#
waTs 0 " About 1835, the Schnefder family bought over the bankrupt
t onrt there made railway material and marine forgings,
S£s :, n e d Thev made armour plate in the early Sixties for the
W French armom-clads, and in the German War supplied more
®hTn twenty Series of field guns and sixteen batteries
of machine guns in five months. In ten years from .876
. t qq- Thie: firm made or supplied steel tor near y
6000 guns for France and regularly employed Is,°p°
Working in close connection with them was the Hotchkiss Com-
nanv makers of machine and quick-firing guns. This company
had Y grown r out of the industry transferred to Pans by Mr
Hotchkiss at the end of the American Civil War, when his ow
countrymen no longer were ac grips with each other. .
The Schneider Company has also had a w°riderfLil
for the excellence of its guns—as instance the 75 of the P resent
Wa Other large French gun-making firms were die St Chamond
Company, the Chatillon-Commentry Company of Montlucon,
Shipbuilders of the Mediterranean with gun works erected mi 88
at Havre and older works at Marseilles, and the Call and Co., o
Paris. All these found abundance of work in the re-armament o
France after the conclusion of the Franco-German War.


The Re-Armament of France
and Germany
The disasters of 1870-71 had brought the whole fabric of French
military organisation toppling to destruction, but when once the
invader was off the soil and the new order began to shape itself, an
immediate and pressing scheme of re-armament was put in hand.
It was necessary to reconstruct the French military machine, to
furnish new artillery of every kind and to provide immense numbers
of rifles and machine-guns, as well as their ammunition.
Finally, it was resolved to draw a line of what should be
impregnable fortresses across the shortened length of the new
frontier from Luxemburg to Switzerland.
By the winter of 1875 the French Army was in possession of a
complete re-armament of field artillery, comprising 494 batteries of
six guns each and these were obtained from Creusot as well as from
the State factories. The Fives-Lille Co. and the St. Chamond
Steel Works were also kept busily employed. In the years 1875-
1877 the last-named enterprise turned out from 800 to 1,000 guns a
year. The owners of this works, Messrs. Petin and Gaudet, also
supplied great quantities of rifles.
The Terre-Noire Works, Derosne and Call, of Paris and Lille;
the Forges de Firminy, the Commentry-Fouchambault Co., Marrel
Bros., fhe Foundries of Marquise, the St. Etienne Works, and
others, were busily employed turning out gun-limbers, trunnions,
axles, cradles, gun-tubes, hoops, shells, caissons, rifles and other
munitions.
The Chantiers de la M(kliterrann6e, who purchased works at
Havre in 1872, made forty batteries of bronze and ten batteries of
steel guns between 1870 and 1878, as well as 325 howitzers and
over six hundred mountings.
The French had been fairly successful in improving the rate
of their field gunfire, but were still somewhat behind the Germans,
though, from many accounts, their weapons were less liable to
erosion and bursts.
On the other side of the frontier the Germans had been busy


replacing much of their worn material and, in 1874-1 undertook the
re-armament of their field artillery with a new gun of 78.5 mm. with
kilometres range, and with this weapon they increased their rate
of fire by about one shot every thirty seconds.
Most of the work was executed by Krupp at Essen, and the
remainder at the State works at Spandau, as well as at Bochum.
The new guns were ready by April x, 1875. Meanwhile, the
Germans were giving great attention to their small-arm material,
which has always been a matter of great care to our enemy.
Hitherto, the German infantry had been armed with the famous
needle-gun, invented by Dreyse in 1839, and manufactured at his
works at Sommerda.
In 1871 the brothers Mauser, two mechanics employed at the
State Armoury at Oberndorf, in Wurtemberg, perfected a new
rifle, and they w r ere allowed to establish a private factory with the
assistance of a Berlin bank in order to turn out rifles of this pattern.
The German Government also preserved to itself the right to use
their patent, which was generally adopted abroad. By the close
of 1875 the w'hole army w y as supplied with Mausers, some made in
Liege, and others at works in Birmingham, so great was the
urgency of the State’s requirements.
Besides Dreyse and the Mausers, Werder, director of the
Maschinenfabrik, Nuremburg, invented a rifle in 1871, and to
these three establishments we must add the Broadwell factory at
Karlsruhe, and Berger and Co.’s Arms Factory at Witten-on-Ruhr,
which had the same importance for rifles as the neighbouring works
at Essen had for artillery. Berger, in addition to rifles, made
Palmkrantz machine-guns, which were greatly in request by the
Russian Government.
Even more important than all these, and quite on a level with
Krupp as an indispensable asset of German militarism, was a firm
of whose insidious and far-reaching activities we have heard all
too little, viz., Ludwig Lowe and Co.
Ludwig Lowe, one of the greatest Jewish magnates of the
capitalist period, had studied the machine tool trade of the United
States in 1870. He returned to his little machine tool factory,
which he had established in Berlin in 1864, and, in 1871, founded
the Ludwig Lowe Sewing Machine Manufacturing Co., appropri-
ating, without acknowledgment, the designs of Pratt and Whitney,
of Providence, Rhode Island (makers of the Martini-Henry rifle).
He w y as the first to introduce American machine tools into Germany
and improved upon them. In this same year, 1871, the Prussian
War Department took a step of stupendous importance for the
future organisation of the German arms supply. It may be that
the Army Chiefs had witnessed the supply of American munitions
to France in the recent war as to Britain in the Crimea. Probably
they were impressed by the wonderful development of rifles and


machine-guns produced by the machine tool makers of America
during and since the Civil War, but with characteristic Prussian
foresight and thoroughness, the War Department decided to build
up the State armament works with the aid of Ludwig Lowe. He
supplied one million rear-sights, and then went on to manufacture
revolvers, as well as to provide State and private factories with
the requisite machine tools.
He was a member both of the Reichstag and the Prussian
Landtag and one of the leaders of the Progressive party, seceding
from it in 1877 on the question of its opposition to the military
policy of Bismarck. He and his group subsequently joined the
National Liberals and gave their support to further military
expenditure.
In 1872 the Duttenhofers founded the Koln Rottweiller Powder
Factory at Hamburg, and contemporaneously with them, Alfred
Nobel at Krummel-on-Elbe, and J. N. Heidemann, of the Rhenish-
Westphalian Powder Works, at Cologne, were enormously
developing the military explosives trade to meet and encourage the
Prussian demands. In 1875 I* l6 Duttenhofers and Heidemann
invented a new powder better suited to the breech-loading gun, and
in 1879 Cermany undertook a further reorganisation of her field
artillery.
Henceforward we shall find these reorganisations of artillery like
those of small arms and fleets become periodic, and behind them
we shall see flitting the shapes of Krupp, Schneider, Vickers,
Nobel, Skoda, Lowe, Mannlicher, and others of similar nature.


Britain’s Troubles Begin
This constantly accelerated competition on either side the
frontier, and the immense effort of the Republic between 1873
1878, visited upon the French steel companies, engineering and
allied industries, contributing to the arts of war, remarkable
prosperity. They did not hesitate to make the most of their
opportunities, and invested more money in their plants and extended
their artillery and other departments under the stimulus of the
new demand. The steel trades received a fillip such as they needed
and they were induced to undertake, partly from patriotic motives,
and largely from those of a more speculative character, the improve-
ment of the qualities of their steel.
When the French had completed the gigantic armament scheme,
which promised for a time to render their fair land secure from a
renewed Prussian assault, they discovered that their naval arma-
ment was in a very unsatisfactory state. So busy had they been
for ten years previously in combatting the preparations and activi-
ties of Prussia that they had been compelled to neglect their Fleet.
Across the Channel, in the meanwhile, there had also been a
marked slackening off of naval preparation, but, notwithstanding,
Britain had gathered together a modern fleet of iron ships, most
of them heavily armour-clad and more than a match for the smaller
fleet of sheathed and armour-covered w r ooden vessels which the
French had built a decade before. This condition of affairs, of
course —and quite reasonably —could no longer be tolerated by
France, who began, to the considerable agitation of our naval
enthusiasts, to build a number of new ships, armour-clad battleships
of a heavier and better armament than our own.
The most absurd and unwarrantable assertions were made by
our naval extremists during the early “Eighties,” and the consider-
ation of France’s unpreparedness and the amount of leeway she
had to make up were never brought into account at all. Nor did
our alarmists pause to recollect that whilst our dockyards could
construct a battleship in about three and a half years, the French
took as long as ten to get their vessels into service.
With the characteristic ingenuity of their class they always


insisted on comparing’ the number of our ships actually in commis-
sion with the number the French had afloat —a very different thing.
They made a great deal of capital out of the bad financial system
whereby the French pushed ahead the construction of their ships
beyond the provision of supplies allotted by the Chamber, but did
not remark that the French rate of building was much more
uncertain than our own.
But we will return in another article to discuss the early armour-
clad scares of the middle and late “eighties, and confine oui-
selves at present to noticing what was the effect on the h rench
armament industry of this naval revival.
Whilst the upkeep of the military establishment occupied con-
siderable energy, it was rather to the naval demand that the
armament industry of France looked for support from 1878 to 1883.
In this connection the same thing happened as in the former case —
the shipbuilders, armour-plate makers, marine engineers, etc.,
called for more capital and proceeded to extend their establishments
in anticipation of a steadily increasing demand. For about five
years there was a run of prosperity in the war shipbuilding trade
of France and the builders were beginning to see a fair prospect of
wresting from their well-entrenched British competitors, from the
Scotts, the Elders, the Napiers, the Thomsons, the Palmers, the
Lairds, and others —some measure of the world’s demand for mer-
cantile ship construction. The French were dreaming dreams of
Colonial expansion, merchant trading, sea power, and manufac-
turing prosperity.
Whilst it was forbidden to them to export war material, armour-
plate, having been until 1876 no more than exceptionally thick
ship-plate and still only a specially strong compound of steel and
iron plates, was permitted to go abroad. Thus came it about that
the French makers were able to secure the contracts for the supply
of armour for the new Navy Law programme of the Italian Govern-
ment determined on in 1877-78.
The French steel-makers, in their efforts to produce a fine gun
steel, also invented a strong steel armour-plate, which met with
the high approval of the Italians at the tests of armour at Spezia
in 1878 and 1879. As a result, the orders for many thousands of
tons of armour were placed with Schneider instead of with Charles
Cammell and Co. and John Brown and Co., the other competitors.
Then, unfortunately for the French firms, their Government
itself showed a predilection for Cammell’s armour, and placed some
of its work in Sheffield. This dashed the French firms’ hopes when
on top of other misfortunes came the momentous decision of the
French Admiralty to abandon the construction of the battleships
they had on the stocks, and to concentrate on the ships of the new
vogue—torpedo boats. This was a cruel blow at the armour-plate
maker and the big gun manufacturer. A serious depression faced


the French steel and shipbuilding industries thus deprived of naval
orders, and with little new military demands to satisfy. Something
had to be done to relieve this intolerable situation, and to com-
pensate the firms for the outlay they had made for a demand which
a change of policy had abrogated.
The writer is firmly convinced that in this temporary suspension
of naval orders and considerable depression in military demand,
we have good reason to see a powerful influence making for the
legalisation in 1885 of the export of war material by French
manufacturers.
Meanwhile, events had been occurring in the sphere of
European diplomacy which made greater recourse to armaments
well nigh inevitable.
The French, who had quickly recovered their national energy,
after the debacle of 1870-71, turned from the dreams of European
dominion which had engrossed their minds for so many long years
to consider the possibilities of African expansion. Their financiers
had already acquired a very considerable hold over the Egyptian
Debt, and they had been deeply interested in the Suez Canal scheme.
They had secured to themselves Algeria at an earlier period, and
were visualising once more that Mediterranean Empire which at
different seasons had tempted Louis XIV. and Napoleon I. to turn
from the Vosges toward the Nile. This aspiration of the French
was encouraged by Bismarck, who saw in it the occasion of endless
entanglements with Britain which would distract the French from
their haunting ideal of the Revenge.
The French investor desired an outlet for his rapidly accumu-
lating capital, and the pride of the people sought some diplomatic
triumph which should re-establish the reputation of their nation.
But one Power’s misfortune is another's opportunity, and our
Government was quick to avail itself of the weakness of the rival
to fasten upon Egypt, to secure the new gate of the Mediterranean,
and to safeguard the short cut to India via the Suez Canal. The
interests of the Indian Empire, no less than those of the Egyptian
bondholder, made it desirable that Egypt should pass under British
control. Furthermore, the recovery of Russia and the weakening
of Turkey made this an essential next step in Imperialist policy.
But the occupation of Egypt was the death-blow to French
plans of African dominion, and relegated France to the ranks of the
nations in decline. Ousted from Egypt, she made her entry into
Tunis with the support of Bismarck and the connivance of Britain.
As a result, Italy, whose dream of Tunisian dominion was thus
rudely shattered, joined Germany and Austria in the Triple
Alliance to obtain military assistance, and inclined more than ever
to Britain for naval protection.


France also set her eyes on Morocco, and so engendered the
suspicions of Spain, whose traditional interests there were con-
siderable.
All these events and tendencies which showed themselves
between 1878 and 1883 inflamed the jealousies of the Western and
Southern Powers, and set France, on the one hand, and Italy,
Spain, and Britain, on the other, vieing in naval outlay.
In the East, Russia was once more becoming active, and from
1871 to 1877 was busily reconstructing the Black Sea Fleet and
fortifying her harbours in direct contravention of that ridiculous
scrap of paper, the Treaty of Paris, in which she had promised
not to do so. Taking the opportunity of the Franco-German War,
she had freed herself from this undertaking given to Britain and
France in 1856, and had begun another movement towards Con-
stantinople. Turkey replied with a larger programme of ships
built in this country, but, despite her naval supremacy, she was
beaten in the war of 1877-78.
At the Congress of Berlin, in 1878, Britain assisted Austria in
depriving Serbia of Bosnia-Herzegovina, and threw all her weight
into the scale against Russia, so making barren the victories of the
Tsar.
Russia retaliated by pursuing an Asiatic policy, which caused
us to go to war with Afghanistan the next year, and resulted in
intense Russo-British military and naval rivalry.
In 1879 Germany and Austria concluded an Alliance aimed at
Russia, which was joined by Italy in ISB2, and the immediate result
of all this new direction of policies was an enormous acceleration
of armament preparation.


Military Armaments in the
Early “Eighties”
In 1872, Russia had undertaken a complete re-armament of her
artillery, at a cost of 28,250,000 roubles, and had overhauled her
small arms factories at Toula. A great volume of work m connec-
tion with this came to Messrs. Greenwood and Batley, of Leeds,
who have always maintained an extensive business with the
Russian Army and Navy for the supply of machine tools. After
the Berlin Congress, Russia began to strengthen her resources and
to renew her armaments on a bigger scale. The great works at
Obouchoff were extended and improved, whilst Baird s erected
another new works at Petrograd. Greenwood and Batley had a
considerable share of the machinery orders and contracts tor
presses, etc., for Obouchoff. ,
In 1879, Austria reorganised her artillery and provided a
number of new batteries. These were ready in 1881. 1 his
re-armament, 'which was on an extensive scale, provoked Russia
and Italy to further efforts, both commencing new preparations,
of course, for defence. Russia proposed to expend 50,000,000
francs, and spent much of this in rendering herself independent of
Krupp and other German firms, now that Germany had concluded
an Alliance with Austria. . .
In 1875 Italy had commenced the construction at lerm ot an
arms factory for making of rifles, revolvers, lances and swords,
and this was ready for work in 1880. Following on her naval
budgets, to which we shall refer later, and her acrimonious
difference with France in reference to Tunis and the Soudan, Italy
brought forward in 1884-85 an eight-year war budget of 215,435)000
francs. This was divided into sums for various arms :
23.400.000 francs for small arms.
4,785,000 ~ ~ field artillery.
20,000,000 ~ » fortress artillery.
19.600.000 ~ )> coast artillery.
57,5 00 , 0o ° ~ )) shore defences.
25.5 00 . 000 ~ ,» fortresses.


Part of the twenty-six batteries of field guns, 1,200 pieces
of fortress artillery and 150 howitzers of n£ inches was the first
fruits of military demand which fell to the Armstrong Works at
Pozzuoli.
In 1884 Austria adopted an improvement of the Mauser rifle,
made at the Werndl Arms Factory, which had been incorporated
at Steyer in 1869 as the Oesterreichische Waffenfabrik, and which
already made four types of military arms, selling them in Austria,
Germany, Greece and France.
The Steyer works were kept busily employed on the new rifle
over a period of three years till 1887.
These extravagances in Russia, Austria and Italy all contributed
not merely to the encouragement of the munitions and contributory
industries in the thjee countries directly affected, but also stimu-
lated demand abioad and gave to the French armament interests
a greater incentive to press for the right to export material to
foreign countries. The partial alienation of the Russian Govern-
ment from German supply sources held out new prospects to the
French, whilst the vast programmes of Italy called for renewed
exertions on their part.
The influence of these new armament schemes on the explosives
and arms industries of Germany and Britain we shall see in a later
section.


Naval Armaments in the
Early “Eighties”
We have already noted some of the factors which were responsible
for the armament policy of France and the growing rivalries
between the two foremost maritime States in the natural anxiety
of our neighbours to repair the deficiencies of their naval defence
occasioned by their absorption in military entanglements, in the
ambitions of their new created war trades and their expanding
shipbuilding industry, as well as in the contrary interests of French
and British Colonial policy.
The determination of the British Government not to be checked
in its Egyptian schemes by any outside interference, together with
the feeling of annoyance and discontent at the continued naval
preparations and Asiatic intrigues of Russia, was further stimulated
to find expression in naval expansion by the restless activities of
W. T. Stead, Arnold Forster, and Lord Charles Beresford. A
period of acute depression in the shipbuilding and engineering
trades further shook the pacifist feeling of the great industrial
centres and made them turn to the opportunities of work and profit
afforded by naval orders.
In 1884 began that sinister form of unemployment relief admin-
istered henceforward at regular intervals by the Government in the
form of Admiralty extravagance. Originally provided in order to
tide over an interval of bad trade, this form of State relief work
became continuous, and only served to aggravate the problem
which it had been instituted to solve,
A careful study of the technical and trade literature of the early
“eighties” makes quite evident the influence on armament policy
of bad trade in the shipping and engineering branches of industry.
It was this made possible the success of the naval agitation which
would otherwise have broken in vain against the Radicalism of
such centres as Birmingham, Sheffield, Tyneside, and Clydeside.
Henceforward economic interests were going to clash with the
political ideals of those who were strongest in their Liberalism,
whether employers or workers. This is a fact which has been far


too often neglected by pacifists and others who have sought to
explain or even understand the strength of modern Imperialism.
The construction of a great steel navy has been of enormous value
to our engineering firms, and has completely shattered their
antagonism to this imposition of the burden of armed force.
This truth the writer would affirm and re-affirm until it has sunk
deep into the political consciousness of everyone of his readers.
Now we must note the more important technical changes which
at this time were revolutionising naval architecture and calling into
use new’ sources of armament supply. So drastic were they as to
be absolutely epoch-making in effect on the naval programme
of the whole world, and called new navies into existence often with
the most far-reaching consequences.
The wrought-iron armour devised in the “sixties” had become
so ponderous a shield wherewith to protect the battleship from the
sledge-hammer blows of Armstrong’s monstrous no ton muzzle-
loaders and Whitworth’s conical shells, that gun power had to be
sacrificed to retain the other vital necessity of speed. Therefore,
the armour makers had to produce a thinner but stronger plate,
which would give as much strength for a less weight, and Cammell
and Brown brought out a new plate compounded of iron backing
and steel face, whilst Schneider invented an all-steel armour. This
resulted in the temporary discomfiture of Armstrong and Krupp,
but, using an improved German slow-burning powder, which
exerted its energy along the whole barrel and not merely at the
point of ignition, the gunmakers perfected their breech-loaders,
and routed the armour manufacturers.
Armstrongs supremely contemptuous of armour, began to build
unarmoured ships, swift and heavily armed, which he stated would
render the armoured battleship hors de combat in a very short time
—the British Fleet consisted of such vessels. Hence, a technical
and professional demand for the construction of warships carrying
Armstrong breech-loaders. The new guns were placed on new
and intricate hydraulic mountings devised by a member of the
Armstrong firm, and from that day to this naval gun mountings,
except for small pieces, have been made exclusively by the trade.
Ihe official story, as told in the words of two ex-Admiralty con-
structors, is that Armstrong’s erected a mounting with two great
guns at their own expense, and then invited the whole Board of
Admiralty down to Newcastle to have a look. The Board came,
saw, and was conquered. To use the very words of Sir E, J.
Reed, the Admiralty had “ fallen into the hands of Mr. Armstrong’s
firm,” and Mr. Armstrong’s firm made them pay the piper.
The “scare” programme of 1884 comprised one battleship
designed and built at Newcastle, the ship subsequently described
by Lord Sydenham as “the worst designed armour-clad ever built,”


and a number of cruisers after the Armstrong pattern all armed
with Armstrong guns and hnd t h an t he French
stricken nations, and the tiny craft was advertised as the doom-
briTrth°e try a, "me h when we were on the verge of war with
Russia. Mr. V-row designed and -gmed .
S° n : of r actually taken over by the
wUh ZS OhS£ Tn the chair, Mr Yarrow
pointed out to a semi-public meeting in London the peril of our lack
o P f .orpedo a pedQ
fleets of France, GerSany, Spain. Italy, etc., and recited a jeretmad
OVC hr'he m neTt d Uvo'years his firm received orders for nearly 50
torpedo boats, and others were obtained from the Clyde, yn ,
Mersey, and Cowes—but not one from a dockyard.
In y . 886 it was discovered by the French on manoeuvres tha the
tornedo boats were too small, and liable to be swamped. Bntai
exoerien«d similar qualms, and then began to bu.ld torpedo-
catches of . 000 tons, which, when it was pointed out that they
WOUM probably have no torpedo boats to catch .were next described
as torpedo boats which would not be swamped. When they were
Tried inturn they wsre found to be too large, and to afford too
much of a target For, meanwhile, Armstrong’s had found yet
another explosive, smokeless powder, and utilised it as the charge
?or a new quick-firing gun which should destroy the unarmoured
and helpless torpedo boat as it dashed towards its mighty victim.
So the battleship came to its own again, replete now with heavy
breech-loading and'light quick-firing guns, with improved a ,
and escorted by torpedo catchers, with a cloud of torpedo boats
and attendant squadrons of Armstrong’s improved cruisers. In
fact every type was adopted, and none was absolutely rejected.
On both sides of the Channel it was decided that no chanc ® s
be taken, and there was a vested interest in armour, another m
guns, a third in cruisers, and a fourth in torpedo boats each a
all ready to assert its own indispensable value.
Armstrong and Whitworth stood for heavy guns and
Armstrong for heavy mountings and quick-firing guns; the Maxim


Gun Co. and the Nordenfeldt Gun and Ammunition Co., and the
Hotchkiss Ordnance Co., were purveyors of quick-firers and
machine guns; Yarrow, Thornycroft, Palmer, Laird, Hawthorne,
Leslie, and others, provided torpedo craft; and J. and G.
Thompson (Clydebank), the Fairfield Co., Palmer, and other ship-
builders, saw a treasure of priceless value in cruiser construction,
whilst John Brown and Co., and Charles Cammell and Co., were
not going to see armour plate sacrificed to any economist whims.
The same thing was going on in France. Meanwhile, in the
year 1885, the French Parliament legalised the export of war
material.
For several years Britain had been pursuing a policy hostile to
French Colonial ambition. Her War Department had not
hesitated to call in German explosive makers to instruct its Chief
Chemist in the preparation of a new military powder, and, in the
previous year, Britain and Germany had displayed signs of activity
in Italy of the most alarming nature.
Senator Brin, the Italian Minister of Marine, had (we have it
on the authority of the “Naval Annual’’) requested Gio, Ansaldo
and Co., of Genoa, to enter into partnership with Maudslay Sons
and Field, Chief Marine Engineers to our Admiralty; had caused
the Societa di Terni to undertake the manufacture of armour-plate,
and had invited Sir W. G. Armstrong to establish an ordnance
factory at Pozzuoli, near Naples. These new works requiring a
resident manager, Mr. Rendel, an Additional Sea Lord of the
Admiralty, resigned his position in Whitehall and went to take
up the vacant appointment. Meanwhile, Messrs. Schwarz Kopf,
of Berlin, were called in to erect torpedo works at Venice.
Next year, the French set free their armament firms to push
their trade in every land, and the Chantiers de la
commenced the construction of a cruiser for Spain before the law
was actually passed.
At once Armstrong, Mitchell and Co. despatched their famous
commercial traveller, Mr. Robert Lawrie Thompson, described as
a “private ambassador,” to Madrid —but he came back empty-
handed.
In 1886 M. Bertin was sent from the Quai d’Orsay to act as
naval adviser to Japan, and from 1887 to 1890 all Japanese ships
were of French type, the Krupp guns were discarded, torpedo boats
were ordered from .Schneider instead of from Schichau, of Stettin,
and Germany lost a good little customer to France. The French
next turned their attention to Chili and Brazil and there poached
with considerable success upon the preserves of Armstrong,
Mitchell and Co. Thither Armstrong sent Mr. R. L. Thompson
in 1890, with a promise of 2\ per cent, on cost of hulls and engines,
and 5 per cent, on ordnance, etc., for which he might obtain orders,
[4]


In 1891 Armstrong, Mitchell and Co. booked an order for a
cruiser, and ousted their French rivals. . ,
More important than these minor economic skirmishes was the
entry of French armament capital into Russia. France had soon
discerned that the antagonism of Russia and Britain and the
jealousy of Germany latent in Russian Army circles might provide
her with a possible comrade-in-arms upon the eastern frontier of
her hated Prussian foe and at the gates of India. It is generally
acknowledged that a desire to obtain Russia’s friendship prompted
French export of capital and armaments. Russia, above all, was
in lack, more even then than later, of munitions. She needed to
develop her resources, to estab ish iron and steel industries, to
erect iron foundries, etc.
Over a period of fifteen years —from 1880 to 1895 —-French
capital steadily fertilised the iron and coal fields of Russia, and
French mechanics assisted in the equipment of ordnance and shell
factories. At Kolpino, Perm, Obouchof, Nikoliaev, Toula,
Sestrovetzk, Igeosk, Poutiloff, Petrovsky, and other great arma-
ment, iron, and steel works, both State, semi-private, and private,
French influence became more and more effective, whilst Chatillon-
Commentry, Schneider, the Chantiers de la and
other French firms exported vast quantities of munitions to Russia.
This reversal of French armament tradition had four main
results :
(1,) It prepared the way for an alliance of French indus-
trial resources and the Russian military hordes.
(n.) It presented both Britain and Germany with alarming
difficulties, the one on the sea, the other on the land.
(m.) It struck a desperate blow at the Krupp land armament
monopoly and at the development of German naval shipbuild-
ing industries.
(iv.) It threatened the British firms, especially Armstrong,
Mitchell and Co., with fierce competition on the naval arma-
ment market.


The Endowment of our
Armament Firms
The continuance by the Italian Marine of the policy of battleship
construction in face of that school of experts who foresaw nothing
but calamity for the big ship when encountered by the torpedo
craft, and the absolute failure of the French flotillas of torpedo
boats during the Mediterranean manoeuvres of 1886 resulted in a
renewal of armour-clad construction in France. The recently
completed big-gun battleships “Italia” and “Lepanto” were
followed by three more colossal efforts whose Armstrong mon-
strosities seemed to threaten Toulon and Bizerta. In April, 1888,
there was a war scare between these two nations, which was used
to inflame the generous heart of Britain for her weak friend beyond
the Alps threatened by the chauvinism of France. In the following
autumn a new panic programme was outlined by the British
extremists, who demanded the immediate construction of six
battleships, sixty large cruisers, and swarms of colliers to cost
20 million pounds.
Our naval expenditure on new construction had shown a steady
decline from 1886 to 1888, but it was still 46 per cent, above the
level of 1878. Over a period of six years it had been 75 per cent,
above the level of the French, and was much higher than the
combined outlay of France and Russia. Nevertheless, in the
spring of 1889 Lord George Hamilton capitulated to the scare-
mongers and brought in his Naval Defence Act, which should
really be described as an Act for the Endowment of the Armament
Firms.
The new measure provided for :
8 first-class battleships.
2 smaller battleships.
9 first-class cruisers.
33 smaller cruisers.
18 gunboats.


Of these the following - were to be built in private yards :
4 first-class battleships.
5 first-class cruisers.
17 smaller cruisers.
6 gunboats.
The whole programme was to be completed in four and a half
years. The vote of for contract work was borrowed
from the fund created by the profitable conversion of Consols in
the previous year, which financial change, there is reason or
believing, was partly carried out for such an end as this. Another
£1 1,500,000 raised by taxation was to be spent on dockyard work.
The entire contract work was to be given out at once and
without delay. The First Lord gave his reasons for this as
follows :
“It was evident early last year that it would be our duty to
submit a shipbuilding programme to this House to take the
place of the Northbrook programme, which is practically
complete. J>
Yet Northbrook had emphasised that his programme was a tempo-
rary expedient which would not need to be repeated !
Let the reader remember the efforts of France and her firms to
break the Armstrong, Thames and 1 hompson hold on neutral
markets, and the marked, though temporary, success of this
policy, and w r eigh carefully these words of Lord George Hamilton
in excusing the immensity of his scheme :
“We have so framed our scheme as to bring into world-wide
prominence the incomparable power of this country and its
enormous resources. The scheme which I have laid before
the House is one which I do not think all the dockyards of
Europe would complete in the time we propose.
And how is this, think ye, for a display of trident flashing?
“ and if there are any nations abroad who do
wish to compete with us in naval armaments, the mere enuncia-
tion of this scheme will show to them the utter futility of their
desire.”
Unfortunately, this prophet was as self-deceived as his predecessor,
Northbrook, for in 1894 (1889 plus equals 1893*) the builders
and armour-plate vendors were howling like a pack of wolves
around Lord Spencer. Rather than surrender—and to his eternal
credit—Gladstone went into retirement and left Rosebery and
Spencer to allay the greedy maws that yawned for gold, and
Harcourt, with his death duties, to find the wherewithal.


The 1894 programme comprised seven battleships and six
cruisers, of which two battleships and all the cruisers were given
out to contract. In addition, there was a fleet of torpedo-boat
destroyers to be constructed—all by private enterprise. The entire
armament, machinery, and armour of all the ships of this, as of
the 1889 and 1884 programmes, were given out to contract.
Liberals, attention ! Sir William Harcourt speaks :
“If we had been free from the new debt (naval), and if the
naval expenditure stood at the expenditure of last year, there
would have been available for the reduction of
taxation. We should neither have had to deal with a deficit
nor to impose new taxation. . . . What we shall have to
meet by increased taxation is
The deficit was and of this the Admiralty was
responsible for 126,000.
Conservatives, Mr. Goschen !
“He would be perfectly frank and admit that if he had
known that the naval programme of the Defence Act was not
to be an exceptional programme he might not have taken that
particular financial step. The late Government did consider
that programme was an exceptional effort. They were
wrong; but at that time no one thought that it would be
necessary for the Government to come forward with their
present proposals.”
What a confession of ineptitude ! What a volley of dust!
“At that time no one thought. . . .” One wonders if
no one thought! Not even these noble lords, who in 1889 were
shareholders in Armstrong, Mitchell and Co., Ltd. ? —The Marquis
of Salisbury (a shareholder in trust); the Marquis of Lansdowne,
Lord Middleton, Lord Sudeley, the;
Duke of Sutherland, £2,000.
Nor these directors and shareholders of the Naval Construction
and Armament Co., Ltd., of Barrow-in-Furness : —The Marquis
of Hartington, M.P. (chairman), Lord Brassey (deputy-
chairman); Lord Edward Cavendish, M.P., Lord
Revelstoke, and Lord Rothschild,
Three Ministers of the Crown, and one of them a director and
chairman of a firm which did extraordinarily well out of the Act,
paying 8 per cent, in 1890 and 1891 and 6 per cent, in 1892, did
these not think nor forecast the stars that swing in the courses of
Capitalism ?
The years between 1883 and 1888 had witnessed a remarkable
growth of armament firms in this country as elsewhere.
In 1882 Sir W. G. Armstrong and Co. had amalgamated its


gun and steel works with the shipyard of Charles Mitchell and
Frederick Swan, shipbuilders of Low Walker-on-Xyne, and united
the two enterprises as Sir W. G. Armstrong - , Mitchell and Co.,
Ltd. In February, 1883, the new company absorbed the London
Ordnance Works of Mr. Vavasseur, and took him on to the Board.
The Admiralty loaned them Mr. W. H. White, Assistant Chief
Constructor, to lay out their Elswick Shipyard, and whilst he was
with them he designed 30,000 tons of warships, two-thirds of them
for foreign Powers. In 1885 he returned to Whitehall, and was
succeeded by Mr. Philip Watts, who had also an Admiralty
training. In 1885 Armstrongs joined with the Dueneberg Powder
Works and the United Rhenish Westphalian Powder Mills in the
formation of the Chilworth Gunpowder Co., Ltd., who then took
up the manufacture of powders suitable for breech-loading and
quick-firing artillery.
Under the Naval Defence Act, the Admiralty gave large orders
to Armstrongs for quick-firing 6-inch and 4.7-inch guns, con-
cerning which Engineering said 1 The results of which are very
plainly visible just now in the Elswick shops. They formed the
main armament of the fifty-nine cruisers provided for in that
measure. This firm received practically all the gun-mounting con-
tracts for the 1889 programme, and of similar orders
in 1893-94, as against for the Arsenal and all other
factories.
Vickers, Sons and Co., Ltd., of Sheffield, who had long sup-
plied gun steel to Elswick, the Arsenal, France, Austria, and other
foreign Governments, had received a windfall when, deprived of
their contract for , the repair of the Tay Bridge, they obtained
handsome compensation for the rolling mill and heavy plant they
had installed. With this cost-free installation, they set out Knight-
erranting for contracts, and found a distressed maiden, Britannia,
in need of guns and armour, beset by a dragon, Armstrong,
Mitchell, and a two-headed monster, Brown and Cammed.
Together with Thomas Firth and Sons and Charles Cammed
and Co., they petitioned the authorities to have pity on them.
They had put in plant to make 12,000 tons of forgings when only
asked for 5,000 tons; they had finished their material to a degree
they had not been invited to do; their works were better situated,
strategically, than Woolwich; they had been starved of orders;
they had put in mills and plant at the request of the Government;
they pointed to the shortage of guns and the unproductivity of
their capital; they remarked on the policy of France and America
in relying on the private trade. “ Baksheesh ! Baksheesh !” they
wailed.
Thus they were answered by the Director of Contracts :
“I am to remind you that the principal points upon which


you now insist were mentioned ... at the meeting in
the Secretary of State’s Room on the 7th February, 1887,
and were fully considered by him. It was admitted at that
meeting that the special expenditure mcurred by Messrs.
Vickers had been commenced before any arrangement was
proposed by this Department for increasing the then existing
means of production, and he conceives that the statement
that ‘we have very largely increased our plant. Our united
expenditure on that account nearly approaching ’ is
an exaggerated one.” — Steel Manufacturers, Sheffield. Army
Paper, 1888.
That w T as pointed.
However, they received an order for of armour from
the Admiralty in 1887, and next year made their first naval guns.
The Government was dissatisfied with the Armstrong weapons
and the Armstrong prices, with the Brown and Cammell armour
and the Brown and Cammell price. So entered Vickers, and for
a while prices fell, and there was a real saving to the Treasury.
But it was a desperate resource to call in another armament firm,
who soon learned to whine and scratch and then to growl and snap
as fiercely as the others, until at last they all joined forces, and
finally went off to play with Krupp and Schneider at ‘‘catch every
patriot’s penny.”
In 1890 William Beardmore and Co., Ltd., of Parkhead Forge,
made their first successful armour and received large orders under
the Defence Act.
Meanwhile the Maxim Gun and Ammunition Co., Ltd., had
been formed in 1884 to exploit the maxim gun patents, and their
first share list discloses the real owners —Albert Vickers, Thomas
Edward Vickers, George Naylor Vickers, Edward Vickers, and
Gertrude L. Vickers, as well as Hiram Maxim. Later on, Ernest
Cassell also became an owner. In 1888 the Maxim-Nordenfeldt
Gun and Ammunition Co., Ltd., amalgamated interests in
Sweden, Spain, and this country with a capital of
The same year saw the birth of the Naval Construction and
Armament Co. under Cabinet and Royal patronage —the Duchess
of Albany not remaining a shareholder.
More ominous still, the Hotchkiss Ordnance Co., Ltd., had
been incorporated in 1887 to sell machine guns to France and
Britain on either side the Channel. Theodore Favarger, Christian
Koerner, and Jacques de Latouche joined with Major-
General G. de la Poer-Beresford, Sir Donald Currie, Vice-Admiral
Jonquieres, Lord Eustace Cecil, Stanley A. C. Clarke (equerry
to the Prince of Wales), W. I. Ingram (proprietor, Illustrated
London News),G. P. H. Villiers (British Military Paris),
and the Countess Howe to share the booty.


The Naval Defence Act, the mere enunciation of which was to
show to all nations the utter futility of their maritime ambitions,
was a lamentable failure only to be paralleled by the scare
programme which followed it five years later As a check to the
growth of foreign Navies it was worthless and had only the effect
of immediately stimulating France and Russia to renewed efforts.
The French brought in Supplementary Estimates for
£2 320,000, and in the following year made prevision for three
first-class and three second-class battleships, again swelling their
expenditure by nearly
The Russians increased their expenditure from 11 »35° m
ißqo to in 1896, and called in more French capital to
assist them. In 1889 a Franco-Polish-Belgian group opened up
iron mines in the Dnieper basin; in 1891 another company erected
the Drougskovsky Works; in 1895 La Society Metallurgique
Russo-Beige (really Franco-Belgian) built the Petrovsky Steel
Works, and another French company erected the Doietzko-
Gouriefski Works. A French squadron visited Kronstadt and a
Russian fleet returned the call at Toulon. In 1891 the two countries
became allies and presented this country with the very menacing
problem of Franco-Russian military and naval aggression.
Events in the Far East were becoming sufficiently disturbing.
France was making difficulties for us in Siam and Indo-China,
Russia was encroaching on the borders of India, and from 1895
onwards was pursuing a policy of penetration and absorption in
Manchuria and Mongolia. The startling victories of the Japanese
over China had aroused Russia to the possibility of a new rival in
the East where Japan was steadily developing her sea power.
Most alarming to Russia was the fact that her ally, France, had
been ousted from favour in Tokio in 1890-1891, and all the new
Japanese warships were being built in this country. Meanwhile,
German firms, German mechanics, and German military experts
were busy upon the perfecting of the Japanese Army. Whilst
Germany had manifested her diplomatic solidarity with France and
Russia in preventing the Japanese continuing their occupation of
Port Arthur, there could be no mistaking the meaning of the
intimacy between British and Japanese diplomacy and naval
expansion.
The expenditure at home and abroad on the development of
Navies, the renewed vigour imparted to shipbuilding enterprise
by the Naval Defence Act, and another turn of the wheel of
invention, all contributed to the extension and consolidation of
naval armament interests in this country and in France.
The Armstrong cult of the swift cruiser had soon gained a
great vogue among the nations. The application of the quick-
firing principle to the medium-sized gun, improvement of marine
engines and boilers adapted to naval requirements, the possibilities


of combining cheapness with destructive capacity which the
abandonment of armour afforded had all made the cruiser popular
with the poorer nations. Whilst the cruiser could not engage the
battleship it could easily out-distance it, and the presence of a
swarm of cruisers on the trade routes became the bogey wherewith
to frighten John Bull.
Lecturing tp the London Chamber of Commerce in 1893, Lord
Charles Beresford pointed out that whilst France had one sloop
or cruiser to every thirty ships of more than 1,000 tons, this
country had only one to every seventy such ships. He enlarged
on the insecurity of our Mediterranean shipping and urged on the
mercantile community that
“the sooner our weak spots would be exposed and our
country freed from those periodical panics so extravagant to
the nation and so prejudicial to commercial interests”
the better it would be.
Even as he spoke, the last cruiser built under the Naval Defence
Act was approaching completion at Blackwall.
When we recall that five first-class and seventeen second-class
cruisers had been allotted to the contractors in 1889, and that the
entire machinery for forty-five cruisers built in five years was given
to the private firms, we can judge of the pressure that was being
brought to bear to obtain yet more of these ships.
In 1894 sixteen large cruisers were ordered, a dozen from the
private yards, and of these two were placed with the Fairfield
Co. and two with the London and Glasgow Co., of Govan. Eight
of the newly devised torpedo-boat destroyers and one batttleship
were also placed with Clyde builders.
Whilst Elswick was the natal place of the cruiser, it was the
Clyde which became its very home. For some reason or other
the Government refused to order cruisers from Elswick, whose
products for ten years —from 1889 to 1899 —were turned out
almost exclusively for minor Powers, such as Japan and the South
American Republics.
One reason for this, probably, was that Armstrong, Mitchell
and Co,, Ltd., were ordnance manufacturers primarily and ship-
builders second, whilst they did not undertake the construction
of marine engines. The Government still built most of its own
battleships; torpedo craft were never Elswick’s line, and when the
Admiralty wanted cruisers it wanted swift, lightly-armed cruisers,
and not cheap, swift battleships, as the foreign cruisers really were.
Now, J. and G. Thomson, of Clydebank; the London and
Glasgow Shipbuilding Co., of Govan, and the Fairfield Ship-
building Co. had a well-earned reputation, each of them, for marine
engineering, and it was to them, and particularly to Thomson’s,


that the Admiralty turned for its cruisers. The “Terrible,” one
of the mightiest of all the unarmoured cruisers, was built at
Clydebank, and from cruisers Thomson’s yard was promoted to
the construction of battleships. Spain and Japan were both good
customers in these years. Clydebank built seven gunboats for
Spain in three months in 1895; the cruiser 4 Chiyoda for Japan
in 1890; then the battleship “Asahi in 18975 th® battleships
“Ramillies” in 1891 and the “Jupiter” in 1894 for the British
Admiralty. .
The London and Glasgow Co. was very prosperous during this
period, and the Naval Defence Act was the absolute making of the
Fairfield Company as naval contractors. Then these three com-
panies, together with William Denny and Brothers, fell heir to the
destroyer “boom,”
Even as the great gun made the Tyne, so the mighty pulsing
machinery which thunders in the vitals of the cruiser made the
Clyde the home of the modern warship.
Meanwhile, in America, Mr. Augustus Harvey had invented
his new process for the cementation of armour-plate, and by 1893
the Harvey Company of Great Britain, the Soci6t6 des Precedes
Harvey, and the Harvey Continental Steel Company had made
Harvey’s method the common property of all the great armour
makers. The new process had completely re-established the
prestige of armour, and new squadrons of battleships were being
constructed plated with Harvey armour. The ill-fated Majestic
was the first battleship in our Fleet to be given a suit of
“Harveyised” steel.
William Beardmore, of Parkhead, had begun the making of
armour-plate in 1890, and had devised some adaptation of Harvey-
ising methods. He had obtained considerable orders throughout
the “nineties,” when the Admiralty had difficulty in satisfying its
requirements either in quantity or price.
By 1898 another twist of the whirligig brought the armoured
cruiser—a ship which combined the peculiarities of the Armstrong
cult with the improvements since effected in the Brown-Cammell
fashion shop and made still better by some new devices of the
Vickers’ genius.
The new ship combined gun-power, armour-protection, and
engine qualifications. She converted Armstrong, Mitchell and
Co., Ltd., now Armstrong, Whitworth and Co., Ltd., to a crusade
for armour-clad construction, and the installation of enormous
armour manufacturing plant at Manchester.
In September, 1898, John Brown and Co., Ltd., the armour-
plate manufacturers of Sheffield, purchased the Clydebank Ship-
building and Engineering Co., Ltd. (late J. and G. Thomson and
Co., Ltd.), and combined the enterprises of armour manufacture
and cruiser construction. It was the reply of the armour makers


to the amalgamation of the gun and armour makers, Vickers, with
the Naval Construction Co., of Barrow, and the resolution of
Armstrong, Whitworth and Co., Ltd., to put down armour-
producing plant.
The interests of Sheffield and the Clyde were fused at one point.
The more one comes to ponder the problems of modern naval
architecture and economics the greater is the place one feels bound
to assign to the genius which has more than once been conspicuous
in the personnel of the Armstrong Company. This firm was
especially responsible for the continued improvement and utilisa-
tion of the quick-firing gun, and by its very insistence on the
superiority of gun power over armour protection, stimulated the
steel manufacturers of Europe and America to further experiment
and research, with results in industry more far-reaching than have
been generally realised.
The adoption of quick-firing guns of remarkable accuracy com-
pletely transformed the Navies of the world. It became imperative
to obtain some kind of armour protection which would stay the
fusillade of light shell which now threatened to rake the unpro-
tected parts of a heavy warship and so hinder its manoeuvring
and fighting powers. Hence, the steelmakers went to
work so to improve their shields as to combine lightness with
strength and relative economy of cost.
In 1888 Vickers, Sons and Co., Ltd., came forward with a new
steel armour, and obtained a place as Admiralty Contractors for
armour-plate. Shortly afterwards, William Beardmore and Co.,
Ltd., also entered the lists. Moreover, Vickers were gun-makers
as well as producers of armour, and thus had superior opportunities
and a greater incentive to counter gun by armour and armour by
gun. They were a new firm to the armament trade and had to
contend against Armstrong on the one Land and Brown-Cammell
on the other. They were carrying on economic warfare on two
fronts at the same time.
Meanwhile, in the United States the Navy Board was trying
to obtain satisfactory armour of native manufacture, and had
induced the Bethlehem Ironworks, and then Carnegie, Phipps and
Co., to instal armour-producing plant. Mr. Harvey, of the Harvey
Steel Company, of New Jersey, invented a new process of harden-
ing steel plate, which w r as adopted progressively by the United
States and other nations to the virtual exclusion of other systems
except that of Captain Tresidder, of John Brown and Co., whose
company compounded with Harvey in order to avoid further litiga-
tion and disastrous competition. The Harvey plates were much
superior, weight for weight, to the compound or even the older
steel armour, and enabled a warship to carry a greater length and
width of belt for the same tonnage and cost as had formerly been
needed for a much inferior defence.


The Harvey process was quickly adopted by Vickers, Brown,
Cammed, and Beardmore, and the Harvey Steel Company of Great
Britain was formed in 1893 to take over the rights and draw the
royalties for this country.
Amongst those who appeared in the preliminary arrangements
were : —Lord Cairns, Lord Elphinstone, two Admirals (one the
greatest scare-monger of his time), magnates of the Low Moor
Ironworks, the Dowlais Ironworks, and other iron and steel
concerns. In the first prospectus much importance was attached
to the favourable reception of the plates, alike by thb British and
Russian Admiralties, and an official testimonial given by the First
Lord was effectively used as a financial “puff.”
In 1894, soon after the British Admiralty had ordered 17,000
tons of Harveyised armour for the new “scare” programme, and
when the Russians, French, Germans, and Italians had also
adopted it, the Harvey Continental Steel Company was incor-
porated. These were its first directors :
Charles Cammell.
Charles E. Ellis (John Brown and Co.).
Edward M. Fox (Harvey Steel Co. of New Jersey).
Maurice Geny (Schneider et Cie.).
L6on L6vy (Chairman —Chatillon-Commentry Cie. of
France).
Joseph de Montgolfier (Compagnie de la Marine et des
Chemins de Fer —France).
Joseph Ott (A. G. Dillinger Huttinwerke —Germany).
Ludwig Kliipfel (A. G. Friedrich Krupp).
Albert Vickers.
And this was in the days when France and Russia were our fiercest
naval rivals and when these two nations were contesting with
Germany for military pre-eminence. But scarcely were the
Harveyised armour-plates the accepted fashion when Emil
Ehrensberger perfected the superior Krupp cementation process in
1896. Next year the British, French, and American companies
were permitted to share the lucrative secret, and the Harvey com-
panies socialised the new method in the interests of the armament
international.
The cost of the new installation was enormous and so was that
of the new armour, but the nations paid up cheerfully and the
firms suffered no inconvenience, but speedily found the ample
reward of genius.
The Harvey armour soon brought tjie armour-clad battleship
back to favour, even greater than ever, and greatly encouraged
the building policies of the Powers. France and Russia, now
co-operating in extravagance, and Japan steadily adding ship to


ship, contributed to the prosperity of the armour-plate manufac-
turers of Britain, France, and the United States.
Vickers, Sons and Co., Ltd., John Brown and Co., Ltd.,
Charles Cammell and Co., Ltd., William Beardmore and Co.,
Ltd., and Schneider et Cie., experienced remarkable prosperity.
Meanwhile, the cruiser cult was proving a great boon to the Naval
Armament and Construction Company, of Barrow; to the Clyde-
bank Shipbuilding Co., Ltd.; to Laird Bros., of Birkenhead, and
the Fairfield Shipbuilding Co., Ltd., in this country; and to the
Chantiers de la and the Chantiers de la Gironde in
France.
Armstrong, Mitchell and Co., Ltd., was doing extraordinarily
well out of the spendthrift naval outlay of South American
Republics, Italy, and Japan, as well as from its monopoly of gun-
mounting machinery plant in Britain.
Then in 1894-5 came the Chino-Japanese War and the Battle
of the Yalu River, which clearly demonstrated the weaknesses of
the unarmoured cruiser. Theory and practical experience alike
determined the British Admiralty to give the swift cruiser an
ample suit of armour, whereupon Vickers amalgamated with the
Naval Construction Company and laid out an immense shipyard
and gun-mounting plant at Barrow-in-Furness; Armstrong,
Mitchell and Co., Ltd., retorted at once by absorbing Whitworth’s,
of Manchester, and putting down armour-plate plant, whilst John
Brown and Co., Ltd., purchased the Clydebank Company and
brought the armour of Sheffield to the cruiser yards of the Clyde.
Krupp leased the “Germania” shipyard at Kiel, and Schnieder
et Cie. joined forces with the Chantiers de la and
with the other shipbuilders of the Gironde.
All these amalgamations took effect in the three years, 1896,
1897, and 1898. They were the result of the technical changes
explained above, of the enormous prosperity brought to the British
and French firms by the naval rivalries of 1888-1895 and the fore-
casts made on the results of the Chino-Japanese War and the new
naval problems confronting Russia and Britain in the East,
Germany in the Baltic and the North Sea, Italy in the Mediter-
ranean, and the United States on the Spanish Main.


Science and Military Armament
The tremendous outlay which the Continental Powers made on
the armament of their military artillery has not received much
attention in Britain because, of course, with our small standing
army, our requirements were never such as to develop a per-
manently vigorous manufacture of military material. But, pro-
perly to understand the development of the foreign industry of
war it is necessary to have some acquaintance with this very
important supply trade.
One might almost say that military ordnance as an arm of power
and efficiency dates from the period of experiment and research in
explosives, and the co-ordination of gnn and powder manufactures.
The chemistry of explosives for war purposes has been of the
greatest influence in the development of mineral and other funda-
mental resources of modern industry. It is certain that the
supremacy of German dyes is not unconnected with the incessant
endeavours of her scientists to produce the finest ingredients and
combinations of military explosives.
The requirements of military “preparedness” resulted in a very
high development of the machine-making trade of Germany about
the small arm and artillery manufactures. Similarly, the necessity
of accelerating the rate of discharging projectiles made it
essential that the explosives trade should be adequately capitalised,
well organised, and closely connected with the armament and
machinery manufactures. So, for instance, it has come about, in
time, that the Chilworth Gunpowder Co., was the chief owner of
the British representative of the Daimler Motoren Gesellschaft.
In France and Austria the same tendencies were apparent,
though nowhere has the intensive organisation of the war trades
trades which are often vital to peaceful production—proceeded so
far as in Germany.
German militarism has won its victories by the sheer weight
of metal and energy of high explosives, for which it must thank
Lowe and Nobel and Duttenhofer and Daimler as much as Krupp
and Mauser. All these capitalist groups have locked and inter-
locked with one another, and all derived their financial dynamic
from the great banks, themselves intimately associated and work


ing harmoniously to achieve the purposes of the Fatherland, which
they so largely dominate.
Soon after 1870-71, the explosives manufacturers of Germany
appear to be co-operating with Krupp to produce a propellant
which should exert a greater force along the gun-barrel and less
at the breech, thus giving greater velocity to the shell and causing
less wear and tear at the most vulnerable part of the weapon. The
British War Office had abandoned the Armstrong breech-loading
field gun because of the inability of its inventor to supply a satis-
factory breech lock, which should withstand the violence of the
discharge. The Germans who had followed our example in adopt-
ing the breech-loader had not abandoned it, but were by no means
pleased with the action of the new method. Hence, all these
experiments with powder and mechanism. In 1875 the new “cocoa”
powder was produced, to be introduced into this country in 1881,
when the Duttenhofers and Heidemann were asked to undertake
its manufacture for instructional purposes at the War Office
factory at Waltham Abbey. With the new powder, such results
were obtained as to cause the Admiralty and War Office to adopt
the new Armstrong and Woolwich breech-loaders, both
for sea and land services. In 1883-84, the British Army was pro-
vided with field guns on the new system.
In 1885, Armstrong, Mitchell and Co., Ltd., together with
Carl and Max Duttenhofer took over the gunpowder works at Chil-
worth in Surrey, and formed the Chilworth Gunpowder Co. Ltd.,
with Lord Sudeley as chairman and the Duttenhofers and Lieut.-
Colonel Tulloch as directors, to make the new explosive and to
produce improved military and commercial powders. All the
artillerists of Europe were, at this time, endeavouring to devise
a quick-firing gun for use in the field, and a naval quick-firer to
drive off the tiny torpedo-boat, a mosquito-craft too small and
speedy for the larger gun to tackle with its slow and ponderous
discharges.
Nordenfeldt had invented a machine gun in the late “70’s,”
but this was too light a weapon, and then, a few years later, Hiram
S. Maxim applied his breach mechanism to a Winchester rifle, and
so produced his famous automatic rifle gun. d his he patented in
England in 1884, and commenced manufacture in London with
the aid of the Vickers family, who really controlled the Maxim
Gun and Ammunition Co. Ltd. Hotchkiss, Palmkrantz, and
other foreign makers were being successful with machine rifles,
and then Nobel, the Chilworth firm, and others produced smokeless
powder.
With this it was possible to accelerate the discharge, and not
have the arc of fire hidden by rolling clouds of smoke. One of
the great problems of aim was solved.


Smokeless powder completed the rout of the surface torpedo-
boat, and set the inventors to work on submarines. The naval
quick-firer was rapidly established by Armstrong, Mitchell and the
Chantiers de la M6diterrann6e.
The military quick-firing gun presented its makers with another
desoerate obstacle to efficiency, to accuracy of aim and rate of fire.
When the gun was fired it “kicked” so violently that much time
was lost replacing the carriage in position and re-laying the barre .
Years were occupied by the gunmakers m ™ eaas f °
absorbing the recoil by exhaust chambers which should, at the
same time, not add unduly to the weight of the gun, and m affix-
ing “spades” to the wheels and shaft should hold the carriage in
position. It is the last method which has occupied most attention
and Achieved most success in recent years. Similarly new diffi-
culties in handling the propellant were discovered and| ha £ to
solved before the quick-firing field-gun could . reasonably be pro-
nounced a success. Finally, motor transport has been called into
bring up the vast stocks of shells required by an arm that_ has
learned how “to be, at times, greedy and prodigious with its
mU Tn the “eighties,” Cail et Cie had erected a new department
for gun-manufacture, and could turn out 150 ba ttenes of fidd
artillery a year; Schneider’s output was between one and two
batteries a day; the Chantiers de la Mdditerrannde had a war
capacity of 10 field gun batteries a month, and Hotchkiss could
make L guns of all types a year. The St. Chamond s produc-
tive power had also been increased, and one and all they had go
ready for making their entry into that world market which
had } hitherto been almost the exclusive preserve of Friedrich
kf 1885 the gates were flung open, and French munitions
poured out on to the markets of Europe and America. S .
Chamond and Cail, Schneider and Hotchkiss were, at this time,
working in close conjunction. The effect of this new move m
France was to bring about a speedy combination a nd
of the German artillery, explosives, and small arms industries.
In the next year, 1886, the Nobel Dynamite Trust Co. Ltd. was
incorporated in London to hold the shares of ;
The Rheinische Dynamitfabrik,
The Dresdner Dynamitfabrik,
The Dynamit A.G.,
The Deutsche Sprengstoffe A.G.,
The Nobel Explosives Co. Ltd.,
The Alliance Explosives Co. Ltd.,
La Socidtd Nobel (Avigliano, Italy), etc., etc.
The first four had really been owned by the Commerz und


Disconto Bank of Hamburg-, and the Nobel Explosives Co. Ltd.,
by the Commercial and Union Banks of Scotland.
Next a French-Italian group of Nobel firms was formed, and
an agreement was entered into between the two groups to continue
for twenty-five years. This was renewed in 1911.
In 1889, the German subsidiaries of the Nobel Trust concluded
another agreement (which was to run till 1950) with the Koln
Rottweiller Pulverfabrik, Wolff and Co. and Cramer and
Buckholz.
In 1890, Nobels absorbed the Sprengstoffe A.G. Carbonit, and,,
again, in 1894, linked up with the Rhein-Siegener group in yet
another K artel.
So much for military explosives. Now for the alliance of
machine tool makers, rifle manufacturers, and the explosives
trades.
In 1887, Isidore Lowe, head of the Lowe firm since the death
of his brother Ludwig Lowe, established a rifle factory at Martini
Kenfelde near Berlin, for making small arms and ammunition.
In 1888, he took over the “Gewehrfabrik von Mauser in Obers-
dorf,” and in 1889, founded, in conjunction with the “Koln
Rottweiler Pulverfabrik,” the “Deutsche Metallpatronenfabrik
zu Karlsruhe” (German Metal Cartridge Factory of Karlsruhe).
“This combination of producers of rifles, munitions, and powder
caused an immense development of the German small arms
industry and secured for it the control of the world market.”
{Meyer’s Konversations-Lexikon, 1904.)
Such was the immediate reply made by the German arms trade
to the invasion of the market by the French firms intent on
emancipating Europe from the clutches of the Krupp-Mauser
Kultur. This was the industrial process that was going on during-
the transition period when, obviously, France and Russia were
about to conclude an offensive and defensive alliance, and to ioin
their resources and co-ordinate their efforts. Germany was pre-
paring for a mighty effort to arm on both frontiers and to wrestle
with France on the field of military industry. The naval “boom”
in Britain was having its equivalent in Germany. The recovery
of France and the coming together with her of Russia constituted
the adequate reason.
France had increased her army by 44,000 men in 1887, and in
1889 had 63,000 more men on a peace footing than had Germany
In that year France made yet another effort, and in 1891 went into
alliance with Russia.
Germany was confronted with a most formidable task of pre-
paring to resist on the West and the East.
In the summer of 1890, a new law was brought forward in
Germany, providing for 70 new batteries of field artillery to cost
22,500,000 francs and 50,000,000 francs for military works


Next year, Austria budgeted 5,000,000 francs for repeating rifles
and 6,500,000 francs for smokeless powder, erecting at the same
time new works at Pressburg and giving extensive orders to
Nobel.
Italy, which had voted 23,500,000 francs for arms and ammuni-
tion and 17,000,000 francs for a new powder factory further from
the ' French frontier than Nobel’s Franco-Italian works at
Avigliano, near Turin, ordered 4,000,000 francs of new rifles from
the Austrian Arms Factory at Steyer in 1891, and spent another
4,000,000 francs on fortress and other guns. Russia was, mean-
while, adopting St. Chamond and Canet a-rtillery.
Krupp was losing somewhat of his influence in Belgium, where
Cockrill, of Seraing, was making artillery, but in 1889 the
Fabrique Nationale des Armes de Guerre k Li6ge was formed to
work the Mauser patents, and fell under German influence. Ihe
Belgian Government then adopted the Mauser as its army rifle.
From 1891 to 1898 was the great and almost silent period of
experiment and improvement of field guns, when every great arma-
ment firm was endeavouring to produce an ideal quick-firing gun.
From 1892 to 1897, Krupps issued no reports on their artillery,
and sent no samples to the exhibitions. During this time they
were hard at work and employing “the various kinds of powders
made by the associated explosive factories of Cologne and
Rottweil ” In 1896 they brought out a new field gun which,
whilst not rapid-firing, was considered by the Germans to be even
preferable. Schneider produced a “75mm.” field gun in 1893
that was a quick-firing piece, but their masterpiece, the famous
gun, was the model of 1896, subsequent improvements being in
the anti-recoil mechanism of spades for wheels and trailer.
In Russia, likewise, from 1894 to 1899, General Engelhardt
was experimenting with a new type field gun at the Poutilov and
Alexandrovsk Factories, evolving one finally with a reputed fire
of 16 shots per minute. In 1898, the Maxim-Nordenfeldt depart-
ments at Frith, of Vickers, Sons and Maxim Ltd., produced a
quick-firing 3m. weapon, which was adopted next year by the
War Office, who ordered 200 guns —90 from Woolwich, 60 from
Vickers, and 50 from Armstrong Whitworth.
The closing years of the old century were marked by pro-
digious expenditure on field-gun equipment by all the great and
most of the minor Powers. In every country producing guns a
more or less satisfactory quick-firer had been manufactured. In
Germany, Ehrhardt and Krupp; in France, Schneider (now
amalgamated with the Chantiers de la M6diterrann6e), St.
Chamond and Chatillon-Commentry; in Austria, Skoda; in
Britain, Vickers; in America, Bethlehem had all evolved guns to
suit their patrons.
Melinite, cordite, lyddite had all added to the destructive power


of artillery fire, and the smokeless rifle powders had given a new
impetus to machine gun and magazine rifle production.
In 1891 Mannlicher, of the Oesterreichische Waffenfabrik, of
Steyer, patented the magazine rifle, which has become the standard
of the Austro-Hungarian Army, and most of which have been made
at this works, now linked up with the Deutsche Munitions und
Waffenfabrik, whose director, Dr. Paul von Gontard, seems to be
übiquitous in the small arms and machine trades of Central
Europe. Paul von Gontard and Admiral Hans Sack, of Krupp,
the Koln Rottweiler Pulverfabrik, and the Deutsche Waffenfabrik
had their finger in every pie. They were the true successors of
the Lowe family.
They have been the heirs of this most resourceful and ever-
present capitalist dynasty, whose operations were more far-reach-
ing and insidious than those of the loudly advertised and execrated
Krupp.
Ludwig, Isidor, and Sigismund were everywhere and in every-
thing.
Ludwig was the the founder of the house; Isidor consolidated
its power and Sigismund was its ambassador.
Mr. Sigismund Lowe early joined the directorate of the Maxim-
Nordenfeldt Gun and Ammunition Co. Ltd., of London, and
passed on to the board of Vickers, Sons, and Maxim Ltd., when
the smaller firm was absorbed. He was with this most British of
British firms until his death in 1903. He was one of their repre-
sentatives on the board of the Steel Manufacturers Nickel
Syndicate Ltd., and was a shareholder in the Chilworth Gun-
powder Co. Ltd. from 1901 to the time of his death,
Vickers afterwards maintained the Lowe tradition by continu-
ing to act as the London agents of Paul von Gontard’s concern,
the Deutsche Waffenfabrik.
The importance of the Lowe brothers was quite equivalent to
that of Krupp, the Nobel group, and the Duttenhofers, and how
great was this may be judged from the following remark of
General von Falkenhausen, Prussian Minister of War, in the
Reichstag in February, 1896 :
“In all that concerns explosives, the Military Board is
wholly dependent on the private industry. The concurrence
of this is, moreover, in every way, indispensable in the event
of war.”


Behind the German Navy Law
It is almost inconceivable to-day to recall that within the memory
of men still living Prussian warships were built on the Thames-
side to the designs of the British Admiralty’s Chief Constructor.
But when Prussia again began to build a Navy subsequent to
the blockade of the harbours of the German Bund by the Danish
Fleet in 1848, she had, perforce, to have the ships built in Britain,
France, and the United States. She had only one dockyard, the
Klawittes, at Dantzig, and it was not capable of turning out any-
thing much bigger than a gunboat.
The paddle-frigate “Dantzig” built at Millwall in 1851 by
Messrs, Robinson and Russell, was one of the first ships in the
Prussian Navy, and another frigate, the “Thetis,” was exchanged
by the British Government for two gunboats built at the same time
and in the same yard.
In iB6O Prussia decided to have ten armour-clads, and at least
three of these were engined by the Chantiers de la M6diterrann6e.
In 1869 she took over the frigate “Fatih,” building at Millwall for
Turkey, and renamed her the “Konig Wilhelm I.”
After the Franco-German War the Imperial Government began
building operations and Fleet provision on a more ambitious scale.
In 1868 an armoured ship, the “Hansa, ” had been laid down at
Dantzig, and, in 1873, the “Preussen” was commenced at the
“Vulkan” Yard. In the same year the “Deutschland” and the
“Kaiser” were put in hand by Samuda Bros., of Poplar. These
were the last armour-clads built abroad, the Government determin-
ing for the future that all vessels and materials should, so far as
possible, be of German construction. Two more armour-clads
were launched before the end of 1878, but after that there was an
almost complete stoppage of naval construction except small craft.
All armour-plate during this early period was of Brown and
Cammell manufacture.
In 1866 the Germans commenced to lay out the great Dockyard
at Wilhelmshaven, near Bremerhaven, and, soon afterwards, the
Kiel Dockyard. The first ship was launched from the latter in
j 874.


In the Middle Ages the great cities of the Baltic, the
Netherlands and Frisian Coast had been the possessors of the
stately merchant navies of the Hanseatic League and had been
justly famed for their splendid seamanship and naval craft. But
those days had long gone by, and the glory of the Hansa was no
more. Modern German shipping began with the foundation of
the Hamburg-Amerika Line in 1847 and the Norddeutscher Lloyd
ten years later. Most of their early ships were built at Greenock
by Messrs. Caird. Later on, the Norddeutscher Lloyd laid out a
yard at Kiel, which was taken over in 1879 by Herr F. A. Egells,
who united his Berlin machine factory and the Kiel Shipyard as
the Schiff- und Maschinenbau A.G. “Germania.”
Another yard, that of the “Vulkan,” who have in recent years
so frequently raced John Brown and Co., Ltd., and the Fairfield
Company for the blue riband of marine engine output, was
established in 1851 by Fruchtenicht and Brock at Bredow, near
Stettin, and was taken over by eight Stettin and Berlin financiers
in 1857. They built their first warships in 1866. Their engineer-
ing manager was trained in Italy and their shipyard director at
Barrow-in-Furness. At a later period they were to become
associated with the Mannesman Tube Company and the Hamburg-
Amerika Line.
At Kiel there was also the Howaldtwerke, a private firm dating
from 1876. Besides the Weser Company, of Bremen, and Blohm
und Voss, of Hamburg, there was the Schichau Company of Elbing
and Danzig, who had been engineers since 1837 an d shipbuilders
since the “fifties.” This firm had by far the oldest connection
with the Prussian Government. About 1884 it took preference
over all others for torpedo-boat construction, and built some 70
boats in two years. Schichau was among the chief rivals of
Yarrow and Thornycroft, and has always maintained his reputation
for exceedingly swift steaming craft. This firm had plenty of
foreign orders in the late “eighties” and early “nineties,” doing
much work for Russia and Italy.
The Stettin “Vulkan” used to do work for China, Scandinavia,
and a few other minor navies, but neither for mercantile nor naval
demand could the German firms seriously compete with their long-
established British and French rivals.
We must now turn to the United States and note how, there,
the Government was giving direct State subvention to a weak and
struggling shipbuilding industry by the renovation of the American
Navy. The more than ample Fleet which the Civil War had
dowered the United States with —an armour-clad fleet —had been
rendered obsolete by the adoption of the Armstrong type of cruiser
and the developments of gun and armour in the early “eighties.”
The decisive victory of Chili over Peru and the construction of the
wonder-cruiser “Esmeralda” for the former, startled certain


Americans into alarm for the naval future of the Pacific Ocean.
The rapid growth of the Oriental navies and the shipbuilding
activities of Spain all gave a political impulse to American navalism.
According to the Scientific American, the shipbuilding industry in
the United States had become “utterly stagnant” and required
“some powerful stimulant to arouse it.” In 1883 Congress
authorised three protected cruisers, and followed these up with a
thorough-going naval programme. The United States Navy
Board called in the Bethlehem Iron Works and the Carnegie,
Phipps Co. to supply armour-plate and guns. The steel magnates
of America have ever since, more and more steadily, pressed
forward the demands and requirements of armour-plate patriotism.
The Union Ironworks of ’Frisco; Wm. Cramp and Sons of
Philadelphia ; the Newport News Shipbuilding Company, and other
yards by 1896 were
“qualified to undertake the construction of the largest
mercantile steamers and ... to rival the best work of
the European builders.”
They were building warships for Russia and Japan, and they were
thrusting themselves forward into the world shipbuilding market.
The French shipbuilders were ousting the Germans, and the
Italian builders were prospering steadily by their own Govern-
ment’s naval ambitions. Just when the German firms were
beginning to see hope gleaming ahead, and when Bismarck had
provided a bounty for German ships built in Germany of German
material, American, French, and Italian firms strode forward,
invigorated by the support of their own Governments and assured
of renown and profit from the construction of American, French,
and Italian Navies.
The moral was obvious : Germany must have a Navy.
Meanwhile, Germany’s over-sea trade was growing by leaps
and bounds. From 1880 to 1899 German exports grew in volume
nearly 100 per cent., and her imports enormously increased. Her
merchant fleets were becoming larger and her vigorous indus-
trialism required more outlets. Phenomenal was the development
of her iron, steel, and engineering trades. “The will to economic
power” was everywhere evident. Her economists and historians
meanwhile taught the importance of being well and thoroughly
organised for war as well as peace. Tariffs, bureaucratic
collectivism, and industrial and financial organisation under high
imperial patronage became the order of the day. The teachings
of Admiral Mahan, the American naval historian, had a profound
influence on the impulsive young Kaiser, for whom, on one
occasion, a British naval review had been specially organised,
whereat the new-created Admiral of the Fleet led his Grandmother s
Navy out to sea. Old sailors at Cowes and Portsmouth would tell


fine stories of the young gentleman’s enthusiasm, half for Grand-
mother and half for Grandmother’s splendid ships.
To Mahan’s philosophy were added Beresford’s perpetual
vapourings and Armstrong’s solemn warnings of the peril of the
cruiser to merchant shipping. But Germany had a great merchant
marine going daily by the shores of England and France, down a
potential avenue of hostile fleets, from the Narrow Seas to the
Ocean.
If Britain needed to defend her merchant shipping from French
commerce destroyers, why, so did Germany —even more so.
Whilst there were plenty of her plaguey professors to echo Cramb
and Spenser Wilkinson and our fire-eaters and to tell the tale of
how English sea-power had ruined the Hansa and the Dutch, how
it had preyed on the Spanish galleons and French marine, and
how England still was England, a nest of pirates and buccaneers.
The German Navy League came into being soon after our own,
and the agitation for a Navy went on more fervently.
It will be remembered how the French firms entered the world
market for military material in 1885, and thus struck a heavy blow
at the dominion of Krupp in that field. Soon afterwards occurred
the great “pool” of armament and explosives industries to which
we referred in an earlier chapter, and in 1891 Krupp absorbed the
Gruson Works at Magdeburg, so adding gun-mounting and
armour shops to his Essen enterprise. In the same year Krupp
completed an armour-plate plant at his original works costing
He had concluded a monopolist agreement with the
Dillingen Steel Company, of Westphalia, who had been making
armour since 1876. Subsequently, Krupp installed a Harveyising
plant, and then, in 1896, brought to perfection the Krupp process
of Herr Emil Ehrensberger. All this entailed enormous expense
and brought little or no return, since the Reichstag refused money
for a Fleet, and foreign nations would not order armour from an
inexperienced manufacturer.
In 1896 Krupp leased the “Germania” Yard at Kiel, and thus
consummated an old ambition of his to control this famous yard.
Krupp had entered the naval industry, partly to spite the French
firms, partly to add a new department of a potentially profitable
nature, and partly to further the ambitions of his very influehtial
shareholder, the Kaiser.
In 1888 the young Kaiser had emancipated the Navy from
military control, and set up an independent Admiralty. In 1890
four sea-going (as opposed to coast-defence) battleships were laid
down and there seemed prospects of further increases. Then the
alliance of France and Russia required great military outlay, and
the Reichstag would have none of the Navy Bills. Meanwhile, the
Kaiser Wilhelm Canal was being pushed forward, and was ready
in 1896. This was an essential preliminary. In 1895 the


ridiculous Kruger telegram had aroused a wave of indignation in
Britain, and the British Government had been almost equally
foolish in instantly mobilising a special cruiser squadron against a
Power that could, obviously, give no effect to its words. The
Kaiser was becoming more and more anxious for a Fleet, and in
1896 Krupp laid down two cruisers, for which no monetary provi-
sion was for a while forthcoming.
Then, in 1898, the enthusiasm of the China Expedition sent out
to avenge two martyred missionaries of the Prince of Peace gave
the opportunity to Tirpitz to bring in and pass his first Bill for
seven battleships, nine cruisers, and other ships, in seven years,
at a cost of . .
Two years later, the seizure of the “Bundesrat” by the British
N av y — an act for which our Government apologised—provided
the psychological moment for the introduction and passing of the
second Navy Law of 1900. Strenuously fought by the Radicals
and the Socialists—Bebel warning the Government that it would
be taken in Britain as a challenge and would lead to war it was
pushed through.
By its original terms it provided for two battleships and one
armoured cruiser per year for seventeen years and torpedo craft
and light cruisers in proportion. It just ensured one armoured
ship every two or two and a half years to each of the six private
firms. It gave them the “necessary assurances for future work,”
of which Count Reventlow has so much to say in his writings. It
came as a boon and a blessing to Krupp and Dillingen. It was a
delight to the Nobel International from Berlin to Glasgow and back
again.
It removed the development of the Fleet from the uncertain
interference of the Reichstag—this von Reventlow unblushingly
records. It promised that Germany should “be able to speak
plain German through her Navy.” It was made unduly provo-
cative. Like the German militarist mind always does when it
thinks people are listening, and the non-German militarist mind
does when it thinks people are not listening, it spoke its naked
philosophy.
Germany shook her fist in the face of Europe in general, and
Britain in particular, with the evident aim of committing an
unwilling Reichstag to a course from which the logic of events
should make it impossible to withdraw —and all to the glorification
of Kaiserism and the endowment of Krupp !


Ten Years of Changing Policies
In 1898, two struggles of the later Nineteenth Century came to
an end. The tariff war between France and Italy terminated, and
with it the relations of the two Mediterranean Powers began per-
ceptibly to change. The Italians almost ceased their naval pre-
parations, and disposed of several of their new cruisers to Spain
and Argentina. The first great naval armament boom in Italy
was drawing to a close, and for the next ten years Italy desisted
almost entirely from Fleet construction.
The victory of Sir Frederick Kitchener at Omdurman and the
pacification of the Soudan brought about a temporary crisis at
Fashoda, but this quickly passed over and the Egyptian question
was virtually closed when Marchand withdrew.
From 1899 to 1906 the French almost ceased the construction
of warships and severely retrenched with serious consequences
for the private shipbuilders and armour manufacturers.
Meanwhile, the battles of Manila and Santiago de Cuba had
ended the last naval pretensions and colonial ventures of Spain.
The United States faced the European Powers as mistress of the
Americas. The satisfactory conclusion of the Venezuelan dispute
between the United States and Britain and Lord Salisbury ’s diplo-
matic support to the Republic at the outbreak of the Spanish War
had made it plain to Germany that she had nothing to hope for in
South or Central America and that the Western Continent was to
remain under Anglo-Saxon influence.
As a result of the agreement with Britain in 1904, France was
relieved of the necessity of great naval preparations to safeguard
her shores and those of her Colonies against the new German
Navy, and was enabled to concentrate her energies upon military
measures.
From 1878 to 1895 the pressure of Russian antagonism had
been most keenly directed against the North-West frontier of
India, but about the latter year some understanding was arrived
at and the storm centre shifted to Manchuria. There the con-
sequences of the unsatisfactory conclusion of the Chino-Japanese
War had prepared the way for another and more terrible struggle.


Germany, probably not without a sinister motive, had
supported Russia against Japan. Britain, on the other hand, had
put her diplomatic assistance at the service of Japan, and con-
tinued year by year to give the Eastern Empire increasing
encouragement. It was generally expected in the years preceding
the Russo-Japanese War that this country would give armed
support to her proteg6 in the event of war with Russia.
All Japan’s warships, with a few minor exceptions, were built
in this country on British models, and her seamen were trained by
British experts, and her engineers instructed here in public and
private workshops.
When Russia, in the autumn of 1898, embarked on a great
programme of battleship and cruiser construction, the vessels to
b* ready in 1903 and destined for the Far East, the British Govern-
ment brought in huge Supplementary Estimates, which were
expressly stated to be intended as a reply to Russia’s preparations.
Our Admiralty laid down ship for ship against Russia, and
designed the vessels (amongst them were the “Cressy,” “Hogue,”
and “Aboukir”) to pass through the Suez Canal.
At this same time in South America the relations of Chili and
Argentina had become much more strained, and there are signs
that this rivalry was not unwelcome to Signor Perrone of George
Ansaldo and Co., of Genoa, and Armstrong and Vickers in this
country.
Something had to be done to improve the armament trade in
Italy after the agreement with France, and Signor Perrone, by an
enterprising display of Garibaldian chivalry in raising a corps of
volunteers for Argentina, secured the favour of the Buenos Ayres
authorities and great orders for cruisers for Ansaldo and Co.—
then in fierce rivalry with Armstrong. No sooner did Ansaldo
commence the “Moreno” and the “Rivadavia” than Sir E. J.
Reed, who was visiting South American waters “for his health,”
found that Chili wanted two light battleships, which he designed
and got placed with Vickers and Armstrong Whitworth.
In 1902-3, Chili and Argentina came to terms of amity.
Argentina sold the two Ansaldo cruisers to Japan on the eve of the
war, and Chili had the two battleships purchased by Britain to
avoid them going to Russia ! One of them, the “Triumph,” was
recently sunk trying to blast a path for munitions for Russia !
The Russo-Japanese War came, and the Russian Fleet, to the
fame of Vickers and Armstrong Whitworth, was shattered and
destroyed by their ships and their guns. Russia was beaten, came
to terms with Japan, and since then options on the outworks of
China have been amicably shared out. Thibet to Britain,
Mongolia to Russia, Manchuria to Japan.


Russia now became more kindly disposed to Britain. She
wanted money, and so she came to London for gold. She ordered
new cruisers from France and from Vickers. In 1907, Britain
and Russia agreed to protect Persia, and so drew a sharp line
across Germany’s path towards the Persian Gulf. The next year,
1908, witnessed the annexation of Bosnia and Herzegovina by
Austria-Hungary, a step which, whilst not over-pleasing to
Germany, as the unofficial ally of Turkey, definitely split off the
Italian Government from any hearty co-operation with the Central
European Powers. Italy, which had already proved friendly to
Britain, France, and Spain at Algeciras in 1906, now found her-
self with diametrically opposite interests to her allies on the
Balkan coasts and hinterland of the Adriatic. She would have to
choose for the future whether she would have Britain or Germany
for a friend in her plans for imperial expansion—and Germany’s
first love was her hated Austrian rival.


Sir Philip Watts and his
Dreadnoughts
To-day, when we are hearing - so much about the foresight and the
capacity of Lord Fisher, and are being told of his responsibility for
the adoption of the “Dreadnought” types of battleship and cruiser,
the writer has often felt that justice has not been done nor sufficient
acknowledgment made to the great work of the late Director of
Naval Construction at the Admiralty, Sir Philip Watts.
Perhaps some future Samuel Smiles, writing a new series of
those invaluable “Lives of the Engineers” will give him a place
alongside of Smeaton, Watt, Neilson, Napier, and Stephenson.
This chapter cannot pretend to do more than estimate the value
of the contribution made by this great naval architect to the art of
modern shipbuilding and to the growth of the world’s Fleets. It
does not aim at giving a biographical sketch but rather at an
appreciation of one whom the writer holds to be the most brilliant
of all the remarkable men who have made the technical efficiency
of Armstrong Whitworth and Co., Ltd., the marvel of the world.
Philip Watts was, originally, a draughtsman at the Admiralty
before he proceeded in the early “’eighties” to the staff of the
Elswick shipyard. There he was an understudy to Sir William
White, succeeding the latter as Armstrong’s chief designer when
Sir William returned to the Admiralty in 1885.
He was the designer and directed the construction of the
greater part of that excellent battle fleet which Togo used with
such deadly effect in the Russo-Japanese War. It was, in great
measure, his ships which focussed the attention of the naval world
on the cruiser after the battle of the Yalu River between Japan and
China in 1895. He was as much the father of the big gun cruiser
as Pett was of the übiquitous frigate of an earlier age. It was he
who improved the protected cruiser, and pioneered the way of the
excessive speed and gun-power of ships so long neglected by our
Admiralty but which gave us the victory at the Falkland Islands
and on the Dogger Bank.
For a whole decade, or longer, the Admiralty turned a deaf ear


to the teachings and suggestions of the Elswick firm. It refused
to have its ships built there or to adopt as its standard ship the
heavily-armed cruiser which was the Armstrong idea of a perfect
war-vessel. It turned aside after new firms, or, at least, placed
its reliance, so far as possible, in others than Armstrong Mitchell
and Co.
From 1888 to 1896 the favours of the Admiralty were particu-
larly for Vickers Sons and Co. Ltd., of Sheffield. To this old-
established steel-producing firm the Admiralty went to emancipate
itself from the bondage of Elswick, so far as gun-supplies were
concerned, and from that of Brown and Cammell in respect of
armour-plates.
In the latter year came about the amalgamation of Vickers
Sons and Co. Ltd., gun and armour manufacturers of Sheffield,
with the Naval Construction Co., of Barrow-in-Furness, and the
Maxim-Nordenfelt Co., of Erith, Birmingham, etc. Vickers Sons
and Maxim Ltd., as they now styled themselves, began to lay
out the Barrow yard on a gigantic scale, to erect marine-engine
shops, gun-mounting sheds, shell factories, and to extend the
building berths. They spent more than in five years
on improvements.
They took Lieutenant Trevor Dawson from Woolwich Arsenal
to be their gunnery expert and Mr. Dunn from the Admiralty to
superintend their shipyard. Their preparations were most lavish
and thorough-going as those of Vickers always are. They were
obviously challenging Armstrong, Mitchell and Co. Ltd., in their
most important asset.
The entry of Vickers into this new field of activity enormously
stimulated the Armstrong firm, and the burden of this new effort
fell upon Philip Watts. His heavy gun cruisers and his remark-
ably efficient battleships had engaged the patronage of Japan,
Chili, Brazil, and other Powers; they had proved themselves in
battle; their type was generally accepted everywhere. Vickers
produced, thanks to Lieutenant Dawson’s genius, some excep-
tionally fine gun types, and the combination of armour-manu-
facture and gun-construction by that firm caused Armstrong
Whitworth and Co. Ltd., greatly to extend their works, to change
from their more conservative methods and to devote vast sums to
improvement and research.
Not only did Vickers confront them, but John Brown and Co.
Ltd., had absorbed the Clydebank Shipbuilding and Engineering
Co., Ltd., in 1898, and had thrown down the gauntlet to both firms
by taking up the construction of armoured ships in the most
important yard on the Clyde. J. and G. Thomson’s had all along
been a cruiser-constructing firm. From the “Terrible” to the
“Tiger” that yard has been exemplary for the power of its grey-
hound ships.


With the financial and economic resources of John Brown and
Co. Ltd., at its disposal, it seemed quite likely that Clydebank
would trench on the foreign cruiser markets of Armstrong Whit-
worth and Co., Ltd. About this time, Armstrong’s ingratiated
themselves with the Admiralty —probably by putting down new
armour-producing plant and so making the authorities less depen-
dent on Vickers, Brown, Cammell, and Beardmore. Then Arm-
strong, Whitworth, and Vickers Sons and Maxim began to display
a curious though indefinable solidarity. It was an “entente”
with commitments undisclosed rather than an alliance avowed. It
is hard to decide whether the Admiralty did or did not approve the
new “marriage of convenience” —it was nothing else.
Then, in igoi, the Admiralty secured the services of Mr, Philip
Watts as Chief Constructor, and he left Elswick for the scarcely
less important position in Whitehall. He was the second of the
three successive Chief Constructors whom the Admiralty have
taken from Elswick, whither they had, at first, gone after a pre-
liminary Admiralty training.
The coming of Mr. Watts brought a new, scientific, up-to-date
regime into the Constructional Department at Whitehall. There
had been little change since the middle “eighties,” and Sir
William White was never an Armstrong man in the sense that
Mr. Watts had become in nearly twenty years at Elswick.
The new ideas, the wide practical experience of successful ships
of battle proof, the freedom from the harrassing considerations of
expense which dominated men in the old Admiralty, all made for
new vigour.
Germany was entering the naval lists; Russia was at the height
of her maritime eminence; the lessons of 1898 were setting the
United States on new paths of ambition. There was to be no end
of naval rivalry, though France was falling out.
In the naval combats of the future it was plain that it would
be a case of “The Race is to the Swift and the Battle to the
Strong. ”
Mr. Philip Watts’ first act was markedly to increase the gun
power of the “County” class of cruisers then building. They
became more characteristically “Watt” than “White” in arma-
ment.
When Sir John Fisher became First Lord of the Admiralty
there was a clean sweep of the “barnacle” brigade. “Efficiency”
became the one purpose. Monetary considerations were no longer
to be permitted to check naval “preparedness” any more than pro-
fessional traditions.
Fisher gave Watts his heart’s desire.
Fisher—blunt, grand old war sea-man, with no ideas of
“civilising war” any more than “civilising' hell”; no visions of
putting Tirpitz’ feet “in hot water”; but a cold, steely, deter


mined warrior, without any cant about him —he believed that
Germany was bent on challenging- our Sea Power, and he deter-
mined to smash Germany. One suspects that this Fisher makes the
marrow of many of our countrymen run cold with his deliberate
war philosophy. Fortunately for them, Fisher does not talk
too much, and so our mealy-mouthed Jingoes do not need to
apologise for or explain him.
Fisher saw that German naval strategy hinged on the Kaiser
Wilhelm Canal, and that our adoption of big battleships would
constantly lay our rival under the obligation of widening and
deepening that Canal at colossal expense. Fisher, therefore,
determined to render the entire German Fleet obsolete so soon as
possible, and gave Watts a free hand to design and produce the
“Dreadnought.”
Intermediate between the “White” battleships of the “pre-
Dreadnought” type and the “Dreadnought” were the “Lord
Nelson” battleships, wherein Watts placed six more 9.2 m. guns
—weighing about 25 tons each—than the “King Edward VII,”
ships carried.
The increase in cost of armament was enormous owing to the
need for larger and more numerous heavy gun-mountings.
In the “Dreadnought,” Watts placed five pairs of 12m. guns
instead of two pairs. Each of the five turrets carried two 56 ton
guns, was plated with about 150 tons of armour costing from j£ioß
to £> I 7S P er ton, an d the total cost of each mounting was some-
where in the region of For the supply of these, Vickers
and Armstrongs had an absolute monopoly.
That was not all. The increased gun-power made the strain
on the ship greater and required more gigantic ship-structure, i.e.,
more steel. The increased speed, which was a main feature of
the “Dreadnought,” needed huge engines, larger coal bunkers,
and, of course, a longer hull. This, in turn, necessitated more
armour —a total of about 4800 —5000 tons of plates at —.£120
per ton.
Watts’ dream-ship was a monster with terrific gun-power, with
tremendous speed and enormous armour-protection. She com-
bined the Armstrong, Cammell, and Parsons’ cult —guns, armour,
and turbine engines.
The “Dreadnought” was the logical consequence of giving an
Elswick genius as much money as he cared to spend, and if you
will have a big Navy of big ships to make you a big Empire, pay
your tribute of admiration to the Father of the “Dreadnought”—
Sir Philip Watts,now retired and lately returned to the directorate
of Armstrong Whitworth and Co. Ltd.


British and German
Dreadnoughts
In the year 1904 took place Fisher’s “Great Scrap, when he,
ruthlessly, swept off the Active List more than a hundred ships of
doubtful value, including a great many cruisers of comparatively
recent date. These were mainly vessels of the type which had
been popularised by Armstrong, vessels which had sacrificed every-
thing to a plenitude of mediocre guns and to high speed. They
were ships which had poured money into the coffers of the Naval
Construction and Armaments Co., the Fairfield Shipbuilding Co.,
J. and G. Thomson’s, Palmer’s Shipbuilding Co., and the marine
engine makers and gun manufacturers. They were monuments
to the discarded naval teaching of Lord Charles Beresford, the
most conspicuous of the “barnacle’’ brigade. It appears, on the
face of it, to have been a drastic and spendthrift proceeding. It
was not Fisher, however, was the rake, but those who had unloaded
on the nation this lumber of useless metal. These ships were
really a gigantic subsidy to the cruiser-building firms and the
marine engineers, a monstrous product of ill-considered unemploy-
ment relief schemes.
They had found work, they had supplied dividends and the
prestige that goes with naval contracts, but they were useless as
warships, and their upkeep was only a further extravagance. It
speaks well for Fisher that he had the courage to “scrap” them.
Then the Fleet was redistributed —or, rather, it was concen-
trated in home waters —and the old far-distant squadrons were
broken up. The China Seas and the Mediterranean were con-
sidered of less importance than the North Sea. Again Fisher acted
with discretion and courage. He knew what he wanted, and he
set out to get it. The writer does not agree with the tendencies
of British policy at this time, nor does he profess any great admira-
tion for Fisher’s views on the politics and economics of sea power,
but that does not prevent him feeling nor deter him from expressing
his sincere regard for Fisher’s genius as a naval expert.
He believes that opponents of large armaments make a


profound mistake in not entering more sympathetically into this
question, and seeking to appreciate the spirit that animates the
great British Navy. It is a wonderful organisation. It has been
directed by men of the purest and most disinterested motives. It is
staffed by officers imbued alike with regard for its long and
splendid traditions, and intense determination to keep it up to the
highest standard of efficiency.
So long as he lives he will remember the thrill of admiration
and something akin to pride that he experienced when he viewed
the Grand Fleet at Spithead, in July, 1914. It was a mighty
monument to the science and craftsmanship of Britain. It was a
Tragedy of Steel cunningly designed and admirably welded to the
fulfilment of the misdirected genius of a nation.
In 1905 Europe was thrown into commotion by the dramatic
appearance and speech of the Kaiser at Tangier in the early Spring,
and for a whole year the negotiations that led up to Algeciras
continued their acrimonious course. Germany was then about to
lay down the fifth quota of two battleships and one armoured
cruiser, as prescribed in her Navy Law of 1900. Two months
after the speech at Tangier the British Admiralty Select Committee
on Naval Design presented its report. Now, it is unquestionable
that the “Dreadnought” was actually projected before this, and
that the Committee merely ratified the plans and made sundry
suggestions. Amongst other questions considered were the
economical reorganisation of public and private shipyards, with a
view to the construction of heavier warships. This Committee had
its corollary in the Murray Commission, appointed in the same
year, to consider, among other things, how far State manufacture
of war material could economically be replaced by that of “the
trade.”
The “Dreadnought” was officially laid down in October, 1905,
and launched in the following February, but Armstrong’s were
engaged on her gun mountings long before the ship was officially
commenced. She was finished by the following autumn. She was
built in a loudly-advertised secrecy, and the Powers paused their
1906 programmes till they saw what Britain had in hand at Ports-
mouth. When she steamed out she startled the world —far more
than she need have done, for she was not so remarkably
revolutionary.
Instead of having two big mountings and a pair of guns fore
and aft, she swung ten 12-inch muzzles in five barbettes. She
could steam two knots faster than her predecessors, and she was
the ugliest squat monstrosity that had yet disfigured the blue
ocean.
The Germans discontinued their battleship construction, and
1906 slipped by and only the heavy armoured cruiser “Bliicher”
was put in hand.
[6]


Crafty old man Fisher had stolen a long march on Tirpitz.
Tirpitz, like everybody else, had his eye glued on the “Dread-
nought.” He believed that the new cruisers were only to be
15,000 tons, and that they would not mount the heaviest guns.
So he placed twelve 8.2-inch guns on the “Blucher,” and laughed
a gleeful laugh. All the time, however, Elswick, Fairfield, and
Clydebank were busily at work on the “Invincible,” “Indomitable”
and “Inflexible.” Each of these was a cruiser for speed and
armour protection, but a battleship with eight 12-inch guns.
Each of them could swing as many 12-inch guns on a broadside
as the “Blucher ” could 8-inch guns. Tirpitz had been “diddled.”
In 1907 Britain had four Dreadnoughts ready for business.
Germany had none ready for launching.
Before going out of office Lord Cawdor provided for four
armoured ships, i.e., four battleships or battleship-cruisers, to be
laid down every year. Presumably, two in the dockyards and two
by private contract. It seems probable that the guns and mount-
ings of three ships were to be provided by Vickers and Armstrong,
those of the fourth by the Coventry Ordnance Works, so soon as
the Scotstoun shops were completed.
Hereby hangs a tale —or, rather, a number of tales. Those
tales were fraught with the very gravest possible consequence for
the future peace of Europe.
The writer has told one tale in “How Asquith Helped the
Armour Ring.” Partly told it, for since writing that pamphlet he
has found what he believes to be the master-key to this great
Capitalist mystery.
When the Liberals came to power in 1906 Lord Tweedmouth
reduced the Cawdor programme for the year from four ships to
three, and maintained that number in 1907. The reason for this
was, avowedly—and, the writer believes, honestly —so far as the
Cabinet as a whole was concerned, and, certainly, Campbell-
Bannerman, to extend to Germany a reasonable offer of a reduction
of naval armaments. The Hague Convention came in i9°7>
Germany rejected that offer.
In 1905 the British had put down four Dreadnought ships; in
1906 three Dreadnoughts; and in 1907 again three Dreadnoughts.
That is to say, the British Admiralty programme was diminished
by two ships, and in 1908 the provision was for only two
Dreadnoughts.
In Germany, on the other hand, the two battleships and one
cruiser of the 1905 programme were followed by one large cruiser
in 1906, and the two battleships of that year were held over until
1907, when five Dreadnoughts were commenced. In 1908 four
Dreadnoughts were provided for, and it was this complicated
manoeuvre on the part of Germany that gave rise to the disputes
of the “ We Want Eight” agitation.


Carefully analysed, the position of affairs can easily be clarified,
but it was not the desire or in the interest of our various naval
alarmists to clear the issue.
The Germans waited in 1906 to see what sort of a ship this
“ Dreadnought ” was going to be. Then they found that they
must increase their battleships from 13,000 to 18,000 tons or fall
out of the race. They had. therefore, to overhaul all their building
berths, their shipyard accommodation, and their engine shops.
This took them until the summer of 1907. By that time they had
discovered the new cruiser type which the British had evolved, and
they, naturally, followed suit, building a Dreadnought cruiser
instead of a cruiser of the type Britain had abandoned.
So in 1907 they had to put in hand two Dreadnought battleships
of 1906, two Dreadnought battleships of 1907, and one Dread-
nought cruiser of the same year—five Dreadnoughts in all.
All that they had done, so far, was to augment the tonnage
and power of their ships to make them a match for the British.
This was done by a Navy Law Amendment Act in 1906, which also
provided for several fast light cruisers struck out of the 1900 Law
by the Reichstag.
Then Von Tirpitz decided that the change in ship design
brought about by the “Dreadnought” had reduced the life of a
battleship from 25 to 20 years, and this, automatically, reduced the
anticipated strength of the German Navy for 1917 by four battle-
ships. In this decision he was only facing facts, but in facing them
and meeting them he had to amend his Navy Law again in an
upward direction. The new Amendment Act of 1908 provided for
one extra armoured ship in each of the years 1908, 1909, 1910,
1911. In 1908, then, the Germans put down four ships instead of
three, and the hullaballoo in this country became loud and furious.
Here had we reduced our programme by two ships in two years
before The Hague Convention, and Germany had flouted us.
That was how it seemed to the British nation.
But in the year 1906 Vickers and Armstrong-Whitworth
obtained orders for two great Dreadnought battleships to be put in
hand at once for Brazil. A third battleship was also projected.
The contract between these two firms and Brazil provided for
the customary right of the British Admiralty to pre-empt those two
ships when they thought fit.
Thus it came about that whilst Britain only had three Dread-
noughts laid down in 1907 officially, there were two more Dread-
noughts about to be commenced in British yards, both of which
might find their way into the British Navy if emergency required
them. These two battleships were also laid down in the summer
of 1907, contemporaneously with the first German Dreadnoughts,
and were of a type much more powerful than any vessels then
building for the British Admiralty. They were experimental in


many respects, and carried twelve 12-inch instead of ten 12-inch
guns, as did British battleships then in course of construction.
The Germans were suspicious when they saw the Cawdor
programme reduced officially by two ships in two years, and the
potential British strength, at the same time, reinforced by two
improved Dreadnoughts. Moreover, there were persistent
rumours that the third Brazilian Dreadnought had been put in
hand —vide Naval Annual, 1908.
Also, the French had, in 1906, renewed their construction and
provided for six battleships as powerful as the “Lord Nelson,”
and not one whit less formidable than Germany’s own so-called
Dreadnoughts. Russia was also discussing plans for a new Navy.
Germany’s Allies, Italy and Austria, had, meanwhile, no Dread-
noughts in hand. The action of the British Admiralty in letting
fake statements concerning the new Dreadnought cruisers obtain
currency, the accelerated construction of the first “Dreadnought,”
and the coincidence of the commencement of the two Brazilian
battleships with that of the German ships, all created a bad
impression in Germany. Likewise the two amendments of the
German Navy Law coming so close together in 1906 and 1908 —
and at a time when the British Government was offering a reduc-
tion of naval armaments at The Hague had a similar bad effect in
this country. It. provided the necessary atmosphere of mutual
suspicion, so necessary to the propaganda of hate in both countries.


The Battle of Beardmore
and Brown
Something has already been said concerning the intense rivalry
which for several years existed between Armstrong Whitworth and
Vickers, Sons and Maxim, and of how, towards the close of the
century, the two firms came to the conclusion that competition
scarcely paid them. Then there commenced, in deadly earnest,
the second great struggle in the naval armament industry, a battle
of the Titans, which came to its dramatic climax in the year 1909.
Just as there was a grimly-contested scientific warfare between
the gun inventor, assisted by the explosives manufacturer, and the
metallurgist constantly perfecting his armour plate, so there had
come to be the keenest rivalry between Armstrong Whitworth and
Vickers, Sons and Maxim, both specialists in ordnance, and John
Brown and Charles Cammed, who made armour, but not guns.
Vickers, less obstinate than the Tynesiders, had always produced
both the guns and the plate, and, hence, had been favoured by
fortune and Admiralty custom during the years when the armour-
clads of our Navy sacrificed gun-power to protection. Armstrong,
the obdurate, had been saved by the monopoly of gun-mounting
manufacture and the extensive custom of foreign Powers requiring
cheap battleships in the guise of heavily-armed cruisers.
The “nineties” were, in this country, years when the authori-
ties put their reliance in armour, and gave protection to their ships
rather than weight and number of guns. They were years of
prosperity for John Brown and Charles Cammed. But this phase
could not last. A battleship is a gun-platform, exists to carry
guns, to destroy, and, of course, it must be able to catch its enemy.
A great weight of armour prevents the mounting of guns and pro-
hibits high speed. Then that battleship, like the slow-footed shell-
back, is doomed as a species.
The gunmakers steadily overhauled the armour manufacturers,
but because of their own success, they had to devise a great com-
plex of machinery to operate their weapons and give them a
barbette and an enclosed hood, a complete shield, to protect both


gunners and mechanism. Vickers undertook the construction of
gun-mountings, and Armstrong Whitworth put down armour-
making plant.
They invaded the sphere of John Brown and Charles Cammell,
and Vickers trenched on the markets of the cruiser-builders of the
Clyde. Both of them were constantly perfecting new guns and
mountings and producing finer variations of armour.
Partly, in order to vie with these two concerns, and, partly,
to avail themselves of the demand for armoured cruisers, John
Brown and Co. had bought the Clydebank Shipyard in the autumn
of 1898. In 1901, William Beardmore and Co., of Parkhead,
bought over Napier’s old yard at Govan, and so became ship-
builders also as well as armour producers.
The battle of the Clyde was beginning.
In the next year, Vickers, who saw the great outlay of the new
owners of Clydebank, entered into alliance with William Beard-
more and Co. Ltd., took over half the share capital; gave them
the support of their own long credit, and enabled them to purchase
and lay out a new yard down the river.
Now, the action of the Vickers-Beardmore combination was
very smart indeed, as anyone familiar with the Clydeside area will
agree. The new group purchased a site immediately adjoining the
Clydebank Yard on the low side. The south shore, as is well
known locally, is not available for shipbuilding enterprise. To
the east of the Clydebank Yard lies a great coaling basin. Vickers-
Beardmore had cut off Brown’s from extending their yard.
Here they had laid out the largest warship-building yard in the
British Isles, with a splendid fitting-out basin, fine machine shops,
and excellent yard equipment of every kind —as instance their
extraordinary slipway accommodation. They enlarged at Park-
head both shops and forges. Money was spent with so lavish a
hand that the enterprise has never paid its way as it should have
done on its turnover.
As battleships and armoured cruisers became more powerful
and the medium-sized gun without a gun-house gave place to the
big gun with barbette and complete gun-hood, a gun and mount-
ing fitted into the body of the hull and not merelv clamped on deck,
builders like John Brown, Laird Brothers, the Fairfield Ship-
building Co., and the Thames Iron Works, were put under a more
serious handicap than before.
Armstrong Whitworth and Vickers and Beardmore had engine
shops, forges, gun factories, armour mills, mounting sheds, shell
factories. They could build a ship and make her ready for battle.
This gave them an enormous advantage, especially in the foreign
market. They could supply every item more cheaply and the whole
creation most economically. They could make themselves respon-
sible for the whole ship. They could, in fact, build not merely a


ship, but provide a fleet and all its equipment —battleships,
cruisers, destroyers, submarines, dry docks, projectiles, every-
thing. The three worked as one. Vickers and Armstrong Whit-
worth began to tender as one concern, and then sub-let the parts
to Beardmore or joint subsidiaries, wherein Nobel’s participated.
They became, by 1903, more self-contained than the Royal Dockyards
Formerly, a foreign Power would order a ship’s hull and guns
to be built by Armstrong, its armour to be made by Cammed, and
its engines by someone else. Now they had everything from one
firm or the three firms acting conjointly.
The outlook began to become serious for Charles Cammed,
John Brown, Laird Brothers, Thomas Firth, and the Fairfield
Shipbuilding Co. —then ad independent concerns. It was time for
concerted action in self-defence.
Cammed began within a year of the Vickers-Beardmore
amalgamation, and purchased the Mudiner-Wigley Works at
Coventry, and there commenced to make gun parts. Next, it
acquired Laird Brothers’ long-established shipyard at Birkenhead
—a firm of ancient origin in Port-Glasgow, by the way—and
Cammed, Laird and Co. began to construct a new shipyard at
Tranmere Bay, south of their old works, and on the finest fore-
shore site in the country.
Next they purchased half the capital of the Fairfield Co., and
so brought to that great marine engineering concern, with its
famous record for packet-boats, ocean greyhounds, swift cruisers
and destroyers, their forge and armour departments of Sheffield.
Then Cammed, Laird invited John Brown and Co. Ltd., to take
half the shares in the new Coventry Ordnance Works, Ltd., late
Mudiner-Wigley, and made over a quarter-share to the Fairfield
Co. John Brown, meanwhile, obtained a controlling interest in
Thomas Firth and Sons Ltd., projectile, gun-tube and steel
makers, and brought about a new combination of Sheffield, Mid-
lands, Mersey, and Clydeside enterprises.
This was the great counter-offensive.
The armament industry was looking up. Mr. Philip Watts
had brought the “Elswick” cruiser into favour, and had produced
a vessel that was, virtually, “a 22-knot battleship.” There were
rumours of a monster battleship of high speed, and the growing
suspicion of Germany’s intentions gave excellent promise of a new
demand for still bigger ships.
There was a boom in cruisers, and Clydebank and Fairfield
always have prospered on a cruiser boom. There was a great
demand for armour, and both Brown and Cammell-Laird, could
supply this. It was only needful to furnish gun-mountings, and
then the new group could vie with the old on terms approaching
equality.
But to make gun-mountings efficiently is the hardest part of


armament manufacture. They are, at one, delicate and ponderous,
they combine the arts of gun-maker and armour-producer. They
are so liable to be failures unless the minutest care is taken. Their
cost is stupendous—a pair of 12-inch guns and their mounting,
then, requiring more than
In 1904-5, the Coventry Ordnance Works resolved to make not
only naval guns at Coventry, but to build a big erecting department
at Scotstoun, and to compete with the big groups in their own
speciality. This new establishment embodied “the most recent
engineering improvements” and “the most modern description
of plant.” Five large erecting pits were provided, and the shops
left nothing to be desired. The site was admirably chosen and
well-served by transport facilities and land on which to extend. It
lay between railway and river, half-way betwixt Fairfield and
Clydebank.
It was probably anticipated that the Admiralty would be glad to
emancipate itself from the monopoly of Vickers and Armstrong
Whitworth, and that a share of naval armament would be required
from the new Company, which was then supplying the Army with
artillery.
Had the Fisher schemes gone propitiously and the Cawdor pro-
gramme of four armoured ships (battleships and battle-cruisers)
been adhered to by the incoming Liberal Government, it is probable
that Coventry would have had orders for one quarter of the neces-
sary mountings and guns. But the new Government reduced the
Cawdor programme, and only provided for three ships in each of
the years 1906 and 1907, and two in 1908.
Vickers and Armstrong Whitworth, having long experience
and an acknowledged position, had prior claim. Besides, they
seemed to have a hold on the authorities, who maintained with
them relations “far more cordial than the ordinary relations of
commerce.” Apparently, these two firms did most of the experi-
mental work for the Admiralty on the ships they built for South
American Powers, and entered into peculiar dealings with nations
hitherto not unfriendly to Germany, e.g., Italy, Austria, and
Spain,
Instead of 18 or 20 heavy mountings, only 14 or 15 were
needed. It was no help to Coventry that Brazil was having two
Dreadnoughts built here—for all their guns, machinery, armour,
etc., were provided by Vickers and Armstrong Whitworth. The
Russian cruiser, “Rurik,” was the concern of Vickers and Beard-
more. No orders for mountings came from abroad to Coventry,
“because the firm was not on the official list of the Admiralty.”
No orders for battleships or battleship-cruisers came to Brown,
Fairfield, or Cammell-Laird between 1906 and 1909-10. The
Admiralty built two battleships or a battleship and a battleship-
cruiser yearly at Portsmouth and Devonport, and gave out the


other ship to Barrow or Elswick. Worse and worse became the
plight of the second group. The chairman of Brown’s described
things as “bad,” and regretted that he saw “very little evidence
of distinct improvement.” “The heaviest plant at Coventry and
the whole of the Scotstoun factory were lying idle.” This was in
1909, and two years before this Cammell-Laird had been removed
from the Admiralty list for “grave irregularities,” and their per
cent, dividend had slumped to nil and a dead loss.
Fairfield was also in the trough of industrial depression.
Brown and Fairfield had built and engined the battle-cruisers
“Inflexible” and “Indomitable” in 1906. The next battle-cruiser
was built at Devonport, though engined by Clydebank, and, after
that, the “Lion” was also given to Devonport, but engined by
Vickers. For four years Fairfield and Brown had no orders for
Dreadnoughts, and for nothing larger than two 4800 tons light
cruisers.
The owners of Scotstoun were getting into deep water, and
they knew it. There is nothing more remarkable about the great
scare of 1909 than the contrast between the silence of Vickers and
Armstrong Whitworth and Beardmore, and the incessant wailing,
imprecations, and protests of the managing director of the
Coventry Co., and Mr. Sam Roberts, M.P., director of Cammell-
Laird and trustee for Fairfield.
In May, 1906, immediately after the reduction of the Cawdor
programme, Mulliner went to the Admiralty and warned them, per-
forming “the public and patriotic duty” of telling them of Krupp’s
extensions. In 1907 and 1908 he again presented himself, smiting
his breast and wailing :
“The naval policy of the Government was nothing less
than a gigantic mistake, the possible consequences of which
are almost too dreadful to contemplate.”
And still no orders were forthcoming !
On 3rd March, 1909, he interviewed the Cabinet at
No. 10 Downing Street, and spoke of “the enormous acceleration
in Germany for producing armaments.” They bowed him out,
after pressing him sympathetically by the hand, and adjuring him
to mention his little visit to no man.
This was one week after M‘Kenna had told the lunch party
following a launch at Barrow how cordial were his relations with
Vickers and “another firm of equal magnitude” (Armstrong Whit-
worth).
Next, Mr. M'Kenna made his great scare speech on the
Estimates of 1909, saying :
“It will tax the resources of our own great firms if we are
to retain the supremacy in rapidity and volume of construc-
tion.”


Mr. Lee, for the Opposition, said that Krupp’s capacity
exceeded that of all the works of this country combined. Mr. Lee
put several questions that session in the interests of Coventry.
The late Colonel Vickers’ reply to these jeremiads was
crushing - :
“I am speaking, of course, for our own Company only,
but I think that what I have said will show you that, as far
as the possible output of the country is concerned, the United
Kingdom need not fear comparison with any foreign country.”
—Annual Meeting of Vickers, Sons and Maxim, Limited,
23rd March, 1909,
Meanwhile, a great shareholder in the Coventry Works, Mr.
Sam. Roberts, M.P., had told the House that, “if necessary,”
Krupp’s “could make the complete armament of ten battleships in
one year”—a bag of moonshine, if nothing else! Again and
again, this gentleman returned to the charge, and even suggested
(Mr. Roberts was a director of the Sheffield Banking Company at
the time) “the desirability of a naval loan.”
In July the Government decided to build the four contingent
battleships, thus giving the “patriots” the eight for which they
wouldn’t wait!
Mr. Asquith said they had now obtained “the facilities” for
producing gun-mountings :
“Steps have been taken, and, I am glad to say, have been
completed, and whatever deficiencies have been in this respect
have been completely made good, and these orders .
are to be given out without delay.”
But not to Woolwich. Three days later, said M'Kenna to
Crooks :
“We do not intend to place any orders (for gun-mountings)
at Woolwich, for which, at the present time, there is no
adequate means of manufacture.”
Armstrong Whitworth had recently completed new “facilities”;
Vickers were extending, and Beardmore were reported to be con-
sidering the erection of gun-mounting works.
That must have been what Asquith meant, but he did not
exactly say so.
The orders were given out thus :
One battleship to Armstrong »Whitworth.
One battleship-cruiser to Vickers.
One battleship to William Beardmore.
One battleship to Thames Iron Works.
Three sets of mountings (14) to Vickers and Armstrong


Whitworth; and one set (5) to Coventry Ordnance Works —for
the “Conqueror,” building at Dalmuir.
Next winter, the “Australia,” battle-cruiser for Australia, was
allotted to Clydebank, and the “New-Zealand,” battle cruiser for
New Zealand, to Fairfield, and their eight mountings to Vickers
and Armstrong-Whitworth.
Beardmore had begun to make ordnance, and in 1909 supplied
their first big naval guns to the Dockyard-built “Neptune.” This
move followed the Coventry move to make mountings on the Clyde.
Then they abandoned the erection of mounting shops at Dalmuir,
and, apparently, the “morning and evening hate” between Dalmuir
and Parkhead, on the one hand, and Clydebank, Scotstoun, and
Fairfield, on the other, has since come to an end.
That is how Capitalist competition profiteth a nation. In this
case it swelled the Naval Estimates to gigantic figures, it called
in enormous masses of socially unproductive capital and labour to
the Clyde, and provoked a programme of waste as a result of a
campaign, often prolific in lies, engendered suspicion and
intensified competition between Britain and Germany.
If Coventry’s ill-starred venture had fallen it might have
dragged down Fairfield, Cammell-Laird, and Brown, and, at any
rate, have gone far to drive them out of the armament market.
Had they ceased to be Naval Contractors to the Admiralty they
would have lost much mercantile custom.
On the other hand, Beardmore was swallowing capital, and
giving an inadequate return. Each group, you may say, would
have competed with the other to keep down prices. Yes ! Until
the minor group came into favour, and when both would combine
to ask for more !
The Editor of the Navy League Annual describes this scare as
“one of the most portentous pieces of Parliamentary humbug ever
practised on the electorate”; whilst the Naval Annual (for 1910)
remarked that whilst eight ships were ordered, six would have
sufficed.
But six shijss would have meant no mountings and no guns for
Coventry, and, probably, no battle-cruisers for Clydebank and
Fairfield.
And however the “scare” has affected the efficiency of the
Navy, that was its origin.


The Struggle for Sea Power:
Last Phase
In previous sections we have shown the course of development of
British sea power and compared it with the German in the years
between the passing of the Navy Law of 1900 and the great British
programme of 1909-1910.
In 1910 the German estimates provided for three battleships :
“Prinzregent Luitpold,” Konig Albert,” and “Kaiserin,” and one
battle-cruiser, “Seydlitz.” In 1911 the Germans voted and put in
hand three more battleships: “Konig,” “Ersatz Weissenburg,”
and “Grosser Kurfurst,” and one battle-cruiser, “Derrflinger, ”
In 1912 their programme was two Dreadnought ships, and in 1913
three ships. These are all that count for purposes of the present
war. Probably, the 1913 ships are not yet fully ready for active
service. The Germans returned in 1912 to a lower standard of
construction, but passed another amending Act, providing for two
additional Dreadnoughts to be laid down, one in 1913 and the other
some time later. Their new ships have kept pace in tonnage, if
not in gun-power, with our own later vessels.
The Admiralty voted four battleships in 1910 :—“Audacious,
Ajax,” “Centurion,” and “King George V.,” and one battle-
cruiser, “Queen Mary.” In 1911 four more battleships: “Iron
Duke,” “Marlborough,” “Emperor of India,” and “Benbow,”
and the battle-cruiser “Tiger.” In 1912 four fast battleships, and
another, which was presented by the Malay States : “Queen
Elizabeth,” “Warspite,” “Valiant,” “Barham,” and “Malaya,”
and five in 1913 : “Royal Sovereign,” “Royal Oak,” “Ramillies,”
Revenge,” and “Resolution”—again all battleships.
Meanwhile, from 1906 onwards, the Germans had been building
two light cruisers a year, rising from the “Emden,” of 3,592 tons,
in that year, to the 4,832-ton “Karlsruhe ” of 1911, and subsequent
ships. The British built five in 1908, four in 1909, and three each
in 1910 and 1911. In 1912 a new class of “destroyers of
destroyers” was begun, and eight voted in each of the next three
years. All the British light cruisers were heavier and more


powerfully armed than the German boats of the same type, but
were, perhaps, not so swift. The Germans built a dozen destroyers
a year; the British sixteen. The Germans were outnumbered by
about two to one in submarines year by year. Such were the
comparative building programmes of Britain and Germany,
Thirteen of the sixteen German, and nineteen of the twenty-
seven British light cruisers, were given out to contract. Krupp
and the Weser Company had the best share of the German work,
Wm. Beardmore and Co., Ltd., of the British —seven boats. All
the British vessels were built by firms in the “ring.”
The British destroyers were built by eleven firms, the German
by Krupp, the “Vulkan” and Schichau; our submarines mainly by
Vickers, a few by Armstrong Whitworth (Lebeuf type) and Scott,
Ltd., of Greenock (Laurenti), and by the Chatham Dockyard. The
Germans had theirs constructed by Krupp and the Danzig Dock-
yard.
The Germans were completely outclassed by the British alone,
without taking into account any of the Allied fleets. And not only
were there the ships provided for in the Admiralty’s own pro-
gramme, but there w r ere a number of other battleships which were
incorporated into the Navy when the war broke out, the circum-
stances of whose building and initiation were altogether extra-
ordinary. We have already referred to the mystery of the
Brazilian Dreadnoughts, which, after having been mooted in April,
1904, were ordered in April, 1907, and of which La Revue Mari-
time writes :
According to the Naval and Military Record, and a great
number of journals, if the horizon should darken at a given
moment, there is every reason to believe that in the presence
of menaces of a conflict, the English Government will have its
hand forced, and that it will be with these three ships, as with
the two battleships “Swiftsure” and “Triumph,” bought in
1903 of the Chilian Government.
The third battleship, “Rio de Janeiro,” was delayed, and on her,
it was said, the Elswick firm desired to mount i5-in. guns, at a
date more than a year previous to that when the Admiralty intro-
duced these weapons into our own Fleet. Brazil not consenting
to the gigantic expenditure that would have been entailed,
Armstrong Whitworth resolved to arm her with seven pairs of
12-inch guns. She was so full of improvements that the Engineer
conjectured she might inaugurate a new era in Dreadnought
building.
More remarkable still, she was laid down on 14th September,
1911, within two months of the Agadir incident; we have it on
the authority of Mr. Hurd that she was built to British Admiralty
specifications and that she was fortunately kept back in British
waters and not permitted to go out to the Turks as soon as she


was completed. Whereas the “Iron Duke” was built and com-
missioned in twenty-seven months, the writer saw the “Rio” on
trials off the Tyne thirty-four months after commencement.
Originally the “Rio de Janeiro,” she passed to the Turks in
December, 1913, the money being partly advanced by the Perier
Bank, of Paris, and, finally, she was taken over as the “Agincourt”
on the outbreak of war.
On 6th December, 1911, Vickers laid down the “Reshadieh”
for Turkey. She was of exactly the same type as the “Iron
Duke.” She, likewise, though commenced a month before the
“Iron Duke,” was still without armament and armour in June,
1914, when Jellicoe’s flagship had been in commission for two
months. The “Reshadieh” is now the “Erin.”
The “Almirante Latorre,” laid down at Elswick on 15th
December, 19x1, for Chili, and carrying ten 14 inch guns (like the
slightly anterior German battleships of 1911 should have had)
was, of course, designed as a reply to two Argentine battleships
and the Brazilian battleship, building on the next slipway. She is
now the “Canada.” Presumably, the “Almirante Cochrane,” her
sister-ship, laid down as soon as the “Rio de Janeiro” was
launched, may eventually become British.
It was very fortunate that these four ships were laid down in
the autumn and winter of 1911; that they so closely conform to
British type; and that three of them were nearly finished in the
summer of 1914. Of course, they figured in no official publication;
Parliament was in no way responsible for them. The Government,
disappointed of the three Canadian Dreadnoughts, and having in
consequence to accelerate the three contract ships—“Ramillies,”
“Resolution,” and “Revenge,” found these three just as if they
had dropped from heaven, ready to their hand. Again, we repeat,
it was one of the coincidences of history, proving that Providence
always favours those who fight for liberty.
Mr. Churchill had laid down in 1912 a constructional standard
of 60 per cent, superiority in Dreadnought ships over Germany.
Interviewed by the correspondent of the Giornale d'ltalia in the
autumn of 1914, he said :
“We started with a substantial naval preponderance, much
more like two to one than sixteen to ten. In the next twelve
months we shall have twice as many battleships completing
as Germany.”
Of course, Germany knew this. Germany would have been
only too glad to have had an equivalent if any one but Greece would
have been foolish enough to go to her builders to order an
assortment of vessels having a questionable battle utility.


The Navies of other Belligerents
One of the most curious circumstances of modern naval and
military development and international relations was the
dependence of the Italians in all that pertained to the fleet and
artillery construction not upon the resources of their German ally,
but on those of Britain and France. Nothing was more inexplicable
than the reliance placed by the Italian Government, itself weak in
those forms of national wealth so essential to political and economic
independence, not upon Krupp and the German firms, but upon
Vickers, Armstrong Whitworth and the French armament makers
at a period when British and French Ministers of Marine were
telling their Parliaments of the necessity of taking account, in the
framing of all programmes, of the increase of the Italian Navy.
France had assisted Russia in the construction of her navy
ever since the Alliance had been consummated. Britain had given
similar advice and aid to Japan, and Germany was collaborating
with Austria and Turkey; but Italy was the one exception to the
general rule. For full half a century Italy has relied on the ship-
builders and armament makers of Britain. Formerly, she gave
her secondary orders to Germany, and, latterly, to France. From
1898 to 1909 Italy called a halt in her naval construction, but in
March of the latter year, a new programme was announced. It
was expected that 200,000,000 francs would be voted. For coast
defences, 70,000,000 francs; for munitions, 8,000,000 francs; for
the navy, 122,000,000 francs. This was the year after Austria
annexed Bosnia-Herzegovina.
In June, 1909, the “Dante Alighieri’’ was commenced—ltaly’s
first Dreadnought. In 1910 three more Dreadnoughts were com-
menced, and in 1912 and 1913 two Dreadnoughts a year. The
armour-plate was ordered from the Societa di Terni, but most of
it was actually furnished by the firms of Sheffield and Manchester
and by the Bethlehem and Carnegie Steel Companies.
The great gun-mountings of the “Dante Alighieri” and the
“Leonardo da Vinci” were manufactured in Barrow, and there is
strong ground for believing that the 15-inch gun-mountings of the
latest Dreadnoughts were in the Vickers shops in the middle of
1914. That is to say, the essential parts of the Italian battleships


were being- supplied from this country by British makers at a time
when Italy was allied with Germany.
Italy has several great armament and war shipbuilding com-
panies. First is Armstrong-Pozzuoli, Ltd., of Naples. This
concern was founded by Armstrong at the express request of the
Italian Ministry of Marine in 1884, and Mr. George Rendel resigned
his position as Additional Sea Lord of the Admiralty to go out to
be resident manager. The Rome manager was Captain Albini,
late of the Italian Navy, afterwards Senator Albini. In 1895 all
the workmen were Italians, but the foremen were English. The
managers were Italians, but the ownership was entirely in the
hands of Armstrong Whitworth from its incorporation as a
separate company in 1896. It was long in fierce competition with
Gio. Ansaldo and Co,, of Genoa, a firm of shipbuilders and arma-
ment makers, founded in 1853 by order of Count Cavour, and later
directed by Signor Perrone. In 1903 Armstrong Whitworth —
In view of their long connection with the Italian Govern-
ment, and in order to strengthen the position of the company
at Pozzuoli, and in other quarters . . . acquired an
interest in the firm. (A.-W. Annual Report, September, 1904.)
In 1911 the official title of the company was La Societa Anonima
Italiana Gio Ansaldo-Armstrong ed Co.
During the last four years shops have been erected at Sestri
Ponente for making armour-plate and naval guns, and extensions
were also made about 1910 at Pozzuoli.
Pozzuoli uses Terni steel. The Societa di Terni was also
founded in 1884 as La Societa degli Alti, Forni, ed Fondieri,
Acciaeri di Terni. In 1902 Orlando Bros., shipbuilders, of
Leghorn; Odero and Co., shipbuilders, of Genoa, and the Societa
di Terni purchased the Elban Iron Mines and formed a great
metallurgical syndicate. In 1905 these mid Vickers decided to
erect a gun works at Spezia
to complete in Italy the means of satisfying, in conjunction
with the Armstrong Works at Pozzuoli, the requirements of
the Government ... in all that relates to gun and
armament material. —{ Vickers' Prospectus, 1908.)
In 1905.
This was the Societa Italiana Artiglieria ed Armament!
Vickers-Terni, whose chairman is Albert Vickers.
In 1906, Odero and Orlando Bros, formed the Cantieri Navali
Reuniti (United Naval Shipyards) at Genoa, and Palmer’s Ship-
building and Engineering Co., Ltd., joined with La
d’Automobiles “Rapid,” of Turin, to form the Savoyan Motor-
Boat Works.
In addition to these, Vickers-Terni and their combination were
interested in the Fiat San Giorgio Co. at Muggiano (builders of
submarines, etc.).


For all these concerns the British firms provided “technical”
and “financial assistance,” raw material, etc., etc.
So much for Italy.
About 1909 Vickers and Armstrong- Whitworth joined with
the Hokkaido Colliery Company and certain Japanese naval
officers to form the Muroran Steel Foundry for the supply of guns,
armour, and forgings for Japanese ships. This also was only a
subsidiary, through which the British firms and, chiefly, Armstrong
Whitworth maintained their grip on Japanese custom.
The Rothschilds of Japan, the Mitui Bussan Kaisha, meanwhile
acted as agents of Vickers until they were involved in the
unsavoury “Kongo” scandals.
The Japan Explosives Co., Ltd., had a. small works near Tokio
and acted as agent for the explosives manufacturing interests who
owned it—Armstrong Whitworth and the Nobel Dynamite Trust.
In 1910 Japan undertook the construction of four battleship-
cruisers, amongst them being the “Kongo” and the “Hiyei,” in
connection with whose contracts Vickers and other British arma-
ment firms were seen in somewhat unfavourable light.
About this time Japan also laid down several giant battleships.
So multitudinous have been the interests operating in the
rehabilitation of Russian naval and military power, and giving to
this Empire with undeveloped industries their financial, technical
and manufacturing assistance, that one hesitates to attempt an
analysis.
Russia needed completely to reconstruct her navy after the
Eastern debacle, and was caught by Germany with the task yet
far from achievement. Her expenditure on this count rose from
87,700,000 roubles in 1907 to 250,398,000 roubles in 1914.
In Russia had ordered a heavy-armoured cruiser, the
Runk, from Vickers, but after that there was a cessation of
new building for some time. In March, 1906, however, the Czar
sanctioned a programme to be spread over a period of nine years
and in the summer of 1907 Admiral Skrydloff came to Paris to
make arrangements for the reconstruction of the Russian fleet. It
was said in the British Press at the time that France insisted that
she was entitled to the greater part of the orders for new warships.
The granting of orders for warships in France being one of
the conditions attached to the floating of a new Russian loan
in i* ranee. (A aval and Military Record , 6th June.)
Russia wanted to have her ships built partly in Germany and
partly in Britain a very tactful bargain for her ! As Russia was
to spend 1,600,000,000 francs on her navy in seven or eight years
it was quite reasonable that the Credit Lyonnais, the Comptoir
d Escompte, the Union Pansienne and the Perier Bank should
watch the interests of the Acieries de la Marine, the Chantiers de


la M£diterrann6e, Schneider and the Chantiers de la Gironde, to
whom they were respectively related.
There was considerable delay in the commencement of the
Russian warships. In 1908 it was resolved that they must be
built in Russia, of Russian materials and by native labour.
Previously, the choice of builders had narrowed down from British,
French, and German, to British and Italians, and now was
restricted to Russian yards. Again and again the Duma refused
to vote the Naval Budgets, but finally orders were placed, workers
were engaged, the Baltic and New Admiralty Yards entered into
agreements with John Brown and Co., Ltd., late in 1908, and on
16th June, 1909, the keels of four battle-cruisers were laid. In
October, 1911, three battleships were begun for the Black Sea
Fleet, two at the Nikoliaev Dockyard, and one in a private yard
there.
Two of these were built under the supervision of John Brown
and Co., and the other at the Nikoliaev yard of Vickers, Ltd.,
who had leased a Russian establishment originally put down by a
group of Belgian financiers in 1895.
The Putilov Ordnance Works, La Metallurgique de Petrograd,
The Russian Society, and Lange Becker and Co., were all busily
employed on the construction of cruisers and destroyers,
Lange Becker and Co. is a mere branch of Normand et Cie, of
Havre; the Franco-Russian Works, which engined two of the
Baltic Dreadnoughts, is controlled by the St. Chamond Co.,
Marrel Bros, and the Chatillon-Commentry Co,, of France. La
Providence Russe & Mariupol is another Chatillon-Commentry
subsidiary. Schneider dominated the Russian Society, and are
involved in the Mytovilinsky Arsenal at Perm.
The great French companies, together with Vickers and John
Brown, have been steadily driving the German interests out of
Russia for some years past.
Skoda had tried in vain to secure a concession for a steel works
adjoining the Putilov and Nevski Works at Petrograd and, pro-
bably, had the war been a little longer deferred, Putilov would,
with the help of Vickers and Creusot, have become much less
dependent on Krupp for its steel supplies. There is reason to
believe that the armour-plate works at “Nikopol-Mariupol were also
dependent largely on Krupp for raw steel.
In naval, as well as in military, requirements Russia has been
terribly handicapped by the undeveloped nature of her metallurgical
and armament works. For much of her raw materials she has
been dependent on Germany and Austria, whence also she has
obtained many machine tools. Guns, engines, and armour have
had to be imported in large quantities from Britain and France,
with the result that when war broke out she became virtually
isolated and deprived of the essentials of naval armament.


It was for this reason that her immense expenditure of recent
years and her colossal preparations availed her so little. Germany
struck before Russia had time to complete her new establishments,
let alone to set them to work.
In 1912 Russian naval outlay rose 55,000,000 roubles; in 1913
another 62,000,000 roubles, and in 1914 by 22,000,000. For
1913-14 the Russian Naval Budget was only behind that
of Germany.
For the time being the advantage accrued most obviously to
the Franco-British owners of armament and steel works.
The share values of the Nikopol Mariupol Works rose from
50J in 1909 to in 1913; of the Putilov Works, from in
1908 to in 1913, and the dividends of La Metallurgique de
Petrograd rose from nil in 1909 to 12 per cent, in 1912.
As Russian expenditure on the Navy rose, so did that of France,
and with its increase went the improvement of French armament
dividends.
From the spring of 1905 there had been a growing tendency in
France to demand and to undertake increases of naval preparation.
The estimates of 1906 provided for the construction of six battle-
ships, which were commenced, four in 1907 and two in 1908. Thus
M. Thomson completely reversed the economist policy of M.
Pelletan, the Radical, and prepared the way for a great naval
revival in France. In 1906 the French main fleet was stationed at
Toulon, and only three battleships and six cruisers were maintained
in the Channel. At the same time the Minister of Marine stated
that twenty more battleships were needed. The autumn of 1908
saw in France, as in England, an agitation for naval re-organisa-
tion, and in January, 1909, Liberty foretold a sensational increase
in the near future. When our alarmists were shouting “We want
Eight !” Le Temps was bemoaning the “complete stagnation” of
the French fleet. The same week that Mr. M’Kenna announced
that the four contingent battleships would be laid down, Admiral
Bou6 de Lapeyr£re became Minister of Marine in France, and began
to frame his new proposals. The new programme for 1910 was
to be increased by 38,000,000 francs, and there were to be Supple-
mentary Estimates for three new battleships, and in the same
autumn, the dockyards, private shipyards and armament firms
began their preparations. In February, the Cabinet approved the
draft Bill for twenty-eight battleships and armoured cruisers to
Compose the fighting fleet, and ten cruisers for distant service, to
be ready by 1922. When the Radicals and Socialists began to
secure modifications in the scheme, Lapeyr£re resolved on
an Organic Navy Law, which should remove French naval expen-
diture from the Chamber of Deputies, in the way that the Navy
Law of 1900 had removed German naval expenditure from the
control of the Reichstag.


“To settle the programme of construction for the next ten
years, and once for all the class of ships, as well as the
construction of the fleets required by France, is the aim in
view, and, indeed, it seems the only means of safeguarding
the position of the Republican Navy among naval Powers, and
of ensuring the rational employment of the Navy Estimates.
(Naval atid Military Record. 16th February, 1910.)
The new law which was passed in 1910 provided for the main-
tenance of two squadrons in the Mediterranean and merely
stationed a coast-defence force in the Channel, where, said the
Naval Annual, 1910 —
doubtless the Admiral anticipates that France will find a naval
ally.
In 1912 M. Delcasse, when Minister of Marine, decided that
the programme should be completed by 1919, instead of 1922, and
that not two but four ships should be commenced in 1913. These
were to be ready by the summer of 19x6.
In 1913 M. Delcass6 was succeeded by M. Baudin, President
of the French Navy League, who brought in amendments for the
construction of three more battleships and for acceleration. In
the same year, Chamber and Senatorial Committees approved a
Supplementary Programme of eight battleships, and the Chief
Secretary to the Marine desired to have not twenty-eight, but an
establishment of fifty-four battleships. France was, avowedly,
setting out to compete with Germany “at sea as well as on land.”
In 1914 the French Vote for new construction was
that of Germany £'10,674,033. The 1913 ships were to cost
,£3,400,000 each, and were to carry twelve 13.4-inch guns. More
work was being given out to the private builders, and the “absurd
monopoly” of the State arsenals on every hand was being broken
down.
The armament firms, since 1903, associated together in two
great syndicated chambers of warship builders and makers of war
material, were reaping great profits from the revival of naval
extravagance as well as military preparedness.
La Soci6te de la Marine increased its profits from 6,817,000
francs in 1908 to 13,567,000 francs in 1913; Les Ateliers de St.
Nazaire from 2,229,000 francs in 1908 to 4,034,000 in 1912; the
Chatillon-Commentry Cie. from 7,756,000 francs in 1908 to
13,162,000 in 1912. In 1913 Schneider et Cie. paid 20 per cent,
and their 360 franc shares were selling at 2,210 francs.
The armament providers of all the belligerents were enjoying
a great period of prosperity from naval contracts, but more par-
ticularly those of the Entente Powers.
Germany and Austria were by no means keeping pace in the
contest for sea power, and the war came with Austria in a very
defenceless position on the sea. Her Dreadnoughts, like those of


Russia, were only slowly completing, and her programmes were
being deferred by the scarcity of money she had to spare for this
arm of her forces.
Four Dreadnoughts were building at Trieste and Fiume, but
it is doubtful whether these were finished before 1915. There
were constant rumours of new construction for some years before
the war, but these always died away when the question of expendi-
ture was brought forward.
Except for submarines and destroyers, the Austrian Navy
hardly counts at all.
As for the Turkish Fleet, this was so effectively organised and
provided for by the mission sent out by the British Admiralty in
December, 1908, when Admiral Douglas Gamble became Naval
Adviser to the Turkish Government, that the “Reshadieh” was
ordered of Vickers, Ltd., and put in hand in December, 1911; the
“Rio de Janeiro” was purchased from Brazil in December, 19x3,
for about part of the money being advanced by the
Perier Bank, of Paris, the ship being renamed “Sultan Osman”;
and the “Fatih” ordered from and commenced at Barrow in the
spring of 1914.
The ships w'ere contracted for by private arrangement with the
British group, which, subsequently, leased the Stamboul Arsenal
and Dockyard for a period of years, formed the Imperial Ottoman
Armament and Dry Dock Co., with directors appointed by Vickers,
Armstrong Whitworth and the Sublime Porte, and was busy
reorganising the Dockyard when hostilities put an end to their
efforts.
The “Reshadieh” had already become the “Erin,” and the
“Sultan Osman” the “Agincourt,” and both ships went to swell
the Grand Fleet. The workmen came back from Constantinople,
and Vickers and Armstrong Whitworth refunded such bonds as
had been called up.


Military Equipment—1904-1914
There is much less to be said concerning the military armaments
of the period 1904-1914 than about the naval preparations, and this
for several reasons.
Naval armaments are, by their nature, more spectacular, and
have been more interesting and important to the English-speaking
world. There has been no great attempt to conceal the develop-
ments of warship construction and, had there been, it would have
been well-nigh impossible to keep secret the general characteristics
and numbers of any but the submarine flotillas. Dreadnoughts,
cruisers and destroyers cannot be built without attracting atten-
tion, and cannot very easily be kept in a semi-manufactured condi-
tion. The primary armament of capital ships is standardized by the
design and stability of the vessels. Before a fleet can have its
13.5 * n - guns replaced by 15 in. guns a new class of warships must
be evolved at enormous cost, and prodigious constructional effort.
Flotillas of light cruisers and ocean-going destroyers cannot be
built, and held in reserve from the eyes of enquiring neighbours.
Only submarines lend themselves to secret construction and,
though both Britain and Germany were building these in numbers
unspecified in their published programmes during the months
before the war, in this country, at any rate, the mere layman was
able to make a fairly accurate estimate of the number building and
the rate at which they were forthcoming. The exact nature of
their torpedo armament and gun power was, however, capable of
concealment.
But all the large craft, on which sea-power still ultimately
depends, require so long to build and complete that a sudden spurt
of effort can never be left until the outbreak of hostilities, when
the cloak of privacy comes down on all that the Admiralties are
doing.
This publicity is not, however, an essential of military prepara-
tions. Here it is possible to keep a very great deal of information
from percolating into undesirable channels. Espionage and the
transmigration of technical secrets had become so general in
Europe before the war that every new device was most carefully
safeguarded, and the intricacies of breech-mechanism, of loading,


of recoil absorption, and of fuse adjustment were treasured and
kept from prying - gaze more resolutely than the mysteries of
Eleusis.
France and Germany, Austria and Russia, each sought to keep
from each other’s artillery, transport and engineering corps the
continuous improvements of their armament and supply services
and to worm out the jealously-kept secrets of their rivals.
The artillery journals of the last decade tell us infinitely less
than those of the “eighties” and “nineties.” For all the inter-
locking of armament control and the common interests of capitalist
salesmen, official secrets seem rarely to have escaped from the
bureaux of the great contractors to those of their associates. They
“pooled” their supplies of raw material; they worked many
patents in common; they participated in profit-sharing but, save to
the allies of their country, their intimate secrets were absolutely
barred.
There have been three cycles of field artillery rearmament in
the last twenty years. The first of these marked the definite
adoption of the quick-firing gun, between 1896 and 1899. The
second of these comes between 1903 and 1906, and the third,
between 1909-19 12.
In fact, no sooner was one cycle of armament completed than
some country began a reorganisation, in which all others joined.
For thirty years, the belligerents in this present struggle have,
every five or six years entirely overhauled their military arma-
ments. Maybe, they began by rearming their field artillery and
then provided new batteries of howitzers. Next their fortresses
and coast defences called for attention, and these would no sooner
be dealt with than a new pattern rifle and a more rapid-firing
machine gun engrossed their care. Germany’s field artillery would
be outclassed by some new Schneider weapons, and then Krupp and
Ehrhardt would readjust the balance whereupon Chatillon-
Commentry regained the lead and Skoda, meanwhile, made a St.
Chamond howitzer of no avail. So the merry, mad business went
its ruinous way.
The Russian field artillery was completely armed by Putilov in
1903, before the Japanese War. In 1911-12, a reorganisation was
begun. A Schneider mountain-gun was adopted, probably for use
in the Carpathians and Caucasus, and in 1913, a Schneider gun for
the horse artillery. Only 138 guns had been supplied when war
broke out. The supply of the new Deport field gun was scarcely
even commenced. This was to have been made by the Russian
Artillery Co., at Tsarytsin on the Volga, where Vickers Ltd.,
together with the leading banks of Petrograd, were to manu-
facture artillery on the Deport system of the Chatillon-Commentry
Co. The raw materials were to come from England, the steel from
French subsidiaries in Russia, and the technical direction was to


be afforded by Vickers and the French firm. The new company
had scarcely begun work when war broke out.
.. Rl ? s,a ’ s hea 'T material was, and is derived from Putilov and
bouchoff, as well as from the Izhora Steel Works and Perm
Arsenal The War Department also has a gun factory at Petro-
grad (the Alexandrovsk Works). Her explosives were obtained
rom Ochta and about half-a-score other great powder factories.
f " e ., source supply was the Russische Gesellschaft fur Pulver-
tabnk, an offshoot of the übiquitous Koln Rottweiler Pulverfabrik
Another was La Society Franco-Russe.
Her small arms factories are mainly grouped around Toula,
near Moscow, where the industry dates back to 1696, and the
reign of Peter the Great; but, probably, the shutting off of
German and British machine tool supplies has been felt
disastrously.
Russia has dozens of steel works and arms factories, foundries
and explosives sheds, but none of them are highly developed, and
very tew are independent of foreign sources of supply and technical
assistance.
Italy is much less at the mercy of other countries, but her works
are mainly supported by foreign capital. Formerly she relied
greatly on Germany but, during the last ten years she has come
to lean more and more on British and French armament resources.
We have already spoken of her naval yards and workshops,
in 1906 finding its Terni designed field guns unsatisfactory!
Italy placed orders with Krupp for 105 batteries. Before Krupp
had completed delivery, which was to be by November, 1911, Italy
adopted m 1910 the Schneider and Deport systems of field artillery.
Uith the earlier armament unfinished, our southern allv voted
£2,0 00,000 for the new systems.
The Schneider patents were leased to Gio. Ansaldo Armstrong
and Go., of Genoa, and experts were loaned them until they could
collect a skilled staff of their own.
I he Vickers-Terni Works at Spezzia secured the lease of the
Deport patents from the Chatillon-Commentry Co. in 1911, and
were making the gun-parts in their own departments, sending
them across to the State Arsenal to be assembled under the super-
vision of the Italian artillery officers.
Terni was making rifles in 1912 and Armstrong-Pozzuoli
supplied nearly all the heavy howitzers, siege guns, and fortress
artillery for the Alpine defences, on which great sums were being
spent between 1909 and 1914, when the Pozzuoli and Sampiaderna
works of Armstrong were being greatly extended.
France, who put her reliance and, certainly, her undue reliance
on quick-firing field artillery, undertook a great reorganisation
of her artillery to be completed by March, 1911. She provided
many additional field-gun batteries, chiefly on the Schneider


system, the famous “75.” In 1913, yet another increase of field
artillery was undertaken, and the French appear to have put their
trust in this arm to an extraordinary degree, P'or some reason
or other, the heavy howitzers projected in 1911 were not proceeded
with, and the war found France without those great guns where-
with Krupp had so liberally supplied Germany.
France seems, however, to have been fairly well equipped with
machine guns, chiefly of the Hotchkiss and Nordenfeldt types, but
not to the same extent as Germany. Her outlay on and provision
of armoured motor cars, motor gun-carriages, and motor trans-
port appears to have been adequate and, here, Schneider and the
other armament firms were well supplemented by the highly-
developed motor industries of the Republic,
Belgium’s artillery was equipped partly by Krupp but mainly
by Cockerill, of Seraing, who were given large orders in the spring
of 1904, and her small arms were furnished partly by the State
factory at Li£ge and partly by La Fabrique Nationale des Armes
de Guere & Liege, a company almost entirely German in owner-
ship and control, lessees of the Mauser rifle patents. One of the
grim ironies of the war was the spirited defence of this factory at
Herstal by its employes against German infantry armed with the
Mausers of their own employers’ home manufacture !
Serbia’s artillery is of Schneider manufacture, and Bulgaria’s
weapons in the Balkan campaigns were also of Schneider manu-
facture.
In fact, during the Balkan wars, Krupp artillery received a
rude shock to its prestige, and much alarm was felt and expressed
in German military circles at the extraordinary success of the
French field guns.
Schneider and Krupp, all through the first Balkan war,
engaged in an astounding campaign of inspired newspaper
advertisements of the merits of their respective weapons, their
subsidised press agencies and cable services providing the journals
of Oriental and other minor Powers with lengthy dissertations on
the prodigious destruction wrought by their several productions.
Seven of the minor Powers resorted to Schneider, and eleven to
Krupp for their artillery, and the former was resorting to the most
amazing devices to equalise and gain the advantage.
Totally inadequate as were Germany’s preparations to assert
her influence upon the seas or to safeguard her commerce, her
military armaments have been developed on a gigantic and very
cleverly executed plan. The technique of German militarism is
extraordinary, and the machine has been brought to the highest
pitch of efficiency. The rapidity with which her armies took the
field at the outbreak of war; the adequacy of every grade of
ammunition and of all manner of stores; the overwhelming
number and weight of her artillery; the multiplicity of her machine


guns and the readiness with which her commanders have accus-
tomed themselves to the changing conditions or transferred army
corps after corps from one front to another, have seemed the
wonder works of some latter-day Caesar, adding to his incompar-
able genius as strategist all the devices of mechanical barbarism.
System characterises the German administration from top to
bottom, and the war-machine is supported by all the resources of
the most highly developed capitalism in the world. Finance,
diplomacy, industry, science, have all been co-ordinated, and over
the ground which they have made ready, the great General Staff
has executed the plans patiently and thoroughly worked out during
Jong years of intensive study.
The writer believes that Germany has had a clear idea all along
in which direction she would move when her neighbours began too
much to circle her about, and exert too severe a pressure on either
frontier. He does not believe that, the Kaiser’s rhetoric and
Tirpitz’ ambitions notwithstanding, Germany has contemplated a
future on and beyond the ocean or that her Moroccan and African
diplomacy was other than a manoeuvre to deflect her rivals from
the true line of her advance into Western Asia.
He draws the conclusion from a very careful study of her naval
policy that however willing she may have been to persuade France
and, especially, Britain that she was seeking her future on the sea,
she has been continuously preparing for expansion in a direction
where her military strength would avail her most and Britain’s sea-
power would be of least account, viz. : through the Balkans to
Syria and Persia.
That way opens before her the surest prospects of success and
the minimum of effective opposition.
All her allies are nations with traditions military rather than
naval; all are weak in industrial and commercial development, and
two of them are seriously menaced by powerful neighbours to
north-east and south-west.
In this war, and in the preparations for it, these allies have
been almost entirely dependent on Germany for their military
equipment, and have fallen under the industrial domination and
financial overlordship of their mighty protector. From them, the
metallurgists, machinists, chemists, and commercial classes of
Germany have come more and more to realise they would have to
draw the raw materials of manufacture and trade which should
sustain in war-time the industrial power of the Fatherland.
The Germans have made exceptionally good use of their rail-
ways, and have owed no small part of their success to the
excellence of their communications, now continuous from Lille to
the borders of Egypt and to the middle of Russia. Their railways
they have supplemented by the river carriage of the Rhine,


Danube, and Tigris, and by an immense utilisation of motor trans-
port.
The Deutsche and Dresdner Banks and the Wiener Bankverem
have formed railway companies and secured concessions to open
up the Balkans and Asia Minor, and then have secured immense
orders for material and rolling stock from these concerns for the
numerous steel works and rolling mills in which they are jointly
or severally involved. Almost all Turkish Government orders for
railway material and public works have been given to Germans tor
many years back, and the most valuable mineral concessions have
likewise been secured by the Deutsche, Disconto Gesellschaft,
Darmstadter, Dresdner, and National Banks for their metal-
lurgical subsidiaries in Westphalia, Silesia, Moravia, and Bohemia.
From about 1900 onwards, the Ottoman Government showed a
predilection for Krupp artillery in place of that of Armstrong
Whitworth for naval as well as military purposes. With the excep-
tion of material seized from Serbia at the outbreak of the hrst
Balkan war, nearly all the field gun, howitzer and mountain
artillery of Turkey is of Krupp manufacture. About forty
batteries of field artillery had been ordered from Vickers Ltd. in
1914 and was in process of manufacture in Sheffield during the
summer, but, of course, was added to the rather scanty equipment
of the British Army. The lighter arms were almost all of German
origin, the rifles being Mausers and Mannhchers.
Whereas Turkey had a complete field gun armament from
Krupp of 1904 pattern, Bulgaria had a Schneider equipment ot
1 got;—but that was in the anti-Turkish days. All her land arma-
ment was of Schneider make, and it is only since the First Balkan
War that Bulgaria has had guns from Germany. Hitherto, as
the protege of Russia, she was a patron of Schneider et Cie.
Austria, whilst still nominally independent, appears to have
fallen entirely under the control of Germany in matters military an
naval. This is merely an extension of a process that had alre aay
gone very far in the direction of her armament firms, and which
has been most characteristic of the last dozen or fifteen years.
The greatest of all the armament firms of Austria is the
Skodawerice, of Pilsen. This was founded by Emil von Skoda in
1869 as a steel foundry, and remained a purely commercial yenutre
until 1886, when Skoda began the production of armour-plate for
land defences. In 1888, he supplied his first howitzer mounting
for a 5.9 inch mortar, and secured the patent of a new machine
gun.
In 1889, he began to manufacture the field and other artillery
which the Russian armament outlay determined Austria to provide
forthwith. In 1896, new gun-shops were erected, and the con-
struction of naval ordnance was begun. Skoda capitalised his hrm


before his death in 1900 and floated it as a company with the aid
of the Credit Anstalt and the Bohemischen Escomptebank.
In 1903, the close relations for some time maintained with
Krupp were given concrete expression in an agreement providing
for the interchange of gun-patents, and Skoda became, virtually, a
subsidiary of Krupp. Next year they both became involved in
the Putilov Works, to which they supplied gun-steel, even if they
did not interchange patents with them.
I his arrangement, no doubt, worked out disastrously for the
Russians when “the best smelted steel of Krupp” was no longer
available owing to war.
As late as 1908, Gio. Ansaldo Armstrong and Co., of Genoa,
submitted to Spain a ship plan with guns of Skoda type. This
Skoda firm had iron mines in Cumberland, and in 1912, together
with the Hartenberger Cartridge Co. and the Oesterreichische
Waffenfabrik secured orders for artillery and small arms from
China in return for the Joan of money by its Viennese bankers. It
was in a fair way to become as übiquitous as Krupp.
In 1909 —the year after the Bosnian crisis—great extensions
were made at Pilsen, and the State placed orders worth
7,000,000 kronen, which were to be completed by 1914. In 1912,
the artillery and machine shops were again enlarged, and next year
the company entered into an agreement with the Hungarian
Government to erect a great ordnance works at Gyor, in which the
State should invest 7,000,000 and the firm 6,000,000 kronen.
The Skodawerke is also closely related to the Oesterreichische
Daimler Motoren Gesellschaft, whose chairman is Von Skoda.
In 1912, the Skoda Co. began to mount its heavy howitzers on
Daimler motor carriages, and it was these monstrous 28c. pieces
which wrought such awful havoc on the Belgian and Polish
fortresses.
Another great Austrian munitions factory is the Witkowitz
Coal and Iron Co. of Moravia, which normally employs about
20,000 men, and makes armour, gun-tubes, shells, cupolas, and
gun-mountings.
It is a participant in the Steel Manufacturers’ Nickel Syndicate
Ltd., of Vickers House, Westminster.
Yet another large firm is the Oesterreichische Waffenfabrik, of
Steyer, at whose head was Mannlicher, and which supplies his
famous rifle to the Austrian Army. This works dates from 1830.
The original owner, Werndl, had his rifle accepted in 1867, the
year after the Austrians had learned the terrible effect of the
Dreyse needle-gun at Sadowa, and had incorporated his company
in 1869, In 1878, this works had a war capacity of 500,000 rifles
and bayonets a year, and employed more than 3000 men. There,
are made Mauser, Gras, and Mannlicher rifles, and the company is
now associated with the Deutsche Waffen und Munitions-
fabriken, and Gebr, Bohler and Co.


Dr. Paul von Gontard, managing director of the German com-
pany is the connecting link here, as in so many other enterprises.
The Nobel dynamite combination also has works at Prague,
The bewildering syndication of the German metallurgical trades
related to the Loewe-Krupp-Nobel interests seems to be endless,
and the ramifications and international relationships well-nigh
infinite.
Associated with this three-headed monster, and dominated by
Lowe, is the Daimler Motoren Gesellschaft, which, in turn, con-
trolled the Mercedes Soci6t£ Franchise d’Automobiles k Paris, which
trades in France and the French Colonies. It was represented
here by the Milnes-Daimler Merc6d£s Co. Ltd., which was con-
trolled on this side by the Chilworth Gunpowder Co. Ltd., a sub-
sidiary held by Vickers, Armstrong Whitworth, Nobels, and the
Koln Rottweil Pulverfabrik. Indirectly, it had a large holding in
the Oesterreichische Daimler Motoren Gessellschaft. This
Austrian associate of the Skoda Werke also had British connec-
tions, owning, half the share capital of the Beardmore Austro-
Daimler Aero Engine Co. Ltd., whose other owner was Wm.
Beardmore and Co. Ltd., and whose work is executed by the Arrol-
Johnston Ltd., of Dumfries, a concern in which Sir Wm. Beard-
more holds three-fourths of the shares.
To Krupp, for the innumerable batteries of all the many
differentiations of his artillery from the trench mortar and the tiny
mountain gun to the immense howitzers, with which they have
shelled Dunquerque at 25 miles range; to Ehrhardt, for his field
guns, and his many pattern pieces; to the Deutsche Waffen-
fabrik, for the bewildering parks of machine guns and the thousand
thousand automatic rifles, magazine rifles, and myriad rounds of
small arm ammunition; to Daimler, Augsburg-Nurnberg, and
others, for the colossal fleets of transport wagons to the Koln
Rottweil and others of the “Pulver Kartel” for high explosives and
charges, to these the Imperial Government has turned, not to
many each working for itself but to one highly-organised system
of collaborators, operating together for common ends, at once, for
private gain and national strength.
It is not easy to review the more recent preparations of
Germany for military warfare. One reads of army corps decreed,
of barracks and depbts constructed, of millions voted but little of
how they were spent in the factories of the armament firms.
In April, 1912, a new Army Bill was brought into the Reichstag
to provide for two new army corps, one on the east, the other on
the west, and other increases to absorb an extra up
to 1917.
These were explained as being changes render ed necessary by
the shifting of the balance in the Near East consequent on the
•weakening of Turkey.


It was this which provided the official case for the French rever-
sion to the Three Years’ Service decided upon on March 4th, 1913,
this and the impending- increases threatened by Germany. This was
to add 230,000 men to her peace strength, a non-recurring expendi-
ture of 440,000,000 francs, a lowering of the age for enlistment
from 21 to 20, anl a further 144,000,000 francs to the annual cost
of the army.
Within a month, a new Army Bill was published in Germany
providing for an increase of 136,000 men, for the calling up of
63,000 more recruits a year, for three more regiments of garrison
artillery, for many more machine gun companies, for a non-
recurring expenditure of and an annual increase of
500,000 on the Army Vote.
Betthmann-Hollweg blamed this on the French Three-Year
Service reform and a Russian Army reorganisation “such as she
never had before.”
Germany was arming and rearming herself to the teeth, and
must have been giving far more attention to her material than any
of her neighbours credited to her. From 1912 to 1914 Europe’s
forges and machine shops roared and shrilled with the growing
pace of armament preparations,
Woolwich Arsenal was working day and night on shells, and
Vickers Ltd. had enough orders in July, 1914, to keep them on full
time for two years. The presses of Sheffield groaned with work
on projectiles for Italy, Turkey, Russia, and Britain. Russia was
rearming her artillery, adding new army corps and considering the
expenditure of £ 260,000,000 on strategical railways on the Polish
frontiers. In June, 1914, she set aside for the year’s
needs of her Army alone. Belgium was introducing Universal
Service in the winter of 1912-13, and increasing her peace strength
from 35,000 to 57,034 men in 1914-15, Her 1913 contingent was
increased from 19,000 to 32,000, and her war strength to 330,000
men. Already the conduct of military operations and mobilisa-
tion had been transferred in March, 1912, from the War Minister
to a General Staff, a change which our Annual Register (p. 358)
describes as “considered a victory for the militarists.”
Austria was calling up 31,300 more recruits, and had kept half
her army mobilised during much of 1912-13.
Everywhere the drums of Armageddon were rolling more
insistently for a struggle now not long to be deferred.


The Coming of War
When, in August, 1914, modern European civilisation seemed
suddenly to collapse, and the primal instincts of men to leap up
in the horror of a world-wide war, it was really nothing else but
the culmination of a mighty struggle which had become intensified
with each succeeding year. When Germany and Austria faced
Britain, France and Russia on the battlefields the belligerent
Powers were only continuing an old quarrel in a new and more
destructive manner. The organisations of conflicting interests
represented by the several States and Empires had really been at
silent but eventually ruinous war for many years. Just as new
nations have come into the conflict since the commencement of
active hostilities, so neutral Powers joined France or Germany in
the preceding stages of diplomatic antagonism.
The invasion of Belgium, like the threat to Serbia, was only a
dramatic incident, which brought the difference to a head or pro-
voked a breach at the psychological moment.
Grave issues of economic interest had sooner or later to be
settled between the great capitalist groups dominating the Central
Powers and the Quadruple Entente. Not merely outlets for pro-
duction and areas of colonisation were the stakes for which the
Empires contended, but the essential supplies of raw material for
the industrial developments probable to ensue over years to come.
It was not so much the world-wide nature of commerce that
occasioned the Great War, but the change in production which
has come about in the last generation. Rival industrial groups
naturally endeavour to monopolise the best sources of raw material
and to shut their competitors off from access to supplies essential
to successful manufacture. It has been contended by many
economists that people do not trade as nationalists, and that dis-
tinctions of “my country’’ and “thy country” are utterly unreason-
able. Such ideas may be, and probably are, retrogressive and
should be combatted by all clear-sighted students of public affairs.
Nevertheless, as the world is organised to-day, and in the
present political chaos of jealous State systems, men and corpora-
tions do traffic as Britons and Germans in certain very important


industries. It is in the interest of the State to secure for its
munitioners the amplest, cheapest and rarest reserves of material,
and to encourage and assist them in this quest. Likewise, is it
in the interest of the State to cast every obstacle in the path of
the armament providers of any Government with which it is not,
for expediency, in alliance.
There are many who ridicule the idea that the armaments interest
has been largely responsible for the present war, and it is certainly
very easy to attribute too much importance to the machinations of
Krupp, Schneider, and Vickers. But the critics would do well to
think again before they speak and to examine the economics of
modern warfare. War is no longer a matter, on the munitions
side, of a few smooth-bore bronze or iron cannon firing a spherical
shot or a primitive case of shrapnel, grape or chain-shot with a
charge of black gunpowder; of a musket discharging about one
or at most, two bullets a minute, a few volleys and then a charge
with cold steel; a regular siege, of a ring-fortress, with mortars,
howitzers and siege train. The whole character of military trans-
p°rt is as utterly revolutionised as the traffic of our cities • the
facilities of defence and offence now utilise all the finest devices and
methods of the engineer, the electrician, and the chemist- the
wounded are not left to die of rot, or to become totally
incapacitated : they are repaired by a wonderful surgery and hurried
back to the firing-line. An army no longer lives on the countryside
and by requisitions, it is fed and clothed, aye, and housed from
hicago and New York and the lumber camps of the Rockies
cattles do not continue from sunrise to nightfall, or even for ten
week, ™ le fl av f the anta B" on '® ts a breathing space of many
cks. The conflict goes on continuously over the same ground
Ire Ta-e/’thT *? 3 The fn men
ae larger than of old, but those in material are immeasurably
increased, both in amount and in variety.
Machinery and science have conquered war in a revolution
for thiT° re rapid an they accom Plished in the arts of peace; and
delay rZ°r : ™IV ° f or^^ and brooks no
delay. A nation can tolerate a slow and wretched railway system
wait n a 0 S y f ar ?i, fOr aito yet not succumb, but it cannot
wait a month for the most efficient service of munition wagons on
a singJe sector of the Front ; it can permit its babies to I/by e
of thousands in the reeking slums of its cities, but a means must be
f? Kart ° nCe °/ COU . nt . enn g‘ an atta <* by poison-gas and of turning-
. upon i s originators; a company may dispense with the
latest machine calculators, typewriters and department telephones
nhnZJ egI TT mUS u have automat| c rifles, adequate field tele-
p ones and electric batteries to charge its entanglements or the
hes 6 t Wl bC b M ken and thC cam P ai § rn lost - Everything must be the
best procurable—money must be a mere means to an end


Herein we have the explanation of much that is new in modern
war and in contemporary statecraft. Germany must have the
largest, the finest and the most guns —so must Britain and so must
France. Her guns must be the most accurate, the swiftest in fire
and reload, the longest-lived —so must theirs. Her gun steel must
be the most flexible, the toughest, the least susceptible to erosion—
so must theirs. As with her guns, so with her explosives, her
small arms, her every munition and every mechanical, metallurgical
and mineral element of her munitions —and so must theirs.
Krupp, Mauser, the Koln Rottweil Pulverfabrik must search
out the best combination of these three elements of the perfect
munition, and they must explore the Balkans and Asia Minor and
Morocco and Sweden for the ore-bearing rocks, and when they
have found them they must secure them, monopolise them for
themselves and for Germany. They must have railways and ships
to bring the ore and the metal home, and German arms and
German diplomacy must guard the road along which they are to
come to-Cologne and Carlsruhe and Essen.
It is life or death for Germany —and Britain and France. The
Governments must take thought for the morrow, and the morrow
beyond the morrow. They must have iron of every grade, nickel,
manganese, chrome, copper, petroleum, and also every element of
explosive. They cannot have too much. They must deprive their
neighbours of them. They must have works abroad to control
them. Britain and Germany and France will, therefore, wrangle
when Vickers and Krupp and Schneider are contending for the
raw materials of industry and profit. Britain will endeavour to
control arms supplies to Turkey; Germany to Belgium; Austria
will supply China; Russia (France) will arm Serbia. Each will
avoid the appearance of an alliance by operating through its
private firms. The small nations cannot support themselves at
all, the countries without manufacturing resources have to become
subsidiary allies, openly or secretly—like Austria or Turkey.
That is one of the great functions of Kruppism—to serve the
Governments in secret, to arm the “neutral,” to prepare the way
for an alliance, to check the rival, if possible—to disarm him and
disorganise his industries. That is one great reason why no
Government will consent to the nationalisation of the armament
industry. That is one reason why the peoples of the world must
wrest it from its present holders —but by no means the only
reason.
[B]


How the War found Britain
The outbreak of war found the Allies in absolute potential
command of the seas. The superiority of the Entente Powers
was overwhelming, and, so far as Britain was concerned, the
numerical advantage was not so remarkable as the qualitative
lead. Ship for ship, gun for gun, in material, in strategical possi-
bilities, in the resources of her shipyards, gun and armour works,
and in expert labour and appropriate installations, Jellicoe was
leagues ahead of his opponent. If the Baltic has been mainly
German, the Mediterranean has been even more an Allied lake.
Japan has kept the Pacific. In all waters the Germans were
impotent from the outbreak of war, and for weeks before.
Extremely few people in authority in this country appear to
have suspected that the great emphasis laid by German writers
and propagandists on the need for increasing the Fleet, and the
quiet support this view was having in official circles was not the
true line of German war policy. The German militarists and their
professorial apologists have been remarkably successful in
arousing in the British and French nations a fear of their quite
indifferent sea power. They have known how to play on the
traditional susceptibilities of their western rivals in such a way as
to distract them in great measure from the real course of German
policy.
Not less notable has been the entire failure of our militarists,
both official and extremist, to appreciate the new problems of
modern warfare. A close acquaintance with the literature of the
war advocates leaves one totally uninformed on the great revolu-
tionary changes in material demand which a European war would
occasion. There are endless pleas and complaints concerning the
shortage of officers, the lack of staff-training and the inadequacy
of our armies. These were the occasion of agitation in the country
and the Press, and of frequent debates in Parliament, but one
searches in vain for any recognition of the utter unpreparedness of
our War Department to munition the forces it would require in
any European campaign. Everywhere one encounters the stock
argument of a reactionary military caste, evidently thinking still
/. . N


in the terms of its Victorian experience, but utterly without
enlightenment on the accomplished marriage of science and war.
Could anything be more futile than to pursue and, with the
utmost vehemence, to recommend a foreign policy which must
inevitably entangle the nation in the complications of Continental
war, and take no steps to provide, on an adequate scale, those
contributions which this country can always best make to a
confederacy, and which constitute her greatest worth as an ally t
Yet this war found Britain without any system whereby all her
incomparable engineering resources could be instantly mobilised
for the supply of munitions, not merely on sea, but also on land.
It was not so much that her supplies of small arms and munitions,
of field artillery and machine-guns, of all kinds of specialise
military accessories were negligible, but that next to nothing ha
been done to provide for such an emergency. Men rushed to the
recruiting offices, and the brigades and divisions spread out in
scores of training areas, but there was no instant re-direction o
manufacturing enterprise to cope with the demand. The
machines were lacking or not co-ordinated ; the great supply trades
were not in intimate touch; central control and sympathetic under-
standing between manufacture and army contract departments
had to grow up during months of critical struggle.
The marked success which attended the selfish capitalist
interests of the armament firms during a whole generation in their
unrelenting endeavour to reduce Woolwich Arsenal, to close down
Sparkbrook, and to injure Enfield and Waltham Abbey, as well as
to prevent the establishment of new State ordnance factories in
suitable manufacturing areas, has reacted ruinously on the cause
of Britain and her Allies. t .
The Murray Commission on Government Factories (1905-1907)
reported : . ,
The trade takes time to adapt itself to an increased
demand, and the Arsenal must be adequately equipped for
tiding over the first few months of a critical period. After
that period, all-important as it is in war, private enterprise
may be trusted to meet the national requirements to a large
extent, (p. 8.)
Not only had the Arsenal staff been reduced and kept to a level
nearly five thousand below what the Chief Superintendent declared
to be necessary; not only had vital improvements not been under-
taken, but the Arsenal was not even put to work at full pressure.
After nine months of war the writer discovered, and drew Mr.
Snowden’s attention to the disgraceful state of affairs in the gun-
shops, and had the matter aired in Parliament. At that time not
one-tenth of the field guns were being made at the Arsenal, and
one firm that had never made them before had 50 per
on hand than the State workshop, where men were not kept fully


employed. The great private firms were late with deliveries, and
it was mainly through them, acting as middlemen, that other
engineering firms were getting work. The Arsenal was not
adequate to its demands; it was dependent, utterly, on outside
undertakings, and these were building up their organisation as the
war went on. Slowly, and with infinite waste and loss of energy,
the industrial system was mobilised in this country.
The invasion of Belgium and of Northern France deprived the
Allies in a month of the mighty metallurgical resources of those
invaluable areas and added them to the wealth of the enemy.
Li£ge, Maubeuge, and other centres of small arms manufacture,
were lost to the Allies, and France was shorn of 70 per cent, of her
steel production.
In the Crimean War Britain had bought arms in Li6ge; in the
French wars her agents had bought up stocks in Germany and
elsewhere on the Continent. Once again, hostilities found our War
Office without small arms or the means to turn them out with
rapidity.
The lessons of the wars of William 111., the Spanish Succession,
the Revolution in ’93, the Napoleonic War of 1805, and of the
Crimea, had been entirely forgotten. Once again our militarists
had leaped into war half-armed, and once again they had to pur-
chase their necessaries from neutrals.
Compulsionists, conscriptionists, militarist extremists of every
school must stand here in the pillory with those whom they have
persistently criticised. Incompetence and reaction were again the
handmaidens of our diplomacy, and to-day Britain and her Allies
are paying, and new generations yet unborn will continue to pay,
the price.
There are two countries in the world with a great machine-tool
industry suitable and adapted to the requirements of land
armament, land transport and electro-chemistry—Germany and the
United States.
Russia was very speedily cut off from the sources whence she
might renew with ease the machine requirements of her arms
factories. Her almost complete dependence on Germany and the
closing of the Black Sea route to imports soon disabled her manu-
factures and put a high premium on all her orders.
Britain, France, and Italy inundated America with contracts
for material and machinery. As in 1854-55, Britain, and as in
1870-71, France, went to New England for rifles, quick-firing
guns, ammunition, and the means to make them. In their
necessity they turned to America per Morgan, Grenfell and Co.,
and so put themselves deeply into the clutches of a financial and
manufacturing group, whose one primary interest was to make as
much as possible out of the war. So, to-day, American capitalism
strains every nerve to supply the Entente with arms, and, at the


same time, uses its monopoly power and the needs of its clients to
ensure the passage of cotton and rubber and fats and other raw
materials to neutrals contiguous with Germany. As the
Westminster Gazette recognises—
We cannot push controversy with the United States to the
point of imperilling the munition supplies without jeopardising
military interests of great importance to our Allies as well as
ourselves.
The Allies positively dare not use the power of their fleets lest
the United States discover a crisis in Mexico and requisition the
armament factories of the country for national purposes, so, auto-
matically, prohibiting export of arms to Europe.
The Allies must pay up and look as cheerful as they may.
Meanwhile the United States acquires an up-to-date munition
plant second to none, and profits such as enable its firms to lay out
shipyards and factories wherein their corporate expression, the
United States Government, can have built economically the fifty
giant battleships and other ships with which to challenge the Right
of Search and all future blockades, at the mouths of Bethlehem
guns.
To pay for American munitions the Allies must raise a loan in
the United States, and, as the war continues, the indebtedness of
Europe to New York will grow and the mortgage will be the
exploitation of South American and Oriental markets by American
capital. To make sure that these pledges shall be kept, the United
States is going to construct a monster navy and equip a large
army. Such is the heritage of expansion and muddle which our
diplomats and militarists have prepared for their children.


How the War found Germany
The German Government appears to have had a very much clearer
grasp of the realities of modern warfare than any of its
antagonists, and to have decided on and vigorously pursued an all-
round policy of offensive-defensive. Fully realising that it was
unwelcome to its established sister empires, Imperial Germany has
faced the perils of its situation and countered them in the most
ruthlessly practical manner.
In Europe, Germany was bound to excite the increasing
hostility of France and Russia, whilst an extra European policy of
expansion would bring her into conflict with Britain and the United
States. Whichever way she turned she must find enemies and, as
time went on, she found them ringing her around with diplomatic
understandings, alliances, armies, and fleets. Her allies, Austria-
Hungary and Turkey, and, later, Bulgaria, were empires that were
in decline and peril, or had failed to make good. All of them were
economically weak and under the sway of monarchist and military
cliques. Each saw the possibility of recovering prestige in such
an alliance as the one Germany offered them. All of them were
military states, and almost immune from naval attack.
Germany alone had a navy and a mercantile marine, and these
were swept from the seas on the outbreak of war, but without
crippling her strength or exposing her curiously defensive coast-
line to invasion or attack. Much more self-contained in reference
to foodstuffs than Britain, and more self-reliant as to raw materials
than any of the Allies, Germany had no serious cause to dread the
blockade. She trusted, and not in vain, to contiguous neutrals to
supply her with food and other necessaries. With this end in
view she had long had organised a system of provisioning by
friendly agents in neighbouring countries. In this, as in almost
every other detail of war administration, the minutest con-
tingencies has l?een provided against in advance.
The communications over which the German and Austrian
armies have been moved from front to front and from position to
position with such remarkable speed and efficiency were, of course,
planned out and developed by the State itself, and the arrange-
ments for facilitating mobilisation and despatch were, from the


first, made by the military. No military State is so foolish as to
tolerate private and competitive running of railways having
strategic importance, and it is most probable that the changes in
administration of British lines during recent years have had the
marked approval of the Imperial Defence Committee, and the
assistance of those on or in close touch with it. It.was generally
held in inner Socialist circles some time back that the Government
desired to weaken the railways and transport unions owing to their
fear of labour action in war, and desire to placate and humour the
railway directorates.
Whilst in this country the plain evidences of the construction
of strategic bases of communication are impossible to trace, there
are queries which arise in our minds about the laying out ot
Immingham and Newhaven, two railway ports whose commercial
importance scarcely seem to have justified the expenditure an
effort put forth, and which, certainly, occupy sites of exceptional
ml * l, nie Germans have, however, pursued a wonderful railway
policy, under State direction at home and under private operation
in the Balkans and Asia Minor. The supply of material for these
great railway systems has, of course, been of the utmost
importance, and has mainly devolved on private engineering and
steel works.
This afforded enormous work for the iron and steel-producing
syndicates which are so highly organised in Germany, and which
constitute a firm foundation, on which reposes the industrial struc-
ture of the armament and machinery trades. Here, as elsewhere,
the dominion of the financiers is paramount, and the great banking
corporations are supreme. The same enterprises provide the
materials of munitions and communications, and in the supply ot
railway steel they naturally found their primary and permanent
strength It is of great consequence to a military power to have
closely co-ordinated and highly-developed railway contractor and
constructional firms which can follow up behind the armies and
maintain those services by which alone the provisions for millions
of men can be transported. German railways have been of the
utmost importance in contributing to the efficiency of German
armies. But railways, nowadays, have been supplemented by
other transport facilities on a prodigious scale, to wit: motor
carriage and the supply columns of modern field forces rely
primarily on petrol-driven vehicles. Here there are several great
concerns contributing to the war machine, the chief of which are :
Daimler Motorenfabrik, Maschinenfiabrik Augsburg-Nurnburg,
and Brown-Boveri, of Baden.
All these three undertakings come within the orbit of the Lowe
“Gruppe.” Dr. Walther Rathenau is a director of Brown-Boven,
and the Daimler is a mere daughter company of that L6we con


cern of which Rathenau, Paul von Gontard and other armament
and machinery magnates are the controllers. The Augsburg-
Nurnburg, reputed to be a “rival” of Krupp, comes under
Siemens-Schuckert influences, shares at least one magnate with
the Deutsche Waffenfabrik, and is indirectly related both to Krupp
and the A.E.G.
The all-important subsidiary supplies of rubber and petroleum
are looked to by the Lowe banks, which “are more influenced by
the great acts of industrial combination than vice versa.”
Rubber brings us naturally to the bewildering maze of interests
grouped around the Allgemeine Elekritaats Gesellschaft (A.E.G.)
and Siemens-Schuckhert. Much has been written (an infinite
selection of fable and fancy) about Krupp and the cannon-kingdom
of Essen, but the mightiest figure in German war industry is Dr.
Walther Rathenau, of the A.E.G.—the man who was entrusted
at the beginning of the war with the mobilisation of German
industry. As he was already in his capacity of banker, electric
king, machine tool maker, steel manufacturer and chemical pro-
ducer, at the centre of an all-powerful national and international
octopus, his cannot have been difficult of accomplishment.
He was involved in the Berliner Handelsgesellschaft Bank, the
Mannesman Tube Co., the A.E.G., Lowe, the Metallgesellschaft,
Brown-Boveri and a host of other ventures. His colleague, Louis
Hagen (by far the most influential of the German directors of the
Nobel Dynamite Trust), Paul von Gontard, Kosegarten, and Baffin
brought within their grasp the whole immensity of undertakings
on which Kaiserism depends for its munitions.
Not Dr. Krupp von Bohlen und Halbach, the husband of
Bertha, and head of the Krupp firm, and not this romantic enter-
prise, but Rathenau and Hagen and the “Lowe Gruppe” con-
stitute the central citadel of German capitalism and German
militar-economic strength.
Ihe writer has beside him lists of machine tool munition,
electrical and chemical enterprises obviously dominated by these
two personalities and their immediate associates. The wealth of
Silesia and Westphalia; the power of the Rhineland and Saxony;
the forges and machine shops of Baden, Bavaria, the Ruhr and
Berlin; the shipyards of Stettin, Hamburg and Kiel; the counting
houses of Cologne; the far-flung tentacles of German commercial
intrigue all responded to the will of these men.
Behind them loomed the Direktion der Disconto-Gesellschaft,
the Norddeutscher Bank, the Dresdner and Darmstadter Banks,
the National and Deutsche Banks, Bleichroder, Levy, Oppenheim,
Salomonson—all the inter-related company and private banks to
which German business eventually traces back. These organised
and prepared at home and organised and planned abroad.


The Metallgesellschaft controlled, so far as it could, the raw
metal supplies of the German steel and metal trades, and mono-
polised the best material for its own people, seeking to disorganise
the supplies of other nations.
The steel producers and, notably, Krupp, endeavoured to make
themselves indispensable to foreign steel consumers, and so in
Russia, made the war problems of Czardom more difficult of
solution.
The Lowe “Gruppe” not only got ready the organisation of
machine tool firms and prepared to handle at the shortest notice an
immense extension of demand for rifles, ammunition, motor
wagons, tools of every kind, electrical apparatus, all the neces-
saries of machine production, operating at a terrific pace, but
actively helped to disorganise the armament manufacture of
Germany’s neighbours.
In Liege, Brussels, Paris, Lille, and Brescia, subsidiary com-
panies were supplying German machines to Belgium, France, and
Italy, in England and Russia, components of this group were pro-
viding the electric apparatus and machine tools so difficult to
replace, except from Germany.
The same was true of their chemical associates, whilst German
finance was thrusting out now here, now there, in Turkey,
Bulgaria, China, and South America, the antennae of finance
hostile to the Entente Powers.
Technical skill, scientific methods, genius for organisation,
unity and continuity of administration, all these helped to make
ready to the hand of the German Mars, a wizard workshop of
Vulcan. There, in Germany, the capitalist and militarist state
was unhindered by Liberal traditions, by Conservative fears of
revolutionary purpose behind the collectivist methods, for the
capitalist class had sprung up after Liberalism had received its
death-blow, and when Imperialism had become the settled form of
government.
Harsh realism, a keener critical faculty, a far greater know-
ledge of history and economics, a finer appreciation of science and
technology, all these explained the triumph of German system, a
triumph in the face of desperate odds of which no eventual
defeat can ever deprive her people.


War not the Way Out
It seems' increasingly more probable that the war of armed nations
is going to fulfil the prophecies of Bloch, and that on no side will
there be conspicuous military successes leading to the overthrow
of one of the belligerent groups. The writer will not, however,
commit himself to any prophecy on this count, and prefers to adopt
an agnostic attitude. For all her technical efficiency, the inventive
genius of her scientists and her superb system, Germany may not
be able to provide herself with all the essential raw materials, whilst
her man-power can scarcely enable her to win in a long war of
attrition. Against her, unless the advocates of more stringent
blockade should have their way, and thus alienate from the Allies
the friendship of powerful neutrals, are mobilised all the engineering
resources of the Allied nations and of the United States. The
productive capacity of these countries has been enormously
augmented and is being taxed to its utmost extent. In a long
siege war the Allies may win by sheer pressure and the exhaustion
of their adversary.
The intervention of a certain neutral State would totally alter
the existing conditions, and the adherence of this Power to either
side would, undoubtedly, turn the scale.
What effect the enormous reduction of wealth output and the
destruction of capital will have on the belligerents and neutrals it is
impossible to say. The prognostications of economists were so
far mistaken in their forecasts of what would happen when war
came that one hesitates to anticipate the peace conditions. It is
well to remember, when discounting fears of economic collapse,
that whilst the Powers mobilised their finances for war, there is
not so much reason to believe that they are so carefully preparing
for peace. They are too busy winning the war to think of the
future that lies beyond. On the other hand, the catastrophic school
would do well to remember the great resistant power of society
and its amazing recuperative energies. Moreover, present-day
production is so great that the damage may be made good in a
very short time. Chaotic individualist control will get short shrift
after the war, and there will, probably, be a speedy clear up of the


appalling- mess. If the war drags on for a long time something
may result analogous to the state of Germany after the Thirty
Years War, but one cannot imagine that Nationalism will be a
flourishing growth after the frightful orgie it has stimulated, and
m which it has wasted itself.
There may be a revulsion against war, and there may even be
revolution as a consequence, but these eventualities are too
problematical to rest any conclusions upon them.
Already the Government, and, more particularly, the repre-
sentatives of finance and industry, are giving their attention to
superior organisation with a view to trade warfare after the
cessation of military hostilities.
State capitalism, which has enabled the Germans to do as well
as they have, will almost certainly be adopted, not only in the
Allied countries, but also in the United States. There will result
a very much closer co-ordination of State action and private enter-
prise than has previously been followed here or in America.
The Germanisation of the industrial system is being advocated
in many and responsible quarters. We are likely once more to
have a national economic policy, and the Free Trade interlude
appears drawing to a close. Tariffs are being suggested by erst-
while ardent Free Traders, and the new systematisation of national
industries will go far beyond what is generally termed
“Protection.” The whole genius and power of the State will be
focussed on the reinforcement of the capitalist system.
Even as Strafford and Colbert aimed at National Power, so will
the statesmen of capitalist society seek to temper the new instru-
ment and make it strong to do their work.
Here, in this country, the double requirements of Army and
Navy will present us with a very grave problem, even should the
Quadruple Entente harden into a long-date offensive and defensive
alliance. Unless Germany is decisively checked in the Balkans
and Asia, the defence of India and Egypt will become more
pressing upon us. It is scarcely likely that our statesmen would
be content to entrust the defence of these dependencies to their
partners or to forces of native troops ; however reliable. Nor
can one credit France and Italy with entrusting to us the sole
control of sea power. Financial co-operation will more easily
resolve itself, for Britain and France will continue to be the lending
parties, and Russia and Italy the borrowers. The military and
economic future of Russia are absolutely baffling, unless Turkey
can be smashed, or detached from Germany. As things were
before the war, and as they would be on a present settlement,
Russia seems bound to develop under the economic tutelage of
Germany. She is utterly isolated by land, save over the long
Siberian route, and presents only a very short strip of Lapland
tundra to the ice-free seas of the winter season.


Entrenched in Belgium, the Nord, and French Lorraine,
keeping a firm grasp on the invaluable iron ore and coal deposits
of these regions, and holding these industrial areas to ransom,
Germany has fine counters in her bargaining game. Nature has
made her North Sea shores and the Balkan Peninsula invincible to
naval assault.
Should Germany be able to sit tight, her prospects remain
excellent. Unless some great change comes internally, we can
imagine Germany entrenching herself behind miles of field
fortresses and drawing cordons of these from one sea end of her
frontiers to the other.
So much for Europe and the European Powers.
There remain the extra-European nations —the United States
and Japan. The last-named will, probably, adhere to the Quad-
ruple Entente, not being strong enough to stand alone in the new
world of alliances. Japan may yet play a most important part in
British foreign policy —a part more than welcome to herself. She
will lie to the west of America, in close proximity to China.
Hitherto we have scarcely made any mention of the United
States, which still remains unconcerned with the political
differences of the European nations, and which has only had an
indirect influence on the international affairs of the Old World.
The rise of American sea power had a curious reaction upon the
development of Germany. First, the constructional policy of the
United States Government so fostered the weak shipbuilding
industry of that country as to make it a serious rival to the new
German firms for the leavings of British builders, and also to
afford a striking example of the advantage to be gained by State
aid to a “stagnant” industry. Finally, the victory of the United
States in 1898 and the seizure of the remaining dependencies of
Spain in the West and in the East ended all hopes of Germany that
these might eventually revert to her and carried with this obvious
success the predominance of the Western Power all over the
American Continent.
The United States, now reconciled to Great Britain by the wise
statesmanship of Lord Salisbury, was in a position to assert against
all comers the Monroe Doctrine of non-interference in South and
Central America. For the last eighteen years the United States
has been steadily consolidating its position as a first-class Power.
The very extent of its undeveloped tracts of land and its sparsity of
population, compared with its area, have kept the American people
from casting eyes on foreign shores. Self-contained economically
to an unequalled degree, the United States has continued dependent
in very large measure on European, and particularly British,
capital.'
Year by year, and without any sensationalism or recurring
scares, her navy has been added to and augmented until it is now


second only to our own. The completion of the Panama Canal
and its inevitable fortification have added to the mobility and also
to the cares of her fleet. Whilst the Kaiser Wilhelm Canal is all
German and lies within the confines of the Empire, the Panama
waterway is some distance from the main territory of the Repub ic.
It brine’s the Eastern seaboard ports into closer touch and better
trading- connection with the Pacific coastline and the Asiatic
market. It djscounts to a great extent the scanty manufacturing
resources and harbour facilities of the Western States. Hence-
forth, Chili and Peru are destined to fall more and more under the
influence of their mighty sister Republic, and, altogether, tenden-
cies suggest the gradual emergence of an American Federation,
wherein the political doctrine of Monroe will be supplemented by
economic cohesion and the financial supremacy of the United
States.
One result of the European War will, probably, be the ousting
of British capital from the pre-eminence it has attained in the
South American Continent. Political Monroeism will be made
more real by the accession of its economic counterpart.
Brazil and Argentina are likely to contribute their raw material
to the industries of the United States and to provide an outlet
for the surplus products of that country, rather than of Britain.
For the last thirty years Chili, Peru, Argentina, and Brazil
have had their armaments from Vickers, Armstrong Whitworth,
Schneider and Krupp. New types of cruisers and the experimental
models which eventuated in the battleship-cruiser and the super-
Dreadnought have been evolved to gratify the petty ambitions and
at the expense of these baby nations.
The Balkan game, which has so dishonoured the Powers, has
not been more cynical than the conscienceless exploitation of these
tiny Republics and their mutual antagonisms in the cause of naval
experiment and improvement of warship design. This is not the
time, and here is not the place, to unfold the records of an infamy
of which the writer hopes spme day to tell the story.
For the future these nations are likely to go to Pennsylvania for
their equipment, to have their ships constructed by Newport News,
Cramp, the New York Shipbuilding Company, and Harlan and
Hollingsworth, and to order their small arms from New England
and their artillery from Midvale and Bethlehem.
The third Power of the coming time will be Greater America.
The longer this war continues the greater becomes the indebtedness
of the Allies —the Powers with over-seas interests —to the financiers
of New York. Already fabulous fortunes have been amassed out
of the sale of munitions to those who could take delivery and
capital has flowed steadily into the war industries. American
engineers have specialised on a demand which gave them the
highest return, and have provided themselves and, incidentally,


their country with an up-to-date, extensive and thoroughly
efficient plant for the organisation of a gigantic home armament.
A board of inventors and experts has been appointed to bring all
the resources of science to the aid of military and naval defence,
whereon Edison is a prominent figure. Meanwhile, the naval and
military attaches in all the belligerent countries are making careful
notes of what they see, and their reports are being sent in and
compiled at Washington.
Scarcely less there than here, men are cudgelling their brains
to add to the frightful armoury of machine and chemical slaughter,
which finds so ready a sale in the European capitals. American
trade and technical papers are a revelation to anyone who cares to
read through their ample pages of attractively presented advertise-
ments.
The Americans, like the Germans, have a genius for automatic
machinery and small tools —it is a characteristic of industry cater-
ing for continental transport —and they have contributed exten-
sively to the arts of mechanical homicide. We need only mention
Colt, the inventor of the revolving pistol; Dr. Gatling, whose
surgical mind adapted parallel rifle-barrels to a single firing
mechanism, and produced the first practical machine gun; Hiram
S. Maxim, whose application of rapid fire action to a Winchester
barrel, gave the world the deadliest of all automatic rifles;
Hotchkiss, Remington, Peabody, Gardner, Pratt and Whitney —
the wizards of small arms output; John P. Holland, who from
1875 to 1902, built successive submarines until he produced
Holland IX. and the brothers Wright, heroes of aviation.
In war after war, the nations have turned to America for equip-
ment which she, with her death’s harvest of the Civil War, has
been well able to provide, till, now, the Engineers’ War has turned
all her workshops into fevered hell-pits, where the wealth of her
mines and forges is wasted in capitalism’s wildest orgie of Pro-
duction for Profit.
The United States is acquiring the enormous machinery
essential to modern militarism, and the owners thereof are already
voicing their demand for national “preparedness” by land and sea
and air. Already, the Peace President has made “preparedness”
speeches in Pittsburg.
America must be, and will be, “prepared.” Why? Because,
though she may be “too proud to fight” when material interests
are not at stake, her governing class will never tolerate the Right
of Search on the high seas one day longer than they can help it.
A nation with thousands of miles of sea-board on two oceans will
never submit permanently to another Power’s claim to be the
Mistress of the Seas, and will, moreover, build such a navy as
she considers ample for her requirements, i.e,, the requirements
of her capitalist class. This class is now making of America a


creditor nation, which will insist on the settlement of mortgage
problems after the war. The price of monetary assistance
will have to be paid in the surrender of trading advantages
and concessions to American capitalism. Both to ensure this and
the maintenance of their hold on new markets, patriotic Americans
will require the provision of adequate naval and military arma-
ments.
Morgan, the financier, now negotiating loans and orders for
the Allies, is Morgan of the American Navy League, and Morgan
who stands behind the Steel Corporation, which controls Wm.
Cramp, the Union Iron Works of San Francisco, and the Carnegie
Steel Co. Morgan works with Schwab, of the Bethlehem Steel
Works, which holds friendly converse with the New York Ship-
building Co., the Fore River Shipbuilding Co., Harlan and
Hollingsworth and Newport News.
The falling away of orders which must inevitably occur when
European nations once more become self-dependent, as will
happen when the war is over, will cause such a depression in the
American steel trade and machine industries as to make the
demands for State expenditure absolutely irresistible. No pacifist
movement, and no socialist agitation will be able to stand against
the adoption of methods which, whilst bringing temporary relief,
will thrust the nation further and further along the disastrous
way that leads to international friction.
The armament manufacturers of Europe will, once again and
with increased prestige, enter into competition on the world market
to challenge Bethlehem and its allies. Behind the old-world firms
their governments will rally, and to the aid of the Pennsylvanian
industrialists will be summoned all the support that the vigorous
flaunting- of “Old Glory” can arouse,
* * * *
It is a dismal prospect not made more pleasing by the enforce-
ment of industrial conscription in Continental workshops and
economic compulsion by armament contractors in this country,
The shadow of a terrible despotism looms
athwart the workshops of the world wherein the workers, bound
by legal enactments, fettered by official regulations, forbidden the
right to strike, deprived of their trade union rules, driven on by
fears of national disaster and kept in control by military authority,


may yet become the helpless serfs of an all-powerful combination
of employers, at whose head are the armament syndicates.
Such is the terror which has sprung- from the dependence of the
nations on private metallurgical and chemical manufacturers,
whose one concern has been to extract the uttermost farthing from
the governments who came to them for armaments. This is the
grim tragedy which has resulted from permitting the exploitation
of organised fear in the interests of the Profit-maker. It is the
universal nemesis of those who have tolerated and encouraged
the fatal philosophy on which Capitalism depends.


BLACKFRIARS PRESS Ltd.
74 SWINTON STREET
GRAYS INN ROAD
W.C.
ALSO AT MANCHESTER
