

How much should be Taught to Children
and Young Adolescents ?
By Sir Thomas Anderson Stuart, M.D., LL.D., D.Sc.,
Dean of the Faculty of Medicine and Professor of
University of Sydney, N.S.W., Australia.
I have long been of opinion that we should teach the young'
in these matters, but that what we should teach is the hygiene
of the sexual orgahs, and not the physiology. It is to be pre-
sumed that what we have in view is the proper use of bur
bodily par Is and the avoidance of abuse. But we use our
lungs, our stomach, our liver, and in fact all our other organs,
without knowing much about them —even the best well-
informed among us. Indeed, we use our organs most per-
fectly when we know least about the details of their structure
and function — i.c., when we arc in perfect health. It is only
when something goes wrong that we begin to pay attention to
these matters, and then we frankly recognise that we are not
fitted to undertake the business, we call upon our physician
to help us. I think, therefore, that when anyone sets out
to teach boys by wall diagrams and models of structure,
however highly-coloured they are, is going the wrong way
about the business. The amount of anatomy and physiol-
ogy which even the best teacher can impart in this way is
very limited, and the boys are not old enough, not mature
enough, to be taught in that way. That, however, is not
the principal evil of this .mode of approaching the subject.
The real evil is that it tends to mala; it appear impossible
that the average parent or teacher can do this duty. ■ It
tends to limit it to the superior sort of person who poses as
a scientific guide where no such guide is necessary, and so
parents and teachers are, so to speak, frightened away from
the duty. I want you not to suppose that I am imagining
things, for I am impelled to make these - remarks from the
account given to me by the boys attending a certain school
where just this kind of instruction was given by just this
kind of person. It was over the heads of the boys, just
85007 —a


mystified them and excited their derision, and, in their opinion,
had as much to do with the real subject as the flowers that
bloom in the spring. They said it was “ bosh.” The less we,
teach the better—l mean we should teach just enough and no
more—that enough, what is it ?
On the material side, I would tell them not to touch or
handle their private parts except in so far as is necessary in
making water and in washing themselves, and they should
be taught to keep themselves clean about these parts. They
should be warned not to play or toy with these parts, audit
is to be remembered that quite little children form this bad
habit. They should be told not to allow other children to
touch or go near them there, and when a parent or a teacher
finds that a child which was healthy, bright and active, becomes
cross and rebellious, tired-looking, weak in body, dull and
easily tired, especially if it has got into the habit of going
away to out-of-the-way places with other children, then the
teacher should be on his guard for possible bad habits.
All this inevitably brings up the question of the foreskin.
Apparently many ancient races met the same difficulty, and
quite independently got oyer it by cutting the foreskin off in
the operation of circumcision. This was made into a sacred
rite, and as such is universally observed by the Jews,
Mohamedans and many Semitic and other races. The only
important Semitic peoples who did not follow the rite were
the Philistines, the Babylonians and the Assyrians, and we
can imagine some Jew asking, where are these peoples now?
The Jews we have still with us, and they perform the rite
with much ceremony when the child is only eight days old.
In our own land, in Central Australia, the rite is obligatory,
and is carried out with a stone knife as it was in the most
ancient times, when " hard stones ’’—-that is flints—were
used, as is described in the Bible. Until the operation has
been performed the youth is not permitted to marry. Thus
the practice of circumcision arose quite independently among
peoples separated by long periods of time and great distances
of space. But we see it arising quite independently in our
own day and among ourselves,for more and more the operation
is being performed as a simple matter of hygiene, of cleanli-
ness. When the prepuce is at all long-—and it often is-
the secretions, which are quite natural, collect within it and
give rise to irritation and itching. This leads to rubbing and
to masturbation, with all its train of evils. While the child
is quite young these secretions- may not amount to much;
but towards puberty, by the ninth or tenth year, they increase


considerably. It is therefore necessary to pull the foreskin
back and to wash and dry the parts regularly, and if this is
done as a matter of habit, as a part of the ordinary ablution,
the child and lad think nothing of it, and arc spared the
irritation and its consequences. Now this I regard as the
principal thing to be taught, and if nothing else were taught
it would still be a great thing done. How many parents
do it? And if it is found that, the prepuce is really too long,
so that it gives rise to persistent trouble, or if it be found that
it cannot be brought back, then the surgeon must procure
relief by the little operation of circumcision.
The case of girls is quite parallel but very much simpler.
The absence of anything like the foreskin obviates the difll-.
culties, but they should be. instructed to keep themselves
clean and nothing more. No further interference with these
parts, either by themselves or on the part of other children
or persons, including nurses, who are sometimes pests in this
direction. And the same applies to the interference of nurses
with boys.
And now as to the moral side. As children grow up, cer-
tainly by the tenth year, and it may be earlier, they inevitably
ask questions. Some of these arc what are called awkward.
They are about sexual matters. I think that these questions
should not be evaded, but should be answered as fully as is
desirable, and certainly what is said should be true. To
either not answer, or answer by humbugging the child will
do no good. To give an example—one of the most frequent
questions is as to where the baby came from. To make
answer that God sent it, nr that the stork brought it, or that
the doctor brought it, and so forth—we all know the sort of
replies often given in such cases—does not satisfy the child,
but only sends it to some even less discreet source of informa-
tion, or to vain imaginings of its own. Of course, the situa-
tions arc sometimes difficult, but they become less difficult
if good sense and thet are exercised, if one shows‘no embarrass-
ment, and treats the matter in a plain, direct, unemotional
manner.
Somewhere, about the age of thirteen to fifteen the lad
should be specially told that involuntary losses of seed, gener-
ally in the form of wet dreams, may occur, and told that
unless these occur too frequently, they are not to cause him
any anxiety, Point out that they are only the overflow of
accumulated secretion, and that they become harmful only
when brooded over as if they were something wrong and
shameful, which they are not, or when they come too often.


How often they may come without injury is very hard to say
in any particular case, but generally if not oftener than once
in the ten days they need not cause any worry. The boy
should be specially cautioned not to read those nasty little
books about “lost manhood,’’ “nervous debility,” "vari-
cocele,” &c., distributed by quacks; and I am sorry to say
that the newspapers are often not free from reproach in this
regard. This matter has caused many and many a boy untold
misery—so much the greater because untold'—and it is not
every boy who has the sense that a little Scotch boy had—
whom you and I know —who went to the family doctor, a
very safe thing to do in this and in many another dilemma
in life. There are corresponding phenomena in girls, but
they are far less complete, and T think that they are far less
common.
Boys should be told quite straight out not to listen to dirty
stories. It would be quite unnecessary to more closely define
What is meant by that. My experience is that boys would
know quite well what is meant, for they recognise that these
stories are dirty, and ought nut to be repeated, for they tell
them and repeat them in a furtive manner. I would not
appeal to them on any religious ground—this is too abstract
and too intangible for the general boy, but I would put it
to them as a family matter which they can all understand.
Tell them not to listen to stories; tell them to go away from
boys who are telling stories, such that they would not like, to
repeat to their mothers and sisters. This is the sort of thing
that boys can understand and would appreciate. Some, 'of
course, would not, but we cannot hope to affect every boy.
We can only hope to influence the majority.' Another potent
appeal is school “ form.” Most boys don’t like to do any-
thing which is “ bad form,” and if we could get it established
as bad form in a school to encourage such stories, we would
have gone a long way to put down the practices too often led,
up to and associated with the stories. The stories and the
practices are both marks of a low tone of morality in the
school. I have ho, actual experience of girls’ schools, but !■'
am assured that this warning is not so necessary among girls,
and I hope that I am well informed, It is what I would
expect from the female who, in the human species, is normally
in sexual matters the less aggressive animal. The reading 1
of unwholesome novels, attendance at foul and suggestive
plays in theatre and picture show should be strongly con-
demned for both sexes. They turn the thoughts inwards’
and excite passions and desire that lead towards disaster, ■ 1


I do not think that anything should be said about possible
disease, venereal disease, until the lad is approaching puberty,
and then he should be spoken to about his treatment of the
female sex-—told never to say anything or do anything to a
girl which he would not like his mother or his sister to know.
It is not much use defining this more closely. The lad would
usually know quite well what is meant. Then he should lie
told about prostitutes, and warned not to have anything
to say to them, and that if they approach him he should go
away and have nothing to say to them, for that they are very
very often diseased, and that their diseases are always catching.
The lad should now have temperately and reverently
pointed out to him the responsibility of the act of generation.
He should have it pointed out that lie is the heir of all the
ages, and that it is his privilege to hand on the lamp of life
to succeeding generations, and that he should pass it on
burning bright and clear —in short, the teacher should' try
to impress upon him the mystery and beauty of life and the
greatness of the thing entrusted to his keeping. In this
way it should be brought home to him that it is his duty to
take care of tins beautiful thing, and not treat it lightly ami
expose it to danger. It is now that the imagination of the
young person, male and female, is at work; now is the. delight-
ful time of daydreams; now is the time to appeal to the moral
side of their nature. Up to this time the, instruction has been
mainly material cleanness; now it must be. mental and moral
cleanliness, reason and holiness.
Ixi the case of girls—about the time of puberty they should
be told about the occurrence of the menses, and about the
same time they should be impressively warned as to the
possible consequences of yielding to the solicitations of the.
male, the risk of pregnancy and the risk of disease, all put
in such a way as. on the one hand, not to offend one kind of
girl, and in another kind of girl so as not to awaken curiosity
and desire. There is one most important lesson which should
be specially inculcated in the case of girls—the truth of the
French saying that " co n’est quo le premier pas qui coute.”
She should be specially cautioned not to allow the least or
any undue familiarity with her, always at once to keep the
o ther sex at their distance if they manifest any desire to become
too intimate, for every inch yielded is the starting-point for
a fresh advance, until at length the citadel is in danger.
These things should be done by the parents, if possible, but
since some of , these are unable, and some are unwilling to
do so, the teacher should inquire whether the parents have
•85007 —6


done their duty, and if they have not, then, for the sake of
the child, he should stand in loco parentis for the time being.
To some it would not be an easy position; to some it would
be a very difficult position; but to all it is a duty not to be
shirked if the call is made.
As to whether the instruction should be given by the
teacher in classes, or to each child individually, I do not
think a rule can be laid down. It depends so much upon the
personality of the teacher and the kind of children he has to
deal with. Once it is laid down that the teacher Ms to do it, he
will have to find out how he can best do it, for unless he can
do it suitably and tactfully it might be as well to leave it alone
or get someone else to do it, and I am not sure that it would
not be a good thing for a medical man, such as the school
medical officer, to take up this function. In the hands of a
tactful medical man the instruction would come from him
with all the greater weight. In any case the necessary
instruction should be given before the boy or the girl leaves
the school to enter upon the business of life.
In writing these lines I wish it to be understood that I am
dealing with the actual boy as I remember him and know
him, lam not dealing with the good little boy of the story
books. I am also fully aware that my ideas are far short
of what is often advocated, but that is just the point. I
think that in theory too much is often advocated and in
practice too little is done. I believe that here, as so often
elsewhere, safety lies in the middle way. It will be noted
that I have not advocated anything that the ordinary parent
or school teacher could not well undertake. Of one thing
we may be quite sure —unless we see to it that the right
things are made known in a right way, wrong things will be
learned in a wrong way, We must be brave, but not bold,
and we must do our duty as deftly and tactfully as we can.
Let it not be said to any one of us'by some poor thing, whom
we could have influenced but did not, “ I did not know.”
Sydney : William Applegate Gullick, Government Printer,—l9l6.
