

Iri fe*TH&KiCli *uZ toHHWtG J 7
P**RtUG-r<> - no* ■£
TRACTS FOR THE PEOPLE, No 4.
FOR GRATUITOUS DISTRIBURION.
HOW CAN WE PROMOTE
NATIVE INDUSTRY?
Scotch Carpenter, English Bootmaker. Scene, Collingwood.
Br. Well, John, have you seen this absurd tract about the
Cost of Protection, trying to make out that it takes a
million of money out of the pockets of the people as a sort of
bonus to us manufacturers, when it is the very life blood of the
country ?
Cr. Aye, I’ve seen and read it too. The figures are a bit
complicated, but it may be true for a’ that.
Br. Well, John, suppose it were true, our members would
soon turn the tables on you; for, cost or no cost, they
will prove that Protection pays over and over again, by setting
up “ native industries,” and keeping people employed, instead
of sending money out of the country to pay for imported
rubbish.
Cr. Weel, Jem, it may be so, or it may not be so, and “ native
industry ”is a grand word that carries a’ afore it; but let me
ask you what you mean by “ native,” has it aught to do with
the Aborigines 1
Br. Is that all you know 1 By “ native ” I mean that we
should make our own boots and a heap of other things, instead
of sending money out of the country to foreigners, which is a
clear loss, you know. Nothing like independence, I say.
Cr. Weel, it has a look like that, and ye see the native
youths are fine ohields, bigger than their fathers, and the lasses
bonnier than their mothers.
Br. Right you are, three cheers for native industry, and
more especially the lads and lasses.


Cr. Weel, Jem, I suppose there were protective duties on
them, by way of encouragement to population.
Br. Come,, now, none of your chaff; you know very well
what I me»n, native industries are native industries, and not
foreign industries.
Cr. I’m sure I hope you’ll thrive in your industry, and get
a grand factory o’ your ain, and then you’ll be able to export
heaps o’ boots to China and Japan.
Br. Well, I might some day, if I could afford to buy the
machinery that makes three pair in the time I could make one
by hand.
Cr. Machinery! Sir, do ye really mean to say that ye would
bring machinery into competition wi’ human beings, and them
crying out for employment at sic a rate.
Br. All for the good of trade, my fine fellow; and trade
makes business, and when I can send my goods abroad, I’ll
made my fortune quick.
Cr. Maybe ye’ll no get paid for your foreign exports.
Br. Oh yes, I will. The ship that takes my boots will
bring back sugar and silk and all sorts of things, and my money
will come out of them.
Cr. Ye don’t mean to say that. Ye’ll be a kind o’ merchant,
then, Jem; but there’s a big duty on silks and foreign com-
modities, won’t that be a bit of a hindrance, if you are going to
change your boots for other articles 1
Br. Then, John, we’ll have the duty taken off, for our lot,
you know, are the masters of the situation.
Cr. Which is another form of expression for saying that ye
mak fools o’ Berry, and Berry maks fools o’ you. Ye can
tak your change out o’ that.
Br. Now, Jem, manners please ; G. B.’s a great man.
Cr. Weel, he may be a’ that, but I’m thinking your G. B.
stands for grand boohooer ; but let’s get back the thread o’ the
argument, as the tailor said. Ye were talking about exchanging
your native industry for other people’s native industries, for
what may be called mutual advantage.
Br. Yes, John, that’s the plan; and therefore we cannot
have too many local manufactures, for the more we do for
ourselves the more we shall get from others.
Cr. Jem, that’s a braw coat o’ yours, ye’ll no hae made that
yoursel’, surely 1 or, maybe the wife helped ye 1


Br. The wife J she Ims her hands full with seven youngsters
and the house to mind, and you don’t take me to be such a fool
as to go coat making, when I’ve been brought up to bootmaking,
and can turn two pair of boots into a coat right off.
Cr. Ye are undoo’tedly a clever man, but ye seemed to
think the home-made article the best awhile since.
Br. Home-made, of course, but the colony to which we
belong is our home, and we are bound to keep the profits
of trade among ourselves.
Cr. No offence meant, but surely on your preenciples it would
be fine for a man to mak his ain claes, and be independent of
other folk.
Br. Well, you are an ignoramus. Don’t you know that
Protection helps us all round in the colony, and only keeps out
the stuff from other countries.
Cr. I see, ye want Free Trade inside and Protection outside ;
and if every country worked that plan for itself, the whole
•world would be a paerfect paradise. J
Br. Right you are, can’t be too independent.
Cr. But then about the Chinese and the Japanese, they’re
ingenious folk, and would soon learn to make for themselves,
without troubling themselves with your boots ; but ye were
talking about Protection a’ roun’. I expeck ye mean that what
suits ye so weel, would suit other folk equally week
Br. Of course we are bound to try to make for ourselves
everything that can be made at all, for how can we tell what
we can do until we give ourselves a chance.
Cr. Quite correck, Jem. Protect them a’ roun’, for ye
canna tell what the upshot may be till ye try the experiment;
but ye see the other folk that’s protected will take it out o’ you
when ye gang to buy breeks and bonnets and sic like for the
wife and weans, and then the profit on the boots will go out at
the hinder end.
Br. John, lam not sure that we should go too far in that
•direction, for you see there are just some particular industries
that are deserving of special encouragement, what the famous
John Stuart Mill calls the exceptional policy.
Cr. Aye, Jem, but I’m thinking ye’re trying to turn the
•exception into the general rule. However, fair play’s a jewel,
man, and ye can’t weel refuse to gie the rest a fair chance, as
weel as yourseT, and then ye see ye’ll have a jump up o’ prices


a’ roun’ that’ll just leave ye whar ye were afore, as far as profit
is concerned, for the worth o’ money is what ye can get for it.
Br. Well, John, I don’t pretend to be a philosopher, like
you, but if all trades fail, I’ll fall back on a bit of land. For
our party have arranged to give us factories first and farms
afterwards, and I calculate that these overgrown estates will be
about ready for distribution by the time I’m prepared to retire
from business.
Or. Now, ye are a prudent man, and ye would mak’ a grand
farmer, Jem, just like the man they ca Mechi, that mak’s the
land stand up on end, and dresses it wi’ pomatum, just like the
hair on your heed.
Br. Is that a fact ? Well, I think I could do something in
that way, what you may call resoling the land when it got a bit
exhausted.
Cr. Yes, and ye could put on splendid macheenery, and have
first-rate tools, for they will be maist abundant, being highly
protected; and ye see the dearer they are the better they will be.
Br. Hem, hem. You are trying, John, to take a rise out of
me ; but a man with seven children is not going to give way to
an old Scotchman like you, for it is my duty and the duty of
the State to think of and provide for them.
Cr. A’ richt; your best plan would be to get them into the
Post Office, or the Railways, or the Lunatic Asylum, for if the
Government is to make provision for them, it might just as
weel create a few more departments, and get some work out o’
them itsel’, instead o’ creating trades, which are just departments
o’ labour, ye ken, maintained at other folks expense.
Br. I’m not going to stand tins any longer, I always knew
your were an ass. My children must be provided for, and my
intention is to provide for them through the agency of the
State, which shall be made to do justice to the working man.
The rights of man are multiplied sevenfold when he has a
family like mine. Exit Br.
Cr. That man’s surely been made wrong end first, for he is
doing a’ he can to mak’ the peeramid o’ society stand upon its
apex. My certes, that would puzzle him 1 But I’ll ha’e another
touzle wi’ him about the children. Exit Cr.
Published by direction of the Provisional Central Committee, to whom all
communications can be addressed. Box No, 221, Post Office.
STILLWELL AND KNIGHT, PRINTERS, COLLINS STREET EAST.
