

Kuranda
THE WINTER
PARADISE of
NORTH
QUEENSLAND
CAIRNS HANRBOUR




HOW I SPENT
A FORTNIGHT
AT KURANDA
PRICE SIXPENCE
By MARGARET CLOW
1914




FROM CAIRNS TO KURANDA.
As the boat drops anchor at the Cairns Wharf, early on
a sunny morning in the delightful month of May, and lets
down her gangway, there is a bustle for luggage, a few hur-
ried farewells to local folk who have been fellow travellers
on the voyage, and then the train drawn up at the wharf is
boarded by sixty visitors eager to view the glories of the
wonderful north, and to sample her delightfully mild winter
climate.
Forewarned by experienced travellers, we had approached
the purser of the boat at Townsville, and asked him to wire
the Traffic Manager at Cairns to run a special train from the
boat to Kuranda, as we guaranteed forty passengers.
RAILWAY CUTTING.
To be seen from the train between Freshwater Station
and Redlynch, 6 miles from Cairns.


Accordingly, to our infinite satisfaction, the train is in
readiness when we arrive. Now for the Mecca of our desires
—Kuranda and the famous Barron Falls.
For the first 7 miles we pass over fairly level ground,
but nowhere can the eye turn without encountering hills, while
to the south-west rises tier upon tier of blue ranges, stretch-
ing far away into the distance. On either side of the line,
cottages nestle amongst their fruit trees and plantations of
pineapples, banana, paw-paw. citrus fruit, granadilla, and corn
indicate the chief industry of the neighbourhood.
Pineapples near Redlynch, Cairns
Railway.
Shortly after leaving Redlynch. the train begins to climb,
and then the scenic feast commences. In and out of tunnels,
(there are 15 all told), round curves, beside chasms, and across


bridges (of which there are 47), with a brawling stream be-
neath, she winds, puffing and snorting.
On one side towers a precipitous wall of rock, sometimes
broken by a mountain torrent, which from its source in the
hills above, dashes down the sides of the range in a series of
cataracts, and is generally almost hidden by the luxuriant
foliage of scrub trees and ferns, that line its sides and find
root hold in every available crevice in the rocks; on the
other side one looks down upon a panorama which for sheer
beauty is unsurpassed in Australasia, if not in the world.
APPROACHING STONEY CREEK FARES.
The side of the range, lined with the dark-green foliage
of a dense tropical scrub, drops to the green flats far below,
where houses nestle amongst bowers of trees, and cultivation
shows distinctly along both sides of the steel rails, over which


the train had travelled but a few minutes before. The eye
wanders further and beholds the Barron River, like a silver
riband thrown across the land, its brightness heightened by
the dark foliage of belar oaks which stud its banks. As a
beautiful background to the fair scene below, one sees between
a high mountain and a low range of hills, a stretch of blue
sea, so very blue, with a solitary white sail on its surface, and
beyond rises the blue hills across the bay; above is the vivid
blue of a tropical sky. and over all is thrown (he glamour of
the golden haze of the warm sunlight
The train speeds along, rushes through a tunnel or two.
past a curve, through another tunnel, and "omes to a stand-
still at Stony Creek Station, where it refills its boilers, while
the passengers seize the golden opportunity of admiring the
wonderful vegetation which runs down both sides of Stony
Creek Gorge, and clothes it so thickly that no trace of the
silvery stream can be seen. On the other side of the gorge
the Red Bluff is sighted, round which the train will soon be
winding its way.
A whistle, a puff, a snort, and we are off again. A few
minutes run brings us past the Stony Creek Falls, that grace-
ful, silvery cascade of water, which for beauty vies with the
famous Barron Falls.
A local gentleman volunteers the information that, when
flooded, the spray of the torrent as it flings itself over the
precipice 350 feet in height, to fall into a clear, green-tinted
pool, oft-times wets the face of the unwary traveller who puts
his head out of the window to view that glorious spectacle.
Now the train is rounding the Bluff. We look back and
find that we have just traversed a semi-circular curve, with
an almost perpendicular precipice towering far above the rails
on the one side, and on the other a deep gorge, clothed with
the übiquitous scrub, shows the course of the creek. Far
down below, the junction of Stoney Creek with the Barron is
plainly seen, and again the level flats and the superb sea view
come into sight.


The train now runs along the very edge of the Barrort
Gorge, and we experience delightful trills of fear as we look
down upon a sheer precipice running hundreds of feet into
the gorge below.
ROBB'S MONUMENT.
Past the glacier
rock (memento, of
pre-historic times)
glides the iron horse;
through a tunnel,
over a bridge or
two, through the
last and longest tun -
nel on the line, then
over Surprise Creek,
where beautiful rap-
ids charm the eye
of the traveller: past
Robb’s Monument,
that peculiar frag-
ment of rock which stands in lonely isolation on the edge of
the gorge, and which obtained its name from the contractor,
Mr. Robb, who built the line; then with a warning whistle,
comes to a standstill at the Barron Falls Station.
We are allowed ten minutes in which to view that glorious
tumbling mass of water, which in beauty, though not in
volume, excels the world-famed Niagara Falls. So absorbed
are we in contemplation of the magnificent sight that the ten
minutes pass as one, and when the whistle warns us to regain
our seats, we feel that we have had only a glimpse of the
wonderful thing, but that glimpse is quite sufficient to enthral
our interest and admiration, and we feel a restrained impat-
ience for the moment when we may stand above that mar-
vellous work of nature and satiate our souls in its beauty.
A few minutes run and we are at Kuranda, 21 miles from
our starting point, and 1080 feet above the sea. Ten miles
of this wonderful line cost the Government one hundred thou-
sand pounds (£ too. 000) per mile, or a total cost from Cairns
to Mareeba fa distance of 44 miles) of one million four hundred
and eighty thousand pounds!


BARRON FALLS IN FURL FLOOD.
As seen in February and March,


The first glimpse of Kuranda from the
Railway Carriage.


ROCKY HILL VIEW.
“All aboard for Rocky Hill View,” sounds in stentorian
tones through the hall of the Barron Falls Hotel. In such
jocular manner does our host, Mr. Hunter, intimate that it is
time to start for our walk to another of Kuranda’s many
beauty spots.
KURANDA.
From Road to Rocky Hill View.


We are twenty all told—twenty insatiable sightseers, and
our host has promised us a surfeit of tropical beauty before we
return to the south.
For about half-a-mile we walk along the railway line. On
one side is the Barron River, sometimes bubbling and froth-
ing over rocks, sometimes flowing smoothly but swiftly with
a deadly calm which indicates unfathomable depths beneath.
The opposite bank of the stream is clothed with a dense tro-
pical vegetation down to the water’s edge. Here and there
can be seen the vivid red flowers of the flame tree, and the
pencil orchid hangs from the branches of trees overhanging
the stream. Everywhere is vivid colour, green predominating.
On our right are high banks, sometimes of cool green
grass, more often of rock, over the surface of which grow
hardy ferns and lichen and little rock flowers. Occasionally a
silver stream bursts from the cool recesses of the scrub, and
tumbling in miniature cascades, hurries to join the river. We
are proceeding in the direction of the Falls, and as we ad-
vance, the roar of the mighty volume of water, as it makes its
leap of 600 feet, can be heard more distinctly.
However, we leave the railway line to climb a low grassy
hill which a white signboard informs us is the path to Rocky
Hill View. Having arrived at the summit, we pause to look
back upon the river and to take a deep breath before com-
mencing the real climb, though, really, it is so gradual that
one scarcely notices the ascent. Turning reluctantly from our
view of the river, we enter the scrub. It is cool and dim, and
there is a pleasant earthy smell. Here and there the sun finds
its way through the leafy canopy, and throws splashes of sun-
light before our path. On either side tower tall trees, clothed
with strange vines, which have twisted and climbed and
pushed their way up the trunks and branches of their host,
but loyal to Mother Earth, who had given them birth, send
down their new shoots to be nourished at her ample breast.


THE LOOK OUT, KOOKY HIKE VIEW.


Chief amongst these vines is the lawyer—so appropriately
named —from which, when once it gets you in its clutches, you
have no small difficulty in extricating yourself.
On the trunks of these scrub trees grow immense “bird-
nest” ferns; orchids, the beautiful pencil orchid, and the tassel
licopodeum, hang from their branches, stag horns beautify
their stems, and no part of the.tree but appears well covered,
whether by vine, or fern, or orchid. Beautiful palms and more
beautiful tree ferns line the sides of the path, while smaller
ferns innumerable grow in every available spot, and logs and
rocks are clad in the soft green moss.
As we approach the top of the hill, the path narrows and
grows rocky, the undergrowth and palms become less, but the
trees still continue to throw a shade over our path. Narrower
and more rocky grows the way; a cool easterly breeze meets
us; the air becomes fresher and bracing. A sudden opening in
the trees shows us Kuranda, far down below us. Red roofs,
rising above the surrounding greenery, makes a pretty picture.
Across the river rise the green hills, and beyond them towers
the blue coast range. We turn again to the pathway. High
rocks rise uu before us; we tread our way round their base, and
clambering over the boulders, reach the summit. We have at-
tained our goal. Through fairyland we have come to this most
desirable spot, where a panorama of expuisite beauty meets the
eye.
In the far distance are misty cape and sheen of sea, and
white dots that represent the town of Cairns, nestling round
the shores of its bay. In the middle foreground are the bold
heights of the Barron Range, round which can be seen gliding
a huge black snake, which we surmise is the train. Below is
the Barron Valley, and in the immediate foreground is sea
upon sea of leafy tree tops. With our backs braced against
the boulders, a cool wind blowing in our faces, and our eyes
feasting on the beauty before us, we wish that we might re-
main in this delightful spot for ever. But our host has already
begun to think of our bodily needs and quickly gathering dry
sticks and leaves, lights a fire, and puts on the “billy.”


AFTERNOON TEA AT ROCKY HIRE VIEW.


Presently “Tea O” we hear, and scrambling to our feet,
we gather around the eatables. It is not until then we realise
that the climb and invigorating air have sharpened our appe-
tites. Mr. Hunter, who is thoughtfulness personified, has
brought a small flask, containing an amber coloured liquid.
“Snake-bite cure” says he, with a twinkle in his eye. The gen-
tlemen all claim to have been bitten by the deadly reptile, and
are accordingly cured.
Having demolished the cakes and sandwiches, and ex-
hausted the contents of the billy, pipes are brought forth, and
we follow our host's lead of recounting humorous stories and
propounding riddles old and new. A very gay and a very
contented party are we, and all agree that “home was never
like this,” but the lengthening shadows remind us that the
night is beginning to unfold its dark mantle over the earth,
and that home is a mile and a-half away. So, very reluc-
tantly, we catch up the empty baskets, and begin to retrace
our steps.
The homeward walk is, if possible, more delightful than
the outward. An exhilarating breeze comes up the gorge, and.
like irresponsible school children, some of us actually run down
the last grassy slope to the line. We get back to the hotel
just as the dressing gong sounds. The girls’ animated faces
and sparkling eyes, and cheeks whipped into roses by the wind
and walk, testify to the pleasure and exhilaration of what we
all agree is the most delightful walk we have ever ex-
perienced.


IN HUNTER’S POULTRY YARD.
THE CASSOWARY.


THE ORIENTAL ROOM.
On the third day of our arrival, we wander into the
Oriental Room, a room of “beauty and delight," a room where
lovely woman falls captive to those wondrous creations of art.
specially designed for the adornment of her person, and the
enhancement of her beauty, which are here displayed in the
form of beautiful laces, gowns, and kimonos, etc.
So much loveliness is displayed that we are at first be-
wildered and know not where to turn. But the glorious silk-
kimonos, in their beautiful shades of colour, so daintily em-
broidered in contrasting hues, claim our first attention. Won-
derful as opera cloaks (into which they are generally converted
by their fair purchasers), one’s soul becomes enraptured with
their beauty, and each and every woman in that room pos-
sesses a wild longing to become the proud possessor of one
of these gems of Eastern creative art. We inspect them all.
and don our favourites. The long mirror on the wall reflects
many a pleasing picture this morning, as youth and beauty, clad
in soft, delicate shades of yellow or red, pink or blue, parade
in gratified vanity before it.
But our attention is caught and held by the sight of beau-
tiful Maltese lace, arranged on blue and red cards, which out-
line distinctly every delicate thread. In silk or in linen thread
are found exquisite Maltese collars of many shapes and patterns,
scarves, cuffs, jabots, plastrons, and handkerchiefs, the last-
named dainty things, a wisp of silk and delicate lace.
“Oh, how beautiful! How simply perfect!” The excla-
mations, coming from a pretty little woman, who has been
flying from one beautiful thing to another, startles us. We turn
our eyes in her direction, marvelling that anything can be
more beautiful than that which we have already seen. But
when onr eyes behold the perfect work of art she has spread
out on a counter before us, we simply catch our breath in a


half articulate "Oh!” and find no further words to express our
boundless admiration. We are speechless with the wonder of
it. It is a bedspread of the finest linen, exquisitely and won-
derfully worked in drawn thread designs. This discovery leads
to others of the same kind of work, all, alike, noted for the
fine quality of linen, the perfect workmanship, and the unique
designs employed.
Then the dainty Japanese handkerchief sachets, with hand-
painted sprays of flowers in delicate shades of pink, mauve, etc.,
on still more delicate grounds of blue, or green, etc., catch
our eye, as do also the sweetly pretty crepe-de-chene scarves,
and the useful but dainty assam silk umbrellas, with the re-
movable covers which can be washed and put on again. Then,
there are Satsuma belt buckles and hatpins; purse bags of lea-
ther and suede; lace and muslin jabots, robes of fine muslin
and silk; rolls of Japanese crepe-de-chene. washing crepe,
grass lawn, linen, and silk.
In a glass-covered case we find many curiosities, such as
mother of pearl hatpins, brooches, and coat buttons, also sweet
little toilet table appointments, and a very beautiful card tray
in the form of a gigantic butterfly; the body, head, feelers, and
legs made of silver, and the wings consisting of a pair of full-
sized pearl shells. The mother of pearl, of which these dainty
things are made, is all obtained from Thursday Island, and
sent to France, China, and Japan to be made into the desired
articles.
It would take pages to adequately describe that room of
beauty and of woman’s desires. As we leave it, after two or
three hours spent within its walls, I am afraid our purses are
very much lightened, but our hearts are glad with the joy of
possession.


FRONT ENTRANCE, HUNTERS HOTEL.
Leading to the Oriental Room.


MR. F. P. DODD’S INSECT COLLECTION.
Having heard a great deal, even on our way to Queens-
land, of a vast collection of insects at Kuranda, which nearly
all visitors who possess the time go to see, we too decided
to add to their number. Soon after our arrival at Kuranda,
we found that this collection, made by Mr. F. P. Dodd and
his sons, was on view, immediately opposite Mr. Hunter’s
Barron Falls Hotel, where we were staying, so, one afternoon,
having an hour or so to spare, we crossed over to make our
inspection. A large straggling but pretty garden, containing
many hibiscus shrubs, gay with their gorgeous pink and red
flowers, and other tropical plants, surrounds the house; after
admiring--these we proceeded to the entomological showroom.
As anticipated, there were various glass-lidded cases, contain-
ing insects, hanging upon the walls; one great case in par-
ticular. with a magnificent selection of moths and butterflies,
at once arrested our attention. From this we moved to smaller
cases, each possessing some special attraction of its own. Then,
supposing our inspection over, we were pleased to learn that
we had seen merely some of great Queensland’s insect beauties,
that many others were yet to be shown to us. Then, taking
seats at a table, other cases, not glass ones this time, but clos-
ing double ones, with the specimens arranged upon each side,
were brought forth. How many were produced we do not
remember; box after box was opened and looked at, each one
seemingly richer than the one preceding, so that we were soon
rapidly using up our expressions of approval and delight. Fin-
ally the three or four finishing boxes found us almost bereft
of speech, we having already expended our best adjectives !
We were amazed at their wondrous beauty, and altogether at
the vastness and variety of the collection placed before us.
We then learnt that we had still viewed only a portion of the
famous collection, that boxes and boxes more were stowed
away, also that each year thousands of specimens were sent
off to museums in different parts of the world, and to various
individuals possessing the insect collecting hobby.


Australia is a young country, numbering but few entomo-
logists yet, but with nature study gaining such a strong foot-
ing in all our schools, we shall soon number them by hundreds
instead of a few dozen as at present. Mr. Dodd showed us
a book containing about 10,000 (ten thousand) names of ento-
mologists of the world; this in reality being thousands short
of the actual number. Of these, Australia and New Zealand
possessed less than 60, Queensland itself about 15, but these
numbers have increased considerably since the list came out in
1905. Who knows how many naturalists are evolving in our
schools of to-day?
Let us now refer to our notes and mention some of the
more interesting things we saw. The collection contains moths,
beetles, and butterflies principally, but besides these there are
dragon flies and their lace winged relations, wasps, bees, ants,
cicadas, grasshoppers, and crickets, praying mant'scs, strange
looking “stick” insects, “leaf” insects, flies, and even cock-
roaches.
Amongst the gloriously painted butterflies there was a
green and black one over 6 indies across, and its female, in
much plainer colours, nearly 8 inches; an electric blue spe-
cies, with wide and deep-black border, measuring about 5
inches; many others, shortening to 3 inches, finishing the large
butterflies. After these came the smaller ones; but of all these
great and small, the little blue butterflies seemed to be the most
perfectly beautiful. Fancy a whole case full of these, and
exhibiting almost every shade of blue, purple, violet, and laven-
der. Some of the brightest, as if not sufficiently charming-
above, have most lovely patterns and colours on the under-
side of the wings.
The moths are many times more numerous in species than
the butterflies, from a giant of almost it inches across the
outstretched wings to mites of things with bodies smaller than
those of mosquitoes, or even fleas. An outsider, having seen
but few moths, learns here that they rival the butterflies in
splendour and in delicacy of pattern. There are reds, pinks,


greens, and yellows, every known shade of colour. A moth
may be all one colour, or possess several, perhaps wonderfully
interwoven and intermixed. One showy species we noticed was
blue, yellow (2 shades), white, and magenta, all freely laid
upon a deep velvety-black ground. Many are, of course, clothed
in what are termed protective colours, especially the greens,
yellows, greys, browns, and blacks, but others again are so
conspicuously marked that they could be detected anywhere
by anyone or anything. Then there are moths with eye-like
markings, or with wing tips like heads of snakes and lizards;
moths that resemble portions of plants, especially green and
yellow leaves; moths with bulky or slender bodies, or with
broad or narrow wings; others that emit unpleasant or de-
lightful scents, many that take in food, and some that take in
none. Indeed, there is no end to the curiosities of the im-
mense moth family. Queensland possesses actually the largest
moth known, taking the width and depth of wings; specimens
of these are occasionally shown alive to visitors, for the Dodds
know all about them, their eggs, caterpillars, and what plant
they feed upon, and their chrysalises; indeed the only way to
get perfect examples is by rearing. And no moths yet known
have more remarkable life histories than several species Mr.
Dodd reared at Townsville a few years ago. Whilst upon
entomological wonders of the world, it may be mentioned that
Queensland possesses the strangest butterfly there is, that fact
also having been made known by our naturalist. Then there
is a honey-loving beetle, which, when it has laid its eggs, has
become too light to successfully battle against stiff breezes, so
it alights upon the ground at a convenient spot, and takes in
a small cargo of fine sand, and, thus ballasted, can cheerfully
wend her way through the forest, regardless of rude winds.
Yet another beetle, a smallish chap, he fires off a little gun to
frighten away or vanquish enemies or meddlesome creatures.
He is know as the “Bombardier,” and is not uncommon over
a large portion of Australia; he has rather a distended body,
distended with gas or vapour, and, when molested, discharges
some of this; it goes off with a little puffing pop, and rises


in the air like a small cloud of blue smoke. We had a good
look at this customer, black with yellow head, and spots o"
back, and should know him again even if he doesn’t “go off
pop.”
Most people know something of beetles, but few know
how beautiful some are, beetles with burnished coats of
green, gold, purple, and bronze. And t : ny beetles, yes, lots
of them; many are smaller than the head of a pin—four or
five of several kinds could safely rest on a pin’s head without
danger of jostling one another over the edge.
The grotesque “Stick” and their relations the “Leaf” in-
sects must always command attention, they pass themselves off
as these objects so successfully that the eyes of bird, animal,
and reptile, and sometimes the trained entomologist, are de-
ceived; the further we get into the tropics the more numerous
and marvellous these are. There is also a rich velvety and
brown butterfly known as the “Leaf,” and the late Dr. A. R.
Wallace, one of the greatest naturalists of his day, tells us, in
his “Malay Archipelago,” how a “leaf” butterfly used to elude
him when it flew into a tree, until he actually saw it settle;
he gives a picture of the insect at rest amongst the leaves of
a dead branch. Our butterfly is just as good a leaf mimic as
that one.
As a rule, we know but a few kinds of flies, viz.: the un-
desirable house pest; the bush one that in dozens settle on
our back when we are out riding or walking, and which, hor-
rid little nuisance, takes a deep interest in our eye corners:
the persistent shall-have-a-bite March flies; and the nasty blow-
flies. However, there are many hundreds of species, from
giants over an inch long down to the tiny but particularly
enterprising sandflies. (Know the sandflies my friends? Well,
go fishing in the warm weather, and you should soon make
their acquaintance.) Besides the biting March flies the mos-
quitoes belong to the great fly family. Some flies have stilt-
like legs over 3 inches long, some species are stout, others ex


tremely slender, and many possess the most brilliant metallic
colours imaginable; others again are marvellous mimics, re-
sembling in looks and ways certain spiders, wasps, and bees—
it will be noticed always like some savage or stinging crea-
ture. This is one of Nature’s ways, she gives various and
generally quite harmless insects the shapes and actions of some-
thing that other creatures dread, or, as before mentioned, the
forms of leaves and bits of wood, &c.
Flies, like many of the great bee and wasp family, are
freely used by Nature as checks upon over-increase of other in-
sects, their larvae ("maggots, or grubs in these cases) existing
in their living bodies and eventually causing death. Every
species of insect has its parasite, it may be in the egg, larval,
chrysalis, or even winged stage, the terrible parasite is there.
Every collector experiences numberless disappointments with
eggs or caterpillars, &c., many of these being destroyed by the
presence of parasites. He may have a batch of eggs, hoping
to hatch out a number of rare caterpillars, but many, nearly
all sometimes, may produce tiny wasp-like insects. We were
much interested in these wonderful insects, of which Mr. Dodd
showed us a good number, and went on to say that many
countries now send out trained entomologists to different parts
of the world, in the hope of discovering parasites that may
assist them in coping with insects that have become serious
pests with them. Not long ago, two of these parasite-hunters
from Hawaii spent some weeks in the Cairns district, and
took away many insects that might help to fight a destructive
“ leaf-hopper” in their canefields.
Perhaps if we write further we shall puzzle our readers,
or even ourselves. There was so much we saw and learnt
that ought to be recorded, but we regretfully feel that we must
omit much that is interesting. We have not touched upon the
splendid dragon flies, the joyous singing cicadas, all the won-
derful wasps, bees, and ants, and the curious bugs. The latter


deserve a whole article to themselves; they are as beautiful
and as varied in form and colour as the beetles, and there are
hundreds of kinds in the Kuranda district alone. As Mr. Dodd
says, these are very respectable out-of-doors species, and never
lower themselves to browse upon ourselves like the detestable
house species (cimox lectularis), which sneaks out on warm
nights, and disturbs the slumbers of adults and children alike,
and like the sneak he is, creeps away before dawn. But,
fortunately, these smellsome insects are seldom in cleanly
houses, and I believe are practically unknown in Kuranda.
Some bugs are destructive to plants and to fruit, others again
are beneficial, catching and preying upon other insects —terrible
fellows they are, when their beak gets into an insect it is
doomed, no getting away from the murderers or “Assassin
Bugs” as they are called.
We came away with a knowledge of nature’s wonders in
the insect world that I trust we shall ever retain. One mar-
vels why such things, and in such countless forms and num-
bers, should exist. Why so many, why so interesting or mar-
vellously beautiful ! Such varied ways of evading their ene-
mies, obtaining their food, and perpetuating their species.
We conclude by honestly and enthusiastically advising all
those who visit charming Kuranda not to leave without seeing
this great collection. You may look to admire, and, if you
wish to learn something of the marvels represented there, be
assured that Mr. Dodd, or a member of the family, will be
willing and pleased to assist you.


THE NATIVE.
Peeping around the Monster Ant-Hill.


FAIRY LAND TEA GARDENS.
-2.30 on a sunny afternoon in May. In the hall of the hotel
is gathered a merry chattering group of men and women, with
eager anticipation writ large on every face, for the announce-
ment had gone forth at luncheon that arrangements had been
made to guide us to that beauty bower of alluring name—
“ The Fairyland Tea Gardens.”
Finally all are ready. Instantly we jump to our feet. There
are no laggards (who could be a laggard in such a climate?).
Our way lies along the line, the greater part of it through deep
cuttings, but the glimpses we obtain of the river are many, and
very beautiful. Deeply wooded islands stud its surface here
and there; sandy beaches tempt us to pretend we are at the
seaside, and noisy rapids tell us of the uneven bed of the river.
The opposite bank where it is not covered with what appears
to be an impenetrable scrub, shows de ghtful stretches of
green sward.
The islands are mostly covered with the ti-tree, whose fea-
thery red blossoms make a pretty note of colour in the pic-
ture. The bloom of wattles and of various gums also tend to
relieve the omnipresent green. What an ideal spot for a poor
drought-stricken wretch to be transported to. He would think
he had been carried to Paradise. Trailing vines of wild sweet
peas, with their dainty flowers, and creeping wild passion vines
with their hairy fruit cases, attract the eye of the observant,
while bushes of wild raspberries bid us search for the red
fruit hidden amongst their green leaves. Pandanus trees, with
their peculiar fruit, are seen standing on the river amidst a
coarse bracken.
A walk of nearly a mile and a-half brings us opposite
Fairyland. But no trace of The Gardens can be seen, nothing
but a thick scrub down to the water’s edge meets the eye. A


loud coo-ee rouses the inmates of a little cottage on the op-
posite bank, and soon we are being carried across the Barron
in a boat, by Miss Lorna Dick, who conducts the Gardens.
Landing, we are led up a low bank, and lo! we are in
Fairyland. Through a maze of leafy trees, palms, ferns, and
luxuriant grasses, we follow our guide along a narrow, winding
pathway, where the trees tower high above our heads. Pre-
CROSSING THE RUSTIC BRIDGE.
sently we come to a gigantic Kauri pine, with a girth of 21
feet ! We are told that the first limb is 80 feet from the
ground ! This tree is under the protection of the Govern-
ment, and is one of the many sights of Kuranda.
Further along we are presented with pride to a monstrous
fig tree, which octopus of trees, has drawn all other trees
within its reach into its all-embracing clasp. Huge bird’s-nest
ferns and orchids of many kinds find ample accommodation
on its broad boughs, and scores of strong vine cables, drop-
ping from bough to ground, tempt the enterprising climber to


try his agility. Retracing our steps, we come again to the
famous pine, but turn into a path on our right, where we
discover fresh beauties, and presently, after much winding, dur-
ing which we cross a delightfully rustic-looking bridge, built
over a stream with high banks, we emerge from the scrub, and
we find ourselves in a banana and paw-paw plantation, prettily
situated on the banks of a stream.
After wandering through groves of fruit trees for some
time, we begin to feel a desire for tea, and are led into the
Fairies’ Bower, where the, little people have magnanimously
provided rustic seats and a rustic table for those human beings
who invade their dainty arbour. The tea is delicious, and the
cake and bread quickly disappear beneath the inroads made
upon it by we hungry people. Bananas from the plantation are
set before us, and never before have I tasted any with such de-
licious flavour as these.


STONEY CREEK
“ Whither away, to-morrow ?” inquires one of our party,
as we gather in the Cosy Corner after dinner on a Wed-
nesday evening. Prompt comes the reply from our genial
host, “Well, as to-morrow is Thursday and there is an early
afternoon train from Cairns, 1 propose yon make the trip to
Stoney."
THE COSY CORNER.
So Thursday morning finds ns once more in the train. It
is a beautiful day. A cool, delightfully fresh breeze comes
up the gorge. The sky is perfectly clear, not a solitary cloud
appears to intensify its deep azure. The trees glisten and
sparkle in the breeze, which, as it sweeps over the scrub on
river and mountain, produces shades and shadows which are
exquisite in their blending. The mountains are a misty blue, a


mysterious, indefinable blue, through which the green of fol-
'age appears as through the lightest of gossamer veils. The
glamour of the tropics has already cast its spell over us, and
this perfect day serves but to further enchain us.
Shortly after leaving the station, we are delighted to no-
tice a number of mia-mias, standing on the river bank near
the line, out of which rush the black inhabitants; the adults
clad in heterogenerous garments, and the children in nature’s
own garb, indeed even the attire of some of their elders is
BLACKS’ CAMP.
rather scanty. For instance, (do not be shocked, oh, gentle
reader), we spied an old nigger standing prominently forward
clothed only in a night shirt.
As we rush past, they stare at us curiously, and their dogs,
mongrels of every description and hue, bark their defiance
of the thundering black creature running on wheels. The
dwellings of these survivors of a dying race are dome-shaped.


STONEY CREEK.


and very ingeniously plaited of the lawyer vine, and, incred-
ible though it may seem, are said to be rain proof. As the
train glides past The Falls, we rush to the windows to obtain
another glimpse of the wonderful sight, a sight which never
palls, even as the magnificent view over the gorge out to the
distant sea, is ever interesting and enthralling, even to the
holders of season tickets, who every day ride to and fro be-
tween Kuranda and Cairns. We notice, as the wonderful
panorama opens before us, that their newspapers are lowered,
and the glance of their eyes wanders out once more to behold
that perfect picture which our unaccustomed eyes arc devour-
ing so hungrily.
As we near Xo. 15 tunnel, Mr. Hunter recounts a little
story in connection thereof, which sends us into convulsions
of laughter. It runs thus :
A lad who had dwelt in the backblocks all his young life,
suddenly decided to journey to Cairns that he might see that
wonderful thing people called the sea, and have the exquisite
joy of riding in that marvellous creation of ‘ human ingenuity
called a train, of which those who came- from civilisation had
often spoken to him. Of the first part of his journey we know
nothing, but we do know that he alighted at Kuranda Station
and proceeded to the refreshment room, where, with bulging
eyes, he recounted to the barmaid the wonders of the train,
and of the sights seen on his journey. “ Oh,” said tne young
lady, “you have seen nothing yet; but if you look out of the
train on your left as you go down the range,' you will sec
where the river breaks ofif and falls into space.” Unbelief
showed plainly on his expressive face. Nevertheless, he kept
a strict watch on the left of the train, and suddenly, to his
astonishment, the barmaid's words were proved true.
Yes. there was the river actually falling down a deep, deep
wall of rock. Where to, he could not see, but supposed it was
int~ snare. Marvellous thing ! Suddenly his broad shoulders


were withdrawn from the window, and he turned to see how
the other occupants of the carriage regarded the wonder.
\\ hy, they did not look at all surprised. Incredible fact !
Much perplexed was the poor fellow by the strange behaviour
of the others.
But the climax came when the train passed through No.
15 tunnel. As it approached the tunnel, the bushy, who rarely
withdrew his head from the window, showed great agitation
and fear, then suddenly crouched down into a corner. As the
STONEY CREEK FALLS.


train sped into the inky blackness, he was heard to catch his
breath, but otherwise was silent. Out of the blackness of pitch
into the sunlight again, roared and rattled the train. Up jumped
our hero, and thrusting his head out of the window, gazed
back at the tunnel until it faded from sight, then with a great
sigh of relief, sank back into his seat with the ejaculation,
“My God, what a mess ther’d ’ave bin if she ’ad missed that
hole,” and he could not understand why his fellow passengers
roared with laughter.
The run to Stoney Creek Station is very short, and every
yard of the way is packed so closely with beauty that we wish
it many times the actual distance.
When we alight from the train our first object is to ob-
tain another view of the Falls. We look longingly into the
clear pool at their base, and feel tempted to bathe in it, but
desist, when we are assured that there is a deeper and far more
beautiful pool farther down the creek, to which we will soon
repair.
Standing on the bridge, we have a good view on the one
side of the main fall and the pool, and on the other side of
the stream as it leaps and rushes over boulders in its desper-
ate haste to join the river, about two miles farther down.
Retracing our steps to the station, a little beyond it we find
a notice directing the uninitiated the way to Stoney Creek. It
is a narrow pathway, and we are compelled to proceed in
single file. Down, down, ever downwards. Luxuriant vege-
tation everywhere. Now we descend on a grassy glade, with
mango, orange, and lemon trees included amongst the native
scrub. We make a raid on the orange trees, which are loaded
with fruit, and after disposing of the luncheon baskets under
the mango trees, continue our itinerary.
Very soon we come upon the creek, gurgling and splashing
over its rocky bottom, and, following its course for a few yards,
we discover, to our infinite satisfaction, the much-spoken-of
Silver Pool. This pool, clear as crystal, with translucent green


depths, is in reality from 15 to 20 feet deep. Its transparency
(the bottom can be clearly seen from the rocks above), makes
its depth appear most deceptive. The invitation offered by
that magic pool is too tempting to resist. The ladies having-
retired to a discreet distance, the gentlemen cast aside their
clothes, and, in the twinkling of an eye, are splashing in its
cool depths.
After exploring the creek for some distance, we return
to the mango trees, and proceed to lay out the lunch. Pre-
sently the gentlemen return, ravenous. The billy is soon set
to boil, and presently, with appetites that would shame a school
hoy, we are devouring the contents of the luncheon baskets
with avidity.
After lunch, we wander along a track which a signboard
tells us leads to “Bridge View.” It is a narrow path and fol-
lows the creek for the greater part of the way, running beside
an overhanging bank on the left, with the stream creeping-
round huge boulders in its channel on the right.
Finally, we come out on a platform of rock, from which
we look up the gorge, and behold, between high walls of
green foliage and brown rock, a distant view of the iron bridge
with the misty white veil of the Falls behind it. Below that,
we see a patch of green, then another splash of silver, as a
second Fall is negotiated; again a strip of green foliage, under
which the stream is quite hidden as it makes a bend, then, with
a rush and a tumble, bursts forth into view again as it leaps
in a series of cascades down the rocky bed, swirling past our
feet in a whirl of foam.
The return climb is a bit of a pull, but we tackle it pluck-
ily, and having left a sufficient margin in which to catch the
train, we take it slowly, making many a pause on the way to
admire a delicate fern or a delightful Pit of scrub scenery.
The top of the gorge at last, and time to have a rest on
the station platform before the train appears. “A well-spent
day” are the terminating words to many a diary this night.


KING O’MALLEY’S CHAIR AND LADY ROBINSON’S
LOOK-OUT.
A train journey to Barron Falls Station, then a walk of
a few yards, noting on the way several sheer drops of the
precipice to the valley hundreds of feet below, and we come
to the steps leading to the natural platform of rock whereon
King O’Malley’s Chair is found.
It is a delightful spot, looking as it does right over the
gorge, where, about 800 feet below, a good view of the Devil’s
Pool is obtained, and the white railing whereon is carved in
large letters, Knight’s Fall, is also to be descried, surrounded
by foliage, far, far below, and, looking at it from here, we won-
der how we could ever have got to the spot. Just opposite
are two tiny falls, which unite, and mingling their waters to
take a big leap, descend in spray on the rocks beneath, and
again dividing, run into the Devil’s Pool by many mouths.
King O’Malley’s Chair, named in honour of Mr. King
O’Malley, who was the first Federal Minister to sit on this
natural chair, consists of a smooth, inviting ledge of rock,
with a fairly high back rest.
We ascended the platform by steps on the left, and we
leave it by steps on the right to regain the line, which we fol-
low for some distance. After crossing the bridge that spans
Mervyn Creek, with its beautiful fall, which, however, cannot
be seen from above, a few yards brings us to narrow steps
cut in the rocky wall, that strongly remind one of similar steps
found in the street-ways of old fishing villages in the south-
west of England.
Steps, and yet more steps, and then a bushy height from
which Robb’s Monument can be seen guarding the line. Down
from this eminence out on to a grassy projection, known as


Lady Robinson’s Look-out. This name was given to the spot
because Lady Robinson, wife of Queensland’s Agent General,
visited it shortly after it was made accessible to the public.
As Mervyn Creek Falls are spied, exclamations of admira-
tion are emitted at sight of the beautiful falling stream of
water, tumbling from' ledge to ledge, between the cleft it has
hollowed in the solid rock, during thousands of years of flood.
(The writer had the good ' fortune to view these falls after
heavy rain.)
A good view is obtained from here of Knight’s Fall also,
and we shudder, as we contemplate the awful death that awaited
the poor girl, hanging practically by a thread to the bare face
of the rock, had she not been rescued by the promptness and
resourcefulness of one who deserved great merit for his
action.


KING O’MALLEY’S CHAIR.
Looking into Devil’s Pool, 800 feet below.


MILNE DELL.
The sun was shining brightly and making the earth and
everything therein unpleasantly warm, as we set out to walk
to Milne Dell,, so named in honour of Mr. G. T. Milne. British
Commissioner' for Trade in the Commonwealth of Australasia,
who was one of the first party to visit the spot.
A few minutes' walk and we are led through a fence, to
enter the outer edge of a scrub. A broad pathway runs through
it, sloping to the flat below. We have left the warmth of the
sun behind us, and pleasant walking we find this Lover’s Walk,
as it has been ; so aptly named. But it is very short, and once
again we are in the open. Now we are crossing a well-grassed
undulating strip of ground, on which one would not be at all
surprised to see deer browsing or standing under its shade
trees.
Down to the edge of an Arcadian stream, descend the well-
grassed slopes. Rippling over a gravel-strewn bottom between
lily-lined banks, babbling over stones and pebbles, with giant
tree ferns adorning either bank, or flowing silently, dark and
calm, between overhanging trees thickly massed, this most
enchanting, this most wonderful of wonderful streams, winds
a circuitous course for three miles, from its source in the
green hills, before joining the Barron, just below Kuranda
Station.
Stepping stones enable us to cross this delightful stream,
and now we look with dismay at the hill before us. A broad
red road running up its length serves to intensify the vivid
green of the short grass. We choose the grass in preference
to the road, as being easier to walk on, and after much climb-
ing and puffing reach the summit, Where a rest is called.
Now the scrub is entered, and we find the walk similar
to that of Rocky Hill, though even more beautiful, until pre-


MILNE DELL.


sently, we leave it to turn down a narrow pathway on our left.
From when this pathway is entered until we reach Milne Dell,
the walk for beauty of foliage is the most wonderful I have
ever seen. All the thousand and one scrub trees and vines,
and ferns, and orchids are here represented. Beautiful tree
ferns of various kinds make one hunger for possession of them;
and the lawyer palm appears in such beauty, that one forgives
it the tears and pricks suffered through its “clutches.” Nar-
rower grows the way, and the slope is downwards; shrubs
thrust out protesting branches, and the grass under foot be-
comes coarser and higher.
The gurgling of running water is heard. We turn a bend,
run down the last slope, and 10, we are at the edge of the
murmuring stream, in a bower of enchantment. “Milne Dell,”
proudly announces our guide. High banks just one wonderful
mass of all the most beautiful forms of tropical vegetation,
with the most delightful of babbling streams girding the slopes
with a silver cincture, and whispering its secrets to all who
have ears to hear, is the picture presented to our wondering,
admiring eyes.
When we have explored all the mysterious little nooks and
corners of the creek, we younger members of the party find
seating accommodation on two logs lying picturesquely across
the stream, while our elders seat themselves on the rocks, and
all patiently wait for the “billy” to boil.
The “boiling of the billy,” and the drinking of “billy” tea
when made, have proved one of the most enjoyable parts of
these delightful walks. On this pleasant afternoon, the feasts,
both visionary and corporeal, are truly epicurean in their ex-
cellence.


A FINE FAMILY.


KURANDA NATIVES
A Pure and Increasing Tribe.


FERN TREE GULLY.
Along the main road for some distance, noting in one part
the broad sweep of the avenue, so like to the drive leading to
a beautiful home; in another part, admiring the warm red soil
flanked by the green of grass and trees; then into the scrub
where the sun cannot find us. Emerging at the foot of a hill,
we proceed to climb it, and reaching the summit, behold a
sea of trees, stretching away into the haze of distance, and
merging into the blue of distance ranges.
GIANT TREE FERNS.


The view, though confined but to trees and mountains, has
a certain indefinable charm about it, very similar to the fas-
cination, which a rolling expanse of sea stretching away to
the distant horizon exercises upon one.
We turn to the right and wander down the slope of the
hill. The descent is very gradual, and it is some distance from
the summit to the foot, where on the banks of Fern Tree
Gully, grows, profusely, that rare and precious plant— the Lico-
podeum. Eagerly, fronds are culled, and roots dug from their
resting-places by we enthusiastic amateur gardeners.
Part way up the hill again, we strike off and follow a path
down another side. The scrub ginger-plant and the scrub pep-
per-vine excite our interest and curiosity, likewise the lawyer-
vine, which also incites our anger, as we become entangled in
its trailing, octopus-like ropes. “Wait-a-while” our host calls
them, a term which is equally as appropriate as the former,
because you certainly must “wait a while” if you wish to leave
their arms without loss of portion of your clothing or flesh.
Over stepping stones we cross a narrow bend of Fern
Tree Gully; then treading luxuriant grass, come to where
magnificent tree ferns, standing in stately form, wave their
graceful, feathery fronds in the breeze. Here the “billy,” our
faithful friend, is filled, and steps are retraced to the upper
slope of the hill, where, under the shade of wattle trees, we put
our black friend over the fire, and stretching ourselves on the
sward, bring forth our best jokes and tales.
Presently, the wag of the party suggests a game. With
true pic-nic spirit, we all willingly agree. “Then,” says he, “We
shall play, who can make the ugliest face. F.rst prize to be
a box of chocolates which have mysteriously crept into the
basket.” A young curate is elected judge. The word “off”
is given, and instantly all faces are distorted in an effort to
win the prize. lam afraid our nearest and dearest would fail
to recognise our faces could they see them now. “Halt,”
calls the curate, having chosen the face he considers to be
the winner. He advances to a lady sitting beside me, and
presents her with the prize. To the young curate’s great sur-
prise, the lady looks up and says, simply. "But I was not
playing.” Our host, to relieve an embarassing position, calls
“Time to start for home.”


SURPRISE CREEK.
The afternoon is clouded, but a cool breeze meets us, as
we alight from the train at Surprise Creek, with its pretty
rapids and falls. A heavy shower of rain fell this morning,
and washed the face of Nature very clean, so that she looks
re-juvenated and appears to us in her best winter garb, beau-
tifully shaded in tones of light and dark green, with splashes
of brilliant red and yellow.
Turning down a grass-grown path that runs from the line
along the edge of the high bank of Surprise Creek, we follow
pretty little stream. We have noted and admired the wonderful
clumps of maidenhair that grow along the side of the walk.
SURPRISE CREEK BRIDGE.


Standing on a huge flat stone, with the clear, sparkling
water swirling past our feet, and looking up the stream, we
notice miniature falls and noisy rapids, tumbling in silvery
spray into the pools below, only to hurry on again and to
negotiate the next drop.
We follow up the creek for some distance. As usual, on
the banks of these tropical streams, we find a dense scrub
running down to the water’s edge. In parts of the creek, the
overhanging branches of the trees almost meet overhead, and
form a lacy screen through which we view the falling water.
Rounding a huge boulder, we drop on an old bent man, dip-
ping his prospecting dish in the water. Our unexpected ar-
rival does not disconcert the old fellow in the least. Turning
calmly around, he bids us a gruff “Good-day.” Made to feel
by his manner that we are trespassing, we turn to retrace our
steps, after passing a few polite remarks, which elicit barely
audible replies. One of our party, as a last resource at at-
tempted conversation, asks the silent one does he think it will
rain. This inane question, to our great surprise, appears to
rouse the interest of the old fossicker. “Well, mum,” he an-
swers slowly, with a very wise look, scanning the strip of sky
overhead, “may be it will be wet, an’ may be it’ll be fine. 1
ought ter know, I ’ave bin ’ere twenty years.” It is impos-
sible to repress an involuntary smilei Thinking that we have
succeeded in gaining his attention, we remain to attempt fur-
ther conversation, in the chance of his letting drop further
pearls of thought, but he relapses into his former taciturnity,
so we depart, cherishing his one thoughtful observation.
Some of us have brought fishing rods, and casting them
into the deeper holes of the stream, we try to ensnare any
hungry fish that may be prowling around, but our success in
this direction is small. Three small “jew” is all that falls to
our line. Others of the party who have brought prawn nets,
make a good haul of crayfish.
Presently the “billy” is boiling and tea is made and drunk
to the accompaniment of laughter and pleasant talk. The time
passes very pleasantly until the train arrives, when we are
whisked home, arriving just in time for dinner.


SURPRISE CREEK.


DOUBLE ISLAND MOUNTAIN.
A clear afternoon with the inevitable cool easterly blowing
presages an enjoyable walk to the top of the mountain across
the river. The Barron is crossed in the hotel boat, and after
scrambling up the bank, a plunge is made into the scrub. For
a short distance we follow a narrow track, cool and moist, with
the übiquitous lawyer r vine guarding its confines, and the myriad
lesser palms and ferns, that cover the brown earth in a tro-
pical scrub, trying to break bounds and thrust out their leaves
and fronds into the pathway.
Emerging on an open roadway, we ascend a slight in-
cline, to find ourselves on a grassy glade, on wfnVh are found
comquat trees, loaded with fruit. The sight of the fruit car-
ries our minds back to the breakfast table, where we had
enjoyed the delicious home-made comquat jam, provided for
our delectation.
Now downhill lies our course, then through close forest
country, where moss of emerald hue adorns logs and trees,
and even carpets the ground. Out of the forest, across an
open space, and once more into the cool scrub; again the path-
way is narrow, and to bar our progress, trees throw out men-
acing branches, which we lightly push aside. The murmur of
a running stream, hidden from us, is the only sound other than
our voices and footsteps, that breaks the silence of the scrub.
Presently we come upon this brawling stream of clear,
limpid water, which, tumbling over rocks and boulders, mak-
ing sudden leaps, and eddying in rock-formed pools, than which
Pysche’s bath could not have been fairer, loses itself in the
scrub. Fairly high banks rise on both sides of the stream, and
these are covered with the usual wealth of vegetation never
absent from a Northern scrub.
A halt is called and our guide gives us ten minutes’ rest
before commencing the climb up the mountain, which is 400
feet higher than Kuranda, and on the east rises above the level
of the sea 1500 feet.


THE PALM TREES.
On the way to Double Island Mountain.


As we sit gracefully posed on the grassy bank, with the
feathery palms as a background, one of the party takes several
snap-shots of us, and we screw up our faces into that strained
expression, with the fixed smile, so beloved of photographers.
Now commences the climb. It is gradual, therefore not
unduly fatiguing. The last pinch is grassy, and the hasty
walker is apt to miss his footing and slide back a few paces.
But before commencing this last pinch, the view we have come
to see bursts in all its beauty upon us. We are standing on r
mountain, with a cool sea breeze blowing in our faces, and we
look down and out upon a blue sea, with a blue, blue dome
above it. and a green gem in the form of an island, set upon
its sparkling bosom, which is confined by a stretch of white
sand, the border of a sea of trees, running down from the
mountain.
It is very beautiful, and the blue sea. rolling out to the
distant horizon, gives one a wild longing for home; for over
those self-same waters, in the dark of an autumn morning,
had we sailed into the port of Cairns.
A timely joke from our guide diverts our thoughts, and
turns them into a merrier channel. Then, like true tourists,
we make frequent use of the note of interrogation in our sen-
tences. When our queries are exhausted, we have gathered the
fact, amidst other information, that the island gem derives its
name. Double Island, from its peculiar shape, looking as it
does, with a deep depression in the middle, and either end
raised well above the level of the water, uncommonly like two
islands.
But the highest point of the mountain has not yet been
reached. It is to that point we now make ou r way, with many
a laugh over the slips and sprawls of some of the party.' Here
we cast ourselves down on the grass under the shade of the
she-oaks. Between the leafy branches of trees, clothing the
slopes of the mountain, we descry Kuranda in the distance. (It
is two and a-half miles from us. and only five miles from the
sea). Soon the “billy” is boiling, and tea and jokes are passed
around.
A merry half-hour is spent on this height, which is often
anove the clouds, then with one last long look at the beautiful
sea, we turn our backs on the mountain, and retrace our steps,
on the homeward way.


THE FAMOUS BARRON FALLS.
It is Friday afternoon. The 2.45 train steams into Kur-
anda Station. She is boarded by twenty visitors, who hold
tickets for the mile and a half journey to the Falls. No need
to designate them, they are the Falls. A bell, rings, a door
bangs, the engine emits a shrill whistle, and the train is off.
The journey to the Falls is very short. Stepping out of the
train, we twenty travellers, most of whom have come 2000 or
more miles to see what may justly be termed Nature’s master-
piece in Australia, pass through the fence railing off the rest-
ing shed, proceed to the head of the path which leads to the
bottom of the Falls, and take our first fill of beauty..
No pen can adequately describe the grandeur, the beauty,
and the fascination of this enormous volume of water, which,
after a plunge of more than 600 feet, when its waters break like
carded wool on the sharp edges of the black rocks, flows
angrily through a narrow gorge, before taking its final leap
into an unfathomable hole, known as the Devil’s Pool. The
walls of the mighty canyon, clothed on the near side wjth
grass and an occasional tree, but which on the far side appear
as dark weather-beaten rocks, softly clothed in patches with
green moss and crowned with a dense tropical scrub, lent
added beauty to the scene.
At the foot of the frothing, boiling, seething mass of
water stands, in pathetic lonliness, a pointed fragment of rock,
clothed with moss, which, to an imaginative eye. appears un-
commonly like unto an old English feudal castle, which has
braved the storms of Nature for thousands of years.
Down the 402 steps and many slooing paths to the very
foot of the mighty cascade, plod we seekers after'beauty. Here
the true splendour and majesty of the great rush of water bursts
upon us, and very small and very puny seem we mere mortals,
while a feeling of awe comes over us at the thought of the
might and relentless strength of Nature, as represented by this
wonderful, stupendous piece of handiwork. We retrace our
steps until we come to a path diverging to the left. This we


THE BARROW FALLS.
Normal Condition.


follow, and find ourselves skirting the gorge. Overhanging
trees on both sides of the narrow pathway darken the way,
and give it a certain air of mystery. Clumps of delicate
maidenhairfern are eyed greedily, and it is hard to resist the
temptation to pluck the beautiful fronds, but we have been
informed that all plant life is protected in the gorge, so stay
our destroying hands.
The trend of the path is downwards, and we very soon
reach the end, where we are glad to rest on the seats provided
by the Government for that purpose. We look up and find
the precipitous sides of the gorge far above us ; our glance
wanders downwards, and we behold, far below, a seething
cauldron of water known as the Devil’s Pool, because of its
unfathomable depths, into which the Barron takes its second
leap, then continues its journey to the fate which awaits it—
absorption in the all-devouring ocean. The sight recalls to our
minds the following story told us by Mr. Hunter the evening
before.
In the early days of northern settlement, a timber com-
pany thought it a good proposition to shoot cedar logs, felled
on the banks of the Barron, over the Falls, whence, they cal-
culated. the timber would be carried down the Barron by the
force of the waters. The venture was made, but proved a
failure. Those of the logs that were not smashed to match-
wood in the first leap were caught in the Devil’s Pool, where
for years they revolved round and round its rocky sides, gradu-
ally being pounded and worn away by the terrific force of *he
water. Recently a specimen, uncommonly like a huge cocoa-
nut, was reclaimed from its prison, and is now on view at
Hunter’s Hotel.
Another story is recalled by the discovery of the words,
Knights’ Fall, cut in large letters in the railing put up as a
protection to the public. It is as follows :
A young girl, sitting on the edge of the precipice, with
her foot supported by a tuft of grass, was horror-stricken,
when she attempted to rise, by the tuft giving way and pre-
cipitating her towards the depths below. Fortunately, in her


downward descent, her blouse caught in a bush, and she hung
suspended 30 feet from the bank above, with a sheer drop of
300 feet beneath her ! Two young men were near the scene
of the accident, and promptly rushed to her assistance: one
by fhdng to the line above and cutting some wire to use
as a rope, the other by descending the side of the precipice as
far as he could with safety, and assuring the poor girl to
keep up her courage, as help was coming. Very soon his com-
panion returned with the wire, which he looped and
lowered to the anxious waiting girl below, who was rescued
little the worse for her fall, excepting for the consequent
shock to her nervous system. Her escape from an awful death
is considered a marvellous dispensation of Providence. It
seems incredible that the weight of a well-developed woman
could have been supported on a mere bush.
Natives spearing fish In the Barron River


iFaalttmiablp ®mlnr
S. HILLMAN
ABBOTT STREET, CAIRNS
The MOST UP-TO-DATE STOCK
TO CHOOSE FROM.
□
It is very desirable for Gentlemen
who intend residing in the country
to have their measurements recorded
with me before leaving Cairns.
H
ALL WORK UNDER MY PERSONAL
SUPERVISION.
S. HILLMAN - Proprietor


HUNTER’S
Barron Falls Hotel
KURANDA
The Latest Addition to the District.
Everything New.
LARGE LOUNGES FIRST and SECOND FLOORS.
ORIENTAL ROOM. BUFFET.
■ TENNIS and CROQUET.
HOT and COLD WATER BATHS
ADVISABLE WIRE FOR ACCOMMODATION TO
SAVE POSSIBLE DISAPPOINTMENT.
Under the Personal Management of
E. Hunter.


WE ARE IN FRONT
WITH
Drugs, Chemicals
Photographic and
:: Fancy Goods ::
Our Stocks are complete
and our Service the Best
Phone 169 After Hours, 182
Box 108
W. A. COLLINS
Chemist
LAKE ST., CAIRNS


Blackburn’s
COURT HOUSE
HOTEL
PORT DOUGLAS
Tariff 8/- Per Day. C.T.A. House
Large Rooms.
Abundance of Air and Light.
Situated Close to Beach. Surf Bathing.
Every Attention Given.
ERN. BLACKBURN
PROPRIETOR.


Harding
and WrigKt
Auctioneers, Land, Stock and Financial Agents
(Established 1888)
Properties for Sale in the Atherton, Eacham
and Evelyn Districts.
Properties Purchased and Managed for Ab-
sentees.
Clients can get the benefit of Mr. C. Harding’s
25 years’ experience in the above districts.
Agents for
National Mutual Life Association of Aus-
tralasia Ltd.
Manchester Insurance Company Ltd.
Queensland Insurance Company Ltd.
AUCTION SALES BY APPOINTMENT.
Prompt Settlement.
Telegrams Addressed “HARDING.”
Correspondence Invited.
ATHERTON and HERBERTON


CARLTON
ALES
Drawn by all Principal
Hotelkeepers in
Queensland
J. & P. PEASE
JlgenCs for Queensland


Wrumlcil loom
CONNECTED WITH HUNTER’S HOTEL
ALL CLASSES OF
Japanese Goods Stocked
L
Kimonos and Opera Coats in Crepe, Silk and Crepe
de Chine, Drawn Thread Grass Lawn and Linen
Tray and Table Covers, Bedspreads (the most beautiful
handwork ever introduced into Australia). Silks,
Crepes, Grass Lawns and Crepe de Chines in piece.
Scarves and Shawls, all the latest novelties. Gent’s
Tussore and White Silk Shirts, Collars, Handkerchiefs,
etc., etc., all imported direct from Japan. Maltese
Lace Work in great variety, the largest assortment in
the Commonwealth, all direct from the cottage lace
makers in Malta. Eastern Brasswork Curios.


The Ideal and Most Popular
SUMMER RESORT for
Tourists in North Queensland.
Lake Eacham Hotel
YUNGABURRA
ESTATE of H. S. WILLIAMS,
Proprietors.
A. S. WILLIAMS, Licensee
THE LARGEST, COOLEST and
MOST UP-TO-DATE HOTEL in
NORTHERN QUEENSLAND,
having all modern appointments, and
being under the personal supervision
of the Licensee. THE FAMOUS
Lakes Eacham and Barrine
are within easy distance of the Hotel,
and Boats have been placed on both
Lakes for the convenience of visitors.


BOLAND’S
Departmental
Stores
LAKE & SPENCE STREETS, CAIRNS
SHOPPING by POST a SPECIALITY
EVERYTHING USEFUL STOCKED IN
DRAPERY IN ALL ITS BRANCHES
BOOTS and SHOES
IRONMONGERY GROCERY
(wholesale and retail)
DIRECT IMPORTERS OF
ENGLISH & CONTINENTAL GOODS
ONLY ADDRESS—
M. Boland, Cairns


OWEN WHITTIGK
Latest
Southern Newspapers,
Jtfagazines and
Novels.
Local Post Cards and
Books of Views.
Fishing Tackle Stocked.
Best Brands of
Sobaccos, Cigars and
Cigarettes,
Phone 137 P.O. Box 61
Abbott Street, CAIRNS


Ernest C. J. Hunter
LAND and ESTATE
AGENT
KURANDA
Full Particulars regarding DAIRY
FARMS FOR SALE in this District,
also large areas of Standing Scrub.


ABBOTT STREET
CAIRNS
This First-class Hotel has Every Convenience
for Tourists and the General Travelling Public.
BALCONY ROOMS
LARGE LOUNGE
DINING ROOM
Under the Personal Supervision of Proprietress,
Nellie Fox.


Alfred Taylor
Plumber, GasfiCter, etc.
Cairns
Begs to notify the General Public
that he is prepared to supply and
instal the DAZZLER Air Gas
Machine, including Piping and
Burners, from £46. COTT
Acetylene Generator installed
from <£4o, and SUNLIGHT
Acetylene Generator for £2O.
Boiling Rings, Grillers and Stoves
for Air Gas supplied.
Satisfaction Guaranteed. Enquiries Solicited


Established 1883.
31 Years Established in Cairns.
ROBERT STURT & CO.
Auctioneer's
Horse and Cattle Salesmen, House, Estate, Land,
Commission, Forwarding Agents, Accountants,
Mining and Sharebwkere
WOLFRAM BUYERS
Sugar Farms for sale as going concerns, also
Scrub Lands, unimproved.
EXPORT TIMBER MERCHANTS
Red and Brown Cedar, Silky Oak, Maple, Beech, etc., etc.
Secretary Cairns Fire Brigade Board.
Valuers for Cairns Town Council.
Member of Cairns Stock Exchange.
Secretary Aloomha Sugar Company.
AGENCIES:
Dalgety and Co. Ltd. Queensland Trustees Limited.
Ocean Accident and Guarantee Co-operation Ltd
Manchester Assurance Co. Ltd
Phoenix Assurance Co. Ltd. White Star Line of Steamers.
Aberdeen Line of Steamers.


The Top Notch
of Scotch
A
King
(ton*? IV.
WHISKY
D.
C.
L.
WHISKY
10 Years.
In Wood.
I
Distillers Co. Ltd Distillers Co. Ltd.
Edinburgh. Edinburgh.


A.U.S.N. CO. LTD.
North Queensland Winter Tours
The Luxurious and Palatial Steamers of the above leave
Melbourne, Sydney and Brisbane weekly for NORTH
QUEENSLAND Ports, embracing the following Health
Resorts and Places of Interest.
Ideal Health and Pleasure Winter Tours
TO
Whitsunday Passage
Hinchinbrcok Channel
Mourilyan Harbor
Cairns
Barron Gorge
Barron Falls
Kuranda
Atherton Scrubs
T.S.S. “KYARRA, 6,953 tons
T.S.S. “ KANOWNA.” 6,942 tons
T.S.S. “ WYREEMA,” 6,338 tons
S.S. “ WYANDRA,” 4,058 tons
All fitted with Wireless Telegraphy.
Connecting at Townsville with the S.S. “Kuranda,” 928 tons.
For particulars of Fares, etc., apply Head Office, Mary
Street, Brisbane, and Agencies at all Ports.


(Catrna Sfonbar IGtmitab
SA WMILLERS,
Exporters of Logs and Sawn timber,
and General „ Merchants .
CAIRNS, N.Q. :
SAWMILLS AND TIMBER YARDS.
Telegrams: “GUMMOW,” Cairns.
Address Letters: “THE GENERAL MANAGER.’’
BRISBANE (Registered Office) :
Managing Agents ; MOXON & COMPANY Ltd., 121 Eagle St.
Telegrams: ‘MOXON,” Brisbane.
Cable Address : MOCASSIN,” Brisbane.
Codes: Al, Western Union, A.B.C , sth Edition.
SYDNEY
Managing Agents; MOXON & COMPANY LTD., 56 Pitt St.
J. Dunstan, Manager.
MELBOURNE :
V. B. Trapp & Co., Broken Hill Chambers.
PERTH:
C. M. WILSON, Railway Parade.
LONDON:
Thos. Gabriel & Sons & Burtons, Lambeth.
CALCUTTA:
Ewing & Company Ltd., P.O. Box No. 73, Calcutta.


Queensland
The Riviera of the Commonwealth and
:: the Winter Playground of Australia
HEALTHY and DELIGHTFUL CLIMATE
ENCHANTING SCENERY
Throughout the length and breadth of Australia, no more
enjoyable trip can be taken than that along the pictur-
esque Eastern Seaboard of dLKEXSLAXD, where, sailing
in calm waters. Hanked to the East by the mighty ram-
parts ol file Great Barrier Keef, one views with comfort
the exquisite beauty of the WHITSLJVDAV ami
lil\('lil\EiltOOK Passages with their numerous islands,
unsurpassed in any paid of the World. A week’s trip
inland from CAIKAS reveals a country of extraordinary
grandeur and richness in timbers, minerals, etc. The
lIAKKOX FA 1,1,5, STOW ( KEEK FALLS, and Tl LLV
EAl,l,s are noted throughout the Commonwealth for
their beauty. Interesting breaks of the journey can be
made at TOW.XSV'ILLK, tl ACK A VIIOWEAI, UOCKHAMP-
'I’OA and lilt ISIIA \E, to view the wonderful wealtli of
the hinterland, of which these places are the ports.
Descriptive Pamphlets and further information relative
to tin. Tourist Attractions of the Stale and its resources
!tml primary industries supplied, gratis, by
The Queensland Government Intelligence
and Tourist Bureau
T - c. TROEDSON.
Director.
QUEEN STREET. BRISBANE


Australian Steamships Limited
HOWARD SMITH COMPANY. LTD.
Managing Agents.
TOURISTS undertaking the Winter Cairns Trip
are strongly recommended to travel by the Twin
Screw Steamer MOURILYAN, 1,350 tons, with
a speed of 16 knots. This steamer was specially
constructed for the conveyance of Tourists between
Cairns and Townsville, with a view to giving pas-
sengers an opportunity of seeing to advantage the
beautiful coastal scenery, which cannot be done
with a larger vessel.
Intending Passengers are recommended to book
as early as possible, to avoid disappointment.
HOWARD SMITH COMPANY, LIMITED,
Managing Agents.


The Adelaide Steamship Company Ltd.
Regular Passenger and Cargo Services to and
from all Ports between Cairns (N.Q.), and
Wyndham (W.A.)
The Q.T.S.S. WARILDA, 7,786 tons, will leave Melbourne on
23rd June, Sydney on 27th June, and Brisbane on 30th June,
and every four weeks thereafter for Cairns via Ports.
Passenger Steamers’ Sailings between Cairns and Melbourne
are as follows;
Q.T.S.S. WARILDA, 7,786 tons,
S.S. GRANTALA, 3,700 tons. S.S WOLLOWRA, 3,000 tons.
S.S. MARLOO, 3,000 tons.
NORTHWARDS SOUTHWARDS
WARILDA. WANDILLA, WILLOCHRA and GRANTALA are
fitted with Wireless Telegraphy.
Above Passenger Steamers carry Refrigerated Cargo.
The Adelaide Steamship Coy.'s Passenger Steamers arrive at Cairns Sunday
morning, and leave that port Wednesday afternoon, thus giving tourists
ample time to visit Barron Falls, Atherton (the Lakes), Herberton, and other
places or interest. The Company s saloon tickets are interchangeable after
first port of call with other Interstate Companies without extra cost.
For further particulars as to Fares, Freights, etc., apply to Agents,
The ADELAIDE STEAMSHIP COMPANY Ltd.
