

PRICE SIXPENCE,
HOW I BECAME \
L
I
I
1
VENTRILOQUIST
WITH HINTS FOR
Self Instruction in that Wonderful
and Amusing Art.
A PROFESSIONAL VENTRILOQUIST.
MELBOURNE:
E. W. COLE, PUBLISHER. BOOK ARCADE


COLE’S CATALOGUE OF BOOKS
ON—
Magic, Ventriloquism, Games, &c.
Magic and Conjuring for Home and Stage.
Magic: Stage Illusions and Scientific Diversions including Trick Photography.
By Hopkins. 15s, posted 16/6.
Modern Magic : a treatment on the art of conjuring. By Hoffmann. ss, posted 3/6.
M ore Magic : By Prof. Hoffmann, js, posted 5/6.
Conjurer Dick or the Adventures of a Young Wizard. By Prof. Hoffmann.
3/6, posted (s.’
Drawing-room Amusements and Evening Party Entertainments: includ-
ing Punch and Judy Show. By Prof. Hoffmann. 3/6, posted 4s.
Sharps and Flats: acomplete revelation of the secrets of cheating at games of
chance and skill. By J. Nevil Maskelyne. 6s, posted 6/6.
Chance and Luck : a discussion of the laws of luck, coincidence, wagers, lotteries, and
the fallacies of gambling, with notes on Poker and Martingales. By R. A. Proctor
2 6, posted 3F
How Gamblers win ; or, the secrets of advantage playing exposed. 1/6, posled 1/8.
Parlour Tricks with Cards : containing explanations of all the tricks and decep-
tions with cards. 1/6, posted 1/8.
Warne’s Card Tricks made easy without slight of hand. By Pro. Hoffmann.
6d, posted yd.
Everybody’s Guide to Conjuring ; specially written for amateurs. 6d, posted yd.
Heller’s Magic and Card Tricks : together with tunny experiences. 3d, posted 4d.
Home Recreations ; or, how to amuse the young at social gatherings, .is, posted 1/2-
Lee’s How I became a Ventriloquist: with Hints for Self Instruction fid.
posted yd.
Practical Ventriloquist and its sister arts : a revelation in vocal phonetics
being a thoroughly reliable guide by an entirely novel system of graduated exercises.
By R. Ganthony. 2/6, posted 2/9.
The Art of Ventriloquism including full directions to learners with amusing dia-
logues, By I'. Maccabe. is, posted 1/2.
Bunkum Entertainments being a collection of original laughable skits, In 'lorous
sketches, whimsical recitations. By R Ganthom. 2/6, posted 2/9.
Warne’s Ventriloquism made easy : the history and practice of art
fid, posted yd.


HOW I BECAME
VENTRILOQUIST
WITH HINTS FOR
SELF-INSTRUCTION IN THAT
WONDERFUL AND AMUSING ART.
a Professional Ventriloquist.
MELBOURNE:
E. W. COLE, BOOKSELLER AND PRINTER.


A (PH
-y,i
HOW I
BECAME A VENTRILOQUIST.
^ —< —
-4 QUESTION often asked me by those with whom
J\j I have conversed upon the subject is, “Did you
uLJL become one, or were you born one?” and the
replies not infrequently lead to another question,
■“Does not ventriloquism afford much amusement?” to
which the invariable answer is, “ Indeed, yes 1” If I,
therefore, say for the encouragement of young readers,
that it is quite within the bounds of possibility that some
•of them may in future be known as ventriloquists, and
provide amusement for their friends and pleasure to
themselves, they will read with some degree of interest
the narrative of my experience.
My earliest recollections on the subject date back at
least fifteen years, when I was about sixteen years of
age. I remember distinctly the merry moments spent
in the perusal of the well-known book, “Valentine Vox”
—how each character and incident made an abiding
impression upon my mind. To me the reading of such
a work without subsequent attempts to imitate its hero
was an impossibility. Not having heard a ventriloquist,
I supposed such an individual must be a remarkable
phenomenon possessing powers akin to those of a
magician. Whatever effort I then made to become one
must have been very feeble, for want of an instructor, a
book, or a copy.


Fortune favoured me in giving me the opportunity of
hearing a public performer, who had a great reputation
as a “wizard” and ventriloquist. To my great delight
and satisfaction, he held a conversation with “Joe” on
the roof, introduced his audience to “Mr. Snorer” in an
adjoining room, to an unseen but not unheard man in a
box, and to another hidden behind a chair.
I'rom this entertainment I received an irresistible
desire to mimic what I had seen and heard.
Of course, I believed that some special formation of
the throat was needful; but whether the mysterious gift
was bestowed upon me must be tested by a trial.
to work I went in my own way. I endeavoured to bark
like a dog, until I coughed and cried from the unusual
strain put upon my vocal organs. I attempted to grunt
like a pig, and imitate the hounds in full cry, until told
for my encouragement, “You’ll surely break a blood-
vessel.” This, happily, has not yet occurred: I am
under no present apprehension for myself or my readers,,
if in practising ventriloquism they use ordinary caution.
Having once tasted the delicious stream of fun flowing
from a ventriloquial entertainment, I soon availed
myself of the opportunity of attending another. This
was to hear the renowned “Thurton,” and to make the
acquaintance of his “Old Folks.” From them I received
several useful hints, besides dialogues for future imitation
and practice.
By this time I began to incline to the opinion that a
ventriloquist might, after all, be a very ordinary mortal,
and that a few sentences which I heard from a profes-
sional conjurer might be as true of the several successors
of the noted “Valentine Vox” as of the conjurer him-
self, who said, “Ladies and gentlemen, in every calling
there is, I believe, more or less of professional humbug.


My profession differs from the rest in that it is nearly all
humbug, and my business to-night is to deceive you.
The extent to which I can do so will be the measure of
my success.”
I need not add that he succeeded as thoroughly as he
could have possibly desired. A confirmation of this
growing conviction was received when an amateur in
the art favoured a few friends and myself by holding an
occasional dialogue with “Joe” up the chimney on the
interesting subject of a change of linen, also a represent-
ation of an amusing but by no means sanguinary dog-
fight, in which poor little “Tiny the Terrier” comes off
worse at the hands (or rather the mouth) of “Bob the
Bulldog.” I had this opportunity for observing the
movements of the performer’s lips and the action of the
larynx. Proud, indeed, was I when one after another
said, as I repeated the experiments which had been tried
in my presence, “Why, you can do it!” “Well
•done!” etc.
It scarcely seemed possible, so gradual had been the
acquirement of the art even in a small degree, for I had
yet much to learn, and to lay on a greater amount of what
is called “ cheek.”
At length I began to practice for the amusement of
others. I learned from an amateur ventriloquist cas-
ually that the performer is not always “in voice,” for
when I asked for a specimen he replied, “ I cannot oblige
you, for I have a cold, and am hoarse.” Of this I made .a
mental note.
At that time (1868 —9) Penny Readings were the rage,
and the writer was in request as a reader of the Lan-
cashire dialect, and humorous pieces generally.
It was at one of these homely entertainments in the
north of England that “Professor Lee” made his dehut as a.
ventriloquist. A noted reader of Shakespeare and other


classics, with the peculiarity of making each characte
“lithp,”had promised to contribute to the entertainment of
some villagers. A severe snow-storm was raging on the
appointed evening. The wind was keen, the night dark.
A resident villager lent us his friendly lantern, by the aid
of which we reached the school-room, which was dimly
lighted by odoriferous paraffin lamps. The readers were
two. We read what we had intended, and recited what
we had not intended, and still half the evening remained.
What was to be done ? Go home ? That appeared to'
be the immediately inevitable unless we were inclined
to entertain each other by a game at “ Stare you out.’ r
The thought presented itself, “Why not make a venture
in ventriloquism ? no one knows you: there could not be a
better chance.” So, recollecting the story of the barber’s-
apprentice who had to practise on the workhouse boys-
because no one else patronized him, I put on the
requisite “nerve,” “courage,” “cheek,” (whichever
you please), and resolved that the audience should be
my workhouse boys (may they forgive me), and I would
practise on them.
Apologizing for the absence of my lithping confrere, I
asked indulgence as I endeavoured to give some recol-
lection of “ Thurston’s Old Folks.” Then followed a
description of Mr Thurston’s sketch. “ The Heir to'
the Crown,” with variations, additions, and omissions,,
no doubt, the embryo professor introducing to the best
of his'ability the different characters and voices which
he felt to be within range. Never shall I forget my
feeling, often since experienced—the dreadful query:
Am I succeeding ? Does it take ? Does the voice;
sound a long way off? etc. Of success or otherwise I
had no means of judging, except by the occasional 1
laughter and applause of the audience. I was set at rest
next day, for I heard an account in glowing terms of a


ventriloqnial entertainment which had been given in the
same room, same evening, and at the same hour at
which I bad made my venture.
Do you wonder that, like the conjurer I have men-
tioned, I now believe in the “gullibility” of the senses
(not the people), x and whenever afterwards asked, “ Are
you a ventriloquist ?” instead of replying as before,
“ Some people say so,” I assumed the air and perhaps
the mystery of one, and said “ Yes.” That memorable
occasion was to me what a first “header” is to a boy
who has learned to swim. I never shirked afterwards ;
and as I have, through my acquaintance with this art,
been provided with an inexhaustible fund of amusement,
I will, from very many, presently narrate a few incidents
which, as being personal though not marvellous, may
interest you.
You will probably say, “ The Professor has only told
us how he developed the gift of ventriloquism, which he
naturally possessed. How did he proceed to imitate
other ventriloquists ? and how did he know that his
results were obtained in the same way ? ” Well it is at
least presumptive evidence, when the same results follow
experiments performed under exactly similar circum-
stances, that they are produced by identical means,
though it is by no means the only proof I have had of
the genuineness of my acquirement. I will endeavour to
answer your several questions.
And first, let me remind you that things are not
always what they seem, or appear to be. The word
ventriloquist is derived from two Latin words, venter,
“ the belly,” and loquor, “ I speak,” meaning literally,
“to speak from the belly;” but the most elementary
acquaintance with physiology will convince you that
there are no organs of speech in that part of the body.
The word is used in an accommodating sense—the


sounds apparently proceed from the stomach, though I
scarcely think that the deception would have been so
great in the present day but for the book, “ Valentine
Vox.” I never received a single lesson in ventriloquism,
but, as the result of observation and practice, can con-
fidently state that the chief requisites for its acquire-
ment are—a throat and lungs of average strength (all
the better if above the average), ability to retain sounds
in the memory, and the faculty of mimicry as to tone,
look, and even gait, for these in no small degree con-
tribute to the effect which the artist desires to produce.
When myself a beginner, I noticed that the pro-
fessional performer invariably had at command more or
less extensive accessories, such as a window, a box, a
chair covered, a screen, curtain, or door; that often he
assumed the dress of different characters; that in
addressing the audience or imaginary individuals he
spoke in the voice of the character he had assumed,
while the replies were given in voices which were in
direct contrast to it, and to this he was indebted for
many of the impressions created in the minds of the
audience.
This will be more easy of belief, if as an experiment
you turn your back upon a feiv of your friends! say in the
parlour, at home, then put on your nose a pair of eye-
glasses having a strong spring; utter a few sentences ;
the result will be a nasal twang in your speech ; remove
the glasses and speak in your natural tone, and though
not ventriloquial the effect will be much akin to it; the
sudden change, contrast and, modulation of voice are half
the battle.
In addition to the accessories of scene and dress, I
must tell you that most practitioners so arrange that at
no time, when speaking ventriloquially, is the mouth
visible, or if it be, it is generally at side view. To this


rule there are several exceptions, of which lam one. It
may seem wicked, but be assured there are people who
will deceive you while they look at you.
It is a great mistake to suppose that a ventriloquist
can “ throw” his voice wherever he may be requested to
do so, or indeed “throw it” anywhere. Friends have
often asked me, “Can you throw your voice on to the roof?”
“ Can you throw it into that far corner of the room?”
“Please make your voice sound behind my chair?”
to which reply has to be made, “ My voice never leaves
me except when I have a cold, at which time its absence
proves sufficiently inconvenient to prevent my parting
with it on any other occasion, even at the request of my
dearest friends.” Or else taking the request as a cue,
an imitation is given of a voice at a distance, and the
imagination of the questioner does the rest.
“ Well,” but you say, “ I hear Mr. So-and-so, ‘throw’
his voice into ever so many places—on the roof, in the
cellar, and out of doors, up the chimney.” Pardon me
for contradicting you, but you did not; you heard him
so modulate his tones as that you fancied it came from
certain,directions and distances; and more than this, you
fancied so because virtually he told you to do so.
What do I mean ? Simply, that in the dialogue which
he conducted you were some way told whence to expect
the sound. For example, the performer approaching the
fireplace may say, “ I thought I heard someone speaking
up here; I’ll just ask.” .He then calls out “Is there
anyone up the chimney?” to which a reply is given in
a different voice from the other, so apparently distant,
that your attention is at once directed to the chimney,
and imagination leads you into error on the point.
It matters not whether the sound proceeds from the
roof, cellar, street, chimney, or from a distance, the same
method is adopted, and the same throat does the work.
NATIONAL LI BRAKY OF AUSTRALIA


PART 11.
This art may not only be practised in public entertain-
ment, but for the- private amusement of the possessor,
who may play no end of practical jokes, which I trust, if
you attempt them, will always be of an absolutely harm-
less description.
They will only succeed as time and circumstances are
fitting, as I will show you presently. Before doing so
there is one difficult question, which I will try to answer.
How are the modulations and change of sound produced
which so deceive the listener ?
They are formed in and by the throat, and are ar-
ticulated without the use of the lips and palate to the
same extent as in ordinary speech ; while also the tip of
the tongue is used against different points of the roof of
the mouth.
The lips, and sometimes the teeth, are closed, while
at others the lips alone must be open, the edge of the
upper row of teeth being allowed to rest easily against
the inside of the lower lip. The face may sometimes
be in repose, sometimes wearing an expression suited to
the utterance given, as of surprise, amusement, inquiry,
attention, etc.
A bass and somewhat sepulchral tone is produced
in the lower part of the throat in much the same way
that you wonld attempt to imitate the sound heard when
using a gargle, except that you will succeed better if
you keep your lips closed, and, of course, it is need-
less to throw back the head.
Try it slowly, and you will notice that in rendering
the gluck, gluck, gluck sound the “lump” or “apple”


of the throat will move as if you were in the act of
swallowing, while the tip of the tongue will be touching
the palate of the mouth.
The strength and pitch of the tones will depend upon
the compass of the natural voice, and the amount of air
which is allowed to pass from the lungs to the throat,
and the force employed by means of the chest and
stomach, which act as bellows, the contraction of which
forces the air up to the throat while an expansion at
once stops the supply.
The greater the distance from which a sound is ap-
parently to come, the nearer must the tip of the tongue
approach the front of the mouth, the greater must be the
contraction of the muscles, and the articulation must
take place in the upper part of the throat.
. The difference between sounds as from a distance and
those close at hand will be detected if you practise the
imitation “ gargle,” first with the mouth closed, and
then gradually opening it to its full extent. The point
in the throat at which the gurgle, is created may
be considered as the base of nearly all ventriloquial
operations, except perhaps the voice of a very little child,
or the mew of a kitten. I cannot better describe the
method by which these are obtained than by stating
that the throat is contracted and the nostrils dilated
somewhat after the condition they assume in a person
about to sneeze.
One naturally feels that the old saying, “ A penny-
worth of showing is worth six pennyworth of telling,” is
very true in connection with this subject, as it is next to
impossible to make you understand from a book what
might be taught in your presence. You may, however,
from these few hints, make a commencement, and with
due patience and much practice, become proficient in
the art.


You have, at least, an advantage which I had not,
that of a written guide. Do not be discouraged if in
practising, you find that not only is it more easy to
articulate vowels than consonants, but it is impossible
satisfactorily to render some consonants.
To the performer, many words will appear indistinct
and imperfect, but the little distance from his audience
at which he usually speaks, will, so far as the hearers
are concerned, remove the apparent difficulty. To the
ventriloquist, for example, the words am, my, up, will
be rendered as aug, gny, ugch, and so with other and
similar words.
Among the many who enjoy ventriloquial stories or
exhibitions, there are some who would doubtless like to
perform equally astonishing feats, for such feats are
very amusing in social gatherings and for astonishing
one’s friends. Anybody can learn ventriloquism. Of
course, in saying this I mean that he can learn it just as
he would learn anything else. There is no secret which
on being told at once makes one a ventriloquist. The
two requirements are observation and practice. These
are essential, whatever aids are employed. Observe the
different sounds you meet with day by day, different
voices at different distances. Try to make them where
you are, as they sound to you from a distance. Practice
over and over with all possible variations, and you will
be learning ventriloquism. When you think you have
got a little power, try it on some companion, leading him,
in advance, to expect the voice from the locality from
which you mean to make it seem to come.
By-and-by you will find you have gained some headway,
and it will soon become a source of amusement even
before you have become a master. Witness an exhibition
by a good ventriloquist, if possible, and observe him closely.
I think good books of instruction a great aid. I know


many have learned from the assistance of such hints and
helps as I give in these pages.
If the reader feel the need of assistance in the way of
examples for practice and exhibition he will find the best
of these in ” Ganthony’s Practical Ventriloquism,” a
handy little volume from which many have derived
assistance in perfecting themselves, as well as affording
a fund of useful scenes and dialogues for the student’s
practice and the exhibitor’s performance.
But you can learn without either book or teacher.
Nobody can learn by simply reading any book, though he
may read it a thousand times.
One should have a decent ear to distinguish sounds, and
if he seek aid from a book he should be able to comprehend
ordinary language. I have known some who had no sense
of distinction their vocal and their digestive
organs. One person asked for an herb or medicine which
would develop ventriloquism in him. I would suggest
to such persons to give up the pursuit altogether of
ventriloquial knowledge.
Now it is time to redeem my promise and give you a few
incidents from my own practice,which will prove that it
is possible both with and without “ get up,” to make
ventriloquism yield amusement to self and others,
provided circumstances be favourable, and the conditions
I have named be duly regarded.
I remember well, when quite a neophyte, trying my skill
upon two friends. We were out fora Saturday afternoon
walk. Approaching a small town, and just as we were
crossing a stile at the entrance of a field, we came upon
a labourer at work, and not being sure of our way, inquired
of him, and were told, we must turn to the right after
crossing the field, When half the fieldhad been traversed
I dropped behind my friends a yard or two, then opening
wide my mouth and contracting the throat, I called out:


“Hilloa ! you must turn to the left, not to the right!”
My companions, to my great amusement, halted, turned
about, and called out, “ Thank you—much obliged !” and
I, of course, being as interested as they were, joined in
their thanks, and undeceived them only when the requisite
turn was to be made.
In this experiment my endeavour had been to make a
sound resembling a voice when heard from a great dis-
tance and, I so far succeeded as to deceive my friends.
You must at once abandon the idea of throwing your
voice anywhere and set about imitating the tone and pitch
of a voice as heard from a given distance. Upon some
suitable occasion, when you hear a person calling out a
long way off, at once attempt to reproduce the sound as
you heard it and not as it was uttered by the speaker.
Soon after the little incident I have narrated, I removed
to London, and commenced my college life, and could not
resist occasional temptations to use my talent for my
personal gratification and that of my fellow-students.
Not to speak of all the little jokes in which I shared, I will
now relate one to show that success depends upon-the
ability of the performer to draw the attention to one
particular direction.
On one of the dark winter evenings of 1870, when
spending a few minutes in the college library, another
student entered in search of a book.
At one end of the room was a window at rather an
unusual height from the ground, the opposite end and
the sides of the room being covered with shelves.
The gas was lighted, the window blind was not drawn
down, consequently persons outside in the dark could
see into the library while unseen by those inside.
Mentally noting all this, I became, apparently, very
much engrossed in a book, the other student, in the mean-


time, searching for one on an upper shelf, when he heard
himself called as from a distance. He at once thought of
the window, and addressing me, wondered who was call-
ing him from outside. He resumed his search, and the
“somebody” lesumed his calling, whereupon, not
at all enjoying the joke, my friend placed the steps
against the side of the window, and after peering into
the darkness, indignantly pulled down the blind, when
his ear was saluted with sounds as of distant laughter.
This time it came from behind him, and this being
rather difficult of accomplishment, especially so as my
risible faculties were getting the master of me, the secret
leaked out, and I had to run for it, leaving my friend to
find his book.
In the following year, when spending a summer evening
at the house of some friends in the country, when we had
assembled for family worship, a wasp, availing himself of
the opportunity afforded by the open window, flew into the
room, and, alighting upon the hand of a domestic in
attendance, made his pt esence felt in rather an unpleasant
manner, causing his victim to exclaim, “Oh!”
Prayers ended, she was interrogated as to the cause,
and informed us that a wasp had stung her, whereupon
a search was made for the intruder; but although the
droning could be distinctly heard, he was nowhere to
be found, and had probably escaped before we were
informed of his mischief, the knowledge of which gave
me the cue for a little ventriloquial deception, hence
the droning, the source of which was eventually dis-
covered by my hostess, who was seated beside me, and,
noticing my apparent indifference in the search, closely
watched me, exclaiming at last: “There is a ventriloquist
present.”
Had it not been for the occurence, any attempt to create
an excitement on account of the supposed presence of a


wasp would have been comparatively futile, but as he was
present to the mind of all, it was not difficult to make him
present to the imagination also.
These experiments were amongst those that might be
described as the “little goes” of my experience, and, find-
ing that they were successful, I tried things rather more
difficult, and requiring even more assurance.
Having taken up my abode in one of the southern
counties, my new circle of acquaintances became aware
that I was conversant with this much-envied art, and
occasionally asked me, when in the drawingroom, to
entertain them for awhile, and I made use of these
opportunities for introducing fresh dialogues and trying
new experiments, amongst which the following was
successfully attempted:
Having prevailed upon a lady to assume for the moment
the dress of an elderly dame, I personated Hamlet—any
thing but a prince, I assure you—a stage-struck youth,
who having taken lodgings in the house of the elderly
dame, annoyed and alarmed her by his constant ghostly
speeches. Upon this grievance she was dilating, when
to her dismay, his voice was heard, and he entered in
“inky cloak and customary suit of solemn black.”
Producing from beneath his cloak a long clay pipe, he
asked her, “ Canst thou play upon this pipe ? ” To which
she, indignant, did reply, “ Go to bed, sir, “ in shrill tones
enough, but not so shrill as to frighten away her guest, who
continued the dialogue at some length, her response to all
queries being the motherly command,“Go to bed.”
The fun and deception in this dialogue arise from the
fact that the lady does not really speak, but only moves
her lips, and gesticulates as in accordance with her speech,
the gentleman alternating a deep bass voice with that of
a shrill soprano, being careful to speak at the moment
and speed adopted by his lady confederate,


This after several rehearsals can be done with great
precision and marked effect, the audience wavering between
the opinions as to whether or not, one or both actors take
part in the dialogue.
The most successful social entertainments are not
always those which are premeditated, but impromptu; as
for instance, when a number of friends assembled in the
drawing-room, awaiting the summons to dinner, a member
of the family (a fun-loving grandpa) entered the room in
a well-simulated flurry, and calling me by name, said,
“Do come into the dining-room, and see if there is not
a man up the chimney.”
Turning to an aged relative, he said :
“You come, too, and listen.”
We all adjourned to the dining-room, and, standing near
the fire-place, the old gentleman called up the chimney to
a supposed personage:
“Now, speak again, will you?”
The reply came from that smoky region, so sociable for
the purposes of a burglar, intruder or spy:
“All right: I will.”
All ears were instantly attentive, and the dialogue
proceeded.
“ How did you get up there ? ”
“ I climbed up the roof. ”
Upon this the aged relative alluded to, being rather
taken aback, called out:
“You had better come down, or a fire shall be lighted.”
“ I shan’t come down if you do. I won’t harm any of
you ; so you can go to dinner; good evening.”
“Come away,” said grandpa, chuckling at the suc-
cess of his little ruse—“come away to dinner.”
“No, indeed!” exclaimed the relative, indignantly,
“the man has no right up there. I shall not rest until
he’s down. lam going to find a policeman.”


And, suiting the action to word, he went into the hall fo.
his hat, when some one informed him of the deception,
and though at first a little incredulous, he soon enjoyed
the joke as much as the rest.
Such incidents prove far more amusing, you will find,
than any “cut and dried” and oft-served entertainment,
as they have the advantage of surprise, and a semblance
of reality not otherwise obtained.
In the same locality, in the winter season, a few work-
ing people connected with a public institution determined
to meet for the purpose of practising singing by the tonic
sol-fa notation. A room in the building had been placed
at their disposal, but as the leader was very modest, he
preferred using the ground floor of an oil warehouse which
had a loft above.


PART 111.
Having been invited to be present, I attended one of
the meetings, which were held at eight in the evening,
and from the moment of my arrival things went wrong r
for as the pupils sang “ Doh, rah, me, fah.” a voice, very
suggestive of an individual with the bronchitis, sang, to
the same tone and pitch, “ Oh, what singers you are! ”
The conductor caught it, and believing it proceeded
from outside the building, said, “Never mind, let
proceed, ’’which was attempted, but with no better success.
He then expressed the opinion that it was “too bad of
(naming a friend) to annoy them like this.
He went to the door to expostulate; not being able to
discover any one in the darkness, he called out: “Where-
are you?” and as I had accompanied him in his search,
you may not be surprised to hear that the reply was,
“Round here.”
■ Round he went; but our trip was unsuccessful, so again
entering the building, the singing recommenced, only to-
be again interrupted; but this time the voice assured us,
“ I’m up here.”
So the conductor, mounting the ladder, and putting his
head through the manhole of the loft, asked once more,
“Where are you now?” but there was no reply, and so
the mystery remained unsolved until the next day, when a
mutual friend told him the secret, at which he wondered,
but scarcely believed.
I will furnish one more instance of what I may call
impromptu entertainment, and then conclude my paper
by an account of my greatest venture, which was a semi-
public one. Upon the festive occasion of a wedding.


after the departure of the bride and bridegroom, the guests
were assembled in the drawing-room, when one of the
company, who was chief clerk to an illustrious judge, came
to me, and, in a beseeching tone, said:
“ I have heard you are a ventriloquist; do favour me
with a specimen of your power.”
“Oh,” was my reply, “you might just as well say to a
supposed wit, ‘Please make me laugh.’ The very request
is almost sufficient to prevent my success.”
After much pressing, however, I consented, with the
assistance of a brother-in-law, to arrange a little “ stock”
•entertainment. We left the room to make necessary
preparations, when our plans were at once altered by a
•circumstance which favoured an impromptu performance.
The house, it must be explained, had a spacious con-
servatory connected with the hall by glass vestibule doors,
•close to the drawing-room, where the company was wait-
ing our reappearance. In the hall we were met by a
servant on his way to announce the arrival of Mr. C.’s
carriage.
“There,” said I, addressing my brother-in-law ; “ that
will just do; go into the room and leave the door open; the
rest I will manage. ”
No sooner was the door opened and the announcement
made, than I called out:
“Well, my man, what do you want?”
“ Mr. C. I’d like to know how much longer I am to be
kept here this cold day?”
“Well, I am sure I cannot tell you, but I don’t think
you should speak in that way.”
“Oh, don’t you? Well, I do! I sha’n’t stand it much
longer.”
“Well, my man, it isagreat pity you should have come
at all, as you are intoxicated.”


“Am I ? not at your expense—a lot of stingy teetotalers
(we were, for the most part, abstainers), who won’t give
me a drop of beer.”
Hereupon the man was threatened with expulsion from
the grounds, and he, apparently, growing very angry, as
we had been cruel enough (to pretend) to kick a dog which
had accompanied him, and which retreated, and howled
or yelped as he did so, a scuffle ensued, during which, of
course, there was much noise and banging of doors, result-
ing in the expulsion of the unruly coachman.
To appear with disarranged hair, coat, and tie, were
necessary to complete the deception. On again entering,
an amusing tableaux was presented to view. A joung
barrister, seated next to my wife, seemeda anxious for my
welfare, and even asked to be allowed to come and se&
what had transpired between the man and myself, sug-
gesting that he might be required as a witness ; while the-
owner of the carriage and his Avife were alarmed, the lady
inquiring of her husband, as she attempted to make her
way out of drawing room, “ Do you think he is in a
fit state to drive us home ?” My presence, and the con-
gratulations of other friends, set them at rest. The
gentleman was astonished ; dog and quarrel were, of
course, a fiction. The real coachman being sober enough,,
his master and mistress left with profuse thanks, which
were ample reward for this attempt.
Recently, when having been asked to lecture to some
orphan boys and their friends, I selected the subject of
“ Haunted Houses, or Bogies and Ghosts,” thinking to
introduce a little ventriloquism to prove the possibility of
deceiving the sense of hearing. The master of the orphan-
age suggested that as it would be given on the evening of
Boxing Day, a ventriloquial entertainment should be
substituted for the lecture. To this I agreed, and began
to make preparations, writing a sketch called “ Boxing


Day,” in which I could introduce most of the characters in
my ventriloquial repertoire, so arranging that no two
should be required on the platform at one time, though
holding conversation with invisible personages.
The programme included :
Grandpapa Grumbleton Soft, who suffered chiefly from
three complaints—gout, bad servants, and a lazy son (in
fact nothing else ailed him).
Mr. Adolphus Soft, who was notably particular about
his (h)air, which he was constantly arranging with his
finger, or played upon a very, very minute cornet of wood.
Simple Simon Soft, who being sent to see his grand-
papa, did all the mischief in his power, setting dogs
■(imaginary) to fight, and pigs to squeal (from ill-usage,
of course), and concluded by hiding the baby, to the great
horror of old “ nurse, ” who next appeared, sobbing with
grief, and sneezing through cold caught in seeking for the
lost treasure She gave instructions to the “Town Crier”
through the window, to “ cry ” the missing baby. He
however having drunk too many healths that day, confuses
his description of the various items of lost property, much
to the annoyance of nurse and the amusement of the
audience.
Then came a dusky visitor, for inthechimmey is heard
the voice of the cook’s beloved “Joe. ” The cook being
out on an errand, the writer imitated her encouraging
speeches, and allowed Joe down, whereupon he unexpect-
edly received his Christmas Box, or rather it received him,
for though not visible he was seized and inclosed in a
large chest, and made to sing a song, which he would have
soon accomplished, but for two difficulties; one the choice
•of its title, the other the frequent interruptions of Sam,
who, though also invisible, had stationed himself
behind a chair, whence he insisted on speaking at
most inconvenient seasons. He also interrupted Miss


Belinda Larrup, who related her experience as a gover-
ness of naughty boys, and sang one verse of a song in
rehearsal for an evening party. A dialogue was carried on
between two Lancashire folk on taking the “census.” This
created much amusement, and little wonder, for having
concluded their remarks they suddenly lost their heads,
which £were wooden, with practical (f. e. moving) jaws,
worked at the back by the entertainer with a spring, while
he supplied the voices without moving his lips or averting
his face.
The entertainment closed by a short lecture from Pro-
fessor Black, who gave ocular demonstration that black
is white; for one moment he appeared as a veritable
“nigger,” and the next as a white gentleman in evening
dress.
Ventriloquism may at times serve purposes of instruc-
tion, for words spoken 'to children—not to frighten but
amuse—by a person apparently present though not in
sight, are not soon forgotten. I remember having been
asked by a gentleman, in the presence of an extremely
wakeful juvenile, to inquire of my friend in the Chimney
at what hour little boys of five years should go to bed, to
to which the answer was given by my mysterious friend
“ Half-past six.”
“ Is not that very early ?”
“ No.”
“ But why should they retire so soon ? ”
“ Because—”
“ Because what ? ”
“ Because early to bed and early to rise make a boy
healthy, and merry, and wise . ”
The ancients practised this art, and the cunning priests
used it to deceive the people. Sir David Brewster has
also furnished instances in which it has been successfully
employed in what is now called spiritualism, as also to


extort money. I have also selected the following as being
highly amusing, and almost surpassing belief.
A Ventriloquist, Louis Brabant, who had been valet-
de-chambre to Francis I, turned his powers to profitable
account. Having fallen in love wicha rich and beautiful
heiress, he was rejected by her parents as an unsuitable
match. On the death of her father, Louis paid a visit to
the widow, and had no sooner entered the house than she
heard the voice of her deceased husband addressing her :
“ Give my daughter in marriage to Louis Brabant
who is a man of large fortune and excellent character.
Obey this admonition, and give everlasting repose to my
sonl. This awful command could not be resisted, and
the widow announced her compliance with it.
As our conjurer, however, required money for the
completion of his marriage, he resolved to work upon the
fears of one Cornu, an old banker at Lyons, who had
amassed immense wealth by usury and extortion. Having
obtained an interview with the miser, he introduced the
subject of demons and spectres, and the torments of purga-
tory, and, during an interval of silence, the voice of the
miser’s deceased father was heard complainng of his dread-
ful situation in purgatory, and calling upon his son to
rescue him from his sufferings by enabling Louis Brabant
to redeem the Christians that were enslaved by the Turks.
The awestruck miser was also threatened with etermjl
doomif he did not thus expiate his own sins ; but such was
the grasp that the banker took of his gold that the ventri-
loquist was obliged to pay him another visit.
On this occasion not only his father but all his deceased
relatives appealed to him on behalf of his own soul and
theirs, and such was the loudness of their complaints that
the spirit of the banker was subdued, and gave the ventri-
loquist 1,000 crowns to liberate the Ghristian captives.


3 1508 02016117 5
V _ ; J
The Magician’s Own Book: containing ample’instructions for recreations in
Chemistry, Acoustics,-Prestidigitations, Electricity. 4s, posted 4/6.
Hanky Panky : or, easy and difficult tricks. 4s, posted 4/6.
The Secrets of Stage Conjuring : by Robert Houdin. 3/6, posted 3/10.
Excursions into Puzzledom : a book of charades, acrostics, enigmas, conundrums,
etc. By Tom Hood, 2/6.
The Club Series of Card and Table Games.
Small Bvo., cloth, It. each, posted 1/2.
Whist ; By Dr. Pole, F.R.S.,
Solo Whist : By F. Green.
Billiards: The Art of Practical-Billiards for Amateurs; with chapters of Pool,
Pyramids, Snooker. By Major-General A. W. Drayson, F.R.A.S., with numerous
illustrations.
Chess : By Robert F. Green, With' Illustrations.
The Chess Openings : with Introduction and Notes. By I. Gunsberg.
The Two-Move Chess Problem : By B. G. Laws. With Illustrations.
Draughts and Backgammon: By “ Berkeley,” With Illustration,
Dominoes and Solitaire: By “ Berkeley.” With Illustrations.
Reversi and Go Bang : By “ Berkeley. ’ With Illustrations.
Bezique and Cribbage : By “ Berkeley." With Illustrations.
Ecarte and Euchre- By “ Berkeley."
Piquet and Rubican Piquet: By “ Berkeley. ”
Round Games: including Poker, Loo, Vingt ; un, Napoleon, Newmarket, Popejoan
Speculation, Spin, Commerce, Snip-Snap-Snorum, etc., etc. By Baxter-Wray.
Card Tricks and Puzzles: By “ Berkeley” and T. B. Rowland.
Skat : By Louis Diehl. (Skat Scoring Book, is.)
Bohn's Handbook of Games.
New Edition, thoroughly revised and in great part re-written.
In 3 volumes, with numerous Illustrations, 3/6 each.
Volume 1.
Billiards: With chapters on Pool, Pyramids, and Snooker. By Major-General'Dray-
son, F.R.A.S., With a Preface by W. J. Peall. With 't9 Illustrations.
Chess : By Robert F. Green. With Illustrations.
Bagatelle, Draughts, Backgammon, Dominoes, Solitaire, Reversi,
Go Bang, Rouge Et Noir, Roulette, E. 0., Hazard, and Faro. With
numerous Illustrations. By “Berkeley."
Volume 11.
Whist: By Dr. William Pole, F.R.S.,
Solo Whist: By Robert F. Green.
Piquet Ecarte, Euchre, Bezique, and Cribbage. By “I
Round Games; including Napoleon, Loo, Poker, Vingt-un, Coi
Pope Joan, Spin, Newmarket, Snip-Snap-Snorum, Fig, Cass
Sjpoil Five, and Loto. “By Baxter Wray.”
Th( different sections of the above Volume II may be had separate ,


• Magic, Ventriloquism, Games, S*c'.
3
V*
Whist of the Future : bein# a forcast submitting defects in existing Whist Laws j
by B. Lowsby. 3/6. Posted 3/9.
Encyclopaedia of Whist : with advice to young Players. By Sir Win., Cusick-S.nith
Bart. 2/6, posted 2/8.
The Correct Card, or how to play at whist or a whist catechism. 2s, posted 2/8.
Bijou Handbook on Whist: 6d, posted yd.
Cut Cavendish an arde-memoise for whist-players. Price 6d.
Australian Chess Annual for 1896- is, posted 1 2.
Modern Chess Brilliances. By G. H. D. Gossiy. is, posted 1/2.
Chamber’s Chess all the principle openings and endings, pd, posted icd.
Draughts
Guide to the Game of Draughts : By Robertson. 10/6, posted ns.
Sturge’s Guide to the Game of Draughts : with critical situations.
4/6.
posted 4/10.
The British Draughts Player: a course of studies on the game of
3/6, posted 3/9.
draughts
Lee's Guide to Draughts : for students and learners. 1/6, posted 1/8.
M 'Culloch’s Draughts with diagrams and critical positions. 2/6, posted i/3.
Draughts-players Manual : By \V. E. Attenborough, half pries 6d, posted yd.
Books on the Game of Chess.
The Art of Chess : J. Mason’s second edition revised and enlarged. Tust
out. '
y/6, posted 8s.
Principles of Chess, J. Mason's in theory and practice. 3/6, posted.
Chess-player’s Handbook: Staunton's; 5s. posted5/6
Chess-player's Companion : Staunton’s: a new treatise on odds, and a collection
of games. 5s, posted 5/6.
Chess Praxis being a suppliment to the Chess-players Handbook. 5s. posted 5/6
Swinton's Chess for beginners and the beginnings of chess. 5s, posted 5/6
Bird's Chess Novelties and their latest developments. 3/6, posted 4s.
Bird’s Chess Practice having a condensed and simplified record of th
openings in the finest games, contained in “ chess masterpieces.” 2/6, postei
Bird’s Chess Masterpiece : acollectkm of 150 choice games. 6s, posted.
The Modern Chess Instructor: By Steinity. Parti y/6; 11 2/6.
Bird’s Chess for Beginners, is, posted 1/2.
Whist.
Cavendish on Whist : 6s, posted 6/3.
CD
CO
Philosophy of Whist : By Pole. 3/6, posted 3/8.
Foster’s Whist Manual : a complete system of instructions. 3/6, posted 3 /(
CO
CD
r-
cr
CO
