

PRiCE THREEPENCE
HOW TO BE FIT
A LECTURE TO SOLDIERS
DELIVERED AT |LIVERPOOL MILITARY CAMP
SIR THOMAS ANDERSON STUART, M.D., LL.D., D.Sc
DEAN OF THE FACULTY OF MEDICINE,
UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY
This Lecture is now published for general circulation in
response to many enquiries, and is an exact copy of the
booklet issued by the Department of Defence for the
use of soldiers. Any profit after paying for the cost
of production will be handed to the War Chest Fund.
SYDNEY
ANGUS & ROBERTSON LTD.
89 CASTLEREAGH STREET


'-s C
W/f J’ehguson Collection yir
II Library' ||1
\\ Canberra jjj


Visual Training 1 and Judging Distance, as taught
at the School of Musketry, Randwiek.
By Staff Sergeant-Major Instructor F. F. Hart. Profusely illus-
trated with a large number of photographs, clearly explaining the text,
and a miniature set of the Australian Landscape Targets. Price 1/6
(postage Id.)
Aiming, Firing, and Fire Discipline Training, as
taught at the School of Musketry, Randwiek.
By Staff Sergeant-Major Instructor F. E. Hart. Second edition,
revised and enlarged, with 56 full-page photographs and 22 diagrams
illustrating the subjects as taught at the Randwiek School of Musketry,
in accordance with Musketry Regulations. Waterproof cloth cover,
Price 2/- (postage Id.)
Handy Notes on Sequence and Detail of Musketry
Instruction.
As taught at the School of Musketry, Randwiek. For the use of
Instructors. Includes Aiming Instruction, Tests in Aiming, Essential
Points in Aiming, Trigger Pressing, Firing Instruction, Snapshooting,
etc. Second edition, revised and greatly enlarged. Price 6d. (post. Id.)
The New Company Drill Simplified. With Squad,
Section and Platoon Drill.
Illustrated with numerous diagrams, showing Positions of Company,
Platoon and Section Commanders, and all movements in Squad Drill,
Platoon Drill and Company Drill, as laid down in Infantry Training,
1914, With the Detail for all Movements. By Lieut. R. Stupart.
Fifth edition, revised. Price 1/6 (postage Id.)
Scouting: Protective or Practical Reconnaissance.
Specially adapted to the training of Australian troops. By Major
F. A Dove. Second edition, with 21 diagrams. Price 6d. (post. Id.)
Semaphore Alphabet Made Easy.
An easy Method of Learning how to Semaphore in a few hours by
means of a pack of 30 cards, showing Sender’s Position “ Front View.”
Price 9d. (postage Id.)
Signalling Handbook for Australian Military
Forces.
Including Morse System, Semaphore System, Use and Care of
Apparatus, Helio., Telescope, Flags, Message Forms, Station Routine,
Training and Classification. Completely illustrated. Compiled by a
Signalling Officer. Second edition. Price 1/- (postage Id.)
ANGUS & ROBERTSON LTD., Military Publishers, Sydney


HOW TO BE FIT
A soldier should consider it a point of honour to be
“fit”- —fit to instantly respond to any command, fit to
completely carry out anything he may be called upon
to do. A soldier not fit to march and fight with the
best only keeps the best back, and a soldier who is sick
is, for the time being, worse than dead —he is of no
use, and uses up the services of other men in looking
after him. Next to not getting sick, a soldier’s duty
is to get well again as soon as possible, so that he may
return to duty. Further, while he is ‘‘below par, he
is exposed to unnecessary risks of infection, etc.
Medical officers cannot keep men well unless the man
helps, by looking after the condition of his body. I
do not forget that the business of a soldier is to fight
the enemy, and that everything must give way to this,
and anything I say must always be considered as sub-
ject to military exigencies. In the field it is probably
difficult, but a strenuous effort must be made by every
individual soldier to be clean —himself, his clothing,
and his surroundings. The value of attending to
health matters in the field is shown by these factsTn
the Crimean Mar, i854 -i 856, the French deaths by
disease were ten times as many as fell in battle. In
the Boer War, 1899-1901, the British deaths were
twice as many from disease as from wounds. In the
Russo-Japanese War, 1904-1905, a new condition of
affairs arises; only one-half as many died from disease
as from wounds!
In these pages, culled from many sources, I have
dealt with the subject from the men’s point of view
exclusively, not from that of the O.C. or of the
Medical Officer, and every man should make a


conscientious effort to practise the sort of teachings
here set down-—in that direction alone lies the way of
safety from disease in the field.
Microbes : Dirt, Disease, and Death go together.
Microbes, micro-organisms, germs, bacteria, bacilli,
etc., named often according to their shape, are living
organisms of a vegetable nature, and so minute in size
that the microscope is required to see them. Certain
kinds of these, when they get into the human body,
give rise to diseases known as “infective,” such as
measles, scarlet-fever, diphtheria, tetanus or lockjaw,
cerebo-spinal meningitis, typhoid fever, typhus fever,
dysentery, and even the common cold. These diseases
are so prevalent among soldiers, who are in such close
personal contact, and sleep in considerable numbers
in such small confined spaces as tents, that they have
been called “camp diseases.”
What we ordinarily call “dirt” may consist of (i)
parts of our own body which are continually wearing
out and are being removed; for instance, the scales
which are continually falling from the surface of the
skin, but are generally so small as not to be seen,
though in the case of the scalp they are easily seen,
and are called “dandruff”; (2) the excretions from the
body, both solid and liquid: (3) the refuse and waste
from food, clothing, etc.,: (4) materials from our
surroundings brought into a tent, for instance, upon
dirty boots. Now all these materials form the food
and breeding grounds of the microbes, and by cleanli-
ness we remove these breeding grounds, and with them
the microbes. Moreover, these little vegetables—just
like ordinary vegetables—require a suitable soil to
grow upon, and they do not like a strong healthy body,


they thrive best where the body is less resistant; there-
fore, keep your general health good—be “fit,” give no
points to the microbes! It is a good rule to avoid
sick people; it is possible that they may communicate
something to you, and your business is to keep fit.
Also be careful not to visit “native” houses or shops,
and never partake of “native” food or drink of any
description; the way in which this is prepared is often
filthy in the extreme, and no such food or drink or
surroundings are ever above suspicion.
Remember that the worst diseases begin with small
troubles, and that the proper place for a sick man is
the hospital. Here he is made well quickly, and pre-
vented from making others ill. If you feel “off
colour,” chilled, have sore throat, report sick at once;
the Medical Officer is there to look after you, and you
may be giving disease to your comrades. See that a
comrade also reports himself; you don’t want to get
anything from him. It is, to some extent, your
business to see that your comrade keeps “fit,” for the
strength of an army is not in its muster roll, but in the
number who are fit to fight.
Avoid close proximity to persons coughing, sneezr
ing, and speaking loudly whilst they are suffering from
infective diseases; they are sending out a fine spray in
their breath in which the microbes are probably con-
tained, and these you may inhale. Let no one spit on
the floor of the tent —there may be a communicable
disease germ in the spit. This dries and is blown as
dust into the air you breathe, and for a certain time
at least it may retain its infective power. Also, it may
be carried by flies to your mouth, or food, or drink
Lastly, fleas, bugs, and lice, which, unfortunately,
abound in the field, may introduce the microbes into
your body through the skin. Promiscuous spitting is


loathsome, and may be dangerous. The same remark
applies to snot —use a handkerchief, or use a rag or
piece of paper. Burn or bury the rag or paper. On
dusty marches you may tie a handkerchief over the
mouth and nose to keep out dust in the air which is,
breathed.
Flies; A Nuisance and a Danger.
Every article of food should be kept safe from the
visits of flies. Do not eat any food, such as sugar,
jam, butter, bread, milk, meat, etc., on which flies
have been seen —they are bred in filth, they live
largely on filth, and they carry filth around
with them. Their feet are provided each with
two claws and a multitude of sticky hairs, and they
carry the germs of infection entangled in the hairs
from any infected material they may have visited to
the food on which they alight. If a fly has drowned
itself in the milk, leave that milk scrupulously alone.
It is not enough merely to rescue the fly or recover its
body, for the milk may now be infected and dangerous.
Further, watch a fly on a lump of sugar; he cannot
bite it as we do, but he vomits a little bleb of fluid on
to it, which dissolves some of the sugar, and then he
swallows his vomit again, and with it the dissolved
sugar. This he does again and again. But he may
just have come from the latrine or any other source of
infective material, and so flies are potent spreaders
of infection. That is why it is so important not to
leave excrement uncovered. Many a case of typhoid
fever has had such an origin. And the other end of
the fly is emitting excreta every few minutes- —one sees
it in some of the “fly spots” on the window. In any
case it is nasty to swallow these, and they may also
contain disease germs, e.g., ophthalmia or sandy blight


in the eyes, and typhoid. Remember that in the Boer
War one-third of all deaths were due to typhoid.
Flies are filthy things, both ends and the middle; assist
in every way to keep them down. Never buy meat or
other foodstuffs from shops where flies are tolerated.
Keep kitchen, mess room, tent, scrupulously clean, free
from scraps of food or particles of refuse likely to
draw flies. Bury or burn all garbage, trash, filth, food
wastes, slops, etc. See that they are covered while
being collected, so that they do not feed flies. Excre-
ment is to be covered at once, just as Moses ordered
(and cats scrupulously do). Urine, too, may
carry disease germs. It very often contains
the germs of typhoid fever. Therefore, urinate only
into the appointed urinals, pits, trenches, or latrines,
even if the night is cold and these places are some dis-
tance from your particular tent. You owe it to your
comrades, and they owe it to you.
Rest and Sleep.
Rest and sleep are most important—-you never know
when the emergency will come. Be ready! Aye
ready! This is possible only if you are “fit.” During
a halt on the march loosen the pack and belts, and, if
the ground permits and is dry, sit down, or even lie
down at your full length, so as to get the most rest.
Kneading the muscles of the legs is good —massage —
it frees the muscles from waste products and prevents
cramp and stiffness. Therefore do it for one another.
If the ground is wet, get something between you and
it, so that you may not get damp clothes. When in
camp rest as much as you can, but do not sleep on the
bare ground when you can get anything like hay,
straw, ferns, branches, to keep you off it. These pro-
tect the angles of the body, prevent damp from the


ground and undue loss of heat, and keep the clothing
and blankets off the ground, which may have insects
or disease germs. Further, get out of the wind and
upon dry ground. In camp or bivouac use the water-
proof to sleep on if you have one, and in a bivouac
dig a hole for your hip to rest in. With these pre-
cautions you will be more comfortable, have a sounder,
and therefore, more refreshing sleep, and be more
rested, and you will avoid colds, rheumatism, etc.
Want of sleep, like privation, exposure, and fatigue of
body and mind, greatly lower the power of resistance
to disease.
The Skin; The Importance of being Clean.
A dirty surface of the body favours various “itchy”
conditions of the skin, dirties the clothes, pollutes the
atmosphere, and invites disease generally. The sur-
face layer of the skin is continually scaling, as is seen
in the dandruff of the scalp. The sweat dries on it.
The oily secretion of the skin is spread all over the
surface, and probably the excretions of the body, both
excrement and urine, soil the surface, and thus the
skin become covered with a layer of dirt which is just
the very soil that microbes grow in and that parasites
feed on. When wounds are made through such a
dirty skin the microbes are carried into the body, for
instance, with bullet, bayonet, or bits of clothing. It
is for precisely the same reasons that surgeons, in pre-
paring a patient for an operation, invariably scrub the
skin with soap and water where the cut is to be made,
and with disinfectant, so as to make it germ-free.
They do the same with their own hands and instru-
ments. There are often little lacerations of the skin
which are not often noticed in ordinary life. These
may form the points of entrance of the microbe, and


are, therefore, not to be neglected. Never let anyone
tattoo you; tattooers are generally dirty, and the dirty
tattooing needle may carry into the body more than
the colour.
Common yellow bar soap, such as is used by laund-
resses, is good for washing clothes, but not for wash-
ing the skin, which becomes dry and cracked, owing
to the fat of the skin and yolk of the hair being too
much removed. When you can get it, use a good toilet
soap. Slightly warm water is best for cleansing, but
cold water acts as a tonic and braces one up, thus it is
good to follow warm water, if possible, by cold water.
A warm bath once or twice a week is a great comfort,
and should always be taken, if possible; it cleans so
much better than the cold water, but the cold bath is
a better tonic in the morning, and generally cold water
should, as already said, follow warm water whenever
possible. If chilly and depressed after a cold bath,
give it up and be content with a cold sponge, or take
a tepid bath. Where water is scanty, a wet sponge or
wet cloth may be used, and on the march, and when
much exposed to the sun and dust, a wet sponge or a
wet cloth are better than soap and water for the face
and hands, since they do not remove the natural oil of
the skin. After a march a wet wipe of face, neck, and
feet greatly removes fatigue. If no water is avail-
able, a good dry rub, with exposure to air and sun, is
better than nothing; a rubbing removes the surface
scales and with them much of the dirt. Sponges are
not necessary; a piece of rough toWel or other cotton
cloth will act as a rubber, but wash it every time it is
used. Do not use too much soap, and remove it all
before drying, for if any is left it only irritates the
skin. Use your own soap and towel and no other, for
obvious reasons.
In the arm-pits, between the legs and buttocks, the


feet and between the toes, around the anus and
beneath the foreskin —In all these places the secretions
accumulate, decompose, soil the clothing, make the
skin sore and chafed. They should, therefore, be
washed every day, at any time, so long as it is done
daily, A little vaseline applied where there is friction
is good. In the case of mounted men saddle-boils are
to be guarded against by scrupulous cleanliness about
the crutch and inside the thighs, and methylated spirits
applied to the skin hardens it, if you can come by the
spirits. Never go barefoot-—you never know what
little wounds of the skin you have, or what you are
going to get; the soil may be full of microbes, for in-
stance tetanus or lockjaw microbes, and other organ-
isms, according to the part of the world you are ini
Keep the nails clean; have no “blacks” to be a har-
bour for microbes. Trim the finger-nails round and
the toe-nails square. Avoid hang-nails and little
lacerations of the skin about the nails, by occasionally
pushing back the skin at the base of the nail where
the skin adheres to the nail as it grows. Microbes
penetrate there, and may be the cause of sore finger
and whitlow. The hands should therefore be kept
clean by frequent washing. Very particularly does
this apply to men dealing with horses, mules, donkeys,
camels, etc. If the hands are soiled when the animal
sneezes, coughs, or otherwise, wash them as soon as
possible. Glanders is bad in horses —it is worse in
men. Always wash the hands after grooming. For
similar reasons, after handling pet animals, cats, dogs,
immediately wash the hands. These animals can only
lick themselves at their toilet, including their private
parts. Thus the abundant germs are spread all over
their fur, and so the hands become infected. It is
best to leave these animals alone,


The Hair.
Keep the hair of the head short. Wash it daily in
cold water without soap, but only once or twice a week
with warm water and soap. If oftener, the .soap takes
too much of the yolk out of it and makes it dry and
brittle. Do not use water, especially the water you
have just washed in, to make the hair lie flat it de-
composes and stinks; use oil or nothing; let the natural
fat of the scalp do it. Have your own toilet articles —
never use anybody else’s if you can avoid it. Keep
the comb clean, as well as the brush, by washing in
water to which a little washing soda or ammonia has
been added. Neither comb nor brush should be so
sharp and hard as to scratch the scalp. If you cannot
shave, keep the hair of the beard and moustache cut
c ] ose —long hair may harbour insects.
Eyes, Ears, and N6§e
Do not rub the eyes with dirty hands. If anything
gets in, ask the Medical Officer to take it out, if
possible; if not, get a comrade with clean hands to pull
down the lower eyelid, or, taking hold by the eyelashes,
turn the upper eyelid over the end of a match or tooth-
pick, or something of that sort, so as to see the lining
of the eyelid. If the foreign body can be seen on the
inner surface of the lid or on the white of the eyeball,
and easily removed, by the twisted corner of a
clean handkerchief, well and good; but if it be on the
clear, glassy part of the front of the eye (cornea),'
you must be very careful. Ihe Medical Officer should
attend to that, though if this is not possible, light a
wooden match and let it burn a little, blow it out, rub
the burnt end on a clean handkerchief so as to make
jt smooth, and use that to dislodge any ' particle which


may be thus removed; but these proceedings are so
risky that every effort should be made to get it out by
a skilled hand.
Keep the ears clear as far as you can with a damp
towel. Once a week or so wrap a piece of cotton-wool
or cotton cloth, or something soft, round the end of a
wooden match, and gently clean the outer end of the
canal of the ear. Do not push the cotton in any great
distance, for the dirt tends to collect just within the
mouth of the canal, and it is not safe to go too far
down. If anything further is to be done report to
the A.M.C. Do not pick the nose with the fingers—
they may have dirt on them, and the nails may make
little sores. If the nostrils get very sore, heated, and
dusty, a little vaseline smeared just within them will
be a relief.
Bathing and Swimming.
Salt water is best. If it be a river or pond, enter
it only if the water be fairly clear, and not likely to
contain infectious matters —you might “get something”
by the mouth, nose, eye, or by some little wound in
the skin not always visible. Do not bathe in cold
water when perspiring much, or when chilled, or when
exhausted by fatigue, or too soon after eating; the
best time is about two hours after a meal. Begin
swimming at once —this prevents chill. Come out
before being exhausted or cold, or the extremities are
numb. Rub and dry the skin thoroughly to restore
the circulation and prevent chill.
Care of the Feet.
The care of the feet is most important—the whole
efficiency of the infantryman depends upon it, and this
even now, with all the assistance of motor vehicles.


It is simply impossible to pay too much attention to
the care of the feet. This is obvious when we
remember that the chief object of a commander is to
get his men to an advantageous position before the
enemy gets there.
The feet are soiled very quickly, not only from out-
side dirt, but from their own sweaty and fatty secre-
tions. The secretions cannot escape from between the
toes, and the skin here is very soft, so that corns
between the toes are soft, and “soft” corns should be
attended to by the Medical Officer. With the scales
from the skin, the secretions of the feet make a perfect
soil for microbes, and it is due to these that the feet
smell in most cases. In certain cases “stinking feet”
are a real grievance to the other men in the tent, and
require treatment by the Medical Officer. The chafing
of the skin between the toes is avoided by some vase-
line or other clean grease, or by foot powder.
Wash the feet every morning, and, if possible, after
the day’s march. Soap makes the skin tender, there-
fore remove it all after washing. Do not soak the
feet; keep them wet just long enough to get the dirt
off. If the skin is very tender use cold water only,
or even a wet cloth only, so as not to soak the skin.
If no water is available to wash the feet after a
march, take off the socks and rub the feet dry with a
towel, or even with the socks you have just taken off,
especially rub dry the spaces between the toes.
Socks.
Always wear thick and ribbed woollen socks to
march in; thin socks are useless, and the ribbing makes
the sock elastic and better fitting; cottons need fre-
quent changing; and are apt to blister the feet. Select
socks two sizes larger than the feet; this allows for


shrinkage in washing, but is probably not so large as
to allow of creases when the boot is put on. There
must be no compression either by sock or boot, and in
this respect the socks are more often at fault than the
boots. Nothing must interfere with the free circu-
lation of the blood in the toes. In taking the socks
off stretch them to avoid shrinking. Wash them at
night and hang them up to dry. Do not rub them
or wring them, but move them about in the
soapy water, rinse them in cold water, and
hang them up to dry without squeezing or
wringing. In this way you avoid making them hard,
shrunken, and uncomfortable. Before putting them
on next morning see that they are perfectly dry.
Change wet, creased, or soiled socks. Holes in socks
are apt to cause blisters, so also does a lumpy darn.
Before sleeping wash the feet and put on dry socks,
if sleeping socks are necessary, but never wear during
the night socks that have been worn during the day.
If the socks have given out, their place may be taken
by a triangular piece of any soft material, even greased
paper, folded with as few creases as possible around
the foot.
On the march, at the halt it is good to change the
right sock to the left foot and the left sock to the right
foot, especially if there is a hole—thus you avoid a
blister. If they are wet with perspiration put on the
dry pair you have in your pack, if possible. Smooth
out any creases, which will soon chafe the skin. Some
people recommend soaping the inside of the socks
before the march. It is better to use vaseline or clean
grease, especially between the toes. Soap is liable to
injure a tender skin, and all that is wanted is a lubri-
cant to avoid friction. After a march, on halting for
the day. the first thing to be done is to examine the
feet. Exposed and painful surfaces should be greased


with tallow, lanoline, or vaseline, not soap. Soaps
are too apt to injure the skin. These painful surfaces
may be protected by collodion or pieces of plaster
applied before the march. Footsoreness is much
relieved by bathing the feet in permanganate of
potash solution- —the colour of red wine. If very
footsore, report to the Medical Officer at once—there
is something wrong. Do not open very small blisters,
but if they are so large that they would break in walk-
ing, prick them with a clean needle inserted through
the skin about one-eighth of an inch from the edge of
the blister, and gently squeeze out the fluid. To make
it quite clean, the point of the needle should be first
heated to redness in the flame of a match. Avoid
breaking the skin of a blister, and after opening smear
with powdered boric acid, vaseline, or clean grease,
and put on a piece of cotton or a bandage.
Corns arise from pressure; hard corns may be pared
or scraped down very carefully with a knife or piece
of glass, or by sandpapering them ; but bad corns and
soft corns should be reported to the Medical Officer or
the chiropodist, if there is one. A very good corn
protector is made thus: —Cut a hole somewhat larger
than the corn in a piece of plaster, and stick this on
around the corn, put a layer of cotton wool in the hole
and over the corn, and then a piece of plaster over the
whole. Be careful about attending to ingrowing nails
yourself—the feet are too important, quite as import-
ant as your rifle. Bunions are serious—report to the
Medical Officer. Cut the toe-nails square across, -the
finger-nails round, as already said.
Abrasions, cuts, wounds of the feet, must be very
carefully dealt with; avoid dirty cloths, poultices, etc.
Keep them clean at any cost, and, if possible, report
to the Medical Officer.


Boots
Boots are of the first and last importance; they
should fit, that is, there should be no undue pressure
on any point, yet they should not be so loose that there
is harmful friction between the boot and the foot; if
there is, the feet are sure to be sore on marching.
Remember that each foot strikes the ground in march-
ing 18,000 times a day! and that every step we take
we spring from one foot. Get a boot that feels com-
fortable when standing on one foot and carrying a
weight of 45 lbs.; thus the lengthening and widening
of the feet under pressure are provided for. Fit each
foot separately, for the two feet often differ very
much in size and shape, and sometimes boots get mixed
at the Q.M. Stores. Let the fit be good and snug
around the ankle and instep, but loose around the toes,
and try the boot with the laces through all the holes
and pulled tight. The edges of the leather should then
be about half an inch apart. The boot should be
rather on the large than on the small side, and have
not less than half an inch vacant space in front of the
great toe when you press the toe of the boot with the
thumb. If the boot be too small, the swelling of the
feet at the end of the day or in warm weather will
make you suffer horribly. The desire for smallness
and “style” is so strong that most men are not to be
trusted to select their own boots —an officer should
control the operation. If the boot be too large, the
foot slides about in it, and gets chafed; besides, it is
uncomfortable and fatiguing. If you “break in” new
boots by wearing them, do it gradually, and about
camp if possible, and avoid marching in them before
they are broken in. Never wear any but the military
boot. Shun the pointed toe, and remember that a
tight boot means a cold foot from interference with


the circulation. If boots as a whole are large enough,
but pinch at certain points, get the company shoemaker
to stretch them, and thus avoid blisters and corns. It
is good to keep two pairs of boots in use, wearing them
on alternate days—it eases the feet immensely. Carry
extra laces. A loose boot soon chafes and makes you
lame. After a wetting never let boots dry on your
feet, nor dry them close to the fire —the leather be-
comes hard and brittle. Keep your boots clean, both
inside and out. From time to time wash them out
with soap and water; scrape them out sometimes, and
grease them inside as well as out. A good time to
grease them is when they are warm after a march.
Boric acid powder dusted into the boots helps to keep
them sweet. Always clean them, if necessary, before
entering a tent. Most of the dirt in buildings is
carried in by dirty boots; therefore, do not overlook
the scraper or the mat. Look after your boots, keep
them is as good repair as possible; visit the company
shoemaker rather than let them get into disrepair.
Keep them soft and pliant by means of dubbing, vase-
line, neats-foot oil, etc. Never mind the shine until
the campaign is over. Shoes or slippers, if available,
in the evening are a great comfort, and ease the feet
after a long march.
Clothing and Underwear.
All clothing must fit loosely; it is warmer in winter
and cooler in summer; movements are freer; no .re-
straint of movement is permissible—the soldier must
be able to march, run, climb, jump, ride, fight, sleep in
comfort. On the march too much clothing causes
sweating and exhaustion; too little may lead to chill
and When resting after exercise, or on
guard duty at night, put on extra covering. If heated


after exercise remove the pack, and belt, but not the
clothing until you are cooler. If the clothing gets wet
the harm does not arise while you are still active at
work. If allowed to dry on you while warm after a
march and when you are exhausted, then danger arises
from depressed vitality and greater likelihood of
catching disease. Therefore, change your wet clothes
as soon as possible after the march is over. Keep
the clothing in good repair; no holes, all buttons on,
etc. Keep all clothing, especially underclothing, as
clean as possible, in the circumstances. Dirt gets to
the skin from the clothing, and from the skin to the
clothing, especially underclothing; that is why this
should be washed. Wash your linen whenever you
can; thus you minimize the risk of catching disease
and of contaminating your comrades; also you
diminish the risk of wound infection. If you are
wounded, it is not the clean wound that is to be feared,
but the dirt from the skin and clothing carried into the
wound. Where washing is not possible, all clothing
may be greatly cleaned by shaking, brushing, and ex-
posure to sun and air, for sun and air are nature’s dis-
infectants. Do not, if possible, wear the same clothes
at night as have been worn during the day. Keep
night clothes—and they always come in as a change
after a wetting. Woollen or flannel underwear next
the skin, both winter and summer, is better than silk
or cotton or linen—the wool readily takes up the
sweat into its substance and slowly evaporates it on the
the outer surface. In tropical climates flannel next
the skin is not very comfortable, but people get used
to it after a week or two. If necessary, wool flannel
may be replaced by cotton flannelette, or, if you can
afford it, a silk and wool mixture, such as Anglo-
Indian gauze. In any case, the material should never
be so thin as to permit chill after sundown. Woollens


best prevent sudden and excessive loss of heat without
unduly interfering with perspiration; they are less
easily soiled by the excretions, get dirty more slowly,
and are more easily cleaned by rubbing, shaking,
brushing—that is, without water —than silk, cotton,
or linen materials. Silk, cotton and linen easily get
wet with sweat, and if next the skin cool it too rapidly,
so that too much heat is lost. When lying in bed un-
covered and perspiring in tropical climates, the
woollen abdominal band or cholera belt may be used —•
not in the day time, only at night, and only when not
under one or two blankets. The object is to prevent
the belly from being chilled, for the bowels are close
against the belly wall, and they do not stand chill. It
leads to diarrhoea and predisposition to other diseases.
Many people prefer a sort of apron of two thicknesses
of flannel sewn together, tied around the waist with
tapes and kept in position below the pyjamas. This
is less heating around the loins, where protection is
not needed.
Braces are better than a belt —they interfere less
with the movements of the waist and belly. If a belt
be worn it should be broad.
Do not pinch in the crown of the soft felt hat;
keep as much air space inside the hat as possible.
Fresh Air; the Breath of Life.
If any one enters an occupied room or tent, and
perceives an unpleasant smell or stuffiness, then the air
is impure. The persons who are already there do not
perceive it. It has come gradually, and their sense
of smell becomes blunted. Even if you smell violets
more than a few whiffs, the sense of smell becomes
blunted. Ventilation in a tent is much more necessary
than in a room, for in a tent there are generally many


men in a small air space. See that there are places
open below for the entrance of fresh air and above for
the exit of the heated impure air from the breath and
from the surface of the body, and this all the more
when in wet weather the pores of the canvas are closed
by contraction. In a room, open the windows at the
top at least 3 inches, and if this is done on one side of
the room only, draught is avoided. If there is too
much air, try and stand it; perhaps wear a woollen or
Balaclava cap. Better too much than too little air;
one soon gets used to it. Fresh air and sunlight are,
as already said, nature’s disinfectants. Rooms should
be aired and sunned, and bed clothing and equipment
should be regularly shaken out and aired, and, if
possible, sunned. It should be understood that this
is not merely a matter of an unpleasant smell, for the
atmosphere polluted by the emanations from un-
washed bodies and clothes, and by foul breaths gradu-
ally lowers men’s vitality, and lays them open to the
attacks of various microbes.
Try hard to breathe habitually through the nose;
it catches dust, etc., protects the throat, prevents un-
due thirst, looks better, and keeps the atmosphere of
the tent sweeter.
Drinking Water
Do not drink water which the Medical Officer says
is not safe. If you have no directions and no one to ask,
boil the water if possible; to make weak tea of it is
even better. Water from wells and ponds is apt to be
contaminated. Always investigate cisterns, water
coolers, barrels, and if there be anything suspicious,
be very careful. “Soft drinks” should be used with
discretion; they are seldom quite above suspicion, and
Are not rarely prepared with bad water and often con-


tain injurious substances, so that when consumed in
large quantities or habitually they do harm. Soft
drinks offered by pedlars around a train or camp are
always best avoided. They have been exposed to
dust, dirty hands, dirty dishes, and perhaps disease
itself. Before the march have a moderate drink. Be
sure that your water bottle is clean and does not leak.
Fill it before starting, and fill it only to the shoulder,
not to the neck, otherwise it will certainly leak. On
the march drink seldom, and only in small draughts
till thirst is relieved, not till thirst is quenched; thus
you avoid being water-logged, with profuse perspira-
tion, indigestion, weakness, and exposure to heat-
stroke and exhaustion. It is said that the water-bottle
should not be brought into use until some 7 miles have
been covered, that its contents should last through the
next 7 miles, and that it should be refilled at the com-
mencement of each 7 miles thereafter. Weak, un-
sweetened tea or coffee is often better than water —
they have been boiled, are slightly stimulant, and less
is needed to quench thirst. Many men drink from
mere habit, not because of real necessity. The drink
from habit is to be fought against on the march, only
the drink from necessity should be yielded to, there-
fore try and keep off drinking till the halt, and then
drink only after being somewhat cooled off. Use
your own cup and no other.
The great reason for all these directions is again
the germ which lives and breeds in impure water
water containing sewer materials and drainage, and
from cultivated land. In absolutely pure water germs
are starved to death. It is therefore the germ which
is the danger; boiling destroys them, proper filtering
takes them out. See that only boiled or filtered or
pure running water is used to wash crockery, knives,
forks, spoons, dishes; dish-cloths should be boiled fre-


quently. If you get into your mind the existence of
these disease-carrying particles it will guide you to a
correct procedure in most cases. Tea and coffee and
chocolate require the water to be boiling: this makes
them a very safe drink when the water is not above
suspicion. Tea stands dilution better than coffee;
very weak tea is still palatable. On the march, cold
tea is best when unsweetened. Chocolate is slightly
nutritious as compared with tea or coffee; the sugar
in it i.s nourishing. It is good, before going on duty
at night or in the early morning, to take a cup of hot,
coffee or tea; it raises your vitality.
The question when should one drink? has been
variously answered—it has been recently determined
that it is best to drink towards the end of the meal,
and immediately after it.
Food.
Wash your hands before eating; you never really
know what you have been touching. Do not eat any
food your officers say is not safe. If you have no
directions and no one to ask, beware of bad-smelling
food; it is probably decomposed and poisonous. The
same with food that “looks bad”; also that which has
been left behind by the enemy. Milk is extremely apt
to go wrong, for it is an ideal soil for the growth of
germs. Think how many outbreaks of typhoid,
scarlet-fever, and diphtheria you have heard of as due
to milk. Ice-creams, which contain milk, are very
dangerous; they are so often prepared in filthy
surroundings that they are best left alone when from
any but the most reliable sources. Food offered by
pedlars is always suspect, exposed to dust, handled by
no end of dirty, and, it may be, disease-carrying hands,
and contained in dirty baskets, dishes, etc. Cooked


food is generally safer than raw — the cooking kills
many disease-bearers (germs, worms, etc.) besides,
cooked food is more tasty and more tender, and, there-
fore, more agreeable and more easily digested. But
be careful about cold food left over from a previous
meal; see that it cannot have been contaminated by
flies or otherwise. Remember that uncooked shell-
fish, such as oysters, have often conveyed typhoid. Be
careful about fruit—unripe it is indigestible, and may
cause an irritating diarrhoea, if over-ripe it may cause
diarrhoea in another way, and diarrhoea on the march
is a catastrophe; it exposes the soldier to many
dangers, and invites such diseases of dysentery,
typhoid fever, and cholera when they are about. In
any case, pare, skin, or carefully wash the fruit; you
don’t know who has been handling it or what is on it.
Always wash in running water any lettuce, celery,
tomato, or other vegetable eaten uncooked. You don’t
know what kind of fertilizer was used!
If greatly fatigued or overheated, it is better to wait
a little while before eating; one eats better and digests
better when somewhat recovered. Food should be
chewed thoroughly before being swallowed; this
throws less work on the stomach and in other
ways avoids indigestion, for men have no gizzards as
birds have. With good digestion and the food as
now supplied by the wonderful work of the A.S.C., the
men are happier and fitter, march better, fight better,
stand cold better, resist disease better, and recover
better from wounds than they used to do. An agree-
able companion at food is certainly good, it helps
digestion —but don’t chew too little and swallow too
soon in order to have more time to talk. With the
food towards the end of a meal drink water, as much
as may be necessary to thoroughly soften the food,


and then drink what more may be necessary after the
meal has been eaten.
All these precautions may seem excessive—but
remember you are out to fight, and to be at your top-
notch of fitness, and what you may neglect at home at
your ease you cannot afford to neglect on service.
Teeth and Mouth.
The care of the teeth is most important. On them
depends proper mastication, digestion, and due fitness;
that is why men with bad teeth and insufficient teeth
are rejected at the recruiting office. Use a tooth-brush
daily, with water about the purity of which vou have
no doubt. You probably have your own ideas as to
tooth powder, but carbolic tooth powder is good, for it
is mostly chalk. The brush should not be too hard,
for it may lacerate the gum and inoculate it with
microbes from the mouth, where the moisture, food,
and warmth are just such conditions as are best suited
for their growth. Soak a new brush in water "for
some hours to soften it. Always wash and dry the
brush after using it, and see that it is kept clean. Use
the brush not only from side to side, but also up and
down, so as to clean out between the teeth and
don’t forget the back teeth because they are
out of sight. It is good to use the tooth-brush
before going to bed; thus particles of food do not re-
main to ferment and decay the teeth. Report tooth-
ache and decay to the Medical Officer at once. Be care-
ful about toothpicks, lest you wound the gum and con-
vey infection; for the same reason never use a metal
tooth-pick and never chew straws. Spongy, bleeding
gums are common, and often due to neglect. Clean-
ing will greatly help the condition. The pollution of
the atmosphere from dirty mouths and decayed teeth


is so repulsive and lowering to the vitality that men
should see that their comrades do not neglect them-
selves in this respect. Perhaps the ceremonial presen-
tation of a tooth-brush will convey the hint and be
useful. Moreover the man himself is slowly poisoned
by breathing through such a mouth, and by swallowing
putrid matter from the decayed teeth; he is liable to
attacks of “barrack-room sore-throat,” tonsilitis, and
deafness.
The Bowels and the Urine.
T. he inside of the body should be kept clean as well
as the outside. Evacuation of the bowel should be
daily and at the same hour, for a habit of going at the
same hour is established, and this greatly helps the
process. After breakfast is usually best, the move-
ments of the stomach after breakfast setting up move-
ments in the lower part of the bowel. When the call
of natuie is felt, answer without delay; carelessness
in complying leads to discomfort, indigestion, consti-
pation, piles, and endless other troubles sooner or
later. In the field one can only do one’s best, but aim
at daily regularity, and, if need be, report to the
Medical Officer. The kind of food available in the
field, the absence of fresh vegetables, tends to consti-
pation ; if brown bread is available it is helpful, and a
laxative pill or tabloid is very useful—have them
handy, but avoid patent medicines.
Always wash the hands, preferably in running
water, after attending to the calls of nature, and, as
roller towels are not permissible, each man should take
his own towel and soap with him to the toilet place.
I his pi ecaution is necessary, because the microbes
contained in excrement are apt to be conveyed by the
hands to the surface of the body and to the clothes,
and when the surface is • wounded they enter the


wound or are carried in by bullets, pieces of shell, and
by pieces of clothing carried in with the projectile.
The entrance of such pieces of clothing has long been
known to be dangerous; we now know why. It is
because the microbes are carried into the wound and
there multiply. Thus, to insure the utmost safety,
one must keep the body and the clothes free from such
contamination.
Further, it is now known that persons can convey
diseases, especially typhoid fever, who are not them-
selves ill; they are called “carriers,” and in every regi-
ment of apparentlv healthy men there is sure to be one
or more such typhoid-carriers. These microbes are
contained, not only in the excrement, but also in the
urine, as we have already seen, and, therefore, it is
a camp sanitary law of the highest importance never
to evacuate in camp except in the latrines and urinals,
for faecal matter and urine are the chief dangers to
the health of the soldier in camp. The only safety
is to consider all excreta as infected, and deal with
them as if they were known to be infected. It is hard
to realize these things, but they are true, and safety
for one’s self and one’s comrades lies in paying atten-
tion to what is here set down. Even when a man falls
out to ease himself on the march he should use his
trenching tool to make a hole and afterwards cover
the deposit with some earth, for the line of march
to-day is the line of communication to-morrow, bee
that the boots as well as the clothing and skin are not
contaminated, and that paper is so secui ed that it
cannot be blown away to become a camp butter y.
The diseases that are here concerned are typhoid,
cholera, diarrhoea, and dysentery. Be careful to re-
port diarrhoea at once; in any form it is serious, m its
form of dysentery it is most dangerous, and m
any form is apt to be contagious. In the


tropics diarrhoea is apt to follow chill of the belly.
When the soldier lies uncovered at night in the swelter-
ing heat he , should wear the flannel bellyband,
“cholera belt,” or apron, already referred to.
Diarrhoea from chill is apt to be followed by real
dysentery.
Alcohol.
Alcohol in any form, except by the doctor’s orders,
is best left alone. It mostly does no good, and gener-
ally does a lot of harm. Following the short period
of stimulation there follows a prolonged period of
depression of every activity of the body and mind.
In this depressed condition of the body it is much
more liable to catch disease of every sort, and the
occurrence of heat-stroke and frost-bite are invited
The mind is muddled, the judgment clouded; the man
is irresponsible, more or less, and may be the ruin of
some military plan and the death of many a brave man.
Further, in this condition men do what they are sorry
for the next morning; alcohol stimulates the sexual
passions, and at the same time lessens self-control, so
that alcholic intemperance and sexual debauchery are
often closely associated—the one leads to the other.
If you will drink alcoholic beverages, drink if possible
with food, and preferably at the evening meal. The
alcohol should not be in the form of ardent spirits, such
as brandy, rum, whisky, or gin. Light ales are the
lease harmful, especially if accompanied by out-of-
door exercise, but if you will drink ardent spirits dilute
them thoroughly, the more diluW the better. You
should not exceed, say, a glass of whisky or a pint
of beer in the 24 hours. No doubt the real danger
of alcoholic drinks is the excess, not the strict modera-
tion—but then the craving for alcohol is so easily
excited, and so difficult to satisfy, that such beverages


are best left alone. Every prudent man who drinks
alcohol in any form should know just what is the most
he can safely take so as not to lose his full self-control,
and he should never go beyond that amount; but, I
repeat, you are safest with tea or coffee or chocolate —
you will do more work and better work, you will suffer
less from disease, will be less exposed to accident, and
will be a better man all round.
Tobacco.
Upon the whole it is best never to have smoked; if
you have not begun don’t begin, but if begun I cannot
say stop it. Only keep it in moderation —rather too
little than too much. Every smoker knows that he
sometimes smokes too much; let him keep well within
his limit of consumption of tobacco. The pipe-—each
man to smoke his own pipe and no other —is said to be
the least harmful mode of using tobacco, though
between the pipe and the cigar there is probably not
much to choose. It is stated that cigarettes are the
worst, but it would be a waste of breath to say any-
thing against these. It is not easy to say why the
cigarette is the worst offender—possibly their cheap-
ness, convenience, and rapid combustion lead to too
many of them being smoked, so that, while each is
small, in the end much tobacco is consumed, and owing
to the milder nature of the tobacco smoke this is in-
haled into the air passages and spread over a larger
absorbent surface. The heart is very vulnerable,
especially in the young, so that many candidates are
annually rejected from the Navy and Army on account
of “tobacco-heart.” Athletes know that tobacco
“hurts the wind”—that is, a tobacco-heart makes
them unable to respond quickly and steadily to an
extra call for work. How then can it be good for the


soldier ? How can he toss “bundles of hay” out of
the Turkish trenches? Tobacco also affects the vision;
it becomes blurred and dim; how then can the soldier
shoot straight? Tobacco affects the movements; they
become unsteady. How then can a soldier take aim
with a dim eye and unsteady hand ? The tobacco-sot
is no good as a soldier! Speaking generally, and
especially in the young, it interferes with nutrition,
growth, and development; it thus lowers physical and
mental vigour; further, once a man begins smoking he
is more apt to take to drink. It is, on many grounds,
best left alone. Even the smoker should not smoke
on the march—it is bad for heart and lungs and pro-
duces thirst.
Certain Parasites.
These little animals we don’t, as a rule, say much
about, but for the soldier in the field they are of
serious importance. Getting rid of them is so import-
ant that it should generally be attended to under the
direction of the Medical Officer.
Lice. —These play a large part in producing the dis-
comforts of an army and in spreading typhus fever.
They thrive in dirt, but, like other animals, they spring
from parents —the first lice must be introduced, and
then they breed. There are three sorts —the body-
louse, the head-louse, and the crab-louse. The body-
louse, by its hooked legs, clings to the side of the gar-
ment next the skin, and sucks blood at least twice a
day. Each female louse breeds at least 200 little ones,
and then, fortunately, she dies. Irritation from the
bites prevents sleep, and thus makes the soldier less
“fit”; besides, there is a certain disgust which greatly
depresses many men. In the Boer War their preva-
lence was dreadful; as soon as many regiments halted
they stripped and attended to the plague, often picking


them off and putting them on a stone in the sun, where
they quickly dried and died. If clothing is con-
tinuously worn they go on feeding and breeding. In
war one has not always the chance of changing
clothes, and that is the one reason why the lice in-
crease so enormously. Thus, if you find one treat it
seriously, you will probably soon find others. It is
good to avoid sleeping where others have slept before,
and don’t put your clothing near that of other men.
If any piece of clothing becomes verminous, 'and you
have no further use for it, burn, bury, or drown it,
for the eggs are more difficult to kill than the lice
themselves. Turn the clothes inside out, examine
seams and folds carefully, kill by hand, boiling, hot
steam, hot flat-iron, petrol, paraffin, wash in sea-water
—but rules will be laid down in the camp. For all
three kinds of lice “Crude Oil Emulsion” has recently
been strongly recommended. It consists of crude
mineral oil five and a half pints, soft soap three
pounds, water half-a-pint. This is to be used as a
soap for washing the body, rubbed into the hair, and
then washed off, and it is also to be applied to all parts
of the clothing that touch the skin. As it is a sort of
soap it may be used for washing clothes —these should
be boiled, if possible, or steamed. The emulsion is so
harmless to the skin that it may be allowed to dry on
the skin and left on indefinitely. Rubbed down the
seams of garments, it kills the young lice as they are
hatched—it is good to kill them in their infancy. It is
well to avoid scratching the irritated part, but that is
very difficult to do. The head-louse is not so import-
ant as the body-louse, and yet many men shave their
heads to avoid it and get sleep at night. Thus,
possibly, wigs came into existence at a time when
bodily cleanliness was not so easily cultivated as it is
now. The small-tooth comb is useful. The crab-


louse is found generally in the hair of the private
parts. Cut the hair close and apply the crude oil
emulsion, well rubbed in. But dealing with all these
pests is so important that they are specially dealt with
by the Medical Officer.
The Bed-bug. —Besides being disgusting, they, too,
possibly inoculate disease, and if one is found there
may be others; examine bedding and clothing care-
fully, and report their presence immediately. One
part of kerosene to five parts of water, thoroughly
mixed with the addition of a little soap and applied to
all parts of the bed, etc., with a brush, is recommended,
also fresh insect-powder may be dusted in the joints,
and so forth.
The Flea is not only irritating and annoying, but
has been proved to convey disease, notably plague, and
this should not be forgotten in the present war where
Orientals are engaged. Fresh insect-powder or iodo-
form sprinkled on the clothing are recommended.
Mosquito. —This insect is the worst enemy of man—
next to the devil. It disturbs with its song, and with
its sting it irritates and infects with dengue, yellow
fever, and malaria, and because of these last it is more
important than any other single factor in producing
disease. In malarial countries be, therefore, most
careful to use the mosquito net; there is no other way
to avoid the malarial infection. lam told that this
precaution was very generally neglected at Rabaul,
with the result that there were a large number of
serious cases of malaria.
Sexual Matters
Self-control-—chastity, in fact—is necessary to the
soldier, who is to be always “fit.” It is not inad-
visable even to the unmarried civilian, for sexual inter-


course is not necessary for physical and mental health.
Nature has her own way of getting rid of super-
abundant seed by emissions at night, accompanied
generally by dreams; the suggestions of the harmful-
ness of these are generally nonsense, so long as they
do not occur oftener than about once or, perhaps,
twice a week. They are not so satisfying as the
natural process; they disturb sleep, and make one feel
not just all-right next day, but that cannot be helped.
The stories one reads in little books written by quacks
and furtively handed by touts —who should be at
once caught and kicked —are mostly wicked inven-
tions, but they have made many and many a lad miser-
able for years, until he found out in the smiles of his
wife and baby that they were lies —all lies. The fore-
skin should be regularly drawn back and the secretions
carefully removed and washed away —then the parts
dried. Unless this is done, the secretions accumulate,
decompose, and give rise to a great deal of trouble.
Venereal disease occurs in two chief forms —
gonorrhoea or clap, and syphilis. Many men make
light of clap, but though one gets over the immediate
attack, it may leave permanent results of the gravest
kind, and it causes endless grave disorders to the inno-
cent wife and child. A man should invariably report
himself for treatment after having had illicit con-
nexion, for one-third of prostitutes are in an infective
condition. Immediate disinfection may save him
many a pang —blood-poisoning, heart, joints, muscles,
eyes, all may suffer.
Syphilis is the gravest disease a man can acquire;
it affects and may ruin his constitution for life, and
it may be transmitted to his wife and children. Should
the sore appear on the private parts, report at once.
Immediate treatment is in any case necessary, and


only the Medical Officer can do it. Far better than
waiting for something, a discharge, or a sore, to
appear, is for every man to report for disinfection at
once or early in the day after he has had illicit con-
nexion, for in that case there is a good chance of the
infection being completely removed and the attack pre-
vented.
Both these diseases are due to microbes; there is
now nothing mysterious about them, and the know-
ledge that it is the handing on of the microbe from the
infected to the healthy may help you to realize the
conditions. This knowledge has also made the treat-
ment rational and efficient, so that there is every in-
ducement for the patient to report himself, in order
that he may receive the proper remedy. There is
every reason why a man who has not been able to
control himself should, in calmer moments, try to pro-
vent the possible occurrence of the physical disabilitv
which unfits him for duty, and in a large number of
cases suitable application made within a few hours
after exposure will succeed in preventing disease, but
these applications can only be had from the A.M.C.
Before the Battle.
i. Evacuate the bowels and bladder; you are freer
and lighter, and in case of wound of the belly are less
exposed to danger from escape of their contents into
the wound.
2. Have your body and clothes as clean as circum-
stances permit, thus lessening the chance of wound in-
fection.
3. Fill the canteen with good —boiled, if possible—
water, or weak unsweetened tea, and keep it filled


when opportunity offers; you never know when
the next opportunity will occur. After bleeding thirst
is very great.
4. See that you have the First Aid Packet, that it
is in good order, and that you know how to use it;
when need arises use it promptly for yourself or a
comrade.
5. Wounds are not to be handled, nor touched with
anything but the First Aid materials, precautions for
using which are on the packet. You must avoid in-
fecting a wound, and make no attempt while on the
field to clean it. If gravely injured, or much blood
is lost, it is generally best to remain where you fall or
at the nearest shelter. Great efforts to walk aggravate
the injury.
3 1508 00323523 6
W. C. Penfold & Co. Ltd., Printers, Sydney.


AUSTRALIAN MILITARY BOOKS
Range Practices, Organization For, and Methods
of Conducting.
In accordance with the official practice. By Warrant Officer H.
Ordish, Randwick School of Musketry Staff. Price 1/- (postage Id.)
The Complete Musketry Instructor.
Including Description of S.M.L.E. Rifle, Care and Cleaning of
Arms, Military Vocabulary, Explanation of Musketry Terms, Theory of
Musketry, Aiming Instruction, Firing Instruction, Miniature Range
Training, Landscape Target Training, etc. Illustrated with numerous
diagrams. By Lieut. R. Stupart. Second edition. Revised and
enlarged. Price 1/6 (postage Id.)
Map Reading and, Field Sketching Simplified.
By Captain T. P. Conway, A. and I. Staff, Commonwealth Military
Forces. Based on the Official Manual. Thoroughly revised and greatly
extended, with special reference to Australian conditions. Illustrated
throughout with numerous folded coloured and other Diagrams and
Sketches. Waterproof cloth cover. Price 3/6 (postage Id.)
Hints to Young Officers in the Australian Military
Forces.
By Lieut. R. Stupart. Third edition, revised and enlarged.
Price 1/6 (postage Id.)
Outposts, and Advanced, Flank and Rear Guards.
By Lieut. R. Stupart. Second edition, revised and greatly en-
larged, with 3 sketches, Price 1/3 (postage Id.)
Guard and Sentry Duties.
By Lieut. R. Stupart. Fifth edition. Price 9d. (postage Id.)
Infantry Pocket Book.
A concise Guide to Regulations, Field Training, Musketry, Camp
Duties, etc. Compiled by Lieut. R. Stupart. Fifth edition. Pocket
size, waterproof cloth cover. Price 1/6 (postage Id.)
Hints to Non-Coms.
By Lieut. R. Stupart. Second edition, revised. Price 1/- (post. Id.)
How to Instruct in Bayonet Fighting.
Including full Detail, Hints and Lessons on all Methods used in
Teaching Bayonet Fighting, with Directions and Rules for Bayonet
Fighting Combats, and 55 full-page photographs illustrating all
positions. By Staff Sergeant-Major D. Fallon. Price 1/6 (postage Id.)
ANGUS & ROBERTSON LTD., Military Publishers, Sydney


AUSTRALIAN MILITARY BOOKS
Trumpet and Bugle Calls for the Australian Army.
Including instructions for Trumpeters and Buglers, Field and
Routine Calls for Mounted Units and Infantry, Bugle Marches and
Trumpet Fanfares, Bugle and Trumpet Parts to the National Anthem.
With words for all Calls and Marches. By Captain W. G. Bentley,
A.R.C.M. Price 2/-(postage Id.)
Grenade Warfare. Notes on the Training and
Organization of Grenadiers.
Including Explosives, Improvised Bombs, Service Grenades,
Grenade Throwing, Bayonet Fighting, Barricading, Organization and
Tactics, Defence, Attack, Storming Parties, Night Operations, Patrols,
etc. By Lieut. G. Dyson, Grenadier Officer, 99th Infantry Brigade,
British Army. Price 9d. (postage Id.)
Hints on Health for Soldiers.
In the Field, in Camp and in Bivouac. Compiled from Army
Medical Sources for Hot, Cold and Temperate Climates, 6d. (post. Id.)
Transport Notes for the Use of Army Service
Corps, Army Medical Corps, and Regimental
Transport.
Includes Organization of Transport in the Field, Horse and Stable
Management, Harnessing up, Transport by Rail, Transport by Sea,
Loading Wagons, Shoeing and the Feet, Drivers’ Orders, Treatment of
Sick Animals, etc. By CapT. S. G. Gibbs, Assistant-Director of Sup-
plies and Transport. 1/- (postage Id.)
Rifle Exercises Simplified.
Including Rifle Exercises, Description of Short Magazine Lee-
Enfield Rifle, Care of Arms, Stripping and Assembling, Sword Exer-
cises, Bayonet Fighting, Bayonet Fighting for Competitions, etc. With
numerous illustrations. Second edition. 1/- (postage Id.)
Light Horse Pocket Book.
A concise Guide to Regulations, Field Training, Camp Duties,
Equitation, etc. With Nominal, Troop, and Attendance Rolls. Com-
piled by LiEUT. D. C. Howeee Price, A. and I. Staff. 2nd edition.
Pocket size, cloth cover. 1/6 (postage Id.)
ANGUS & ROBERTSON LTD., Military Publishers, Sydney
