

r~"—i
iHOW ESCAPE?I
I I
I I
|| HEBREWS ii, pt. 3 v. ||
1 ; 1
(|j) BY the
|| KEY. M. B. BROWNBIGG, I
iNCUMBENT OF ST. JOHN’S CHURCH, |S)
M (IM
i • p
|j| Price, Twopence, or Is, 6d. per dozen. )
Sold by Messrs, Walch, Brothers, & Birchall, and Hudson & Hop-
wood, Launceston ; Messrs. Which & Sons, and W. Westcott,
Hobart Town ; and by the Printer.
J. S. V. TURNER, MACHINE PRINTER, BRISBANE-ST,, LAUNCESTON.




tviysa Per| F
HOW ESCAPE ?
‘ How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation ?”— Heb. ii, pt. 3rd r,
Reader,
Let me invite your serious attention to the ques-
tion which heads this page. If you are not a true
believer in the Lord Jesus Christ, that question ought
to make you think, and think deeply. I admit that you
are free to disregard it altogether if you choose, but it
will do you no good to treat it thus. Be persuaded
to face it honestly, and earnestly. If you will but con-
sider and try to answer it, you may, by God’s grace, be
led to see that there is NO escape if you neglect so
great salvation, and by the same grace may be brought
to accept eternal life and peace upon those easy terms
upon which God offers it to you. In the hope that
you will thoughtfully follow me in what I am about to
say, I would ask you to observe for one thing from
that solemn text,
I. That there is a great salvation provi-
ded for, and offered to you. The word, “ sal-
vation” means simply deliverance. It may sometimes
be applied to a temporal deliverance, and so the deliver-
ance of the Israelites from their bondage was a salvation.
But it is chiefly used in a spiritual sense. It is of
a spiritual salvation the text speaks—lt is the deliver-
ance of the soul from the eternal penalties of its sins.
This salvation, you will observe, is called a “great
salvation and I would now try to show you why it is
so called. For this I will give you three reasons. It
is called a “ great salvation ,” —
1. Because of the greatness of the misery from which it
saves all who accept it. How awful are the statements


which the Bible contains about the sufferings of the lost.
We read three times in the ninth Chapter of the Gospel
according to St. Mark, of the “ worm” that “ dieth not,”
and “ the fire” that “is not quenched.” Ido not stop
to examine the question whether this is to be under-
stood literally or figuratively. In either sense you will
surely admit that the truth set forth therein is suffici-
ently awful, and to escape from such misery, if pos-
sible, is worth every effort that could be made. Then
again, w T e read of the rich man, who, “in hell lifted up
his eyes being in torments” and earnestly entreated
that a drop of water might be given to him to cool his
tongue, but his entreaty could not be heard. Now
whether all this is to be understood figuratively or
literally does not affect the question. The real point
of importance is this, “ what is the truth intended to be
taught by what is written in that place ?” The truth
taught there is—■“ That the sufferings of the lost can
NEVER be lessened.” Again we read numerous
statements which teach that as these sufferings are never
to be lessened, so, indeed, they are never to end.
I will name some of these passages of Scripture,—
“Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire” (Matt, xxv.,
41); “These shall go away into everlasting punish-
ment” (Matt, xxv., 46) ; “ And some to everlasting con-
tempt” (Dan. xii., 2); and again, “ The smoke of their
torment ascendeth up for ever and ever ” (Rev. xiv., 11).
Reader, ponder these passages and ask yourself, “ what
do they really teach ?” Do they not distinctly teach
that the sufferings of the lost are eternal ? I solemnly
wax'n you against that teaching which maintains that
the souls of ungodly men, or of pagans, are finally anni-
hilated, or consigned to what is termed a “ painless
non-existence.” Such teaching is thoroughly unscrip-
tural, and would lead to the most disastrous conse-
quences, and these should be sufficient reasons for
rejecting it entirely. The soul is as immortal, by the
decree of God, as is God who gave it its being, and if
plain language means anything, then the texts which I
have quoted teach that the souls of the lost never cease
to be, and, therefore , that their sufferings are eternal.
But should you have any doubt on this point, let me


ask; supposing it were desired to teacli that the miserie?
of the lost know no end, what language could be usee
which would declare it'more plainly than the language
of the texts I have named? Header, accept what
Scripture teaches upon this subject, awful as it maybe,
and do not suffer yourself to be drawn away by that sub-
tle reasoning, by which, it is to be feared, numbers will be
deceived to their ruin. Do not venture upon the risk
of finding out by actual experience, that the miseries
of the lost are real and eternal. That they are so,
Scripture strongly testifies; seek rather to escape from
them, than doubt about them. From this indescribable,
endless, ruin, the salvation offered can save you, and a
salvation from such misery deserves to be called
“ great ”
But, again, it is called a “ great salvation, 5 ’ —
2. Because of the greatness of the h appiness to which it is
intended to bring us. What glorious statements do we
meet with in the Bible about the happiness of the saved.
Turn to Revelation xxi. and xxii., and read the beautiful
account which is there given of the joys of the redeemed,
and the glories of their heavenly home. No tongue of
man can tell the delights of that land of purity, peace
and love ! There is a beautiful hymn which says: —
We speak of the realms of the blest,
That country so bright, and so fair ;
And oft are its glories confessed ;
But what must it be to he there !
We speak of its pathways of gold,
Its walls deck’d with jewels so rare
Its wonders and pleasures untold ;
But what must it be to be there I
We speak of its freedom from sin,
From sorrow, temptation, and care,
From trials without and within ;
But what must it be 'to be there / (
We speak of its service of love.
The robes which the glorified wear,
The church of the first-born above ;
But what must it be to he there I
Ah ! Reader, “ to he there,” is to enjoy to the utmost
the good things which God has for them That love Him.
O O
• c 2


And all those pleasures are for evermore ! The eternal
duration of their happy state with Jesus in heaven, is
assured to every one of God’s children. Those words
“eternal life”—“everlasting life”—“ever with the
Lord”—declare the eternity of the joys of the saved.
To this end, the salvation offered is designed to bring us.
Is not, then, such a salvation well called “great?” But,
Reader, I have kept until now, the best reason for this
salvation being called “ great.” It is great —yes, “so
great”—
3. Because of the greatness of the Being who ■procured
it for us ! Who, then, has procured it for us, and how ?
It is One who is higher than the highest of the sons of
men. It is One who is superior to the noblest and
mightiest archangel. It is Jesus, the Son of God!
O, Reader, make an effort to realize that fact! J esus,
who was equal to the Father—-who created the uni-
verse—who supports all things by his great power—
who had the just homage of countless hosts of angels.—
Jesus bought this great salvation for us! But how ?
He took our nature upon him, —that is, “ He was made
flesh,” (John i., 14.) He fulfilled “ all righteousness.”
He perfectly obeyed the law for us that he might be-
come “'our righteousness.” (Jer. xxiii., 6.) He was
“ obedient unto death ” (Philip, ii., 8.) He gave
up his life for our life. “He died and rose” again.
(Rom. xiv , 9) that God might forgive and save us !
He did all this, not because there was anything good in
us (Rom. v., 6,8) but because He loved us so deeply !
Thus “ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as
silver and gold, BUT WITH THE PRECIOUS BLOOD OF
Christ, as of a lamb ivithout blemish and without spot”
(1 Peter i., 18, 19.) O, never till we shall know how
great a Being is Jesus, and how great a price he paid
for our redemption shall we be able to realize how great
is the salvation offered !
Row, Reader, you will, I trust, have seen good rea-
sons why this salvation is called “so great.” I want
you in the next place to realize that this “ so great
salvation” is at this moment offered to you ! My au-
thority for offering it to you now, and personally, is the


commission which I have received from God to do so;
and the nature of that commission you will gather from
the Second Epistle to the Corinthians, the fifth chapter,
the eighteenth and twentieth verses. “ God, who hath
reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, hath given to
us the ministry of reconciliation.” “ Now then, we are
ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you
by us; we pray you, in Christ’s stead, be ye reconciled
to God.” As an ambassador for Christ, I therefore
now say to you, in His stead, “ Unto you is the word
of this salvation sent,” —“ Believe on the Lord Jesus
Christ and thou shalt be saved.” Header, if you will
not, and do not accept this salvation, you will certainly
be inexcusable. God is witness—l am witness, your
own conscience also is witness, that you have now had
a distinct offer, as from God himself, of this salvation.
Your past sins need be no difficulty in the way of your
acceptance of this offer, for “ the blood of Jesus Christ
his Son cleanseth us from all sin.” (1 John i., 7.)
The dangers and trials you might meet with in the
“ narrow” way to life, need not hinder you from accept-
ing God’s offer, for God says “ As thy days so shall thy
strength be,” (Deut. xxxiii., 25), and “ My grace is
sufficient for thee” (2 Cor. xii., 9). A solemn responsi-
bility therefore now rests upon you, and the character
of your whole future may depend upon the manner in
which you now treat this offer ! Accept it now, and
you will surely be saved; but if you refuse it now,
God only knows whether you will ever accept it at all.
Do consider, then, in what way you will treat God’s
offer to you ! “ To-day if ye will hear his voice harden
not your hearts” (Heb. iii., 7,8).
And now. Header, I would remark from the great
question which heads this Tract,
11. That, that so gee at saltation can be
neglected. “ How shall we escape if we neglect so
great salvation ?” It is thus clear that neglect of it is
possible. One would almost have thought that to
ensure the acceptance of this great salvation, all that
would be necessary, would be to make it known. But
it is not so. Millions do neglect it. It is possible for
c 3


one to be duly baptized—to be brought up in the know-
ledge of the truth, —to be regular in observing religious
ordinances, —to take part in Christian movements, and
yet to neglect this salvation. But how or when may
anyone be said to neglect this great salvation ? I will
try to make this clear.—lt is neglected so long as it is
not accepted. It is a sad proof of the corruption of the
heart that so many turn away from this salvation.
Many hear of it, but remain uninfluenced by it, and
while it is thus with them, they are certainly neglect-
ing it. But, again, it is neglected when anything
else is substituted for it, and many things are often put
instead of it. Morality, charity, self-righteousness,
outward observances of religious ordinances, church
privileges—these and other things are trusted to as
grounds of salvation, —as the procuring causes of safety,
while Christ is neglected, and so, is dishonoured; and,
therefore, while anyone looks to, or trusts to anything
else for salvation, except to Christ alone, that one is
neglecting the great salvation offered.
Now, Header, how are you treating this great salva-
tion ? Have you accepted it ? Are you trusting to
Christ alone, under the conviction that his merits are
the procuring cause of salvation ? Does that trust
which you profess to repose in him influence you to
live a good and holy life ? Does it lead you to fight
against sin, the world, and the devil ? Then, indeed,
you have accepted that great salvation, but never forget
this Scripture statement that “ we are made partakers of
Christ if we hold the beginning of our confidence stead-
fast unto the end”—(Heb. iii, 14) —which teaches that
the only reliable evidence of an interest in Christ, is
the EEMAIXING STEADFAST unto Clll’isf,
But, Reader, if you have not accepted this great salva-
tion you are neglecting it—you may, indeed, be think-
ing about, and hoping to accept it one day, but you
are practically neglecting it as long as you leave it un-
accepted—and the proof would be seen in the fact that
were death to overtake you in this state you would
certainly be lost—and this leads me to observe in the
next place—


111. That if that great salvation is finally
NEGLECTED THERE IS NO ESCAPE —THERE CAN BE
NONE FROM THE CONSEQUENCES OF THAT NEGLECT.
This is the real meaning of the question, “ How
shall we escape ?” but it is put in . the form of
a question that men may ponder it, and consider if
there be any way possible by which they may escape
the consequences of neglecting the salvation offered.
In order, then, to make it clear that there can be NO
escape if the salvation offered be neglected, I shall
examine some of the pleas which might be advanced
why the soul should be spared the consequences due to
its neglect, and shall shew that such pleas will be of no
avail whatever at the judgment seat. Suppose, then,
you were to plead,—
1. Ignorance. You say you did not know better —■
you did not know that Christ was the only One by
whom a sinner could be saved. Will ignorance excuse
you? Certainly not. Ignorance about the laws of
nature does not prevent the operations of those laws.
An infant that falls into a blazing furnace is not saved
from being burned because it did not know that fire
would injure it. No safety, therefore, can be hoped for
on the plea of ignorance. It may possibly be
found that such a plea only shows an increase of
guilt on your part, for it might be asked, —Did
you take all the steps in your power to become
better informed ? Did you manifest any real concern
to gain more light ? Did you earnestly ask God to
give you His Holy Spirit to teach you about these
things?. If not, then your ignorance is criminal , and
such a plea, therefore, cannot save you from the
everlasting consequences of your neglect.
But suppose you were to plead—
2. Want of time. You say that you had not time to
be religious, you have had so many cares pressing upon
you —so many things demanding immediate attention,
and so in your attention to those things you have had
no time for religion. Now, how will this plea stand?
In the first place it proceeds upon a very serious mis-
c 4


take. \on suppose that religion consists only in acts
of devotion, and, therefore, that through press of
worldly duties you have had no time for these acts of
devotion. Religion, it is true, includes acts of devo-
tion, but it is not limited to these things. It is
to be the governing principle in every event and
circumstance of your life—to be carried into all
your household duties, or your business affairs. If,
therefore, in whatsoever you do, you do all to the glory
of God, you are as truly living religion, as when you
are engaged in more direct offices of devotion. Thus
it appears you have had plenty of time, but instead of
beginning with accepting salvation, and living out its
principles, you have begun with the world and have
persuaded yourself that you have had no time for this
necessary work. You have therefore, incurred the guilt
of reversing God’s order, which says “ Seek ye first the
kingdom of God and his righteousness” (Matt, vi., 33).
But in the next place, can you tell God that you had no
time in which to accept His offer? Now I dare say that
you have many times had the acceptance of salvation
pressed upon you. Even supposing it were so that
religion consisted only in devotional offices, and only at
such times of devotion could salvation have been had.
Is it really then the case that you have had no time ?
You can easily count what time you have had, when
you remember, that one who attains to fifty years of age
has had no fewer than seven years of sabbath days! and
and if only on sabbath days could salvation be accepted,
I ask, Reader, how many of such opportunities have
been given to you ? Be assured then of this, that want
of time cannot be accepted as a plea to save you if you
neglect so great salvation.
But suppose at the last day, you plead—
3 That you intended to accept this offer, hut that
death unexpectedly overtook you before you had fulfilled
your good intention. Will such a plea help you?
Most certainly not! For consider how much is ad-
mitted when you confess that you intended to accept
God’s offer, though you did not really accept it. By
your expressed intention you admit, that you needed


salvation—that only this salvation could have helped
you, and that you ought therefore to have accepted it.
In the face of these admissions, how do you think you
could satisfactorily account for your neglect? The
fact is, that your intentions to have accepted salvation
coupled with your neglecting to do so, must render you
much more guilty in God’s sight than those would be
regarded who never had the clear light that you have
had. Header, if you are satisfying the voice of your
conscience under you present neglect, by intending to
accept salvation at some “ convenient season,” let me
entreat you to consider how full of danger is your present
state, and let me persuade you to that better course
which you cannot but know you ought to take. To
intend to accept salvation is good and necessary, but do
not stop at the intention. It has been truly said that
the way to hell is paved with good intentions. I have
no doubt that those who are lost, never intended to be
lost, and I am quite sure that multitudes who are now
in misery intended at one time of their lives to pre-
pare for heaven; and as merely intending to accept sal-
vation has not saved them, so neither can it save you,
if you go no further than only intending to be saved.
But suppose your plea should be that of—
4. Self-Righteousness. Let us enquire whether that
will save you. You say “I have not been a wicked
person. I have tried to keep the commandments of
God. I have been regular in the use of the means of
grace, and while I know I have done some things
which are wrong, I have done my best to do that which
is right.” Header, let me ask, can you find one passage
of Scripture which teaches, or even hints that a man
may neglect the great salvation which God offers, and
yet be accepted at the last on account of a righteous-
ness of his own. From what source have you got this
way of being saved, as you regard it? You trust
to your own righteousness as the ground of your salva-
tion, or as a reason why you should not perish, but
what does Scripture teacFon this point ? It teaches you
plainly that there is only“one way or being saved,
and that it is “ not by works of righteousness which we


have done, but according to His mercy” that God saves
us (Titus hi., 5). And St. Paul says “By grace,are
ye saved through faith, and that not of yourselves, it is
the gift of God; not of works, lest any man should boast”
Ephes. ii., 8,9). Thus, no man can be saved on ac-
count of any righteousness or goodness of his own. It
is indeed true that you should try to do good works to
prove your love, but it is equally true that you should
not trust to your good works to save you. Your plea
of self-righteousness, therefore, while it may please you
now, cannot save you either now, or hereafter. But
suppose you say —
5. “ I have done many good works,” and look to this
to save you; will it indeed save you ? Let me admit
that you really have done much good—that you have
given of your means to relieve the sick, the poor, the
needy—that you have helped the fatherless and the
widow—that you have subscribed to many good socie-
ties—that you may even have preached acceptably to
men, but will all this save you apart from Christ?
What does the Scripture say on this point ?
This is its language, “ When ye shall have done all those
things which are commanded you, say, We are unprofit-
able servants; we have done that which was our duty
to do.” (Luke, xvii., 10). Aud again, our Lord says
in his sermon on the mount “ Many will say to me in
that day. Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy
name ? and in thy name have cast out devils ? and in
thy name done many wonderful works ? And then
will I profess unto them, I never knew you; depart
from me, ye that work iniquity” (Matt, vii., 22, 23).
Reader, this is strong language, but it is Scripture—
it is the truth. All your, (so called) ee good works”
cannot save you from “ wrath to come,” if you neglect
this great salvation. If you could be saved by your
works without Christ, then there would be more ways
than one of being saved; but Scripture teaches that
there is only one Saviour the Lord Jesus Christ who
says “ I am the way” and, “no man cometh unto the
Father, but by me. (John, xiv., 6.)
But suppose you plead—


6. 44 1 have followed the instructions of my religious
Teachers, and if they have misguided me, I am
not in fault and therefore ought not to be punished
Will, then, this reasoning save you from the conse-
quences of having neglected this great Salvation ? It
cannot be. The responsibility of your case does not rest
wholly on your Instructors. You are responsible for satis-
fying yourself as to the Scripturalness of what you hear.
Even when Apostles were the teachers, we find that the
Bereans were praised as more noble than they of Thes-
salonica, in that they searched the Set ip tares daily,
whether those things were so —(Acts xvii, 11). They
judged of the Scripturalness of that which they
heard, by comparing that teaching with the writ-
ten word. Header, no man is authorized to claim
your undoubting acceptance of what he teaches as right,
simply because he may be your instructor. No man
may forbid your testing his teaching by the word of God.
He only could dare to forbid this who knows, or fears
that his teaching is not quite Scriptural. No man need
fear his teaching being examined who believes that it
is in accordance with revealed truth. But, perhaps,
you say 44 It would be presumptuous on my part thus
to examine and judge for myself.” It might not, in-
deed, be well for me to question your humility on this
point, but I gravely doubt your wisdom. You do not
well if you think and reason thus. Do you think
that the discovery that your instructor teaches you
according to Scripture would do you harm, or be other-
wise than acceptable and encouraging to himself
whoever he may be ? And will you not admit that
• the discovery that you were being brought up in error,
while the means of being saved from your danger can
be had is of the greatest possible importance ? Can you
flatter yourself that God will save you because you
have blindly followed your instructors in the path of
error, when you ought to have taken every care to
know the truth and to follow it ? Do you really think
you can be saved just as well, and just as certainly with-
out the Gospel as with the Gospel ? If so, then,where is
the use of the Gospel? In what respect is truth more
valuable than error ? Let me entreat you to ponder


this point. If the existence of error and false
teaching is possible, then you are bound to
satisfy yourself that the teaching you follow is accord-
ing to Scripture. If your teacher does not point you to
Christ as the alone Saviour —if he does not counsel you
to come to Jesus by repentance and faith—if he does not
teach the need of “being born again,” and of living a holy
life as an evidence of regeneration under the influence
of the Holy Spirit, then he does not preach the Gos-
pel. He may preach well and fluently and fascina-
tingly—He may preach much that is good and true and
moral, but he does not preach the Gospel, and if you
try to get on without the Gospel, you do so at your
peril. Has not the Master said “If the blind lead the
blind, both shall fall into the ditch?” (Matt, xv., 14).
The one blind man is not saved from the consequence
to Avhich the other blind man led him, simply
because the one knew not where the other was leading
him to ; and so will it be at the last. I have
dwelt rather fully on this point, because it is the
case that so many are apt to assume that their teachers
must be right, and do not examine for themselves.
No man may so place his own safety in the hands of
another as to follow whatever he hears without “ Prov-
ing all things”. It may be an easy thing, and pleasant
as avoiding some personal trouble, but it is not a safe
thing to do. The Master, again, has said “ Take heed
what ye hear”. (Mark, iv., 24). Reader, if you are
content to save vourself the trouble of examining for
yourself the Sjßpturalness of what you hear, on the
supposition that it would be presumptuous for you to
doubt or to enquire, then you are responsible for the
consequences, and such a plea as, that you followed
implicitly the instruction of your teachers without
satisfying yourself about its soundness, will not save you
from the ruin which must result from your trusting to
<c another Gospel” than the true one, and so of neglect-
ing this great salvation.
But supposing you were to urge as a plea.
7. 1 had doubts about the truth of Scripture —Many
of the doctrines were such that I could not reconcile


them with my ideas of justice; I found many inaccu-
racies in the dates and figures, and supposed facts which
were recorded, and thus a suspicion of uncertainty
about the truth having been thrown over the whole
book, I set it aside altogether, resolving to cast myself
upon the mercy of God.” Now let us enquire whether
you could be saved on such an account as this, the
t£ great salvation” having been neglected ? I shall sup-
pose and admit that your doubts about the Scripture
are honest doubts, and not ingeniously devised means
for strengthening yourself in some course of life which
you desire to follow, but could not comfortably follow
without entertaining or professing such doubts. Putting
your case in the most favourable light, let me ask
if you have tried every means in your power, and
especially this one which our Lord has given for ascer-
taining whether the Scriptures are from God, viz., —
££ If any man will do His will,” (that is, is minded , or
really wishes to do His will) ££ he shall know of the doc-
trine whether it be of God” (John vii., 17) ? Plave
you thus sincerely desired to do God’s will, so that you
might become satisfied, as God promises you shall be,
that the doctrine is from Him ? If you answer ££ How
could I be expected thus to ascertain the point, when
doubting that the Bible is from God.” I reply, Would
the desire and the effort to do God’s will lead you into
any harm? Could there be any sound objection in re-
sorting to this as a way of satisfying yourself on so im-
portant a point ? Has not God a right to you, as your
Creator, and is it not reasonable, that even as a crea-
ture, you should desire and try to do his will ? If,
therefore, you have failed to do this, and have left any
means untried to assure yourself that that most impor-
tant book, the Bible, is from God, then you are respon-
sible, and will be judged for that neglect, so that your
doubts about the Bible cannot shield you from the con-
sequence of neglecting that great salvation of which the
Bible speaks. Then, as to the difficulty of reconciling
the doctrines of the Bible with your own ideas of jus-
tice, how can that help or save you ? You are not held
responsible for removing all those difficulties. God has
not made it essential to your salvation that you should


be able to explain all those mysteries. No doubt, God
can explain them all, and if God were to give you all
the light that He has upon those difficult points you
would certainly justify all his proceedings, for “shall
mortal man be more just than God?” (Job iv., 17.)
“ Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?”
(Gen. xviii., 25). Reader, I solemnly warn you that
if you are trying to secure yourself by your professed
doubts, Satan is deceiving you to your ruin. Suppose
that after all the Scripture should be true, then how
will it fare with your soul for neglecting the salvation of
which it speaks ? And as you cannot certainly TROVE
that it is not true, though you may fancy/you can, do
not let these difficulties, whether you may feel them in
respect of doctrines or of figures, or of dates, or of facts,
be a stumbling block in your way. Make a trial of
God’s way of gaining assurance about the truth of His
word, otherwise your persisting in objections will cer-
tainly prove your ruin; nor will your casting yourself
upon the mere mercy of God save you if you neglect
His great salvation. There is no mercy extended to a
soul apart from Christ, for Jesus has said “no man
coraeth unto the Father but by me ;” (John xiv., 6)
and again, “ no man can come to me, except the Father
which hath sent me draw him.” (John vi., 44). Jesus
alone, is therefore the one mediator between God and
man,” (I Tim. ii., 5), and so there can be no dealings
of mercy with any soul apart from Christ. O, Reader,
let me affectionately urge you to believe that such a
plea as I am now considering is deceitful in the extreme,
and cannot save you if you neglect “ so great salva-
tion.” But suppose in the next place you should plead
8. I have not been able to believe the necessity of ac-
cepting salvation, while 1 have seen the careless and tvorldly
lives of some of those who profess to have accepted it, and so
1 can only hope that whatever may be the right toay God
will save me. Reader, I admit that the inconsistent
lives of many professors does great damage to the cause
of Christ, but you cannot be excused from the conse-
quences of neglecting salvation on such an account as
this. You are not to be judged by the incon-
sistency of others. To your own Master you stand.


or fall. There are, however, many who call themselves
God’s people who do live holy lives, why should not
you, then, be influenced by the good example which
they set ?. Why should not you make trial for your-
self, and then show by your own conduct that
true religion is not a mere name, but a living power ?
While mere professors will be judged for their unfaith-
ful lives, you will be most certainly judged for your
neglect. lam quite sure of this, that if you are not
wishing and seeking to excuse yourself from the claims
of God, you will not run the risk of losing your own
soul because others who profess religion are not careful
about their daily life, but you will enquire for yourself,
and finding out the truth of religion, you will endeavour
by God’s grace, to live a holy life, no matter what others
may do. Be assured of this, that the plea under notice
is only an excuse to silence your own conscience, and
to encourage yourself in a course of life more suited to
your natural tastes. Do not. Header, be offended at
my plainness, I ask you earnestly, am I not truthfully
explaining your own conduct to you; your salvation
is concerned in all this, and whatever may be the con-
sequence, I must plainly tell you that the careless lives
of professors, however discouraging it may be, cannot
justify you in your neglect, or save you from eternal
ruin if you neglect this great salvation.
But again, suppose you say,—
9. 44 My circumstances in life-were such as to make it im-
possible to be religious —my temptations were so many
and so much beyond my power that I could not resist
them. My means of living kept me in the way of sin,
and often when I would have accepted salvation, others
put hindrances in my way, still, though, I have not
accepted salvation, I do hope to find mercy with God.”
Header, if this is the plea you would put up as a
reason why you should not be eternally punished for
neglecting so great salvation, do you think it would
help you ? It is impossible, and for many reasons—
In the first place, God never makes it a necessity that
you should be in such a position that you cannot attend
to yo ur soul. If your occupation is such that you feel you


must sin if you have to continue in it, tlien your duty is
to give it up at once, no matter what may follow. Lose
everything rather than lose your own soul —“ For what
shall it profit a man if he shall gain the whole world,
and lose his own soul ? (Matt, viii 36) —ln the next
place, God says, “ No temptation hath taken you but
such as is common to man, hut God is faithful, WHO
WILL NOT SUFFER YOU TO BE TEMPTED ABOVE THAT
ye are able, but will with the temptation make a
way of escape, that ye may be able to bear it”—(l Cor.
x. 13). If, then, you have yielded to temptation, it is not
because you were really tempted beyond your power,
but because you did not look for the way of escape;
and oftentimes the very looking for the escape is itself
the mode of escape. Thus, you cannot charge God
with putting you under the necessity of sinning; and
further, if you had been really in earnest about being
saved, God could and would have helped you if you
had prayed to him to overcome all the hindrances that
others tried to put in your way. Reader, let me assure
you, that it is easy to deceive yourself as to your feel-
ings about salvation, and let me impress it upon your
mind that no excuse will, or can be accepted for your
safety if you neglect this great salvation.
But once more, if you are encouraging yourself in
neglect by saying—
10. “If 1 perish, then multitudes must also perish,
and God will not surely punish so many can this
really save you ? O assuredly not! If multitudes neg-
lect this great salvation, then multitudes will certainly
be lost! Numbers will he no protection. This truth is
very solemnly taught in Holy Scripture. God once
destroyed the whole world by a deluge of water, and
saved only eight persons alive. God once destroyed
Sodom and Gomorrah, and saved only Lot and his two
daughters. And God says “ thou shalt not follow a
multitude to do evil.” (Exod. xxxii. 2). And again
“ Though hand join in hand he shall not be un-
punished” (Prov. xvi. 5). and again “ The wicked
shall be turned into hell and all the nations that forget
God” (Ps. ix., 17). Thus, Reader, there is no safety in


numbers, in this respect. Do not think that you can
escape if you neglect this great Salvation, because
many millions would also have to be punished for their
neglect if you are punished for yours. God is no
“respecter of persons.” (Acts, x,, 34). Every one
WHO NEGLECTS THIS GREAT SALVATION MUST PERISH
EVERLASTINGLY, for such is the plain and positive
teaching of Scripture.
Now, Deader, I have examined a variety of the pleas
which it is probable might appear in the eyes
of some persons would be so far acceptable with God
that they might be saved, even though they neglected
God’s great salvation. I trust you will admit that I
have dealt with them honestly, and that the fair con-
clusion to be now arrived at is this—“ That there can
he JS/O ESCAPE , ip we neglect so great salva-
tion, What, then, is to be done ? I gladly answer —
ACCEPT that Great Salvation at once. Do you ask,
“ How is this to be done ?” I answer—“ Depent” —
take all your sins to Jesus, that he may wash them all
away in His own blood. “ Believe on the Lord J esus
Christ”—that is trust Jesus—believe that when he died,
he died to save you, and that his life and death has been
accepted by God as a full atonement for all your sins.
Tell Jesus that, you long to be saved, and pray to him
to save you. Ask him to give you his Holy Spirit to
help you to live for him. Thus in looking to Jesus,
and living for J esus, you accept his great Salvation. If
you will not do this, then, Eeader, you will have to
answer for it before God ; you have now had a distinct
offer of Salvation. Do not reject it. You are
living amidst great religious advantages. To each and
all of us this applies. We have knowledge and
opportunities which are denied to multitudes,
and well may we ask “How shall we escape
if we neglect so great salvation ? There is no way of
escape possible if salvation be neglected. Then,
Deader, if you have not now accepted God’s offer, do
suffer me to entreat you to do so without delay. Lose
no time about it, for you know not what a day may
bring forth. Do not promise that you will attend to
this question to-morrow — attend to it to-day. God


calls upon you to accept his offer now, the Devil tells,
you it will do to-morrow —but believe him not, for “he
is a liar, and the father of lies.” God says to you
“ Behold now is the accepted time, behold now is the
day of salvation.” Hearken to his loving call, and
“ Receive not the grace of God in vain,” for Reader,
HOW SHALL WE ESCAPE, IF WE NEGLECT
GEEAT SALTATION ?
J. S. Y. Turner, Printer, Brisbane-street, Launceston.
