

H z
boir
1 went
Jfkflrod*
and what befcl me
». Ir®w
Henry Gyles Turner.
Privately Printed by
Mason, Firth a MsCutcheon,
April 1898.




®0
■^r




foreword.
7X HE
excuse for this somewhat egotistical narrative
is to be found in my desire to acknowledge in
some form the kindly interest of the many friends
who, in a season of grave anxiety and severe pain,
sent messages of condolence and sympathy by cable
and letter, from all parts of Australia.
It was impossible to reply to these as they came
to hand. We were six miles by a mountain road from
the nearest telegraph office, and dependent on the
friendly offices of neighbours to bring us letters and
messages. We were too heavily weighted with
anxiety to organise any proper service, and except
when replies were absolutely necessary, we were
constrained to accept all this kindness without
acknowledgment. But the earnest sympathy which
it displayed was deeply felt and gratefully appreciated
by my dear wife, and helped to sustain her under a
crushing load of responsibility.
For those generous friends this little account of
our trouble has been written, and is affectionately
inscribed to them by
HENRY G. TURNER.




N the Ist of March, 1898, my wife
and myself, accompanied by Miss
Sybil Hennessy, were in Dunedin,
thoroughly enjoying a long-deferred
holiday. Having explored the
beauties of the Southern Lakes
District, and having exhausted the
sights of Dunedin, we were debating
whether to go direct by rail to Christchurch, or to
take one of the coasting steamers to Lyttelton, with
a view to seeing the ports en route. A travelling
companion settled this for us by saying that on no
account ought we to leave New Zealand without
visiting Akaroa, which had one of the most beautiful
harbours in the island. Accordingly I made this fit
in with our plans by taking our passage in the Union
S.S. Co.’s steamer “Taupo,” which sailed on the
evening of the 4th March, calling at Timaru,


Apart from the promised beauty of scenery, I had
a desire to sec Akaroa as representing one of the few
picturesque bits of N.Z. history, and bearing even now
upon its population the stamp of its French origin.
Some sixty years ago a Frenchman named
L’Anglois, who was whaling in the South Seas, put
into Akaroa Harbour, and being charmed with the
beauty of the surrounding country, he purchased a
large tract from the natives, and hurried back to
France to organise a company of colonists. Great
Britain had not then formally taken possession of any
part of the Middle Island, and the French Govern-
ment heartily embraced the chance of securing the
territory. They sent out a frigate, under the com-
mand of Commodore Lavaud, to convoy the settlers
who were returning with L’Anglois in the “ Compte
de Paris,” and to protect them on arrival.
Unfortunately for France, Commodore Lavaud
touched at Auckland, where Captain Hobson had
just arrived to represent British interests. Under the
influence of the latter’s hospitality the Frenchman
incautiously revealed his mission. Hobson was quick
to see the importance of forestalling him, and he
promptly and secretly despatched Captain Owen
Stanley in a small gun-boat to hoist the English flag
in Akaroa before the French arrived. It was a race
that left the mark of its result on history. Captain
Stanley got in some 24 hours in front, and when the
sixty French emigrants were disembarked a day or


two later they quietly accepted the position, and
acknowledged the authority of the English magistrate
whom Stanley left in charge.
We had a long day at Timaru, and soon exhausted
the sights of that flat and generally uninteresting
town, sailing for Akaroa at sundown. The night was
exceptionally brilliant with moonlight, and the sea
was smooth as a mill-pond.
The entrance to the harbour is magnificently bold.
It is over a mile wide, and the mountains, which form
the Heads, rise almost perpendicularly from the water’s
edge to a height of from 3000 to 4000 feet. So
boldly does this precipitous wall mark the waterway
that steamers pass in and out on the darkest nights,
the channel being perfectly straight for about seven
miles, when French Bay, the first of a series of inden-
tations in this harbour proper, branches off. At the
head of this indent is the pier serving the wants of
the town of Akaroa, which spreads its cheerful-looking
residences along the shore for half a mile or so. I
was on deck at 4.30 a.m. The moon was just setting,
and the outline of the surrounding mountains was
rendered indistinct by fleecy clouds rolling up their
sides. So far there was no indication of daylight in
the east, but through the morning mists that were
gathering on the waters I became dimly conscious of
the presence of an old-fashioned foreign man-of-war.
She was a frigate-rigged screw steamer, painted
white, and proved to be a French cruiser en route for


New Caledonia, whose commander had elected to
spend a couple of days in a port that so narrowly
escaped belonging to his country. As I stepped on
to the pier at 5 a.m., the bugler on board the French-
man called the crew to work; the anchor was brought
apeak, and slowly through the rising mists she
steamed out to sea. Meanwhile, the ranges to the
eastward stood as black as night, silhouetted against
a faint turquoise sky ; but presently some of the
higher peaks on the western side of the harbour
began to take on colour and distinctness, until they
glowed with a ruddy warmth that crept down their
rugged sides and heralded the coming sun. While
my wife and Sybil were dressing, I strolled down
to the foot of the pier to have a look at the sleeping
town. The echoing sound of my footsteps, however,
disturbed the repose of a big dog who was on sentry
duty in the first street, and his protesting barks
aroused a number of his colleagues to a sense of their
duty, so that in a few minutes I was face to face with
a semi-circle of canine intolerance, which I did not
care to put to the test of combat. In plain language
I beat a retreat, and went back to the steamer to fetch
my family and luggage.
It was now daylight, but so far there were no
indications of life about the place, and as the steamer
had to proceed on her voyage, our effects were put on
the pier and left to take care of themselves. We
went to a comfortable-looking, but old-fashioned


hotel, facing the pier, but did not succeed in getting
any response to our knockings. Finding the front
door was not fastened, I went in and brought out
chairs, and we sat under the verandah for an hour,
enjoying the exquisite views of water and mountain,
and the lovely tints with which the rising sun painted
them as it steadily surmounted the eastern hills. In
due season a servant appeared, and allotted us bed-
rooms and a promise of breakfast. That Sunday, the
6th of March, destined probably to mark the last of my
mountain-climbing efforts, was a day never to be
forgotten. We wandered forth after breakfast for a
four hours’ undefined stroll. Chance, rather than
intention, took us into a lovely public garden that
crept by winding shady avenues up the steep side of
the hills amidst the most superb arboreal surround-
ings. Beyond this lay a picturesque old burial
ground, from nearly every point of which glimpses
of rare panoramic beauty were attainable. As
we passed through these onward and upward on
the well-graded mountain road, we met occasional
groups of settlers, evidently on their way to church in
Akaroa. Here again we had fresh evidence of the
French origin by the fact that most of the young
men whom we passed lifted their caps at the sight of
two strange ladies, and did it with the ease and
naturalness of a fashionable Parisian. Further on our
road overhung the harbour, at a height of from 500 to
800 feet, and commanded views in each direction of


what appeared to be an extensive inland lake. With
the exception of two or three sailing boats hovering
around the Akaroa pier, there was no shipping visible,
and the deep blue of the placid waters, reflecting
clearly their mountain border, added greatly to the
impression that it was a lake of fresh water like
Wakatip or Manapouri.
Leaving my wife to enjoy the view and a rest, I
marked a peak behind us that was crowned by a
substantial cairn of stones, and appeared to command
the whole country for miles around. I set off lightly
to the task of mounting it, but found myself several
times on all fours before I negotiated the summit.
The substantially built cairn was about six feet high,
and when I climbed on to it, I was disappointed to
find that on three sides at least higher and higher
peaks rose behind one another, limiting the range
of view. I estimated the peak at about 2500 feet
above the harbour, and it was well grassed to the
summit, carrying a large number of healthy-looking
sheep, as indeed did more of the country round.
From this point of view it seemed as if the whole of
Banks’s Peninsula was a mass of mountains, with their
highest sides towards the ocean, spreading in soft
undulations over the interior, and finding the only
level ground on the margin of the numerous bays or
inlets which the ocean had worked into them. Up to
the winter snow-line, these hills were all fairly well
grassed, and carried a large quantity of stock. Above


that point, their summits were often fantastic masses
of bare rock, having a ragged and forbidding aspect
against the sky-line.
In the afternoon we explored the little town and its
immediate surroundings, and I think I may say that
not even in Devonshire did we find more beautiful
leafy lanes than in some of the suburbs, while every-
where the enormous size and shapely growth of the
walnut trees surpassed anything of the kind we
had seen elsewhere. There was plenty of evidence
too that the people of Akaroa took life easily. The
devotees of lawn tennis, cricket, bowls, yachting, and
rowing had ample provision made for them, and as a
rule the people looked happy and thoroughly healthy.
There arc two ways of leaving Akaroa, both involving
a coach drive over the surrounding mountain barrier.
On three days a week the coach goes to Little River,
20 miles distant, whence there is railway communica-
tion with Christchurch. On the other three days the
coach goes to Pigeon Bay, about the same distance,
and connects with a small steamer that plies between
some small townships on the bay and Lyttelton
Harbour.
Monday was‘the day for the Little River route, and
we started at 7.30, full of pleasurable anticipations of
a delightful drive through a picturesque country. A
good team of four horses and a light coach rattled us
through the village streets, and, having taken Her
Majesty’s mails on board at the P. 0., we commenced


at once to ascend the hills. Three times we reached
what, from the extensive views, I should judge to be
a very considerable altitude, and three times we
descended to the margin of the harbour to take up or
leave passengers or mails at places where settlement
had concentrated.
At the last place of call, Barry’s Bay, which is
really the head of the harbour, the descent was parti-
cularly steep, and full of sharp curves, and was taken
at a pace that distinctly bordered on recklessness.
At this stage the coach was changed for a much
heavier one, seated to carry fifteen passengers, although
at starting we only numbered ten. A fresh team
of five horses, three leaders abreast, was attached, and
we started for the final climb to a point called “ The
Summit,” where the roads to Little River and Pigeon
Bay diverged, each from that point making a con-
tinuous descent to the sea-level.
When we reached the summit, and stopped for a
few minutes at the hotel there, a drizzling mist encom-
passed the hill tops; but below, in the direction we had
come from, it was all clear and bright, and the harbour
of Akaroa, shimmering in the sunlight, looked as
picturesque as any Swiss lake, while before us lay a
huge basin-like valley surrounded by rugged ranges,
and at its outlet, some six or eight miles away, we could
see the Little River, and beyond it the ocean breakers
on the Ninety-mile Beach. We had not left the
summit ten minutes before I felt uneasy at the rate


we were going. It had evidently been raining on this
side the range, and as our way increased, mud and
travel from the wheels was thrown into the coach,
o
showing that it was swaying very much. I did not
wish to communicate my nervousness to anybody else,
but I carefully scanned the road. It descended by a
very steady grade, cut out of the inner side of the
surrounding mountains, with many long curves to
head off gullies, and some rather abrupt ones in turn-
ing a mountain flank. It was fairly broad, quite half
a chain, I should think, and the character of what I
may call the dangerous side varied from a precipitous
drop of a hundred feet to a gently sloping bank of
twenty or thirty. I could not sec any reason why I
should apprehend danger, except for the fear that at
the pace we were going the horses might get out of
control and bolt. We had gone barely a mile from
the summit when I saw a man on the outer side of
the road throw up his arms as though signalling to
the driver to pull up. Immediately after this I was
conscious that something had gone wrong, though I
could not tell what. I was sitting in the centre of the
middle scat in the coach, my wife on my right hand,
and Sybil on my left. Facing us, with their backs to
the horses, sat two ladies, and behind us a lady and
gentleman. Suddenly there was a tremendous luich
of the coach, as though one wheel had gone over the
bank; this was followed by a sudden wrench in the
other direction, then a crashing of broken timbers,


and a lapse again over the bank. I must have been
slightly stunned by a blow on the head, for I have no
recollection of rolling down the bank. When I
opened my eyes the coach was on its side firmly
jammed in position by a huge stump that Providence
had left for us, and which undoubtedly saved all our
lives, for had the wrecked vehicle passed over this it
would have been broken to pieces in a descent of fifty
or sixty feet amidst rugged boulders and stumps.
The first thing I saw beneath my feet, and right
under the side of the coach, was the blue skirt of
Sybil’s dress. My heart gave a great jump, and nearly
choked me, and for a minute I lost consciousness
again. When I recovered myself the dress was gone,
and though I heard cries and groans all around, the
only people inside the wreck with myself were my
wife and a very stout woman who had been sitting
opposite me. She must have weighed fully sixteen
stone, and now she was yelling for help with all her
might, and trampling on my wife with a view to getting
a better footing. I heard my wife say, “Don’t stand on
me : you arc causing me great pain”—a remonstrance
which passed unheeded. In a pause of her cries, I said,
“Don’t be impatient—you’ll be released directly; the
horses are detached, and we can’t go any further.”
Some good Samaritans shortly hauled her forth, and
then I asked my wife if she could get up. She
thought she could, and as I made an involuntary
move towards assisting her, I discovered I could not


use my right arm, and the slight effort caused a sharp
stabbing pain in my chest. I did not know how far
I was injured, but the sudden discovery of my help-
lessness gave me a shock; and putting my left hand to
my head, and finding it covered with blood, I lapsed
again into unconsciousness. Probably only a minute
or two intervened, but it seemed to me that I had
indulged in a long sleep, when I was aroused by
a voice saying, “There is a poor old gentleman inside
as seems very bad.” Strange as it may appear, this
remark called up something very much like a smile.
I had so long declined to recognise that I was growing
old, and resented the affront of being told so. And
now the appropriateness of the term to a bruised and
battered lump of humanity, bald headed, grey bearded,
and practically helpless, came home to me with a
snap. It seemed almost like an acknowledgment that
my life’s work was done. While these thoughts flitted
through my mind, a couple of stalwart men proceeded
to the task of hauling me out over the upper side of
the coach. How they did it I can hardly tell. One
of them told me some weeks afterwards that I gave
them every assistance, and used my legs freely. All
I know is that by the time I was deposited on the
ground I was aflame throughout all the upper part of
my body with acutest pain, and was struggling for
breath, with a sense of impending suffocation. While
a litter was being improvised to carry me on, my wife
stood beside me, and I learned with the most devout


thankfulness that neither herself nor Sybil was
seriously injured; indeed, the latter escaped with
nothing worse than torn garments, although she fell
through the side, and was right under the coach.
Fortunately a large boulder was alongside, and took
the weight off her, or she would have been fatally
crushed. Her wonderful escape was a fortunate
circumstance for others as well as herself. Her calm
self-possession and activity of mind and body enabled
her to render invaluable service to all about her, and
materially lightened the arduous labours which fell
upon my wife.
A steady rain was now falling, and I was carried,
with my face to the clouds, in a solemn pro-
cession to the nearest cottage, that of Mr. Fahey,
on whose property the upset occurred. I was
deposited on a stretcher in a small room off the
kitchen, where I was destined to pass the next three
weeks in utter helplessness. The cottage contained
about five rooms, and was the domicile of Mr. and
Mrs. Fahey and eight children. The sudden acces-
sion of three adults who had evidently come to stay,
must have been a severe tax on the accommodation;
but not only were we disposed of, but some four or
five other passengers were housed pending the arrival
of the doctors, who had been telegraphed for from
both ends of the line—Akaroa and Little River,
distant respectively fourteen and six miles. Dr.
Morris, of Little River, was the first to arrive, and


realising by my difficulty of breathing and inability
to move that mine was a serious case, he decided to
await the arrival of Dr. Hargreaves from Akaroa
before making the examination. Meanwhile he gave
me a sub-cutaneous injection of morphia, and
proceeded to stitch up the wounds which some of
the other passengers had sustained. When Dr.
Hargreaves arrived, he promptly stuck another
syringe into my arm as a preliminary, and then
having cut away my under garments, proceeded to
assess the damage. I set my teeth, determined
to play the stoic, and I succeeded in keeping my
feelings to myself, though the manipulation of my
ribs made me involuntarily wince. As I considered
myself more interested in the result than anyone else, I
wanted to discuss matters with the doctors—to tell
them what my sensations were, and to know what
they thought of my chances. But they were profes-
sionally reticent, and seeing the difficulty with which
I pumped up enough breath to frame a question, they
begged me not to talk. The effect of the morphia
was beginning to tell on me, and I relapsed into a
tired acquiescence, and lay still. Later on I was
given some opium powders, and under their influence
passed into a troubled sleep, waking every now and
then with a sense of imminent suffocation. The
infiltration of blood from the wounded lung had got
into my chest, and I could not cough it up. The
least effort in that direction caused such acute agony


that I seemed to prefer the risk of suffocation to
attempting it. Lying on my back, gasping for
breath, I passed a tortured night. But the physical
pain I suffered was more than equalled by the intense
mental anxiety of my dear wife, who, bruised from
head to foot and aching in every limb, sat beside my
stretcher on a rough box in the bare, unfurnished
room through the long watch of the night, soothing
with hand and voice as only a woman can. The
doctors had not given her much encouragement, but
she faced the position with courageous hope. In the
early morning she despatched a messenger for
Dr. Morris, and he came out twice during the day.
On his second visit he strapped and bandaged my
chest, but could do no more than prescribe perfect
quiet, and the administration of more opium. During
the second night I succeeded in bringing up some of
the blood that threatened me with suffocation, and
was immensely relieved thereby. On the third day I
began to get restless, and felt that I must be moved
to a place where proper appliances for examination
and treatment could be had. I sent a telegram to a
friend in Christchurch to ask if it was not possible for
an ambulance to be sent up to take me to the hospital
or some kindred institution. He promptly replied by
chartering a special train and sending up an ambu-
lance waggon the same day. Then Dr. Morris
entered his protest, and said he declined any responsi-
bility if I was moved, being sure that the inevitable


jolting on the mountain roads would bring on a
return of the bleeding from the lung, and I should
die on the road. To be sure on this point, Dr.
Hargreaves was again summoned from Akaroa for
consultation, and as he entirely concurred in Dr.
Morris’s views, the special train had to return without
me.
By this time the news of my disaster had
reached Melbourne, and telegrams of condolence and
sympathy from all parts of Australia, from the
remotest points of Western Australia to Queensland,
began to pour in upon us. It was like a break
in the clouds on a stormy day to realise so much
loving friendliness in our remote and desolate
surroundings. For sixteen days I lay on my
back utterly helpless to make the smallest move-
ment alone. On the seventeenth day I was lifted
into a sitting position in bed, and felt that I was
coming back into the world. The next day I put my
feet to the ground, and with the assistance of my wife
and Sybil walked across the room. The following
day I was up for three hours, and on Sunday, March
27th, I was able to sit in a chair in the garden for a
couple of hours, and for the first time to see the lovely
views of mountain and valley by which we were
surrounded, and to note the precise spot in the road,
about a hundred feet above us, from which we had
made our violent entry on Mr. Fahey’s property.
The providential nature of our escape from a sudden


death came home to me with vivid directness, and
on that balmy Sunday morning I felt my heart
suffused with thankfulness that the result had been
no worse. On Monday morning I was brought down
to Little River station in comfort. 1 sat in an easy
chair swathed about with rugs and pillows, and four
stalwart men lifted me into a waggonette. My wife
sat in front, and Mr. Fahey led the horse gentlydown
the mountain road at a walking pace to avoid all
jolting. Arrived at Little River, the chair was lifted
out of the trap and carried to the carriage door of the
train, where I was comfortably cushioned for the
journey to Christchurch. My procession through the
township of Little River was very suggestive of a
Guy Faux fete, but the people of the district knew all
about the accident, and everybody appeared willing
to help. Indeed it will always be a redeeming point
in this disastrous episode to remember the generous
kindness of all with whom I came in contact.
Mr. and Mrs. Fahey, whose cottage we invaded, did
everything in their power to make us comfortable.
They sent away all their children, except the baby,
distributing them amongst neighbours and friends to
keep the house quiet. They gave us of the first of
everything they had, killed their own lambs and
poultry, and supplied the best of butter, milk, fruit,
and vegetables; and when I was leaving them, it
was with difficulty that I could make them accept
any financial acknowledgment for their three weeks’


generous services. The neighbours around vied with
each other in sending flowers, fruit, and fish, and
when I was leaving they turned out to bid me good-
bye, several of them expressing - the candid opinion
that they never expected to see me leave there alive.
We remained in Christchurch five days, comfortably
housed at Warner’s hotel, and each day 1 was enabled
to improve in my walking. On Friday, the ist April,
we embarked on the “ Waikare,” at Lyttelton, and as
soon as I got on board I went to my bunk, and had
the best night’s rest since the accident. Next day
we spent the afternoon ashore at Wellington, and I
walked several miles, though very slowly. We had a
tempestuous passage to Sydney ; but, thanks to the
kindly offices of Capt. Richardson and his staff, each
day I felt an improvement, and by the time we reached
Sydney I was able to spend two or three hours in the
glorious sunshine, amidst the beauties of the Botanical
gardens and Domain. By the courtesy of the railway
authorities of New South Wales and Victoria, I was
able to perform the overland journey to Melbourne in
comfort, and reached my home on Saturday, the
9th April.
I had maintained what the Americans call “ a stiff
upper lip” through all the trying days of pain and
anxiety ; but when the train drew up at Spencer
Street, and I met the many loving friends that had
come to greet us, and again when I entered my own
home and realised the wealth of affection that awaited


us, I confess that my stoicism failed me, and for a
time I was as a little child.
The refrain of a favourite poem of Alexander
Smith’s forced itself continually on my mind, and it
was with a devout thankfulness that I could repeat it
to myself.
“ Daisies are white upon the churchyard sod ;
Sweet tears the clouds lean down and give;
The world is very lovely. Oh, my God !
I thank Thee that I live.”
Mason, Firth and M'Cutcheon, Printers, Melbourne.


3 15 08 0007035 6


00062647
1508
