





HOW THE MONEY GOES;
THE STATE AID QUESTION
EXAMINED.
“FOR THE LOYE OF MONEY IS THE ROOT OF ALL EVIL
WHICH WHILE SOME COVETED AFTER, THEY HAVE ERRED
FROM THE FAITH, AND PIERCED THEMSELVES THROUGH
WITH MANY SORROWS.” —St. Paul.
CONTENTS:
THE 53rd CLAUSE —PUBLIC OPINION OF THE COUNCIL THE
CHARACTER OF THE ENDOWMENT —THE GROWTH OF THE
GRANT —SIR RICHARD BOURKE IN FAVOR OF THE VOLUN-
TARY SUPPORT OF THE CLERGY A NEW LEGISLATURE,
THE FIT TIME FOR THE REPEAL OF THE CLAUSE
EXAMPLE OF ADELAIDE —PUBLIC SENTIMENT ON THE
GRANT THE LIST OF RECIPIENTS THE PRESENT DIS-
BURSEMENT PREMATURE, UNCONSTITUTIONAL, UNJUST,
ETC. THE MONEY GIVEN TO THE TOWNS RATHER THAN
THE COUNTRY DISTRICTS THE ENDOWMENT CONDEMNED
BY THE RECIPIENTS ITS EVIL INFLUENCE ON THE
CLERGY THEMSELVES THE WATCHWORD, “ IMMEDIATE
AND ENTIRE ABOLITION.”
PRICE SIXPENCE.
MELBOURNE; y
GOOPHUGH & HOUGH, PRINTERS, 48 FLINDERS LANE ’HAST,
AND AT QUEEN STEEET.
1856.


The Author hegs to lay on the Table of the Board of the Associa-
tion for the Repeal of “ the Fifty-Third clause ” the following pam-
phlet, as an expression of his earnestness in the attainment of the
object; the profits of the sale to be devoted to the expenses attend-
i
ing the operations of the Board.
Melbourne, 25th June, 1856.


THE FIFTY-THIRD CLAUSE,
APPROPRIATINGr FIFTY THOUSAND POUNDS
TO ECCLESIASTICAL PURPOSES.
“ For the advancement of the Christian Religion in Victoria, the sum
of Fifty thousand pounds shall be reserved on the eight part of the said
Schedule, to promote the erection of buildings for public worship, and
the maintenance of ministers of religion, and such sura shall be appor-
tioned to each denomination according to the relative proportion of the
members of such denomination by the last census, every such apportion-
ment to be made under regulations to be framed by the Governor and
Executive Council, and submitted to both the Legislative Houses; pro-
vided that no monies exceeding in the aggregate the sum of Twenty-five
thousand pounds shall be issued in any one year, in aid of the stipends
of ministers of religion.’’
This Clause, originally framed by Mr. O’Shanassy, one of
the Members for the City of Melbourne, was passed in the
late Legislature by 29 to 10, on the 16th February, 1854,
and now forms part of the New Constitution.
An analysis of the votes on the occasion, forbids the con-
clusion that the Clause was passed Avith the consent of the
people through their proper representatives. Of the majority
twelve Avere nominees of the CroAvn, and eight squatters re-
presenting merely nominal constituencies. As to the re-
maining nine, had the question been left with the represen-
tatives of the great bulk of the population, they would have
been in a minority, and the country spared an agitation that
can never cease, but, on the contrary, must move on with
ever deepening intensity, till all compulsory support to re-
ligion is withdraAvn, and the various ecclesiastical, com-
munities are left, as they certainly ought, to rely ory their
OAvn resources.
The Clause, so far from receiving the public sanction or
support, was all but universally condemned. It Avas almost the
only part of the Ncav Constitution Avhich excited discussion.


and aroused public feeling; and on every occasion when the
question was submitted to a free public assembly, the pro-
posed endowment was unanimously and strongly condemned.
Though the insertion of such a Clause in the New Constitu-
tion took the public somewhat by surprise, and the interval
for remonstrance and opposition was brief, no fewer than
nineteen petitions against it poured into the Council, from
various parts of the country, while not a single public
meeting declared for it, nor a single petition was for-
warded in its favor.* Indeed, so little confidence had the
public in the wisdom and fitness of the Council to deal
with this and other matters, that the feeling was general that
the proper course for them to pursue was to dissolve the
Council and allow the New Constitution to be framed by a
House of Representatives chosen by the people themselves.
This course prudence and honor, not to speak of modesty,
would at once have dictated, but it was not pursued, and
hence a vast amount of unnecessary and disagreeable work
has been left to their successors to perform. The Constitu-
tion itself, which might have come out in a perfect and per-
manent form, remains to be amended in some of its very
leading features.
That the late Legislative Council was an inadequate ex-
ponent of public sentiment, and its decisions often at variance
with the most matured and clearly expressed opinions of the
colonists, few will deny. The proof, however, is ready and
abundant.
THE OPINION OF THE PRESS RESPECTING
THE COUNCIL WHICH ENACTED THE
CLAUSE.
During the first years of its existence, the Argus, then the
leading journal, was under the necessity of heading all the
reports of its proceedings by the following standing advertise-
ment :
“ LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL.
“ It is necessary to guard those who read the reports of the proceed-
ings of the Legislative Council against looking upon the decisions of that
body as expressing the opinions of the Colonists of Victoria. While our
Legisture is so constructed, that it is simply a mockery of representation
this fact should never be forgotten when estimating the value of its de-
* See Appendix.


cisions. In an Assembly of thirty members, ten are nominees of the
Crown; and the right of returning the twenty elected members is so
artfully distributed through the Colony, as very materially to check the
free expression of popular opinion. The majorities in the Council, there-
fore, not only do not necessarily represent the opinions of the Colonists,
but are very frequently diametrically opposed to them. The members
representing large and important constituencies are—Messrs. Westgarth,
Johnston, and O’Shanassy, for Melbourne; Mr. Strachan and Dr. Thom-
son, for Geelong; Messrs. Smith and Bight, for North Bourke ; Mr.
Miller, for South Bourke; Mr. Mercer, for Grant; Mr. Osborne, for
Belfast and Warrnambool; Mr, Wilkinson, for Portland ; Mr. llutledge,
for Villiers and Heytesbury ; Mr. Snodgrass for the Kilmore Boroughs ;
Mr. Fawkner, for the counties adjacent; and Mr. Turnbull, for Gipp’s
Land. Only where the names of these gentlemen occur, whether in a
majority or minority, are the opinions of the great mass of the Colonists
indicated.”
Previous to the passing of the New Constitution an addi-
tion had certainly been made to the Elective Members of the
House, but the Nomineeism had also been increased, and the
Legislative Council received but a small augmentation of the
public confidence. The following was the estimate of the
House entertained by the fore-mentioned journal at the period
of the passing of the clause:—
“A SAMPLE.
“ Characteristically enough, our worthy collection of legislators in
Bourke-street have taken advantage of the very last clause in the Con-
stitution Bill, to favor us with a true taste of their quality. We com-
mend the division upon that occasion to the especial attention of any one
feeling an interest in the actual composition of the House of ‘ represen-
tatives.’
“At the time of the recent addition of members for all the larger con-
stituencies, we made a calculation of all those who recorded their votes
throughout the entire colony, and adding them all together, we showed
that less than one per cent, of the present population had any voice in
the election of this Assembly.
“ But the Assembly as a whole only representing one per cent, of the
people, let the annexed lists be studied, and let each one settle for him-
self what proportion of the people interested in the decisions in this im-
portant Bill, are represented by the working majority by which the
Government carries itself on, and which is here exhibited in such beau-
tiful perfection. The division was as follows :
Noes 20.
“ Colonial Secretary, nominee
Attorney-General, nominee
Solicitor-General, nominee
Commr. of Police, nominee
Coll, of Customs, nominee
Auditor-General, nominee
Mr. Highett, nominee
Russell, nominee
Graham, nominee
Riddell, nominee
Ayes 17.
Mr. O’Shanassy, Melbourne
Hodgson, Melbourne
Greeves, Melbourne
Sargood, Melbourne
J. Murphy, Melbourne
Smith, Melbourne
W. Nicholson, Bourke
Dane, Bourke
Burnley, Bourke
Annand, Bourke


Noes 20.
Colonel Anderson, nominee
The Speaker, squatter
Mr, Goodman, squatter
Griffith, squatter
F. Murphy, squatter
Campbell, squatter
Splatt, squatter
M. Nicholson, squatter
Hervey squatter
Mollison, squatter
Ayes 17.
Cowie, Geelong
Myles, Grant
Wilkinson, Portland
Cole, Gipp’s Land
O’Brien, Kilmore
Fawkner, Talbot
Charlton, liipon ”
Argus, 18 th Feb., 1854,
Amongst the honourable Ayes in the above division, let it
he observed, a majority voted against State Aid to Religion,
viz.:—Messrs. Hodgson, Sargood, W. Nicholson, Annand,
Cowie, Myles, Wilkinson, Fawkner, and Charlton.
The character of the debate in the House at the time,
and the conduct of some of the members, was anything but
calculated to excite a feeling of respect for the Council, or to
cherish any hope in respect to the beneficial tendency of its
measures. Never, perhaps, in any senate was'there a more
lamentable exhibition of ignorance and levity, acriraonious-
ness and strife, utter indifference to divine truth, and wanton
outrage upon the principles of civil and religious liberty.
The report of that debate, as given in the newspapers of the
day, and as witnessed by individuals, may form a separate
tract on this question; but we shall content ourselves in the
meantime with giving the remarks of the Herald on the fol-
lowing morning.
“ THE ‘ STATE AID ’ CLAUSE.
“ The discussion on the clause of the New Constitution Bill affording
State Aid to Religion, created yesterday a great deal of very excited de-
bating—honourable members frequently approaching, in their personal
recriminations, the extreme verge of Parliamentary decency. It is a
strange and lamentable fact, that whenever religious topics are intro-
duced into a political assembly—whenever what ought to be a standard
of general peace is unfurled—some contradictory principle of human
nature prompts men to give full swing to all their bitter and acrimoni-
ous passions—to be more violent, arrogant, splenetic, and generally un-
Christian in their speech and conduct than on any other occasion. Every
one in Council yesterday seemed to be of one accord in their anxiety for
the spread of religion and morality; there was the most perfect unanim-
ity as to the ultimate purpose to be attained : and yet, according to the
strange perverted principle we have just stated, the Council could not
proceed to discuss the means by which the commonly desired end —the
worship of God, and the spread of peace and good-will amongst men —
could be promoted, without manifesting the bitterest and most angry
feelings we ever saw exhibited within the Council walls. The very turn
the debate took might have afforded a salutary lesson as to the impolicy


of mixing politics and religion together, and as to the certainty that
while £50,000 a-year is paid to maintain churches and ministers of reli-
gion, more angry feelings will be excited thereby than the fifty thou-
sand pounds worth of parsons will ever be able to allay.
“ The debate closed at too late an hour last night, and our columns
are too crowded to-day, to enable us at present to enter fully into the
very important principles involved. Without trenching upon this very
large ground, however, we may in a few words express our extreme dis-
approval of the conduct of the present Council in treating this topic at
all in the New Constitution Bill. The Council must know well that it
most meagrely and imperfectly represents the people of Victoria. The
task of framing the New Constitution has devolved upon them, because
they are the only body on whom it could devolve; but even in the
Constitution they have framed, the truth is recognised that a very dif-
ferent Parliament must be created to govern this country properly.
Hence we conceive that the creation of the new and more perfect
Government power should have been the sole task of the present and
most imperfect one. Yet, having previously fettered futurity with the
notorious “ two-thirds clause,’’ this miserable compost of officials, semi-
representatives, and nominees, has resolved upon binding the future
Legislature to the maintenance of a particular policy on which society is
completely at issue. Be they right or be they wrong about state aid to
religion, they are unequivocally and unquestionably wrong here, ihey
have no right to decide anything that can be left to the future more
perfect Parliament to decide. We often observe that these Council
members lay the flattering unction to their souls that it is they who are
about to give a Constitution to Victoria. Certain powers have been
unavoidably entrusted to them —and we know too well how these
powers are being exercised ; but it may justly excite indignation when
we find these men—who are in fact but the registrars and returning
officers of the future Parliament—arrogating to themselves the power
of prescribing what the course of that future Parliament is to be. It
would be but a small departure from the precedents this Council has
established, to pass in review all the probable subjects the future
Council might have to consider, and to decide these for them in advance.
Our Council proceeds “ with pleasant and confident thoughts to
legislate for their successors as well as for themselves. We wonder that
no Government squatting member has got up to decide what proportion
of corrosive sublimate should be used under the New Constitution to
cure the scab in sheep. In all matters, large and small, general and de-
tailed, the Council seems determined to leave nothing to the uncertain-
ties of future legislation which can, by possibility, be brought under the
jurisdiction of that tried wisdom of their own in which they place such
implicit confidence.’’
Such was the complexion and character of the Council by
which this 53rd Clause was enacted, and certainly no one in
the coming Legislature can possibly be deterred from dealing
with this or any other part of the New Constitution, by any
feeling of reverence for its fathers and framers.'


THE ENDOWMENT WHICH THE CLAUSE
PROVIDES.
The endowment is professedly for the Christian religion,
but whether the Christian religion, as such, be promoted or
not is a matter of no consequence, if only something bearing
that name is maintained. It is the name of Christianity that
is cared for, and not the thing. This is no misrepresentation
or caricature. The Council disclaimed either the right or
the ability to decide what real Christianity was, and the
grant has been made available to all Avho assume the Chris-
tian name, irrespective of the nature or tendencies of the
tenets they hold or the rites they observe. The terms “ offi-
ciating minister” in the Act are “ taken to mean any minister
authorised according to the usages of any church religious
society or denomination to officiate and officiating in any
building registered according to law now in force in the said
Colony as a place of public worship.”
The Clause in its original form bore simply that it was for
the advancement of religion, and would have provided for
every species of religionism, from the purest form of Chris-
tianity down to the vilest superstition which the colonists
might embrace. And, indeed, the original form of the
Clause had political equity and fairness to recommend it. For
all religionists contributing alike to the public funds, one
class has certainly as good a right as another to have their
peculiar system maintained at the public expense. As we
say of the birds, “ every crow thinks its own bird whitest,”
so in the body politic, every sect thinks its own system
the best, and who is to be the judge? The difficulty
was felt in the Council as every one anticipated. No one
felt it more than the present Chief Secretary, who stated
that “ the most logical way of escaping from the difficulty was
the adoption of the voluntary principle.” What a pity that the
courage of some men should not be equal to their convic-
tions ! After a stormy debate the Avord “ Christian” Avas in-
serted before the Avord “ religion,” on a division, by a majority
of nineteen to thirteen. An attempt Avas afterwards made
to admit the members of the JeAvish persuasion to a partici-
pation of the fund, but this also failed, the numbers being
for the motion 15, against it 16. But Avhile narroAved to the
class professing Christianity, the endowment is still suffi-
ciently comprehensive to embrace creeds and religious systems


the most diversified, opposite, and conflicting that can well
be conceived, and to demonstrate to any reflecting mind, the
self-contradictory and absurd character of the scheme.
t It was the boast of the great Apostle of the Gentiles, and
his fellow labourers in the gospel, that their “ preaching
was not yea and nay.” 2 Cor. i. 19., “ For the Son of
God, Jesus Christ, who was preached among you by me,
and Silvanus, and Timotheus, was not yea and nay, but in
him was yea.” But our late legislators were Aviser than the
apostles, and gravely determined that the best mode of pub-
lishing the gospel, and promoting the Christian religion, was
for one set of teachers to say “ yea,” and another set of
teachers to say “ nay:”—to maintain, in other words, one
class of ministers to contradict what another affirmed, and to
pull down Avhat another built up.
One class is paid to assert and teach that the Bible is in-
spired ; and another is paid to assert and teach that the Bible
is not inspired. One class to preach that Jesus Christ is a
divine being; and another class that he is not a divine being,
but a mere man. One class that Jesus died as a mediator
between God and man, to expiate human guilt; and another
class that he did not die to expiate human guilt, but simply
as a martyr to his principles. One class that sinners are jus-
tified freely by divine grace through faith in Jesus Christ;
and another that this is pure fanaticism, and that “ works” is
everything. One class is paid to teach that there is a hell
hereafter for the unbelieving and ungodly; and another class
is paid to teach that there is no hell at all. One class is paid to
preach up transubstantiation; and another to preach it doivn.
One class that it is lawful to pray to saints and angels as in-
tercessors, and another that it is lawful to pray to Christ only.
One class is paid to testify that the Church of Eome is the
Holy Catholic and only true church, and other classes are
paid to denounce her as “ Antichrist,” “ the Mother of Har-
lots, and abominations of the earth,” and “ drunken with the
blood of the saints.” One class is paid to testify that all are
damned who leave her communion, and other classes are
maintained out of the same fund to testify that it is the duty
of all to come out of her communion and be separate, if they
Avould not be partakers of the aAvful plagues that coming
upon her for her damnable heresies and soul-destroying doc-
trines. Trinitarians are paid to cry doAvn Unitarians, and
Unitarians to cry doAvn Trinitarians. Episcopalians are paid
to teach that the Church of England is the true Apostolical
Church, and Presbyterians are paid to testify that the Church


of England is but the Church of Rome partially reformed.
But enough, the absurdity, not to speak of the blasphemy,
of the system, must be shockingly palpable to those whose
vision is not jaundiced by the gold they touch. Indeed, we
have the greatest difficulty in supposing that there is a single
recipient of the State bounty who does not perceive that he
is lending himself to the perpetuation of the most absurd and
self-contradictory system. But what is to said of the
more serious aspect of the question ? Wliere is conscience
all the while in connection with such a scheme of revolting
blasphemy ? How can Christian men be quiet under it ?
We have heard it well remarked, that the absurdity of
the endowment is as great as though the Crovernfhent were
to pay one set of contractors £25,000 to build a number of
bridges, and £25,000 to another set to pull these bridges
down, and this from year to year. But if the absurdity be
so great, the mischief is greater still. The system breaks
down the eternal distinctions between truth and falsehood,
between right and wrong. It makes religion anything or
everything that people choose to make it. The system is
essentially pantheistic, and as the symbol of such consummate
policy we may yet have a Pantheon like ancient Rome,
where the gods of all nations can be held in sacred adoration.
As to the fostering of the religious element of which some
speak with such a philosophic air, not knowing well what
they mean, we know not well what to say. In our simplicity
we know nothing of the religious element, apart from religion
itself. We can distinguish between religion and superstition,
but we take the religious element and the element of religion
to be one and the same thing; and we know further that re-
ligion is not anything or everything that men choose to fancy
it, but that it is a certain well-defined something which all
who are willing to learn may easily comprehend. But the
fact is, that evangelical religion, or the pure, personal, prac-
tical, and every day religion ot the New lestament, such as
voluntaryism in the long run alone will sustain, is, with
our affected philosophers, downright fanaticism. It is a
thing they cannot bear, and rather than it should flourish
and prevail, they would endow by its side the vilest form of
heathenism, and smother it with royal bounty. Might
not even common sense teach the disciples of the “ Argus
school” that two perfectly opposite and conflicting doctrines
cannot be both true or right; and, further, that that which
is true and right only can be beneficial. Now, if our
senators cannot determine what is right and true in religion.


why should they meddle with the subject at all? Since they
find the subject to be beyond their power, is it not a clear
intimation that it is beyond their province ?
By this time our senators might surely be taught, that they
cannot deal with the subject of religion Avithout doing mischief
either to religion itself, or to the community for which they
legislate. If, on the one hand, they determine what is true
religion, and endow that only, then those of the community who
entertain different views are compelled to support a religion
which they do not approve. Thus the rights of conscience
are invaded, and the principles of religious liberty are viola-
ted. Even where the system sanctioned and endowed is
the true and right one, still by the very compulsory cha-
racter of the endowment, the minds of the dissentient por-
tion of the community become prejudiced against it, and the
object of the measure is defeated. On the other hand, if to
avoid the evils of partiality, unfairness, and anything like the
appearance of persecution, they endow all religious systems,
they attempt, as Sir Richard Bourke says, an “ impossibility,”
and in the mean time, religion itself is insulted, and brought
into general contempt. The reproductiveness of religious
error is endless, and its varieties innumerable. And surely a
nation cannot be guilty of a more daring act of impiety than
the endowment of a false religion. It is the Devil and not
God to whom the homage is shown.
Thus whichever way a Legislature turns in dealing with
the subject of religion, she encounters insuperable obstacles.
There is injustice on the one hand and impiety on the other.
“ Incidit in Scyllam, qui vult vitare Charybdim.”
Civil legislation cannot do everything for man, and she should
not attempt to do .everything. She has her own sphere; let
her confine herself to it, and occupy it well. Her more im-
mediate if not entire sphere is the protection of person and
property, and she will find in doing this well that she does a
good work. In reference to the Christian religion, let her
see that she does nothing against it, and she will do much in
its favour. Christianity only requires to be let alone. She
is strong in her own divinity and must prevail.


THE GROWTH OF THE GRANT.
The grant at first was only £6,000. _ This was provided
by the Constitution given to the colony in 1850, when it was
detached from New South Whies. This small amount was
evidently inserted in the Schedule under the conviction that,
as the days of endowments were numbered, the colonists,
when free to act in a legislative capacity, would leave every
sect to support itself, and that in effecting this arrangement,
they would have the less to do. No vested rights to study,
no private interests to care for. It was the mere name of
an endowment, and everyone regarded it as such.
In the absence of free legislation however, the grant, in-
stead of being removed, was increased. The late member for
Yilliers and Heytesbury in what one would suppose a post-
prandial speech, in which he declared that “ he was in favour
of religion both here and hereafter,” moved the Govern-
ment to bring in a bill for the augmentation of the grant to
£30,000. This was done in January, 1853; the whole bill,
in all its thirteen clauses, passing through committee in one
day, members even not being in possession of the draft of
the bill till the very hour of discussion. The amount is now
£50,000. Thus a grant, not only wrong in principle and
injurious to the very interest it professes to subserve,
threatens to become a serious and intolerable burden upon
the public revenue. AVI thin the short space of three years
it has more than octupled itself, while the population in the
same interval has not increased three-fold. Left alone, it
would soon be ten times the present amount. But this
aspect of the question is of small moment compared with the
other, in which the highest interests of society are involved.
Allowed to leaven society with its unholy latitudinarianism,
and its Pantheistic heartlessness, it would soon ripen the
country for revolution and judgment.
SIR RICHARD BOURKE IN FAVOR OF THE
VOLUNTARY SUPPORT OF THE CLERGY.
In framing his famous Church Act, which provided for
the endowment of various Christian sects, especially the


Episcopalian, Roman Catholic, and Presbyterian, Sir Richard
Bourke was evidently influenced by the social condition
of the colony at the time. It was peculiar and exceptional;
New South Wales was then a convict colony, and the
great mass of the inhabitants in a state of penal servitude.
The whole country was a vast gaol, and the ministers
of religion more to be regarded as prison chaplains than
in any other capacity. It seemed natural and just that the
Government should provide religious instruction for those
who, by their crimes, had forfeited their personal liberty,
and had neither the means nor the opportunity of providing
it for themselves. But what was suited to a convict popu-
lation might not suit a free and independent people. It
savours of despotism to speak of paternity in connection
with Government, but the character seems both natural and
proper in connection with felons and convicts. Not that
in any instance faith should be forced, but these are, of
necessity, the parental charge of Governments, the rest of
the community being capable of taking care of themselves.
Though it seems even a questionable stretch of parental in-
dulgence to give convicts spiritual teachers according to
their several likings, as the question should rather be, not
what system of religious instruction will please them most,
but what will do them most good, what will bring them most
effectually to repentance and amendment of life, and restore
them at length to society, quiet, honest, and useful mem-
bers.
On this point the editor of the Sydney Morning Herald
in a late article thus writes: —
“To ‘ Voluntaryism,’ meaning self-support, all colonial churches
must come. Sir Ilichard Bourke, who made a provision, meant it to be
temporary, and he made it only because he deemed the social state of
this colony peculiar and exceptional. What his views were may be seen
from his despatches, from which we quote the following relating to Port
Phillip, then a part of this colony, but in different circumstances: —
“ ‘ I would also recommend that provision be made for the schools,
in which the children of persons of different religious tenets may be in-
structed without distinction, on the plan now adopted in Ireland. The
means of education being secured, I shall feel disposed to leave it to the
voluntary contribution of the inhabitants to provide for churches and
clergy. To aid all, where the creeds are various, seems impossible,
and a partial distribution of the public funds appears nearly allied to
injustice.’ —Despatch of Sir Richard Bourke respecting land in Port
Phillip , Oct., 1835.”
With such views as those now quoted from his despatches
to the Home Government, could Sir Richard Bourke have


appeared on the floor of our Legislative Council when Mr.
O’Shanassy, Dr. Palmer, and Mr. Stawell were lauding his
Church Act to the skies as the “ charter of religious liberty,”
and the very perfection of state legislation, with what aston-
ishment and surprise would he have listened to the speeches
of these gentlemen. We can imagine that enlightened
Statesman putting the whole host of our small senators to
the blush, and causing them to hide their faces in self-con-
founding ignorance as he thus addressed them: “ Gentlemen,
while you laud my statesmanship you completely misappre-
hend my sentiments. In a convict colony lam a Compul-
sory, in a free and independent community I am a Volun-
tary. In framing that Church Act I never dreamt of
making compulsory provision for the clergy in Port Phillip,
or in a free colony like this. s To aid all, where the
CREEDS ARE VARIOUS, SEEMS IMPOSSIBLE, AND A PAR-
TIAL DISTRIBUTION OF THE PUBLIC FUNDS APPEARS
nearly allied TO injustice.’ Your grant of £138,500
for educational purposes astonishes and delights me. After
such liberal provision for the education of the young of all
sects, irrespective of the tenets they hold, such discussions
as the present are unnecessary and unseemly. Your course
as legislators is clear: * Leave it to the voluntary
CONTRIBUTION OF THE INHABITANTS TO PROVIDE FOR
CHURCHES AND CLERGY.’”
THE FORMATION OF A NEW LEGISLATURE,
THE PROPER TIME FOR THE REMOVAL
OF THIS OBNOXIOUS GRANT.
THE EXAMPLE OF ADELAIDE.
This State Aid question, important all times, becomes pe-
culiarly so at the present crisis. Other questions are doubt-
less of vast importance, but involving as this does the princi-
ples of religious liberty and the highest interests of man, its
importance is vital ; and on the eve of a New Legislature,
when the Civil Constitution of the country is to pass under
review, and be purged of every obnoxious element, it becomes
the question of questions.
The people of South Australia, like ourselves, had a trial of
endowments for a few years, but they were not found* to work


well. A deep conviction possessed the public mind that they
were unscriptural, impolitic, and unjust; that they tended
to injure true religion rather than to promote it, detaching
Christian ministers from their congregations, and congrega-
tions from their ministers; lessening the sense of individual
obligation in reference to the support and spread of the
Gospel, checking the flow of Christian liberality; alienating
the ministers of the Gospel from each other; setting one class
of the community against another; fertile only in envy, dis-
cord, and strife. Accordingly, immediately on the receipt
of their New Constitution in 1851, they resolved to rid the
country at once and for ever of the enormous evil. “ State
aid” or “no State aid” became the one grand leading ques-
tion at the first general election. Whatever the sentiments
of the candidates on other points were, on this point
they had to give forth a clear and certain sound; and they
must go in for the immediate and entire abolition of endow-
ments, or the popular support was withheld. The Council
consisted of twenty-four members, eight of whom were
nominees of the Crown, and sixteen representatives. Out
of the sixteen representatives which the people of South
Australia were allowed to return, twelve were sent in
pledged against the continuance of the grant. The battle
was fought out of doors. When the Council met in August,
1851, the matter was summarily and satisfactorily settled.
The second day of the Council a Bill having been brought
in by E. C. Gwyne, Esq., a non-official nominee, and se-
conded by Charles Sturt, Esq., for the continuance of the
endowment, it was moved by Captain Bagot, and seconded by
G. S. Kingston, Esq., and carried by a majority of three,
that the Bill be read that day six months. B. D. Hanson,
Esq., Advocate-General, one of the members of the Executive
Council, voting with the majority against the grant. And
now for the last five years the colony of South Australia has
been entirely without endowments, the various ecclesiastical
communities depending entirely on their own resources, and
religion, so far from being extinguished or suffering from the
change, was never in a more satisfactory or promising state.
Even the former clerical recipients of the bounty have ex-
pressed themselves satisfied with the present arrangement,
and would deprecate any return to the old systen)'. Major
O’Halloran and other eminent lay members of the Episcopal
Church, who contended stoutly for the continuance of the
grant at the first, are now as strenously in favour of the volun-
tary support of the clergy. The great bone of contention


among the sects has been taken out of the way, and nothing
but peace and proper rivalry prevail, each denomination labor-
ing diligently to spread religion according to its own consci-
entious views and with its own means. At the late general
election the question of State aid was not even mooted.
Bishop Short being even pleased to entreat or enjoin upon
the members of his communion on the occasion that the pre-
sent state of things should not be disturbed. It is, indeed,
quite delightful to find that distinguished prelate adapting
himself so readily and ingeniously to the new mode of church
support. The following extract from the last Diocesan Re-
port, of date 29th April, 1856, which is nearly after a five
years’ trial of the voluntary principle, must rebuke the fears
of such men as the Chief Secretary and the Attorney-Gene-
ral here, who expressed themselves in the late Council, as
though religion if left to the voluntary contribution of the
inhabitants, “ would be banished from the land
“I now proceed to lay before you,” says the Bishop of Adelaide,
“ the statistics of our Church in tabular form, so far as I have been
able to ascertain them. Not that they give a complete view of our
actual state or progress, but are chiefly valuable as showing the
enormous deficiency of pastoral care and public ordinances under
which the members of our Church in the bush continue to labour.
I earnestly pray God that the view thus exhibited may stimulate
every member of our Church who values the salvation of his own
soul and that of his brethren to be up and doing in the cause of our
Lord’s Gospel and Kingdom, so far as his individual instrumentality
can farther them. The decree has gone forth— ‘ Henceforth the Church
shall, under the blessing of God, grow by the zeal of its own members.’
Believing then as we do in the providence and care of the Great Head
of the Church, let us accept it without repining, and let us pray that it
may be said of each one of His servants as it was said of Himself, ‘ The
zeal of thine house hath even consumed me.’ Were this sentiment
stamped upon our hearts by the spirit of God, who could doubt that ‘ so
mightily as grew the Word of God and prevailed’ in the apostolic age,
in like manner would it grow in these latter days, not by State aid un-
willingly conceded, but by the faith, self-denial, and almsgiving of its
members.
“1. Church Accommodation. —There are thirty-six places in which
Divine worship is celebrated according to our Liturgy every Lord’s Day,
exclusive of the Gaol, the Stockade, and Hospital, where services are
also supplied by ministers of our Church. In these houses of prayer
there is accommodation for 6,500 persons, and sittings let 3,314, or little
more than one-half. This, however, does not represent the total sum
collected by voluntary contribution in our Church j for though the sit-
tings are mostly let for £1 each, yet whenever the sum so raised is in-
adequate to maintain a minister, a Stipend Fund has been raised in
addition, while the fees paid on account of occasional services are not
inconsiderable ; to which must also be added the offertory alms, and the
usual monthly collections for the expenses of the churches. ' The total


sum raised within the year for buildings, stipends, and the maintenance
of Divine worship, cannot much have fallen short of £13,000. According
to the last census the number of persons nominally belonging to the
Church of England exceeded 33,000, scattered through the bush, un-
reached as yet by missionary clergy. There is evidently large scope for
our exertion to bring them within reach of the ministry of the Word
and Sacraments. The number of those actually known to have commu-
nicated is 786, but this falls short of the number of those in full commu-
nion, seeing that our presbyters are too few to offer this Sacrament to
numbers who live far from town and places of worship.”
The Free Presbyterian Church in Adelaide, which has
all along been exclusively maintained by the free-will offer-
ings of the people, is also making great progress in over-
taking the spiritual wants of the population, both in town
and country. The "Wesleyans seem themselves again since
their liberation from state entanglement—free/fervent, ener-
getic, and successful. While the Independents, Baptists,
and United Presbyterians, who have borne the burden and
heat of the day in upholding the standard of religious
freedom, and the cause of the gospel generally in South
Australia, betray no symptoms of lassitude or decay. The
example of Adelaide must be followed here. Indeed, if we
may judge from recent manifestations, the public feeling of
Victoria is ripe for the same decisive line of action.
PUBLIC SENTIMENT IN MELBOURNE ON
THE SUBJECT OF THE GRANT.
At a public meeting of the citizens, convened by the
subjoined requisition, held in the Theatre Royal on the
22 nd May, and at which, on a moderate computation, up-
wards of two thousand were present, the necessity of the
immediate and entire abolition of state aid to religion was
unanimously and enthusiastically affirmed: —
STATE AID TO RELIGION.
GREAT PUBLIC MEETING AT THE THEATRE ROYAL, BOUEKE STREET, ON
THURSDAY, THE 22ND INST.
To the Hight Worshipful the Mayor of Melbourne.
Sir, —We, the undersigned Citizens of Melbourne, disapproving of the 53rd
clause in the New Constitution Act, which appropriates £50,000 per annum for
Ecclesiastical purposes, hereby respectfully request your Worship to convene a
public meeting of the inhabitants of the city and vicinity, to consider the
propriety of taking immediate measures for its abrogation.
(Signed)
Wm. M. Bell, merchant Patrick Macarthur, merchant
F. J. Sargood, M.L.C. Wm. Westgarth, Market street, do


Campbell Brothers & Co,, merchants
Fulton and Smith, do
Hy. Langlands, do.
Charles Vaughan, Alderman
James Wisewould, solicitor
R. and J. Clowes, ironmongers
Geo. Barker, merchant
Walter Powell, ironmonger
Thos. Rae, M.L.C.
James McCulloch, M.L.C.
Richard Fletcher, minister
A. M. Ramsay, do.
James Callender, merchant
Langlands, Buick and Co., do.
Thos. Dickson, do.
H. S. Chapman, M.L.C.
Jno. Grant, M.L.C.
R. and N. Guthridge, merchants
A, & W. Ferguson, wholesale drapers
Francis Reilly, Alderman
Alex. Cairns, merchant
Jno. Sleight, Collins street
Benj. Bell, councillor
Louis L. Smith, surgeon
J. W. Bell, furniture merchant
E. Tufton Smith, solicitor
Frederic Lloyd, F.R.C.S.
H. Beauchamp, furniture merchant
Wright and Peebles, drapers
Ambrose Kyte, Provision merchant
J. K. Purves, furniture do
Alexr, Morison, minister
David E. Wilkie, M.D.
Kidston and Atchison, accountants
William Little, merchant tailor
Robert Hamilton, minister
William Farrage, M.D.
Jno. Macgregor, solicitor
Robert Campbell, draper
Robt. Mailer, do
Haigh Brothers, Collins street
Alexr. Fisher, M.D.
Robert Matthewson, ironmonger
Wm. Overton, Commercial Chambers
Robert Callaghan, importer
Edmund Jacob, auctioneer
Jno. Pascoe Fawkner, M.L.C.
Thos. Embling, M.L.C.
And two hundred and thirty-five others
In the absence of the Mayor, we, the rcquisitionists, hereby convene a public
meeting, to be held at the Theatre Royal, Bourke street, on Thursday evening
next, at 7 o’clock, p.m., for the objects specified in the above requisition.
Chair to be taken at 7 o’clock precisely.
At this meeting, which was presided over by F. J. Sargood,
Esq., M.L.C., and addressed by the Revs. W. B. Landells,
James Ballantyne, and A. M. Ramsay, J. P. Fawkner,
Esq., M.L.C., H. S. Chapman, Esq. M.L.C., and H. Lang-
lands, D. Blair, Campbell, and Cowderoy, Esqrs., the fol-
lowing resolutions were unanimously passed :
I. “That the 53rd clause in the New Constitution is not calculated to pro-
mote the object which it contemplates; that it involves a violation of the prin-
ciples of civil and religious liberty; that it is likely to prove a fruitful source of
discord and contention in this new community; and that immediate steps
should be taken to have it expunged from the constitution.
11. “ That, in the opinion of this meeting, the formation of a new Legislature
affords a fitting opportunity for purging the civil constitution of the country
of such an obnoxious element; and that it is the duty of the electors, without
overlooking other important questions, to return such representatives only as
are prepared to vote for the immediate abrogation of the aforesaid clause.”
111. “ That the following citizens constitute a committee to carry out the
object of this meeting in regard to the ensuing city election, viz.: Messrs. W.
M. Bell, H. Langlands, Langton, W. Wcstgarth, F. J. Sargood, M.L.C.,
Walter Powell, Thomas Rae, M.L.C., Revds. R. Fletcher, James Ballantyne,
and A. M. Ramsay; Messrs. Chapman, M.L.C., Wisewould, Embling, M.L.C.,
Grant, M.L.C., Campbell. R. Clowes, J. Clowes, W. Little, and James Callen-
der, with power to add to their number.”
In the course of his remarks, Mr. Chapman, who has had


Appropriation of the £50,000 for 1856 : —
Church of England ...
... £28,614
2
0
Homan Catholics
... 10,837
15
0
Church of Scotland ...
4,505
3
2
Free Presbyterian Church ...
3,203
3
7
Wesley ans
3,723
17
8
Lutheran Church
802
6
6
Unitarians
... 314
2
6
long and extensive acquaintance with colonial affairs, ob-
served that, —
“In the course of his career he had attended various meetings, both at home
and in the colonies, but he did not remember so emphatically monster a meet-
ing as the present on any subject, except the- repeal of the Corn Laws. That
movement was carried by precisely the same means which we were adopting in
reference to this question, by systematic and constant agitation ; an appeal to
the reason of the people, and gentle pressure on the legislature of the country.
Those means which had been so eminently successful elsewhere, would, no
doubt, be successful here. He hoped the new Legislature would represent the
sentiments of the masses of the people.”
Mr. Chapman urged the immediate abrogation of the clause.
At this large and influential meeting, the circumstance
being mentioned that while the public were discussing whe-
ther the 53rd clause should be allowed to remain or not, the
clergy and Executive Council had stolen a march on them,
that the £50,000 the first year had actually been already
appropriated thus:—
And that a list of the recipients of state aid, both for 1855
and the present year, lay on the table; an almost universal
call was made that the list should be read. This it was
deemed prudent at the time not to do; but a pledge was
given to the meeting, that it would in due time be forth-
coming from the press, and in redemption of that pledge it
is now presented to the reader.
In connection with the various lists of recipients, we feel persuaded that to
many of their own Church Members and adherents, the fact of their ministers
being in the actual receipt of the State Bounty, will be as startling as it will
be to the general public. We believe also that the merest fraction of their
people sympathise with them in the mean and humiliating position in which
they have placed themselves, as a body of Spiritual Police, employed and paid
by the Government.
As for the Eleven Free Church Ministers, who appear, for the first time, as
suppliants at the Treasury, we consider that they have rendered the Free
Presbyterian Church of Victoria, in a practical point of view, thoroughly
Erastian. Fancy the immortal Chalmers going to a brother minister for a
certificate that he had done his duty for the year, and thelj repairing to the
Treasury for his pay, and waiting, perhaps, the favorable issue of a Govern-
ment investigation before receiving it! I* From Heaven, we can imagine the
God-like man weeping over the sad degeneracy. Oh! temjpora; Oh! mores.
* See Government Regulations. Appendix.


Amount
authorised for
Statement of the
Distribution
Act of Council,
Public Worship for the year
16 Vic. No. 28.
1855
Stipends.
Buildings.
Total.
Particulars.
Cluircli of England.
Melbourne, St. Janies’ .. H. B, Macartney
„ St. John’s .. J. Darling
St. Paul’s .. S. L, Chase
St. Peter’s •. J. Barlow
St. Mary’S .. T. Heron
St. Mark’s .. J. A. Cloti
„ St, Mark’s .. J. A. Clowes ..
Emerald Hill .. A. J.M'Causland
Richmond .. C. T. Perks ..
St. Kilda .. D. Seddon
Brighton .. S. Taylor
Upper Plenty .. W. Copeland .
Brunswick .. C. P. M. Barton
Williamstown . • J. G. Medland.
Pentridge •• W. Carter
' Theodore Budd.
_ „ 1 Jan. to 31 Mar.
Heidelberg - j ames Lyneir, 1
April to 31 Dec.
Hawthorne .. W. Wood
Kyneton .. .. E. G. Barton .
Kilmore .. .. W. Singleton ..
Geelong, St. Paul’s .. T. C. B. Stretch
„ Christ Church.. C. Goodman ..
St. James’ .. T. C. B. Stretch
l’T. P. Yipont, 1
.. .. Jan. to 31 Mar.
Cmlwell .. .. •G. M. Brough,
Bellerine •. G. Pollard
Belfast .. T. H. Brain
Tower Hill .. L. A. Baker
Tarraville .. Willoghby Bean
Sale .. .. P. K. Simmons
Prahran.. .. E. Puckle, Jan.
1 to March 31
Benalla E. Puckle, April
1 to Dec. 31..
Wangaratta.. .. Cooper Searle
Church, Pentridge
„ and Parsonage,
„ Tower Hill
„ St. Kilda
„ Belfast
„ Portland
Williamstown
Castlemaine
Sandhurst
and Parsonage,
Do.
800 0 0
300 0 0
300 0 0
300 0 0
225 0 0
225 0 0
225 0 0
300 0 0
225 0 0
300 0 0
225 0 0
225 0 0
300 0 0
300 0 0
1 300 0 0
225 0 0
225 0 0
225 0 0
300 0 0
300 0 0
225 0 0
| 197 15 7
150 0 0
300 0 0
225 0 0
225 0 0
225 0 0
225 0 0
225 0 0
7322 15 7
1000 0 0
1014 2 11
120 0 0
500 0 0
500 0 0
500 0 0
800 0 0
800 0 0
C. T. Perks
Carried forward,
7322 15
7 5234 2 11


Particulars.
Stipend.
Buildings.
Total.
Brought forward.
Parsonage, Winchelsea
„ Warmamhool
„ Port Henry
„ Benalla
„ North Melbourne
„ Emerald Hill
„ Ballaarat
„ Barrahool
„ Wangaratta
7322 15 7
)234 2 11
200 0 0
300 0 0
300 0 0
200 0 0
200 0 0
200 0 0
320 0 0
200 0 0
199 10 0
-
7332 15 7
7353 12 111
L4,676
8 6
Presbyterian.
Geelong .. .. Andrew Love ..
South Melbourne .. Samuel Conie..
Camphellfield .. Peter Gunn ..
Belfast .. .. Thomas Craig..
Essendon .. .. J. Eeid
Heidejberg .. .. T. Boyd
Wardy YaBock i .. J. Gow
Gipps’ Land .. .. T. M‘Anlis
Kalkallo .. .. Andrew Graham
Cranbourne .. Alexander Duff
185 6 11
300 0 0
300 0 0
300 0 0
300 0 0
199 19 11
199 19 11
249 19 11
199 19 11
45 0 0
Church of Belfast
Do. Camphellfield
Manse, Castlemaine ..
Do. Colac
Do. Tarraville
2280 6 7
340
800
400
340
400
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
2280 6 7
2280
0 0
4560
6
7
Wesleyan.
Geelong .. E. Hart, 1 Jan. to 30 April ..
Jos. Albiston, 1 May to 31 Dec
Do. . • Isaac Harding
Port Fairy.. J. Albiston, 1 Jan. to 30 Apri
E. Hart, 1 March to 31 Dec.
Brighton .. T. Beekford
300 0 0
179 17 0
199 19 11
300 0 0
Chapel, Brighton
977
17 8
979 16 11
977
17 8
1957
14
7
Other Protestants.
Melbourne.
Lutheran .. .. Matthew Goethe
Unitarian .. .. Maswell Davidsoi
Unitarian Church
German Lutheran Church
300 0
1 300 0 (
sod
250
0
0
I
600 0
3 550
0
11150
0
0
Carried forward,
11,182 19
11,161 10
22,8449
8


Brought forward,
Roman Catholics.
Melbourne .. .. Isaac Hayes
Do. .. .. D. M'Every
Williamstown.. .. G. A. Ward
Colac.. T. Slattery, 1 Jan. to 30 April
P. Bermingham, 1 May to 31 Dec
Warringal .. .. Y. Bourgeois .
Geelong .. •. P. Dunn
Ashby .. .. H. Geoghegan.
Portland .. .. J. Eoe
Warrnambool.. J.Bleasdale, 1 Jan. to 3 Apri
T. Slattery, 1 May to 31 Dec
Brighton .. .. P. Nial
Eichmond .. .. J. Madden
Pentridge .. .. C. O’Hea
Belfast .. .. W. Shinnick
Kyneton .. .. Maurice Stack
Elmore .. .. Tim O’Eourke.
Broadmeadows .. M. Downing
Tarraville .. .. P. Veiling
Emerald Hill .. J. O’Connell
Church St. Mary’s, Geelong
Parsonage, Sandhurst
„ Eichmond
„ KeEor
„ Emerald Hill
„ Belfast
~ Portland
„ Kilmore ..
Buildings.
Total.
11,182 19 1 11,101 10 7 22,344
199 19 11
199 19 11
199 19 11
199 19 11
199 19 11
199 19 11
199 19 11
199 19 11
199 19 11
199 19 11
199 19 11
199 19 11
199 19 11
199 19 11
199 19 11
199 19 11
199 19 11
199 19 11
138 16 0
892 0 0
246 0 0
400 0 0
400 0 0
400 0 0
400 0 0
400 0 0
400 0 0
7 3538
0 7076
3538 14
14 7
Audit Office, Melbourne,
May 6, 1856.
14,721 13 8 14,699
29,421 4 3
1856.
Statement of the Distribution of Amount authorised for
Public Worship for the year 1856 ; by the Act of Council
18 & 19 Vic., c. 65.
Particulars.
Stipends.
Buildings.
Total.
Clim-ch of England.
Melbourne, St. James’ ... H. B. Macartney
„ St, Peter’s ... J. Barlow
„ St. John’s ... J. Darling
„ St, Paul’s ... S. L. Chase
„ St. Mary’s ... T. Heron
„ St. Mark’s ... J. A. Clowes ...
Carried forward
270 0 0
270 0 0
270 0 0
270 0 0
220 0 0
270 0 0
1570 0 0






1861 18 7
7 33170 2 9


£ s. d.
Treasury, Melbourne,
7th May, 1856.


THE PRESENT DISBURSEMENT OF THE
£50,000 PREMATURE, UNCONSTITUTIONAL
AND ILLEGAL.
The distribution of the £50,000 has been premature, and
has taken the public by perfect surprise. The clause enjoins
that the “ apportionment is to be made under regulations to
be framed by the Governor and Executive Council, and sub-
mitted to both the Legislative Houses, No such regulations
have been framed, and it is notorious that the two Legisla-
tive Houses to which they -were to be submitted have not
yet assembled. They have not yet been chosen. We are
awarethat at a deputational interview with the Chief Secre-
tary in October last, that gentleman gave it as his opinion
that the terms “to be submitted to both the Legislative
Houses” implied simply, that the regulations were to be sub-
mitted for information, and that the Legislature might take
action upon them or not as it saw fit. Exception was taken to
this view of the matter at the time, and the more fully we con-
sider the terms and spirit of the Act, and the parliamentary
phraseology usually employed in connection with such matters,
we are the more deeply convinced that Mr. Haines’ view is
quite untenable, and that the only meaning which either law
or common sense can attach to the terms employed, is that
the regulations were to be submitted Tor approval. Sub-
mission for information is an absurdity. In the very sub-
mission the information is imparted. When mere informa-
tion is intended, the terms “ laid before” are the terms em-
ployed in senatorial procedure. Thus in the New Constitu-
tion Act itself, in the very clause immediately preceding the
one in question (viz., the 52nd), where information only is in-
tended “ laid” is the term used. “ A list of all pensions
granted under this Act, and of the persons to whom the
same shall have been granted, shall be laid in every year be-
fore both Legislative Houses of the said colony.” Had
information only been intended, the same words would un-
doubtedly have been used. The graces of composition are
not studied in Acts of Parliament. Again, in clause 46,
“ accounts in detail of the expenditure of the ’.several sums
expended under the authority of the Act shall be laid before
the Legislative Houses of Victoria,” &c. &c. The wide dis-
tinction between “ accounts of monies” and “ regulations for


the disbursement of monies ” is kept up throughout the Act.
Accounts of authorized expenditure by the Government are
to be laid before the Legislature for information. Regula-
tions for the proper expenditure of the public money are to
be submitted to the Legislature for approval. How com-
pletely may the object of a public fund be defeated by the
mode of its disbursement, and what Government would not
desire to be relieved of responsibility, by working according
to regulations duly submitted and sanctioned by the Legis-
lature. On more grounds than one we believe the Executive
Council have laid themselves open to impeachment, and in
the approaching Legislature they may find themselves in a
very awkward and uncomfortable situation, with little hope
of escape by any bill of indemnity.
THE PRESENT DISBURSEMENT PARTIAL
AND UNJUST.
The principle on which the distribution has been made is
unjust. The money has been apportioned not among the
parties entitled to it, but among those who have clamored for
it. The Executive Council have gone on the principle of
first come first served, and some are away with other people’s
money. The business of the Government was very simple
and clear. They had £50,000 to distribute amongst the
various Christian sects in the colony, according to the relative
proportion which their several members bore in the last census.
Instead of this, they have selected a few of the different
sects, and given all the money to them, leaving the others
totally unprovided for! It will not do for the executive to
say “ Oh! the other sects do not wish the money.” They
may or they may not. One thing, however, is clear, they
have been allowed no opportunity of refusal. But with
this matter of liking or disliking, the Executive, we submit,
had no business whatever. They had simply to deal with
the instructions of the Act. They had no right to pre-
sume that one sect or another would refuse the provisions
of the Grant. The A.ct takes no cognizance of the sen-
timents of particular bodies on the subject. It deals with
the claims, not with the creeds, of the various Christian
sects, and the business of the Executive in the apportion-
ment of the £50,000 lay purely and entirely with the nu-
merical claims of the different denominations of Christians.


According to these claims the money should have been appor-
tioned, leaving it to be taken up or not as the several claim-
ants thought fit. If it was not lifted, the money lapsed into
the general revenue of the country, according to the spirit of
the Act, and express recent legislation on But
even granting that some denominations declined their por-
tion of the Grant, on what authority was that portion given
to others. Their numbers entitled them to a certain amount
and no more. The Government were not required by the
Act to disburse the whole of the fifty-thousand, nolens volens,
amongst the different denominations ; their instructions only
forbade the disbursement of a greater sum in the aggregate
for the support of the clergy than the moiety of the grant.
THE DISTRIBUTION UNFAIR.
The distribution of the money is unfair in its details as
well as unjust in its general principle. With not a third of
the population of the colony as adherents, even taking into
account all their extravagant and ridiculous claims to those
who hail from no denomination, why have the Episcopalians
received £26,614 2s. more than the half of the entire
amount ? Again, why have the Roman Catholics, with only
45,011 of the population, received £10,837 155., and the
Presbyterians, with 42,317 of the population, only £8,229
Os. sd. ? And again, in reference to the subdivisions of the
last-mentioned sect, while £4,505 3s. 2d. has been given to
the Scots Church, with 16,924 of the population; and
£3,723 17s. 3d. to the Free Church, with 12,033 of the
population; where is the portion of the United and other
Presbyterians, with 13,360 of the population? As we have
already hinted, it is nowhere. It is nil; and the pro-
portion of the 7,709 Independents? It is nil. And of the
4,724 Baptists? It is ml. And of the Primitive Metho-
dists ? It is nil And of the Wesleyan Association? It
is nil. And the Quakers? and the Irvingites? Christian
sects too ? All are nil. True, all these denominations re-
fuse the grant on principle, but is that any reason why
other sects, less scrupulous, should be allowed to run off
with their proportions of the grant. Why should the money
not be allowed to return into the General Exchequer, to go
out again in the formation of roads and bridges, and the like,
by which course, in their estimation, the interests of true re-
ligion would be more effectually promoted, than by such
direct and deceitful gifts to the clergy ? And then, the


Unitarians, though not forgotten in the division of the
spoil, does their proportion of the population, 1,180, entitle
them to no more than £314 2s. 6d., taking the ratio observed
with the Free Church ?
But to be still more particular, why do we find some
clergymen in the receipt of very much and others in the
receipt of very little ? Is there such a difference in the
amount of work performed by them, or are the congregations
of those who receive such large sums so much poorer than
those of the others, that it is necessary to provide their entire
support out of the public funds in order to secure their ser-
vices to the country ? Or is it because the principle laid down
in a recent Act of Council has been adopted in the present
instance, viz., that those who are best helped by their con-
gregations are to be best helped by the state, or in other
words, that those who need least are to receive most ? Some
explanation is required.
Since no new regulations for the apportionment of the state
grant to ministers of religion have been issued, we presume
that the Government have fallen back on the Regulations
issued by Mr. La Trobe and his Executive Council in 1853
in disbursing the £50,000; but if so, how comes Dr. Perry,
Bishop of the Anglican church, to receive £500; and Dr.
Goold, Bishop of the Romish church, £500; and Dr.
Macartney, of St. James’s, first, as H. B. Macartney, £270,
and then as Vicar-General, £SOO, in all £770 ? We should
not be surprised, though many discover in this quiet com-
fortable arrangement, the secret of his recent pamphlet in
favour of State Aid, which, by the way, is certainly not
marked by the charity, logic, or even knowledge of Bible
facts, which might have been expected of the worthy Dean.
But to return, how come these clergymen to receive such
large sums, when it is expressly laid down in those regulations,
and even in the act which they were designed to carry out,
that “ £4OO should be the highest rate of stipend granted
from the general revenue,” a rule to which we find no ex-
ception in the distribution of 1855.
,I® consistent ? is this legal ? is it not an outrageous
violation ot the act ? Do the Government imagine that
they can do as they please with the public funds ? A reckon-
ing day is at hand. They appear to have conformed to the
statute referred to in the matter of churches and ministers’
dwellings, to which no greater amount is to be given to a
church than £2,000, and not more than £4OO to a parsonage
or manse. Why have they gone in the face of the act in


the matter of stipends ? Moreover* we should like to know
whether in every instance, before a stipend was granted,
the application was made in conformity with the require-
ments contained in schedule A*, and the regulations gene-
rally. We fear that on this point sad disclosures will be
forthcoming, damaging alike to the Council and the Clergy.
THE MONEY HAS GONE TO THE TOWNS
RATHER THAN THE COUNTRY DISTRICTS.
The utmost that any person of enlightened and liberal
politics ventures now-a-days to say in favour of State Aid to
religion is, that while the towns may do without the grant
the country districts certainly require it. We have observed
that the few candidates for legislative honours who have
expressed themselves in that way, in almost every instance
contend for the grant only as respects the thinly peopled
districts of the interior. And it is the very general impres-
sion on the public mind that the greater part of the money
goes to meet the spiritual destitution of those parts. Now, as
the Treasury tables show, the very reverse of this is the case.
Fully four-fifths of the entire grant are given to the towns
and cities, where, on all hands it is acknowledged, religion
may safely be left to voluntary contribution, and less than a
fifth PART is given to the country districts, where its
advocates say, it is essentially needed. The princely city of
Melbourne itself absorbs £10,331 17s. 4d., and the gold
townships of Castlemaine, Sandhurst, Ballaarat, and Beech-
worth receive £5,002 18s. 7d. Of the amount received by
the Episcopalians, not more than two-sevenths go to meet
the destitution of the interior properly speaking. In this,
however, they are an example to the other sects. The Ro-
man Catholics devote only one-seventh; the Scots Church
Presbyterians but one-fourth; the Free Church Presby-
terians only one-sixth; the Wesleyans send none, the Lu-
therans none, and the Unitarians none. It will be found
that not more than £9,786 2s. Bd., or less than a fifth part
of the £50,000 is devoted to the country districts, and as for
the more distant and thinly populated squatting districts, or
the Bush Proper, what has the grant done ? The Squatters
will themselves reply, next to nothing. What then becomes
of the constant cry of the necessity of the grant for the bush
and country districts. As the money is withheld from the
* See Appendix,—Note 111.


very districts for which it was professedly granted, and
given to those districts, and to those parties that can best do
without it. Is not the whole affair a perfect public cheat ?
a piece of scandalous jobbery enacted under the cover of
the confusion of the times. The hands of the Government
are too full of other business to attend particularly to eccle-
siastical affairs, at any time to statesmen rather dry and
troublesome, and the consequence is, the priests or pres-
byters of the different orders have it all their own way.
The unseemly scramble and awkward meetings at times of
the various applicants, furnishing not a little amusement
to the present good-natured occupants of the Treasury
Chambers.
But before quitting the subject of the destitution of the
interior, we would venture the remark, that while we con-
demn the insincerity and inconsistency both of the Executive
Council and the clergy in neglecting the bush or squatting
districts, these districts, after all, are least entitled to any
extraneous aid, whether from public or private funds. It
would be like providing chaplaincies to dukes and earls.
We may, even yet, say tkat the most opulent of the colonists
occupy those regions. Now what is to hinder a dozen squat-
ters or so, in any particular locality, from uniting and main-
taining an evangelist or minister to intinerate amongst them,
holding service at their different stations in turn, and other-
wise labouring to promote the spiritual welfare of the
settlers. What is to hinder them, we say, doing this, and
doing it handsomely ? making the evangelist feel at home
wherever he passed the night. How much more than their
proportion, in such a case, do many of them knock down in
a single evening at some of our hotels and theatres when
they come to town in the wool season. What doth hinder ?
Nothing but a sense of duty and good agreement amongst
themselves. We know of several bush districts that have
been overtaken in this way, much to the credit of the parties
concerned, such as Buninyong, Elephant Bridge, the Hop-
kins, and the Upper Murray, &c. Indeed, it will be found
that much more has been done for the bush by voluntary
contribution than ever has been, and we think we may now
add, or is ever likely to be done by compulsory exaction.
In parting with this subject let it not be forgotten by all
interested in the evangelisation of the bush, that itinerant
service is the only system by which the object can be at-
tained. Churches and congregations, in the usual sense of
the terms, being entirely out of the question. The men on


the different stations must be reached by personal interview,
by godly converse and faithful admonition as circumstances
arise, the distribution of small religious books and tracts, or
such other means as sanctified ingenuity may suggest.
THE ENDOWMENT CONDEMNED BY THE
RECIPIENTS THEMSELVES.
Foremost amongst the ecclesiastical communities now
found in this awkward predicament must be placed the Free
Presbyterian Synod of Victoria. And perhaps history does
not furnish a more flagrant example of dereliction of prin-
ciple on the part of a public religious body than this Church
affords in connection with the subject of Indiscriminate
Endowment. None of the numerous variations of popery
can do more than equal it. The most deliberate and solemn
protestations, but recently made, have been thrown to the
Avinds, and the early and fond-cherished principles of the
body trampled in the dust. Let any one who thinks that in
the spirit of faithfulness this language is too strong, oblige
us with more subdued and becoming phraseology if he can,
after carefully comparing the present reception of the grant
by this church with the following Synodical resolutions
printed and published to the world: —
“ APPLICATION FOB, GOVERNMENT AID FORBIDDEN.
u Preamble.
“ The Synod having had under consideration the question whether it
be proper for the Congregations of this Church to apply for, or accept
sites for Churches and Ministers’ dwellings from the Colonial Govern-
ment, resolve and declare—
“ Christ’s supremacy over nations declared.
« 1. That this portion of Christ’s Church believes and holds that as
the Lord Jesus is Governor among the nations, and Prince of the Kings
of the earth, it becomes nations and their rulers to own His supremacy,
and in their legislation and administration to seek His glory and the
propagation of His truth.
u Public endowment of error condemned.
“ 2. That it is plainly inconsistent with this view of national duty for
any government to endow and support error, which it must do if it sup-
port religious systems inconsistent with, or antagonistic to each other.
“ Protest against the Ecclesiastical system of New South Wales
and Victoria —Duty to seek its abolition.
“3. That as in the legislation and government of New South Wales,
Judaism and Christianity, Popery and Protestanism, are practically
treated as equally deserving of support from the public funds, and ot
grants of those lands which are vested in the Sovereign as trustees for


the people, and as provision is made in the Constitution given by the
British larliament to the Colony of Victoria for the continuance therein
of the same procedure, the Synod feel called on to protest against the
principle involved in such procedure, and hold it to be the duty of the
members of this Church to seek the abolition of the system hitherto
pursued.
a No application to be made for Church purposes.
“ 4 That in order to render this protest effectual and consistent, the
bynod consider that it is indispensable that the congregations of this
Church should, as in times past, abstain from applying to the Colonial
Government for either money or land for Church purposes.
Officers of Synods not to promote such applications.
5. 1 1 hat neither the Synod nor its officers shall promote or sanction
any application of the kind now condemned.”
Again, let the censor read with care the following protest
against the sinful procedure of the Council in the matter
of this Indiscriminate issued in November,
1852 i
Resolutions come to by the Free Presbyterian Synod of Victoria, held
on the 28th December, 1852 : Present—Rev. William Miller, Mo-
derator Present with him—Rev. Messrs. Sinclair, Tait, Hastie,
M‘L ac hlan, D. Hume, and Messrs Bonar and Armstrong, Elders.
1. That this Synod holds, in common with the Parent Church, and
her numerous branches throughout the world, that the civil magistrate
is bound to use his power and influence to protect, support, and extend
the truth of God revealed in the holy Scriptures, both from a regard to
the authority of Him whose minister he is, and to the highest interests
of those over whom he rules, and that it is lawful and right in the
Church to receive and make use of this support, not only for its own
sake, but from its being a practical and national acknowledgment of the
sovereignty of the Lord Jesus Christ as head over all things to his
church, and equally to be recognised and honoured as King of Zion, and
Prince of the kings of the earth.
2. That there is an equally fixed and certain line of distinction be-
tween what is true and false in science, and right or wrong in morality,
and that for those in civil authority to have no reference to this distinc-
tion in legislating and acting in reference to religion, and to be guided
entirely by the varying opinions and errors of the people, is at once un-
reasonable and absurd in itself, highly sinful in the sight of God, and
most mischievous in its effects upon the community, being an attempt
to uphold and perpetuate systems that are contrary to and destructive of
each other, calculated to provoke the displeasure of Him who has given
us his own word to be our guide, and tending to confuse and mislead the
popular mind, and to produce an indifference to and contempt for dis-
tinctions that are of eternal moment, and to encourage and confirm them
in those erroneous views of the divine character and law which lead to
crime.
. 3- That while the rulers of a community or State may be placed in
circumstances in which it would be inexpedient to appropriate any portion
of the public hinds for the maintenance and support of the true religion,


from such a course being calculated to excite prejudice and produce dis-
affection and animosity in those hostile to the truth, and retard rather
than further its progress, they cannot be placed in circumstances in
which it is either lawful or expedient to give equal countenance and
support to the false and the true —a thing unreasonable in itself, dis-
pleasing to Him who is governor among the nations, and injurious to
the highest interests of those over whom they rule.
4. That while the Church could lawfully, and consistently with her
own principles, claim and receive support from the Colonial Govern-
ment, yet as this would be a falling in with a system which they cannot
but condemn, weaken the protest they feel called upon to maintain
against it, and tend to encourage and perpetuate it, they adhere to the
determination they have formerly come to, to stand out and he separate
from it altogether , and resolve to use all lawful means to have it abol-
ished.
5. That the Synod rejoices in the efforts that have been lately made
to have the support given to different religious by the Colonial Legisla-
ture, withdrawn, though in some cases proceeding on grounds somewhat
different from those which are in accordance with the principles of this
Church, and resolve that a petition in conformity with these principles, be
drawn up to be presented to the Legislative Council, signed by the Mo-
derator in the name of the Synod, in opposition to the proposed increase
in the amount hitherto granted for that purpose.
It must be quite a relief to those to whom the honour of
the Free Church is peculiarly dear, that though eleven of
their number have this year, in the face of such a solemn
and recorded protest, ventured to the Treasury in company
with Roman Catholics and Unitarians for a “ piece of bread,”
there are yet four, if not five, ministers of the body, who
prefer their principles to their pay, viz., —The Rev. John
Tait, of Geelong ; William Miller, of John Knox’s Church,
Melbourne; Thomas Hastie, of Buninyong; and Adam
Cairns, D.D., of Melbourne. Perhaps we should scarcely
admit Dr. Cairns to the honourable list of exceptions now
given, inasmuch as he has been the leader of the present
retrograde movement. He was the first to violate the rule
in reference to sites, and though he is not in the receipt of
any stipend from Government, he has done all in his power
to enable others to get a participation of the grant, and it is
hard to avoid the conclusion that he would himself take it, if
he needed it; his present popularity alone precluding the
temptation, and securing to him the shadow of honourable
consistency.
In a letter to the Argus, 9th November, 1855, in which
he contradicts an “ official report ” of a speech made by him
at Geelong, attributing to him the terms “ heathenish and
devilish,” in connection with the Colonial Endowment, the
Doctor gives his opinion of the system in language if less
vilifying, certainly not less condemnatory :
“ Upon the principle of recognizing and supporting, not the truth alone


revealed in the Word of God, but any form of worship, however corrupt
or erroneous, that bears the name of religion, it is impossible to deny
the claims of the Hindoo, of the Mahometan, of the Chinese, as well as
of the Eoman Catholic or the Protestant Christian. This principle is
one of indifferency or atheism. It refuses to take cognizance of the
truth, or even to entertain Pilate’s inquiry, what is truth ? and, there-
fore, like the Romans of old, opens its Pantheon to every idol. It is
impossible, I think, to defend this principle. It must create constant
annoyance to the Government; and if the rulers of the country are
unable, either from want of light or from want of opportunity, to dis-
criminate between the Divine truth and its counterfeit—between the
religion of revelation and the religion of imposture,—the wisest course
they can follow is to leave the support of the Christian ministry to the
Christian feeling of the people.”
THE PEINCIPLE OF THE GEANT ALL ALONG CONDEMNED BY
THE HEAD OF THE EPISCOPAL CHUECH OF VICTOEIA.
As President of the first Episcopal Conference held in Mel-
bourne in 1851, in his opening remarks. Bishop Perry
observed in reference to the subjects that were to come
under consideration, that the first of these was “ The pro-
priety of providing for the permanent endowment of the
church of this diocese, and the best means of carrying out
this object—
Probably it had been the object of the Committee to bring under no-
tice the importance of making an independent provision for the clergy—
so that while on the one hand they might he dependent upon the voluntary
system of support , founded upon a full sense of every member of the
church contributing to its maintenance, yet on the other hand means
should be taken to preserve them from the evil influences that might
arise out of the system, and to maintain their independence.
*****
“ He could not bring himself to regard the State as a collector appointed
to save them the difficulty of making a collection; besides, he would
point out to them another distinction, namely, that the State, while it
collected from all parties, collects from all according to their means; but
the amount is not apportioned according to the means of the sects, but
according to their numbers. This made a very wide difference, since
the money was collected from one class, and a large portion of this
money was given to support another class. This brought him to the
distinction of a Church established by the State, and a Church paid by
the State. The Jewish religion was established by the State, but it was
in nowise paid by it. It was far from desirable that the ministry should
be dependent on the bishop, for that was as bad, or nearly so, as having
to rely on their congregation ; but he had considered that the present
dependence on himself must necessarily be only a temporary one, since
the whole tenor and tone of the feeling of the present day was against
the continuance of State support. As they all thus far indirectly con-
curred with the Government, he considered it their duty on every occa-
sion to protest against a plan of distribution founded on a principle by
which error was supported, believing, as he did, that one of the churches
thus supported taught doctrines which were subversive of true religion.
With regard to whether, on the ground of expediency, or as an absolute


moral right, the Government should recognise and support a particular
church, he had no hesitation in expressing a most decided opinion that
it would be most inexpedient so to do ; and if the Government of the
colony were at that moment vested in him, he should feel it to be his
duty not to do so. He believed that by recognising an Established
Church, they would be doing that which would prove most injurious to
the progress of true religion and piety.
*****
“ Then came the question—it was a difficult one, and he would not blink
it—were they to reject the State support, and depend entirely upon Vo-
luntary assistance ? With a full sense of all the difficulty in his way, he
answered—Yes. It was the only answer he could give without compro-
mising his duty. And if it was so, let them go forth in the full confi-
dence that the Lord was with them, and would not see them want. It
was urged that the voluntary principle was one of belief, and not of ex-
perience ; that its effects were not to be tested by the results in America;
or that, if they were, a different conclusion than adopting it should be
come to. But even if it were a matter of belief, what was their own re-
ligion but a matter of faith ?—and if they believed that they were right,
they required only to continue their way, in the true confidence that
God would not leave or forsake them. Before entering on the facts that
he should adduce, he would say a few words on the effects that the call-
ing forth of the principle of Voluntaryism would have upon the members
of the Church. It should not be forgotten that every object of the
Church should be the promotion of godliness and Christian graces in its
members, and that these were cherished and increased in the same ratio
as they were called forth. He was bound to consider it as proved that
to set apart a portion of his income for the maintenance of the clergy,
was not only the duty but the privilege of an individual ; and he pressed
upon them that the true Christian acting on this principle would find
that the sum thus expended would bring him more real and pure enjoy-
ments than any other portion of his outlay.
* * * *. *
“ No doubt there were many defects in the voluntary system in America,
against which they would have to guard ; but altogether the testimony
was most valuable as showing that the system had not failed in America,
and if not there, why should it fail here ? Let them only look with con-
fidence on the influence of the gospel on the peaple ; and whatever diffi-
culty might arise, let them also rise with the responsibility that was en-
gendered. And withal let het them not reject the State support, but
receive it so long as it was offered, but protesting at the same against the
principle of its distribution, and preparing always for the time when
they should receive it no more. But, above all, to use the words of the
Venerable Archdeacon, let them not lean on the State for support, or
assuredly it will prove a bruised reed, which will break and pierce their
side.
At this conference the Rev. Mr. Hales, at that time a
clergyman of the diocese of Melbourne, expressed himself as
follows: —
The Rev. Mr. Hales would ask, for what was the Church established but to
sow peace, and not discord, amongst mankind ? And looking to the state of
England and of this colony at the present time—looking at the state of feeling
of those around them, they must see that such a demand as that about to be
made would be to cast amongst the community the bitter seed of malice, envy,
evil-speaking, and all uncharitableness. According to all the rules of justice.


if the State supported one Church, they must support all, whether Turk,
Infidel, Mahomedan, or Heathen; for they could not suppose that any nation
had ever yet existed that had not amongst its inhabitants some who did not
believe in the existence of a God ; and if this was always found to be the case,
they must be guilty of injustice when they called upon all to aid in the support
of one religion. They could not, he thought, go to the State and say, “It is
your duty to support us.” For he did not consider the Government, as a
Government, bound to support any religion whatever; and in the case of this
colony, the question was, is it wise or is it expedient in all cases to ask for
Government support. In this case he would say it was not expedient. The
first and most usual effect of a State endowment was to produce sloth, not only
upon the minds of the ministers, but upon the people also, and he would again
refer to the results shown in the American Almanac to show this. Before the
revolution, the Church of England was the established Church of America, and
for some time after the declaration of independence, things went on in the usual
way, but first one State and then another repudiated this State Church, until
the Church established was now the lowest and the least numerous of all the
religions in America. Again, to ask for an increased endowment would he to
cast amongst this community the most bitter of all the apples of discord that
could be east amongst them, and to create hostile feelings even amongst their
own members ; and for these reasons, also, he thought it would be unwise to
seek State support. Whatever might be their own feelings in the matter, they
ought not to shut their eyes to the fact that things were on every hand
verging towards Liberalism; and as like effects always proceed from a like
cause, they would become like the Church of America, instead of being the first,
they would be the least, and they would fix a canker in the bosom of the
Church that would never be healed.
When it was proposed to augment the original grant of
£6,000 in 1852, Bishop Perry thus expressed himself in a
letter which appeared in the newspapers*:—
“As to any Increase of the amount of the present grant, I would most earnestly
deprecate it as implying an approval of, and tending to perpetuate, a false and
most pernicious principle, and as stereotyping, so far as the State can do so,
every existing religious error.
The recent petition of the Roman Catholics* must, I should think, make
every Protestant Legislator sensible that that church feels itself dependent
upon State support for its continued existence in this colony, and that its
priests are aware of the impossibility of retaining their dominion over the con-
sciences of an intelligent and independent people, such as the inhabitants of
Victoria are likely to become. Great, therefore, in my opinion, is the guilt of
assisting to prop up amongst us this system of Satannic delusion.”
And last year when in England, at a meeting in London,
the Bishop’s sentiments were evidently unchanged. He ob-
served, —
“ As I have mentioned in my letter the Secretary of the Society for
the Propagation of the Gospel, I was myself opposed to the principle of
the grants ; being of opinion that the Government of a country is not
justified in appropriating the public money to the maintenance of
various kinds of religion, of which, if one be true, one or more of the
others must be fundamentally false. This placing of truth and false-
hood upon the same level appeared to be wholly unjustifiable ; and
hence, if I had been called upon to choose. I should have preferred to
struggle as best we could against our difficulties, rather than receive
assistance upon such terms.”
See Appendix,—Notes IV. and V.


On reading such sentiments, it is with unfeigned and deep
sorrow that we find £5OO opposite the Bishop’s name in the
foregoing list for the present year. We can sympathise
with him in his official position, and might excuse him
taking any very active steps for the removal of a grant of which
his clergy participate, and which some of them may think
essential to their maintenance, but what law of God or man
compels him to take the endowment for himself? He is not
to follow a multitude to do evil. Is he not by personally
partaking of the grant annulling his own protest against the
principle of the grant ? Is he not giving the most effectual
countenance he can afford to the Government in a course
which he has been pleased to denominate—“ wholly unjustifi-
able ?” Is he not accessory to “ the guilt of the state in
propping up a system of satannic delusion ? Is he not help-
ing as far as any man in his personal and private capacity
can do “ to perpetuate a false and most pernicious principle,
and to stereotype in the colony every existing religious
error ?” He may feel to choose for others in the matter, but
is he not called to choose for himself? Can Bishop Perry
retain that £5OO with a good conscience after the solemn
and oft-repeated testimony which he has uttered against the
principle of the grant ? We would stretch our charity to
the utmost to save the character of the amiable Bishop, for
our respect for him is sincere and deep, but in this piece of
business we can see nothing but the most lamentable and da-
maging inconsistency. Serious persons cannot pass it by,
and the men of the world will not hesitate to speak of it in
the worst of terms. “We have no argument,” says the
Sydney Morning Herald —
“ With those who throw the blame of this unprincipled system from their
own shoulders while they demand its benefits; nor any with men who claim a
right to tax their neighbours ; hut we expect at least some reverence for truth,
as such, wherever religion is deemed anything higher and better than a system
of police.”
But perhaps as in the Returns the sum is set down as “ wait-
ing his lordship’s return to the colony,” it may have been
set down inconsiderately and officiously in the Bishop’s
absence, and without his sanction. A personal application
is required by the regulations indeed, but the Executive
Council have evidently been taking great freedoms with
their own regulations, and perhaps no importance is to be
attached to such a consideration. None would rejoice more
than we, at any explanation which would save the consistency
worthy diocesan.
If it be wrong in the state to grant money in this way,
can it be right in him who thinks so to take it ? Conscience


is the only guide to duty. Its office is to control the whole
man. Whatever be the Bishop’s feelings in respect to his
clergy, we do not require to inform him that conscience
ought to control them, and that when national guilt and the
injury of true religion are involved, no consideration of
worldly comfort should have any weight, whether in refer-
ence to ourselves or others. Indecision betrays a want of
faith, and compromise is treachery.
Dr. Macartney, while Arch-deacon at the Episcopal Con-
ference already referred to, remarked that he and his bre-
thren “ ought not to lean upon the state, as they would find
it a broken reed that would pierce their sides.” Is it not
leaning on the state to be drawing a yearly stipend from it,
and this year the goodly sum of £770? Moreover, how can
the doctor reconcile it with his conscience to walk to the
Treasury for his pay arm-in-arm with a party he calls
“ Antichrist.”
In his recent pamphlet in favour of State Aid, the Dean
bases the lawfulness of the church claiming the grant, not-
withstanding the support which the State gives at the same
time to “ damnable error,” on the fact, as he says, that “ Elijah
did not object to receive a bullock, though the priests of
Baal were likewise supplied with one.” Now, on this point,
we are really under the necessity of referring the dean to
the Bishop and the Bible. The Bishop will tell him, as he
does in the foregoing extracts, that “though the Jewish
Church was established by the State, it was not paid by the
State,” and therefore the bullocks cannot have come from
that quarter. And the Bishop is right; for the very tithes,
though divinely commanded, were voluntary offerings on
the part of the people. But if the worthy dean must stand
corrected by his diocesan, what must his surprise when he looks
again into the sacred narrative, and finds that he has com-
pletely mistaken the character of such a well known trans-
action. The State did not furnish either the bullock for Elijah,
or the bullock for the priests of Baal. It was a popular
challenge on the part of Elijah for the confirmation of the true
religion, and the exposure of idolatry. 1 Kings, xviii, 21—
“And Elijah came unto all the people, and said, How long halt ye between
two opinions, if the Lord be God, follow him; but if Baal, then follow him.
22. Then said Elijah unto the people, I, even I only, remain a prophet of
the Lord; but Baal’s prophets are four hundred and fifty men.
23. Let them, therefore, give us two bullocks, and let them choose one
bullock for themselves, and cut it in pieces, and lay it on wood, and put no
fire under; and I will dress the other bullock, and lay it on wood, and put no
fire under;
24. And call ye on the name of your gods, and I will call on the name of
the Lord; and the god that answereth by fire, let him be God. And all the
people answered and said, It is well spoken.”


The challenge of the prophet was accepted. The people
themselves furnished the bullocks. The experiment was
made in terms of the challenge, and the glorious result
must be familiar to the ordinary reader. On this subject
we have heard it rather waggishly observed that the dean
has forgotten a circumstance in the case essential to the
parallel, namely, that Elijah did not eat the bullock, whereas
the bullocks which the State-paid priests of Victoria receive,
they themselves quietly devour.
Nothing in our opinion can justify parties taking the
grant who condemn the principle on which it is given.
That others take it who have expressed no such condemna-
tion, is no reason why they should go against their own con-
scientious convictions in the matter. The direst extremity,
starvation itself, is no plea for doing what is sinful or wrong.
The Dean says “Itis a sin, to encourage Popery. Granted,
in the largest and fullest sense. But one must remember
that the endowment is not to Popery as such, but to Chris-
tianity, of which Popery claims to be a part.” Does the
Dean admit the claim of Popery to be a a part of the Chris-
tian religion ? Does he not regard Popery as such, to be
altogether anti-christian ? Moreover, does it not savour of
cunning casuistry, to say that the grant is given to Popery
because of the pure Christianity or gospel that is in it?
The Dean cannot surely be ignorant of the fact, that the
Council did not undertake to decide what was real Chris-
tianity and what was not ? what was the gospel or what was
not ? He cannot have forgotten that the Council adopted on
the occasion of the passing of the clause, the very convenient
definition of the Attorney General, that all were Christians
who declared themselves Christians, and that of course so
far as the state was concerned, anything was Christianity
which persons declaring themselves Christians chose to make
it. How can he affirm that the State gives the sum of nearly
£ll,OOO to the clergy of the Church of Home to preach
Christianity, when the State has not declared what Christian
doctrine is, and repudiates the assumption of distinguishing
between what is true and false in Popery or any other system.
But if the Doctor feels at all comfortable in his “ anti-chris-
tian connexion,” if he can get over the awkwardness, and the
instinctive horror of lending the shadow of countenance to
Popery, which, as an Evangelical Minister, he must feel;
what does he say of the grant as given to the Unitarians,
who according to the Dean’s own views of the truth, “ deny
the very Lord that bought them ? ” Is the' money in this in-
stance given to promote the essential doctrines of Christianity?
In taking leave of our Episcopalian friends whom, notwith-


standing the air of severe faithfulness which our expostula-
tions have assumed, we regard in general as a very amiable
and useful body of clergy, whose labours, perhaps, more than
those of any other denomination, have tended to the promo-
tion of true piety in the colony, we would impress upon them
the solemn fact, that with them chiefly all along has rested
the blame of upholding this indiscriminate endowment, the
principle of which their dignitaries so unequivocally con-
demn. But for them. Government would never have given
a penny to the other sects. While again, and again have the
Roman Catholics have declared, that they take the money only
because it is given to the Church of England. Let the plea
be taken from one and from all. Bishop Perry has only to
say this vile system shall endure no longer, and it instantly
ceases and determines!
THE PERNICIOUS INFLUENCE OF THE GRANT ON
THE CLERGY.
The pernicious influence of the system on the clergy them-
selves, is one of its worst features. It gives them a pecuniary
interest in upholding a bad system, and when we find it dim-
ming their moral perceptions, warping their judgments,
neutralising their protestations against error and impiety,
bringing them down from their lofty independence as am-
bassadors of Christ Jesus, and making them the paid officers
of earthly government, keeping them at a distance from their
brethren of other denominations whom, as Christians, they
must inwardly love; ever conscious of an unsettled contro-
versy between them, and a controversy too which could be
settled without argumentation, simply by a little self-denial
for Christ’s sake, —when we thus witness its unhappy effects
upon the clergy, we repeat we see in the system one of its
vilest features. And with the truth of the old proverb in
our minds, “ Like priest, like people,” what a poor social
prospect is before this colony, if such a system is allowed to
continue. Ere long we may hear—nay, rumours reach us
already—of clerical equivocations, and questionable returns
to Government; ministers riding about far and wide to ob-
tain the necessary number of signatures to obtain a certain
amount of stipend, not over scrupulous whether the parties
actually belong to their congregations or not. Indeed we
would not be surprised though some day some of the recipi-
ents are found on the e roads ’ for obtaining money on false
pretences. The system is thoroughly bad. “ Our eye must
not pity, our must not spare.” The watchword at the
approaching elections must be— immediate and entire
ABOLITION.


Fellow Electors, this is a vital point. Those who give it
a fourth, or third, or even a second place in their political
creed, have not studied the question. We are alive to the
importance of other reforms, but this, involving a principle
which affects at once the common and highest interests of
man, is paramount. Withhold your support, therefore, from
every candidate that will not pledge himself for the imme-
diate and total abolition of the grant. Indeed, in this lies
the very hope of the clerical recipients themselves. The in-
stantaneous termination of the State bounty will awaken in
the public mind a powerful sympathy in favour of all godly
and faithful ministers who have been in the least dependent
on it, and will cause such a springtide of liberality to flow
as will carry all such recipients over every difficulty, and
fill their hearts with grateful acknowledgment. It was the
suddenness of the disruption in the Church of Scotland—the
immediate and entire abandonment of the State emoluments,
when they could not be held with honour and a good con-
science, that brought Dr. Chalmers and his four hundred
noble associates more than a quarter of a million in the first
year of their freedom. Beware, then. Fellow Electors, of
being misled by any mistaken sympathy. Beware of
any specious compromise. Keep the noble example of
South Australia before you. The battle must be fought at
the ensuing elections. The die will be cast in the ballot
room. And remember that the dignity, integrity, and effi-
ciency of the Christian ministry, the interests of true reli-
gion, the moral advancement and peace of society, and the
cause of civil and religious liberty,—all demand that you re-
cord your votes for those only who go in for the Immediate
and Entire removal of the Obnoxious Grant.


APPENDIX.
Note I.
In the Memorial to the Queen, signed by 13,000 in Melbourne and Geelong
which was forwarded to the Home Government against the “ Clause,” the
fact is stated of nineteen petitions against the clause being presented. ' The
Memorial would have been given in this Appendix but for its length
During the year preceding the despatch of the Memorial, it was ascertained
that upwards of £ 60,000 had been raised, by voluntary contribution, amongst
the churches in the colony not in the acceptance of State Aid.
Note 11.
Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Melbourne, 21st March, 1853.
Public Worship.
His Excellency the Lieutenant Governor, with the advice of His Executive
Council, has been pleased to direct that the Regulations of the 16th December,
1851, relative to Public Worship, shall be cancelled in consequence of the Act
of Council, 7 William 4, No. 3, being repealed, and that the following shall be
in force from this date to carry out the provisions of the Act of Council, 16
Victoria, No. 28, to promote the erection of Buildings for Public Worship, and
to provide for the maintenance of Ministers of Religion in the Colony of
Victoria.
1. The head of each Christian Denomination that can claim aid under these
regulations is required to send in an application for this purpose to the Colonial
Secretary, for the of being laid before His Excellency the Lieutenant
Governor and His Executive Council, on or before the first day of May in the
present year, and in all subsequent years on or before the tenth day of January,
setting forth its designation, the number belonging to the denomination at the
last preceding census, and the names of the clergymen who are qualified by
these regulations to receive stipends, stating the parishes or districts to which
they are attached, and the amount of stipend they can claim from the public
fund.
2. No application for assistance for any purpose, from any religious denomi-
nation, not heretofore receiving it, will be acknowledged, unless it can be satis-
factorily shown that the head or minister of the denomination has been duly
appointed in accordance with its recognised custom ; that it has a Church or
Chapel or other fixed place for the performance of Public Worship, and that a
certificate accompanying the application signed by at least three hundred adults
that they are bona fide members of the denomination. ’
3. The entire amount set apart from the public funds for religious purposes
under the present Act of Council will be divided into sums proportionate to the
numbers which each of the religious denominations, that can receive aid, had at
the last preceding census, and will be set apart for, and paid to them, upon the
conditions hereafter named, one-half of such sums being applicable to the
payment of ministers’ stipends, and the other half towards the erection of
buildings for public worship and ministers’ dwellings.
4. Any portion of the sums so set apart for the several religious denomina-
tions, which cannot be appropriated in accordance with these regulations in any


one year, cannot be carried on as a balance to the next, but will merge into the
general revenue of the colony.
5. Applications for aid towards the erection of buildings for public worship,
or for ministers’ dwellings, must be made by the head of the denomination to
the Colonial Secretary, and must be accompanied by satisfactory proof that the
portion of land on which the buildings are to be erected, lias been duly con-
veyed, to not less than three, nor - more than five trustees, appointed by the
contributors towards the erection of the building, and approved by the Lieu-
tenant Governor and Executive Council.
6. No application for aid and towards the erection of a Church or Chapel,
can be entertained until £2OO at least shall have been raised by contribution,
and actually paid over to the Trustees ; and in like manner £5O at least must
have been raised and paid over, in the case of an application being made to
erect a minister’s dwelling, and in support of each application the Trustees will
forward a list of the contributors, with the amount which each has paid over
to the Trustees, with a certificate attached to the list, and signed by the
Trustees, that they have actually received the sums therein shown for the
erection of the building in question.
7. Upon the above particulars having been laid before the Lieutenant
Governor and Executive Council, authority will be given to appropriate from
the general revenue of the colony a sum equal to twice the amount paid over to
the Trustees by the contributors towards the erection of the building ; pro-
vided such sum in no case exceeds £2OOO for a church or chapel, or £4OO for a
minister’s dwelling.
8. Payment of the authorised amount will be made to the Trustees from
time to time, as the building progresses, upon the production of an account in
the usual form, accompanied by the necessary vouchers of the sum actually ex-
pended on the building. This account will then be referred to an Architect,
who will be required to certify upon it, that he has examined the building, that
the workmanship and materials are good and sufficient, and that he believes the
sum specified in the account to have been actually laid out. A sum equal to
that so certified to will then be directed to be paid to the Trustees.
9. Payments will not be made in less sums than £5O, nor can they be
granted for material not worked up.
10. Before a Minister appointed to a Church or Chapel, which has
been erected in the manner before stated, can receive a stipend from the
general revenue, it will be necessary for the Head of the Denomination
to send in an application in the annexed form (A) to the Colonial Secre-
tary, containing the signatures and declaration from those adult inhabi-
tants of the Parish or District who intend to attend Divine Service at
that particular place of worship.
11. The number of signatures thus attached to the declaration would
claim for the Minister appointed to officiate, a rate of stipend according
to the following scale, viz.:
100 signatures £2OO a year,
150 signatures £3OO a year,
300 signatures £4OO a year,
which latter will be the highest rate of stipend granted from the general
revenue.
12. It will, however, be necessary, before the full amount of any of
these stipends can be sanctioned, that a declaration must be obtained from
the head of the denomination, that a sum equal to one-half of the stipend
claimed will be obtained in the course of the current year by contributions
from other sources; which declaration, in the case of a first application for
the minister’s stipend of any newly established church or chapel, is to be
forwarded to the Colonial Secretary with the form A, and in all other
cases it is to be sent with the annual returns (previously directed) in sup-


port of the claim then made for each minister’s stipend. Should the full
amount of contributions thus required not be certified for, double the sum
stated in the certificate only will be allowed.
13. On or before the 31st of December in each year, the head of each de-
nomination will send to the Colonial Secretary a list containing the names of
the persons contiibuting, or the other sources from whence the sums have
been contributed to make up the amount which had been previously certified
to, to entitle the several clergymen to the stipends which they had received
within that year, stating the sums received from each person or source, and
to which the several ministers are to certify that they have actually received
the whole of the sums therein named, as having been paid to them, for their
own use and benefit. Should the amount received, in any case, fall short of
the sum required to be raised by contributions, the deficiency will he deducted
from the amount which would be set apart for that denomination for the next
year.
14. In special oases, where it is found impossible to obtain 100 signatures
to the form A, a representation may be made by the head of the denomination
stating the cause of such deficiency, and of the necessity for a stipend being
allowed; and should the Lieutenant Governor and Executive Council consider
it expedient, a stipend will be authorised not exceeding £2OO a year, and
upon such sanction being given, the application is to be made in precisely the
same manner, and under the same conditions, as heretofore directed.
15. In districts or parishes where it is found necessary to employ a minis-
ter, hut where no church or chapel has been erected in which he can officiate,
the Lieutenant Governor, with the advice of his Executive Council, will sanc-
tion a stipend being issued to him, upon a representation being made to him
by the head of the denomination of the circumstances. No such stipend can,
however, be paid until £SO at least has been raised in any one year by private*
contributions towards the support of the minister, and a list containing the
names of the contributors, with the amount given by each, and certified by
the clergyman that he has actually received the amount for his own use, has
been sent to the Colonial Secretary. Double the amount so paid to the
minister by private contributions will be directed to be paid to him from the
general revenue, but it is in no case to exceed £3OO a year. In the event of
a stipend of this character being required to be renewed for subsequent years,
it will be always necessary for the head of the denomination, in making the
application, to represent that there is reasonable cause for delaying the erec-
tion of a permanent building for public worship.
16. An application for an increase of the stipend already allowed to a
minister, by the- number of adult parishioners who are desirous to attend his
ministration, being augmented, is to be made in the same form and manner,
and under the same conditions as already directed for an original stipend.
17. Pursuant to the seventh clause of the present Act, a statement
shall be transmitted in the month of January of every year, signed by
the Head of each Denomination, certifying that each Minister of their
respective Churches has, during the past year, or such part thereof as
he shall have been employed, faithfully and diligently performed the
several duties allotted to him in the district for which he shall be ap-
pointed, which statement shall be deemed sufficient proof of such per-
formance, unless a complaint be made in writing to the Lieutenant
Governor or Executive Council, who shall render further inquiry neces-
sary, and no stipend shall be issued for the current year until such cer-
tificate shall have been received, or such inquiry, if instituted, shall have
been satisfactorily determined.
18. The sums set apart by the Imperial Act, 13 and 14 Yict., chap. 50,
schedule B, part 3, will be primarily appropriated to satisfy individual
interests and claims which existed prior to the passing of the Act
of Council now in operation: should such claims not absorb the whole of


the schedule, the balance will be appropriated, as far as may be, under
these regulations. Clergymen receiving stipends under this clause, who
would be entitled to a higher rate under the previous provisions of these
regulations, can claim such increased rate, upon the terms heretofore pre-
scribed being complied with, provided such minister’s stipend, from both
sources, does not exceed the maximum amount.
Note 111.
Application for a Minister's Stipend, pursuant to the Act of Council,
16 Vic., No. 28.
We, the undersigned adult inhabitants of the parish of in
the county or town of do hereby solemnly declare that it is
our desire and intention to attend Divine Service in the place of worship
situate within the said parish, and known as • that we are
members of the denomination to which the place of worship belongs, and we
have not previously signed any other application of this kind for this or any
other place of divine worship.
Note IY.
The Rev. Messrs. Clow and Ramsay having waited on Bishop Perry, at this
date, to give the excellent prelate an opportunity of signing a petition to the
Legislative Council for the abolition of the original grant of £6,000, here-
quested the petition to remain over the night with him for his consideration,
and next morning sent those gentlemen the following letter, which he after-
wards authorised them to publish in the daily papers.
Melbourne, November 27th, 1852.
Reverend and Dear Sirs, —Although I fully agree in the principles enun-
ciated in the first clause of the petition which you left with me yesterday, and
in the sentiments expressed in the latter part of the second, and in the third
clauses, yet I am obliged, after full consideration, to decline signing it.
My reasons are, first, that there are some of the sentiments, °e g., that ex-
pressed, in the former part of the second clause, in which I do not concur;
and secondly, that in the position which I occupy, I do not consider myself
justified in petitioning the Legislature for the repeal of a grant which many of
my clerical brethern, as well as of the laity of my own branch of the Church,
regard as absolutely necessary for the maintenance of an efiicient ministry.
I have felt the less difficulty in coming to this decision, because I have
already expressed my opinion upon the subject of this grant in the “ Church of
England Messenger ” for September, In accordance with these opinions, lam
myself perfectly willing to encounter any difficulties which the immediate with-
drawal of all assistance by the State, towards the maintenance of public wor-
ship, might occasion, in order that our colony might be freed from the guilt of
supporting a corrupt form of Christianity. I think, however, that it would be
more equitable to name a period after which such assistance should cease,
rather than withdraw it altogether at once.
As to any increase of the amount of the present grant, I would most ear-
nestly deprecate it as implying an approval of, and tending to perpetuate, a
false and most pernicious principle, and as stereotyping, so far as the State
can do so, every existing religious error.


The recent petition of the Roman Catholics, must, I should think, make
every Protestant Legislator sensible that that church feels itself dependent
upon State support for its continued existence in this colony, and that its
priests are aware of the impossibility of retaininig their dominion over the
consciences of an intelligent and independent people, such as the inhabitants
of Victoria are likely to become. Great, therefore, in my opinion, is the guilt
of assisting to prop up amongst us this system of satannic delusion.
I am, reverend and dear Sirs,
The Rev. J. Clow. Your affectionate brother in the Lord,
And the Rev. A. M. Ramsay. C. MELBOURNE.
Note V.
The following Petition from the Roman Catholics, referred to in the
Bishop’s letter, the only petition presented to the Council against the aboli-
tion of the Grant:—
Sheweth—That we, your Petitioners, regret the introduction into your
Honourable House of a Bill, having for its expressed object the abolition of
the sum set apart for the maintenance of Public Worship, in the third part of
Schedule B, of the Constitutional Act.
That the aid from this source, hitherto appropriated to our Church, has
operated beneficially in supplying us with the ordinances of our Religion, the
influences of which are most necessary for our own and the common good
inasmuch as they afford us the most effectual means of performing our dutv
to God and to civil society.
That if the requirements of a new Country rendered this aid so beneficial
and necessary heretofore, we cannot but regard its sudden withdrawal, as an
experiment highly inexpedient, and calculated to check Religion and Morals
especially at a time when late eventful changes continue to attract such a
numerous and unsettled population to our shores.
That the disproportion to our Religious requirements of the aid at present
supplied us, is equally disproportionate to the sum provided for the same
object, under a similar Constitution in the elder Colony, of which we so re-
cently formed an integral part; and that this disproportion, instead of being
an argument for the abolition of such aid, is a cogent reason for the increase
of its amount.
That the operations of the Church Act have been entirely free from any
interference on the part of the Civil Power with our Religion and Ecclesias-
tical Government; and that the aid thus obtainable has not lessened but
stimulated our exertions, individually and collectively, for the extension of
the Ordinances of our Church amongst the Roman Catholics of the Colony.
That the Church Act of the enlightened statesman, Sir Richard Bourke is
our Charter of religious liberty, and has written on the the tablets of the
Australian Constitution in our equality of rights with those of our Protestant
fellow colonists, and that its abolition, unaccompanied by an equivalent would
necessarily ignore our existence in the State as Roman Catholics whilst it
would invest Protestantism, to our detriment, with a most preponderating
patronage and influence, unchecked and unjust, in the Executive in the
Colonial branch of the Church, established by law in Great Britain 1 and in
the general Protestant majority of the population of the Colony. ’
That the abolition of the aid, as proposed in the Bill before your Honour-
able House, is an absolute abolition of Sir Richard Bourke’s Church Act and
that, therefore, we most solemnly protest against such a measure as invasion
of our religious eqality, and as a legislative enactment of oppression against us
We, your petitioners, therefore respectfully pray that your Honourable
House mil not pass any law which would deprive us, your Roman Catholic
leilow colonists, of our religious equality, guaranteed to us by Sir Richard
B^ Ur ] ie j S Clmrch Act ’ or of the P ecuni ary aid which that act has hitherto
attorded to us, or of the prospect of increasing such aid, proportionately to
our numbers and our wants.
Goodhugh & Hough, Printers, 48 Flinders Lane.




