

How to Keep
FIT
A LECTURE TO SOLDIERS
DELIVERED AT LIVERPOOL MILITARY CAMP,
4th JUNE. 1915
SIR THOMAS ANDERSON STUART
M.D.. LL.D., D.Sc
DEAN OF THE FACULTY OF MEDICINE,
UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY.
JSp autfjoritp:
ALBERT J. MULLETT, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, MELBOURNE.
0.12593.




HOW TO KEEP FIT.
A LECTURE TO SOLDIERS.
Delivered at Liverpool Military Camp,
4th June, 1915.
By Sir Thomas Anderson Stuart, M.D., LL.D.
D.Sc., Dean of the Faculty of Medicine, Univer-
sity of Sydney.
A soldier should consider it a point of honour
to be “ fit ”—fit to instantly respond to any com-
mand. fit to completely carry out anything he may
be called upon to do. A soldier not fit to march
and fight with the best only keeps the best back,
and a soldier who is sick is, for the time being,
worse than dead—he is of no use, and uses up the
services of other men in looking after him. Aex
to not getting sick, a soldier’s duty is to get well
again as soon as possible, so that he may return to
duty. Further, while he is “ below par, he is
exposed to unnecessary risks of infection, &c.
Medical officers cannot keep men well unless the
man helps, by looking after the condition of his
body. I do not forget that the business of a soldier
is to fight the enemy, and that everything must
give way to this, and anything I say must always
bo considered as subject to military exigencies. In
the field it is probably difficult, but a stienuous
effort must be made by every individual soldier to
be clean—himself, his clothing, and his surround-
ings The value of attending to health matters
C. 12593.


in the field is shown by these facts:—ln the
Crimean War, 1854-1856, the French deaths by
disease were ten times as many as fell in battle.
In the Boer War, 1899-1901, the British deaths
were twice as many from disease as from wounds.
In the Russo-Japanese War, 1904-1905, a new con-
dition of affairs arises; only one-half as many
died from disease as from wounds!
In these pages, culled from many sources, I
have dealt with the subject from- the men’s point
of view exclusively, not from that of the O.C. or
of the Medical Officer, and every man should make
a conscientious effort to practise the sort of
teachings here set down—in that direction alone
lies the way of safety from disease in the field.
Microbes : Dirt, Disease, and Death go
TOGETHER.
Microbes, micro-organisms, germs, bacteria,
bacilli, &c., named often according to their shape,
are living organisms of a vegetable nature, and so
minute in size that the microscope is required to
see them. Certain kinds of these, when they get
into the human body, give rise to the diseases
known as “ infective,” such as measles, scarlet-
fever, diphtheria, tetanus or lockjaw, cerebro-
spinal meningitis, typhoid fever, typhus fever,
dysentery, and even the common cold. These
diseases are so prevalent among soldiers, who are
in such close personal contact, and sleep in con-
siderable numbers in such small confined spaces
as tents, that they have been called “ camp-
diseases.”


What we ordinarily call “ dirt” may consist of
(1) parts of our own body which are continually
wearing out and are being removed; for instance,
the scales which are continually falling from the
surface of the skin, but are generally so small as
not to be seen, though in the case of the scalp they
are easily seen, and are called “dandruff ”: (2) the
excretions from the body, both solid and liquid:
(3) the refuse and waste from food, clothing, &c.:
(4) materials from our surroundings brought into
a tent, for instance, upon dirty boots. Now all
these materials form the food and breeding grounds
of the microbes, and by cleanliness we remove
these breeding grounds, and with them the
microbes. Moreover, these little vegetables —
just like ordinary vegetables—require a suitable
soil to grow upon, and they do not like a strong
healthy body, they thrive best where the body is
less resistant; therefore, keep your general health
good—be “ fit,” give no points to the microbes!
It is a good rule to avoid sick people; it is pos-
sible that they may communicate something to
you, and your business is to keep “ fit.” Also
be careful not to visit “ native ” houses or shops,
and never partake of “ native ” food or drink of
any description; the way in which this is prepared
is often filthy in the extreme, and no such food or
drink or surroundings are ever above suspicion.
Remember that the worst diseases begin with
small troubles, and that the proper place for a
sick man is the hospital. Here he is made well
quickly, and prevented from making others ill.
If you feel “ off colour,” chilled, have sore throat,


report sick at one©; the Medical Officer is there
to look after you, and you may be giving disease
to your comrades. See that a comrade also re-
ports himself; you don’t want to get anything
from him. It is, to some extent, your business to
see that your comrade keeps “ fit,” for the strength
of an army is not in its muster roll, but in the
number who are fit to fight.
Avoid close proximity to persons coughing,
sneezing, and speaking loudly whilst they are
suffering from infective diseases; they are sending
out a fine spray in their breath in which the
microbes are probably contained, and these you
may inhale. Let no one spit on the floor of the
tent —there may be a communicable disease germ
in the spit. This dries and is blown as dust into
the air you breathe, and for a certain time at
least it may retain its infective power. Also, it
may be carried by flies to your mouth, or food, or
drink. Lastly, fleas, bugs, and lice, which, unfor-
tunately, abound in the field, may introduce the
microbes into your body through the skin. Pro-
miscuous spitting is loathsome, and may be dan-
gerous. The same remark applies to snot —use a
handkerchief, or use a rag or a piece of paper;
burn or bury the rag or paper. On dusty marches
you may tie a handkerchief over the mouth and
nose to keep out dust in the air which is breathed.
Plies: A Nuisance and a Danger.
Every article of food should be kept safe from
the visits of flies. Do not eat any food, such as
sugar, jam, butter, bread, milk, meat, &c., on which


flies have been seen —they are bred in filth, they
live largely on filth, and they carry filth around
with them. Their feet are provided each with
two claws and a multitude of sticky hairs, and
they carry the germs of infection entangled in the
hairs from any infected material they may have
visited to the food on which they alight. If a fly
has drowned itself in the milk, leave that milk
scrupulously alone. It is not enough merely to
rescue the fly or recover its body, for the milk
may now be infected and dangerous. Further,
watch a fly on a lump of sugar; he cannot bite
it as we do, but he vomits a little bleb of
fluid on to it, Avhich dissolves some of the sugar,
and then he swallows his vomit again, and
with it the dissolved sugar. This he does again
and again. But he may just have come from the
latrine or any other source of infective material,
and so flies are potent spreaders of infection.
That is why it is so important not to leave excre-
ment uncovered. Many a case of typhoid fever has
had such an origin. And the other end of the
% is emitting excreta every few minutes —one
sees it in some of the “ fly spots ” on the window.
In any case it is nasty to swallow these, and they
may also contain disease germs, e.g., ophthalmia
or sandy blight in the eyes, and typhoid. Re-
member that in the Boer War one-third of all
deaths were due to typhoid. Flies are filthy
things, both ends and the middle; assist in every
way to keep them down. Never buy meat or
other foodstuffs from shops where flies are
tolerated. Keep kitchen, mess room, tent, scrupu-


lously clean, free from scraps of food or particles
of refuse likely to draw flies. Bury or burn all
garbage, trash, filth, food wastes, slops, &c. See
that they are covered while being collected, so
that they do not feed flies. Excrement is to be
covered at once, just as Moses ordered (and cats
scrupulously do). Urine, too, may carry disease
germs. It very often contains the germs of
typhoid fever. Therefore, urinate only into the
appointed urinals, pits, trenches, or latrines, even
if the night is cold and these places are some dis-
tance from your particular tent. You owe it to
your comrades, and they owe it to you.
Rest and Sleep.
Rest and sleep are most important —you never
know when the emergency will come. Be ready!
Aye ready! That is possible only if you are
“ fit.” During a halt on the march loosen the
pack and belts, and, if the ground permits and is
dry, sit down, or even lie down at your full length,
so as to get the most rest. Kneading the muscles
of the legs is good—massage —it frees the muscles
from waste products and prevents cramp and stiff-
ness. Therefore do it for one another. If
the ground is wet, get something between you and
it, so that you may not get damp clothes. When
in camp rest as much as you can, hut do
not sleep on the bare ground when you can
get anything like hay, straw, ferns, branches,
to keep you off it. These protect the angles
of the body, prevent damp from the ground
and undue loss of heat, and keep the clothing and


blankets off tbe ground, which may have insects
or disease germs. Further, get out of the wind
and upon dry ground. In camp or bivouac use
the waterproof to sleep on if you have one, and
in a bivouac dig a hole for your hip to rest in.
With these precautions you will be more comfort-
able, have a sounder, and, therefore, more re-
freshing sleep, and be more rested, and you will
avoid colds, rheumatism, &c. Want of sleep,
like privation, exposure, and fatigue of body and
mind, greatly lower the power of resistance to
disease.
The Skin: The Importance of being Clean,
A dirty surface of the body favours various
“ itchy ” conditions of the skin, dirties the clothes,
pollutes the atmosphere, and invites disease
generally. The surface layer of the skin
is continually scaling, as is seen in the dan-
druff of the scalp. The sweat dries on it.
The oily secretion of the skin is spread all
over the surface, and probably the excretions
of the body, both excrement and urine, soil
the surface, and thus the skin becomes covered
with a layer of dirt which is just the very soil
that microbes grow in and that parasites feed on.
When wounds are made through such a dirty skin
the microbes are carried into the body, for in-
stance, with bullet, bayonet, or bits of clothing.
It is for precisely the same reasons that surgeons,
in preparing a patient for an operation, invariably
scrub the skin where the cut is to be made
with soap and water, and with disinfectant,


f
so as to make it germ-free. They do the
same with their own hands and instruments.
There are often little lacerations of the skin which
are not always noticed in ordinary life, These
may form the points of entrance of the microbe,
and are, therefore, not to he neglected. Never
let any one tattoo you; tattooers are generally
dirty, and the dirty tattooing needle may carry
into the body more than the colour.
Common yellow bar soap, such as is used by
laundresses, is good for washing clothes, but not
for washing the skin, which becomes dry and
cracked, owing to the fat of the skin and yolk of
the hair being too much removed. When you can
get it, use a good toilet soap. Slightly warm
water is best for cleansing, but cold water acts as
a tonic and braces one up, thus it is good to follow
warm water, if possible, by cold water. A warm
bath once or twice a week is a great comfort, and
should always be taken, if possible; it cleans so
much better than the cold water, but the cold bath
is a better tonic in the morning, and generally
cold water should, as already said, follow warm
water whenever possible. If chilly and depressed
after a cold bath, give it up and be content with a
cold sponge, or take a tepid bath. Where water
is scanty, a wet sponge or wet cloth may be used,
and on the march, and when much exposed to
the sun and dust, a wet sponge or a wet cloth
are better than soap and water for the face and
hands, since they do not remove the natural oil of
the skin. After a march a wet wipe of face,
neck, and feet greatly removes fatigue. If


no water is available, a good dry rub, with
exposure to air and sun, is better than nothing;
a rubbing removes the surface scales and
with them much of the dirt. Sponges are not
necessary; a piece of rough towel or other cotton
cloth will act as a rubber, but wash it every time
it is used. Do not use too much soap, and re-
move it all before drying, for if any is left it only
irritates the skin. Use your own soap and towel
and no other, for obvious reasons.
In the arm-pits, between the legs and buttocks,
the feet and between the toes, around the anus and
beneath the foreskin —In all these_ places the
secretions accumulate, decompose, soil the cloth-
ing, make the skin sore and chafed. They should,
therefore, be washed every day, at any time, so
long as it is done daily. A little vaseline applied
where there is friction is good. In the case of
mounted men saddle-boils are to be guarded
against by scrupulous cleanliness about the crutch
and inside the thighs, and methylated spirits ap-
plied to the skin hardens it, if you can come by
the spirits. Never go barefoot —you never know
what little wounds of the skin you have, or what
you are going to get; the soil may be full of
microbes, for instance tetanus or lockjaw microbes,
and other organisms, according to the part of the
world you are in.
Keep the nails clean; have no “ blacks ” to be a
harbour for microbes. Trim the finger-nails
round and the toe-nails square. Avoid hang-
nails and little lacerations of the skin about the
nails, by occasionally pushing back the skin at


the base of the nail where the skin adheres to
the nail as it grows. Microbes penetrate there,
and may he the cause of sore finger and
whitlow. The hands should therefore he
kept clean by frequent washing. Very par-
ticularly does this apply to men dealing with
horses, mules, donkeys, camels, &c. If the hands
are soiled when the animal sneezes, coughs, or
otherwise, wash them as soon as possible. Glan-
ders is bad in horses —it is worse in men. Always
wash the hands after grooming. For similar rea-
sons, after handling pet animals, cats, dogs, im-
mediately wash the hands. These animals can
only lick themselves at their toilet, including their
private parts. Thus the abundant germs are
spread all over their fur, and so the hands become
infected. It is best to leave these animals alone.
The Hair.
Keep the hair of the head short. Wash it daily
in cold water without soap, but only once or twice
a week with warm water and soap. If oftener, the
soap takes too much of the yelk out of it and
makes it dry and brittle. Do not use water,
especially the water you have just washed in, to
make the hair lie flat —it decomposes and stinks;
use oil or nothing; let the natural fat of the scalp
do it. Have your own toilet articles —never use
anybody else’s if you can avoid it. Keep the comb
clean, as well as the brush, by washing in water
to which a little washing soda or ammonia has
been added. Neither comb nor brush should be
so sharp and hard as to scratch the scalp. If you


cannot shave, keep the hair of the heard and
moustache cut close —long hair may harbour in-
sects.
Eyes, Ears, and Nose.
Do not rub the eyes with dirty hands. If any-
thing gets in, ask the Medical Officer to take
it out, if possible; if not, get a comrade with
clean hands to pull down the lower eyelid,
or, taking hold by the eyelashes, turn the upper
eyelid over the end of a match or toothpick, or
something of that sort, so as to see the lining of
the eyelid. If the foreign body can be seen on the
inner surface of the lid or on the white of the eye-
ball, and easily removed, say, by the twisted corner
of a clean handkerchief, well and good; but if it be
on the clear, glassy part of the front of the eye
(cornea), you must be very careful. The Medical
Officer should attend to that, though if this is not
possible, light a wooden match and let it burn a
little, blow it out, rub the burnt end on a clean
handkerchief so as to make it smooth, and use that
to dislodge any particle which may be thus re-
moved ; but these proceedings are so risky that
©very effort should be made to get it out by a
skilled hand.
Keep the ears clean as far as you can with a
damp towel. Once a week or so wrap a little
piece of cotton-wool or cotton-cloth, or something
soft, round the end of a wooden match, and gently
clean the outer end of the canal of the ear. Do
not push the cotton in any great distance, for the
dirt tends to collect just within the mouth of the
canal, and it is not safe to go too far down. If
: anything further is to be done report to the A.M.C.


Do not pick the nose with the fingers—they may
have dirt on them, and the nails may make little
sores. If the nostrils get very sore, heated, and
dusty, a little vaseline smeared just within them
will be a relief.
Bathing and Swimming.
Salt water is best. If it be a river or pond,
enter it only if the water be fairly clear, and not
likely to contain infectious matters —you might
“ get something ” by the mouth, nose, eye, or by
some little wound in the skin not always visible.
Do not bathe in cold water when perspiring much,
or when chilled, or when exhausted by fatigue, or
too soon after eating; the best time is about two
hours after a meal. Begin swimming at once—
this prevents chill. Come out before being ex-
hausted or cold, or the extremities are numb.
Rub and dry the skin thoroughly to restore the
circulation and prevent chill.
Care of the Beet.
The care of the feet is most important—the
whole efficiency of the infantrymen depends upon
it, and this even now, with all the assistance of
motor vehicles. It is simply impossible to pay
too much attention to the care of the feet. This
is obvious when we remember that the chief
object of a Commander is to get his men to an
advantageous position before the enemy gets
there.
The feet are soiled very quickly, not only from
outside dirt, but from their own sweaty and fatty
secretions. The secretions cannot escape fx'om


between the toes, and the skin here is very soft, so
that corns between the toes are soft, and “ soft ”
corns should be attended to by the Medical Officer.
With the scales from the skin, the secretions of the
feet make a perfect soil for microbes, and it is due
to these that the feet smell in most cases. In
certain cases “ stinking feet” are a real grievance
to the other men in the tent, and require treat-
ment by the Medical Officer. The chafing of the
skin between the toes is avoided by some vaseline
or other clean grease, or by foot powder.
Wash the feet every morning, and, if possible,
after the day’s march. Soap makes the skin
tender, therefore remove it all after washing. Do
not soak the feet; keep them wet just long enough
to get the dirt off. If the skin is very tender use
cold water only, or even a wet cloth only, so as
not to soak the skin. If no water is available to
wash the feet after a march, take off the socks and
rub the feet dry with a towel, or even with the
socks you have just taken off, especially rub dry
the spaces between the toes.
Socks.
Always wear thick and ribbed woollen socks to
march in; thin socks are useless, and the ribbing
makes the sock elastic and better fitting; cottons
need frequent changing, and are apt to blister the
feet. Select socks two sizes larger than the feet;
this allows for shrinkage in washing, but is pro-
bably not so large as to allow of creases when the
boot is put on. There must be no compression
either by sock or boot, and in this respect the
socks are more often at fault than the boots.


Nothing must interfere with the free circu-
lation of the blood in the toes. In taking
the socks off stretch them to avoid shrink-
ing. Wash them at night and hang them up
to dry. Do not rub them or wring them, but
move them about in the soapy water, rinse them
in cold water, and hang them up to dry without
squeezing or wringing. In this way you avoid
making them hard, shrunken, and uncomfortable.
Before putting them on next morning see that they
are perfectly dry. Change wet, creased, or soiled
socks. Holes in socks are apt to cause blisters,
so also does a lumpy darn. Before sleeping wash
the feet and put on dry socks, if sleeping socks are
necessary, but never wear during the night socks
that have been worn during the day. If the socks
have given out, their place may be taken by a
triangular piece of any soft material, even greased
paper, folded with as few creases as possible
around the foot.
On the march, at the halt it is good to change
the right sock to the left foot and the left sock to
the right foot, especially if there is a hole —thus
you avoid a blister. If they are wet with per-
spiration put on the dry pair you have in your
pack, if possible. Smooth out any creases, which
will soon chafe the skin. Some people recommend
soaping the inside of the socks before the march.
It is better to use vaseline or clean grease, espe-
cially between the toes. Soap is liable to injure
a tender skin, and all that is wanted is a lubricant
to avoid friction. After a march, on halting for
the day, the first thing to be done is to examine
the feet. Exposed and painful surfaces should be


greased with tallow, lanoline, or vaseline, not
soap. Soaps are too apt to injure the skin. These
painful surfaces may be protected by collodion or
pieces of plaster applied before the march. Foot-
soreness is much relieved by bathing the feet in
permanganate of potash solution—the colour of
red wine. If very footsore, report to the Medical
Officer at once—there is something wrong. Do
not open very small blisters, but if they are so
large that they would break in walking, prick them
with a clean needle inserted through the skin
about one-eighth of an inch from the edge of the
blister, and gently squeeze out the fluid. To
make it quite clean, the point of the needle should
be first heated to redness in the flame of a match.
Avoid breaking the skin of the blister, and after
opening smear with powdered boric acid, vaseline,
or clean grease, and put on a piece of cotton or
a bandage.
Corns arise from pressure; hard corns may be
pared or scraped down very carefully with a knife
or piece of glass, or by sandpapering them; but
bad corns and soft corns should be reported to the
Medical Officer or the chiropodist, if there is one.
A very good com protector is mad© thus; Cut a
hole somewhat larger than the corn in a piece of
plaster, and stick this on around the corn, put
a layer of cotton wool in the hole and over the
corn, and then a piece of plaster over the whole.
Be careful about attending to ingrowing nails
yourself—the feet are too important, quite as im-
portant as your rifle. Bunions are serious—report
to the Medical Officer. Cut the toe-nails square
across, the finger-nails round, as already said.


Abrasions, cuts, wounds of the feet, must be
very carefully dealt with; avoid dirty cloths, poul-
tices, &c. Keep them clean at any cost, and, if
possible, report to the Medical Officer.
Boots.
Boots are of the first and last importance; they
should fit, that is, there should be no undue pres-
sure on any point, yet they should not be so loose
that there "is harmful friction between the boot
and the foot; if there is, the feet are sure to be
sore on marching. Remember that each foot
strikes the ground in marching 18,000 times a day!
and that every step we take we spring from one
foot. Get a boot that feels comfortable when
standing on one foot and carrying a weight of
45 lbs.; thus the lengthening and widening of the
feet under pressure are provided for. Fit each
foot separately, for the two feet often differ very
much in size and shape, and sometimes boots get
mixed at the Q.M. Stores. Let the fit be good and
snug around the ankle and instep, but loose around
the toes, and try the boot with the laces through
all the holes and pulled tight. The edges of the
leather should then be about half an inch apart.
The boots should be rather on the large than on
the small side, and have not less than half an inch
vacant space in front of the great toe when you
press the toe of the boot with the thumb. If the
boot be too small, the swelling of the feet at the
end of the day or in warm weather Avill make you
suffer horribly. The desire for smallness and
“ style ” is so strong that most men are not to be


trusted to select their own boots —an offi-
cer should control the operation. If the
boot he too large, the foot slides about in it, and
gets chafed; besides, it is uncomfortable and
fatiguing. If you “ break in ” new hoots by
wearing them, do it gradually, and about camp if
possible, and avoid marching in them before they
are broken in. Never wear any but the military
boot. Shun the pointed toe, and remember that a
tight boot means a cold foot from interference
with the circulation. If boots as a whole are
large enough, hut pinch at certain points, get the
company shoemaker to stretch them, and thus
avoid blisters and corns. It is good to keep two
pairs of boots in use, wearing them on alternate
days—it eases the feet immensely. Carry extra
laces. A loose boot soon chafes and makes you
lame. After a wetting never let boots dry on
your feet, nor dry them close to the fire —the
leather becomes hard and brittle. Keep your
boots clean, both inside and out. From time to
time wash them out with soap and water; scrape
them out sometimes, and grease them inside as
well as out. A good time to grease, them is when
they are warm after a march. Boric acid powder
dusted into the hoots helps to keep them sweet.
Alw T ays clean them, if necessary, before entering a
tent. Most of the dirt in buildings is carried in
by dirty boots; therefore, do not overlook the
scraper or the mat. Look after your boots, keep
them in as good repair as possible; visit the com-
pany shoemaker rather than let them get into dis-
repair. Keep them soft and pliant by means of
dubbing, vaseline, neats-foot oil, &c. Never


mind tlio shine till the campaign is over. Shoes
or slippers, if available, in the evening are a great
comfort, and ease the feet after a long march.
Clothing and Undekweak.
All clothing must fit loosely; it is warmer in
winter and cooler in summer; movements are
freer; no restraint of movement is permissible—
the soldier must be able to march, run, climb,
jump, ride, fight, sleep in comfort. On the
march too much clothing causes sweating
and exhaustion; too little may lead to chill
and frostbite. When resting after exercise, or
on guard duty at night, put on extra covering.
If heated after exercise remove the pack and belt,
but not the clothing until you are cooler. If the
clothing gets wet the harm does not arise ■while
you are still active at work. If allowed to dry on
you while warm after a march and when you are
exhausted, then danger arises from depressed
vitality and greater likelihood of catching disease.
Therefore, change your wet clothes as soon as
possible after the march is over. Keep the cloth-
ing in good repair—no holes, all buttons on, &c.
Keep all clothing, especially underclothing, as
clean as possible in the circumstances. Dirt gets
to the skin from the clothing, and from the skin
to the clothing, especially underclothing; that is
why this should be washed. Wash your linen
Avhenever you can; thus you minimize the risk of
catching disease and of contaminating your com-
rades; also you diminish the risk of wound infec-
tion. If you are wounded, it is not the clean


wound that is to be feared, but the dirt from the
skin and clothing carried into the wound. Where
washing is not possible, all clothing may be greatly
cleaned by shaking, brushing, and exposure to sun
and air, for sun and air are nature’s disinfectants.
Do not, if possible, wear the same clothes at night
as have been worn during the day. Keep night
clothes —and they always come in as a change after
a wetting. Woollen or flannel underwear next the
skin, both winter and summer, is better than silk
or cotton or linen—the wool readily takes up the
sweat into its substance and slowly evaporates it
on the outer surface. In tropical climates flannel
next the skin is not very comfortable, but people
generally get used to it after a week or
two. If necessary, wool flannel may be re-
placed by cotton flannelette, or, if you can afford
it, a silk and wool mixture, such as Anglo-Indian
gauze. In any case, the material should never
be so thin as to permit chill after sundown. Wool-
lens best prevent sudden and excessive loss of heat
without unduly interfering with perspiration; they
are less easily soiled by the excretions, get dirty
more slowly, and are more easily cleaned by rub-
bing, shaking, brushing —that is, without water —
than silk, cotton, or linen materials. Silk, cot-
ton, and linen easily get wet with sweat, and
if next the skin cool it too rapidly, so that too
much heat is lost. When lying in bed uncovered
and perspiring in tropical climates, the woollen
abdominal band or cholera belt may be used —not
in the day time, only at night, and only when not
under one or two blankets. The object is to pre-
vent the belly from being chilled, for the bowels


are close against the belly wall, and they do not
stand chill. It leads to diarrhoea and predisposi-
tion to other diseases. Many people prefer a sort
of apron of two thicknesses of flannel sewn to-
gether, tied around the waist with tapes and kept
in position below the pyjamas. This is less heat-
ing around the loins, where protection is not
needed.
Braces are better than a belt —they interfere
less with the movements of the waist and belly.
If a belt be worn it should be broad.
Do not pinch in the crown of the soft felt hat;
keep as much air space inside the hat as possible.
[s* Fresh Air: the Breath of Life.
If any one enters an occupied room or tent,
and perceives an unpleasant smell or stuffiness,
then the air is impure. The persons who are
already there do not perceive it. It has come
gradually, and their sense of smell becomes
blunted. Even if you smell violets more than
a few whiffs, the sense of smell becomes
blunted. Ventilation in a tent is much more
necessary than in a room, for in a tent there arc
generally many men in a small air space. See
that there are places open below for the entrance
of fresh air and above for the exit of the heated
impure air from the breath and from the surface
of the body, and this all the more when in wet
weather the pores of the canvas are closed by con-
traction. In a room, open the windows at the top
at least 3 inches, and if this is done on one side of
the room only, draught is avoided. If there is


too much air, try and stand it; perhaps wear a
woollen or Balaclava cap. Better too much than
too little air; one soon gets used to it. Fresh air
and sunlight are, as already said, nature’s disin-
fectants. Rooms should be aired and sunned, and
bed clothing and equipment should be regularly
shaken out and aired, and, if possible, sunned.
It should be understood that this is not merely a
matter of an unpleasant smell, for the atmosphere
polluted by the emanations from unwashed bodies
and clothes, and by foul breaths gradually lowers
men’s vitality, and lays them open to the attacks
of various microbes.
Try hard to breathe habitually through the
nose; it catches dust, &c., protects the throat,
prevents undue thirst, looks better, and keeps the
atmosphere of the tent sweeter.
Drinking Water.
Do not drink water which the Medical Officer
says is nob safe. If you have no directions and no
one to ask, boil the water if possible; to make weak
tea of it is even better. Water from wells and
ponds is apt to be contaminated. Always investi-
gate cisterns, water coolers, barrels, and if there
be anything suspicious, be very careful. “ Soft
drinks ” should be used with discretion; they are
seldom quite above suspicion, and are not rarely
prepared with bad water and often contain in-
jurious substances, so that when consumed in large
quantities or habitually they do harm. Soft
drinks offered by pedlers around a train or camp
are always best avoided. They have been exposed


to dust, dirty hands, dirty dishes, and perhaps
disease itself. Before the march have a moderate
drink. Be sure that your water-bottle is clean
and does not leak. Fill it before starting, and fill
it only to the shoulder, not to the neck, otherwise
it will certainly leak. On the march drink
seldom, and only in small draughts till thirst is
relieved, not till thirst is quenched; thus you avoid
being water-logged, with profuse perspiration,
indigestion, weakness, and exposure to heat-stroke
and exhaustion. It is said that the water-bottle
should not be brought into use until some 7 miles
have been covered, that its contents should last
through the next 7 miles, and that it should be
refilled at the commencement of each 7 miles
thereafter. Weak, unsweetened tea or coffee is
often better than water —they have been boiled,
are slightly stimulant, and less is needed to
quench thirst. Many men drink from mere habit,
not because of real necessity. The drink from
habit is to be fought against on the march, only
the drink from necessity should be yielded to,
therefore try and keep off drinking till the halt,
and then drink only after being somewhat cooled
off. Use your own cup and no other.
The great reason for all these directions is again
the germ which lives and breeds in impure water —
water containing sewer materials and drainage,
and from cultivated land. In absolutely pure
water germs are starved to death. It is therefore
the germ which is the danger; boiling destroys
them, proper filtering takes them out. See that
only boiled or filtered or pure running water is


used to wash crockery, knives, forks, spoons,
dishes; dish-cloths should be boiled frequently.
If you get into your mind the existence of these
disease-carrying particles it will guide you to a
correct procedure in most cases. Tea and coffee
and chocolate require the water to he boiling;
this makes them a very safe drink when
the water is not above suspicion. Tea stands
dilution better than coffee; very weak tea is
still palatable. On the march, cold tea is best
when unsweetened. Chocolate is slightly nutri-
tious as compared with tea or coffee; the sugar in
it is nourishing. It is good, before going on duty
at night or in the early morning, to take a cup of
hot coffee or tea; it raises your vitality.
The question when should one drink ? has been
variously answered —it has been recently deter-
mined that it is best to drink towards the end
of the meal, and immediately after it.
Food.
Wash the hands before eating; you never really
know what you have been touching. Do not eat
any food your officers say is not safe. If you
have no directions and no one to ask, beware of
bad-smelling food; it is probably decomposed and
poisonous. The same with food that “ looks bad ”;
also that which has been left behind by the enemy.
Milk is extremely apt to go wrong, for it is an
ideal soil for the growth of germs. Think how
many outbreaks of typhoid, scarlet-fever, and
diphtheria you have heard of as due to milk. Ice-
creams, which contain milk, are very dangerous;


they are so often prepared in filthy surroundings
that they are best left alone when from any but
the most reliable sources. Food offered by pedlers
is always suspect, exposed to dust, handled by no
end of dirty and, it may be, disease-carrying
hands, and contained in dirty baskets, dishes, &c.
Cooked food is generally safer than raw the
cooking kills many disease-bearers (germs, worms,
&c.) besides, cooked food is more tasty and more
tender, and, therefore, more agreeable and more
easily digested. But be careful about cold food
left over from a previous meal; see that it cannot
have been contaminated by flies or otherwise.
Remember that uncooked shell-fish, such as
oysters, have often conveyed typhoid. Be careful
about fruit —unripe it is indigestible, and may
cause an irritating diarrhoea, if over-ripe it
may cause diarrhoea in another way, and
diarrhoea on the march is a catastrophe;
it exposes the soldier to many dangers, and
invites such diseases as dysentery, typhoid fever,
and cholera when they are about. In any case,
pare, skin, or carefully wash the fruit; you
don’t know who has been handling it or what is
on it. Always wash in running water any let-
tuce, celery, tomato, or other vegetable eaten un-
cooked. You don’t know what kind of fertilizer
was used!
If greatly fatigued or overheated, it is better
to wait a little while before eating; one eats
better and digests better when somewhat recovered.
Food should be chewed thoroughly before being
swallowed; this throws less work on the stomach


and in other ways avoids indigestion, for men
have no gizzards as birds have. With good diges-
tion and the food as now supplied by the wonder-
ful work of the A.S.C., the men are happier and
fitter, march better, fight better, stand cold better,
resist disease better, and recover better from
wounds than they used to do. An agreeable com-
panion at food is certainly good, it helps diges-
tion —but don’t chew too little and swallow too
soon in order to have more time to talk. With
the food towards the end of the meal drink water,
as much as may be necessary to thoroughly soften
the food, and then drink what more may be neces-
sary after the meal has been eaten.
All these precautions may seem excessive—but
remember you are out to fight, and to be at your
top-notch of fitness, and what you may neglect at
home at your ease you cannot afford to neglect on
service.
Teeth and Mouth.
The care of the teeth is most important. On
them depends proper mastication, digestion, and
due fitness; that is why men with bad teeth and
insufficient teeth are rejected at the recruiting
office. Use a tooth-brush daily, with water about
the purity of which you have no doubt. You
probably have your own ideas as to tooth powder,
but carbolic tooth powder is good, for it is
mostly chalk. The brush should not be
too hard, for it may lacerate the gum
and inoculate it with microbes from the
mouth, where the moisture, food, and warmth are
just such conditions as are best suited for their


growth. Soak a new brush in water for some
hours to soften it. Always wash and dry the
brush after using it, and see that it is kept clean.
Use the brush not only from side to side, but also
up and down, so as to clean out between the teeth,
and don’t forget the hack teeth because they are
out of sight. It is good to use the tooth-brush
before going to bed; thus particles of food do not
remain to ferment and decay the teeth. Report
toothache and decay to the Medical Officer at once.
Be careful about toothpicks, lest you wound the
gum and convey infection; for the same reason
never use a metal tooth-pick, and never chew
straws. Spongy, bleeding gums are common, and
often due to neglect. Cleaning will greatly help
the condition. The pollution of the atmosphere
from dirty mouths and decayed teeth is so repul-
sive and lowering to the vitality that men should
see that their comrades do not neglect themselves
in this respect. Perhaps the ceremonial presenta-
tion of a tooth-brush will convey the hint and be
useful. Moreover the man himself is slowly
poisoned by breathing through such a mouth, and
by swallowing putrid matter from the decayed
teeth; he is liable to attacks of “barrack-room
sore-throat,” tonsilitis, and deafness.
The Bowels and the Urine,
The inside of the body should be kept clean as
well as the outside. Evacuation of the bowel
should be daily and at the same hour,
for a habit of going at the same hour is estab-
lished, and this grea+ly helps the process. After


breakfast is usually best, the movements of the
stomach after breakfast setting up movements
in the lower part of the bowel. When the call
of nature is felt, answer without delay; careless-
ness in complying leads to discomfort, indiges-
tion, constipation, piles, and endless other troubles
sooner or later. In the field one can only do
one’s best, but aim at daily regularity, and, if
need be, report to the Medical Officer. The kind
of food available in the field, the absence of fresh
vegetables, tends to constipation; if brown bread
is available it is helpful, and a laxative pill or
tabloid is very useful—have them handy, but
avoid patent medicines.
Always wash the hands, preferably in running
water, after attending to the calls of nature, and,
as roller-towels are not permissible, each man
should take his own towel and soap with him to
the toilet place. This precaution is necessary,
because the microbes contained in excrement are
apt to be conveyed by the hands to the surface of
the body and to the clothes, and when the surface is
wounded they enter the wound or are carried in
by bullets, pieces of shell, and by pieces of cloth-
ing carried in with the projectile. The entrance
of such pieces of clothing has long been known to
be dangerous; we now know why. It is because
the microbes are carried into the wound and there
multiply. Thus, to insure the utmost safety, one
must keep the body and the clothes free from such
contamination.
Further, it is now known that persons can con-
vey diseases, especially typhoid fever, who are
not themselves ill; they are called 11 carriers,” and


in every regiment of apparently healthy men
there is sure to be one or more such typhoid-
carriers. These microbes are contained, not only
in the excrement, hut also in the urine, as
we have already seen, and, therefore, it is
a camp sanitary law of the highest import-
ance never to evacuate in camp except in the
latrines and urinals, for faecal matter and urine
are the chief dangers to the health of the soldier
in camp. The only safety is to consider all
excreta as infected, and deal with them as if they
were known to be infected. It is hard to realize
these things, but they are true, and safety for
one’s self and one’s comrades lies in paying atten-
tion to what is here set down. Even when a man
falls out to ease himself on the march he should
use his trenching tool to make a hole and after-
wards cover the deposit with some earth, for the
line of march to-day is the line of communication
to-morrow. See that the boots as well as the
clothing and skin are not contaminated, and that
paper is so secured that it cannot be blown away
to become a “ camp-butterfly.” The diseases that
are here concerned are typhoid, cholera, diarrhoea,
and dysentery. Be careful to report diarrhoea at
once; in any form it is serious, in its form of
dysentery it is most dangerous, and in any form
is apt to be contagious. In the tropics diarrhoea
is apt to follow chill of the belly. When the
soldier lies uncovered at night in the sweltering
heat he should wear the flannel bellyband, “ cholera
belt,” or apron, already referred to. Diarrhoea
from chill is apt to be followed by real dysentery.


Alcohol.
Alcohol in any form except by the doctor’s
orders is best left alone. It mostly does no good,
and generally does a lot of harm. Following the
short period of stimulation there follows a pro-
longed period of depression of every activity of
the body and mind. In this depressed condition
of the body it is much more liable to catch disease
of every sort, and the occurrence of heat-stroke
and frost-bite are invited. The mind is muddled,
the judgment clouded; the man is irresponsible,
more or less, and may be the ruin of some military
plan and the death of many a brave man. Fur-
ther, in this condition men do what they are sorry
for next morning; alcohol stimulates the sexual
passions, and at the same time lessens self-control,
so that alcoholic intemperance and sexual de-
bauchery are often closely associated—the one
leads to the other. If you will drink alcoholic
beverages, drink if possible with food, and prefer-
ably at the evening meal. The should not
be in the form of ardent spirits, such as brandy
rum, whisky, or gin. Light ales are the least
harmful, especially if accompanied by out-of-door
exercise, but if you will drink ardent spirits dilute
them thoroughly, the more diluted the better.
You should not exceed, say, a glass of whisky or a
pint of beer in the 24 hours. Ho doubt the real
danger of alcoholic drinks is the excess, not the
strict moderation —but then the craving for alcohol
is so easily excited, and so difficult to satisfy,
that such beverages are best left alone. Every
prudent man who drinks alcohol in any form
should know just what is the most he can


safely take so as not to lose Ms full self-control,
and lie should never go beyond that amount; hut,
I repeat, you are safest with tea or coffee or
chocolate —you will do more work and better
work, you will suffer less from disease, will he
less exposed to accident, and will be a better man
all round.
Tobacco.
Upon the whole it is best never to have smoked j
if you have not begun don’t begin, but if begun X
caunot say stop it. Only keep it in moderation
rather too little than too much. Every smoker
knows that he sometimes smokes too much; let him
keep well within his limit of consumption of to-
bacco. The pipe—each man to smoke his own pipe
and no other —is said to be the least harmful mode
of using tobacco, though between the pipe and the
cigar there is probably not much to choose. It is
stated that cigarettes are the worst, but it would
be a waste of breath to say anything against these.
It is not easy to say why the cigarette is the worst
offender —possibly their cheapness, convenience,
and rapid combustion lead to too many of them
being smoked, so that, while each is small, in the
end much tobacco is consumed, and to the
milder nature of the tobacco smoke this is inhaled
into the air passages and spread over a larger
absorbent surface. The heart is very vulnerable,
especially in the young, so that many candidates
are annually rejected from the Navy and Army on
account of “ tobacco-heart.” Athletes know that
tobacco “ hurts the wind ” —that is, a tobacco-
heart makes them unable to respond quickly and
steadily to an extra call for work. How then can
it be good for the soldier? How can he toss


“ bundles of bay ” out of the Turkish trenches ?
Tobacco also affects the vision; it becomes blurred
and dim; how then can the soldier shoot straight ?
Tobacco affects the movements; they become un-
steady. How then can a soldier take aim with a
dim eye and unsteady hand? The tobacco-sot is
no good as a soldier! Speaking generally, and
especially in the young, it interferes with nutri-
tion, growth, and development; it thus lowers
physical and mental vigour; further, once a man
begins smoking he is more apt to take to drink.
It is, on many grounds, best left alone. Even the
smoker should not smoke on the march —it is bad
for heart and lungs and produces thirst.
Certain Parasites.
These little animals we don’t, as a rule, say
much about, but for the soldier in the field they
are of serious importance. Getting rid of them
is so important that it should generally be attended
to under the direction of the Medical Officer.
Lice. —These play a large part in producing
the discomforts of an army and in spread-
ing typhus fever. They thrive in dirt, but,
like other animals, they spring from parents
—the first lice must be introduced, and then
they breed. There are three sorts —the body-
louse, the head-louse, and the crab-louse.
The body-louse by its hooked legs clings to the
side of the garment next the skin, and sucks blood
at least twice a day. Each female louse breeds
about 200 little ones, and then, fortunately, she
dies. Irritation from the bites prevents sleep, and
thus makes the soldier less “ fit ”; besides, there is


a certain disgust which greatly depresses many
men. In the Boer War their prevalence was
dreadful; as soon as many regiments halted
they stripped and attended to the plague,
often picking them off and putting them on a
stone in the sun, where they quickly dried
and died. If clothing is continuously worn they
go on feeding and breeding. In war one has not
always the chance of changing clothes, and that is
one reason why the lice increase so enormous y.
Thus, if you find one treat it seriously, you wiU
probably soon find others. It is good to avoid
sleeping where others have slept before, and dont
put your clothing near that of other men. If any
piece of clothing becomes verminous, and you have
no further use for it, burn, bury, or drown it, for
the eggs are more difficult to kill than the Ik t
themselves. Turn the clothes inside out, examine
seams and folds carefully, kill by hand, boiling,
hot steam, hot flat-iron, petrol, paraffin, wash in
sea-water—but rules will be laid down in Iffie
camp. For all three kinds of lice “ Crude Oil
Emulsion” has recently been strongly recom-
mended. It consists of crude mineral oil 5* pints,
soft-soap 3 pounds, water half-a-pint. This is to
be used as a soap for washing the body, rubbed
into the hair, and then washed off, and it is also
to be applied to all parts of the clothing that touch
the skin. As it is a sort of soap it may be used
for washing clothes—these should be boiled, if
possible, or steamed. The emulsion is so harm-
less to the skin that it may be allowed to dry on
the skin and left on indefinitely. Rubbed down the
seams of garments, it kills the young lice as they
are hatched—it is good to kill them in their m-


fancy. It is well to avoid scratching the irritated
part, but that is very difficult to do. The head-
louse is not so important as the body-louse, and
yet many men shave their heads to avoid it and
get sleep at night. Thus, possibly, wigs came into
existence at a time when bodily cleanliness was
not so easily cultivated as it is now. The small-
tooth comb is useful. The crab-louse is found
generally in the hair of the private parts. Cut
the hair close and apply the crude oil emulsion,
well rubbed in. But dealing with all these pests
is so important that they are specially dealt with
by the Medical Officer.
The Bed-hug.— Besides being disgusting, they,
too, possibly inoculate disease, and if one is found
there may be others; examine bedding and cloth-
ing carefully, and report their presence imme-
diately. One part of kerosene to five parts of
water, thoroughly mixed with the addition of a
little soap and applied to all parts of the bed, &c.,
with a brush, is recommended, also fresh insect-
powder may be dusted in the joints, and so forth.
The Flea is not only irritating and annoying,
but has been proved to convey disease, notably
plague, and this should not be forgotten in ihe
present war, where Orientals are engaged. Fresh
insect-powder or icdoform sprinkled on the cloth-
ing are recommended.
Mosquito. —This insect is the worst enemy of
man —next to the devil. It disturbs with its
song, and with its sting it irritates and infects
with dengue, yellow fever, and malaria, and be-
cause of these last it is more important than any
other single factor in producing disease. In mala-
C. 12593.—8


rial countries be, therefore, most careful to use the
mosquito net; there is no other way to avoid the
malarial infection. lam told that this pre-
caution was very generally neglected at Rabaul,
with the result that there were a large number of
serious cases of malaria.
Sexual Matters.
Self-control—chastity, in fact—is necessary to
the soldier, who is to be always “ fit.” It is not
inadvisable even to the unmarried civilian, for
sexual intercourse is not necessary for physical
and mental health. Nature has her own way of
getting rid of superabundant seed by emissions at
night, accompanied generally by dreams; the sug-
gestions of the harmfulness of these are generally
nonsense, so long as they do not occur oftener than
about once or, perhaps, twice a week. They are
not so satisfying as the natural process; they dis-
turb sleep, and make one feel not just all-right
next day, but that cannot be helped. The stories
one reads in little books written by quacks and
furtively handed by touts —who should at once
caught and kicked—are mostly wicked inventions,
but they have made many and many a lad miser-
able for years, until he found out in the smiles of
his wife and baby that they were lies—all lies.
The foreskin should be regularly drawn back and
the secretions carefully removed and washed
away —then the parts dried. Unless this is done,
the secretions accumulate, decompose, and give
rise to a great deal of trouble.
Venereal disease occurs in two chief forms—
gonorrhoea or clap, and syphilis. Many men
make light of clap, but though one gets over the


immediate attack, it may leave permanent results
of the gravest kind, and it causes endless grave
disorders to the innocent wife and child. A man
should invariably report himself for treatment
after having had illicit connexion, for one-third
of prostitutes are in an infective condition.
Immediate disinfection may save him many a pang
—blood-poisoning, heart, joints, muscles, eyes, all
may suffer.
Syphilis is the gravest disease a man can ac-
quire ; it affects and may ruin his constitution
for life, and it may be transmitted to his wife and
children. Should the sore appear on the private
parts, report at once. Immediate treatment is in
any case necessary, and only the Medical Officer
can do it. Far better than waiting for something,
a discharge or a sore, to appear, is for every man
to report for disinfection at once or early in the
day after he has had illicit connexion, for in that
case there is a good chance of the infection being
completely removed and the attack prevented.
Both these diseases are due to microbes;
there is now nothing mysterious about them, and
the knowledge that it is the handing on of the
microbe from the infected to the healthy may help
you to realize the conditions. This knowledge
has also made the treatment rational and efficient,
so that there is every inducement for the patient
to report himself, in order that he may receive
the proper remedy. There is every reason why
a man who has not been able to control himself
should, in calmer moments, try to prevent the pos-
sible occurrence of the physical disability which
unfits him for duty, and in a large number of


cases suitable applications made within a few
hours after exposure will succeed in preventing
disease, but these applications can only be had
from the A.M.O.
Before the Battle.
1. Evacuate the bowels and bladder; you are
freer and lighter, and in case of wound of the belly
are less exposed to danger from escape of their
contents into the wound.
2. Have your body and clothes as clean as cir-
cumstances permit, thus lessening the chance of
wound infection.
3. Fill the canteen with good—boiled, if pos-
sible—water, or weak unsweetened tea, and keep
it filled when opportunity offers; you never know
when the next opportunity will occur. After
bleeding thirst is very great.
4. See that you have the First Aid Packet, that
it is in good order, and that you know how to use
it; when need arises use it promptly for yourself
or a comrade.
6. Wounds are not to be handled, nor touched
with anything but the First Aid materials, pre-
cautions for using which are on the packet. You
must avoid infecting a wound, and make no at-
tempt while on the field to clean it. If gravely
injured, or much blood is lost, it is generally best
to remain where you fall or at the nearest shelter.
Great efforts to walk aggravate the injury.
By Authority : Alee it t J. Mclutt, Government i’rinter, ilelbourar
