

d
J&m
h;o w
JUSTICE IS ADMINISTERED
IN THE
* V >
NORTHERN TERRITORY
.#•0 SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
■ - « . • , • . , . . .
•••#••* I * , •
- > §SH^sir-9f!L&i
Palmerston :
“NORTHERN TERRITORY TIMES AND GAZETTE,” OFFICE,
’.A REPRINT OF ARTICLE . AND .CORRESPONDENCE
PUBLISHED IN THE ‘/NT,’ TIMES GAZETTE,”
JANUARY-- 9th,- T-886. . *• .
• •




NORTHERN TERRITORY.
Reprinted from leader of “ N. T.
Times and O-asette,
The Observer, in a very strong sub-
leader on December sth, comments
regretfully upon the fact that Mr.
Thomas Kennedy Pater, the Judge of
the Northern Territory, only holds
that important office during the pleas-
ure of the Governor. For our part
we read the announcement with feel-
ings of unmixed gratification. It
would indeed be a serious matter for
the Territory, if a man so utterly un-
fitted for the position of Magistrate or
Judge coxild be hoisted from the ranks
of the legal profession into such an
important position, as a permanent ap-
pointment. Our readers have not yet
forgotten the experiences of the past
eighteen months since Mr. Pater’s ar-
rival in the Territory, and the many
charges of falsehood, brutality, ungov-
ernable temper, illegal and unjust
action in his position, which have been
brought against him by this journal.
Not only have these charges been
allowed to go unchallenged, but they
have been distinctly sheeted home and
proved.beyond question. Some of the
charges were made openly at one of
the largest public meetings ever held
in Palmerston, and a large majority at
that meeting passed a resolution that
Mr. Pater was unfit for the position
of Judge. To refresh the memory o°
our readers, the following is a copy of
thpt resolution ;
“ That in the opinion of this meeting it is
highly undesirable that the appointment of
Judge should be conferred upon Mr. T. K.
Pater, he having shown himself to be unfit-
ted for such an important position owing to
his nervous and excitable temper, ment
hasty temper, impatience, and overbearing
conduct upon the Bench.”
ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE IN THE
” Jan. 9,1886.
At the same meeting a resolution
was unanimously passed, that a full
enquiry should be made into the
charges against Mr. Pater, but in
spite of this, and in spite of the open
charges laid against Mr. Pater in the
public Press of the Territory, no
enquiry has been held, and he is still
allowed to occupy the position of Mag-
istrate and Judge. It seems strange
to us that the Adelaide Press and the
South Australian Parliament should
be moved to give the alleged unfair
dismissal of a policeman the promi-
nence of a question of national import-
ance, while charges of the gravest
nature laid against a Judge or Magis-
trate, in whose hands the sole admin-
istration of the law in a settlement
2000 miles distant, is placed practi-
cally without the right of appeal,
should be treated with silent contempt.
We have no desire to review the vari-
ous charges and complaints laid
against Mr. Pater, until such time as a
fair and full enquiry is granted, but
we cannot publish the correspondence
in reference to one of the serious
charges against that gentleman, without
calling attention to the grossly un-
fair and improper manner in which
Mr. Kingston, the Attorney-General
and Acting Minister for the Territory,
shirked the enquiry demanded by Mr.
Solomon. Had the statements made
been unsupported, there might have
been some shadow of an excuse, but
when the whole of the facts stated in
the letter of complaint were fully in-
dorsed by three Justices of the Peace
of unquestionable character, such as
Messrs. McMinn, Elphick, and Baines,


Mr. Solomon and the public are en- who had secured the services of the
titled to some reasonable explanation
why Mr. Pater has been allowed to re-
tain his position without those charges
being enquired into. There is no ne-
cessity to go into the various charges
made against Mr. Pater in the
past, we emphatically assert that his
action in the case under notice alone
proves him to be utterly unfitted for
his position, and the sooner he is re-
moved, the better it will be for the
public safety and the administration
of justice in the Territory. We invite
our readers to carefully peruse the
correspondence following, and leave it
to their judgement whether such seri-
ous complaints are not entitled to a
full and fair enquiry.
Correspondence between Mr. Solo-
mon and the Government
Resident, Northern
Territory.
Ordered by the House of Assembly to be
printed, November 17 th, 1885.
Return to the Order of the House of
Assembly (Mr. Moule, November
4th, 1885), being copy of a letter,
dated February sth, from V. L.
Solomon to the Government Resi-
dent of the Northern Territory,
the Hon. J. L. Parsons, and copies
of all correspondence relating
thereto.
Palmerston, February sth, 1885.
Sir —I have the honor to submit the
following case for your consideration,
and respectfully request that you will,
after satisfying yourself that my state-
ments are correct, forward them
through the Hon. the Minister for the
Territory for the consideration of the
Hon. the Attorney-General,
In November last a Chinese client
placed in my hands an important case
d gainst another Chinese storekeeper,
only legal gentleman in Palmerston
(Mr. Beresford). Under the circum-
stances mentioned, and considering
that my client was suffering under a
great wrong, I took up the case and
commenced proceedings. The case
came on for trial yesterday before a
Court of Full Jurisdiction, consisting
of T. K. Pater, Esq., S.M.; G. R.
McMinn, Esq.; and E. Elphick, Esq.
Immediately the case was called, I
respectfully asked permission of the
Coui’t to conduct the plaintiffs case,
stating that the man could not obtain
legal assistance, and could not conduct
his own case as he was a foreigner and
did not understand English. Mr.
Pater at once refused my application,
without even consulting the other mem-
bers of the Bench, and stated that he
wondered, after what had occurred, I
could make such an application in any
Court where he sat. I replied that I
knew of no reason why I should not
make such an application. He still
refused, and I pointed out as strongly
as I could that my application was to
the Court and not to him individually,
and requested the opinion of the
Court. He still refused to consult his
colleagues, although Mr. McMinn
openly expressed His disapproval. Mr.
Elphick did not speak, but was of the
same opinion as Mr. McMinn.
I pressed for the Full Court’s de-
cision, but Mr. Pater simply refused
to hear me, and gave his reason that I
had insulted him. This I denied, but
finding that it was useless I withdrew
the case, and gave Mr. Pater notice
that I would represent the matter to
the Hon. the Attorney-General. I
have confined myself as much as possi-
ble to a bare outline of the facts, and
I now respectfully demand a full
inquiry into Mr. Pater’s conduct, which
I fearlesslv submit shows him to be
unfitted for the position of magistrate,


upon the following grounds :
Ist. In this case Mr. Pater allowed
his private feelings against me to over-
come that sense of justice which as a
magistrate should be his first and only
consideration.
2nd. That Mr. Pater has been guilty
of an unwarrantable breach of duty in
depriving a litigant of a fair hearing
without consulting his colleagues, and
in direct opposition to their opinions.
3rd. That the action of Mr. Pater
has been such as to bring the Court of
Justice into disrepute.
4th. That Mr. Pater’s own remarks
show that he was false to his oath to
administer justice without fear or
favor, and used his position for the
purpose of gratifying his private feel-
ings, to the injury of a litigant.
sth. That Mr. Pater’s act in not
taking the opinion of his fellow magis-
trates upon the question brought before
the Court was in direct opposition to
the lam he is paid to administer, either
proves him to be unfitted for the posi-
tion of a magistrate, by reason of his
ignorance of the law, or, if his own
words are to be taken, that he is unfit-
ted owing to his high handed injustice
in using his position to gratify his
private feelings of animosity towards
individuals.
Respectfully asking that the text of
this letter may be forwarded to the
authorities with as little delay as
possible, I have, &c.,
Y. L. Solomon.
To the Hon. J. L. Parsons,
Government Resident.
Port Darwin, Feb. sth, 1885.
I have received the following letter
from G. R. McMinn, late Acting Gov-
ernment Resident: —“Yesterday I was
“ summoned to attend the Local Court
“of Full Jurisdiction, at Palmerston,
“as Justice of Peace, to sit with the
“S.M., and E. Elphick, J.P., to adju-
dicate on any matter that might be
“ brought before the Court. I mine-
“ diately after the Court was opened
“ and the first case called, Mr. Solomon
“ rose and asked permission to appear
“fora suitor who he stated was not
“sufficiently acquainted with the Eng-
“lish language to conduct his own case
“ intelligently, and who could not ob-
“ tain properly qualified council, the
“ only lawyer in the place being em-
“ ployed by the other side. Immo
“ diately after the application was
“made, the presiding magistrate, with-
“ out in any way consulting his col-
“ leagues on the Bench, gave an em-
phatic refusal to the request, upon
“ which I asked the presiding magis-
trate if the matter lay entirely with
“ him to decide, and received a reply
“in the affirmative. Mr. Solomon, on
“ asking for a reason why he should
“ not be allowed to appear, was in-
“ formed by the presiding magistrate
“ that it was owing to the insults he
“he had heaped upon 1 im from time to
“ time, and enlarged upon the matter
“in terms I cannot remember. At
“ this stage of the proceedings I felt it
“ incumbent on me to state from the
“ Bench that I had no objection to
“ Mr. Solomon appearing. I learnt
“ afterwards from Mr. Elphick that
“ neither had he any objection to offer,
“ At this stage of the proceedings Mr.
“ Solomon expressed dissatisfaction at
“ the ruling of the presiding magis-
trate, and gave notice of the discon-
“ tinuance of trial on behalf of his
“ client. My object in calling your
“attention to these facts is to request
“ that you will bring the matter as
“ speedily as possible under the notice
“ of the Attorney-General, and get his
“ ruling as to whether the justices are
“entitled to be consulted as laid down
“in the Local Courts Act. I must
“ say that I was greatly surprised at
“ the action of the presiding magistrate
“in this matter. I have sat on the
“ Palmerston Bench for a great many
■“years, both as presiding magistrate


“and as a justice, and tins is the first tion involved in this letter ought to he
“ occasion that my presence on the
“ Bench has been ignored. During
“ these years, Mr. Solomon has ap-
“ peared a great many times on behalf
“of suitors, and I can testify that he
“has at all times conducted himself
“ with all proper respect to the Bench.
“ Had he done otherwise I should have
“been the first to interfere, and it has
“ often been remarked by the magis-
“ trates that Mr. Solomon’s iutelli-
“ gence in conducting cases has greatly
“ saved the time of the Court. It now
“ appears from the ruling of the pre-
“ siding magistrate that, because there
“is a personal difference existing be-
“ tween himself and Mr. Solomon, the
“ latter gentleman is not again to be
“ allowed to appear before him in the
“ manner asked for. This is a ruling
“ that I object to in toto —not because
“ it at the present time applies to Mr.
“Solomon, but because the principle
“might at any time be extended ad
“ infinitum. My own opinion is, and
“ I believe I am supported by the
“ majority of my brother magistrates,
“ that, in the cause of justice, it is well
“to allow intelligent laymen to appear
“ for suitors who are unable to conduct
“ their own cases properly, and who
“ are also unable to procure qualified
“ counsel. And I am further of
“ opinion that it would be highly un-
“fair that, where the presiding magis-
“ trate has any personal differences, it
•“ should be allowed to interfere and
“ overrule the opinions of other magis-
“ trates who may at the time be asso-
“ ciated with him. I am, &e.,
G. R. McMinn, J.P.
“To the Hon. C. C. Kingston,
“ Acting Minister of J. & E.”
Indorsement by Mr. Elphick, J.P.
I sat on the Palmerston Bench on
February 4th, and feel that the ques-
settled.
E. Elphick, J.P.
Indorsement by Mr. Baines, J.P.
I was present as an eye-witness of
what took place, and what is referred
to by Mr. Me Minn, and I concur with
all that he has written.
Arthur P. Baines, J.P.
Indorsement by the Government
Resident.
I may add that the Chinaman who
was suitor in this case came to me
some weeks ago in great distres, and
appealed to me for help, stating that
he had been turned out of his house by
Mr. Beresford and Yee Kee. He
could only speak English very im-
perfectly, and I sent him to the police,
where there is a constable who speaks
Chinese. If he were acquainted with
Court procedure his ignorance of Eng-
lish would prevent his conducting his
case. J. L. Parsons, Govt. Resdt.
To His Honor the Judge of the N.T. —
Shall be glad to receive telegraphic re-
port on letters of G. R. McMinn, E.
Elphick, A. P. Baines, J.P.’s, and V.
L. Solomon, copies of which I have re-
ceived from the Government Resident,
and have requested him to furnish you
with same.
C. C. KINGSTON,
A.-G., and Actg. M. J. & E.
6/2/85.
To Government Resident, Port Darwin.
—Please furnish His Honor the Judge
of the N. T., with whom I have com-
municated, copies of letters of Messrs.
McMinn, Elphick, Baines, and Solo-
mon.
C. C. KINGSTON,
A.-G., and Actg. M. J. & E.
6/2/85.


Port Darwin, Feb. 9th, 1885.
Re Solomon—l had no intention of
slighting colleagues in not consulting
them, in ruling that he should not
appear. I considered it unnecessary,
being of opinion that unanimity of
Bench was necessary, clause 112,
Local Court Act, 18G1, No. 299 of
1883-4, not applying to applications of
this nature. Took sole responsibility
as president of the Court, as I was
desirous of saving colleagues from
newspaper abuse. Shall be glad to
to have your opinion for future guidence.
Reason for refusing Solomon audience,
was that he had grossly insulted me in
my magisterial capacity, both in news-
paper of which he was manager and
verbally at public meeting. I con
sidered that dignity of Bench should be
upheld’ Solomon was aware of my in-
tention to refuse him audience prior to
making application, and he brought
into Court notice of discontinuance
ready written. The litigant represented
by Solomon, if injured, was due to
Solomon’s own act in discontinuing
action ; should have allowed adjourn-
ment without costs if adjournment
applied for’ Such discontinuance
was unnecessary, as there are other
laymen who have been in the habit of
appearing in Court whom I should
have allowed to appear, as Solomon
was well aware Adcock, Brown, and
Hughes have respectively appeared for
litigants before me.
T. Kennedy Pater,
The Judge of the N.T.
To Hon C. C. Kingston, A.-G and
Acting Minister of Education.
Office of the Minister of Justice and
Education, Adelaide, February 12th,
1885.
In response to your request for my
opinion for future guidance, I think
that majority of Court should rule in
minor matters, such as application
under section 112, equally as in case
of judgements, and that the Act, of
1883 is large enough to cover this.
At the same time, I recognise that a
contrary opinion may fairly enough be
held.
His Honor the Judge of the N.T.
C. C. KINGSTON, A.-G.
Office of the Minister of Justice and
Education, Adelaide, February 12th,
1885.
In reply to telegrams re the ruling
of His Honor the Judge of the North-
ern Territory in the matter of the
the application of Mr. Solomon, for
leave to appear for a litigant, I have to
request that you will inform the writers
that I have made inquiry into the affair,
and find that the questions involved
are simply points as to the construction
of section 112 of the Local Courts Act,
and as to the exercise of discretion
thereby vested in the Court, No
Attorney-General has any authority to
settle these points, which, in case of
dispute, must be decided by a Court of
of competent jurisdiction ; and, under
these circumstances, I must decline to
give the gentlemen who have invited
my attention to the subject an opinion
which would have no binding effect on
them.
You will also please inform Messrs.
McMinn and Elphick that Mr. Justice
Pater disclaims any intention whatever
of slighting them by not consulting
them, but he considered consultation
unnecessary owing to his view that
unanimity in the Court was requisite
to the granting of the leave required
by the section of the Act I have re
ferred to.
To the Government'Resident,
Port Darwin.
. C. C.
A.-G., and Actg. M. J. ifeE. a


Port Darwin, February 16th, 1885.
Mr. McMinn acklowledges receipt
of letter, and writes, I perceive by the
answer given, that the presiding magis-
trate bases his right to act, as stated
in my letter, on clause 112 of Local
Courts Act of 1861, whereas my letter
was prompted by clause 1 of the Act
299 of 1884, which clause I have
always believed was enacted for the
purpose of setting at rest any doubt
there might be as to unanimity on the
Bench being necessary for the settle-
of any question brought before it. I
would therefore respectfully request
that you will again bring the matter
under the notice of the Attorney-Gen-
eral, and, for the satisfaction of
myself and brother magistrates, obtain
his ruling as to whether clause 1 of the
Act 299 of 1884 is intended to super-
sede clause 112 of Act, 1861.
J. L. Parsons, G.R.
To the lion. C. C. Kingston, Acting
M. of J. & E.
Please inform Mr. McMinn that he
will note that his last letter does not
remove the grounds of my objection,
previously stated, to giving my opinion
on the points of law involved. lam
desirous of meeting the wishes of him-
self and his fellow magistrates, so far
as I fairly can, but it would be placing
me in altogether a false position if I
gave an opinion which he and they held
themselves at liberty to disi’egard.
C. C. KINGSTON,
A.-G., and Acting M. J. & E.
To the Government Resident, Port
Darwin.
17/2/85.
Port Darwin, February 16, 1885.
Mr. Solomon writes :—“ I beg res-
“ pectfully to point out that my letter of
“ the sth February, in addition to
“ pointing out the injustice and illega-
“ lity of Mr. Pater’s action, requested
“ a full inquiry into the matter, and
“laid certain charges to be inquired
“into. The Hon. the Attorney-Gener-
“ al has carefully avoided both the re-
“ quest contained in my letter and
“ giving any opinion upon the question.
“ Under these circumstances I have
“again to earnestly request that the
“ whole of the correspondence may be
“ laid before the Honorable the Minis-
“ ter for the Territory upon his return
“ to Adelaide, so that the question may
“ be fully and fairly investigated by the
“Government. I shall be glad if you will
“ permit me to have copies of all the
“ correspondence upon the subject.”
As Mr. Pater telegraphed without re-
ference to the Government Resident I
have informed Mr. Solomon I cannot
comply with his request, but I presume
copies of the correspondence, so far as
it has passed through my hands, he can
have.
J. L. Parsons, G.R.
To the Hon. C. C. Kingston,
Acting Minister of J. &, E.
Be good enough to inform Mr. Solo-
mon, in reply to his last letter, that the
matter he refers to has been fully in-
quired into, and no further investiga-
tion is intended. I know of no reason
for supplying Mr. Solomon with a copy
of the correspondence.
C. C. KINGSTON,
- -
A.-G., and Actg M. J. & E.
To the Government Resident,.
Port Darwin.
17/2/85.




f I*>4 (f\
M j
• • o




