

■;X j
HOW DOES A TREE
GROW?
BOTANY FOE YOUNG AUSTRALIANS.
JAMES BONWICK,
Sub-Inspector of Denominational Schools, Victoria,
Author of “ Geography of Australia and New Zealand,"
dc. dc.
JAMES J. BLUNDELL & Co., Melbourne;
SANDS & KENNY, Sydney.
1857.




HOW DOES A TREE
GROW?
BOTANY FOB YOUNG AUSTRALIANS.
JAMES BONWICK,
Sub-Inspector of Denominational Schools, Victoria,
Author of “ Geography of Australia and New Zealand,”
dtc. dtc.
JAMES J. BLUNDELL & Co., Melbourne ;
SANDS & KENNY, Sydney.
1857.




PREFACE.
At the request of several Teachers, I have com-
menced a Shilling Series of School Books, chiefly
to be confined to subjects of Colonial History
and Popular Sciences.
The form of dialogue has been adopted with
the “Botany for Young Australians,” from a
belief that the sympathies of our young friends
will be excited on behalf of the juvenile ques-
tioner, and their interest thus maintained in the
study of the sciences.
A dialogue upon Astronomy will shortly follow;
being a conversation between a father and his
son, coming out to Australia, from Old England.
JAMES BONWICK.
Melbourne, April 17, 1857,




HOW A TREE GROWS
IN AUSTRALIA.
Willie was a fine rosy-faced boy of our south-
ern colony. Though not eight years of ag’e, he
was as healthy and merry a lad as ever climbed
up a Gum tree, picked up manna, or rode in a
bullock dray.
His father had once occupied a g’ood position
in Old England ; but the uncertainties and losses
of business, and the constant struggle to uphold
a respectable appearance with decreasing means,
became so burdensome to his mind, that his
spirits failed, and his energies sunk. His atten-
tion was directed to Australia, the land of mut-
ton and corn, the home of health and plenty.
Gathering up the wreck of the past, he left the
country of taxation and paupers, and established
himself on a small farm in Port Phillip.
The young hero of our story had been a year
or two in the colony. It so happened he had a
piece of land of his own, in which he proudly


exhibited some rising- cabbages, a few peas, and
a flower or two. His father had given him a
rose tree, which was the reigning beauty of the
bed. It was upon the occasion of his parent’s
visit to the garden, that the following dialogue
took place :
Look, father, and see how my rose tree has
grown.
Indeed it has, Willie. Can you tell me what
has made it grow ?
The sun and the rain, I suppose.
Do you remember, when we got tired of the
old slab hut, and set about building this brick
cottage, that you noticed it getting higher and
higher every day !
Yes, that was because more bricks and wood
were used.
Then, if your tree increases in size, there
surely must be something added on continually:
do you think the sun and rain do this ?
Well, I never thought about it, father ■ but I
should like to know why it does grow.
Can you tell me, Willie, what a plum pudding
is made of?
Yes, that I can. There is the flour, the suet,
the raisins, and the cold water. All these are
mixed together.
Then let us see of what our rose tree is made.
I don’t think it so easy to tell that as to
reckon up the articles in a pudding.
Never mind, we will try. First, there is the


stalk, or woody part. When you put a piece of
stick in the fire, what becomes of it ?
Oh, it smokes and blazes, and then nothing' is
left but some ashes.
What is it which burns away ?
That I cannot tell.
It is the gaseous part which burns in a flame,
like what you have seen come out of coal. But
what do you call woody matter that will not blaze?
Charcoal, father. Then I understand now
that wood is nothing but charcoal and the gases.
What are these gases ?
The gas which blazes so readily, my dear, is
hydrogen: and it has a very strong smell too.
The air we breathe is a mixture of two gases—
oxygen and nitrogen. It is only the oxygen that
we take into our lungs.
Well, that is curious.
I shall puzzle you more, Willie, when I tell
you that water is nothing but a mixture of oxy-
gen gas and hydrogen gas.
It certainly is funny that water, which puts
out flame, should be partly composed of the
burning gas.
You must also know, my lad, that hydrogen
would not burn without oxygen. You blow air
into a fire to give food for flame.
But however could the plants get hold of the
gases, father ?
Did it never strike you why God formed
leaves ?


It never did, except that I thought he did it
to make the trees look pretty.
That is quite true, Willie. The good God
loves beauty, and he has surrounded us with
beauty of all kinds. But he made things for
use as well as to be looked at. The leaves ab-
sorb or suck in gases from air and water.
Then I suppose the veins like that we see in
leaves conduct these gases away into the
plant.
Quite right, my boy. Where now shall we
get the charcoal, or carbon, as the learned men
call it ?
That I cannot find out at all.
You told me, Willie, that smoke came out of
burning wood. What becomes of it ?
When I was a very little boy, I thought it
went up to form clouds; but now I know part of
it turns into soot in the chimney, and that looks
like our charcoal or carbon.
It really is. As to that which comes out of
the chimne} r , it passes upward, and gets gradu-
ally mixed with the air. The little particles of
carbon join the oxygen, and become a sort of gas
called carbonic acid gas, which is absorbed into
the plant.
How wonderful that the solid part of a tree
should once have been floating' about in the air!
Do you think the leaves of a plant to be the
same as the stem ?
Yes, I do; for when they are thrown in a fire,


they smoke, blaze, and leave an ash like the
wood does.
Just so. You know the smoke to he carbon
passing into the air; but we must examine
the asli a little more carefully. If you taka some
ash from the fireplace, and put it into hot water,
the solid part will of course fall to the bottom.
Will no part mix with the water ?
There will be something; for if we pour off
the water, and allow it to evaporate in a dish,
there will be found to be a sediment left, and
that is potash or pearl ash.
I have heard of people in the bush doing that
when they could not get soap, for they said that
the potash got the dirt out of clothes.
It is a great pity that we in these colonies
burn away so much wood in waste when clearing-
land, Willie, without thinking of making potash
out of the ashes, for it fetches a good price.
Then there is potash in the plant. Has any
thing else been found in the ash beside that and
carbon?
Yes, my lad. Sulphur or brimstone, lime,
soda, flint, ammonia, phosphorus, magnesia, and
iron, are contained in trees.
But how could all these things get there ?
Why, if we cannot find them in the air to be
absorbed by the leaves, they must be in the soil
or ground. Now, it so happens that those sub-
stances are to be found in different quantities in
different places.


How do they get into the plant, father ?
Simply by the little rootlets absorbing small
particles of them, mixed with moisture.
But do all plants require the same amount of
lime, potash, soda, and the others ?
No, my dear. There are not two sorts of trees
that feed upon the same materials in exactly the
same proportions.
Is that the reason, then, why some land is so
much better fitted to grow one plant than an-
other ?
The reason is, because the one soil has more
of the right sort of food in it.
Now I see that if I wanted to grow a good
crop of any thing, I must give it plenty of the
food it likes best.
Yes, but not too much. For like as too much
nice rich food is bad for children, so it is with
vegetables : ground may be too rich, as well as
too poor.
I have heard people say that it is not wise to
to grow the same thing in the same soil year
after year ; why is this ?
Because it would gradually consume”all the
food there, and then it would starve, and look
miserable.
Then my beautiful flower-bed will by-and-by
cease to bring forth such a fine show as it has
done this season.
Of course it will, unless you provide your
olants with fresh food.


Fresh food, father; Ido not understand you.
I mean, manure must he mixed with the soil.
How is manure food for plants ?
Because it contains the materials they require.
You throw wood ashes over the ground, and so
add sulphur, potash, and carbon. Sea weed
manure furnishes plenty of soda. Bone dust
contains lime and phosphorus.
It is possible, then, to apply to the ground the
amount of solid matter taken out of it by the
plant, so that if my radish bed had some ma-
nure, it would be as_ good as it was before my
crop came off.
That is perfectly correct, my boy.
But how is it that a gum-tree forest is kept
up, for there must be a tremendous lot of lime,
soda, flint, and the rest, removed from the
soil?
Yes, but when the trees fall, they rot, and The
solid parts return to the ground.
Oh, father, the remains are very small, com-
pared to the living tree.
True, because the principal part of a plant
consists of the gases, which fly off, and of car-
bon, which unites with the oxygen of the air.
How does God bring fresh carbon to the fo-
rest?
Several ways: smoke is one source, and the
breath of animals another.
What has the breath to do with it ?
Every time you respire, or breathe out, some


carbonic acid comes out with air, and is carried
into the atmosphere.
Why, father, you do not mean to say that my
breath helps to make cabbages grow.
The carbon passing from your body may be-
come a part of a cabbage, or gum tree, or a de-
licate tulip.
The next time Willie and his father were out
together, the conversation again fell upon trees.
The wonder of the boy had been strongly ex-
cited by the last lesson, and he had now lots of
questions to ask. He knew enough to know
that there must be a great deal more to learn.
He had been told that trees fed the same as ani-
mals, and he felt sure that inside there must be
some entrances for the food to reach parts need-
ing supply. Then he sought to understand how
the growing process was managed, and especially
how seeds were formed, and how the plant
sprang from them. Thus, question after question
poured out from the boy’s lips, without even a
pause for a reply.
“ Stop, stop, my man,” said his father; u I
am not like the Hindoo god with half-a-dozen
pairs of ears, and half-a-dozen tongues. We
will go now a little deeper into the subject; but
we must take one thing at a time. What do
you think of that gum tree yonder ?
That is a noble fellow. What a barrel he has


got for splitting paling out of! And hasn’t he
got a fine top knot? Why, that must he al-
most as big as that Tasmanian tree you- read
about.
Oh, no ■ that one was 350 feet high, and was
104 feet round; while this is not above 100 feet
high, and 30 round.
Well, then, that must be a monster surely.
How curious to think it was once a tiny little
thing that I could pull up with my finger ! I
say, father, how many cartloads of carbon this
one must have got hold of! I fancy it lias got
gas enough to fill many a balloon. But how did
it grow ?
To answer that question, will give us some
trouble, and take some time. First, tell me all
the parts of the tree.
What I cannot see is the root; then comes
the stem, then the branches, and then the leaves.
You forget the flower.
Flower! whoever heard tell of a gum flower ?
How funny the word sounds !
If there be no flower,' how are you to get the
seed ?
I never thought of that. But flowers are al-
ways such pretty light things, that one would
be sure to see them a long way off on a g’um tree.
But if instead of having fine red leaves, my
lad, the flower had none, and the other part was
much the same colour as the leaves, do you think
you would notice it so readily ?


No, father. Won’t I give a good look out for
it after this; for lam sure none of our hoys at
school ever talk of gum flowers, though we often
go to gather wattle blossoms.
To go on with our tree —we will take the
root, and there is a Stringy Bark blown over in
the last storm.
And a strong root it has, too. How the wind
must have pulled to overcome the weight of all
the gravel and clay resting on that lot of roots,
especially as they held the gravel like so many
Angers. So these are the suckers of moisture
and food out of the soil.
Yes, but you do not see the real suckers.
They are very small, and were broken off and
left behind. Those are called spongioles, be-
cause they suck up like a sponge. The raye
situated at the ends of the small fibres of roots,
and have their mouths always open.
Yet I don’t see why the moisture rises. If I
put my mouth into the rain cask, the water will
not rush up into it.
Your mouth is too big. Supposing you put a
lump of salt near a little water, so as to be
touched, what will be the result ?
The salt will gradually absorb the water, until
there be none left.
After dipping the corner of a towel in the ba-
sin, and hanging it up by the opposite corner,
does not the dampness run down when drying ?


No, the moisture ascends and wets the dry
part of the towel.
So you see, then, that the water in small par-
ticles can arise in the ppres, or narrow openings
of substances. This is because the sides attract
it, and the process is called capillary, or hair-
like, attraction. On this principle the moisture
rises into the rootlets through the spongioles.
Is that all the work .they do?
Sometimes these fibres reject things not wanted
in the tree, and that often prove poisonous to its
growth. Such important little workmen as the
spongioles ought not to be disturbed in their la-
bour, and this is what makes the difficulty in
moving trees.
I know that most of those I move are sure to
die. But gardeners are more lucky.
The reason is, because they do it at a proper
time.
What, father, can we catch the spong-ioles
asleep ?
Not exactly; but they only live a year, and
you must take up the tree between the time of
the death of one set, and the production of an-
other, which is the winter season. Even then
you should get up as many fine roots as possible,
for at the end of these the spongioles grow.
All roots are not alike, father.
That is true; some are creeping, or fibrous, or
bulbous, or knobbed, or taprooted. Can you
give me instances of each ?


Let me see. The mint spreads underground
by its creeping l roots. The potatoe is knobbed,
and the onion and tulip are bulbous. The grass
is fibrous, and the parsnip has a tap root.
So much for the root. Now let us look at the
bark. I suppose you have noticed the difference
of the bark of our forest trees.
I know that they shed their bark, thoug'h not
in the same way. The stringybark peels off in
strings. The gum thi’ows out fine long ribands,
waving in the wind. The iron bark sheds its
thick coat in great lumps.
But does the whole of the bark thus fall off?
Oh, no: it is only the rough, worn-out stuff.
There is always bark left. It puts me in mind
of my hand, that got so horny after sawing a
whole day at a big tree; for days after the
rough skin got peeling off as if it was not
wanted.
Then you have more skins than one. You
are just like a tree, for that has several coats to
its bark. Which is the softer, the outer or inner
bark ?
The outer is hard, and the inner soft. But
there is a fresh gum tree just cut down; that
will show us the barks.—Yes, now I peel off the
outside, therais a very soft, juicy stuff, a thing
I feel—a soft coat of bark close to the ring of
white-looking wood.
Mind, Willie, the outside is the cuticle or epi-


dermis, having- pores or openings through which
moisture issues at one time, and is absorbed at
another. These Stomates or openings are very
small ; in our Bush Pigfaces, that the Blacks
eat, there are 70,000 Stomates to every square
inch of skin.
Then the tree perspires in the same manner
that we do : that is odd. But what is the mid-
dle pulpy bark, with its green colour and sticky
feeling ?
Botanists call that the Chlorophyll or co-
louring matter. The inner bark is the liher,
which you see to be soft and fibrous like, being
full of sap.
Why, this is something like our skin, as there
is a watery stuff between our cuticle and the skin
that has the blood in it. I have heard of people
writing on bark: that must have been on the
liber.
It was so. The English wrote on the bok or
bark, and thus we have the word booh; while
with liher we connect the word library. But
we shall return to the liber in another lesson.
Is the cuticle always naked ?
No, some plants I have seen with hair over
the skin, and others with something like scales.
Having talked of the bark, boy, we will turn
to the stem. What are your notions about it ?
My eyes and fingers tell me that, after I pass


the liber of the bark, I reach the fresh-looking
white ring of wood, and that after that the wood
which is still in rings gets harder and drier to-
ward the centre. But 1 thought there was pith
in the middle of a tree : how is it there is none
seen here ?
Because these woody layers or rings have
crushed it in time. I must say a little about this
pith. You know it is soft enough ; that is, be-
cause it is composed of small cells filled with
juices at first, and then with air.
Cells, father! what, like the bees’ honey-comb!
Yes, indeed, and six-sided like those cells.
The walls, however, are not made of wax, but of
cellular tissue. This tissue is a fine membrane,
or skin; or, rather, a transparent, colourless,
film. Mucous threads connect the cells.
What curious things to be in a tree ?
I shall astonish you more when I tell you that
all your tree —root, hark, pith, wood, and leaf—
every one of these is composed of a number of
these little cells. Do you see those small spots
in the wood, and these in this leaf in my hand ?
I do, father.
They are thought to he the openings of the
cells, through which various juices may pass.
Some cells are round and regular, as in the leaf;
while those of the wood, from being much
crushed, are spindle shaped, like a tap root.
Would they not be round in the fruit, then?
They would, Willie, and are there filled with


some nice secretions, that boys rather enjoy. In
the pretty leaves of flower#, they contain a co-
loured fluid. Some cells hold carbon, and others
have crystals of flint, lime, iron, starch, Ac.
Sugar, gum, resins, turpentine, Ac., are in cells.
That is where the scratching-stuff comes from,
which I have felt in the cutting- grass and wheat
straw. But are there cells in roots?
Yes. There are, also, long tubes in plants like
our water pipes, which are open at each end, not
closed like the cells. They are parallel to the
line of the stem, and are extremely small. They
may he called elongated or lengthened cells, and
form what is called the vascular system, or sys-
tem of vessels.
Is there any other sort of vessels ?
Some are spiral, or twisted. The tracheae
are such. Some are round the pith. It is sup-
posed that these convey air from one part to
another.
Are these spirals everywhere ?
No, there are none in the hark nor root —nor
have ferns any. Speaking- of air tubes, I may
tell you that aquatic or water plants have air
cells, divided from other parts by layers of cel-
lular tissue.
W hat do the spirals want with air ?
You have been told that oxygen of the air is
as necessary to the life and nourishment of a tree
as of a hoy; sometimes the leaves do not absorb
enough, and then the spirals get it, through the


root, from the moistened soil.
I can now understand why so large a thing as
a tree becomes so small when the really solid
part is got together. If all the cells and vessels
were jammed up tight, so that the air and juices
were driven out, how thin our thirty-feet round
gum tree would appear! But will you tell me
if the regular sap runs through those vessels we
have talked of?
It is considered that it runs rather between
the interstices or openings between the cells.
Why do you say considered and supposed, ?
Simply because the things we talk of are so
very minute or small that the most powerful
microscope will scarcely exhibit them, and thus
it is difficult to observe their nature and action.
Father, what are these silver lines through
the solid wood, coming from the pith centre ?
They are the medullary or pith rays, and
reach the liber or inner bark. They convey
nourishment. Through them there is also a
communication between the root and the leaf.
I want to ask a question about the leaf. Does
it throw off anything as well as absorb ?
You have been told that it absorbs oxygen
from the air, and also carbonic acid gas —that is,
carbon and oxygen. This carbonic acid floating
in the air is absorbed in the day-time, though
the leaf exhales, or breathes out, oxygen gas
while the sun shines.


Does it not do so at night ?
No; then the leaf throws out some carbonic
acid gas undigested. There is this use of the
oxygen being taken in by the leaf, that it acts
beneficially upon the sap to thicken it, &c.
What is the true shape of the leaf?
The course of veins or branching vessels. The
fleshy part of the leaf is of cellular tissue.
I have heard that our leaves differ from Eng-
lish ones : how are they different ? I know they
do not fall off in autumn.
English leaves are made to fall, as from the
first they are nearly divided from the petiole or
leaf stalk, the mark of division being to he seen
in the budding leaf.
Have our Australian leaves that mark ?
No, they have not. The petiole expands or
becomes leafy, and the leaves, therefore, do not
readily fall. There is yet another difference.
While the glands or tumours for imbibing mois-
ture are on the underside of the leaf in England,
they are on both sides of it here. Instead, too,
of being horizontal, our leaves are set in edge-
wise on their stems.
I often notice the great difference there is in
leaves, father.
Yes, they differ in size, structure, direction of
veins, situation, form, duration, kind of surface, &c.
But what have you to say of those plants
which have no leaves ? I could never see any in
our sheoak nor cherry.


Quite true. Our Casuarina or oak family, and
the Exocarpus , or cherry, have no leaves. They
have, however, long 1 hanging 1 knotted twigs at
the end of branches. They have been called the
Pines of Australia.
Is light necessary to leaves as well as air ?
It is. Sunlight acts chemically to produce
changes in substances. It is believed necessary
to enable the leaf to separate the carbon from
the oxygen in carbonic acid gas. Leaves love
light, and will turn toward it. Some even follow
the sun in its daily motion. In a dark place,
plants soon fade, and the leaf turns white.
Well, father, we have got rid of the root of
our gum tree, as well as its bark and leaves—•
what shall we take next? I seem to know a
good deal, but I cannot yet make out how the
tree grows.
But you are prepared now to understand that
part of my lesson to come. You see the rings
of wood, and the rings of bark, and you want to
know how they come there.
Yes, that I do. Of course I could say that
the sap makes wood, as I know that bread and
butter make flesh ; but I want to understand
how' the change takes place.
Let us then imagine ourselves, Willie, to be
spirits able to be inside of the tree, without ta-
king up any room, and with our eyes about us
to wuttch all that is done.


I wish I could do that j ic would be better
than flying 1 .
Don’t talk about it, but jump inside along
with me.
I am with you, father, with eyes and ears all
open.
I’ll tell you what it is, Willie, we shall have
not only to be inside the tree, but to be able to
stay there a few weeks or months to notice all.
That is easy enough. We may as well fancy
hundreds of years as millions of miles.
Let us go to the pith. Around here are
vessels in the sheath of the pith. The circles of
wood are ranged outside. We will pass along
one of the Medullary or pith rays, which you
saw make the silver lines of the wood, and here
we are at the Liber or inner bark.
But what is this soft white wood next to it ?
This is the Alburnum, or white wood. When
you tap a tree, the sap comes from this part.
Now watch what is coming.
I see—the Liber is separating from the soft
Alburnum, and there comes a sticking substance
of sap oozing between them. What is that ?
It is the Cambium, or Albumen; the white
of egg is albumen. Look again.
All ! the cambium is softening the cellular
tissue that bound the liber to the alburnum, and
while that is growing outward, I And that the
other parts are growing- upward.
Let us take a peep at the leaf buds. You see
19
IJST AUSTRALIA.


they feel the growing influence, and are letting
fall bundles of woody matter, which pass into
the cambium, and become attached to the liber.
The cellular tissue passes in the mass around,
along the medullary rays, and a new substance
becomes attached to the liber.
But that new substance is another alburnum,
father, and our old alburnum is turned a quite
hard wood.
You see, then, that while the last year’s soft
wood becomes a hard ring or layer, another is
formed in its place alongside of the liber. The
hard wood is dead compared with the softer
kind.
I think I understand that. But where does
the nourishment come from ?
The sap when first rising is w r atery and nearly
colourless. But after exposure to air and light
in the leaf, and losing much water in evaporation,
it becomes thicker, and, descending by the bark,
is prepared, like blood, to renew' and to form
different parts of the structure.
Is there any other movement of the fluids of
a plant ?
Yes, there is a true circulation in the interior
of all the cells.
Does a tree form a fresh ring of wood every
year ?
This depends upon the character of the tree.
Some trees take many years in forming it.


How is it that the layers of our Gum tree are
not equal in thickness ?
That is influenced by the season. One year
it was very cold or dry, and the tree made little
wood. Another season, the rain was abundant,
and the sun did his work well, and so the con-
centric or ring-like layer was fuller.
But I see that on one side of the tree, the
bands are thinner than on the other.
That was the side that received the cold
wind. The greater the number of leaf-buds
above a part of a stem, the greater the diameter.
How does the bark manage when the tree
forms new wood, and presses against the liber ?
The outer hark cracks and peels off. When
the hark grows, it does so internally; a new
liber appearing adjoining* the layer of new
alburnum.
What connection, father, has grafting trees
with growing ?
The gardener takes a hud of one fruit-tree, and
applies its liber, the life part, to the liber of the
stock of another tree, binds them together, and
puts clay outside to exclude the air. The
nature, then, of the bud is communicated to the
tree; the juices will be altered, and another
fruit produced.
Well, thank you kindly, dear father. Ido feel
that I know something* now about a tree growing.
I can tell, too, why a tree does better in one
place than another, making more wood and


leaves. It is when it can find in the soil a
sufficient amount of food, in the carbon, lime,
phosphorus, sulphur, potash, and the like.
Quite rig’ht, and some other day we may
have a talk about the varieties of manures, and
the way of tilling the soil, especially in relation
to Australian farming’. But it is now time for
us to return home. So come along’, my bo} r .
It was not until a few days had passed, that
Willie’s father was at leisure to give another les-
son. During’ that interval the boy had not been
idle. He had roamed over the Bush, and stored up
lots of specimens of the vegetable world. There
were many varieties, of roots in one place, and of
bark in another. He had cut open many a
plant to try to observe some of the peculiarities
of which his father had told him. The leaves
being so perishable, rather bothered him in his
researches, till his mother showed him how to
preserve them, by placing’ them between sheets
of blotting or other soft paper, and changing
the wrapper occasionally. Willie himself was
astonished at his collection, and greatly sur-
prised at the many kinds of leaves he had ob-
tained. Having some notion of drawing, he set
about copying a few of the most curious forms,
especially in cases where he thought the pressure
would spoil the appearance. His good father,
as you may be sure, was quite delighted at his
son’s industrious research.


One thought had all this while very much
perplexed our young friend. He had a fair
notion of the causes of the growth of a tree
after it had begun to grow ; that which puzzled
him was, how the tree arose from a seed, and
how the seed itself was produced. He unbur-
dened his mind to his father.
To describe this subject, said the father, I
must give you the history of a flower.
I used to think, father, that the flowers were
only formed to please our eyes, and yet I knew
the seeds had something or other to do with
them.
You are partly right. There w'as no reason
for flowers to be pretty, any more than for
butterflies. But it has pleased God to put the
beautiful along with the useful. He has thus
adorned this world for our home, that his
creatures may be the happier in it. You have
doubtless observed that flowers are as various
as leaves.
I have done so, and I remarked that the
same sort of plant always produced the same
kind of blossom, year after } r ear, just as birds
lay certain eggs of their own sort only. How
is this ?
No one can answer that question, except by
Saying that God has established fixed laws,
according to which everything acts in order.
The planets turn round the sun, the sun appears
every morning; plants and animals produce their


like, and everything that God has made moves
in its proper path.
Except men and women, father. And yet I
think if stars and flowers know and do their
duty, we should be at least as good as they.
Now for the flowers, Willie. What do you
see in them ?
There are the pretty leaves, the common-
looking green leaves outside of them, and a lot
of things standing upright in the middle of the
flower.
Your pretty leaves are the Corolla of the
flower ; the green ones form the Calyx; and
the standards inside are Stamens and Pistils.
We will take one at a time, and begin with the
Calyx, although that, and the Corolla too, may
be wanting in a plant, as they are not really
necessary.
It seems as though the Corolla took care of
the Stamens, and the Calyx protected the Coi’olla.
You are not far from the mark, my boy. But
can you tell me whether the Corolla of a flower
is always in one piece or not ?
I should think not. I recollect some flowers
with one pretty cup all round, w'hile others are
made up of a great many coloured leaves.
You must call those leaves Petals. Some
plants have four petals in the form of a cross.
Did you ever notice a pea blossom ?
Yes, father, and thought it a funny one.


Just gather one and examine it. How many
petals are there, and how are they placed ?
There are five, but not all of the same size.
There is a good upper one, two side ones, and
two at the bottom, enclosing the rest of the
flower.
That upper one is the standard, and the two
at the sides are the wings. Could you describe
the orchis, the wild flower of our bush.
I will try. There are six petals; three are
bent backward, two are at the sides, and one
opposite to the three is also bent backward. Is
not honey found at the bottom of the corolla cup ?
It is, in a place called the Nectary. I shall
afterwards explain the object of the sweets.
But we must hasten on to the Stamen*. These
generally arise from near the base of the petals.
Are they the ones with the yellow dust on
the top ?
They are, my lad. If you look at one, you
will find a long thread or Filament, bearing a
loose top, called the Anther, which carries the
Pollen or yellow dust.
But why is not the pollen always to be felt
on the anther?
Because it is shut up in cells at first. When
the walls of these burst open, the pollen shows
itself outside, and is also scattered about.
As things alter so strangely under the micro-
scope, father, how would our dust look there ?
No two plants have the same shaped pollen,


which is of all possible forms. The tiny grains
are generally each enclosed in a delicate bag, the
subtle powder of which is more like smoke than
anything else, in which are particles of starch or
drops of oil.
But our orchis does not seem to have a regu-
lar anther, for the pollen looks all of a heap.
That is correct. But which do you fancy is
the Pistil ?
I don’t know, unless it be that in the middle
surrounded by the stamens. This is a thread,
too, with a knob at the top.
The support is the Style , and the summit is
the Stigma. When you examine flowers you
will observe the stigma of various shapes and
sizes ; but there is always a sticky substance on
the top. Does the pistil rise from the same
place as the stamens ?
No, it comes from a lump at the bottom.
That lump is the Ovary, or seed basket, some-
times known as the Germen. Some botanists
believe that the several parts of flowers are only
metamorphosed, or changed leaves, and that the
pistil is one of these growing vertically. You
have seen in a double stock, or other double
flower, that the stamens have grown into petals.
But why is it that the corolla falls off so
soon ? I have seen our garden beds strewn with
blossoms, and yet the stamens and pistils keep
on much longer.


But what happens when these go in their
turn, Willie?
Why, the ovary, as you call it, swells out.
But what makes the fruit ?
That fleshy substance around the seeds, of
which you are so fond, is merely the swollen
Pericarp, or covering l of the seed vessel. Chil-
dren’s teeth should not go into the pericarp until
the seeds are about ripe.
I know that. When a pear is nice and mel-
low, then the seeds within are quite hard. But
would you call the pod of the pea a pericarp ?
Certainly. It consists of two valves, with
hinges, and the seed on each side. Sometimes
there are several valves together, and we call
the whole a Capsule. When these burst, the
seeds fall out.
But how are the seeds produced ?
We are coming to that next. I told you of
the bursting of the anther, and the scattering of
the pollen. Though much of the dust is wasted,
a part is caught on the glutinous stigma of the
pistil.
And what becomes of it then ?
It passes down the hollow style into the ovary
at the bottom.
Yet I have seen flowers in which the pistil
was higher than the stamens; how could the
pollen reach it ?
Many curious contrivances effect the transfer.
The wind blows the yellow dust. A bird throws


some about. An insect catches some on its
wing’s and legs, and stepping on the stigma,
leaves pollen behind.
Is the honey in the nectary to tempt the in-
sects to the flower?
The sweet morsel attracts birds as well as
insects.
When, then, the stamens have discharged
their pollen, and the pistil conveyed it to the
germen, I suppose there is no further use for
them.
There is not, and they die off like the petals
of the corolla and the calyx before them. But
because of the variety of stamens in number and
situation, botanists have thought it well to divide
plants into classes by this means.
II ow do they do that, father ?
They place in one class all vegetable substan-
ces whose flowers contain but one stamen ; in
another, those with two stamens; and so forth.
The number and arrangement of the pistils
enable us to form plants into orders; as, a flower
may have four stamens, and one pistil, or four
stamens and two pistils, Ac.
I suppose the stamens and pistils are always
found together.
No, they are not; though Compound flowers
are made up of sets of flowers within the same
calyx, we have plants in which the stamen, or
male flowers, are in one part, and the pistil, or
female flowers, on another portion of the tree.


The former are barren flowers; tbe latter, fertile
or fruitful, as the seed vessel is only connected
with the female side.
I think the service of winds, insects, and birds,
is more needful than ever now. But I have seen
people pick off flowers from melon and cucumber
plants, saying’, that they were no good.
These were the male blossoms. But they who
pluck off all the barren blossoms before the pol-
len appears, can never expect to have fruit; for
the fertile blossoms are of no use without the
others. But what would you think of male
flowers being all on one tree, while the female
are upon another at a distance ?
I suppose that is to give the birds and insects
more work than ever. Please tell me a tree that
has this curious plan.
The Palm is an instance. Where the trees
grow in a cluster, as they usually do, there is no
difficulty. If very far apart, the male blossoms,
when ripe, are cut off, carried to the other tree,
and tbe pollen shaken over the pistil flowers.
That is singular. But how do water plants
get on with the yellow dust ?
Some of them rise to tbe surface to flower,
and sink to seed. Those that keep below are
provided with a glutinous pollen, which cannot
be affected with the wet.
Well, father, I do think we are getting on
bravely with our lesson. But I would so like


to peep into the germen or ovary, and see what
goes on there.
We will do so. I ought to have said, that
before the pollen sheds, the ovary has a lot of
half formed seeds adhering to the Placenta in-
side, These Ovules, as they are called, are a
sort of nucleus or kernel, and are each placed
between two sacs of open mouths.
What goes into those mouths ?
Nothing goes in, but the pollen of the sta-
mens comes down through them out upon the
ovule, and is received to its Embryo, or heart,
throug'h a very small hole. Soon after the pol-
len has entered, the ovule becomes perfected and
vivified, or made full of life.
And is that the seed ?
The ovules do then become seeds in their little
cells, and are, in their turn, shed out when
ripe.
But do they turn into real seeds directly the
pollen gets down ?
By no means. Nourishment and time are ne-
cessary to growth and change. I must explain
further about the seed. Beneath the internment
or covering of ordinary seeds, as a pea, what do
you observe, Willie 1
I have seen the two halves of the seed show
themselves, when the skin breaks, and the plant
seems to grow from between them.
Your two halves are the lobes or cotyledons of
the seed. These fleshy substances enclose the


embryo, from which the leaves and roots proceed.
The upper part, from which the leaves arise, is
the Plumula, or little plume, or feather. That
from which the rootlet proceeds is the Radicle,
or root part: sometimes it is called the Eostel-
lum, or little beak.
Of what use are the cotyledons, father ?
They supply nourishment to the central por-
tion, which is to develop the plumula and rostel-
lum, and thus surround them. A sort of passage
of communication exists between them. There
is, also, a neck between the plumula and ros-
tellum.
What is that scar upon the seed ?
The point at which it was attached in its
vessel.
Well, now I think I really do understand all
the mysteries of tree growing. Like as a young-
animal suckles its parent until strong enough to
manage other food, so does a young plant depend
upon the cotyledon for provision, until its root-
lets are able to search the soil, and leaflets ab-
sorb from the air.
I trust, my hoy, that while you admire the order
and adaptation, you will acknowledge Him whose
wisdom planned the whole, whose power per-
formed it, and whose goodness makes it serve
the happiness of His creatures.
A few days after the last conversation, Willie
went with his father into the Bush among the


mountains. The way was long, and the track
was rough, but various things occurred to make
the journey pleasant. The Laughing Jackass
gave the boy a merry greeting, a snake peeped
at him slyly among the long grass, and then
brushed off quickly to its hole. A Porcupine
raised up its quills as he passed, and then trotted
off to the scrub. But the trees, —the trees !
How tall they were ! How thick they were !
With the help of their handkerchiefs, Willie and
his father measured the girth of some, and
found them thirty, forty, and even fifty feet
round. Most of the Stringybark and Gum trees
ran up straight as a dart, fit to thrust into some
monster ship for a mast. Then the sweet-
scented shrubs on every side, the green Myrtle,
the pyramidal and beautiful Sassafras, and many
others, seized upon the boy’s imagination, until
be came to a place that made him stare, and
then caper about like a Black fellow at a corro-
bory. What could it be ?
A break in the tangled brush underwood had
given him a peep down into a valley that seemed
prettier than an}ffhing he had read of in a fairy
tale. There was no rough rock, but a floor of
soft moss. The most musical of rippling creeks
trickled along the vale. No other sound was
heard, for the very birds seemed afraid to dis-
turb with their joyous notes the silence that
dwelt there. There were no Gums, no Wattles,
rising from this moss bed. Instead of these,


Willie saw a lot of very odd looking- trees.
They were not very tall, for they rarely rose
above 12 or 15 feet. The bark was unlike any-
thing- seen elsewhere. There were no branches,
but at the top of the straight stem were several
branch-like leaves, 8, 10, and 12 feet long, with
such a graceful bend towards the valley. At
the top of the stem, rising up from the place
where the leaves sprang- out, was a curious
curling piece, with little shoots. The valley was
full of these wonderful vegetable festooned
pillars.
Oh ! Father! father ! cried the boy, what are
those beautiful trees down there? 1 never saw
any like them before.
They are Fern trees, my lad. Walk over and
look closely at them.
Willie trod upon the soft carpet, and thought
it damp, as well as soft. The air, too, was so
close, and felt so cold and raw, that he lost half
his pleasure already. He could not help saying
so to his father.
Ah, my boy, said he, you are not the first to
find nice things having something disagreeable
about them when approaching nearer to them.
Remember, that while roses have thorns, plea-
sures will have their drawbacks.
Yes, I know 1 am often very tired after
a pretty ramble, and rather queer after a
pasty.
True enough; there is only one place where


happiness brings neither fatigue nor surfeit.
But let us see what is the difference between one
of these Fern trees and one of your old com-
panions, a Gum tree.
I can tell. One is like a tree with branches
and so forth ; but the other is not. Then the
bark is quite different, I can see that the leaves
of the Fern tree are like those of the common
Fern, which is so troublesome in our sandy land,
only they are a great deal larger.
But there is a stranger difference still. Just
take my axe and cut one of them down.
I can soon do that. It is not nearly so thick
as that Wattle I fetched down the other day
with not a dozen cuts.
Willie doffs his jacket, catches at the axe,
and is at once dropping it in double quick time
upon the Fern stem. A dozen blows were given,
and another, and another, but the tree did not
fall. Taking breath, and wiping his forehead,
Willie murmured out:—
Well this is tough ! it heats rny Wattle,
hollow. I declare if the axe don’t ring against
it as if it were iron or glass. It is quite differ-
ent from one of our trees, for that is rather soft at
the outside, though it may get harder as we get
towards the middle. *
As I think you are more likely to blunt my
axe, than cut down the tree, you may put on
your jacket, and we will inspect that fallen fern


I see yonder. Perhaps after you have looked at
the inside, you will find another wonder.
It was not long- before our young- Botanist
uttered an exclamation of joyful surprise.
I have found it out, said he. Only fancy,
father, I was hammering- away at a mere shell,
though it was a hard one. The tree is quite
soft inside, though like flint outside. It is the very
opposite to every tree I ever saw before in all
my life.
No doubt it is; and it was to see it with
your own eyes that I brought you here to the
Fern tree valley.
Thank you, dear father, you always like to
give me a treat, and this is a rare one, too.
But I am sure that such a tree as this could
never grow like a vegetable Gum tree, that you
were telling me all about.
Can you name any plants, Willie, of which
the fern tree puts you in mind ?
I know of none, unless it he the Bamboo, for
that is hard outside and hollow within, and it
seems, like this, to grow up straight about the
same thickness throughout.
There is another tree of this character which
we have in Australia, some kinds of which grow
in other countries, producing dates, of which
boys are so fond.
Any one can guess that; —it is the Palm.
But whence have we Palms, father ?
There are some in Gipps’ Land, at the foot of


the Australian Alps; other finer ones are at
111 a war ra, south of Sydney; but more northerly,
in the hotter parts, Palms are very common.
Is that one from which we get our Cabbage
Tree Hats?
It is so. The head of the Cabbage Palm is
so good tasting and nourishing, that many trees
were felled on purpose to get at this sort of cab-
bage, especially in the early days of the New
South Wales Colony.
Then Palms, and Bamboo, and Fern trees
grow the same way, as their stems look the
same, and as they have neither branches nor
solid timber. But how do they grow, father ?
There is no new wood formed outside the last
ring, as in the Gum tree.
It so happens, my hoy, that new layers are
formed for a while, inside instead of outside.
Our ucav class of trees are, therefore, called
Endogenous, from their growing internally,
in opposition to the ordinary forest trees, which
are Exogenous, from growing externally.
I suppose the new shoots arise from where
we see the joints in the cane; hut where is the
fruit of our new Endogenous friend ?
Have you never seen the pictures of hunches
of dates and other fruits all among the leafy
branches at the top ?
Eh ! that I have, with the figures of Blacks
climbing up the long poles to get at the fruit.
Now I have two more hard words for you


to learn, to distinguish our two sorts of trees.
We know them not merely by the difference of
wood, hut of seed. First tell me how many
cotyledons or lobes are in a seed ?
There are two in all the seeds that ever I
What! was that cocoa nut the same which
you bought the other day ?
No, that was all in one piece.
True, Willie; and you may recollect some-
thing about a date stone.
I do, indeed; that was single also. I see I
must not be so sure another time about what I
know. Now I understand. Our new T friends of
the hard shell stems, which bear fruit at all,
have seeds of one piece instead of two.
Quite so. Now a plant of one cot}dedon in
its seed, is said to be Monocotyledonous, while
that having two lobes is Dicotyledonous; mono
meaning one, and di, two.
Then my Gum tree, and Rose tree, and Sweet
Pea, are all Dicotyledonous; but the nice Date
Palm, the pretty Orchis, and the sweet Cocoa-
nut, are Monocotyledonous. But are there any
plants which are neither one nor the other ?
There are some whose seeds are not to be dis-
tinguished, and are known as Acotylcdonous,
or without cotyledons. Can you not name one t
I don’t know, unless you mean such as the
Ferns, the Mosses, and the Lichens on the rocks
or decaying timber.


They are the very ones. We have now had
examples of the three great varieties of vegeta-
tion ; Monocotyledonous , having one lobe to the
seed; Dicotyledonous , having two lobes; and
Acotyledonous , without any.
Will you now, dear father, explain the way
in which the Monocotyledonous plants differ
from the Dicotyledonous, especially in their
system of growth ?
I will, my boy, and we will begin this time
with the seed.
Any one can tell where the plumula and
rostellum of the Cocoa-nut proceed, for we can
see the two places in the shell, one at the top
and the other at the bottom. Bus do tell me
what the white of the Cocoa-nut is ?
That sweet substance is the Albumen , to
nourish the young embryo inside. In most
Monocotyledonous seeds, there is a lot of this
albumen—which is thus chemically changed to
suit for food. In the Date Palm this store-
house is very hard, as you well know.
Is the Embryo different from others ?
In general it is like an undivided cylinder,
but in Grass and Corn, it is a flat plate.
What! is Corn like the Palm, father 1
Yes j for although it has a second, unshapen
lobe, it is truly monocotyledonous.
Well, father, how does the growth of the
Mono folks go on 1
In the Palm embryo are noticed bundles of


fine tissue, arranged circularly from the plumula
to the radicle. These tissues increase and shoot
downwards. The cellular tissues of the embryo
now enlarge to make room for woody fibres,
which begin to appear. A rootlet is formed, and
a leaf comes forth.
But how is the stem formed 1
There are several crown leaves springing from
the root in a circular form, each circle with its
own cluster of vessels. Each leaf bud sends
out a lot of woody bundles, curving downwards
and outwards, which become entangled irregu-
larly in the cellular tissue.
That is how it is that there seems no order
and arrangement about the wood of a Palm
or Fern tree. All is higgledy-piggledy, and the
moist stuff must be collected near the circum-
ference. But what is the soft centre made up
of ?
Cellular tissue, of course. You can distinguish
no pith, no medullary rays, and no distinct bark,
like our fruit trees.
No, I see that which ought to be the bark is
a jumble of fibres, which cannot be separated
from the stem as in the regular trees. I don’t
like these monocotyledonous trees; they seem
quite ungainly and unnatural.
And yet you have no objection to the bread
of corn, the sugar of the cane, the nut of the
cocoa, the date of the palm, the banana, the yam,
the arrow-root


Stop, stop, father, you have given such a list
of good things, that I will never say a word
against the monocotyledonous family as long as I
live, though I do wish the botanists would give
them a name that hoys could pronounce better.
Something must he said about the leaves of
these curious plants. Instead of their veins
being branched out, the leading* ones run paral-
lel, and are connected by small cross veins. For
this reason an injury to any part of a palm leaf
is of much more consequence than if it happened
to a gum leaf. You have seen that the leaves
are the true organs by which woody matter is
formed, and not the inner bark, as with other
trees.
Is there any peculiarity about the flowers of
Endogenous trees ?
Their petals, stamens, and pistils, are gene-
rally in threes or sixes. The palm has usually
six stamens. Half the plants of New Zealand
are monocotyledonous, being far more than in
Australia.
Will you please, father, say a few words
about the tliird sort of plants—the Acoty-
ledonous.
These are cellular, and have no apparent
flowers.
But how do they propagate or spread them-
selves, if they have no regular seeds ?
They have little things called Sporules , or


Spores, without spiral vessels, which are the
means of increase. Mosses have capsules, with
teeth, as before mentioned; the fringe enclosing-
a rude kind of flower. Some of these are barren,
and others fertile. The latter may have several
imperfect pistils along with one perfect one.
I have half a mind, father, to fancy that the
common fern is one of the acotyledonous.
Some botanists think the same. The seeds
are formed upon the back and margin of the
fronds or leaves, in the form of hud-like spores.
They are exceedingly small, and no flower is vi-
sible to the eye.
Do these spores, like seeds, produce stem from
one part, and root from the other %
No, my boy, the little globular things have
no plumula and radicle ; but that part which is
exposed to the lig-ht produces stem, and from
the shaded portion the root descends.
Are other plants produced from spores ?
Yes, Willie, the mushrooms and sea-weed are.
The productive organs of lichens, the most im-
perfect of plants, are the Shields, as they are
called, upon the Thallus, or leaf-stern.
Well, father, I think now we have gone over
all the different sorts of plants and trees, and I
feel myself the wiser for your kind and pretty
lessons. I shall be a regular botanist now.
Not so fast, my little man; you have only
begun your lesson. There is plenty more to
learn. There are many thousands of names of


plants, most of which are hard to understand,
and many are hard to pronounce. Then }mu
have to know the arrangements of all these, and
their peculiar natures and uses.
Ah ! I see my work is not done. Never mind,
you have taught me the alphabet of botany. I
mean now to study all the flowers and trees I
come to, with the help of your letters, until I
can read off easily all about their peculiar habits
and modes of growth.
Do so, my son; but don’t, like some philoso-
phers, elbow God out of the field. Be ready to
notice His thoughtfulness and goodness in the
world of plants ; and, as they in a dumb manner
show forth His praise, be you willing, with heart
and voice, to say, “ My Bather made them all.”


Works by the same Author.
GEOGRAPHY OF AUSTRALIA AND
NEW ZEALAND.
Cloth, 4s.
Illustrated with Four Maps of the Colonies.
Sanctioned in the schools of the National and Denominational
School Boards of Victoria.
OPINIONS OF THE PRESS.
Mr. Bonwick has been for many years resident in these colonies;
he has had access to the best sources of information; he has been
indefatigable in his efforts to produce a book which might be a
standard one on the subjects it treats; and he has succeeded.—
Melbourne Argus.
DISCOVERY AND SETTLEMENT OF PORT PHILLIP.
Future historians will turn to it as a repertory of valuable facts,
lucidly, systematically, and chronologically stated.— Melbourne
Argus.
MAP OF VICTORIA.
Affording information upon Geological Features, Roads, &c.
THE BUSHRANGERS;
Illustrating the Early Days of Van Dieman’s Land.
The book is by no means a mere Newgate Calendar, but some-
thing infinitely better. It exhibits a correct position of the state of
society in earlier days. —Hobart Town Colonial Times.
GEOGEAPHY FOE YOUNG AUSTEALIANS. Is.
One half the book relates to the Geography of the Colonies, pre-
pared for the use of Junior Classes.
WILLIAM BUCKLEY, THE WILD WHITE MAN,
And his Port Phillip Black Friends. 2s.
THE EARLY DAYS OF MELBOURNE.
Is. Cloth, Illustrated.
Now Publishing,
EAELY TIMES OF ENGLAND FOE YOUNG
AUSTEALIANS;
AND
BIBLE STOEIES FOE YOUNG AUSTEALIANS.
Ooodhugh Sc Hough, , Printers, flinders Lane.


Works by the same Author.
GEOGRAPHY OF AUSTRALIA AND
NEW ZEALAND.
Cloth, 4s.
Illustrated with Four Maps of the Colonies.
Sanctioned in the schools of the National and Denominational
School Boards of Victoria.
OPINIONS OF THE PRESS.
Mr. Honwickhas been for many years resident in these colonies;
he has had access to the best sources of information ; he has been
indefatigable in his efforts to produce a book which might be a
standard one on the subjects it treats; and he has succeeded.—
Melbourne Argus.
DISCOVERY AND SETTLEMENT OF PORT PHILLIP.
Future historians will turn to it as a repertory of valuable facts,
lucidly, systematically, and chronologically stated.— Melbourne
Argus.
MAP OF VICTORIA.
Affording information upon Geological Features, Roads. &c.
THE BUSHRANGERS;
Illustrating the Early Days of Van Diemen’s Land.
The book is by no means a mere Newgate Calendar, but some-
tiling infinitely better. It exhibits a correct position of the state of
society in earlier days.— Hobart Town Colonial Times.
GEOGRAPHY FOR YOUNG AUSTRALIANS. Is.
One half the book relates to the Geography of the Colonies, pre-
pared for the use of Junior Classes.
WILLIAM BUCKLEY, THE WILD WHITE .N,
And his Port Phillip Blacli Frien 2s.
THE EARLY DAYS OF MELBOURNE.
Is. Cloth, Illustrated.
Now Publishing,
EARLY TIMES OF ENGLAND FOE YOUNG
AUSTRALIANS;
AND _!2A ' ..H
BIBLE STORIES FOE YOUNG AUSTRALIANS.
Ooodhugh <Sc Hough, Printers, Flinders Lane.
