

HOW TO WORK FOR GOD
A SERMON
PREACHED AT
ST. DAVID’S CATHEDRAL,
HOBART TOWN,
ON THE
FIFTH SUNDAY IN LENT,
March 17, 1872.
BY FREDERICK H. COX, 8.A.,
DEAN OF THE CATHEDRAL.
W. FLETCHER, LIVERPOOL STREET.
1872.
Sold for the benefit of the New Cathedral Building Fund.
Price Sixpence,
SOLD ALSO BY
J. WALCH & SONS, WELLINGTON BRIDGE ;
W. WESTCOTT, COLLINS STREET ;
AND
WALCH BROTHERS & BIRCHALL,
LAUNCESTON.




HOW TO WORK FOR GOD.
Exodus iii. 5.
“ The place whereon thou standest is holy ground'd
ss/rgrg^
(6-5-77
The history of the Israelites’ bondage in Egypt would
commend itself to any reader, whether religiously in-
clined or not, as being perfectly true to human nature.
It is not their story only,—it might have been taken from
the life of mankind in almost any age. Everywhere and
in all times it has been too common for the strong to
oppress the weak, even as the tyrant and the people of
Egypt oppressed the family of Israel. And the history
of the oppressed has always been of this kind ; they
have borne the yoke at first contentedly, while its weight
was not felt; then more or less discontentedly, but still in
silence, as those who felt that an evil that could not be
cured must be endured. The longer they are crushed,
the more they lose heart and spirit, till they almost
forget that it is possible for them to be anything but
slaves. Meanwhile, the cruelty of the oppressors goes
on increasing ' 1 -y come to regard their slaves as no
better than living machines, and forget how they once
felt a little pity for them as for their own flesh and blood.
But at length even oppression over-reaches itself, and
learns that it is possible to be too cruel, and that when it
comes to the worst, the souls of men, though crushed


and trampled down, are not destroyed, but can arise and
demand vengeance for their wrongs.
And this final outbreak does not come without some
notes of warning. Perhaps, some time before the actual
moment of deliverance, one or another among the multi-
tude of slaves burns with an earnest desire to stir his
brothers to avenge their wrongs: and he speaks out, or
it may be acts out, his desire, for the most part in vain,
because the time is not come. And yet not in vain, for
the very striving after liberty helps to hasten on the
coming of liberty, and to teach men to value it.
Now all this, which is written in many a history of
mankind, is certainly written for us here in this Book of
Exodus.
First, we see the old man Jacob and his children and
grand-children going down to Egypt, and welcomed as
settlers in the land. Then, under “ another king who
knew not Joseph,” after many years have passed and
they have increased and multiplied, we see them regarded
by the Egyptians, first with jealousy, and then with
grinding tyranny. Fresh men are born and die ; and at
length we come upon a generation which seems to take
it as its natural condition to be enslaved. As long as
body and soul will hold out, they are willing to make
bricks for their task-masters, and to find their compen-
sation in “eating bread to the full.” They have forgotten
the sacred promises once made to Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob : forgotten the covenant which bound them to be a
peculiar people: forgotten their customs, their religion,
almost their God. They are little better than dumb
driven cattle labouring hopelessly under the lash.
Then Moses is born, and educated under God’s special
providence to be their deliverer. He has the oppor-


tunity of being one of their oppressors ; but he refuses
that, and prefers to be one of them. He will not be
called the son of Pharaoh’s daughter, while Pharaoh is
enslaving the people to whom he really belongs. He
prefers to be one of them , yet not that he may join them
in dull submission to a great wrong: that he can never
do. It is really a greater thing to him to be an Israelite
than a courtier of Pharaoh : because he has faith to look
on, and to look upwards; he knows and feels (like all
men, I suppose, who have ever been destined to any
great work) that he is capable of high aims. And at
first he takes it for granted that all who see him will feel
this too. It would be strange if they did; for their
thoughts are not as his thoughts; they are content to
say to all men, and therefore to say to him, “ Let us
alone, that we may serve the Egyptians.” And so, after
a brief struggle on the side of fair-dealing and brother-
hood, he has to abandon the cause that he has taken up
so warmly, and to get him away from Egypt. He is a
man before his age, and he must wait.
He does wait, for a second 40 years of his life, in the
pastures of Arabia, the very place where St. Paul after-
wards went to school in like manner. A valuable time
to him, no doubt; a time of solitude and reflection iif
the presence of God. We are told that “ the proper
study of mankind is man”; and so it is; and Moses had
had great opportunities for that study in the court of the
King of Egypt, and in the brickfields where his own
people toiled ; great lessons he learnt for himself then
in the art of governing and being governed, and very
useful those lessons were to him in his after-life : but
they were not enough thoroughly to furnish the man of
God ; if he was indeed to be a man of God, and a great
workman for God, he must learn not among men only,


but in God’s own awful presence. He had stood before
those great temples in which the Egyptians ignorantly
worshipped they knew not what; and he had doubtless
felt how vain were all similitudes to represent the King
Eternal, Immortal, Invisible: but he would learn this
even better where there was no shrine of man’s building
to be seen, but only the vast rocks of Horeb round about
him, and over his head the infinite sky, and before him
the fire which no hand of man had kindled.
The time was come for him to be sent to deliver his
people from their bondage: not to go in his own strength,
as he went once before, supposing that they w r ould
understand, —not to go, but to be sent, upon God’s errand.
But even this must not be till he first knew thoroughly
who He was who was sending him. First, he must learn
the awfnlness of God’s presence. “ Draw not nigh hither
(said the voice to him from the burning bush) : for the
place whereon thou standest is holy ground.” And
Moses “ hid his face, for he was afraid to look upon
God.” It was a great truth that was then spoken home
to his soul. The very ground on which he stood was
holy. So was that sandy soil of Egypt, in which years
ago he had buried the Egyptian, —so was that also holy
ground, though Moses had not thought of it at the time.
*He would understand from henceforth, that all the earth
was holy; that the very thorn-tree of the desert could
be a shrine of God’s presence; that the phenomena of
the visible world were not to be regarded simply as
“ great sights,”—they were marks and signs that God’s
hand had been there. It was the very foundation of ail
religion; too often forgotten by men, but not to be for-
gotten by one who would be the leader and deliverer of
his people.
Then comes the commission, “ Come now, I will send
thee unto Pharaoh, and thou shalt bring forth my


people.” Then we hear how Moses distrusts himself, —•
how deeply he feels, what once he did not feel at all, his
own insufficiency for the charge to which God calls him, —
and then how he ventures to ask concerning the name
and nature of Him before whom he stands.
And this question is wonderfully answered. Wonder-
fully, considering how much more might be made of
human language, supposing it to be employed at all in a
communication so mysterious, “ Who art thou ? ” said
Moses to that awful Presence. “ What shall I say when
they ask me who it is that has appeared to me ? ” The
answer is the simplest that could possibly be given—
“ I AM THAT (which) I AM.” “ Thus shalt thou say to
the children of Israel, I AM hath sent me unto you.”
No more than this ? No more. Simply a declaration
of God’s existence—his essential, uncreated, Existence
in Himself, —I AM. Contrast this with the definitions
and theological statements, the Creeds and Articles of
Religion, with which men have thought it necessary to
fence in their notions of the Divine nature, —and you
will begin to realize its wonderful simplicity, its surpass-
ing majesty and grandeur. “ I AM.” Such a title stands
alone, as well it may : the utterance of God’s wisdom,
not of man’s guess-work. Every idol-god in Egypt had
his legends, his sacred history, his secret mysteries which
priests must guard. All these were to be confronted
now, and vanquished, by One who needed no such
refuge of lies, but only the simple assertion of His own
uncreated Being.
Armed with this Revelation (and observe, with no
more than this), Moses goes on his way. The time is
come now. The powers of Egypt must yield to the
Lord God of Hosts. Israel, in spite of their oppressors,
nay, almost in spite of themselves,—must be brought


•forth from the house of bondage, and made free with
the freedom which God loves.
Now to gather up, please God, the leading lessons of
this history. Whatever else it may teach us, this at least
we ought to learn from it, —that all the work that needs
to be done for the world in which we live—purely human
work though it may seem to be —can only be well done
by men who are imbued with a sense of the presence
and the over-ruling hand of God. I know that any man,
who has within him the heart of a man, must needs desire
to deliver the oppressed, to comfort the afflicted, to cleanse
the unclean, to teach the ignorant, to protest against
superstition, to repress crime, to promote virtue. Very
well: but let him learn that he cannot really do that which
he desires to do, till he has gone apart from the world
into a place of silence, and there, alone with God, has
looked, so far as man can look, into the solemn truths
which underlie the surface of these visible things. We
are too apt to catch at that which lies nearest to our
hand, —to say “ This wants doing,” and to think that of
course it can be done by us. In this spirit—this hasty,
superficial spirit—no doubt many a man’s daily business
is done, many a family is ordered, many a law is made,
many a State or Church is governed or reformed. And
so the world gets on, after some blind fashion, with a
great mixture of the wrong and the right, ever jostling
against one another. The world may “ get on ” : but
still I say, that the only true workers in this troublous
scene (whether their sphere of action be wide or narrow)
are the men or the women who give themselves time to
think, seriously, in God’s presence, what it all means, and
to what it is tending. We may work our machinery,
whatever it is, and seem to accomplish something by its
means. Yes: but what is the result really worth ? What


will be its value when all machinery, so far as we are
concerned, will have stopped,—when the rush and haste
of life will be over, and we shall be still ?
Surely this to which I am inviting you is not a dream
or a fancy. There is a very true sense in which we, even
now, may enter into the Presence of that God who is a
consuming fire, and may think what we are, what He is,
and what He requires of us. We may try to think out
steadily by ourselves the real value of things, and resolve
to do that and that only which is verily right, and true,
and necessary. We may refuse to be guided by con-
siderations short of the very truth,—such as, the natural
inclination to have our own way, the force of prejudice
or dislike, the gratification of our own self-esteem ; all
these, and all other false and spurious motives to action,
we may determine (so far as in us lies) to resist, while we
keep steadily before us the remembrance that we are in
the presence of God, standing upon holy ground, called
to do Plis work in His name, and with consequences, to
ourselves and others, which are eternal. Once let us
realize this truth, and it will be no wonder if, like Moses,
we hide our faces for very shame, as those who are afraid
and unworthy to look upon God. Nothing but the
comfort of the grace and the forgiveness which Jesus
Christ our Lord gives us in His Gospel,—nothing but
the remembrance of his encouraging “ Fear not, be of
good cheer,”—can enable us to face a thought which is
in itself so terrible.
I am sure that we need to be reminded of these con-
siderations, though they may seem to be very elementary
and simple. In these days especially, when so many of
us are agitated, more or less, about questions of religious
doctrine or practice, fearing that some portion of God’s
truth is being tampered with, and in that very fear hasten-
ing to defend it—(if there is any one here who does not


know what I mean, I need but refer him to the daily
newspapers,)—at such a time as this, I am sure that
we are in danger of forgetting those great truths
of which Moses was reminded; —the Presence of God,—
the simplicity of the essential Revelation of God, —
the necessity of taking up God’s work reverently,
if we take it up at all. I am afraid that those
who speak and those who write in a time of excite-
ment do not sufficiently remember the responsi-
bility that belongs to words: how much depends
upon even a single word, —how God (not man only) is
listening to our words, is reading our words, —how He
must discern and notice the difference, not only between
truth and falsehood, but between simplicity and ex-
aggeration; between the word of honest assertion and
the word that suggests suspicion, or whispers more than it
dares speak out; between the word that wounds a
brother unwillingly and of necessity, and the word that
is selected for the sake of its bitterness, and admired in
proportion to its power to sting.
O hearken once more to that great Name of God—“l
am that which I am.” Must it not be, that He who calls
Himself by that name has pleasure in the speech of the
guileless, whose words are few and well weighed, who
fear to sin with their tongue, and who keep a watch over
the door of their lips ? Is it possible that He can care
for the subordinate doctrines of His Church so much as
He cares for the honour of His own name and His own
essential attributes ? Is it possible that He can desire
us to defend those doctrines by words that shew that we
have lost reverence, and lost charity, and lost faith in one
another ? Will He ever send us to deliver His people
out of their bondage if that be the temper with which
we recommend ourselves to His service ? Or will Pie
not rather say to us “Go back, I call you not: you are


hinderers, not helpers of my work, —go and learn rever-
ence, and faith, and humility, and patience, and brotherly
love ; and then, but not till then, I will receive you, and
you shall be My servants.”
I say this to you to-day in all candour and honesty,
because I think that it ought to be said. Of course I
run the risk of being misunderstood. One or another
will very likely think, that I could not so speak if I did
not undervalue those principles of our Reformed Church,
which in these days are being called in question. Let
me say to any one who is disposed to think that , that I
do value those principles very highly, and just because I
value them, I want to see them defended in a right spirit.
For certainly I value even more highly the essential and
fundamental principles upon which every Church must
be founded, and all religion must rest, —namely, truth and
justice, reverence towards God and charity towards man.
God grant that these may flourish among us, and be held
fast in our hearts ; and then there is little fear that any
other section or province of the truth will fail for want
of loyal and brave defenders.
APPENDIX.
It may be as well for me to say here more explicitly,—in reference to the
special points concerning which our Church in Tasmania is now agitated, —
(i.) That I very strongly dissent from the language used in certain recently-
published books on the Holy Communion, of which the following may be
taken as a specimen : “ As Christ after His Resurrection showed Himself to
His disciples under various forms, so He shows Himself as really to us
under the forms of bread and wine.’' (Priesfs Prayer Book , p. 17S-)
Such a statement appears to me to be supported by no warrant of Holy
Scripture, and to be directly contradicted by our authorised formularies. If
by the circulation of manuals for the Holy Communidn, or in any other way.


our communicants are being taught to regard the Sacrament of the Supper
of the Lord in this light, they are, to my mind, being dangerously mis-led.
(2.) I as strongly object to the language of similar books concerning the
duties of “ the Confessor ” and the practice of “ Sacramental Confession.”
(P.P. p. 157.) It is Roman, not English, and cannot be justified by any-
thing that is to be found in the formularies of our Church. It must belong
to the office of a Pastor, —not because he is “ a priest,” but in proportion
as he is a “ godly learned man,” —to be the guide and comforter of souls,
according to their needs and his own knowledge of human nature and of
the Word of God : but “it is against the true Christian liberty that any
man should be bound to the numbering of his sins.” (Homily of Repent-
ance.) If any clergyman among us desires (and I neither know nor suspect
that any one here does desire) to make “ the Confessional ” a part of his ordi-
nary pastoral ministration, he desires, in my opinion, that which is for him
plainly unlawful. But while I for myself declare this belief, I ask -at the
same time that any who may think differently may have a fair hearing and
a generous judgment. If they are wrong, let their error be pointed out,
calmly and dispassionately, but let them not be reviled upon suspicion, or
condemned for offences which possibly they have never committed. I
regard with grief and abhorrence the sweeping accusations and the still more
mischievous insinuations of newspaper correspondents and editors, that some
of our clergy, with their Bishop’s connivance or disregard, are “in secrecy
and stealth pursuing dishonest courses to the subversion of the Church of
England in this land,” introducing “ underhand practices,” and “ for the
sake of the pay ” remaining in one Church while they believe, and, as far
as they dare, teach the doctrines of another. Ido not wish to suppose that
those who so write are actuated by malice. Let it be granted, that they
think they have sufficient grounds for their accusation. Even so, this is not
the shape in which an accusation should be laid. But may it not be, that
they are prejudiced or misinformed ? And, if so, how great is the respon-
sibility that must attach to the publication of their most injurious words !
F. H. C.
March 21, 1872.
\V. Fletcher, Printer, 87, Liverpool-street, Hobart Town.
