

■■■ . ; , tic?_ , . ...^ vs
: ■ ■ f’
'■ i
r-(S.
:,F&t
S >
(M
I ■ ; fe •
: r: ■■: ■ ■■■;■- :
m :how we went to :: : - - ,
i |
J ON ! BOARD- THE “ FUSILIER.” , |fe.
‘ff ■ '-.I 'i'i ■■■ •■■■.' ■ n;..-.'
1 iitilt. I
' "
df , , p),
A. WEEKLY JOURNAL.' WRITTEN ON BOARD.
•«s - pc*
■ 6 l| : . .. .■
■ dl v ■ n
&J&-- CAPTAIN . D. B. OARVOSSO, Esq.
■ V-v-- .
<sm CHIEF OFFICER . Mr, JOHN BROWN.
- j(i SECOND OFFICER Ma, OODEICH j,
£ ‘ TIIIRDOFFICEE , Mr. JONES
• .„... g3^>
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED AT BRISBANE.
*SeJ<3
SEPTEMBER 2Stu, IfttH. £*-■.
IR^pr
jf "ir w ur ”& ■


PUBLISHED weekly every Saturday, “ Erne we went to
Queensland, on hoard the “ FUSILIER.” A first
class Illustrated Journal. , •
Terras of subscription payable in advance, as follows :—■
A payment of la, will entitle a subscriber to read the paper
until our arrival at Brisbane, and arrangements will be made
for printing it, should a sufficient number of subscribers be
procured to defray the expense.
CONCERTS.
Volunteers wanted for the “Passengers Weekly Concert”
_ The Minstrels are open to form a few more engagements,
With parties of undoubted talent. See Programme of next week
SAILORS CONCERTS,
Unabated exertions will be used to keep up the style of
those popular concerts, and the 2nd. of the series will take
place this evening ( Saturday,) at the usual place.
. iV. B. See hand bills.
TO CORRESPONDENTS.
Correspondents _ and Advertisers are requested to forward
their Communications before Thursday of each week, at 12
o’clock, noon, after which the publishers cannot warrant that
they shall appear ip the next issue. No communications un-
accompanied with the real name of the writer (under what-
ever fictitious naum they may appear in this Journal,) can be
issued ; and the Editors cannot pledge themselves to return
rejected articles.
_. , WANTED.
■p c of the works of Sterne, also the English and
■Enfield Speakers. Great care will bo taken that the books
S r £E° d UniUjUred A<ldrCS!l Mrs ‘ Lodgings,
NOTICE.
Any person possessing copies of Screaming Farces, or Light
Eomcdios, arc requested to communicate with G. II jVb.'l,
Bleak House, iind. Cabin,
OWING to the great amount of elaborate work required
on our frontispiece, our artist has been unable to complete it
in time lor this issue, but we hope to present it to our readers
with our nexp
■ SATURDAY, 14TH 'mlyTTscJ --
ft 10 commence a Journal and in doing so to fix happily upon
X a name, is easier said-than done. Like popping the
question, all depends on the concomitant circumstances under
which the 100 is broken; and as the unfortunate lover who
cannot rise from his knees from before his ladyo love without
assistance should never have boon down on them at all, so
must a Journalist calculate his strength, not only to insure
his success in wooing a fickle public, but must also to lay his
plans as to retain what by a bold and successful venture he
may have won.
Our care and anxiety in choosing, the name of this our first
and hoped to be highly appreciated literary bantling, altho’
we cannot say that it has fun-owed our brow and blanched
our hair, has been one of tho heaviest tasks wo have yet un-
dertaken on board the good ship “ Fusilier; and even now for
tne first tunc ( and it startles .us when we see it) when wo
assume our Editorial We, our own surprise is that we have so
soon, got out of a maze of titles which has haunted us like a
nightmare over since the idea of a journal was started, and
we do believe but for the happy idea of a highly accomplished
artistic frwnd, “How we wont to •Queensland, on board tho
lusilier. would either have been published without a title ,
or with such a worn,out name, that not even all the talent wo '
tool confident our paper will call'forth might, have saved it' ,
from being ranked amongst the failures that were, , Havmit i
thus congratulated ourselves, for this must be a paper of oou- i
gratalations, our .next duty and a pleasant one it is to eon- i
gratulatc our gallant Captain on our hitherto prosperous voy- ]
age, unprecedented we believe in regard to every thing which
can make a voyage pleasant.
, T]lG remarkable weather with which we have boon blessed
has contributed much to our comfort, aud.no praise can be too
great tor the admirable management on board in which from
the Captain downwards the boast of the British sailors has
been uphold, for every man has done his duty.
In introducing ourselves to the public we claim a distinction
wc believe quite unique in the annals of floating literature
Wo arrogate to oursolves not only tho title of an enlightened
put an Illustrated Journal, enjoying the real felicity of carry-
ing with us our Artist, a gentleman of tho very highest abil-
ities, and by whose pencil our numbers will be adorned in the
first style of art
Arrangements arc in course of being made for the repl-o-
duction ot our illustrations 'by tho aid of Photography, and
bolero our second issue wo hope to have this branch of our pub-
lication in lull operation, should time and weather permit of
our chemicals being fished up from the bottom of the hold. •
In conducting our Journal wo shall keep before us 2 objects;
viz. the amusement of our fellow passengers, and a record of
our voyage, which may in future years recall many happy
hours spent when wc went to Queensland in 1864 by the old
Jiusilier and which, when our ship-mates shall have again
scattered themsplyes, may sometimes quietly amuse the happy
homestead fireside, or cheer the lonely wafcchfiro of the -isolated
pioneer of the Australian bush. May it then be our privilege
to chronicle many an interesting event and thought to ."ird
most to tho memory of Aulddamj-syne,' - ' °
It shall be our endeavour to jiavo the feelings' and interest
ot all classes on board duly represented, and whilst wo,shall:
consider it our duly to repress all offensive 'personalities, •■■our''
Editorial lash .shall not bo withheld nor lightly laid on should
roid gi-cmincos be brought under our notice. Our motto wo
trust will ever be ‘ Jusium el ienuem viri prwposiium, Wc.
are lovers of peace, but we shall never sacrifice truth or honor
at any false shrine ot that Goddess.
'\Vc shall take care that our paper shall always contain li
good pressure ot our local news; our remarks on general lite-
rature, science, and art, will we hope, always be found worthy
o bo read, and our sporting intelligence will bq obtained from
the first circles,
Wc have to crave the assistance of our follow passengrrn in
enabling ns to record events of interest g oing c. around us,
lor without our correspondents our paper will become flat
and uninteresting. . • •
We want a general co-operation of all on board to keep uh
up to the proper pitch, and as nothing lightens labor so much
as the knowing it is appreciated, the spirit and regularity of
our correspondents will show their interest in our joint adven-
ture, and; will spurn us on to more sustained'efforts to 1 amuse
our readers. 1
We do not pledge ourselves to insert all that may be scut
to us, reserving intact our Editorial rights of rejection ; but
every notice of general..interest' will.be gladly received, and '
notices on natural history, original poetry, eomiindruiUH ito.,
will always, bo acceptable. A most interesting part of our
papoi to the ladies, the births, and we wore going to add mar-
riages, shall not be forgotten, but greatly tho’ we may regret
it Wfl, cannot promise anything of that kind until! our last
number,, there being no : facilities on board for the .perpetration
or such interesting ceremonies; but we hope in due time on
our arrival at Brisbane, to eat cake and drink wine at the
happy consummation, of the many incipient cases already bud-
ding on board, and wo heartily give timely ■notice that if trea-
ted as wo have, indicated the notice of marriage shall be jnscr-
tcclm our paper gratis., The last of. the -trio nf domestic
notices has by God’s goodness as, yet been a stranger to our
little community and may wc never have the-■melancholy duty
m mm to (fluer-ftiiliiiulon Bdhiul tlit ‘Vliiiiilleii.’’
~~~" -"7 T —=-=—


.Latitude.
Longitude.
Distance.
‘ 23rd.
4S°
47 / N
fr
48' W.
176 miles.
. 24th.
46
15
9
44
185
25 th,
46
7
1.1
43
81
26th,
44
49
13
0
100
27 th.
43
19
18
0
90
28th.
42
66
18
3
25
29 th.
41
45
13
42
77
■ 30th.
39
59
14
80 ,
113
May 1st.
37
40
15
54
148
2nd,
34
40
17
32
197
3rd.
81
51
18
60
182
4th,
29
23
20
30
171
5th.
27
56
20
36
88
6th.
25
8
21
87
177
TtH,
21
41
23
5
■ 224
8th.
19
35 v
24
25
147
9th.
16
52
25
28
175
10th.'
13
49
25
32
183
llth.
11
85
24
49
147
“SOW WE WENT TO QUEENSLAND, ON BOARD THE “.FUSILIER.”
to perform. Gentle Header alias Subscriber with your money
paid WO have made oUr salaam on enter ng, by your kindness
aa.l favor' we shall be encouraged to persevere and hope when
Wo bid you adieu you will be able to say with some measure of
truth, and kindly overlooking our many infirmaties, that zeal
.at least in our seif imposed task has not been wanting.
CORRESPONDENCE.
Hh the Bditor, Sir,
As you have started a paper onboard, showing
“ Mom we went to Queensland ” I purpose with your sanction to
give you, a weekly account of the Ships progress. Hitherto it
has been most satisfactory. Our passage -up to the present time
has been guile a pleasure trip, we have not only had beautiful
weather, hut ( with the exception of a day or two ) a fine breeze
throughout. These two are seldom combined , and at this time of
the year we. always expect the passage d very tedious one. IPe
have not however, arrived at the Eqm 'or, and the next 3 or 4 days
are very critical ones, asm are now where we experience generally
ti great many calms, heavy rains, squalls, <&o.
Since leaving Gravesend we have sailed a distance
of ‘2 986 miles, and arc now 095 miles from the Equator, that is
Up to Wednesday at noon. Should such good for time continue
to attend us, I hope to have the pleasure of landing you at Bris-
bane in a much shorter time than, I anticipated. The Doctors
report of the healthy state of all ou board will be very satisfac-
tory too, lam sure to every one; and I sincerely hope that his
anxious endeavours to promote order and cleanliness, without
which, we cannot have a healthy ship, will meet with every support
by .all on board.
Wishing you every success in your weekly Jour-
nal, amt hoping you will persevere in carrying it out,
. I am, Sir, Yours Sc,
D.B. GARVOSSO,
1864, Captain of the Eusilier.
April 21st.— > Left Gravesend.
22nd.— Off Beaohy Head.
:23rd,— IS miles East of Start Point,
Total distance 20d6
LATEST TELEGRAMS.
By the kindness of the proprietors of the Allan tioTelegraph
Go. we are supplied with the following important news.
ENGLAND.
Lord Palmerston has resigned and John Bright is now
Prime Minister;. .
The European conference on the Danish question ended very
■satisfactorily. England proposed that Prussia and: Austria
should deliver up all the Grounds they then occupied in Den-
mark, and that they should only retain the Guns and Ammu-
nition which they had captured during the war.
This both Austria and Prussia acuccdcd to, as, they had come
to the conclusion after due deliberation, that they had been
carrying on an unjust war.
The Young Prince of Wales has boon created Commander-
in-Chief of the Forces at Aldershot ■ He has lately become
very popular from his having taken a very active part in the
religious services now held at Exeter Hall.
The Corporation of the city of Cork have voted a sum of
£20,000 towards the erection of a statue for Garibaldi.
FRANCE. .
Advices received froin Mexico state the arrival or the Arch
Duke Maximillian, and that he has taken a return ticket by
the steamer that took him out; the reason assigned being that
the Duches “ did not seem to like it.
The Emperor Napoleon has decided on laying Up and pay-
ing off 50 of the Hen of War now on service, and that he will
make similar reductions in the army, to show that ho is wish-
full to establish peace in Europe.
' MUSICAL LITERARY & DRAMATIC.
On Saturday last we were favored with an excellent Concert
by the Ship's crew, in front of the poop. It would be invi-
dious to particularize any songs whore all wore so good, but
we think the most appropriate for the occasion rvas “ ihe Sai-
lors grave ”by Signor Dibdinette. “ Quite Ooloxiial ’ by ham
Slick, with a great deal of quaint humor; and “ Green grow
the Rushes Oby Robert Burns. Thanks arc duo to our
Chief Officer Mr. Brown, for the admirable arrangements
made by him fur the seating of so large an assembly.
Hearty and eontinous applause accompanied the pro-
gress of the entertainment which left no room to doubt its
signal success.
On Tuesday evening the admirers of true poetry had a great
treat, viz. a reading from the Works of R. Burns, given by the
General at the back of the poop. The reader poscsses all the
faculty of taking firm hold of his audience, sportive in fancy,
refined in taste,"yet with a keen perception of the hulierioua
and a marvelous faculty of giving it visible embodiment, he
makes an hour pass so quickly by that bis audience depart
not only unfatigued, but with a keen desire to enjoy the treat
again. His reading is less like an ordinary entertainment
than an evening spout in private society with a polished Scotch
gentleman, whose sense of fun is acute, and whose power of
portraiture is almost unbounded. The selection was very ju-
dicious, viz. some of the author's minor pathetic pieces and the
inimitable Tam o’ Bhanter.
AVe are sorry that this class of entertainments is'loss
patronized than it should be.
SPORTING & MISCELLANEOUS INTELLIGENCE.
Nothing of note occurred during the early part of the week
owing to the lassitude produced by the heat of the weather, if
we except a few games of Quoits, at which Herr dc Witt was
themoatsuccessfui performer, and the game of Tatnaroo, which
has also boon patronized to some extent.
The contests between Messrs. Croft and Nutting, and Nut-
ting and Blunette was very exulting, and causing roars of
laughter tVom the spectators. In ease any of our readers should
uotliave witnessed these performances it may bo as well to de-
scribe- them as shortly as possible.
Tliogame of Quoits is played- by 2 or more parties, and on.
the same principal as when played on shore, hut the Quoits
ou board ship arc made of colls of rope and the objects at which
they are thrown are 2 buckets placed at a distance of 6 yards
apart. The game may be 20, or any other number fixed upon
by the players. The Quoits must be thrown into the buckets
or there is no score
The game of Tam o’ Shauter is played thus A bucket is
plaued ou deck, 2 persons are then blindfolded and lie down
ou the deck each bolding the bucket with one hand and a
knotted handkerchief in the other with which they attempt to
strike one-anobher alternately; it is an amusing game and well
'worth trying by those who have not hitherto had an oppor*


“ HOW WE WENT TO QUEENSLAND, ON BOARD THE “FUSILIER.”
tunity of doing so. Further instructions can bo obaained by
applying to 0. Nutting, No. 1, Bleak House, 2nd. Cabin.
BOXING.
On Wednesday afternoon the first bout took place between
tbe Bull-Washer and Winkle. Gome rattling exchanges took
place in the first part of the encounter, in which the Bull-
Washer had rather the best of it, tho’ Winkle was rather hot
on the Bull-Washer’s ribs and bread-basket; but Bull-Washer
not to be denied was “all there” on Winkles smeller and later
trap. About the sth. round the Bull-Washer rushed in fu-
riously and delivered some slogging lefthanders on the dial
plate of Winkle, which caused him to look rather flushed about
the peepers.. A prettier bout than this it has seldom been our
lot to witness, tho’ short it was sufficient to show forth the fine
hitting and stopping qualities of the men, which we cannot 100
highly praise; the left hand straight ’ uus of tho Bull-Washer
being the most effective, while the half arm right handed vol-
leys of Winkle told a painfull tale on Bull-Washers stomach.
The next bout was between." Sam Pug” and “Bruiser.”
These men are so well known in the P. R, that vve will not
fully describe tire light, suffice it to say the Bui 1-Washer had ra-
ther Hie best of it, for although the shortest man, he is in better
condition and possess© 1 of more stamina than his opponent, Only
4 rounds were fought, in the last of which The Bruiser caught
Sam Pug a stinger on the smeller drawing the claret freely
amid’ the cheers of Ms bankers, tho sponge was then thrown
up in token of defeat. The winner can have the stakes (steaks)
by applying to the butcher,
WHIST TOURNAMENT.
On Wednesday the'4th. iusb. a notice was issued to the ef-
fect that a Whist tournament would talcc place to determine
who should bo the champion players at that game. There
were 20 entries, tho names we give below. After a very se-
vere contest Messrs. Say and G. Harris won and became
champions.
FIRST HEAT.
Messrs, Roskoll and Redcap beat Herbert and Spencer,
Orux and Robinson De Witt and Robinson.
Say and G. .Harris 11. Harris and Porter.
Bennette and Herbert Oxonford and Canning.
Theilo aud Herbert Jr Hyue and Thompson.
SECOND HEAT.
Say and Harris beat Roskoll and Redcap.
Crux and Robinson Bennette and Herbert.
TJicile and Herbert Jr Ran a bye.
FINAL.
Say and G. Harris beat Crux aud Robinson.
Say and G, Harris Theilo and Herbert Jr,
On Wednesday Messrs Crux aud Tholle challenged Messrs.
Say and G. Harris to play the best out of 5 fames for the cham-
pionship and 2,bottles of Porter, S out of 4 games were won
by Tlicile and Crux, but we understand that Say aud Harris
intend playing them again.
LOTTERY.
Anything that breaks the dull monotony of life at sea. being
eagerly welcomed on board ship, and enjoyed with a keen re-
lish. The passengers of the “ Fusilier " derived considerable
amusement from a Raffle which took place on Wednesday last.
The article was a Watch said to be the property of Garibal-
di. Fifty tickets at Is. each ( certainly a low figure for such
a valuable article) wore quickly disposed of, and throwing the
dice proceeded with great activity, aud no little noise. To-
wards the close 2 gentlemen engaged in a game of speculation
by buying up the chances of the highest throwers, ( being a
tie of 28 ) and the watch was finally won by Mr, N. Griffin,
No. 23 intermediate, Cabin.
CONUNDRUM.
If a Cat ran away with the great gun in Hyde Park, taken
from the Russians in the Crimean War; in what one word
would you name the transaction '(
ENIUMA.
I soar in the sky with every lark,
lam heard‘in every wateh dog’s bark;
In the thunder’s roar I’ve always been,
In the light’nings flash I’m likewise seen j
1 float in the air, 1 dwell in the earth,
In seasons of plenty, In Jasons of dearth,
1 have lived right well since my earliest, birth ;
1 dwell in the sea, in the coral caves
Where the mermaid sings and the wild wind raves;
1 roam at pleasure o’er every land,
Yet Reader, even now, I’m in thine hand. ,
BIRTHS.
On the 30th. April the wife of Daniel Callaghan (if a Sop;
On the 11th. May the wife of—Reynold of a Daughter.
SECOIsTO zbzditicot:
Since going to press we have been bailed and boarded by
the ship “ Southern Empire ” from Liverpool to Melbourne,,
out since the 15th. ult. Visits have been exchanged, a shindy
has taken place, and all particulars of interest will be inserted,
in our next.
How lie wit is (|iwtsW, att boiird tfe
~~~ ■ SATURDAY, 21ST. MAY', 1804. ; „
LAND ORDERS.
A FEW Land orders, the property of unprotected femaks,
are to be disposed of, in the only legitimate way,-—Ready
money no object. Apply at the office of tho paper.
WANTED.
Tho addresses of about 100 eligible young men wanted on
board. N. B. Most valuable time may be thus saved to all
parties interested.
WANTED immediately, a supply of Ice.. Any reasonable,
price,, below 20s. lb might readily bo obtained, Deferred
annuities granted for the amount of purchase money.
LOST, STOLEN, OR STRAYED.
A Valuable white handled Pocket Knife with Cork-screw,
Leather punch, Tooth-pick, Tweeuors a large and small blade,
and name marked on side 0,. I. Bennett. Whoever will, give
such Information to the undersigned as will enable him to re-
cover the same, will be amply rewarded,
-ipptyt XI, 1. Bennett, Mrs. Limpet's 'Lodgings, 2nd. Gubin,
LIBRARY 'NOTICE,
Attention is called to the Library- Regulation, That “No
book held on loan shall be retained luni/er t/urn 3 da //if, under
a penalty of la. per day beyond the period. ..Loans may be re-
newed, at the discretion of the Librarian, and parties wlto have
not paid fines clue by lliein, shall not he eutUied to burrow books,
‘SAILORS CONCERT.
A Concert will take place in trout of the poop on Saturday
tho 21st. inst. at half past 6 o'clock in the evening,
GRAND BALL.
Tho great success attending the last one, has induced the
M. G and Stewards to make these meetings a weekly institu-
tion. Dancing to commence each Wednesday at 0, 30, P, M
CLASSICAL READING.
Hen. Orux will road from Byron’s Works at the back of the
poop, on Tuesday the 24th. mat. at li o'clock, P. M.
ORIGINAL .CONCERTS, A ,
Tho Managers of these popular Concerts will give novel-


“ HOW WE WENT TO’ QUEENSLAND, OX BOARD THE « FUSILIER.”
tins oaoh Thursday evening during the voyage, weather permit-
ting. Next Concert, Thursday 20th May 1864.
SATURDAY, 21ST MAY, 1864._
lb la an old and true saying " That the least said is soonest
mended ” we shall therefore say as little as possible about such
things as may tend to excite any ill feelings amonst our fellow
passengers, and on that account shall pass over the late fracus
which took plane on board our ship ■" Eusilier for however
much we may have been annoyed at the time, wo have our-
selves forgotten, and consequently forgiven all those who were |
the aggressors, and wo hope that no ill feelings may rankle in i
their hearts,and that the good feeling which ( with the above!
solitary exception ) has boon felt by every one on board may!
always he kept up, ;
In our columns will bo found an account of our voyage from ■
the day wc left Gravesend to the 10th May, so that nothing |
need emanate from,our editorial pen in connexion with it, ex-
cept that we ought to congratulate ourselves on our hitherto
most prosperous and pleasant voyage, and let us hope that we
may have a continuance of that line weather, which with the
exception of a few days, wo have enjoyed throughout,
The easiest way of making time pass quickly and pleasant
is to make ourselves as agreeable as lies in our power to all on
board and not to take offence at things which are done merely
in joke.
It is no use regretting now, that we did not stop at home, as
the step is now taken and no amount of repining will take us
hack to old England again. The voyage may of course seem
to many-of ua, have iyjon used to the comforts and lux-
uries of a good home,) monotonous and rough, but wo must make
up our minds to boar with any little hardships which may come
across our path, and remember that we cannot expect always
to have our own way. There is an ample field in Queensland
for all those who are blessed with a good .constitution and the
will to work hard and make as little as possible of their trou-
bles; to live happily and make a much larger fortune than they
possibly could have done in England, without very good con-
nexions and heads well supplied with brains. We ourselves
have friends out there who describe the climate as being heal-
thy and the country beautiful, which are 2 great essentials to
a comfortable and happy life. Erom what we have heard, we
should not recommend our friends to stay long in Brisbane,
but go at once and pitch thein tents a little way out of the
town, and utilosa something good immediately offers itself, to
go up into the bush in search of employment which is readily
to be met with; and we would say to one and all avoid the
Public houses in Brisbane, as their is always plenty of loafing
fellows about ready to pick up any body with a little money in
their pockets, and the excitement of being on shore again leads
us to commit extravagances which we shall afterwards regret.
We think that a few pounds, shillings, or pence, as the ease
may bo, may be nothing at the time, but there is nothing like
laying up fora rainy day.
: CORRESPONDENCE,
Under this head wo have received such varied-Voluminous
and contradictory reports of the scrimmage of last Saturday,
that though wo promised further particulars in our last, we
think wo best fulfil our duty by saying no more on this chap-
ter of accidents; a worthy Hibernian friend having stigma-
tised it as a more tin-pot affair.
To tha Editor, Sir,
I aw, vary sorry in be obliged to report so unfaforahly
of the progress of the “ Fusilier ” for the. week that is past, It
is hmoener nothing more than what I have frequently experienced.
The meeting of the N-B tfe -SB trade winds always occasion
a tedious interval of squalls, heavy rains, die, We are nowhoioovcr,
I hope thro’ the worst of it, and I think by.the lime I give you
my next weekly report that we shall be bowling along 7 or S
knots in the S E trades, 12 or 15 degrees South of the Equator
fie change from the oppressive, weather we have lately lad to
the beautiful weather audjino voyage generally experienced in the
8 E trades will be hailed with pica sure, and delight by every one
on board. It is in fact generally the most pleasant part of the
voyage. I think I told you last week we were 695 mile's from
the Equrtor. To day, Wednesday, we are still 180 miles Worth
of it. This is slow work indeed, but we expect letter times.
I am, Sir, Yours dw,
D. B. GABYOJ3SO ,
1864, Captain of the Fusilier.
Latitude. Longitude. Distance,
May 12th. 9° S 2/ N. 24° 22 / W. 134 miles.
18th. 7 20 23 41 130
J4tli. 6 24 23 16 50
15th. 5 48 23 6. 8(3
16th. 4 50 23 0 58
17th. 4 0 22 40 50
18th. 3 23 22 38 17
Total distance 481
OHLIV DEAD lIORSE'AT SEAT
■ant Gentle reader, for I presume we have some very gentle ones,
on were you ever at sea when this ancient custom was celebrated,
•oly jLnot I should advise you to take a trip for the purpose cf
witnessing it,' and if you do not laugh till every bone in your
h skin aches (in the language of Palstaff) then call me “ Horse.”
3 us The ceremony takes place one month after the ship leaved
eem p ort> as Jack then begins to receive pay. he havingforeatallcd
lux- his first month's wages, so that he lias been -working a dead
lake -horse—a fact he is fully alive to. On Tuesday, 17 May, the
ome good ship ' Eusilecr 1 having been one month at sea, in the
cays evening, the ceremony above-named took place,
and , A model of a horse, capitally got up, all but the neigh,
the fully eaparisanod, with one of the tars inside acting as a pro*
rou- i peller, followed by his mates, armed with sticks, besoms, &0.,
hey i promenade, or rather carreer round the ship, upsetting all who
-*on- oppose them, reminding one forcibly of John Gilpin's eole-
Ives hratod equestrian performance. After an hour's curvetting,
eal- bolting, jibbing, prancing, and dancing, amid the shouts of the
s ho assembled spectators and the cheers of Jack, the horse was
we hauled up'to the port main yard; after quivering a few
me, seconds in the breeze, .the bolt was drawn, and " the poor old
the horse,” with a dash and a splash, sank into the ocean deep.
') to This was a signal for a great deal of screaming on the part of
My the ladies, one in particular who, with a great deal of portur-
tho bation depleted in her face, earnestly hoped there was no one
’mg inside. We are enabled, by the kindness of the boatswain, to
Jto subjoin the pathetic words of “ the poor old horse,” as sung
:ads by the crew at the ceremony,
Poor old man la golns? down hill, Then If he dip.a, I’ll tan hia shin,
And you say so, and I hope so 5 And you say so, and X hop* so ;
poor old man is going down hill, Then if ho dlos, I’ll lan his shin,
Oh 1 poor old. man. Oh ! poor old *o«.
I say old man your horse will die, And if ho lives, I’ll ride him again,
And you my so, and X hope so ; And you say so, ami I hope fio ;
I say oM man your horse will die, And If lie lives, i ’ll ride hlm'a.uodu,
On ! poor old ’oss. . - Oh I poor old *oss.
■MUSICAL, DRAMATIC,
Our Weekly Concerts are produced and patronised with
unabated interest, notwithstanding the lassitude consequent
on the high temperature of the atmosphere. The Concert, on
ThurSday evening was in seme- particulars better than any of
the preceding, but it is evident that until the directors and
porformors arc relieved of many of their multifarious duties
much of that careful finish, which is the true test of every
artistic effort will not be attained. The leading novelties were
‘ Auld laug Syne,’ and ' Vvlikins and his Dinah.’ ‘Auld lang
Synel fell flat on our ear, althcfUgh wo like the idea of each
verse being taken ’up as a solo. The time, however, was too
slow, and Me companionship too recent for effective execution'


« HOW WE WENT TO QUEENSLAND, ON BOARD THE " FUSILIER.’’
but with careful practice it may yet be, we hope, better put on
the boards before wo part. * Vxlikins and bis Dinah,’ by Herr
Crux, irt a most careful and appropriate get up, was the event
of the evening. The beauty of this gentleman’s singing bad
hitherto always appeared to us to lie in the taste ot feeling he
showed in rendering the beautiful songs ho had selected, so
well suited for his fins tanore and alto. We had a shrewd idea
that he might take up any role, successfully, but we wore not
prepared for the rich freshness and exuberant humour with
which he gave this song. It was a difficult task to make such
an audience relish Yilikins’ sentimentality, as much as, or
more so, than they had done on hearing it for the first time
from such an artist as Sam Cowell, but its originality of treat-
ment by the Herr not only took away all the hackneyed feeling
to which its quondam popularity rendered it liable but caused
it to be received with a favour quite unprecedented. The old
Scotch lady was well received, no doubt on account of the pe-
culiarities of her odd manner and appearance., but we would
recommend her if she means to come out before a fashionable
colonial au lienee more closely to observe the habits of those
around her accustomed to move in polite society. ‘Do they
miss us at home’ was feelingly rendered by Herr de Witt. The
pathetic and appropriate words well suit the the plaintive air
to which they have been adapted, and full justice was done to
both by the artist, who is a universal favourite as well as a ver-
satile genius, Last, though not least, is Count Kossuth, whoso
inexhaustible repertiore of libretto, combined with hlswell
cultivated and fine voice, makes him the most popular singer
of the troupe, and he well merits a special critique to himself,
which wo promise in our next.
GRAND BALL.
Although very hurriedly get. up, this ball, the first of the
seassa, may bo counted a auecess. The programme and general
arrangements gave universal satisfaction, and wo need scarcely
say that the good-natured adherence by the assembly of on-
lookers tii.the rules laid down necessarily to preserve order as
well as the total absonoo of confusion on the dancing platform
afforded the greatest pleasure to all, and made the duties of
the M. O. and Stewards light. .Wo have always held that
meetings of this kind, under proper regulations such as dps
tinguished the Ball on Wednesday evening, are groat amelio-
rators of social asperities, and it was with feelings of self-
gfatulation that we saw one of our favourite themes exemplified
in the true politeness which characterized the whole proceed-
ings of the evening. We are glad that the directors intend
continuing these assemblies, and we trust that our small com-
munity will aid them in making the Soiree Dansantc one of
the pleasantest of the week.
Owing to the press of other matters we have not space for
any remarks on the elegant costumes brought out both by
ladies and gentlemen on such short notice,
MISCELLANEOUS.
Wo have received a very full account of the incidents of our
voyage from the date of our leaving Gravesend to the publica-
tion of our first number, but highly interesting as this must
be to all on board we are compelled most unwillingly to post"
pone its publication till our next.
SPORTING INTELLIGENOB.
Epsom Races—lBC4.
Those races are fixed to take place on Wednesday, 25th in-
stant. Stewards : Messrs. Winkle, Crux, and Scarlet. Starter:
Count Kossuth. Judge: The General. Clerk of the Course:
Signior Bennetti,
DRAUGHTS.
Draughts, setting aside Chess, is one of the first of scientific
amusements. It is at least 4000 years old, and is a capital
exorcise for the mind. Chance is an element of nearly all
other games, but in draughts wo require knowledge and practice
which always triumph over inexperience.
It is proposed that a draught tournament will take place in
the following week and all parties desirous of taking part in this
noble game for the championship will kindly forward their
names at once to Signior Rkd Cap, 28, Intermediate.
PRO VlBlO X MARKET.
The, supply uf nil kinds of meat has been limited and the-
quality very inferior. There was a, good demand for the best
quality, all other sorts met with a dull enquiry and it was with
difficulty a clearance was effected. There -was a good demand
for Hams and Ohee.se, but the, whole, on offer, being in the factor’s
hands, and owing to the high prices asked, viz., ‘2s. per lb., for
the former, and Is. Bd. for the latter, there were no sales ef-
fected.
ALE (f? PORTER.—The demand for these, commodities has
been very good, in fact it has been the principal business tran-
saction of the week, and although the prices have been extravagant
in the extreme., yet it has, been with difficulty that the demand has
been supplied.
ENIGMA.
T mluglo with nil I,by love ami halo,
Unknown to tliyflolf I am llnkurt to thy. fate,
Without me thou nevur ooulrt’.it c;rouL a friend,
Or u message of lore to thy sweetheart send ;
■Of thy dourest treasure I form a purl,
Rnthron’d I Hit in the core of thy heart}
In thy peaceful home I over abide,
Yet go whore thou wilt am still by tby side.
If sickness or poverty e’er should o’ortake thee.
Unlike thy false friends I will never forsake thee,-
X will bo with thee ever aa H ia moot,
For without me thy life would be Incomplete.,
ACRosfia
From home and friends we are palling away,
Unto a far off land,
Ktvong in the hope to win high' plo.ee
In the world by head or hand,
but us in the van bo always found
In fighting the battle of lift*,
yixoel.sior tor our rallying cry,
UosoumUug mid the strife.
Answer to Conundrum in our lust. —Cat —Fas-—trophy.
(Catastrophy.) Hu! Ha! the wit's weak,
Answer to Enigma.- —-Tire letter A.
Our, Doctor’s Sanitary Report has been received too late for
insertion in this number, but will appear in our next. We
have, however, the pleasure of saying that it is perfectly satis-
factory.
HmD iif to on ironwl ito “tofuiiilifiK.”
-- » 1 1 ; SATURDAY, 28TH. MAY, 1864, ' ' ' !
' ~~~ “ 'SPOONS.' ~' ' ■ ' .’ ' , ■ NOTICE OP A»IUBBMENI'S“ ~~
Great inconvenience Is felt in the 2nd Cabin from the dis-
appearance of almost the entire lot of teaspoons from The
premises- It is supposed that the spoons have been taken into
jjpfue of the private cabins for the purpose of mixing medicines
or drinks And still remain there, and it is requested that every
one will carefully examine their bunks and see that none have
been mislaid or overlooked.
■NOTICE OP AMUSEMENTS,
The present arrangements for these are as follows :—-
Passenger Concert, each Tuesday evening.
Ball ... ... Thursday evening.
Sailor's Concert ~, Saturday evening.
LOST, a Brown Silk Umbrella, with bone: handle. Any
one returning it to the Steward, 2nd Cabin, will be rewarded.


1864,
Latitude.
Longitude.
Distance,
May 19th.
8°
60 / N.
22"
50' W.
48 miles.
20th.
8
10
23
0
22
21st.
8
26
24
12
80
22nd,
1
52
25
3
62
28rd.
0
32
2(5
15
108
24th.
1
12 S..
26
57
114
25th.
3
3
27
85
118
" now we wu.vr to Queensland, on board the » fusiliib."
SATURDAY, 28TH, MAY, 1864.
This week w:i have had-to celebrate 2 events, the annivor
savy of the birthday of our beloved Majesty the Queen and the
Oreat National Holiday of our land, the Derby Day. The
former was observed with all honor, many a loyal subject boat-
ing in unison with the toasts we drank on the occasion, tho'
perhaps with a. longing desire to commemmorato the same with
tho old folks at homo in dear happy Old England.
May it he our fortune ere many years have passed to have
all such wishes and hopes happily realized. Of the Derby Day,
who among ua would not liked to have wended our way to Ep-
som Downs on Wednesday last, and made one of the eager
spectators of this time honored sport, who among us have not
at one period of our lives witnessed it; the pleasure of going to
the Derby, the mirth joy and happiness of such an holiday,
and last tho’ not least tho journey down by road in vehicles of
every description from the one horse dray containing the post
boy John Bull large wife and small family, tn the splendid
.turn-out of the nobles of our land, tho. 4 in hand dray with 4
Total distance 552
. To tho Editor, SJp, , „ ~ , ~, vi r ±
I ham munh jilonsuro in furnuh inn you * lth 11 hrl,!f nalement
rceardlngthe “ Fusillm.” The »rrangi>munts are, in my liurahlc enllmatlon, ad-
’ mirably calculated to ensure ft hoalthy condition of the ship throughout tho voyi\tjo f
as has been tostlllod by the healthy state of all on board, with a tew exceptions,
' (limns what I believe to have been In a sanitary point of view the most trying part
of it, The cases that have oomc under my notice have therefore been huoli only that
have boon expected from the chauKo of habit, mode of life, and want of that.exer-
cise which is so essential so the maintenance of health, and ol which t doubt not
may have boon deprived on board ship. 3-bvery effort has boon made to keep the
docks clean and sweet, but such endeavours can not but prove abortive unless they
, have tho cio-opcratlon of all on board. I bi% therefore, you wil uso the inlhwuc*
; vour iournal possi'sses in hrindner about tho desired effect. Another point to which
/would direct your attention, and that of tho pasHcn ß ers on board, i« the slate of
tho day sohool. The attendance. I luidoratand, is very indeed this sliould
not bo : there arc children on board who have just arrived at that Ptai'O of thoirex.
istonee whoa doolrlnna could most eiisily and lastingly bo impressed on their minds.
The least a regular attendance at school would do, would beta Keep them out of
mischief and briny them up to vo.yular habits, Instead of sleeping about and destroy-
iuy their constitution, which It docs to a very oxUmt,
I trust in the next you will make some comment on tho subject. Number of cases,
40. majority oaw«. Temponanw—Saloon, SOUR—HfI-aO. 'Tvrwn Drakfl,
82-S—SB'6. Main TJnrli, SO-o—Ha. up (111 to-dny. Trusting that your pmlsoworthy
efforts to amuse your t'otloiv-passimaerfl will meet with the success they tliwm,
’ I am, Sir, >o’urs, ftc., JS. W. It()T)(4kINSON, MM),
I ' riurßCon-Hiiporhilondont,
“ Ohcsnufcs of the rarest stamp, whose like was never scon, Istonei
youm? and sound from head to tail, so beautifully dean, Tim h
WAI |jollsh« I up their harness too, and then, the splendid dray, minch:
Who w mid a)t boast of suih a orsneh a turn-out in^th
i But to snub.scenes au-1 pastimes for a time wb must bid
adieu, and endeavour to the host of our ability whilst on our ss-s—t
voyage to Queensland to commomraonito all the passing events letlortsI etlorts
that happen in our native land ns we did tho Derby Day on |
Wednesday, when ail classes seem to vie with each .other in I 2b
striving to preserve order, and the happy smiling faces and!
hearty cheers of the. multitude assembled to witness the Fusi-I have
Her Darby of 1.8.64,fu11y testified how completely they relished j your
the sport Tho morning broke gloriously find, tho’ during the they
after part of the day we had some heavy rain, in fact the event have
came off in a drenching shower, which however did not do-] to he
tract from the. interest of the race, It is not our province to I and I
encroach on the duties of our sporting'correspondent, ( details ■ ralial
of the same.will b 0 found in another column,) enough for usj is yo
to say it was a magnificent run, and we shall venture to assert it ev<
that tho 25th of May will long live, in the recollection of tho j who
passengers and crew that sailed in the good ship " Fusilier ” I lister
in 1564.,
lb the Editor,
Sir, —Availing myself of your journal, which you
have announced as intended not only as an amusement for
your fellow-passengers, but also as a medium through which
they can call .attention to any grievances real or fancied. I
have troubled you with a fow linns containing my opinion as
to how we .have boon misled by those in authority on shore,
and from whom, in their official capacity wo naturally thought
reliable information could be obtained. Ido bo, knowing it
is your intention to publish your.paper at Brisbane, so that if
it ever roaches our friends in England (as it is likely to do)
who intend to follow ua, it. may bo a warning to them not to
listen to those who tell them that comforts and luxuries and
everything else in .the shape of provisions can bo had on board.
Forewarned is forearmed, so lot all w r ho want more than tho
plainest, fare to keep body and soul together take warning and
provide accordingly.
No one can complain of the management of tho ship itself,
.nor with the officers and men, for from the captain down to
the man before the mast there is nothing but good seamanship
and order, coupled with kindness and civility to all. Neither
can I say anything against any of my fellow-passengers, they
are all affable, and obliging, and ungrudgingly willing to share
all they have with their neighbours, and if we could only for
a little lay aside some of that pride and distinction sometimes
necessary in the world on shore, but always insufferable in a
small community afloat, we might hope to bo, if not a united
at least a social assembly. I will now state in *s few words
as I can what we. have to complain of. Salt meat, as our staple,
was what we expected, and although not palatable in warm
OOHKES PONDEN (,'E,
To An Editor, Sir,
I am requested by our Lady passengers tn the 2nd.
Cabin, to convey throuk your columns to ov.r qallant md excel-
lent Captain their thanks for his present of (Jhampaigne on Tues-
day the '24th inst., on the c.ommemmnraiion of the birthday of our
; Gracious sovereign Lady Queen Victoria. Long may she
reign, and long may Captain Carvosso hare an opportunity of
performing a similar graceful act,
1 am Sir, Yours Respectfully,
■ C. I. Bennett.
Mrs. Lirriper’s Lodgings, ‘lad. Cabin.
To. the. Editor, Sir,
My report for the. present week Jam sorry to say is.
almost as unsatisfactory as the last. I had hoped to have been
at hast 500 miles further Smith. Wa
have not yet however been weather,
it was our bargain, and were it not for the private
so long as to warrant our looking forward to a long passage.
I s till hope to do it in something like 100 days, which is a very
fair passage, to Queensland, The weather lately has not been at
all as I anticipated to have had in.the S E trades.
• . I had forgotton however that the months of May and
June to the South of the line are the rainy season, and consequent-
ly wa may expect showers, but 1 think in a day or two ice shall have
more favorable weather. Our run for the week only amounts to
652 miles. This is slow work indeed, but next week J hope our
prospect tvill be more cheering. .
1 am, Sir, Yours die.,
D. JICARVO SSO,
Captain of the Fusilier,
stores of the more knowing voyagers we should have often to
go short, Want of water, in a hot climate is what most of us
felt, and if this ever reaches tho eyes of our friends in, Eng-
land let them fancy themselves on hoard an emigrant ship, tho
thermometer at 110 degrees, nearly double the heat of what
they call a warm day at home, with only three pints of water
each per day for drinking, washing, and toilet purposes, and
they will understand the difficulty we have to supply our thirst
and appear clean and respectable, as we are not only expected
but commanded to do. As for wines, spirits, ale, and porter,
these may be almost considered as things of the past, for with
the exception of the first class passengers none is supplied to
any 6n board. By our agreement these are to bo supplied to


“ HOW WE WENT TO QUEENSLAND, ON BOARD THE "•FUSILIER.”
us at the discretion of the captain under the Passenger Act,
and most of the passengers were assured by the officials in'
charge on shore that we would be allowed as much of eaoli as
we required in moderation by paying for them. Being myself
unacquainted with the regulations of an emigrant ship, I en-
quired of the gentleman who has the arranging of the berths
for the passengers whether it would be advisable to lay in any
stock of wine and spirits to use on the voyage, and ho told me
no, as I could got plenty from tbo Purser as cheap as I could
buy it in Loudon, but on applying for it after wo had sailed,
I was told that neither were provided, but for the saloon pas-
sengers, adding, however, that I could have plenty of ale and
porter by paying for it.
Now boro we are, only five week* from home, with perhaps
other ten weeks voyage before us, with nothing to bo had but
a limited supply of water, and nothing to mix it with but a
bottlo of lime juice, A pleasant prospect, no doubt, to be
looked forward to by those who have enjoyed every comfort at
home Limejuioe and water may do very well when boiling
in an equatorial sun, but what shall wo do without a drop of
comfort when we reach the region of icebergs, through which
toe like the " Royal Standard," wo passed the other day, must
find our way before wo reach Brisbane. SCARLETT,
Great amusement was afforded to a numerous audience on
the Main Deck on Friday evening, the 20th instant, a regular
Nigger Concert having been got up in proper costume, Con-
sidering the hurried way in which it was gob up, the affair
went off well, and if the singing and dancing were not up to. the
mark of our sable brethren, the blacking, and dusting wore
faultless.
Wo hare received a letter from a passenger, suggesting as
an improvement on our paper that wo ought to notice the re-
ligious services on hoard. These are 'chronicled in the. diary
published this week, and we shall be glad to insert any adver-
tisement as to tho time and place of snob meetings, but wo do
not consider it our duty farther to review them,
We have received an anonymous critique on our last Lite-
rary and Dramatic notice, which, with our remarks, we must
reserve for next paper, Wc must however remark that all
anonymous communications will in future pass unnoticed, and
it is only from courtesy that this first one will be inserted,
DRAUGHT TOURNAMENT.
A series of most interesting games for the championship
was played on tho 24th inst., the first S out of 5 being the
number agreed upon ns the comparative trial of skill, The
undermentioned were the competitors !■—
First Heat., Second Heat.
BAttray btAt Il«rr Ooz Rod Cap beat lUUrny
Hughes beat Thomson Bradshaw beat Ilughpo
Bftppo bvat Robinson JHippo beat Maulojrian
Bed Gap beat S, Waik ‘PI DUB,
Bradshaw beat 0. Thompwm Bradshaw beat Bed Cap
Htwloman boat Grlflln, JJeppo brat Bradshaw
It created a little excitement when it was understood that
Red Cap’s intention was to challenge the champion, and wo
believe some betting took place on the event. Those games
were commenced last Tuesday evening, and at the end of tho
second game Beppo gracefully resigned, and Bed Cap claimed
the championship only, however to be challenged by Mr,
Brown, our first mate. Tho issue of this contest is still un-
certain, tho players being at present equal.
OBITUARY.
DIM), at M*. 9B IxwitJ the ship ' Vuallior,’ oa the S7Uj Kay, Geotgo William, In-
fant son of Simon Koycs, from London.
We have in the obituary of our present number recorded
the first death amongst our small, society. At two o’clock a
temporary platform was prepared at the starboard gangway,
and immediately two sailors emerged from the intermediate
cabin bearing a small burden covered with the Union , Jack.
The dim outline of the child's corpse could bo traced through
the ample folds of the flag, and as the captain proceeded to
read the beautiful burial service with much nolemuity ami
feeling, nearly the whole living freight, all uncovered, crowded
round him. In a fow minutes more the body was slipped from
the gangway and the doep rolls over another gathered to its
rest,
ENIGMA.
Not in, IHntJootßn’a entile** bloom,
Nor yet in GireenUiui’i cllmal {loom;
Nor in Amerla&’s forejit, T&dt,
Do I find a plfice where I c«n re*t.
Kut on the shores of Southern lules,
Wound which the fast l*Adtln mnUei,
Neither on Iceland's rocky ihore,
Where the north Sen I .* surpe* wildly row;
Neither the land, noryot tha sea,
Not earth, nor Air, ccmtAlneth me)
Tet .eoiiuall am I that hirlclen I He,
Snugly ensconced in a, luitnms aye,
ANSWERy-Th Utter I
Why is an Irishman when drunk like a mounted Poliaman f
Because he's Pat—^rolling , (JPatrolling.)
LATEST TELEGRAMS.
The Shakesperian Tereentary. : oopmiUee finding that neither
Frechinr nor Phelps were likely to take, pari in the Btratford-nn*.
Avon Festival applied to Mr. Spurgeon, who consented to Sake
the part o f Othello, saying that although it was rather out 0/ His
line, yet he thought such an occasion warranted Ms departing
from Ms usual course. He is now a member of the dramatic club.
It is rumoured that GarahsAdi, after a short stay at Oaprera
will visit Paris, where he will be the guest of the. JSmperor,
Disraeli has retired from political life , liis time is chiefly,
occupied in visiting the sick, and in many other ways 1,1 ginitg
about doing good,"
NOTICE TO SUBSCRIBERS.
It hfca koen found impo.uiblp, from many paujos to go on with pne** Khktt
copy of owr journal lu Jf.S., And tho following wUl in future lie. ohi
Borvod)— A
Eftoh Saftaxlivy the papor will bo .sent to the Captain fop. the of thp
Cabin, until Sunday morning.
Knnday It will u« road an, the Wain Dock, betwoon thoheiujoftwa-'and. thr** 1
p.«u,, and during tho md of thu week may bo read at. auoh oonyßhhiM.UHiW: and
placoß a* may bust suit tho geueml public.
NOTES OF A JOURNAL KEPT ON BOARD THE
'FUSILIER.’
Since a weekly journal, " How we went to Queensland' 1
baa been established for ttie purpose, amongst other things, : of
chronicling all important events that might happen durifigThe
voyage, a retrospective glanoo at our almost uneventful pAst
may be considered perhaps worthy of a place in the columns
of your paper, '
Du the evening of Wednesday, the 20th April, 1864, about
9RO p.m, our good ship almost imperceptibly slipped from her
moorings at Gravesend, and ere many were aware of this fact
was gently gliding towards the Channel. Everything : vnw
calm and serene, and the day having been hot and sultry, sheer
exhaustion prevented almost any appearance of excitement
arapngst the passengers when they actually became award they
wore off, but it was with a feeling of relief that all of uA
thought our voyage really begun and soon nothing was hoard
on board save the snorting of the tug and the half-hourly
tinkle of the ship’s bells.
Rested, if not refreshed by their night’s retirement, many
of the passengers early sought the deck tho, next morning 'in
a new-fangled excitement to know where we were and how we
got on.
We found ourselves off Deal, in Kent, the chalky cliffs of
Albion bounding our coast view, The air was delicious and
refreshing, the wind S.E,. and rather against us, which made
the old tug puff and blow to make head way with snob a har-
den'behind her, but the wind getting more to the eastward
more, sail was set, and our little sable ally leading her big


SPORTING
INTELLKIENO.N.
llAtiup, MayR5,1864,
nuxrariis ... ..... .
Judge, ...
Starter
Meam‘*.-WiiMi), Crux, (0 Smrlel,
<• .The Gnimil.
■ • Utmii KttsmiJr. '
Qlcrh of Ike (Jmirxe .
•• Siamr- Iknm-UL
" HOW WE WENT TO QUEENS!
D, ON EOAUD TILE “ FUSILIER.”
'.LAND,
companion, who was now on her logs, was relieved of tho
heavier part of the task, while our ship’s increasing speed soon
showed that extraneous aid was no longer required.
The Huh dirty was soon therefore cast off, and returned as
ugly as she was useful, to her river home. In the course of the
morning we met a French steam frigate, which from some mis-
management nearly ran foul of us, but tho boatswain was at tho
helm and our old ship steered well and escaped tho damage.
Down the channel wo got under the charge of the pilot, and all
goes well till midday, when some of the ladies begin to feel
a queer sensation of giddiness in the upper regions, droop
their heads against tho bulwarks and sympathize with each
other by collecting in groups on tho deck, wondering when
they are going to get sick, and presenting pretty subjects
for tho artist’s pencil. Sea-sickness was, however, much less
general and loss severe than wo expected, although most felt
a little squeamish. At 9 - 80 p.m, tho pilot loft us off the
Isle of Wight, taking with him, we fear, a quantity of un-
paid letters, from the unsatisfied demand that existed for
stamps. Throe hearty (but weak) cheers were given
as he, in his cookie shell, shot from tho vessel’s side to join
tho little dashing wild looking craft waiting to convey him
on shore. To those who were .well enough to enjoy it, this
was an exciting scene, as the sea was running high and a
fresh breeze of 9 knots blowing. The little skiff danced
and whirled like a cork, now on the crest of the wave,
now in the trough, as it struggled to reach the pilot smack
which was lying-to.at a short distance off. The smack itself
was a perfect picture, impatiently fretting like a wild thing
of life under restraint, and tho glad willing plunge she gave
when her sails again filled made us all feel that wc were out-
ward bound, and that she. carried our last parting words to
those left behind, and that tho last thread was cut for a while
between- us and old England. When off Start Point, which
we reached next mid-day, we took a more southerly direction,
and bounded towards the Atlantic, glad to think that we had
how, in all all probability, escaped tho miseries of delay so
often experienced in the Channel, and about 7-30 p.m. wo'lost
sight of land for the first time, seeing nothing but sea and sky
around us. Sailing W.S.W., nothing occurred to break the
monotony of our daily routine, which' was so barren-to all in-
terest, that a small sea-gull (a diver) hovering near us attracted
as much notice as a Lord Mayor’s show, and a dead flat fish
floating past'became an incident of sufficient importance to ho
recorded. We were now bowling along at 9 knots, and although
the women generally were very ill, and many of the men very
queer, the excitement of rushing through tho water and the
new feelings of locomotion wore highly relished by those who
could stand \t.
Sunday morning, wind S.E., nice breeze, but decreasing,
and by tea time only propelling ns at tho low rate of 4{ r knots.
In tho morplng the Doctor road prayers to a pretty larro
audience on the Main Dock. Our first Sunday on hoard was
•quite an orderly one, and the sun sot on many a silent croup
whose thoughts were on shore. All wont comfortably till
Wednesday, 27th, and Thursday, 28th April, when wo were
nearly becalmed, but the fine weather gave our sca-sick friends
an opportunity to convalesce, and amusements for those on
board began to he,spoken of.
_ Friday, 29th April, onr first concert came off, and was
highly entertaining, if abundance of applause ho any criterion
of satisfaction and enjoyment. , This day has been , the finest
we have yet had, a happy medium of temperature, all sea-sick-
ness has past away and with tho exception of a few illnesses
not altogether arising from .seafaring causes our ship has re-
mained in a very healthy state. Our general course has been
W-S.TI , running -U knots, and for some time wo have not
seen a single sail, but a novelty to most of us attracted o iir at-
tention and kept up a little excitement for a time. A whale
Was seen about half-a-milo off. moving slowly across our stern
and giving us many opportunities of viewing it, Tt appeared
to lie about, SO foot long, and was of a very light color, ap-
proaching to a dirty white, which caused those who professed
to bo learned in the matters to assert that it was of the sperm
species. It made considerable progress on its way, while wo
saw it making its whereabouts known by spouting the water
some 20 or 30 foot high. Sunday ,morning, church service as
usual, and worship in the Presbyterian form in the afternoon.
Monday, 2nd, a fine breeze propels ns 0 knots an hour, and we
were all interested in watching a shoal of porpoises which came
around us, and at the rate at which our ship was running it
was a beautiful sight to see them racing past ns, first on the
port then on the starboard side, at double our speed, as if to
show how sluggish our movements when compared with theirs.
They were often quite out of the water, darting like an arrow
from a how out of one wave and into another, Quo we believe
was shot from the poop, but it was out of the question to think
of securing it. Wednesday, 4th May, the heat begins to be
oppressive, and an awning lias boon spread over the main dock
find poop, greatly to the comfort of the passengers. Friday,
6th May, strong breeze from the west, and again a shoal of
porpoises paid us a rapid visit in the. morning;' Sunday, Blh
May, we arc holding on our course, the wind steadily blowing'
from the N.1i1., making 6 knots. Church service on the main
deed: and a preaching in the afternoon—every one who was
willing to bo was, or might have been happy, and although
some pleasantly thoughtful countenances might he seen quietly
using the hour of rest in the regions of memory, lew sad and
discontented faces Wore seen. The days arc getting shorter
and warmer ; thermometer in the 2nd cabin 76 deg. Fahren-
heit. A few flying fish wore seen floating about to-day, their
flight resembled that of a flock of swallows, and the diatmiee
they fly may ho 50 or SO yards at a time—they only take to
night•yrhou pursued by their natural enemies the dolphin and
benitti, and when flying it is difficult to distinguish them from
small birds. Monday, 9th .May. Tho announcement that hind
was m sight enticed many of ns from our dormitories an hour
earner Uian usual. This proved to be one of the OapodoVerd
Isles (ot. Antonio). Tho misty atmospheric effect on the red
lugged rocks, of which the island is composed, reminded vis
much of the world of 'dreamland. Tho island is of volcanic
origin, and rises to tho height of 9600 feet above the level of
tho sea, tho productions arc tropical, consisting of wines, rice,
indigo, Ac., in small quantities. We lost a Utile time by
getting so close under the lee of the island, but the pleasure
of seeing something firm and stable again, let alone the phi-
turcsquoncss of tho landscape, more than.consoled us for any
little delay. A shoal of porpoises came around us, but this
time we scarcely noticed, the sight of laud having tho greater
oi 'w A' mi ‘, Way woworo in KiTiO N„ longitude
-4-40 VV, the thermometer in the sun 1,08 and iu tho 2ml
cabin o(). During the day tho heat; did not seem very .mures
sive, but the oftoet was manifested iu the evening, there helm-
a general complaint of headache and depressed spirits prevail-
ing, and fainting fits among the females. Wc saw no more of
apo t^ d n WaU(ls ' m,dijl lohl,1 K Ki S' ht S* Antonio
wo knew that if all went well it would ho a,mere chance if we
again saw land till wo sighted the Australian coast.
n o have thus endeavoured to bring up our Notes to nearly
the date of your first issue, and shall continue' to record very
briefly tho diary of our,voyage. ‘ J
■ '™V /1C Com ™ ■ tivinuvlknnciU.
- .-this men took place on.the- day above-mentioned, on board
i. j u.mioi,- under else distinguished patronage of. the'cap*


tain and the ladies and gentlemen of tlio 1st cabin. The
manner. Prince .Arthur is the property of Me. Hvdnev
course was from tins front of tlio poop to tlio forecastle,
Mills, and is a low but powerful horse, yet not possessing
there and bade again. The clay, although rather showery,
pace enough for the Derby ; ho has
rood logs and feel, r.l-
was well adapted for the sport, although the rain rendered
though they showed signs of work ; ho, like his compel line,
the ground rather heavy. Each event caused much amuse-
Cambusean, having been running in a mutton cart for some
incut, especially the heat between the two butchers for the
time previous to the races. Ho was
in his usual stylo, hut no amount of
him a winner. Scottish Chief, the
ridden by (IrinmliaAv,
persuasion could land
winner of the Lad ion’
Derby, who both fell more than once and rolled about the
course like a couple of beer barrels, articles of use, which
though with us are out of sight will never bo out of mind.
Plato, is the property of Mr. Pry, and is a small light chon-
"Wo have not space in our columns for a full description of
nut horse, on short
good "looking logn
: ho was in (.rood con--
all the horses and their previous pfcrforraauees, and shall
ditiou, hut lacked that length of stride which wo look for
therefore only notice the winners, and the two before-men-
in the Derby horse
although ho ran
second for that race,
tinned horses which most attracted our attention.
only losing it by a length. Ho was i
idden by Eonlham -(lie
Dundee, the winner of the 1'usilior Stakes, is the property
eclobra ted Tamaroo player.
ot Mr. Callaghan, and is a light bay, with black points,
having an immense stride and good sound legs, but he did
The arrangements of the Grand Stand wore well carried
out, and the refreshment marts di
mo amide iutdieo to,
not look to us like a Derby winner, as ho is rather light in
Great praise is due to Signior Benuctti, fwho as a fiirchmcv
the quarters, and has too much daylight under him, never-
is somewhat unused to such an cilice
and is more at litmio
tholoss ho showed great pluck and lasting powers, and pulled
with the stiletto than the hunting w
n’p,] for the admirable
lutioa as Clerk of the
oil his race in a style which does great credit both to his
maimer in which he discharged his
jocky and trainer ; ho was ridden by'Griffin, who rode the
horse with groat judgment. Ely, tlio winner of the Derby,
Course, ■ which were rather arduous. Very little hot! in,"'
took place on the course, as backers of horses wore few and
is the property of Mr. Thomas Mills, and is a dark brown:
far between. One well-known boot maker made, we believe.
ho looks every inch a Derby horse, being in splendid con-
something like 2-18 farthings, ho hav
lug laid against every
ditiou, having good quarter and a head well put on; bis
shoulders are good, and ho has good legs. Ho was ridden
horse except the winner.
Lath st
JjKTTOTO EE FOOT!
the Pack.
by Goator, and both horse and rider deserve groat praise
for the way in which they won the race. Ely also ran
DIWny.—Hvnn mi IMn.1v A tied, even on Prince Arthur, even on, Lord of l.lut
Mips, even on Onmhusean, J) to 2 agaiuut HrotUnh Chief,
DAD113S' I’JjA'J'H.—2 to 1 on Scottish Chief.
second for the Eusilier Stakes, in which he was only beaten
mirtilHU HASmOAP.—First Prise,'2s. 0,1. Sorcmd ditto. U
by a head, and we cannot help thinking the result of that
First limit.......Mr. T. Mills' Maeearoni heat Mr, .1. PopuA Surplus.
race would have been dilibrent had-he not fallen a short
M r. Bums’Kettledrum heat Rau-a-hyo.
distance from tlio post.
SeeondTroal....Mr. Pullagau’s Dundee heat Mr. T. Mills' Maeeiufmi.
Final Heat Hr. Caltaiuvn’s Dundee heat Mr. Bum’s Kettledrum ami won.
Mr. Pope's Oainhusean, who wo mentioned before is
TIT 13 D.13RBY BTAICMS,—First Prize, 6a. Heeond ilHtn, 2s,
worthy of description, he beiug an immense animal, with
groat power*, and the thighs and fore anna of a dray horse.
First Heat Mr. Fry's Scottish Ohiol’ heat Hr. Hushes* lilair Athol.
Mr. Dope's Oamhmean limit Mr. S. ‘Mills' Prince Arthur.
Second Heat...Mi*. T. Mills’ Kly heat Mr. Pope’s Pumiiusemi.
Mr. heat Mr. Fry's Scottish Chief, end wmi. ilcnllisii
Chief won the second prize. In this ease Hr, OaUaghanVi Dundee was dimurnii
Ho was rather too fleshy for our mind, having only'been in
the trainer’s bands for about-a mouth, before which he. was
lied, he having won a previous race,
out .at grass, and has since-ran in a butcher’s cart, which
THH HABIBS’ PhATH.—First Prize, {Is, Second ditto, Is. »d,
Mr. S. Hills' Prince Arthur heat Mr. Bums’ VoUigner.
has knocked his legs about rather—nevertheless ho ran a
Mr. Fry’s Scottish Chief heat Mr. Pope's Daniel hamhert.
game race. He was ridden by Wells in a most artistic
Hr Scottish Chief heat Mr, H. .Mills* Prince Arthur npd wr-ij.
Prineo Arthur ran second,
Horn in uum! to
wl, ffji foil
i the "(J;
rif|t
SATURDAY, 4
TIL JUNE 18(iL
“ HOW WE WENT TO QUEENSLAND; ON BOARD THE « FUSILIER.”
NOTICE.—HOW WE WENT TO QUEENSLAND.
Tlio original proprietors of this Journal being now satis-
fied of its success, feel themselves in a position to issue tho
following'Prospectus''of tho formation of a Joint Stock
Company for its publication in Brisbane. Tlio heads of the
Memorandum of Agreement are as follows
Ist. That a Company, under the Limited Liability Act,
be formed for Hie publication of the ‘Weekly Journal,'called.
“ How wo went to Queensland on board tho Eusilior.”
2nd. That the subscribed capital for this puaposo shall
he £25, consisting of2oo shares of 2s. Od. each;
3rd. That a deposit of Is. per share shall bo made on
each share at tho time the Memorandum of Agreement, is
signed, and the balance shall he paid on calls made for such
sums and at such times as tho Directors may appoint.
4th. A Manager and three Directors shall be elected by
the shareholders to superintend this publication, and gene-
rally to attend to. the affairs of the Company.
5 th. That the Directors shall elect a Secretary and Trea-
surer to facilitate the despatch of business.
6th. That, if necessary stops shall be taken on landing
at Brisbane to have this Memorandum of Association duly
registered and made valid in terms of the Limited Liability.
Joint Stock- Company Act, Tbe Memorandum of Agree,.
mont will bo found on application to the Steward oi'the
2nd cabin.
LOB T .
On tho 14th of May, an Iron CAMP CHA IR, last aeon
near the Poop. Any one returning tho same to No. H,
Intermediate, will he rewarded.
On Thursday, 2nd June, a POCKET-ICNIEE, with three
blades (one broken), buck-horn handle and plate for-name.
Any one bringing the same to IL E. IL, No. I, Bleak
House, 2nd cabin, will receive the thanks of the owner be-
sides being suitably rewarded.
A Silver Plated TEASPOON, with the initials of J. 0,
scratched on the hark, As tho spoon has boon stopped at
his'“Uncle’s,” the party in possession had hotter return it
to (he 2nd cabin.
NOTICE,
SIGNIOR BENNETTI, Architect, Domestic Engineer,
Artistic Decorator, and Sanitory Professor, hogs to intimate
to Hid Public that.-having exercised his talents on Mm,
Lirriper’s -Lodgings, 47, Norfolk-street, Strand, 2nd.cabin,
.he has tho honor,’by permission of the occupier, rtf request,
iug the public’to take a sly glance at the premises, and lie
feels satisfied that a-visit wilt repay the. trouble mid at mint)


“HOW WE WENT TO QUEENSLAND ON BOARD THE 'FUSILIER.”'
convince visitors not only of the great improvement on the
premises mid inmates themselves, but also of the admirable
talent he lias for his professional calling and introduce him
to a lino of business he longs' to he employed in. N.B.
A preference given to lady visitors.
SATURDAY, 4TH. JUNE, 1864.
We have already introduced our Journal to our fellow-
passengers, under the title of “ How we went to Queens-
land.” To the thoughtful mind, the question “Why we
went to Queensland” presents itself with a degree of signi-
ficance and importance paramount in interest to any other
enquiry. 'Hope, our great support, under every trial, buoys
up all our minds, and dancing before us on the path of life,
allures us to now and strange scenes whore we may renew
or start afresh the battle of life wo all have to light. That
those hopes may be realised in every particular is our most
earnest wish, and when the carking doubts and anxieties
for 1 1 1 0 future (which no doubt do at times obtrude them-
selves upon all of us) are dispelled, may we Hud. that we
have reason to be thankful to the Giver of all Good for
having bestowed upon us more than we had reason to expect
or wah. Each of our minds has its own individuality, and
when idly gating on the circle of waters that surrounds us,
the reins of fancy will sometimes hang loose, and we plea-
sanjjjy dream that among new associations, and with fresh
habits, we shall bo able to earn by head or hand a compe-
tency, if not a .fortune in that new laud of ours, so that, our
friends at home may not be disappointed in their expecta-
tions and wishes of success. Who among ns does not feel
his pulse leap and heart hound at the thought that ho may
perhaps, in after years, be pointed out by a friend, at homo
as a beacon to some weary plodding wayfarer unseen, hut
not forgotten, in the old and happy land.
It is not our desire inquisitively farther , to intrude the
inquiry “ Why we went to Queensland? ” let. each giving
.himself up to his .own reflections, which there is plenty of
time to indulge in, so use that leisure in resolving, and here-
after carrying out those resolutions that he may have no rea-
son to regret, having come, or have occasion to mourn over
the step lie has taken. There are many of us who have plen-
ty of time which could not be better employed than, by con-
veying, through our columns, the reason “ Why we went to
Queensland,” and the prospects which induced-us to take
such a stop. Wo have given the hint, let our friends act
upon it.
We call the attention of our Headers to an Advertisement
in-our present; number proposing a scheme for the publication
at Brisbane, of our Journal, “ How we went to Queensland.
After mature deliberation the only satisfactory plan that
could be devised was the formation of a Joint Stock Company
with shares at so moderate a rate as to place it within the reach
of all to become members. The difficulties and risks which
beset any other mode of proceeding would .have debarred the
promoters of the J ournal from ever thinking of incurring the.
responsibilities of publication, for while they are willing to
give the product Of their wits for the amusement of their fel-
low passengers, they are all intent on making money, not on
spending it. A private speculation might leave the publish-
ers in the’luroh On our arrival in Brisbane, the excitement
and interest of the voyage is at an end, too many business en-
gagements occupy the thoughts of others, and a very large pro-
portion will so soon be, absorbed by the demand for labor, that
in all probability our Journal after being printed would from
the concatenation of ciroumstances arising out of the dispersiou
of the inmates of our ark, lie on the publishers hands till dis-
posed of as waste paper. By establishing. a : Joint Stock Lim-
ited Company all these difficulties are got quit of by the funds
being provided befor i the subscribers seperate,, and these funds
as well as the entire management of the business of the com-
pany will bo left in the hands of responsible parties chosen by
the subscribers themselves. - We do not
will subscribe to this scheme with a view of making money by
it hut to show that there can he no groat loss wo will shmtly
recapitulate the advantages under which the schema up.
The Editors and contributors have given then woidand wil
prepare the Journal for the Printer only «ponm to
be Let out of the funds of the company being he n
for transcribing and printing, The brain woik, toa tl o »
capital, is in our case presented to the company, bo that m fact,
to use a familiar simile, our scheme rosemb es Jat of a Rail-
way Company who have received all the Land and Eugineoiuig
and Professional skill for nothing, and havo only to pay the
wao-es of the navvies and the expense of constructing the per-
manent way. Wore such a scheme to ho brought into the
Market, no doubt would be entertained of the value of the
shares or the prospects of a dividend. To divest the scheme ot
any appearance of a monopoly for the making ot money, it has
been proposed to fix the price of each shave at something like
the probable cost of a single copy of the Journal. «(H) shares
at 2s. fid. each will raise a capital of ’£2s. a sum supposed to be
sufficient for the expense of publication. A deposit of Is. f
share will be payable ou the allocation of the shares in order
to show the bona fides of the subscribers, and the shares on
which calls are not paid within the period fixed by the memo-
randum of agreement, which is before leaving the ship, are
forfeited to the company and may bo again allocated or sold.
It is also proposed, that as the object of the iiiteriou subscrip-
tion may have been misunderstood by some, altho’ specially
stated to have been required for strictly preliminary expenses,
the sutns already paid shall if so required, bo imputed towards
payment of the original deposit on calls, or in the event of no
shares being taken’the money will ho returned to the subscri-
bers. This ought to satisfy all, and with a simple explanation
of another oroneous idea which it appears has got abroad, that
the subscribers to the preliminary fund have already become
proprietors of the paper, ought'to leave no room to cavil. The
original subscription was for the purpose of allowing the paper
to be read on board, and the subscribers were the Readers, not
the proprietors of the Journal in the same way as the pureha-
sor of a copy of the ' Times ’ is a more reader, not a proprietor.
There are doubtless many ou board who do understand the
effect of a Joint Stock (Limited) Company, but there are us
many.in all probability who do not; and for their benefit we will
try to explain in a popular way what these 4 technical words
mean. A Joint Stock Company is plain English, and means
what it expresses, viz. any business in which a number of peo-
ple agree to he jointly interested either in the profit or loss
which may arise according.to the capital each has advanced in
the concern. The word ' Limited ’ means that no member of
the association ( or in other words subscriber ) shall under any
circumstances be liable to pay or lose, any more than the
amount agreed to bo contributed by him to the common stock,
hut when the word 'Limited ’ is not used, the liability is un-
limited, and each partner or shareholder would then bo .1 iablu
individually for any obligation undertaken or debt contracted
by the company.
By taking shares in Iho Joint Stock. Limited Company
the shareholders become the proprietors of the Journal, and
they know what they may at the very worst lose by its pub-
lication. But should any profit he made, which will depend
altogether on. how it takes with the public and the price that
can be got.for it, that whatever it might be will he divided
rateable amongst them. £25. has been assumed iu be the
sum which will bo required for the production of our publi-
cation and if 200 copies, of 2s. fid. each, are sold there
will he neither profit nor loss to the subscribers, and while
they, the shareholders, like anybody else, will pay 2a. fid.
for a copy, should they wish to possess one, they will get
hack from the company; the original 2s, fid. subscribed by
them, or in other words, will, if they wish it, got a copy, of
the Journal in lieu of their original subscription.,, If, ho w-


“ HOW WE WENT TO UDEEN BLAND, UN BOARD THE “ FUSILIER.”
ever, 300 copies are sold, at 2s. 6d., this will produce a pc
fund amounting to £37 10b., or £l2 10s. over and above) ro
the Bubserihod capital, so that in addition to the return of cc
the original 2a. 6d. each shareholder will get Ib. 3d. thereby la
reducing the cost of his copy hy one half, or giving him 2 tp
copies,on payment of an additional ls._3d. should 0
it. We have to apologize for occupying so_ much of this ft
weeks issue with a more business matter, but it involves the tt
question whether our original idea can be carried out. We C
have tried to he as explicit as wo could, and hope to see the w
share list soon filled up. "
Ou Thursday last our ship waa folloAvod hy a flock of 40 ai
or 50 Stormy Petrels, bettor known as Mother Carey’s Chick- h
eus. Signor Bennett! succeeded in hooking 2 of them, but a’
their being a. superstition amongst sailors with regard to v
these birds they were immediately released. ‘
The last notes from a Journal kept on board brought us p
up to about the 10th. of last month. On tho 11th. May a I
large fish, said to he a Albatross, continued for some time c
SAvimraiug alongside the ship, it appeared to bo about (5 feet t
long aud closely resembled the Halibut found on the English i
coast, Sunday 15th. May The Aveather beautiful Church i
service road by the Doctor, and Presbyterian Avorship in the ■>
evening. Monday Kith. May V ery calm and warm 12 ships i
visible from deck, all outward bound like ourselves, After i
breakfast a large Shark 7 to 8 ft. long sAvam leisurely along i
our port side aud crossed our stern almost grazing the rucl- i
dor. A lot of empty bottles had been throAvu out and were i
floating in our wake, these attracted tho attention of the 1
huge monster which busily made its way through them smel- i
iug each bottle as ho wont, his ominous dorsal fin being all- i
ways visible above the water. A junk of Pork attached to \
a K.ook. failed however- to attract the fish. Tuesday 17th. ]
Early in the morning a small Shark Avas caught, it; was about i
21 ft. in length and exactly like the common Dog-fish, it was •
cooked and pronounced very good hy all who tasted it, in ;
the evening avo had a sharp squall and heavy fall of rain
which apparently refreshed all on hoard, tho amusement of
tho evening terminating in a water fight. Sunday 22nd.
Church service and Presbyterion Worship as usual, Monday
23rd. Wo sighted a large screw steamer, she proved to bo
the “ Royal Standard”'sl days out from Melbourne, south
of tho Cape she had run foul of an ieeburg and lost her main
and mizen masts, this vessel belongs to the White Star line.
In--the afternoon wo were signalled aud overtaken hy a
very fine vessel, tho “ Sir John Lawrence ” from Loudon, for
Calcutta, this waa an old acquaintance many of us having
seen her before Ave sailed, in the East India Docks,, she had
sailed from G ravesend ou the 23rd of April, 3 days after us.
Tho clean look of this ship’s deck and sides called forth
the praise of some of our passengers, which evoked from our
worthy chief officer a touch of his lareonio wit, She’s got up
passengers. ” Wednesday 25th. The “ Oceauica ’’ from Cork
to Oalleo, passed us. Sunday 29th. Church Service read by
the,Captain and Presbyterian worship as usual. Dullfig
the past Aveek few of the proposed amusements," with the ex-
ception of the Derby Day could be carried out owing to the- 1
weather, which was squally;
Alt'S 1 HVI^IWi'ERARY, AND DRAMATIC,. _
An immense sensation was caused on hoard the ‘Fusilier
ou Tuesday last by a notice that a vast accession ol talent
to the Troupe of the Original Minstrels had arrived by Sub-
marine and Electric Telegraphy and purposed making their
dehut that evening'. Long before the hour fixed for the
Concert a groat crowd -had assembled, and it-was with the
greatest difficulty and hot a little crushing that the eager
lovers of song were accommodated with- seats. Ihe as-
sembly room was tastefully -and elegantly hung with varie-
gated lamps, whose lustre reflected resphmdeutly’ oil the
many coloured and superb dresses of the ladies. The per-
formance commenced with “ Ye Banks and Braes of Bramie
Doon” sung hy the entire troupe, the purity of style,
patlios, and feeling with which this waa rcmlcrce left: us no
room to doubt of its signal success. The very peculiar
comic song of * Tamaroo,’ followed and provoked roars of
-laughter not alone from the racy humour of the words, nor
qiiaintineas of the air hut the originality with which the
Count .Kossuth treated it. This gentleman is an immense
favourite with his audience, his appearance before the cur-
tain invariably calling forth bursts of applause. Herr
Crux’s 1 Gipsy Band,’ from its novelty and freshness, was
well received. The pathetic ballad of ‘ Hearts and Homes’
was sung with exquisite taste by Don Monie.o. We augur
well of this young artiste’s career; with time and practice
ho will become a finished singer. The Christinas Treat
was a treat indeed, but we should recommend Don Erieasao
when next he sings it to pitch Ids key n note lower. The -
‘ Violet,’ a duet by Qaribaldi.and Daudo brought the first
part to a close—both parts were admirably _ sustained, the
lino deep notes of the former gentleman telling with splen-
did effect. The GteueraTs capital song of * The Whale 1
commenced the second part of the eutertaiiimei.it, and wan
received with a perfect hurricane of applause,, it was snug
. in his best style. ‘You’ll remember me ’by Her de Wi t(,
i was feelingly .rendered. 'Signor Daudo’s “ Sweet Spirit hear
i my prayer, was given with great taste, tho’ had he taken
' it a note low er it would have had. better effect. “.I’d choose
; to he a baby,” with a violin accompaniment, was snug hum.
■ itahly by Signor Redcap. Signor Beunolti, our Italian tenor a
i who hail only partly recovered from severe indisposition
* brought tho entertainment to a dose by singing lira mas-
■ terly manner “ The British Yolnuteom”* This gentleman's
■ urbanity of manner coupled with .his readiness at all'times
> to oblige ban made him very popular, especially among the
■ ladies, who after tho performance Availed upon him ami pro-
:■ sented him with a stilletto of tho finest manufacture with
i the Signor’s name boa.utjfully engraved on Ihe handle, ex-
i pressing a hope that he would not find that use for it among
i our small community Avhich he did for the one he recently
f lost among his own countrymen.
CORRESPONDENCE.
As promised lasi; week we insert tho following anonymous
criticism on our last Musical aud Dramatic notice: —
To ihe Editor,
Sir, —Fault finding, though, sometimes an imperative,
is always an unpleasant duty, aud it is with great reluctance
I take pen in hand to offer a few remarks on the aritif/uv
mvnaale of Inst week. "With regard In the more slrietly
musical part of the critique, the writer’s ideas as- to how
‘ .Auld long Syne’ ought to ho nuug are entirely abroad,'in-
stead of being sung too slow it waa sung much too quick,
and tho words and music, as rendered by the troupe must
have Bounded strangely indeed to a Scottish ear,- nud this
fact would naturally load one to infer that the writer is wot
bo well up in. music, as it is desirable a critic should bo. It.
is the duty of every writer to give a fair, correct aud im-
partial report, Avhich in this instance baa not beeii clone, as
the services o^several gentlemen who took no inconsiderable
part in the concert, and whose songs' were .admirably ren-
dered and highly appreciated hy the audience are entirely
ignored. An impartial aud judicious criticism, avoiding
alike undue praise and undeserved censure, has a tendency
to improve whatever subject it is brought to bear upon, and
Avill. be .always appreciated, .but the cant of criticism cannot
be endured. S.
I rt,l» ovldcut that tho write* of this tetter, to use his own elegant and elaraica-l
ejenronniun is much abroad when lie assumes the pen .of the nrllie. A few thjend-
bure nbi.tltni.lM bo trowed from old school books, Intonnlxsil with alilUmoJ thatrnrt
the writer professes to hate, and strnujr together at random, expose the Imiwp re-
aboircs of tho birth place of a orituiue that shown a. total went of that aonunhuauo
with his subject, loiskml head, and thorough, knowledisn of the languoite !1 > whirh
he attempts to write, essential in.one who would yield the sharp pointed jirn. dJien»
is an old proverb about tarrying at Jcrleo, this mu' cumxpondout mir;ht do wilu
profit to himself. We need not remind our readers Him wo did nut praise pie exe-
cution of‘Auld lung Syne,’ and when we mild the time was tnV.ru too stow, nmhlch
our oonespondont thinks us wrhns’, we simply expressed onr own, opinion', witwh w#
'incsn lo hold as firmly ae our correspondent la entitled la slick to the contrary one.
Our frlond ought to know that a more, wiitrsdlotion la Ito avathueiit, umt when,


" HOW WE WENT TO QUEENSLAND, ON BOARD THE FIT SILT KB,”
wrilini* us dmm An Asa" hn nivjht to liaye Mimvii tlu> reason why. Anil outfit also I s ] imv a ]ill lo moi’O energy ill promoting 11 Suitable place of*
meeting. The late Doctor Chalmers used to talk of the no-
Knaillsluium, U*a fault; was certainly not o.liarseivMe to our want of a musical cduoa- 0 f (‘XClWatill!*' the llOiltllOll, tllO 811)110 proOCHH IUUb(, bo
tion, as our oovrcspomlent illogtcally infers it was, but must bo put down to tbo )r J " ~ p . g , 4<l r 'i
(•mifnsUm of tonkin;:; at Babel, which no doubt prevented Scotch tongues being put IoIiOWGu Ollt With to CBUluilSll IV SCllOOi,
in iingllsh bends. One correspondents real quarrel with us is not musical, but the ’
.Front,'of our offending is that we have not asyofc praised some protege of his, which, Q'P/'VPT'I ’NT A- Ar ’MTMnI<VIVfi A ’M’ If'OTTSI
'by tho way ho might have done himself and have overlooked tlie talent which ho &.t UIViXi-N u twil.u,i xu.u*.vi.i m uo.
had discovered. Homo was not built in a day, nor could we in our article notice "Wo rGffl’Ct WC liflYO BO ilttl.o Sporting IOT OXII*
nvery individual mombor of the troupe, but our Correspondent may be sure that; if ,?• , v p i. „ 1( j i .i 11 ,., , i , >4/l
ho will only praias his favorite in good English, wo will gladly insert his communi- I’GtICLGrS tlllS WGOIC fIS Ol IluClCSt ililS (dkOll [U»R(.
miLUm, as wo hold that tluiro Is not one meinbor of the company who is not entitled MgSSI’S. Say and Harris WOll liliclc tllO elimimkmslli II 111. \V ll ini
t o all tlio laudation wo ca n give. • I’ho personalities indnlgod in wo can aiFord to „ _ J , T> i ri -j , • , ,*■ 1
]>ass ovor. Partiality and Gant arc sins which sit light on our conscience, and wo irOlll IVI.OSBrB. (JrilX tUUI IVtOBKOU tllCVUl »> OUl ;
of therul “ of 4, tliis isi-tlie 4th, time, they have Avon tho championship,
0 ~~~ ~—’ they have not been yet able to retain if: tho required, length
To tho Editor, Sir, _ _ of time (thvoo successive weeks) after wlueli they will bc-
The report for this week is somewhat more cheering, come champions, and will not lie called upon to play again.
Our run for the last seven days amounts to 971 miles, this is CHESS.
an improvement altho’ it does not come up to what I expected. Herr Crux succeeded in winning tho final game from Hud
■The '8 E trades have neither lean as steady or as pleasant’as Cap and thus boeamo champion, and is open to play any one
they usually are. Tic have now almost done with fine weather, on hoard who may challenge him for the championship.
ami may look forward U a month or G weeks of dirty unpleasant BACKGAMMON.
weather. Hitherto one can scarcely say they haw. leen to sea, our A series of games at Backgammon were played on Mon-
voyage from the first has been so free from anything like had wca- day last in which Messrs 11. I l '. Harris, Crux, the (ton oral,.
the.r, I intend having the. Boxes up to-morrow for the last time, and Q% Harris took part for tho 3 out of 5 games for the
before getting to Brisbane. I hope every one -will get all their championship.
warm eh thing up and any thing they may have to protect them- Ist, HEAT.
selves from bad weather, as 1 omnoiopm ike. hatch for this pur- 11. E. Harris heat Crux, the General beat G. Uarrris.
pose again. Hoping to give you as favorable a report again FINAL.
next weeh, I am, Sir, Yours (be., ' H. F. Harris licit tho General,
• B. B. GARVOSSO, Mr. Canning and tho Capiain withdrew. We would ro-
Oaplain of the Fusilier, commend Backgammon to those of our fellow passengers
1804, , Latitude. Longitude. .Distance. who arc at present unacquainted with tho game, as it is an
May 26th. 0° .6' S. 28'’ O'W. ISO miles. exciting and amusing one, and requires less head work (Inin
27th. 7 28 31 7 1.58 Chess or Draughts. Any person wishing to loam tho game
28th. 9 34 32 ,18 145 may do so by applying to Mr. G. Harris, Ko. 1, Bleak 11 imsu
2Sth. 12 28 33 1.5' IS3 who will ho most happy to toaoh them to tho' best of his
30th. 15 20 33 30 174 power, aud to place a hoard at their disposal.
3 l«t.. 17 23 88 48 124 DRAUGHTS,
June Ist. 18 20 33 35 . 57 Messrs. Brown and Redcap played tooir Jlnalheftt for the
championship mi Frit lay last, which lied Cap Avon by i! games
Total distance 971 out of 5 and thus became the champion, 'lied Cap is open
—— t - to play any one. who may challenge him for tho champion's
To the Editor, Sir, bolt on Tuesday in every week.
, ’ Feeling interested in that part of our Medical Su- : DHITH
perintoudenis letter published in your last issue, referring o n.tho 29th.,uU. tho wife of Mr,' 8. Spencer, of a daughter
to the means of, Education onboard, 1 began to enquire DEATHS 1 min.,mu.
Avhore the School Boom avos mid found that no suitable-ac 0 n the 80th. nit. the in&nt daughter of Mr. S Sncnrer
comodatrou has been provided for that purpose. I. also An tl.n o, lr i .T o™ne 0 ™ ne na »i r i opumu
learnt that this want has deterred some passengers from 0n th ° 2nd ' Jamos, son of Mr. _J olm Emily,
sending their children, and had induced others to remove CONUNDRUM,
theirs as their health suffered from the confinement to which When tlie Hen foil overboard tho other day, why was it
they wore subjected. Our Captain and Doctor have certain- whon floating away, like a suicide ? Because it avus n fowl
ly their hands full, but there are other officials who might ( foul ) proceeding.
: pow m|tii to ®n foititl % "JiriiiliGt,”
SATURDAY, 11TH. 1
' GENERAL"'POST OFFICE.—NOTICE.
The Board'.of .Inland- Revenue hereby give notice that
they have ordered the establishment of a Post Office on
hoard' the Fusilier for tho accommodation of tho public,
letters must be posted at the box, jn- front of the poop,
before S p.m. and 5 pan., and will be delivered' at 0 a.m..
add 6 pan. By order, DON MONICO, Postmaster.
PUBLIC AMUSEMENTS.
.Concert on Tuesday, 14 June. Ball on Thursday, 16
June. . COUNT KOSSUTH, M.C,
LOST.,.
From the 2nd cabin, a book, entitled Songs and Lyrics,
with name of owner written in it.
one J u of this book is requested to return
R to the office of tins paper.
( STOLEN OB TAKEN BY MISTAKE. ,
Stolen or taken by mistake, on Sunday night or Monday
morning, a piece of ham, Bto 10 lbs. weight. Any info/,
motion which may load to tho recovery of the ham, or the
c iseovory of the thief, -will entitle tho party comimtuL
eating it, at the office of this paper, to a handsome reward,
LOST
Lost, on Slat May,, a glass iantorn, lent ou tho night of
the concert. Bod Lap will fool obliged by its bein'"' re-
turned to No. '23, intermediate. °


“imv WE WE N'T TO QUEENSLAND ON -BOA,111) THE ■■W®..’”
INLAND HEVENUE-r-CAUTION. need scarcely say, ■that in order to facilitate the speedy
Persons are cautioned,against putting letters into tbo.box 'delivery of letters, attention should be given at on«e »to tli.o
•of the Post Office, icoutainipg money, jewellery of any h ind,
.or locks of hair, of any,shade, without having them regis-
tered, as the Post Office .authorities cannot do responsible
for the delivery of letters .containing valuables,, unless
registered.
N.B.—No live stock ,of any kind transmitted by post.
Young Ball Washer, who may be heard -af at the Frce-
masous’ Arms, ..continues to give lessons in the noble art of
.self defence; He is always at home on Thursday and Satur-
day evenings, to receive his friends. Morning lessons,
Mondays and Wednesdays. Y, B. W. trusts his admirers
will, rally round him for his forthcoming light with the little
butcherti-big-un, which takes place qn the 17th.
The long nights we have .at this season, iu our present
latitude,’are at least favorable to rumination,,. if not to
profitable reflection,- and the question started ,iu our lost
journal, why wo went. to Queensland ? still .runs through
our half-waking thoughts'. For our own part wo believe
that no very particular reasons further .than the general
wish to establish ourselves somewhere iu the world, induced
us to take ,our passage for Queensland, -on hoard .the
Fusilier. '“Where thei-e is .a will there is a way,” and if
the 'avenues to wealth, distinction, -or even .rough, .plenty
are only open at home'.to influence, and connections, as
must over be .the case in .an did country, the open sesame
of all-thoeo will bo found iu the colonies to consist in stea-
diness and sobriety, and a facility of accommodating our-
selves cheerfully to the 1 duties of a position never before
experienced, and often irksome. Wo believe that -those
emigrants are .safest and surest of success, should they not
he able to command a largo enough capital ito avail them-
selves of the assistance and experience of others, who go
■ out free from any preconceived ideas as to what they will
do, and determined to keep their eyes and era's open, so that
as opportunity may present itiolf, they may fall into any
particular grove best fitted for their natural inclination and
capabilities. Wo would .-say to,(ill emigrants, don't be iu a
hurry to settle, get a knowledge of the country and its
ways before you think of investing your skill or your money,
be cautious, creep before you walk, and,by all moans avoid
being in a hurry -to•get rich, and remember that although
there is time and tide iu every man’s life, which, if missed,
may ho lost, there is yet soiaid wisdom iu the eld proverb,
that there is luck in leisure. In a now colony, labor must
always be in demand, and strong arms and willing hands
are sure to meet with a remunerative market, .aud .even-
tually .clear the way for independence and plenty. A
colonist pioneer, really deserving the name, has a higher
and nobler duty to perform*, than, merely to wrench from
the soil ho limy become possessed of, all the wealth
obtain by any means in his. power, and then JeavinjPlhe
country to its .fate, looks to re-establish his, fatherland ,iu
another clime, and .to do this, lie must go on in faith, be-
lieving that the country of his adoption must and will rival
the land of his birth.’ ."Virgil in his' JEnias, beautifully
expresses this when he .represents ASueas addressing his
followers, encouraging them .again to put to sea, by -iie-
miuding them that , the Delphic oracle has promised that
there should bo a .new' Sajamis in, another land. Oertu*
inim novam pvarriisit Ajmllo futuran ■ — JSulamiden,
By the, time we arrive in Brisbane, .we expect to see our
little comihunity ,on boardthe Fusilier, accommodated with
.all those ,conveniences and modern •appliances.-for social
.comfort, which px-eierainently ■distinguish ■ the present ,ago.
tOn Wednesday ,<our .spirited Board raf Inland Heveuue
.opened ,a Best -Office for the ;eon,venieuoQ .of .all on hoard,
ra .notice of which, with the regulations that must boiai-
.teiidß.d to, .will he found iin onr .advertising molunnis. W.e
postman’s knock,, and ,about the hour of .delivery, no brack
ought to he left without .some ,0110 in ,charge to take the
letters for the inmates. The letter carrier’s services .arc in
ihe mean time given gratis, hut it may ho expected that iu
due time the postmaii’a .petition will he handed iu as at
home.
.MUSICAL, LITEE.ABY, AND DRAMATIC.
t(i) nr weekly,Concert took .place on Tuesday evening in
front-of the poop, but owing to same mismauagement in 11 u-
diug seats for the lady part of ,tho audience it was not mo
well-attended as usual. Wo are sorry for this as the com-
fort of the ■audience should always be attended to, ami wo
hope we shall not have a recurrence af it. At about 7o'
clock the concert began, the Ist. .song .sung * The Men of
Merry England 1 by (laribaildiwlio [pitched it ,n note too high
but to ‘those who have .aver sung on heard .-ship .and in the
open air this is ,a limit which will lie .readily forgiv.on. The
next .-sang of- 1 Tbo Jolly Waggoner ’ was sung by Signor
Bonnetti, but tho chorus w,as flat and faint iu the .extreme.
‘•Cathlccn Mavourneen ’’ -was well [rendered by Herr
■Crux.’ ‘The Chilly Man ”by Bon Fricasso, w.ns .a
, good song but was pitched too high, a faul t which ,tho Bon
is rather apt to indulge iin; w.e would recommend him to at-
tend the private meetings more regularly, as practice is the
only way of getting,out.of that habit. The chorus iu this
was rather better but sadly wauling in -spirit. ‘ A Life .on'
the ocean wave’ by Herr do Witt, came next but was sung
too low to bo heard with any etl'cct. The .chants was as iu
the proceeding -songs very Hat and;wan ting in power. ‘One
night to a Concert |I went ’ was a capital song well sung.by
onr Hibernian temve Ban.. Antonio, the chorus ,again ,satiny*
wenlk. ,Ye G-ontlomou *6f England ’by Bon Mouico, cum-
moncad the second part and was well sung .altlio’ the .Bon
was inat-quite so wall,up to the words as he ought, to have
been, two would recommend him to begin lo leant his song
a little earlier, as it is a wery -dill'orent tiling singing a,sung
to one’s self and hinging it to.ailargo.n,nd distinguished au-
dience like that we have.on board the ‘iFusilier. The chorus
was again faint owing to the short practice the troupe has
had. -‘Will ye no’ come back again’ was well sung by the
General, but ho had to sing it all himself : as not; one,single
voice could wo hoar iu the chorus to the Ist, verse,.and the
choruses to the rouui!mdler were .not up to the mark. ‘Fruity
Polly Perkins’ was sung in too high a.koy by Signor Bandit,
but the chorus was rather hotter than usiwl. -‘When ,I;ant
far away from homo’’ was admirably sung by Hen- XlHinini.,
and we hope ho will give us another .song next week,. ‘The
Old Soldier's Baughter’.was nicely sung by our,new impor-
tation Sambo, hut the wcn-st.part.of the whole,affair was the
breaking down in ‘ God Save the .Queen,' wo hope this will
never .occur .again .and that .-somebody, wi 11 take upon him-
self the responsibility of Binging the solos, Wo, ai:e sorry
to find fault with the troupe, hut criticism is of ,110 use un-
less it be fmeely and impartially given. We can .easily un-
derstand the choruses being badly performed as there,is .so
much .difficulty-in .gotihg all the members of, the troupe to-
gether ito practice, and aintil this is .done we cannot. e?;p(\ut
to improve. Li case, any of the Minstrels should not.-know
the regular ■Hiimca for practice wo.suhjoin thorn, and hope that
iu future they will be regularly attended. Every- Monday
on the poop at 12 o’.clock-at noon and 3,1 J . M;. Jivqr.y Tues-
day the same. .
* . PHI V ATE CONCEPT.
Wo were honored with an invitation to.a privatoiccmeer.lj,
in which five or six of the young ladies hoard took the
principail parts. The only seguet, wro- had was ,that iliho
innate modesty of the ladies who.got mp this concert had in-
duced them to confine their linyitations, and althe’ we were
{there., ,it ,w.as ,iu m\i,r monmffichil .capacity, still, w.e do .ucit


3rd.
22
9
32
54
143
4th.
24
40
31
3 •
183
5 tli.
27
15
28
58
194
Oth.
; 29
54
25
54
, 228
7th.
32
21
22
60
212
8th,
33
45
21
29
112
"HOW WE WENT TO QUEENSLAND, ON BOABD THE " EU SILTED ”
consider it. any breach of privacy to notice in our paper
the rich vein of musical talent, on board still wailing to he
brought out. The ppima donna, Miss M. A. 11,, possesses
a sweet voice, with a Hrm and correct intonation, and she
sang with great taste, and feeling, ‘ I’ll hang my Harp on a
Willow Tree’ and 1 Sweet Spirit' hear my'prayer.’ Mia’s M.'
T’s singing is diiforent in style, and is characteristic of the
school ra which she has stuclied: her treatment of ‘ Mary
Queen of my soul’ , was quite,a finished performance : the
Misses L. sang a beautiful obligato accompaniment to most
of the songs, which in the absence of instrumental music,,
greatly added to the effect- Wo hope to he again favored
with an-invitation to another meeting of this kind, which
so pleasantly Jilted up what otherwise might have been a
tedious hout of our now lengthened evenings,
, , LOCAL NEWS, ’
On, Sunday evening last, during the storm, some- pig-
gishly disposed person or, persons, entered the premises,
known as Mrs. Lirriper’s lodgings, and stole therefrom the
best part of a fine ham. The following morning a rumour
was also current, that a hammer, belonging to one of the
inmates of this fashionable boarding-house, had likewise
been nailed, but. this proved only a. rumour, the -purloiner
no doubt, feeling satisfied with the pork in the positive de-
gree, and not caring about its, comparative ’merits. Of one
thing wo arc positive, and that,is the thief is a superlative
rascal, and we only hope the dainty .morsel-will stick -in -his
wind, instead of seeing it.
THREATENED SUICIDE. ,
Much excitement prevailed on hoard, on Wednesday ah
ternoou, in consequence of.a letter having been received by
one of the young ladies from one of her admirers, convoying,
the-intelligence, that if she tailed to show him some signs of
her favor before 8 o'clock p.ra., he, the gallant lover, would
throw himself overboard. 1 The event was anxiously looked
for, as the lady failed to appear on deck during all, the after-
noon, but the public excitement, which had been worked
up to the u tmost, was doomed to disappointment, as up to
a late hour there was no- appearance-, of anything which
looked like a fulfilment of the threat. We cannot say
whether the authorities-interfered,- or the lover lost courage,
our own. private opinion is thatmatters wore quietly
made up between the parties.
The late Hale,—-We are sorry to loanlthat- the internal,
repairs and decorations of Mrs. Lirriper’s lodgings, executed
by .Signor Bonetti, were all hut demolished by the gale on
Saturday and Sunday. The signior himself very nearly
shared trio fate of some-of his own mechanical contrivances
(which were thrown down and totally destroyed), and only
escaped it by great presence of mind in leaping out of bed,
and thereby avoiding the catastrophe.
The SoirciSs Dansautes—On the-main dock continue to
be a source of groat attraction to_ young and old on hoard,
and too much praise cannot be given.to all attending these
meetings for the order and decorum al ways observed. No
doubt h few keep aloof, but wo hope they do so more from
inability to take apart in the dance than from any other
feeling. -This want can be readily obviated, as we are sure
there are plenty of ladies’on hoard able and willing, to- teach
the 1 gentlemen; : while we feel satisfied that a spirited com-
petition amongst the gentlemen would take place for the
honor of teaching the ladies. , The ball of the 2nd instant
wont off very well indeed; notwithstanding the continuous
rolling of the ship,' and the public, are ...under great- obli-
gations to Siguior Red Cap and the cook for their services
as musicians; especially to Red Cap, who being a dancing
man, thereby deprives himself of his own amusement. On
Thursday the 9th, the music was'admirably supplied by two
concertinas, and the steadiness and good time observed by
the performers, gave perfect satistaction to the dancers,
amongst whom a manifest improvement was observed, most
of them now having got their sea legs,
'THE PROPOSED JOINT STOC XV.
The’ memorandum of agreement has been ready for some
days, and the shares are" in the course of being allocated.
During the next week, each compartment will ho waited on
with it, when they will have an opportunity of subscribing,
CORRESPONDENCE,
To the Editor, Sir,
Our run for the last weds amounts to 1160 miles, of
this we cannot complain. We have had Bor 4 days ojgood winds
which has taken us thro’ what are generally termed the variables.
These variables arc generally experienced between the latitudes
of 25 to 30° and sometimes ships arc detained as long here as
they are on the line. We are fortunate in having escaped them
so easily. Altho’the weather to-day does not seem to indicate a
gale of wind, yet we may expect from our position now, and until
we get to our destination, a great deal of unpleasant weather.
I have heard some express a wish to be in a gale of wind, ayd have
ho doubt they will he fully satisfied in this particular before long.
We are mm about 450, miles from the island of Tristan d’
Aauhna, our nearest point of land. The, island is hot inhabited,
but whaling ships occasionally call there I believe for water.
Some 4 or 5 years ago a large ship was burnt within sight of the
island, and luut to remain several months before assistance came.
It is to be hoped that the regulations laid down here for the
prevention of accidents by fire, will be strictly attended In. Kfn
naked lights under any pretence whatever should be used at any
time. I am, Sir, Tours <(•«.,
D.B. CARYOSSO.
Captain of the Fusilier.
1864, Latitude. i: Longitude. Distance.
June 2nd. 19° 54' S. .3:3'’ 40' W,, ~ 94 miles.
Total distance 1106
To the Editor, Sin
I have much pleasure in furnishing you with my re-
port for last week. The number of eases under treatment during
that time has been 58, of which 1 terminated fatally. The tem-
perature for the week lias haen,asfollows~Sakmi77-ti, Main
deeh 77-4... Tween decks 82, I am, sir, .Tours &c.,
E. W, JJodgkinson, M. 1)
Notes from a Journal—Monday, 30 May, 1864. —Wo
have now passed thro’ a current, which for, the last two
days has carried ns to the west of our course. Tuesday,
31 The breeze having 1 failed, wo wore again he-
cahneMjtob some hours, and intermitting winds wore expe-
riencePhoth this day and Wednesday. June 2. This fore-
noon, occupied in getting up the, boxes from the hold for
the last time, until we arrive at ’Brisbane. Another child
died to day, and was hiyled in the evening, in consequence
of which all public amusements were stopped. 1 Ericlay, 3.
A beautiful day, lino light breeze, calm sea. Wo must now
be off the South American coast, about, the parallel.-of Bio
Janeiro, and nearly out of the .tropics, thro’ which wo 'have
passed without meeting with either a regular squall or a
thunder storm. Saturday, June 4, The breeze freshened,
and on: Sunday miorniug we' had a hit of a squall, which
created a great uproar throughout the ship, boxes being
tossed about, and dirty water cans upset, thereby exposing
the untidiness and dirt which calm weather had allowed to
remain hidden. 1 The noise in the-steerage was terrific, all
the mess utensils being- made of tin, and rolling about the
sound, seemed like thunder. , As 'Church Service was about
to be proceeded with, a lurch of the vessel drove the Dr.
from and In) sought refuge in the Ist cabin, ae-


“ HOW WE WENT TO QUEENSLAND, ON BOARD THE EUSILTER.”
A SCENE IN THE STEER AGE DURING- r rHE G ALE
companied by the more timid passengers of that class, where
wo believe lie road prayers, A gentleman from the 2nd
cabin road the Church Service on the main clod;. This day
the Captain’s report was that wo bad run 104 miles, flame
kin A of weather continued, and wo made the longest run
within the 24 hours wo have yet clone, vi/„, 228 miles. We
are now about the latitude erf the Cape, and several alba-
trosses, largo brown gulls, and Cape pigeons, accompany the
vessel all day. Wednesday,. Juno 8. The breeze slackened,
but'has carried us thro’ the region of variables. The deck
behind the poop was crowded with passengers, trying to
catch some of the birds hovering around, Signior Benetti
hooked two, hut both' escaped before they were secured.
To-day a Post; Office was established oh board, which pro-
mises some amusement. ~Thursday, Juno f). This forenoon,
iSignior .Benotti'succeeded in catching a Capo pigeon, and
in the evening the ship was visited by a shark, which, con-
tinued to swim round for some time, so that every one on
board had au opportunity of seeing it. After some delay,
a hook, baited with a junk of pork, was thrown from the
forecastle, and twice the, huge iish missed the bail:, but cm
bis third attempt:, he was securely hooked, and a rope
having been passed below the pectoral Una, lie was safely
hoisted on deck. He measured about Bft. in length. 1*1;
was a pity that the sailors cut up - the fish so rapidly, as
few of the passengers had an opportunity of seeing it entire
after it was caught,
About half-past 4 o’clock p.m., on Sunday, June 5, the
ship was rolling dreadfully. Many of the boxes under tin;
bunks, in the steerage, ‘ got adrift, and was 'sliding across
the clock, tbo larger apparently chasing the smaller ones.
Things now assumed rather a ludicrous appearance, as
some unfortunate individuals were seen stalking about in
long white shirts, endeavouring to collect the scattered
utensils of their mess. The articles of some of Urn messes,
viz., coffee, sugar,, mustard, pepper, &c., all in one mass,
were drifting about the floor, and were next morning taken
up and thrown overheard. One of the steerage passengers
was thrown.from his bunk, on to the floor ; be knows not
what part of his person came in contact with the deck first,
but this morning lie appears in mourning (having a black
eye), and the worst part of the job was, that as. he lay on
tlio floor, Ins box began chasing him, and a water bottle
discharges its 'contents on to his head and shoulders. These
sad mishaps kept him in a state of excitement for some
time afterwards. Those events may afford. us a fund of
amusement when we reach Brisbane* but at present ’tin a
little too much, to be pleasant. Borne of our Irish friends
stylo the present a big win'd, and in faith it is. Another
friend from the Emerald Isle, who was on for a walk about
4 a.m., having risen 2 hours before timer, informed us that
lie should turn in again after smoking boots and oil. How
long ho took to smoke his boots is unknown.
VlOlf Iff UTIII 10
©lUTidaiii
tm Boat’d Hit' ‘AjufliHcr.’’
SATURDAY", 18TII". 'JUNTO. 1804,
TO GRUMMETT MAKERS.
WANTED a Supply of Donkey Engine Q-rummetts,
to be made from first quality of Linen tape, or Berlin Wool.
Any person competent to supply the same' can receive all
particulars by calling at the office of the Engineer oil beard
immediately. , , '
NOTICE TO YOUNG- LADlES.—AGentleman 21
years of age, Wishes-to correspond with a Lady with dark
hair and eyes,' age 20. Any young person wishing for. the
oiler, must’"send- d, earUrde vuHe-,. with name and address,
No. 12, Trevannion-st., -near' the Baker’s shop, Bt, Mar-
garet’s. ,
LOST.
Lost,-from the 2nd cabin, A Treatise on Agriculture, 4to,
hds. Any one returning this to the office of the paper,
will be rewarded, .
INLAND REVENUE.—CAUTION.
Whereas, certain evil disposed and 'officious persona have,
during the last week, interfered with the property of ijtft
'Post Office, and have from vulgar curiosity or other causes,
attempted to ascertain the contents of the letter box.
Notice is hereby given, that should any similar attempt bo
made hr future,Hie name of the offender will be published.
DRAMA,.
It is proposed to get up a Dramatic Butej+aiumexit on
board the Eusilier, and any information as to parties ac-
customed to take a. part, or who have books, dresses, or
advice to offer, will be welcomed at the office of the journal,
PUBLIC AMUSEMENTS.
Concert, Tuesday, 21.: Ball, Thusday, 28. N.B.— : Wind
and weather permitting..
On Monday, 20 inst. Her Crux Will give a reading from
Shakspeare at the back of the poop. To commence at half-
past 8 o’clock, weather permitting. .
Wanted, the loan of Chaucer's Works;' Communications;
H. C, Mrs, Limpet’s lodgings, jJnd cabin,
SATURDAY, 18TII. JUNE, 1804.
To those accustomed, as the greater part of our readers
are, to abundant exorcise or to severe work, the idle life on,
board-a-ship becomes anything but agreeable after the
novelty him passed away. The time hangs doubly heavy oa
our bauds, when from an adverse wind, or still worse, from
no wind at all, we make little or no progross on our lung
journey, During the last two months we, have at least had
ample time for reflection upon our now life,' which will in
all probability commence in some six weeks hence. Many
of us have, no doubt, already determined what precise step's
we shall take on our arrival. Bonin' have their occupation
there already provided—others go out under the auspices
of a friend or relation already settled, who has written.
homo a glowing-description of the comfort and prosperity
ho enjoys. Whilst others, and probably a largo'majority
are emigrants'on their own account, literally going' to sock
their fortunes, and have chosen Queensland ns the most
likely country wherein to find it. In all probability most
of us have formed too favorable an idea of our adopted
country, and when the stern reality of hard work, under a
tropical, sun, with iniuiy inconveniences, of which we have
scarcely heard, presents itself, some will be found who will
heartily wish- -themselves back again, in old England or
Ireland, as the case may he.' There are many different wavs
of making money in the colonies—some will take ad vantage
of the laud orders, others will obtain places as domestic
servants, whilst others again will launch out: beyond the
settlements far away into the bush. But whichever stylo
of life each one chooses, ho may be sure 'that it is not to* bo
one of unalloyed pleasure.
The poe try of a w ild, life, the hope 'of realising, which has
induced bo many to'leave the populated and overstocked
districts at home for the exact opposite, soon vanishes when
the, hardships which arc inseparable from it have lost, the
novelty,: which may dt .first render them even ploasnut,
Many a hard day’s work, many along journey, manv-ia
night passed upon the bare, ground, are the only means by
which a working-man can advance to the position ho de*


« HOW WE WENT TO QUEENSLAND, ON BOAED THE “ FUSILIER.”'
wires to attain. 3.h sliorfc the same qualities that advance
man in England, will do so in Australia, the only difference
is that as competition is less, so advancement is more rapid
in the new than in the old country. Of one thing we may
he fully assured., that a faint heart will neither win n fair
lady nor a fortune. Wo must put our heart and soul upon
making our way step by stop along, the path that we hav_
marked out for ourselves, and if determined not .to be dis
heartened by any of the, reverses we are sure to encounter!
t here can be no doubt that we shall roach an honorable and
affluent position, and be able to look back with present
recollections, to our struggles with fortune in our earlier
career.
We arc constantly receiving advertisements and commu-
nications from persons who fail to give their proper* name,
which, in accordance with our unchangeable, determination
on this point, prevents the insertion of their praise-worthy
endeavours to enlighten, their neighbors. No communi-
cation can bo inserted, unless accompanied by the real name
of the writer,, which of course is never divulged, hut must
always bo given to prevent the liberty of the press.degene-
rating into license. Our official opportunities leads us to
form now ideas .entertained by the general public on board,
as to the duties and responsibility of editorship. Quo cor-
respondent this week,sends ns several anonymous commh-
nicasions, accompanied by an editorial critique written by
himself. We admire this man’s sagacity, and from his
praiao-wortliy economy (having pi aid off bis trumpeter), we
presume ho is a Scotchman. Wo have inserted one adver-
tisement to-day from a young man aged 31. We would
have supposed from the nature of his notion, that he had
not come of age, unless he had told us so. In a small com-
munity, like the inmates of the Fusilier, ho had better use
Ills eyes than his pen in sue!i matters.
CORRESPONDENCE.
Tu the E-lilor, Sir, .
lam the most persecuted man on hoard, ever .since I
set foot upon this vessel I have been tormentedwith questions
like the following, “ Why are you going to Queensland i
What arc you going to do when you get there, Ac., &o. Now
though these questions so constantly put arc somewhat imper-
tinent, yet as I see from a leader in your valuable journal a
wish expressed that passengers should give some reason for
their coming 1(3.;000 miles, I for one will, in a few words fur-
nish you with the inducement that actuated me in this.serious
.undertaking
I am a poor man, in fact so poor that I had the greatest
.difficulty in paying my passage, .and had it not been for the
kindness of a friend I should never have been here. At the
,aga of 1-f, with only half an education, and scarcely as much
money as would make a jingle on a tombstone, I was, as it
.were kicked into the world to take my chance, sink or .swim,
like thousands of others, It would be encroaching too much
of your valuable space, and perhaps afford no entertainment
:fb your readers to recount the trials I have .endured, or the
jsiglits I have,seen, suffice it to say I have had many vicoissi-
.tudes’, sometimes hardly a shilling in nay pocket, at ,others '
-•seven o-r eight hundred (£7OO or 800) which with airy one
.moderately careful, and persevering might soon have grown
■into so many thousands but some how .or .other this money so
worked for never did me good. I spent, or rather squandered
it as fast as I got it, and all owing to my love of company, and
I must also admit a slight partiality for drink than which there
is is not a greater cause- I have tried my hand at twenty
different,avocations, and several times has the ball been.at my
feet and only required kicking in other words fortune.has
been within my reach, hnt from the above-mentioned causes
it lias always eluded my grasp. Some six months back 'a
friend who, had just returned from Queensland, .mot mo, and
over a pipe and a glass I heard , all his history from the time
he left, England till his return, .a .period'extending .over seven
or eight years. I questioned him closely about the country
climate, its capabilities, &e., and the more I listened the more,
I became convinced it was a likely place for such as myself to
go to who had outlived his luck in the old country., Accor-
dingly, before we parted, I had half promised to go ; ho, on
the other hand extracted a solemn vow from me that if I did
entertain it I would in the first place abstain from fid excess
of drinking and avoid loose company and jolly follows. 1
thought quietly and calmly over all he had said, and in a few
weeks wasbn board the ‘ Fusilier,’ full of good intentions and
hopeful anticipations for the ; future, resolving not only to turn
over a new leaf but to burn the old book altogether. So to
all those who intend doing well in this new land of, ours, my
advice is to ‘ Avoid the cup,’ give l up your old had habits, com-
mence a new chapter in your life, and take as the heading ‘Do
not put-that into your mouth which will steal away your '.brains
Yours, Ac., JNEAIO,
, To the Editor,
Sir,—l do not pretend to know much about the country to
which wo are hound, I did not leave home without having
paid a little attention to the terms upon which land could, bn
possessed or purchased in Queensland- This being a subject oi
general interest, I propose, through the medium of your jour-
nal to state the impression's left on my mind from a perusal of
the Acts of the Queensland Government, hoping that I may bn
at onoe put right, should, any one better informed than Ijvm
observe that I have fallen into error from want of practical
knowledge of the working of the regulations laid down by the
Colonial Legislature. I need scarcely-apologise fur introducing
this subject, and perhaps occupying more room in your journal
than may suit tho tastes of many of your readers who look only
for nows and amusement, but the grave business of life which
has-induoed so many of us to make such a long journey, must
be of paramount importance to all, and ought to occupy sonic
portion of. our thoughts. There .are throe classes to whom tho
laws affecting a settlement in Queensland, are, specially inte-
resting, viz-, the stock master, or. squatter, the agriculturist
settling on the reserves, and the labourer, the miner, and the
woodcutter are not forgotten by tbe Government, but in our
ship we believe that the tending of the flocks and,tilling of tho
ground is the pursuit most generally looked forward to, and
so these we will direct our attention. The stockholder, or
squatter, by the present laws of ,Queensland, the stock farmin’
can never become tbo proprietor of a run. His solo right is that
of an occupier or tenant who must clear out for the purpose of
.cultivation and civilization, and in this he essentially differs
from the agriculturist settling down on the .reserves, who, for
tlmSOs. an aero becomes absolute proprietors of the laud lus
fixes on as his chosen locality.
To obtain a run the intending squatter having' cither in-
spected the ground'himself, or depending on the information
.and judgment of others, must as an initiatory stop go to the com-
misiiimer of the run ho wants.; This description, must be as,
.accurate, as possible, describing the locality, by its natural
features and boundaries, as.aru.le, tbo portion .applied for must
be of A rectangular shape, that is square or .oblong, but,as nearly
square as the boundary lines will admit of. . These boundary
lines must run East and West, North and South, or as nearly
so as possible, or as the natural boundaries permit. Suit-
able variations of ‘course being made so as to accommodate
the supply of water in the best way to the wants of tbo
•adjacent district, and if the lands are described with reason*
able accuracy the professor is free from molestation. . •
No run shall contain’ loss than., 25 square miles or more
than,loo,. Having lodged the necessary, description, the ap-,
plicant,if he is the first on the commissioners hooks for that
particular.locality immediately,receives a document .entitling
him to possess the land described in hisapplication for twelve
months from the date of the,granting of. the license. With-
in ;90 days after, obtaining a license, the party doing so must
pay into the Treasury, at Brisbane, in name of 'occupied


1864,
Latitude.
Longitude,
Distil mm.
June 0th.
38°
40' S.
20"'
32' W,
50 miles,
10th.
33
52
20
12
20
11th.
34
31
10
43
177
12th.
33
47
.15
22
so:
13th.
84
30
15
21
43
14th,
35
50
14
11 .
101
15th.
86
S3
12
4
110
" now WK WENT TO QUEENSLAND, ON BOARD THE « PUSILTEB."
the sum of 10s. per square mile, and failing this payment
the license is forfeited and the next applicant obtains a new
license on similar conditions. Although this license is for
one year from it? date the possessor, if ho wants to retain the
land on lease must not be later than three months previous to
the expiration of the twelve months allowed by his license,
apply to the Commissioner of Grown Lands stating his wish.
This application is made' through the District Commissioner
to the Chief Commissioner of Crown Lands and if the, ground
applied for has been, at the date of application stoclcdd to the
extent of one-fourth tho quantity prescribed by Act of Parlia-
ment, a lease for 14 years duration bearing date the Ist Jan-
uary or Ist July preceding such application, and from which,
as a terminus, agree (lie lease shall run, will be granted to tho
applicant. The rent for the first 4 years will bo 10s. per sq
mile, according to an estimate made by tho Commissioner and
party applying, or in the event of a difference of opinion, by
an umpire. When a dispute as to the future rent takes place
the lessee, not loss than three months before the expiration of
his lease must nominate a valuator to act for him, and the
Commissioner may either act for tho Crown himself or appoint
some one to do so, and if the parties acting as valuators differ
in opinion, an umpire is appointed to fix , the value for the
second five years, the rent thus fixed shall not be less than £25
or more than £5O for every 26 square miles. For the third
period of five years the, rent fixed in the same way shall nut
be loss than £3O or more than £7O per annum for .25 square
miles. For the third period ~of five years the rent fixed
in the same way,shall not bo-less than £3O or more than
£7O per, annum , for 25 square miles. Parties failing to pay.
their rents forfeit their leases, But if the rent remaining
unpaid he paid up within 90 days after the term for the
payment of the full years rent and also a penalty of one
fourth part of the sum due he at tho same time paid the lessee
defeats the forfeiture. If, howevever,: the whole rent and
penalty is not paid within the SO days the forfeiture becomes
absolute, and the lands may be relet as Government may think
fit. The Government capability on groupd for carrying stock
is defined to be 100 sheep per square mile or 20'cattle. Thus
26 miles would carry 2500 sheep or 500 cattle . and; before a
lease could be obtained the lands would require to bo stocked
with 655 sheep or 125, cattle., • The prices vary; 5 6 months
ago sheep were worth 175.: 6dveach and cattle' 80s, at, this
rate 625 sheep at 17a, 6d : . is equal to £546 17s, (id. or 1,25
cattle at 80s., £5OO. . , ,'
Runs of. course must be stocked before a lease is
got, so that it follows as a matter of fact that no
transference can take, place until this is done. All runs are
leased under the following conditions: —‘Grants for public >
purposes may be made irrespective of any existing, liednse, I
grant, dr lease, as also for working all metals and, minerals i
and for public defence, safety, or enjoyment of the colony and i
for all purposes facilitating its improvement and sottlem|jat. (
When land is resumed for any purpose, 12 months’notice 1
must be given to the lessee, and the proportionate rent must 1
be returned or allowed to him, as also any claim for improve- -
ments must be made within two months' after notice of tha't
Government's intention to resume the land, and'the value of 8
such a claim bo fixed hy valuators. Every squatter holds his 1
land subject to the passage of all kinds of stock along the roads c
through his occupation, and stock travelling may be depaa- c
timed for the dis anoe of half a mile on each side of any such 1
road, hut cattle must continue moving on at the rate of 7 miles 1
and sheep 4 miles, during each 24 hours, unless prevented by -
rain or flood. Any one contravening the, rules laid down by £
tbo Government is liable in a penalty of £2O for the first and 6
every future offence. Lessees of runs may object ofi Season- 1
able' grounds to. the granting of licenses to cut timber, &c., in |
favor of other parties, and all questions relating to such mat- '
tors shall, be determined by the commissioner, Bench of *
Magistrates, or Governor, as the case may bo, Bartienlar spots
may also be protected from suoh licenses, by application to tlui
magistrates, at the instance of the lessees. Lessees may cut wood
and use all building materials found on their occupation for the
purpose of erecting or repairing any buildings required by them
as tenants. Trespassers on any run may lie removed on appH
cation to two Justices of the Peace Puch, we believe, to bo
the leading features of the laws of Queensland regulating the
possessors of runs for pasture. In another number we shall
return to the subject of Agricultural Reserves, Laud Grant,
and Labor, which wo hope will not bo without use, ns many
no doubt will be glad to know their rights without wading
through voluminous Acts of Parliament. No doubt there are
many bye-laws and local customs which will affect the practi-
cal working of the Acts made by the Legislature, but these
will be best learned by experience
To the Editor,
Sir, —I herewith furnish you with my report for the week
ending Wednesday, 16th instant, and I. am .happy to say that
it will bo more satisfactory than I had anticipated. Of the
40 cases that have been under treatment, the majority have
either been discharged or materially relieved, and those cases,
3 in number, which have been a source of considerable anxiety
to me during the past week, are progressing favorably towards
recovery. Temperature for the week lias boon as follows
Saloon, CG*C j main deck, GO'S ; ’tween docks,-73.
E. W. IIOD.'iK|NSON, M.D,
To the. Editor , Sir,
I have but little to say in you this week for my rejm-t
is so unsatisfactory. The distance we hare traversed is 681
miles. This does not bear dwelling on, so I shall leave it and
subscribe myself, Tour diseonted contributor,
D. B. OARVOSEO,
Captain if the Fusilier.
Total distance SSI
To the Editor,
Sir—As one of the steerage passengers, I have 1 bought '
that a few words on .how wo get on there may be interesting,
if not to the readers on board, they will be to intending
emigrants. First--with regard to living, we are divided
into messes of S to 10 men in each, having a captain for
every mess; some appoint a cook, choosing the man best
fitted for that position, who malms the puddings, &0.., all
the voyage, or they, take it in turns, as they may agree on,
Tho other member’s duties are to wash up the utensils of
tho mesa in rotation,; of course every one at home has a
scale of diet for the passage, so that has only to bo multi-
plied by the number of men in the mess, and thus your
quantities of every article are served to you. A knife, fork,
and spoon, are indispensable, and when the cook of the ship
has made youi" food eatable, all yon have to do is, at the,
proper time, to sit down, eat all you can, but pocket n, one
The messes need not be formed till you have been on hoard :
a day or two, therefore use your eyes, and pick from those
with whom you come in-contact*■ such as you would like to-
mess with for 3or 4 months. Wo rice about 7 .o’clock,
breakfast at 8, dinner at 1, tea at half-past 5 to 6 o’clock. ,
Sometimes- some unfortunate cornea rushing down into tho .
steerage to enquire if any one has seen his missing im.flt or


"TIOW WE WENT TO QUEENSLAND ON EOAED THE ‘FUSILIER.’”
■nuddin"" Ho is received with loud shouts ot laughter, and
)liis effort's fruitless, very likely has to go empty away.
Ooncfets aud halls are got up for our amusejneut on decL
+ - „ tlinrohv nißSum more quickly than wo could lioao an
- nt«l Aiiy one at home may easily ascertain what
It £ they wftl require for the mess, hut by a means
Cithern vervulanily, and lot* after them, or they will
ho ost IfposSo lig hams, cheese, herrings»
■foe &c and a little of the creature comfort, as all will he
n efol. "With regard to bedding, bring 2 pair of sheets, 2
countomnuPß pillow, a good matttess, and a blanket. Bo
■ cut your chests made according to regulation di-
n ! r s ihcii you will always have one at least under,your
SS y own Chargl Our last words are, give
ww iulittlAhiugs, to your messmates, -and thus you will
nda more pleasant time. With regard to the grub there,
is plenty of it, and wo hope we may never get worse.
LOCAL NEWS, ,
Disturbances in the Steerage.—Card playing. In the
st „ as elsewhere, 100 seems the rage and gives vent
for the steam kept up there, ever , ready to work at high
pressure'. A quarrel arose on Thursday evenmg, which
caused a fight, ending in one of the combatantsdiavmg his
ear and shoulder bitten severely by his opponent, llus is
bl Aftatoai—Tho Signior Benetti, on Monday last, _ shot a <
largo albatross—this is the only bird ol the land which has •
yet been killed, and it is to bo regretted that owing to the .
Lto of the weather it could not he bagged, thereby to add
substantially, as well as figuratively, another leather to the <
cap of this indefatigable sportsman. . , ;
Marriimo—Tne captain lias of late bad application made •
t o him to learn what bis powers arc in bmdmg Has bard to- .
be-undono knot. A passenger, from the steerage, in hot
haste, waited on him, we understand, last week, and while
the captain’s answer assured the impatient, that ho could
bind in wedlock’s bonds, an advice was given to await the
arrival of the ship at Brisbane. Don’t marry in baste and
repent at-leisure. , . _ , . in'
Thefts —Potty thefts are now becoming ol; almost daily
occnnTenec, and parties leaving anything tempting, ospo- :
eiallv of the edible kind for a moment behind them, m an
exposed position, are sure to come to loss, _ Last week
more ham disappeared, both from the 2nd cabin and steer-
an-o. There is some talk of establishing a mutual protection
society fortho discovery and punishment of the evil doers,
as also for receiving the good old punishment ot keel
hauling for all such offences. . ■ ... ra ,
Baffles.—During the week several articles wore raffled.
The first was, two scarf rings, one worn by Mr. Griffin,
another, by DoWitt; a pair of boots, won by Bed Gap, a
meerschaum pipe (silver mounted), won by the 2nd mate,
useful pocket-knife, won by the purser,. a Geneva watch,
won by the 3rd mate. „ ' ,
MUSICAL, LITEEAEY, AND DEAMATIC.
On Tuesday last, our weekly concert took place m front
of the poop. ¥e are glad to see our suggesticinsaro acted
up to relative to the seating of the company, for it must
have been conducive, to their comfort," as well .as to the pre-
servation of order. The songs went off in a spirited inannci 1 ,
some of the choruses being, rendered with tremendous
power, find iii excellent time. "We cfimiot give too mncli
praise to tlie troupe for their capital selection; no doubt
they find that ballads too sentimental, are not suited to the
tastes of those on board, but good; national , songs, and those
that tell of the glories of the sea, are more adapted to please
their audience. The concert lasted above an hour, and the
company departed highly gratified with the treat.
MISCBLL ANEOU S.
"Whist.—On Tuesday last, Messrs. Say and Harris again
played Messrs. Crux and Eoskollfor the championship, and
won by 3 games out of 5.
Loo.—The game of 100 has been very much the rage
during the past week—wo'have not heard of any one making
his fortune by it. _
SPOUTING INTELLIGENCE.
On Friday last (tlie day fixed lor the between
Young Bullwaaher, of the Eroomasona. Arms and the Little
Butcher’s Big-un) : at an early hour, a largo crowd wore
seen taking their way towards tho steerage, among whom
wo recognised a considerable sprinkling ol tbo upper leu
thousand, and a large muster of tho" fancy. A tow moments
after 7 o’clock, Young Bullwasber, attended by tho balia-
hury Slasher, to whoso care and training ho is indebted tor
his splendid condition, arrived upon tho ground, presenting
the very picture of manly vigor j his close dropped hair and
firm determined mouth, -betokened that ho was all there,
and rather a dangerous customer to have anything to do
with. We suppose the Blg-nn was ot our' opinion, lor he
would not put in an appearance, which caused unusual dis-
appoiutment,, as tho mill had been looked forward, to with
Considerable interest, and tho crowd dispersed with a, deal,
of grumbling. Tlio stakes can be bad at our office,ym Mon-
day, the 20th'inst. Young Bullwasbor, as champion ot tho
feather weights, is open to fight any man in the world at
8 st. 2 lbs., for" 3 or £5OO. Tbo latter smn preferred
Notes from a Journal. —Saturday, 11th Juno, I°-
day wo experienced a stiff south-tvostor off tho Gape, our
previous acquaintance with, which having boon on lygatlioml
from Torn Hood’s admirable illustration, m liis Uiinic
Annual, in which" pigs, with south-wester hats,-and Dutch-
men. with pig-tails, are soon scudding bolero the breeze. •
Notwithstanding of the’heavy sea, wo made considerable
progress, running 177 miles. Pew or none otthfl landsmen
wore steady on their leg, tho dock being often at an incli-
nation of’of 45°, and one old gentleman was scon pro-
gressing on his hands and posterior, his log being useless.
Towards tbo afternoon wo shipped several heavy seas, but no
farther accident occurred. It is, however, an ill wind that
blows nobody good, and if tbo captain- missed lua mutton
chops at breakfast this morning, an active" young man m the
steerage must have made an excellent lunch, ilio eiuldy
servant, in carrying tho chops from the galley, stumbled and
fell, tbo dish was broken, and tlio contents- spilt. Iho ad-
mirable forager, to whom-wo-have alluded was, however, at
hand, and secured the spoil in an old tiii-box, ■ amidst tho
envious gaze of his compeers, bun day, .June .12. Hie sea
running high and little sail being; carried,, tbo rolling ol tho
B liip was very great, and little progress was made, ’ Uiurdi
Service was, however, read, by one of the passengers, to a
soleqt congregation. During tbo day. tbo sea began to fall,
and towards Monday morning became comparatively quiet..
At day-break, on "Wednesday, 15tli, tbo unusual inti
mation' of land in sight was not welcome. Tho island we
were approaching was that referred to in tho captain’s last
letter, Tristan d’Acuhna, one ofa group of 3 islands, lying
.in lat, 38° south, and long. 12 west j the other 2 islands m
this group, are named Inaccessible Island, to the north west:
of Tristan d’Aeuhna, and the other .Nightingale Island, to
the south or south-west of it. We saw Inaccessible Island,
but, could not with certainty make out the other. Tristan
i d’Acnhim, when first seen,; was supposed to bo about 35
' miles off; some said 45 miles. At this time it appeared like
1 a mole bill on Hie horizon. About 2 o’clock wo had neared
* it bo far as, to see the formation of the rock, which, aecord-
* ing to the estimate might be B or .10 miles off, tbo’ wye .had
no data for fixing the distance, except the distinctness with


" HOW WE WENT TO QUEENSLAND, ON BOARD THE 11 EUSILTER.”
which we saw the fissures in the rock, and its docidoly vol- [Friday, 17th, nearly becalmed, hut lying tocmr course.
canic structure. The island rises from the sea to a sharp
point, which appeared to ho at least 10,000 foot high. When BIRTH.
nearest to it, the high peak waa quite clear from clouds, and The wife of Mr. Oxenford, of a child, still horn.
being covered with snow, presented the appearance of a rOTSSriiToKB ov obhwC
large marquee, the ropes of which wore well represented by 0n tl!010t „ d(ly o f April> fmm tmuion wo ut sail
the sharp edges of the rock, which had been bared of snow ivw ftuoonsianA, in Australia, »uu aswot amii>>»"fu«‘ s*' ls i
by the action of the sun and wind, A thick white cloud (SSmlfanSalMUio nriliiu ifnsiit«p.
hung about the mountain about One-third from its apparent o tho wimi amioara to favor««, now wo »ro out to son,
top; at tho bottom of this cloud, the snow lino was quite wXS"™^^
visible. Several sketches of the island wore made, which As wo mu along to Qncciuiana' iu tuo British Fwiuor.
wohoeotn qno i*f v ni , nr]n pa/I A wliale made its nmienrL’rrn on, Whou wo wove out a mouth at Ron, tlm woathoi 1 duo,
i uu f u 10 800 iCpiOCUltoa, J\. vyiuuo uliiuu als cimjeiutiuce AVe apoko a ship with boloii } ?!nu to our Him.
between us and tho island, but at a coiißidorablo distance. so Pius i)ein« twina to Moiboumn, wo atom? with her ma stoor,
Wo met with an old acquaintance, tho Lord Macaulay, n«t left tefar touted ™. in the Brttiou itoiiior.
whom wo had passed on tho line, and after some signalling AsK'u\miS
about correct tune.&c..- a verbal communication took place. SaZiSffaftßtSlS 1 ' ”‘ ar ’
Ulll’ Captain asked it they wanted any COinpauy, to which no Now, for thin name bravo action, yon may think wo bwvoil him hard,
reply was made, wo-presume from their being as short of wo put a n>pa around hi. nock, ana Huns Mn u» Jjwi.
J, J T %tr i • But Uu>’we honKOiUlir luwso, VUI Ws I'lilcr wiwnnt nmiv,
grog as ourselves. Thursday, IC* Juno. Wo have again h. s i i P tHmi* uis m®, amistoodonthe«io«itofu»o vratiirr.
lost sight of land, but there are 3 ships in view, the Lord Now our son* has neatly omied, and imw* ms Rf iiim? <inii,
1 ' 3 We bo down to die rumor, liat ho.mama tit lie rmlte null,
Macaulay, one supposed to 00 the SOUtJIOIII Jjinpxie, ’ w r o ciiuVt [.fit imuu or liviuuly, iiov jinrliM*. ulii, ov Hfifii",
and another unknown, all on tlie same course of ourselves j SowcjisoiongasUontwo can, in tue nriiteh Wwiii™.
Hutu tup tutmt to OfUtuunslmid, mi tumid toe “Jjtisilhit
T-TT , 'iiii>i*"i**if<«n«iiAT»ni , »iTiM'iiii~iinTTwnin-irn , T~r ,, ~ , - , ~!'Bii 11 j —*—»■«*■«—««*—* .ininn-iirr—
SATURDAY, 25TH. JUNE, 1864. . ,
LOST OR STOLEN.
LOST or SEOLEN from the 2nd Cabin, a Horn Drink-
ing Gup, also several plated and pewter Spoons, viz., 2 tea
spoons, marked N, 1 dessert spoon, with aX; also, 4 black
handled knives, marked N or IT. It is particularly re-
quested that tho above articles may bo returned immediately
to, tbo Steward of tho 2nd Cabin, or
Ct, W. HARRIS, 1 Bleak House, 2nd cabin.
POST OFFICE.
All Letters for tho Editors of “ How wo went to Queens-
land” &e., should now be posted at tbo Bos in front of tho
poop-
SATURDAY, 25TH. JUNE, 1864.
Eire and water, are good servants, but bad masters —they
are the boat friends, as they are the worst enemies of the
emigrant. To emigrate to a far distant land is, a stop of
great importance, virtually effecting the life of man, invol-
ving as it does not only tho great dangers to which human
life is liable on shore,, butdu addition all the perils of the
deep.; .Storms, hurricanes,. and squalls are oyer .to be looked
for at sea as the rule rather than the exception, but in our
exceptional case wo have hitherto been highly favoured,
and wo hope those dangers of the deep will still absent
themselves till the oud of our. journey. An alarm of fire
makes the boldest sailor quail and stand aghast,.paralysed
by air element ho is unaccustomed to control., Tho ship
leaves the land, staunch, stout, and strong, and favored by
a line breeze and pleasant weahter, gaily cleaves the yield-
ing waters, and, all is pleasure and enjoyment, but by-and-
byo a dark cloud rises in the horizon, tire heavens become
overcast, the gale swoops, down upon tho ship—tire sea rises
as if to engulph her, while every timber in her frame creeks,
and groans as slip dashes through the eager waves. Bold
hearts and good seamanship can surmount tho perils of the
storm, but there is one other and more appalling danger
against which human skill and courage are of still avail, for
what language can describe or, what imagination, conceive
the horrors of a fire at sea. In spite bf all the publications
taken on board, emigrant ships may.prevent lire, by having
all lights encosed in lamps and extinguished at a given
hour thro are still those who through either recklessness or
olfisimess will disobey tho rules of tho ship by-having pri-
vate lights during the night, thereby endangering their own
lives, togetherwith those of their follow-passengers, Wo
cannot too strongly impress on tho minds of all on hoard
tbo necessity of strictly adhering to tho rules laid down as
regards the management of lights on board ship as the
safety of the vessel humanly speaking depends on a 'strict
adherence to those regulations which caution, and expe-
rience have dictated as tho beat provontatives of tho greatest
calamity we have to fear. Many of ohr readers have road
of ships at sea taking fire, lot thorn picture in their own
minds tho sad catastrophe it would present on board our
own ship. In conclusion wo would urge all on board to
uso their best endeavours to prevent a recurrence of an,
event which happened last week, and bo very careful bow
they handle the destructive element —Eire.
MUSICAL,"LITERARY, AND DRAMATIC.
Our weekly Concert took place on Tuesday evening and
was attended with great success, as the Minstrels have
taken tho advice we gave them a week or two ago, and have
with one-or two exceptions attended the private meetings
•regularly, consequently the improvements hi the choruses
is very manifest, aa they were rendered with far greater
power than they have previously been, The first song wan
Bonnie Dundee, sung by the General, well backed up by
the troupe, and from what we can judge it gave general
satisfaction to the audience. Tho ‘ Cork Leg,’ by our new
Caledonian singer, Signor Bagg caused much laughter, al-
though the Signor pitched it a little too high. ‘ Nil Dcs-
perandum was .well sung by Garibaldi, and tbo chorus was
about the best we have heard since wo came on board the
* Fusilier.’ Herr Crux ‘ "We won’t go home Morning,’ and,
another good chorus ensued, Wo cannot say much in
praise of Don Ericasso’s ‘ Luck’s All,’ and we shall recom-
mend him to stick to singing and drop the .reeitatva on a
future occasion. Great thanks are duo to Signior Dibdiii-
etto for his admirable song ‘ The Minute Gun at Sea,’ and
we only wish tbe troupe, could have assisted him more in
tho chorus, but as they had not had any practice at it no
blame can be attached to them on that score. ‘ The Gum
Tree Canoe’ with its beautiful chorus was well rendered by
Don Ricardo. Signor Benue tti, sang “ I’m off to Charles-


“HOW WE WENT TO QUEENSLAND ON BOARD THE 'IHISILIEE'.’ ’’
town ” in his unequalled style. Count, Kossuth com-
monced the second park with ‘The Crocodile but he pitch-
ed it 100 high, a fault which ho is rather given to. Don
Moiiico sang 1 Johnuy Sands.’ ‘Widow Maoroo’ was mmg by
Oou M’ile.sano and created roars of la lighter, procuring him
an encore. Sambo sung 1 My-Motbcr-iu-law,’ a capital song.
Pan do ‘The Little Bog’s Tail,’ also a good song. _Horr
aormi ill’s was rather unfortunate, as he was not quite up
ie the words, and the concert ended with another song each
fenm Rhnioi- Dibdinclti and Ricardo and ‘God save the
Ouecn, 0 Wc ho]ie thaf all our concerts in future will go
off as well as tins has done, and (here is no reason why they
should not if the practice meetings are well attended.
BALL.--A Ball came off on Monday evening, and was
well attended by the, lovers of the light fantastic—the music
was good, and the dancing kept up with great spirit, good
order being observed throughout. This class ot amuse-
ment is becoming very popular.
CORRESPONDENCE.
To the Editor, ,
Sir,—l look upon the little world on board the bushier
ii,s a small sample of that greater world of which we form a
part. The stage and the players differ very little, except
in the fact that the latter may now perform their several
parts without having a grand interested object to attain.
To play harmonically the parts, we have assumed should
now be our chief object. They ‘Who piaps the best, albeit
in the broadness of absurdity is filling up a part not with-
out its use in the constitution of aharmouious whole. How
lew among us do really put their shoulders to the \vhccl,
or play their part, to entertain, surely the conventionalities
of society might for a short spare be set aside, and should
any onehave a lurking thought that such a mode of pro-
fodurc mi "lit lioroiiftfGi’ be attended with, inconvenience let
him ai, once dispel such an idea and reflect that wo aie now
bound to a land where conventionalities are not so strictly
observed as in the old country. Hour to whom honor, say
wo but, bui; for the Hum being no one loses caste by making
himself entertaing and agreeable,and wo arc sure more might
bo done for the amusement and entertainment ul all, it a
little of that diffidence (shall we call it pride) which charac-
terises our countrymen of all ranks wore laid aside at least
fur a little while. ‘ Any who can contribute to the general
amusement, and who do come forward with hearty good
will are to bo considered as a boon to toe community, and
will hereafter be sure of having their names treasured among
those well to be remembered ones, who from no self inter-
ested motive did all they could, to make things pass plea-
santly while wo journeyed to Queensland. They will soon
find out that an 'idle listless- life is a more imbearablo one
than the constant active iudeavour to bo busy, and that
there is as much pleasure in endeavouring to amuse as won-
dering how they are to be amused, or goumbliug because no
amusement is provided for them. L. T,
To tliD Editor,
Sii —As we anticipated, our last letter was dry, and taste-
less to many, which was to be expected from the craving
for excitement all feel during a long voyage, and we would
say to our friends at-home, don’t for a moment suppose
that the idleness of an emigrant’s voyage is a time at all
suited for study of any kind; it is the very reverse, for any
thing hut amusement go down in the smallest ot homai-
pathie doses. Having, however, prophesied a futurity for
your journal, we will, undeterred from following out our
i lea of making it useful to the settler, return to tho con-
ditions and regulations in the colony respecting agricul-
tural reserves and land grants. The agricultural reserves
nr tracts of country, selected by the Government authori-
ties as suitable, from soil and other facilities, tor the pro-
duction of good crops, and easy transport to market, for
tho encouragement of settlers w-ho will devote limit time
principllly to the cultivation of tho ground, Tho’ admi-
rably adapted for the cultivation of all intertropical pro-
ductions, most of tho cereals, and many of tho fruits and
vegetables of Europe, and suited to the latitudes ot the
north, grow to perfection in Queensland, and wo have been
told that nowhere but in E.gypt, that granary of the world,
can such wheat be grown as on the Darling Downs. V\ e
have been also told on tho other hand, that from the want,
of small birds analogous to our sparrows and chaOinclica at
home, all cereals suffer from insects and grubs of various
kinds. This may or may not, be the case, for our own part
we have never heard of “such things in Queensland, altho’
we arc aware that; as a means of curing this plague, many ,
abortive attempts have been made, to introduce sparrows
into Month Australia. Out of many hundreds sent from
England, only a few pairs have survived tlm voyage, _ Tho
likelihood in, that with colonization and cultivation, insect
life will also increase, for it is seldom that a remedy for this
is not discovered by the careful and intelligent cultivator of
the soil.. Wheat, free from all disease, of the finest quality,
has been raised on the Darling Downs in very abundant
crops, and it will be time enough to cry mil; about, the sup-
posed evil, which may come after it has made its appeordiicc.
The holders of land'orders or grants are entitled to select
(heir own locality from any of the unoccupied reserves, and
information as to the alllolmenlH to be disposed of, will be
learned from the proper authorities in Queensland. The
whole of the land reserves, wo believe, are under the man-
agement of tho superintendent of the Botanical Gardens at
Brisbane, and parties who do not bold land grants cannot
do better than apply to that functionary, but all particulars
will be easily learned, on enquiry, at the Government oliice.
Land grants or orders can be obtained under tho following
conditions, first, parties applying, must be under tho fol-
lowing ages —Males, under 40; females, under i!5. A.
married couple, accompanied by 5■ children, the youngest
above 4 years of age, are also entitled to land grants ; tho
parents to a full grant each, and for every two children, be-
tween the ages of 4 and 14; another grant is given. All
above 14 are adults, and entitled to a full grant; no half
grant can bo obtained, that is a married couple, with 5 chil-
dren, between the ages of 4 and 14, are entitled to 4 grants.
If, however, they have 6 children, they are entiled to 5
grants. Oases may arise, however, involving an appearance,
if not, indeed tho reality of unfairness in the application of
the principle laid down by tho Queensland Government, in
regard to the working out of one provision, contained in
the Act, regulating such matters. Suppose that a man,
above 40 years of age, who is not willing at first to subject
bis wife and family to all tho inconveniences of an emigrant’s
life, while unsettled in a new ' country, but who goes out to
Queensland to select; a locality, on which he may eventually
settle down, leaving bis wife and family at homo, and ho,
as at present, -interpreted by Mr. .lordan, the Government;
Emigration A gent in London, cuts off this man from ever
obtaining a grant; for himself, altho’ on the arrival of. his
wife and family in the colony, they obtain tho usual al-
lowance of land. This reading of the law rests on the
words in the A.ct, accompanied by, and appears to ns,
■to have been applied more strictly in conformity to tho
wording than tho spirit of the enactment; Land grants
were introduced for the purpose of inducing men with
families; or likely to have-families, to emigrate, and wo can
see no good reiison for withholding from the prudent settler
the bonus, which any imprudent one may obtain. Tho in-
terest of the colony is to have self-supporting and indus-
trious families settled down in it, but if a man, without
having counted the cost, goes there, and is unable to effect


" HOW WE WENT TO QUEENSLAND, ON BOARD TII® « FUSILIER.”
a settlement in such a way as neither jo benefit lihnselt nor
the colony, he had much better remain at home. An im-
prudent man is 'almost sure to become a burden on the
public, while one proceeding as a pioneer _ lor Ins family,
ashing nothing, in the mean time, but intending to bring ins
family out to him when he has obtained a home for them,
not only brings to the -fcolony an amount ot pormamont
population, of the' best sort, but in the event, of finding no
suitable settlement, returns home, and thus never himself
becomes a burden, nor leaves those behind him who may
become burdens on the community. Wo have, no doubt,
that some of tho clear-headed and active-minded statesmen
of Queensland, will he induced to look to this, but in the
mean time the facts are as wo have stated them. 2nd. —
No assisted passenger can get a land grant. Every pas-
senger paying under £2O of passage money, and ot a proper
age, is entitled to a grant ,of 18 acres, or a land order for
£lB. All emigrants paying above £2O of passage mouejq
who are of a proper age, may obtain grants to the extent of
30 acres or an order-of £3O; two children, between tho
ages of 4 and 14, are equal to one adult. In all cases pe-
sonal occupation is necessary, and within-a fixed time the
settler must begin to improve and fence his land, a.s we
shall afterwards see; 3rd.—The extent of any agricultural
farm 011 tho reserves, shall in no case exceed 320 acres, and
the smallest is 1.8 acres. A purchaser may also, if he
chooses, occupy for 5 years, three times as much more land
as be purchases,, lying contiguous to Ins purchase, at tho
nominal rent of 6s per acre per annum, with this advantage
also, that he will have the right of pre-emption of the same
at the end of 5 years, at the original price of 20s. per acre.
Thus, a man buying 30 acres, would bo entitled to occupy for
6 years, 120 ae res, on paying for the 90 acres be bad not
yet purchased, 455. per annum, with tho first right of buying
these at £90.. Thus, also, a person buy ing 80 acres of land,
at a cost of £BO, either in money or land orders, can oc-
cupy other 240 acres, in addition to Ids purchase, for the
yearly payment of £6 for five years, in the name of rent,
with a. right to purchase the whole, on or before the expiry,
of the 5 years, at £1 per acre. 4th.—Poncing and im-
proving of the land, has also occupied the attention of tho
Legislation, and all lands purchased by land orders or other-
wise, must he commenced to ho improved within 0 months
after the date, at which application is made for them.
Lands held on lease must be fenced within 18 months after
the date of the lease, but if the lands leased are contiguous
to a purchase,, it is only necessary to fence the lands so
held. Until the above conditions are complied with, no
deed of, grant of the lands purchased will be given, and
where leased, the lease will he forfeited. It appears from
this, that nojsale or transfer ,of land can take place until the
lands have ,been so far fenced and improved. Want of space
compels us to leave the rest of our communication on this
subject until next number-,
To the Editor, , ,
Sir —;My report for the, last week is most satisfactory.
The -health of the passengers seems to have considerably
improved, barring a few coughs and colds, which every one
expects during such -weather as wo have experienced. I.
have much pleasure in informing your readers that the
state of the schools has very mpoh improved, the attend-
ance, very regular/ Thanks to'Tho exertions of a, gentleman
well known onboard. A;Sunday school has alsobeoncom-
menced for children, ; and promises well. I hope in my
next ■to he able tb ! 1 give to' your readers further details as
regards the progress of the different schools, and I trust
they will he as satisfactory as J anticipated. The number
of cases, under treatment, has been 48, 17 of whom were
patients last week, : and are how convalescent. Temperature
.--Saloon, 64 ; maiii 1 deck, 62'6; tween decks, 67-0,
' E, IF. UodgUnson, M. B.
Sir, —It has just struck me that Ms is Wednesday, and am-'
sequently the day for my sending you the account of the number
of miles run by the ship during ihe week, I don' t know of any
pla.ee where the time apparently passes so quietly as 071 board
ship, aliho' each, eonseeuiive day seems tedious. It scarcely
seems fiuo days ago since I sciit you my last report, and yet
seven days ha7>e gone by without any material progress having
Lean 771a.de, Bui we must not complain, for we find that several
of the ships we have spoken have been several days longer than
ourselves, We are still in a. position to make something like an
average passage, and I think at present that there, is every ohanee
of our doing so. The week's run amounts to 861 wiles, Every
one on board knows what 1 tic have had to contend with—-light
easterly weather, which it is i77ipossible to work against with any
amount of satisfaction., The present appearance of the weather
augurs well far the neat two nr three days, and I hope we vow
experience something like Oape Weather — good, strong, rattling
westerly winds,
I). B. OARVOSSO,
Captain of the Fusilier,
1864, Latitude. Longitude. Distance.
JuaoX6th. 36° 59' S, 8° 31/ W. 172 miles,
17th. 37 6 ,6 21 • 105
18th, 87 2 3 36 182
19th. 86 24 0 B 8 186
20 th. 85 50 0 10 11 7i
21st. 36 55 1 I ‘ 49
22ud, 87 49 4 57 190
, Total distance . 801.
Notwithstanding our reiterated announcements that no
communication can ha inserted in this journal, unless ac-
companied by the real name of the writer, we still continue to
have anonymous letters sent to us. One received this week on
the subject of the alarm of fire on Sunday morning, and on
uncovered lights used in the ship, but this cause have been
inserted, and altbo’ wo took the trouble of making enquiry iu
the steerage, from which plaee tho letter was dated, to,ascer-
tain who our correspondent was, we are unable to learn his
name. Tho name is kept by us ’strictly private, and as we
said last week is of no other use than to enable us to verify
the good faith of any communication wo may receive. As an
instance of the use of this precaution, we may mention that
in last number, under the head of local news, and titled mar-
riages, some circumstances, wore stated which gave offence on
hoard, altbo’ no names were mentioned, nor bad the Editors
of tho journal any notion as to who was meant. We knew
our correspondent, and on applying to him wo learned, and
have now the satisfaction of stating that his informant was
cpiite wrong in his facts of the paragraph, and that it was al-
together a trick on the gullahle and unwary. The subject of
fire is treated in our. Leader of to-day, hut wo cannot see w hat
connection there is between lights during the night iu the
2nd cabin, and fighting in the steerage, os two .blacks will
never make a wliito We scarcely think, that there is any
ground for the insinuation that partially is shown by tho am
thoritios on board for any class of passengers. We believe
that in many particulars, steerage passengers are better off
than those in any other part of the ship, and the forbearance,
which has ever been exercised towards thorn, to say nothing of
the friendly and neighborly way in which all classes meet, pre-
vents us believing that the feeling of our correspondent as to
the.partiality shown to others,-and the strict discipline to
which the steerage is subjected, represent the opinion of fhafe
class of passengers.' We should be ’sorry to think ij diet, as it
is totally unfounded; , . ,
LOCAL , new&:
Post Office.'—Complaints are daily madp that tije corres-
pondence which can now be carried on board, is all one-gidcd (


"HOW WE WENT TO QUEENSLAND, ON BOARD THE " FUSILIER.”
“HOW WiS \VJ««T TU IjIIi'iKNISHAJNJJ, UN IsUAivU THI'J " IMJ&UAIU*.
a&from the want of proper addresses Being given, few, if any proximatiug, the ships time to-day being,'l2 minutes slow-
letters can ho answered. Can.no ingenious individual suggest Sunday, 19 June, Greenwich time and ship time to-day almost
a"remedy. Wc fear it lies with the writers themselves. the same, the longitude' of the ship being 0.53 W., or still
Alanuin» Oeccurrenoe. —A few morning’s ago, one of the minutes slow. Church. Service as usual., During Cast night
young gentlemen, a first cabin passenger, was observed in the ah alarm of firo was raised, but was soon suliduod. Monday,
muson truck. iu a very awkward predicament. His presence 20th. A light and variable heocze, and S ships jp sight from
of mind Lad failed him in-liis elevated position, and be was the deck. A Farmers’Chib, established in the, 2nd cabin, for
seen clhmno 1 to the rigging in the agony of despair, appa- the discussion of all, matters connected with a settler’s life,
vently about* to loosen his hold, when '.another gentleman, well Tuesday, 21st. , Five vessels,' in view, all full rigged ships,
known for his quiet energy and pluck, immediately proceeded Four were on the same course; as ourselves, and one on. the op-
to the relief of the unfortunate, and soon landed him safe on posito tac,k. Two of thorn,passed,us within hailing, distance,
deck. one the Helena, from Cardiff, to Shanghai, 61 days out. The
.Fire.—Early on Sunday morning, ah alarm of fire was other was the Spray of the Ocean, from London to Sydney, 54
raised in the 2nd cabin. At one time it looked serious, hut days out, doing that distance in 7 days loss ,than wo have
was soon subdued. The facts, as far as can be ascertained, taken. Towards the evening, the breeze freshened. Wednes-
aro, that a candle, left burning, in one of the private bunks, June 22. The breeze continues fair. Wc have boon !) weeks
bad either fallen down, or bad ignited the tallow in the bottom out to-day, and wo can scarcely say wo have had any foul
of the lamp, which, again falling upon the floor in a burning weather,.or that if we should happen to,have a longer passage
state, produced tho alarm given. Wo understand that some than wo anticipated, we hope that our luck for good weather
one was sick in the cabin, thus accounting for any light being will continue, and which will mqro than compensate for any
■ there at all at that timo. It would bo" a groat safety, as well little delay. Thursday, 23rd. In tho, morning wo name up
as a great saving, wore nothing hut spring lamps allowed to be with, and passed th e American ship, Tho Western, Star, of
used, to say not Sing of the much greater cleanliness, Boston, U. 8., from Liverpool to Calcutta, and opt 09 days,
Bailies,—During tho week, several articles were raffled, the G days longer than wo have .boon, Wo soon lost sight of her,
first was a pair of Balmoral boots, 20 chances, at Is. each, won tho’ wo may expect to seedier again. During the last 24 hours,
by tho ondtly servant; who sold his ohaftoo to Mr .Mark for 55.; wc have made tho best run wo had yet-, done since.leaving
he Mr. Work, sold them after tho raffle for 12s. Speculation Gravesend, tho distance run being about 245 miles. The fair
was rife, an offer being made by tho last buyer to raffle them wind still continues. Friday, 24 th. About 4 o’clock ■this
over again, 18 cbanecs, Is.; this could not bo done, so ho sold morning,- tho breeze increasing, and tho sou running high, the
at 15a'.' to one of tho crew. A revolver was won by Mr. J. weather studding-sail-boom broke, - and early in tho- forenoon
Jones, saddler, passenger. , Another pair of Balmoral hoots tho fore-top-gallant-sail, ripped „np. Saturday, J uno 25. As
was Avon .by Signor Bennetti, who immediately sold them Avas anticipated, our Yankee-friend crept past ns during tho
for 125.. ", : uight, and is noAv ahead. ;We are now nearly.in the long, of
Notes from a Journal—Saturday, June IS.—We .arc again the . Cape, of G ood Hope, which, is 18° 24 oast, and about 400
approaching the longitude of Greenwich, ship time, and the miles south of it, ?
old London time wo brought from homo Avith us, arc now ap-
||ohj Muj lumt to (fitpsW, mi kat;tl tk •■Jtoiilm;; -
satubday, 2nd. jifijiTißGi.''' : fTT'-... . : : “
LOST-
Lost, a Library Boole, entitled Line upon line, No. 56.
Whoover brings the book to Mr. Robinson, Librarian,- will
receive a reward. June 28,1804. ’ :
Lost, a hook, entitled Say and Seal. Avith name of OAvner
on it. Anyone returning it to Foxglove Lodge,2nd Cabin,
will he'Awarded. ■ - ; ,
LIBRARY NOTICE.-
- Notice is hereby given, that . after Saturday nest, 2nd
July; the period allowed for reading books on loan from the
library will bo extended from 3 days to 5 days,,inclusive of
the;days of borroAving and.returning, library open every
lawful day, from a quarter past 4 till 10.o’clock a.m. July
28,1864 ...
i ■ . SCHOOLS;-. ■ ■
The schools on hoard meet as- follows ; —Adult Males,, 10
,to 12 a.m.; 3.to 4 pan, ■ Females; 10, to 12 'aim.; 3 to 4
pan. Children, 2 to 3 p.m. July 28,1864.
WANTED.
Wanted, a small, pair of hinges for a pipe ease; best price
.given. > ; Communications to Mrs Lirripei-’s lodgings, 2nd
•Ga})in. . A ; ■ .y
'WajiTcd, the loan of Tennyson’s Works’ for a ,few days,
The greatest care taken of the same. Communications as
above.
Wanted, the loan,of songs, music, or song books, for the
use of the troupe, ■
. SATURDAY 2ND.- JULY, 1864. ~
Slowly,-yet safely, we proceed On out- journey; and though
Ave often hear the words, “ I Avish wo avoco there,” yet, in-
stead of complaining, Ave have more--cause:to die thankful
that, so far, avg have been blessed Tvifch so pleasant-and,
prosperous a voyage. It is now-Upwards of teii avooIIb sinco
wo loft tho shores of England, panel though 1 The time may
seem long to some, Avith most of us if liras passed- quickly.
Wo shall long remtsmber the day when we.iill met hero to-
gether .for tho first time, representatives;,of nearly every
county in Great Britain and Ireland, tho.majority,of im
strangers to each other, and having, with.foAV exceptions,
one great object in view—that, of bettering our condition in
life, and realizing a-fortune. Lot us hope, avo shall not bo
disappointed in o br expectationshut .certainly all will not
bo satisfied, especially if .they think to find, a colonial-, life
oiio of ease and luxury. Money .cannot-be had in Queens-
land by asking for it, and a fortune cannot ho made there
liny more than at home without energy. If any on o; sup-
poses that business inquires Ipss.attention'-there than at
home, they will find themselves mistaken; for it will he only
by p6i’sqvera.nee,nai’cfulness ? : and honesty , industry that he
will attain Ris object. The samo_ epipmand—that map shall
eat bread by tlie SAveat .qi .hishrOAV—pwill follpw ,us through
tho World.; but, Avhateyer, piny,fie,.oiir, success there,iet.us
one and all ehcteavpr.to become useful colonists, worthy


"HOW WE WENT TO QUEENSLAND ON BOARD THE 'FUSILIER.’'
representatives of those we have left behind. Let our
motto he--“Do as you wish to be done unto;” so that, at :
least, it may bo said that the emigrants of the “ Fusilier,” •
in 1861, wore-respectable members of society, and a prodit . 1
to their Fatherland—a'land few of us shall ever see again;
for, though some may homo fortunate as to accumulate ■
sufficient riches early enough ill life to enable thorn to return
to enjoy the same, yet it will he-the lot of most of ns to find
a colonial grave. It is but a short time that wo have been
together, but it'lias had its results.' Many acquaintances
have-been formed amongst l us which will ’odd in a lasting
friendship; and though niost' ef'ub (wlien tho time comes)
will bo glad enough to-icavo the old ship, yet there are many
on board from whom we shall part witlfrogret. A few weeks:
only have passed'Since wo-parted from all that was near 'and
dear to us, bidding-thom a long—moat of them a last—
farewell-; in.a few-weeks’- more, those who'are now become
used to bacll other’s society,-and wlio arc almost reckoned
among old familiar fiicea;must part, many of'us never to
meet again. hlFet such is: life. If we arc 'spared, there is
no doubt that■ wo snail look back with pleasure lo tiro time
wo spent together, especially if we can remember any. little
trouble, wo- have taken, or any little saerifreb .'wo,have made
tor the comfort oi> amusement of our follow passengers • and
in. after, life many a happy hour will wo spend (either by a
cheerful fireside in our native land,' or hi our Colonial home)
in. relatiug.-io.those aromid us how we passed’ our,time, and
how happily, many-an hour was 'spent, when wo went to
Queensland on board the-Fusilier. . ■ • 1 •
.Loj'd, (J, E.) hq, “ East and be'thankful.”— ■Ptmclv. ■'
We are, not aware' of onything that more closely resembles
the constant motion'and clustering of boos around the en-
trance of a hive in. full - operation, than' the movements of
the paHSOiigiU'S ou"board:an.emigrn,nt ship. The restlessness
of the boo is.proverbial; and at leastin this 'respect, if not
in productiveness, the; inhabitants'of'tho-FuSilibr equal tho
inmates of ahivo. In getting; up our Journal on the Fridays ;
and Saturdays of each week, we have a tolerable notion of •
tho: ingress and egress-tb aiid .'from the 2nd' Gahin, as no- |
cossity uciw; compels.us, from the: change'of Climate, to con-
duct ouri labors iurdoors,. arid to>u«eth6' only table suitable'
for our purpose in jtlttit .-cabin,, which 3s the -quo nearest ‘ the
gangway- • i The: whole light; as well as- ' the ■ Only mbans of
any-entrance .or. exit to. or from that compartment; is by the
door. , Every transit either .way Obscures 'the*'dim Tight'with
which we mutt.' do our host nto,-.work*; i and on Friday and
Saturday last, when chafing.under tho constant interruptions
our _ labors were subjected to, 1 we began to think 'that ’the
statistics, of. restlessness i dm. iboard, would mob be ati unpro-.
Jitable, source of amuadfnent; of might help to prevent tho
explosion of .certain not. tbo polite ejaculations to which w 6
treated, our,fellow passengers; .iW& 'immediately sot 'about
■ tuning and counting, the number of /pof sdns wlio went- out
aiufin; : and..although'tho.mean;.result of our observations
for. homvvery'much astonished us—being a
fraction; less than '3,0 in.'aanurut'o—wb were-more than smv
prised to find that withm 6 minutes, i2di2 exits andentrances,
and, during one minute of the same time, upwards ■of 50
passages in and but were made. This was on K’iday morn-
ing; . hniuediatejy after. ibreakfaSt-r-rno .-doubt. i a very busy
time ; , but, on .Saturday! .afternoon we . tried a Similar, experi-
ment. ,w t it,h .nearly the j same: resixlts,.utlthouglr • the frequent
occupation. pf ;onr. light .then arose in . some degree- from the
inmates ,qf..other. pamta .of - the.; ship browdiiig around our
only, window- and idoor by way i of. Shelter. •;-. Our cabin- coni-
tainS|3o .adults;.,and,oun .eompiitationds, that.every,,dire of
them, during: thoutinioi iwebobserved them, passed .nj> • and
dpwn.o'uce ,eyery, minute; and,of cousre,,as many, of them
did not do, so,, the. time ,6f: the restmust i -have heeii pretty
constantly occupiediixr 'the, exciting, and. intellectual -amuse,
mont of such a. getting i tip. stairs: as wo never ,did i see,
When wo undertook the duties' of editors of this. Juurual
for the amusement of the public, wo certainly foresaw many
of tho incohtoniences which must be endured from the want
of suitable opportunities for doing so. We did not expect
to find that a snugly carpeted and well lighted “ .Editor's
[Room” awaited ns; but tho constant irritation of having
that taken from us which cannot bo returned, is sometimes
more than our temper can stand; and we recommend to our
friends on board a perusal of the tale of Alexander .the
Groat and ."Diogenes the philosopher. The king visited the
philosopher, \ylio was, ns usual, sitting in a tub ; and asking
'Diogenes what he copld do for him, received as his answer,
“ Stand out from, .between mo and tho light, so that you
don’t tak’o away from mo that which you cannot give.”
■MUSICAL, LITEEAEY, AND DRAMATIC,
"Week after week our concerts continue to take place with
unabated success, and thrd’ the 'evenings gradually become
colder, tho. attendance in'every Distance, up to the present
time, has been all that, the moat sanguine expectations ot tho
troupe could wish for. The company, since their formation,
have shown a gradual improvement, and by the time wo
at Brisbane, we. hope they will have arrived at such a statu ol
proficiency, as toepahlq thorn to, give thoir friends a musical
treat on shore.:,. The last concert, we think, was the best wo
have had since, we eamo on hoard the good ship .fusilier.
Notwithstanding the absence of their valuable teuare, I hut
Crux, who wo arc sorry to jicar frow Mrs. Lirripcv has been
suffering fyoxv severe disposition for some days past, owing to a
a spro .throat. ; hocaught from tho wind blowing into his open
mouth when, singing in tho last concert, but we hope by nos t
week he will be well enough again to appear before the piih-
lic. The troupe has reason to be proud of' their now bari-
tone Signor DUxlinctti, whoso fine-voice and obliging .dispo-
sition have,procured him many admirers, especially among tlm
fair sex. Ilia .songs, of the “ blood hyo, afc.tho door” and “My
;own my Guiding .Star" wore, a groat treat to a music-loving
•audience. The- General (as usual), created roars of laughter,
iihhis character of the No.wlmvcu:Fish Wild, and this spug ol
" The.Botie Rows, : was well sung. The Signor Bonetti,, like
his follow lodger, Herr Crux, was prevented from singing
thro’ -.a severe .Cold, and as ho is ono:of our most popular Vo-
calists, he was-missed. We wish that some others ot the
troupe would'imitate■.this gentlemen’s style of singing, , so as
to make the-words of their songs hotter heard, as the Lignor,
notwithstanding his Italianaeoent, made tho words,.ot IDs
songs more easily understood: than almost any man .xu the
company—“Am I .right- or. any other man.” Ahj piling
we will go,”. was.Buiigby'Mario. in very- good Style, and the
chorus was. well-performed. Signor. Ba-gg, sang “ Good News
from Home.” ■ Count Kossuth sang “-.A Great Big Jfttili,” and
they called him a, whale, . Signor 1 Ricardo Sang, “ Willie, wo
have missed'youj” in very good stylo. Sambo sang “ Tln>
Poor Irish Boy,’; ODahdb, “TlmYirgin of Nineteen Years Old;”
Don Milesiano sang- " Lilly Pale,” and Don Frioas.su, “ Hop
Light, Loo.” The concerted pieces wore “ Bold Bobinjluod,
and* “Airs wcll,” -both'of which were well rendered by the
troupe, and'showed, to great-advantage, the impruyewent they
have lately’ made." iThe feature of the evening was, however,
Garibaldi’s ultracomie sohg of “ My Dadda,’’ which is a parody
on the “ Low Back Gar,”, and created yells of laughter. The
practice-' will 1 lake jJ'aee as usual, on Mon day; and Tuesday,
■each'^y, : nt'-ll ; .Bola.a».'and' ftplmy- ■ ■'. ■ ■
gPOETISIG INTELLIGENCE. ’ ■
Little has taken placj?'in this lino for some week’s' pokt, until
Monday, / whdii.a few games at quoits were played By Herr’do
Witt Kossuth', & A, and on Wednesday, the . General intro-
duced, the well-known ffcotcli- .gp-mo of" curling,” only, that
tho game lin'd to ho played.with the rope quoits, and the docks
wore suhstituod for iqe,;' neyertbp] ess, .most pf them ofl hmvrd


“ITOW WE WENT TO QUEENSLAND ON HOARD THE 'FIMLIEU."
tried tlieiv hands at it., and derived considerable exercise and
amusement from the game. Wo wish that those on board
would show more energy in getting up games of this kind, as
the time passes ranch more, quickly when the hands and mind
are occupied.
JOINT STOCK COMPANY ECU THE PUBLIOA.
TIGHT O P “HOW WE WENT TO QUEENSLAND.”
A letter on this subject will bo found among our corres-
pondence. Wo regret that, owing to some misunderstand-
ing or mismanagement, the memorandum of agreement has
gone a missing in the Ist Cabin. This has put us to great
inconvenience, as the, document was carefully prepared, and
it is always awkward for a second copy of such a paper to
cast up after another has been signed and completed.
There is however now no help for it, and we have been
obliged to get up .another memorandum, which will be sent
round the ship for signatures in charge of a responsible
party. A fter the signatures are obtained, a meeting will he
held’, in order that business may he proceeded with,
CORRESPONDENCE.
To the Editor,
Sir—-You stated in a former number that it was your in-
tention to publish your Journal on your arrival at Brisbane,
by a Joint Stock Company, and that a Provisional Committee
had been appointed to issue shares, and for general purposes
since then, nothing move has been done concerning it. Will
you kiudly inform mo in your next, whether such is now your
intention, if so, to whom we are to apply. If not taking too
much liberty, I would recommend you to name a special day,
time and'place for issuing shares) so that parties wishing to
obtain them, may know what to do.
A WOULD-BE SHAREHOLDER.
To (he Editor,
Sir—Last Monday night, we held another meeting-for
the purpose of discussing the sub ject of scab in sheep. There
was a very good attendance. we-finally came to the con-
clusion, that scab injaheep is similar to the itch in man and
mange in dogs. It is produced by the acarus (a.small in-
sect,) burrowing thro’ the scarf-skin, and there laying its
eggs, and hatching its young. Alitor which it brings them
out, attached to its foot. As soon as brought above
the surface of the skin, they all begin to burrow for them-
selves, making a -small hole at the root of the wool. The
first sign that you see of the scab is a tendency of the-sheep
to bo always scratching itself, and rubbing up against posts
or trees. Thro’this rubbing, it is that, the contagion is
very often conveyed from one animal to another, the in-
fected sheep leaving a piece of wool behind, in which one of
the acari may chance to he secreted, so that the nest ani-
mal that uses this rubbing place, iu.uine cases often, catches
this disease. It is generally a dirty or half-starved sheep
that this disease attacks, altho’ a short-wool led sheep has
been known to escape it altogether. It is also often brought
on by the sheep (after, being over-driven, and getting much
he'at'od), being exposed to cold and damp, thereby chocking
the perspiration. The first signs of the scab ai;e, a con-
tinued -uneasiness; and a tendency in the sheep always to be
rubbing itself. When this is perceived, the shepherd should
immediately catch the infected sheep, shear and wash it
well with soap and water, and: then dross it either with, to-
bacco, water, and turpentine, or mercurial ointment and.lard,
as the case may be. After the sheep has been well dressed,
there is very little fear of its conveying the disease to any
other animal, as the insect is killed as soon as it makes its
appearance above the surface of the scarf-skin.
IT. F. HARRIS.
To the Editor,
, Sir—l am a landsman, and never was so far out of senj
before, in fact, I am almost as bad as a friend of mine,
who on a pleasure excursion in the South of England, ar-
riving at 'Southampton, thought he would go over lo the
Isle of Wight. The sea was somewhat rough, and he of
course began to feel queer, and to settle accounts with old
Neptune, montally resolving .he would never again trust
himself on Hie water, and such was his joy, that on
reaching Cowes, he was the first to jump on the pier, and
forgetting, his insular position, ho loudly exclaimed —
‘•Thank God, I’m here, now I’ll go homo by rails.” I re-
peat it, I am almost as bad as he, and have sometimes wished
I could, find a back door on board the Fusilier, by which I
might retire, and if some of my fellow passengers would
admit the fact,l should notbealoneiu my wish, Since coming
on board the good ship, I have been very favoorably im-
pressed with the striking difference there, is between Jack
on shore and Jack at sea. A more complete contrast can
scarcely ce conceived. On shore.too ho often presents the
appearacc of a wild, reckless, whole hog, or some sort of
being Rising thro’ the follies of his. class, his hard earned
gains, and to a certain extent the respect of socity at sea.
When the excitement of leaving his friends lias subsided,
ho becomes a tractable, and able, often a well, informed man,
capable of putting to shame many of those who have un-
thinkingly laughed at his eccentricities on shore. Shortly
.we hope to be able to say that thro’.his bold exertions, and
the goodness of benign Providence, wo have safely escaped
the perils incident to a long voyage, and ever after let us
remember that it is our bounden duty to speak out honestly
in his praise, and do what wo can for his coniibrt and hap-
piness on shore, seeing wo are now able to testify to his
good qualities, and the bright side of a character, that, when
on shore, is often more sinned against than sinning. AII of
ns now know what a life at sou is, and can pndoratand the
temptations of the shore after a long voyage, let us thore-
I fore take care when wo have again the pleasure of being on
dry ground, not to'commit.the follies and absurdities which
we have been accustomed to deprecate in J ack a shore.
.) UiSTITI A.
To (he Editor,
Sir—Any one who can afford entertainment, or give plea-
suro, no matter in how. small a degree, confers on his fellow
passengers a boon. That some of us have done our best, Hus
weekly. concerts and balls, which still continue to afford
amusement, fully attest that more might bo done in the way
of giving readings from the works of our host authors, and,
lectures on.different subjects, ■we are quite confident tho’
this, can ho done in the open air; for Hie nights are now
very cold and dark, still we .have room for such entertain-
in tho 2nd cabin; and if wo can raise an unanimity
of feeling on the subject,'it would bo comparatively easy to
get up something of the kind. There, is scarcely light
enough for each individual to read by himself, therefore this
should he another inducement, as it would be a capital way
to beguile some of the weary evenings wehavo still to spend,
ere we reach cur destination. I propose, therefore, a meeting
in jibe 2nd cabin, for the furtherance of this desirable
object, to which meeting all who feel interested, and will
give us their co-operation and assistance, will be heartily
welcome. ,• NEMO.
‘To the Editor, .
Sir—Wo , have been unable to obtain any definite infor-
mation as to the transference of land, orders, or the sale of
lands. Personal occupation of land is of so much /conse-
quence in a new country, that no doubt such transactions
will he regulated by the Government,- who do cer-
tainly, in the ease of land orders, retain in their own hands
the right to allow or withdraw transferences. After the
title deeds have been got, and the lands partially improved,
sales, no doubt, will be/effected; No leave, however, can
he held by an agent for another, neither can money be bor-
rowed in any way on the security of a lease. If, within 6
months; parties have commenced their occupation of land,


“ HOW WE WENT TO QUKKNBLAN'D, ON BOARD THfc] 11 FUSILIER,"
they fail to begin their improvements, their right to posses il-
ia forfeited, but the purchase-money, under a deduction of
40 per cent, that is 2s. in the pound, is returned to the pur-
chaser, and tho laud is again open to the public for se-
lection, In tho case of lands taken up under a land order,
no money is returned to tho nominal owner, this right
lapses.. - Parties holding land on lease, forfeit their pos-
session by allowing their rent to remain unpaid for 30 days
after it is' duo. A forfeiture is also incurred if tho occupier
allow tho land held by him on lease to remain IS months
uufonced, Little further practical information as to bind
orders, can bo given, and the only remark that occurs to us
is, that part ies already settled in the'colony, may send homo
for their friends, and may also, if they bring out servants,
or send for them, obtain land orders on their account. In
tho case of sending for friends, land ordro will bo given aa
usual, according to tho amount of passage-money paid, and
for servants a grant of 18 acres, or an order for ;GIS, will
bo given to tho master bringing them out, and tho servant,
after 2 years service, will bo entitled tb a grant of 12 acres,
or mi equivalent order. In all reserves, there will bo for a
long time a largo qnnuity of unoccupied laud, winch, as long
as unallotod, or not otherwise required, will bo available to
tho neighboring settlors, under such restrictions aa Govern-
ment may impose, and those lands may be of use to them
much in the same way as our commons arc in England. Tim
inducements therefore to emigrate to a man with small
capital, and a large family, willing and able to work, arm an
equivalent in land for tho passage money; easy terms, for
the purchase, of land, rights of common, of a groat extent,
mul unlimited demand for every thing that can bo raised on
the soil (which in general will produce most things grown
either within or beyond the tropics.) Wo do not, know
to what this right of using common lauds maybe applied,
but wo should f lunk that a largo amount of young stock may
be reared, which either may bo kept for feeding, or disposd
of at remunerative prices, or such a right may form a largo
addition to a dairy farm. What Queensland wants most of
■of all is n. supply of labor, the demand for which cannot bo
satisfied, and all authorities agree that as it is easy to ob-
tain employment iu agricultural or pastoral pursuits, in-
-1 ending' settlers are safest at first to take an engagement until
they become accustomed to the ways of tho country, and
have had time to look about them. what wo aixi going t o
do in Quouslaud, will now very soon, we hope, lie a solved
problem wo all arc interested iu, and tho natural bent of
our talents will have full scope for experiment- Bravo
hearts, clear heads, and stout arms, must succeed.
To the Editor,
Sir—Since I last wrote you, we. have shortened our distance
from Moi'cton Bay hy 1069 miles. This is hut a very ordinary
week's work for this pari of the world, but you know sailors are
proverbial for their grumbling propensities, and it would seem
that lam no exception to the general rule, We, must, however,
endeavor fp he content, although we are not exactly flying along. I
am in hopes that something, like 6 week’s hence , if all goes well,
and. we get anything like the usual breezes, to land you all in
Queensland.
D. B. QABVOSSO,
Captain of the Fvsilier
1804, Latitude. Longitude. Biatn-noe.
Juno 23rd. 32° 44' S. - 14” 45' B. 470 miles,
24th.
25th. 40 41 17 03 141
20 tb. 41 27 17 40 48
27th. 41 20 20 29 127
: 28th. 41 16 24 20 . 174
29th. 41 15 26 46 109
Total distance 1069
MISCELLANEOUS.
Ball.—Ou Wednesday uiglit the weekly ball took place,
and was kept up with unabated spirit.
Theft.—Petty thefts continue to be carried on daily, and
it now takes a man all his time to save bis bacon, as it
appears there are always a select few loitering about tho
galley at meal times, ready to take anything in the shape of
grub that may come iu their way. A few days ago a goose
was stolon from one of the boats on tho starboard side of
the poop. Tho culprit no doubt finding it impossible to
“ cook his gooso,” must have disposed of it in some other
way than was at first intended, and thus, perhaps, saved
himself from the disgrace of cannibalism in dating his
brother. The only motive for the act wo can conceive is,
that the thief wanted to accustom himself to tho unlive
habit in Queensland, of having cold man ou tho uideboard.
“ Who,stole the goose?” has been the question of the week;
but, like the road murder, it still remains a mystery. That
tho goose was done for is a fact, and no doubt it would give
unusual satisfaction were the culprit discovered,
Mesmerism.—On Wednesday evening, Signor Redcap
volnntoorcd to make a few experiments on animal magnet-
ism in tho 2nd Cabin, which turned out to ho extremely
interesting and entertaining. Several gentlemen subjected,
themselves to the preliminary manipulations, one of whom,
well known ou board, proved a good subject, lie was put
through many of tho usual experiments, in which the oper-
ator was quite successful. The thanks of tho passengers
present arc duo to the Signor for an hour’s excellent amuse-
meut, and he has kindly consented to operate ou some other
evening.
Podostriauism. —It has only just’come to our knowledge
that there is one of the fleet of foot among our little com-
munity. The Pod who has repeatedly beaten belli Teddy
Mills (Young England) and the Seneca Indian Doorfooi ,
and is now on his way to tho antipodes to compete with all
comers. Ho is to bo seen frequently talcing violent exercise
on tho main dock ; but more frequently to bo found iu Jus
bunk, smothered in blankets, with the view, no. doubt, of
bringing himself down to running weight,
LATEST TELE'GRAMS
In consequence of Spurgeon having been returned by an
overwhelming majority for the borough ot Southwark solely
at tho expense of his 1 constituents, ho (Spurgeon) with his
usual liberality, coupled-with his desire.to bring more sheep
to Ids fold, or rather grist to the mill, is making arrange,
incuts by subscription to add another storoy to his Taber-
nacle.
Notes from a Journal. —Saturday 25th Juno, ISOk— To-
wards sundown we had all tho indications of a squall from
tho North-West. Very shortly after lightning at a great
distance was flashing along the horizon both to the East
and West of North, and a change of wind wan expected.
As tho evening closed in, the storm came gradually down
on us, and about half-past 8 o’clock wo were in the middle
of it. ■ Though not- a severe one, tho appearance of thin
thunder storm was quite -different from what wo ever see at
homo. The length of. the Hash is much greater, and the-
angle of the streak of .lightning loss acute; in fact, it iu
more like a fiery serpent wriggling.about than the orthodox
lightning represented by our artists. Wo were reminded
of Vasco do Gamba weathering tho Cape for tho first time,
some 300 years ago ; and it-required no stretch of imngina-
lion to picture, tho superstitious but bold old man - strug-
gling against-what, ho conceived to be the visible presence
of the spirit of the atom), as tho clouds and lightning were
constantly assuming such fantastic out!hies. When tho
storm was at its height, two small balls of.blue, flame made
their appearance, one on file imiin mast, hqlow the main lop


" HOW WE WENT TO .QUEENSLAND, ON BOARD THE « FUSILIER,’''
which speedily ascended io the extremity of the topgallant
and settled there for 20 or 30 seconds ; the other on the
inmeu mast, which also took a similar course. The sailors
call such things “ complasancobut the derivation of the
word wo could not make out. We suppose it to bo a col-
lection of phosphorescent atmospheric particles, perhaps
lighted up by electricity, or, at least, collected and con-
densed by such an agency. It is quite harmless, and closely
resembles, what wo have seen at home collect on the mane
and head of a horse when crossing marshy moors at night.
N unday, 2(ilh June.—Wo fair wind yet. Church service on
the main deck as usual. Shortly after dinner, 4i grampuses,
a species of whale, wore scon floundering about close to the
ship, and blowing frequently. They were about the size of
the long boat, and very unwieldy looking. Their backs
were of a dark brown, and their bellies white, so that they
often looked like a dark colored boat with a white streak
round it. Monday, 27th June—A breeze from North-West
is now blowing, and we got merrily along. In the evening,
the 2nd mooting of the Settlors’ Club was hold in No.*!
Bleak House. The hall in which we met was about 01-ft.
by (5 ft., and, having bunks on each side, a clear floor apace
would have been loft of (ij- ft. by 1 ft. 6 in., had it not been
hampered with boxes. We laid nearly a dozen members
present, and although the scono was grotesque enough, the |
Hulk was good. Tuesday, 28th June.—Our coucert —the
best we have yet had—came off in the evening. Wednes-
day, 22th. —The Scotch game of curling introduced to-day,
perhaps the first time it was over played South of the Liuo
on the high seas. In the evening Signor Redcap success-
fully exhibited his powers as a mesmerist, Thursday, 80th.
—The weather to-day much colder, and the salt provisions
go much better down. In the evening there was a squall,
accompanied with lightning. Friday, Ist'July.—Weather
still colder. Early in the morning, a sharp but violent
squall created some excitement among the nervous. One
man gravely assorted that they had cut away the masts ;
but wo only lost a studding sail. Wo are now making good
progress on our journey, and in about 4 weeks we may ex-
pect to see land, To-day a largo Brown sea-bird, called by
the sailors a Molly Hawk, was shot; and falling on the deck,
a good opportunity of inspecting it was afforded to the pas-
sengers, It measured 8 foot 5 inches between the tips of
the wings, and, as usual in moat sea birds, the carcase was
comparatively small.
OONUM.DRIJMS.
What excuse might a tailor make for stealing a gooso P
—He only wanted to heat it.
Why is a cigar like a lady’s bustle P—Because it is manu-
factured tobacco.
||(3i mpf to tfii toaiid tint ‘Vifitiiiliiti!.’’
I, HIT tilt “rJjllHtlti;!',’’
iKZxviTvn ■■>‘ l "iiiwnw»w»iw»‘irrwaiin»iii»»in«i»iMHM«w—h^m—iw—wimw— w—mm— w—^mtonnimmujiimv
■ JULY, ].SG4.
SATURDAY, 9TH
LOST.
■Lost, a pair of spring side boots, of very little value to
the owner, or any one who may now have thorn. Garibaldi
will he much obliged if the boots are-returned to him.
Lost or mislaid, a library book entitled Campbell’s Far-
mer’s G uide, No, 102. Any one in possession of the book
is requested to baud it to Mr. Robinson, librarian.
Lost, The Monster Penny Song Book, Any one having
it will ploose return it to tie steward, Ist Cabin.
Lost, an. edition of White’s Queensland, with name of
owner inside. Please return the same to Mr. George Harris,
Bleak House, 2nd Cabin.
TO LET.
Apartments delightfully situated, A light and airy bed-
room, with use of sitting-room. Terms moderate, ‘Apply
lo Mrs. Lirripcr, 47 Norfolk st. References given and ox-
changed. No latch-keys allowed. Eorciguors need not
apply,
WANTED.
Wanted, a piece of pasteboard or thin panel, suitable to
mount ly drawing on. Size, 17 by 13 inches. Apply to
Garibaldi.
Wauled, a quantity of thin whip-cord. Apply ns above.
SATURDAY 9TH. JULY, 1864.
The monotony of our present life tempts us to waste much
valuable time, and makes us neglect many opportunities of
self improvement.' Yet we are journey nig to a land where
wo shall lind that well-known aphorism of Lord Bacon’s,
“ Knowledge is power,” most thoroughly exemplified. We
shall find there many men who have risen to affluence, and
wh o are respected and looked up to by all around them, and
on analysing the cause of their success, it will bo found to
bo owing, in no slight degree, to their possessing that gene-
ral knowledge' and power of applying it which wo so often
discern in reading the lives of eminent travellers, explorers,
Ac., which enables them to subsist when thrown entirely on
through feelings of curiosity had watched—perhaps assisted
—carpenters, blacksmiths, and other mechanics in their
daily avocations, and when placed in the wild hush, under
circumstances of unforeseen difficulty, their early recollec-
tions proved indeed invaluable. We should therefore at all
times strive to extend our sphere! of such 'information ns
much as possible; and, as I believe there are on board per-
sons of almost every trade, wo would endeavor to impress
on nil, that if they wore to acquire from each other only a
partial insight into their various trades, an amount of prac-
tical knowledge would ho obtainedhvhich would b« of the
greatest value to them in their future colonial home. From
our worthy sailors one might get instructed in the use of the
compass, making knots, plaiting, splicing ropes, Ac. The
compass has often saved persona who, have lost their way in.
the bush, and sufficient practical knowledge of its use might
ho easily picked up on board to save many a traveller from
a painful and lingering death, A well-tied knot is often a
matter of very considerable moment, and may ensure the
safety of lives and property, while many a serious accident
bas happened both on sea and shore from the want of skill
or care in this apparently simple operation. At first sight,
few things would seem so simple; but to do them effectively
is the result of considerable practice and some judgment.
There arc also several amongst us who have spoilt years in
the Colonies, and who are well capable of giving much
valuable information and advice, which would bo of the
greatest help on landing on the shores of our future home.
An excellent example' has been given by some of,the gentle-
men of the 2nd Cabin, by having a weekly meeting to dis-
cuss the diseases of sheep and other animals, the staple of
the settlor. It is ranch to he regretted that their want of
accommodation will not permit of more being invited to
profit by their discussions. We may look forward 4;o enjoy-
nig in our new country that, greatest of blessings, viz'., of
living under the administration of a benevolent and truly
TiirlYWiml O’AirrtmmimW- a ~,1, J 1 ~.A7 1 / .
7 ■ —— uuwiwj vm , *“ ivim w. uj. y
their own resources, and that too oven with comfort, on Internal government, one which has offered.to many of us,
desolate uninhabitocVrogious/hy rendering them.indopond-. /[?* v defraying nearly the entire expense of the passage, a
wit of tlie artisans they would have summoned to their as- ™'P’ e of independence and liberty almost impossible to be
uistauco in 1 more civilized life. Many of them in their youth amv ' ea llt m tlioso days of competition at homo. She has


"HOW WE WENT TO QUEENSLAND ON BOARD THE 'FUSILIER.”'
endeavored at the same time to relieve onr wearisome
voyage by placing at our disposal a carefully selected library,
containing works of travel the perusal of which, would well
repay 1 the intended wanderer in the hush. The Queensland
Government lias also thought of the education ot her future
subjects, and wo trust that all, young, and _ old, who have
hitherto not bad opportunities of being instructed, will
avail themselves of and attend ' diligently to the classes
opened under the able direction of Mr. Eohmson, who also
merits the thanks of all for . the obliging ■ manner he has
fulfilled his office of librarian., However, it would bo a
mistake to imagine that the more refined accomplishments
mil be useless for the roughlifo many of about to
enter on. On the contrary, they will tend to cheer us in
moments of despondency, .and dissipate those'tee mgs ol
gloom occasioned by the separation from all we hold dear
in the old country. In conclusion, wp have only to add
that, as most probably wc shall be companions for 5 or 6
weeks longer, let that time belaid out to onr future advantage,
and not deliberately incur the responsibility of a waste of time
which is so forcibly described by Cowpor as being nothing
better than iC into empty wells, and growing
old in drawing nothing up.”
CORRESPONDENCE.
To the Editor, . . •
gi rj Since I sent you ah account of _ the scab in bhoop wo
have bad 2 more meetings, ; one to discuss the rot, and tbo
other the treatment of the owe before and after lambing
Eirst of all then I will treat upon the rot. This disease is one
of the most aUcient as well as the ihos.t destructive with which
sheep arc attacked, tlie first syiutomsarc a swolliug under the
■jaw and yellowness under the eyelid, instead as in sound sheep
a fresh red color. The latter of these is the way in which a
farmer or dealer when buying wii, examine them, and if they
look rod under the oyGlid they are sound, if yellow there is
reason to suspect the sheep are infected with this disease.
There are a great many different; opinions how the rot is first I
conveyed into the system, pome think it brought on by pastu- 1
ring on land that is naturally iyetj or soon after it has beou [
flooded. The water lying hn the grass becomes stagnant, and ’
when the'grass, Is again exposed to the sun it decomposes, and l
as food for cattle acts upon tlie blood and causes an overflow of 1
bile which brings on the rot. This we are all inclined to j
•a"roc to, but some consider the' fluke has a deal to do with
the disease. The ova of the fluke are constantly seen in the
dung of the sheep,this being a thing easily preserved from de-
struction by warmth and moisture when taken with the food
soon hatches, and works its way up the gall duet to the liver,
and so impedes the overflow, of bile as to produce disease of the
liver and it’s this 'diseaseijiat is'termed the rot. Spooner says
in his work on sheep it is a fact, that the eggs of the fluke is
found in countless numbers .in. thedung, and there retaining
their vital principle for an indefinite period. .Secondly, we
have to consider the treatment of the ewe before and after lam-
bing Eirst tlie time for putting the" ewe to the ram must be
■regulated by the climate, and, the .likelihood, of the spring keep
being good or bad.Thc great thing is hot to have the ewes too
fat at the time of lambing, and if possible to give tlieni. a few.
turnips and a little hay or corn for a week, or two before they
.arc expected to lamh ; also keep them as quite as possible, as
a sudden fright is apt to .make them miscarry. We now arrive
,at the actual time of lambing, when , the shepherd s eye ought
always to be on his flock. Let nature have its course impos-
sible, and never .help a Ewe unless you are comparatively
bound so to do,.which, is sometimes the case when the lamb is
not in tbo right position for being dropped. If jou see the
nose and tbo two fore feet, appearing, then you may consider
that the owe will be able to lamb herself, although sometimes
she takes a long time about it, and a young ewe will undoubt-
edly in most cases take a longer time a hont ittean an oldono.
' . ■ IT. F. lIAIIR lb,
To the Editor,
Sir—l have received a letter to-day telling me that in spile
of all the cautions, and threats which has been given from time to
time on the subject of fire, yet an individual, and that the same,
that so short a time ago, nearly set the ship on fire, has again
been gidlty of bkrning naked lights in his cabin. The person
is one who we should habe supposed mould not so obstinately have
refiised to attend to the rules of the ship, and endangering the
lives of all board. Thro ’ the medium of your I should
wish it to be made hnown, that any person trangressing in this
way for ths future, will not he allowed a light in his cabin,
covered or uncovered, for the remainder of the passage, and ®
person ; will be appointed to see that this penalty is strictly
carried out. I shall feel obliged by any person informing me
when the rules are brolcen for the future.
D. B. GARVOSSO.
To the Editor, ■ -
Sir-in ono ofyour rorrespondonta rmnariwiUiisl wools we ate (plting along:
but surely. Ihe beginning of the week promised well; we sailed a distmco 01
miles in/days; tire remainder of tlw welt bus been spent in f
S,B. gala, of which I daresay many of you will have a lively remembiance. Galea of
wind aro not very agreeable, but wo can’t expect to go snob a distance wiill out
getting a fow of thorn, although It is more usual to have them m am favor' tlmn
against us- The total distance run amounts to 961 miles, a meat uunsati. laetoiy
dißt ' lCo, ’ : E. E. GARVOSSO,
Captain of the Fusilier,
1864, Latitude. Longitude. Distance.
JunoSOth. 41° 15' S. 3D 22' E. 209 miles.
July Ist. 41 37 35 43 19<
2nd. 42 12 40 21 209
3rd. 41 31 44 49 202
4 tb.
stb. „ ,
Ctb, 41 59 48 7 Ul
Total distance 964
To the Editor, ' , n „
Sir,—ln a former number of your paper, an account was
given of how we live in the steerage; and as many o yom
readers may not have been a long sea voyage, perhaps an ac-
count of bow we live in the 2nd Cabin may prove of some
interest. Eirst of all, then, for a description of tbo cabin it-
self, and the bunks thereunto appertaining., iho cabin is
about 24 feet long by 12 feot wide, and has three tables,
which stand athwart ship. The only light-we have is ob-
tained from the gangway which thus acts as both dooi and
window, and a small portion from the main hatchway in the
intermediate cabin which adjoins ns. The bunks or bei tbs
are partitioned off from the cabin, and stand on each side ot it.
The married bunks being against the cabin, are liglitoU by
dead lights, and the single ones next the side of the. step de-
rive their light from the port lights. The singly bunks me
made to hold four people, two on each side, and m spine, two
on one side and two at the end. We are called by the sbewai cl
at half-past 7, and breakfast at Softer which every ope ough t
to clean bis bunk out thoroughly every morning ; but wc are
Sorry to say that there are but few who do so. Dinner takes
place about half-past 12 o’clock, and consists of salt beef or
pork,' preserved meat,- preserved potatoes, soup, 3am puddings,
■ and dough (pronounced duff).' No complaint, can be made as
to the quality of the articles nor the quantity, as there is
■ ‘always enough and tb spare at each meaU* ii e have tea us
. half-past 4 o’clock, consisting of tea and bread and butter, and
i turn in about 9, as the lights are not allowed to be kept bum,
. ‘mg' after half-past 9, and thus we jog along dayaftoi day.
r Many complaints are made as to the dirty state of the ohbin
s itself, and with good cause j and we do not hesitate to sayßmt
1 it is the dirtiest place in the whole ship, and we have been m
t tbo steerage, intermediate, and single female oompartmmibi,
3 Some say the steward ought to clean it betterq but it. they.
. will only recollect that he and his assistant have to atteud
regularly upon upwards of 80 people, they will. I thmk, agi eq
’ ' with me, that ho has quite os much to do as he is alffo. If a


»HOW WE WENT TO QUEENSLAND ON'BOARD THE. 'FUSILIER. 1 ”
few of tlio passengers would take it in turns to clean the cabin
■every morning, we might soon have it made comfortable p but
if no one will exert himself, we cannot ,expect it. As to tiro
steward, I can only say that a more civil and obliging young
man I never yot mot with;, and I onlywbndor that he lakes
tilings as quietly as lie docs, as he has much, to,try his temper.
We hope some of our fellow passengers will take the hint, and-
try to make things a little more comfortable than they have
hitherto boon, and thus remove the stigma which at present is
attached to the 2nd Cabin. PICKWICK.
A WASHING- DAY ON ’BOARD.
We all, know what a washing day at home is, and it may
interest our friends left behind us to know how these things
are managed on hoard the Fusilier. The flavor of soap siids,
the cold scrag of mutton for dinner, the uneasy and anxious
mistress, with many a heavenward glance, all come up in our
memories, reminding us of our old home when a washing day
is talked of j and yet most of us would even now say of such
an event, “with all thy miseries I love thee still.” Nay, for
once at least, the master would willingly, instead of seeking
his club or the pot-house, sit down at his old familiar fireside,
and positively enjoy the time, however discomforted, of a
washing day he has so often depreciated, rejoicing in the old
song,—
, My wife ICuto’s a canty wife; ,
Thore’a uaiic miiir free fra ovil,
1 But when a washings iu Uio house, • ;
She is a very iluevjl | J
Thu very klttllngs on the huarth,
They tlaum even play,
For its thump, thmup, scold,scold,.
Upon a washing day.
A. washing day on board the Fusilier presents many a
grotesque and laughable episode; and a scene which occur-
ed the other day sol; us a-tluhldng of another which wo have
often soon as a foreground to the noble panorama presented
by the view from the north Inch of Perth. As most of our
friends on board are from tho south of the Tweed or from
the sister island, it may amuse them and wile away a leisure
hour of our own, to recall a North Country washing, which'
is a very different scone indeed from the popular notion of
tho subject, taken from a rude drawing on the top of a
wooden snuff box, representing' a frowsy female up to tho
knees in a washing tub. Such a libel must not bo allowed
to exist, in the ‘ minds of any of the intelligent and well-
informed population who wont to Queensland in ’O4 in-tho
Fusilier; and wo arc right glad to find an opportunity of
recording a true picture of a home' scone which, like many
others, tho further we are separated from them, more fre-
quently recur to us. -Wo have wandered a good deal in our
day, and have seen many a fair scone, yet a : -
“ Fairer scene wo ne’er surveyed.”
than the North Inch and,a North Country washing at Perth.
Gur acquaintance with a North Country washing and tho
fair city commenced many years ago, on a bright and , sunny
morning of August,‘when .our beard, now blossoming like
the almond tree, was still in futurity, .and wo were brimful
of life and glee, in:expectation ofour first day’s grouse
shooting on a-highland moor. We had arrived the previous
evening, out-aide the: “ Defiance "' coach, and were fresh from
devouring Sir Walter Scott’s npvel of “ The Fair Maid of
Perth,” and longing to traverse the veritable field of the
bloody fight botwOpn the Clan Chadian and Clan.Quhaile.
Tho North Inch of Perth, which was the scene of this, one
of-the most extraordinary judicial trials by combat for the
settlement of contending rights on record, is a large, flat’
expanse of laud, perfectly level, stretching for nearly two
miles -along the margin of the clear, broad, and rapid run-
niug Tay, which, with a magnificent sweep, bounds the plain
on the north and east. Beyond the river and on every other
sido the hills close in and the foreground is studded with
snug villas and noble palaces and parks, while far to the
north the blue and grey Grampians shoot up, forming a sky
n lino unsurpassed, if not unequalled, iu the land of tho
it mountain and tho flood, and terminating the extreme ceii-
.e trad distance of a landscape of which a Scotchman may well
g bo proud. Nor do wo suppose that our .Southern friends
!3. are insensible to such a scone. The high spirited of every’
land have over a common feeling—‘“One touch, of .nature'
d- makes the whole world killand many an English heart
e responds to Fits Euataceh ; enthusiastic outburst in. Mar-
s mioti:— - '
Fitz Euatnco heart felt nloscily poiit, 1
And if to give lils rapture Jjent, l ’
Tho spur he to his chargor lout* .
And raised hifl bridlo liand, :
And inalung deml-volt in air, ' ,
Cried, where’s tho coward that would not daro
g To light for such u land.
, 9" p firat enh'ancod gaze at the gloripuslnudscnpn before
us, in all tho freshness of the morning sun is over, and wo
■ draw -a long breath- of satisfaction. y a few yards furt lifer, mid
■ we arc thrown headlong into another and -different statevof
estacy, by a sight wo shall not forgot, and which in a. mo-
ment drove all our romah'ce about tho glorious days of yore
out of our head, nor for the time-did wo care for any other
lair maids of Pt»rth, thtotho living, laughing, mid lively fair
oiioa around ua. wo- fear-we wore- much in tho predica-
ment of Tam O’Shantcr, and like liiin, “ glowed like ! one
possost,” tor soon the gopd natural chaff, at our expense
flow from one laughing group to another, and our position'
became ridiculous enough for a.young man, whoso unborn
modesty and shamq-faopdnoas, in female society, him only
increased with years, Wo stood our ground, however, an d
gentle reader, for tho first ,tiuio, wo, aaw a (Scotch north
country, washing ! Banged along tho gravelly edge of the
lay, word a number of large pots from tho common black
1 yottlmg,’’ to the aristocratic bright copper cauldron,'the
pride ortho laundress’, (ill..steaming and boiling on tempo -
rary fire-places. On the edge of the green ' sward, and on
the sot tost Atilt which could bo Mound (forwith thin, the
bare loot of the washer come hi contact), wore sot tho
waaimig tulm, iu each of which stood a blooming Inns, tri' r
and neat, in her bright colored short jacket, and blue or
many colored petticoat, which was kilted “ a little above the
mice,, while over and aiion her liaudsomo logs and feet
kept time to the air of,some old ballad of love or war, an she
tramped beneath the clothes ..subjected to so dainty a pres-
sure. One, wo do remember to have neon thus en<>-)i"ed
who convoyed to ns the very beau ideal of Scott’s imad-
gmation, ; ’- 1 ■
What tho* rio’rwlb of oourlly gwiMi . , ’
To moammsd mood hiid trataetlhor'faoi>;
A foot move light, a step moro true,
Ko’ci- from the Iwatli llowor dashed tho dow: r
E’en tho B|ight .Imrobell rained Us head. .
Elastic from hoi’ airy tvotul. ; -
Tho river supplies abundniico of tho finest water, and not
only carries oil’the dirty suds, but tho rinsing Heoltiiwi
‘‘ranging’ is also done' in tho broad stream, and the clothes
being dried on the sward, : arc carried homo, redolent of
honeyed clover and wild thyme,, by the happy lassos, who,
though working hard all day, have lightened their labor
by their mirth, and turned into a complete holiday win t
in other circumstances, might have proved tho weariest
hours of their existence;- No. nasty smell of suds, no smoky
fines, nor coppers requiring 'ikying no room for Joe in tho
copper hero, nor for any other disagreeable consequent on
washing days elsewhere, and how gladly would many atown-
born maiden,-take her turn ft Seotch'wasMngwith hor’nin
dear lad, to wheel tho brirrowfor her, with the now washed
clothes, as they rotui’iiedhomeward in the gloaming Thti
Inch, the river, tlio hills, the fair maids, the green sward’
“ the broom, wi- its tassels bn the lea,” are now to ua' like
other matters of tho past, loft far behind. Tho good shin
is our dwelling, the world of waters our homo, the ever-
sounding and mysterious main our -constant- companion'
whispering often to ns in tho dead hours of the night, the-


" HOW WE WENT TO QUEENSLAND, ON BOARD THE “ FUSILIER”
tender recollections of other days, or thundering in its angry
growl of the wrongs we have botne, or the tempest of wrath
we have perhaps brought on ourselves. Memory fails me
to supply a theme for communion with the ever-surging
sea, But it is washing day on board the Fusilier. Along
the lee scuppers, standthe forma or temporary erections, on
which rest the washing tubs, The presiding deities rub and
scrub in the usual home style; foremost among them is our
well spoken,/ ever obliging, ever active, friend Biddy, the
paragon of sea-going washerwomen ; albeit understood, that
by this enconium, we' draw no invidious comparison, nor
cast any reflection on others similarly occupied, who has
not seon “ John’s wife,” and many others equally pains-
. taking and, diligent at their toilsome lavatory labors. But
Biddy is onr friend, and to a certain extent the heroine of
■our tale, for the ship has suddenly lurched, and off goes
Biddy’s tub, stool, water-cans, and washed and unwashed
•clothes, in a sea of soap suds, across the deck, Biddy,
yielding to the force of circumstances, goes down easy on
the most fitting part of her person for such a performance,
and clutching the captain, lies quiet, till the empty utensils
have again settled in the lee scuppers, and the vessel having
/steadied, she picks herself iip, and matters go on as if
nothing happened, The operation, is altogether carried on
with salt water and marine soap, barring the last rinsing,
■which is done with fresh water, nor need we advise all and
sundry to provide themselves with the article we have al-
luded to, as all outfitters take care to sell you' us much of
everything as they can, both useful and useless, and we only
wish we had had the experience we now have when we
made pur little iny estment in goods and chattels for the
voyage. The drying process is camedononropes,whichought
to bo hung so high, that the clothes do not impede the pas-
sage on, or use of the deck, altho’ a contrary practice pre
vails, and it is not an unfrequeht occurence to get a good
slap of the face from a wet sheet or newly washed chemise.
As to the mangling and ironing we do not exactly know,
■where, for the general population these operations are per-
formed, all we know is, whore and how our own collars are
■ dressed, and when wo do wear ohe We are rather particular
•about them, suffice it to say they most entirely meet our ap-
proval. Wo have now dirtied much clean paper on the
subject of making dirty linen clean; if we'have disgusted any
of our gentle readers by referring to foul clothing at all,
as a matter never to be mentioned in polite society, wo
crave their pardon. Our apology is, that on board we have
not many subjects to choose from, and that, even then
having chosen onr subject, it Would be impossible to fill up
bur weekly journal without indulging in a little digression.
MUSICAL, LITERARY, AND DRAMATIC,
Our weeky concerts continue to affordamnsement, and are
carried on with unabated spirit, notwithstanding the in-
clemency of the weather. The minstrels favored us on
Thursday evening with a capital selection, and the exe-
cution of the various songs was first rate. The concerted
pieces-" Am I not fondly thin© own,” was well rendered,
tbe troupe keeping excellent time. Signor Bagg sung the
“ Cruschoene Lawn,” which was. Well received. “ Beloved
Star,” by Dando, sung withgeeat pathos, elicited applause.
“ The Days when I was Hard-up,” provoked a deal of
laughter, and was humorously given by Sambo. Herr Crux
was rather at fault in pitching the key of his song —“ The
Gipsey’s Tpnt.”, Garibaldi favored the company with “The
Ratcatcher’s Daugher,” with rather a novel chorus; it
brought down roars of laughter, and wo venture to say it
was never sung with such humor south of the Lino, Our
new baritone, Signor Dibdinetti, gave “ Ever of Thee, a
freshness and beauty, from the deep feeling and sweet plain-
tiveness with whichke rendered it. “ Bingo,” a catch from
the pen of Herr de Witt brought down a regular hurri-
cane of applause; the novelty and style of tills catcli will
ensure for it great popularity among our fellow-passengers.
We omitted to notice in our last week’s report, that Herr
de Witt gave us first-rate impersonation of “The Bailor
and the Jew,” which was well received, and we opine that a
repetition would not be unacceptible at some future time, as
he seems so well at home in this class of recitation, Coun-
Kossuth commenced the second part of the entertainment,
with “What shall we do with a Drunken Sailor,” in his
usual good style. The “ Mariner's Grave” followed, sung,
by Signor Mario. The General sang, “Willie Brewed a
Peck o’Malt,” with its truly bacchanalian chorus, evi-
dently pleasing the audience. A comic medley, from Don
Carlos folllowed, and, “ I’m an Irish Boy,” were the gems
of the evening; both were received with thunders o f applause,
many of our Hibernian friends joining in chorus. The
National Anthem brought the concert to a close. We trust
the Minstrel will not flag in their efforts to amuse, and
will, if in .their power, exert themselves still more to make
the few concerts the have to give pass off with spirit
SPORTING INTELLIGENCE.
The Flying Cobbler is open to jump with any man on board
V lbs. weight, in each hand, for any sum not exceeding 6s,
Money ready, No. 19, intermediate,
Whist.— Messrs, Say and G, Harris having held the
championship for throe successive weeks, they are now
entitled to wear the champion’s belt,
LOCAL NEWS.
Owing to the muddy impurities of Mrs, Limner's lodg-
ings, caused by the water running in during the fate storm,
the Signior Bennetti has taken apartments in Bleak House
for a few nights, and all letters must be addressed to him
at the last-mentioned villa,
The signor has not quite recovered from his late india-
postion, which interferes considerably with the violent ex-
exercise he has been in the habit of indulging in, .
Ball,—ln consequence of the roughness of the weather,
no boll took place during the week, _We understand,
weather permitting, that these meetings will be resumed as
usual, we are glad to see this amusement is becoming
more popular.
The Late Gale.—Many discomforts were, no dbub, expe-
rienced daring the last week, hut it is satisfactory to know
that no such real hardships existed. Some may have only
had one oup of coffee in the morning, or may have failed to
get his arrowroot or sago prepared, and may have perhaps
gr umbled because there was no pudding for dinner, but
these things, we believe, to have been the greatest incon-
veniences which have yet befallen us.
Serious Accident:—On Friday afternoon, one of the
seamen, Dennis McCormick, slipped from the ladder of the
fore hatch, and fell with great force; to the bottom. He
was taken up quite insensible, and remained in that
state for some hours. We have not been able to ascertain
the extent bfhia inj nines, but it will be contained in the
doctor’s report.
NOTES FROM A JOURNAL.
Saturday, 2 July—A fresh breeze and weather very cold
Sunday, 3 July—The wind is getting ahead of us. A
Church Service a Te Deum and other parts were daunted
which is a great improvement. Monday, 4 July—Agals
blowing ahead, the ship was laid to, but drifted towards the
west. We have had nothing like this weather previously.
Tuesdays 5 July—-Few were able to sleep last night,'the roll-
ing of the ship was so great, and: next morning, still fewer
could keep their feet without holding on by anything Within
their reach. The noise during the night' in the 2nd cabin
Was terrific,.and we mpmentarily expected to hayo the fittings


Wii TO.QI’E'KNSfjAJN'Dj..O2s BOARD. X HREIi SURER.’'
W the cook's -alloy ~preeipiUte<l aiiiang!iit = us,asinost of these
: acbmeid 'to be'dancing mad.- -tbe; ot. the spilling
kf'adeal of dirty waterandthA'loss ofu-ooffsei and 'tea .at meal:
’ times/ no aoc’ul.ent 'occurred,,. We- were ok short commons liovy, 7
‘ evet, 'from the' nuposßibility coppdrs. anything.
. Gur good 'ship-aa;»
our ctaptain, andwe
we'see her so abiy handled. . i i
, Thursday, 8 July—iS.tiil- running pretty npap, our course on
a wind for Brisbane as,Som«!:Qne :oay#:it 7 Qne, of
*• Kite half full Wednesday) 'a, : ljettfeE,/th e !aMlors: fqlß,dowß'Ahftifd r !%kata}|,;i,part(ipu t law,ot~wpj.pn Will
• niUt' ■" Early in the morning thtmeDwhs .some’.huhbuH in ibeifound l in!thpjD!saßne*i:;. 1 .■'.biJy;. l x;.: , A ■- b ■
* w.rarine shipf and'it was ’-commonly ir&jjorted: tha't-'wethfn .. :Saturday,.9July,.|«! l-PWtede.
r "nearly lost our, butthis appears, to-hayhbeen aj5t0ty.,,6Q , 1 , 9 Ei b b.bws,,?^
■ merfciy'foKtho penny a Hqers; " '.W' 31 '.-' •' / ! ■.■■-■ ;■’ i ‘ !,: ' '■■■ -v, W'■■'''kif''’ ;I .' ,“W
p. ; :
V r 1 ; - A-'-... J
• . WANTED. .. •
Wanted to punch nab. 100' yards of* Asphalto to keep ouf,
'■ the faiii; from Airs. LifripeV,s lodgings; ’ Apply between .R
and Id p.m. Plcaso pull thc'arfa bell. . ; .. -i .. .. , o
Tiio advertisor is duairous, of .obtaining, on his arrival at
'■ "Briab&nte; ‘apaf tmun’tw',!iti r = $l)6 ihause'oi; a
f ■faraHyfsituatßddir a fitebiowidiib.
,)ess.on.s to tho nobility-and gentry oMthe drum and
s ' ,:! btfnev' Address‘Mr. Ikibbage. h'.|h&.S. _ _ b
To' Coaira.ci.or3 '.V
thorough repair of Osbourne House, '.viiicu has suffered
-greatly from tho late * galo.r -Tehlltra, in sealed envelopes,;
’ addressed to’ OskoUffle lloiiScy iiitofmodiate'; . 1:1.. 0 j ! /
‘ : • NfOThGiOl. A; vl .n-1.:;
[ The shareholders in- the J^irtte;Btobi:;oo^affl^<-DMte4)'
,k - ‘ arc' re-quaiited to - attend a- ifiedtlug in .front of the poop, ok ;
Wednesday, the 23th July, :b f ;lo':hnd!l9‘ \
'' o'clock forenoonto mhtl- payinont to the treasure*'. Mr.'"
■' Qmni-ge Harris,' of the deposit’of Is. on each share heldby -
thorn terras of the memorandum of agreement; and ,mik-' ;■
'• sequent minute of the'fHrec.thrs., '■•■< ••'■.■ 1 ‘ ,
- ' By order/ JAH, ODbfNmGfHAMr, r ' ■
{ - ' j ‘ l ’• ' Chairman of'Directors-, j ’
■' SATURDAY,' 10TH: T JTOtT^
■ ->‘i >oDu'riilg :. thaopast ; wbok- w.e; Ugv& -bfieaj
< filling up the share list forthe .printing of.the 1
'/■' arrival! a,t Brisbane, which, ..as.mpst qf us .are. awarp, .is to bo
Aafried' .ora by:a Joint Stoek. ap.d,
< tfle’qlroumspecr.ibn of 4 direp.ton? chosen, .by thq.sJw.ofioldqrs';
’ “ouf-of'Whom is, to be eleoled a chairman, by the dirqqtpts
■'thdmselv.eaa.i Wo should strongly jeoqinmqnh ;thq,.,sk&e. J ,
holders to choose for,directorf
shown some voitergy. i« ,yyritbtg. fpr ..and, ( pu|)ljgl|ing' the
iTHr J Utjxp ■ ’ -k :
"toofj'^Slslp.dip,.|%.all li^yb,,'aiv.OpppHtii^ity
; , pf bearing it.read bpcfi a,ypek, and, oyen^this, wbl.tlilhk; is
,too‘m,u,ch fcir.tkose who baW-'fljo means fo.#ibhbribAy H '!rh«
, rekdiug of tho a * s at first
' bonetit of those only who'hadinot,the meanA'bf.BWftnMng
nor the’power of iti,. tlielnsfsl vea jhut ' we’.dDnOt ao»
: that those who,. alone
by.#ay : oilier najnp),,hAYo ‘refused,j.to suhseribo,' shotlld ho
! a|iawodtb .reap! fhe .'bmftgji'of P
, will' not ■,'conttdblite’ , ppfiuniarily/or' W wrStfoivfb'f, it
p.tbemselvßsiAVlien' pim^r.wasistarfhd/wAlmcflvb^
‘ .but, with/opo ( or t>ro
ubt'ani ,o| has .hppoarod oxcopt
frqin. the,hands of tKq, Slrlj. we hhall struggle
, qn toAhqhiid pf tho, voyage, and iry 'dur bqtf to make our
.p,apm;';aß.amnkng an«?t^
as lies in hope
tiiat there m.plonty.jolf .|'igie .before we land to with for our
'papei-j dhtieß. ( We
haTO.np doubt' -that,, m'Bft fvho
have not takbn',s]jaroa.,yill.regret it; buktlfey Will.Mkvo .no-
body to ’blame, .’but’,thein^ely.6s,; .'foy .'Had; ; an
.equal, chance if IQ become’ aMktehblder; Wo
imufjt, t'hanh, those. wh f o., hato. .taken'. w' liDotra.l
.waw.in'whieh.onp
. Tjie labodr ofpubfjpjuk Pur-|purnal ■in‘m,auWkipt’?'dmpois
f .glsjirW.-RfiPw iff on hoard ffilly
■jigpfq§eW e 4 at i*;)?dtHh/iin4rv^.Ynyy>;andfby,ftli ; o ,of
hharep/pKiseut. 0%
■stated: th9.objwt,qf.t^m^ing,>!?.<*. the el6‘btldti of pffigßt*.
beatera/ .and herqqjai|te3 sss t
should be read. ’ ThKlao^^cnu-ldftnb' 'Oapmh 'CarVasso
aiyd'MdsSrsV wens
elboted’ dir ectOrß; 'atvaSltie- otimripwlltfiiltw
i 1 -Journal, as- no litlfe ltiipp r nnAi^Hbl! a 'M,lh.b e <^Wispd-^'fof i ; elected difectOrßy 'aTVd-s'ome'QtlMrrpTOUmj®Mphn^HtwS’ s ofihttlo
■' ’• the uufposerof seolug-itbe iutEfest to'thepablid'WahtWnsfctlMlr, o' ihn tr n-.>
v • propbrlyoarritid out' fn thsimoßt-oonvfipieiß,aitd.expeditious l Ah advertisemehkwill'hd founditeottr pjipei!uof tosdayl/nn-
t.r -UlmuiP possible,:,o.ujb-mshp-rps timathig that , -mtf: oa
( - up bo f th^^ocdifficwlty’ yiP>v nexty SOthrlS2
A meeting was called for Tuesday in order sfirsk, dc^it r r,.ftns : w*
number of direntors inightr-bfr'appGnrtod.; hut, owing to the trnit,that’all tiiai) apeoifibdv •
rq«gh woaihef, : .bht ■few- 1 -f , b\ir, we-' hcfiieye—attended, ko '"'py de»fe^«n«iwni’l»l)W»'ed
* thath'io”busihdsß‘Was’hi'difsketed'; ■■We' , hope;th;!ttVbdfdfe the ;&U.
t * .end* of’tßß 'pAsejdtyvbpki ahbthW meefihgyyiilbe failed %nd' att 'eqdaHy IhtcreSted/I TO'traKy aawoll addithat if conyifciont
;! fepctv/ith-bqiteiiijesul'thj afi-thfekodkoryrnatters.toe;arrafige3' thq' whole-am,owhthr ShaWs i^&^tbo ! paid up-ationoe.
t.* .end* of tISB ttiidther- meefmgyyll-be palled %nd'
ihqctvath-bqiteiii.'esullhj afi-thfekodkoryrnatters.toe;arrafige3'
tk'e fettef if will' bfejor^afßlffirtios.; 1 ’ Oiir-dan&ircab'be- at !
' ,i/oUeelald,. apd‘ to 'start ,as
f I'we arrive'’ at - Brisbane. ‘ There ifk>soAefew,&faOagBt us who
• '.w.e'are' sorfy tb'say, altlipti|fc always'rladjrtoTehd'the.paper,,
not ortly refused to take shniresi (though;of;that ,w.e dp
, u . - 'hot oomplam)i.biit'have'6V6n-.refEngsted thafe tfreit Mrigjnal
f'/ skbs'etiptioafe- for copy-in*g bh'&-dapef:.o& hoard,;sbould .bfe i’e-‘
: 'tufned to them." Lot : tl4a ho ■ den®, ky albinbanß,* but,: it
the satpe time, do not on any account allow thorn the privi-
. By Submarine 'aftdf midmd'Tele'graph Jfixtraordm«ryi~-
. John .Bright, , ’Mlic|iok v t:o, tp'fßfeikiefshilikhhS/iatro-
duoed -a. JB.ill - for;
crossing sweepotk. ’ Thik'||%PWSt It)Mhe3 ! bf'th6 hpilbfli(ble
*1 1 "'
;■ ■f/''/i;."I;
-On,tlie,-Bth July. of .Mr^WUWlm^l^hoU
aged 2 moathi ■■■'' ,j 1 - & 5 • f w J j


" HO W AYR Wiv.NT TO -QUEIiNSbAHi) ON BOARD THE * E.UBILIEII.’"
-LOGAL.iNIiWS. .
Serious'Accideht,—On 'Mbuday, lltli, Mr. M„ Horan,
well; known and nohpoijted i by all oh hoard, fell, on ■ tho
'• 'main- debit,. and brokering i#aitaeto"tlio• • shoulder,■ The doc-
: tor's' l ropert h’rfGrh'ito dihis/hhd -wo’hope soon to.see Mir,
■ •Hotamagain OHjoyiiigdifalpipo on,dock.,
rShOW-lmllhig'.---T l hab fearful;AM (degrading practice,,: as
■ dhdioild; , priheipal!6f to call it, but winch
has I always i»ppi»rb4-'to-’i(ui;! apteatioif ttajper. aijd.courago,.
; -on!®idjlynnprning . l; Many well
iknoWn eharaotern oaohwdd, taking proinimmt. parts, in :tho
amusemont, 1 ; : ,
' 1 0n> Thursday! forenoon,. tiuti rdifiommast assumed its fa-
■■miKar:etod!;lodk’hgain/i,tlje,ißuwlciio««ijdbk-yard having boon
.'heintod to itsqflaooj 1 . ,' ■', V-
The captain’s pudding.—Aa a sequel,'to the loss of the
'.dhopslftluAuMod u‘h bunjoiiffelai ttoirtinwi ago, on Friday,
a the same erratic. course, but. no one
being atmand to secure the spoil, ibholldd useless-; into tho
Joe scuppers. ' ;
■ v notes"from a : to ! HKnab.
' Hkthrdiiy,: July '9,.--Tho wind ihdShened towards tho af-
ternoon, 'and the 'miton-cross-jack-yard. .snapped, in two at
tho behtro./ Ahoufelill o’clock' the huporatious,
whp \v,9r&:hwako;'!thl| heard it, were'alarmed by the doleful
tolling of the Bhip'rbell, aa if for B ifuiidr'il,, . the foiling of
tho hliip having', catfapd this. 1 , ~ ■ ;
Sunday; duly 10. -We had Ohureli. Heiwioo behind the
poqj) to-day, the m»ih 1 occupied in tho prepa-
Wtipn.pf .ij neworosft-jaqk^yarq; ; ( 'j?dr the first time we ob-
sorvbd .thafc>what wo wbum, 4d‘wfeh We got to Brisbane,
waa. tho sole topic';,ofi cpihvomtiibh aihfjtig those, who pro-
£■ mqnadodj or sat aroun diho deck,;fchd many hotidde aohetnes
1 were talkod of,. ' ’ '
Monday, July ll.—-Tlio and high. . Mr. Horan
foil tins morning, and-brofemhis' arm. His prdsdhco.on
. dock will ho luissed by jn,ofij. .■ Tbd ftold incroases, and wo
ara.glad, to dkaw tor cl6(ll,{hg. The woathbris
liko. our, thrhatoning lJ'occmher.aays. 'at Home, largd- stormy
.loading w,{(ito.a|id_groy oloublß, flying ahhht, and 'oooasionaT
.glimpsespTahnslimd. , , . : ;
Tuesday i '4iu&, iMs —Occupied- 1 l.h khttlng isubstrihotH ■ to
‘ thojourdk'!; bHo' M TObqut’ any or;
• proesing;;; m onahdrda, ihohe 1 Tuah 12 hhareh.
, oddesdgy,'. ’ Jhly cpntihuaa;; W '&
;aro,movv 4,500 yijilop , . , :
.’ itliuradayi, July ld,:-r-Mftoting,,;6f 1 bKareholderS’ td'olbbt
oflioo.huorora' ibr., td publish this
.journal. .The eaptllbh Tlßlay,! O. Harris, and J. Obn‘-
and I .at the first, meeting;
of.
tho,Boaa;di.A£rl Oeo^gq.Hgi^ia,'Trh'a‘iurer, iuid Mr. Themas
,iiamli6rt,,Seoro : tary. tho now (jrpsfcjkck-.
yard -was; got,-vixp. ho'.' I^9-add' the mizeh-niafit lodks
itself again. wo Have a ’fi'itppN of .oandlhi'heiiig
idiorhi; ;finpr,. slror^ r gß6wak(».of tank-water, butthdije
will be had enough wlleh wo Tdel''tnem. . There Was a cqh-
cort in the 2nd cabin this evening.
Friday, July 15,—Hail and snow on the decks this morn-
ing, 3or 4>. jnohes deep. A snow-ball matoh soon coni-
and for sdiap time, until
tho dipappnoirftnsolji' sw|.puh;lri end .to it. ; We are
-«tiß work for
Brisbane. Jf c ;, sailed upwards of 12.00 miles .this waeky
fppffii;'tjhe ’6th fcp . Tlie; ship id .getting, very wet, and
' many arosuffer,TOffeem cold'- ; V.., >..
We are still driving on
•nuriway..tbo.lqiaSness, qijiMr. Brown, we are enabled
to alat-ts ihp latitp.de qjrd^ij^tuag’..of 1.0-day at. o’clock.
.jtatiHidpylMhS H,; Ipiigitude, Sg.^l-B.
CORRESPONDENCE.
To tie Editor,
Sir, —It has been .hinted to we that ,1 should give an
account of. how,.w«;pus.■otu I :time-j» the intermediate during
this very unpleasant -weather. I will, therefore, through tic
medium:ofynur journal, satisfy; this anxious enquiry. Our
favorite amusement, chiefly among ■ the single men, is cards.
Cards andeard-players have been scandalised,and.decried, but
both flourish, bravely to this day. I never played so many
games of cards as I have/done since I cumo on board this ship,
and it has:been, ta me. as. well as do others, an excellent
pastime, and so long as the 52 pieces ,of painted card board
are used and 1 not abused, and so }cmg as amusement does not
degenerate into heavy gambling, so long os, good temper and
kindliness reign around the table, there cun be no possible
harm done,. We,may defy the gamblers, and enjoy ourselves
often, in Our fashion, , The poor cards are innocent enough,
but it is the spirit in which they are played that Ims 'some-
times bfOdght ruin to their players.; There are many different
kinds of playing Cards. The Hindoo’packs consist of 96
cards, being, 8 suits of 12 each; and I have seen packs of cards
in Prance which contained only 28 cards, , Our pack, as every
one knows, consists of 52 cards. No one knows their origin ;
it is believed by many' that they were invented to amuse a
mad'king, .bdt that is, now,very generally doubted, as we have
evory tcßSon to-believe that cards’were used in China and
India, 'centuries before their introduction, to Europe.
Others behove that the 4 aces wore intended to represent
tho 4'seasons, the.’ Court cards the mouths, the number of
oards’tlie Weeks, stM' 'the'Spots the days iu the year. . Three-
card 100 - is the game ,mostly sought after by us-n-dfaughta,
chess, And other games being now, very stale, ,;Wo play for
small sums sufficient to give,us an interest in the. game, and
striotly play according to rules which are laid down, thus pre-
venting disputes. i
Well has it boon said by Brough-:-;
doalora, Tae 05Utior«) ; pinyon!, be Bhrowd.
If you auars Jrv the pool, ttaa aToltl being low'd,
'■ . Vot in H life, Uibro- is often K*oaC 4i* _ .
Satisfaction In ehooalug or a mins. ~ . . Jwi.wi.Ay.
To tie Editor, . , • : ; v
■Sir,—Since I sent in my last account of tho. swMUjp;.jpg|n*
ioultufai Society,, we 'have, been employed in discussing tha
bcat.'jfhy of improving the breeds, of different kinds of sheep
by crossing. Not being well up.in the kind of sheep that a>c •
kept itt Queensland, w'o wei.e apt-able to go very far into the
■'subject ;, but it being our wish’to gather as, much intoriiiatipu
asfpd®i;blo;aljout our ndws'hqme, before, entering ’ it,we kept
As 'ihujjji to the improvement of wool as possible; for is. th?s<
and .not the carcase, ; that we shall haye .most to do with
.Thep? .arditwc' .things, the : wqol.gfower has to consider™-decs
he waht; te improve the quality or the quantity pf the ,yo.ol f
It is a very hard,matter to improve the .quality, but on the
other hand quantity may R pon he procured. Tbb qdeSlidii.ifl
then—Witt it; answer, to 1 cross h 'fdiort-wooUcd sheep with; a
long-woolled hue ? On this point wo were not all agreed, but
porhaph■ Spooner answers tlnsquesMon,better than,we coulddo
it .'ourselves, :■ He asserts tjuat ? t|;e more closely the natures ot
different auunalsi approach; each .other, the likely is tho
offspring they produce to be according to bur wishes; lor na-
ture does not delight in contrasts, Long-woolod sheep are bdsl
adapted to breed .with others lik-wise having long wool, it
two animals,vdry opposite in •theiyqiialitiqs, ore.put together,
the offspring may resemble either .one pai’enl or (ho other;
but the faults of either may'appcar in the second or third
generation. I. - is found that the Leicester agrees letter-with
black faced and other bipods than flo the South Bowes
and’ the odarseness of (he wool ot' cabll denotes a resembm!. oa
which from their: very opposite-natural pastures we Stmmd‘n,.,t,
expect-. Tie goes on to Say that it is not a badiprcetico when
It is intended to substitute la .now fur ,an old breed to do ro by


"HOW WE WENT TO QUEENSLAND ON BOARD THE ' HJSILIER.
using the male animals alone of the new breed for successive
generations until the character of the old breed is lost It is
in this manner, though not effecting with regularity that
nearly the whole of the sheep of Australia have become almost
entirely merinos. '
It may be, surest, as well as the, safest system by which a
new improved breed can be made to supplant an old and indif-
ferent one, Taking this into consideration, our advice to the
intending settler is, as soon as he gets to Brisbane to go to a
wool warehouse and examine the wool closely, and try to find
out which kind there is the best market for, and if possible how
the sheep are bred that produced that particular wool.
. • lam, Sir, H. P. HARRIS.
To ike Editor, ,
. Si Vi —fie past week ha# not been a very pleasant one with
respect to the weather, but we have managed to made a very re-
speoiahle week's work, hut it is y&nsvixlly so in this port oj the
.world. ■ , . _ ~
In the worst weather we make the best runs. 1241 miles is
a distance which, for a'week's run is nothing to boast of, but
nevertheless it is one we are very well satisfied with, and I only
hope we shall continue it. In another week, we shall he off Oape
Leeuwin if all goes well , the S. W. Gape of Australia, and al~
though we certainly cannot make anything in the shape of a quick
passage, yet I dare say we shall find several of the ships that
have lately amved in Brisbane will have done worse than our-
selves, I am, Sir, Yours, &c,, D. B. GABVOSSO.
Captain of the Fusilier
1864, Latitude: Longitude, Distance.
July* 1 7th. 42° 0' S. 52" 22 A B. 161 miles.
Bth, 42 0 55 20 160
9th. 41 30 60 19 224
10th. 41 24 ’ ■ 64 88 195
11th, 41 48 68 10
12th. 42 82 71 20 501
13th. 41 46 76 6
Total distance 1241
To the Editor,
„ Sir,—l havo muoh pleasure in furnishing you with my report for last week, whtoh
t trust, will he mote interesting than those I have sent you hitherto. _The number
of cases under treatment amounts to 45. Of these one, that of an Infant who had
lone suffered from diarrhoea and bronchitis, terminated fatally, and two were inju-
rles resulting from falls. Of these, the first was one of wound of tho scalp, attended
with concussion of the brain. It would appear that, on Friday evening, Bth mat,,.
Dennis McCormick, one of the crew, lost his footing, and fell down the main hatch-
way, striking the right side of his head against a large iron ring, placed on the
’tween deck next the batch; but, judging from the,nature of the wound, I should
imagine that his head must have come against some angular . projection* He was
pinked up unconscious, in which state he remained for some hours in the hospital,
but was so far recovered the next evening that I could not prevail on him to absent
himself front duty. On Monday, 12th Inst,, M, Horan slipped, and had a most
awkward fall on the main deck, which resulted in a fracture of the aim bone (hu-
merus) at the junction of the middle and uppeic third, He Is suffering a great deal
from tho unsteadiness of the vessel, but is otherwise do}ng as well as can be expected.
Your readers will be glad to learn that the childrens* school and Sunday school are
'conducted regularly when the weather permits, and that Mr. Cunningham’s little
plinils are,making rapid progress in. their studies. The Sunday School Vn the female
compartment also attrao ts many pupils, and Mr. Jliokenson speaks yer/hlghly of tho
■ decorum observed by those who are not members of his class, In my neat I hope to
bit able to report as favorably of tho classes of adults superintended by Mr. Eobiusen
who is assisted In the class of females by Miss M. Looney. Mean Temperature—
Main 61>6.| ’Tween,Bl‘o. Youra, &0., B. W. HODOKINSOM,
MUSICAL, LITERARY; AND DRAMATIC.
’ On Thursday evening our® troupe, owing to the bad weather,
wind and rain, were compelled to give their weekly concert in
;~tiie'2nd cabin, but through/thTnegioct"^some of the official*
vDL6 -6IIU LwU*Uj uwu , O ..
in not properly advertising It, the attendance was very small
It would be unfair to criticise the performance, as tho place is
totally unfit for such entertainments, for what with tho creak-
ing and rolling of tho vessel, the minstrels must have found it
a difficult matter to have made themselves heard, nevertheless,
there was a good deal of fun and laughter, more especially
when one or two of the performers, m the middle of pathetic
songs were compelled to stop short and hang on with all them
might It is very evident, however, that with tho exception,
of the members of the troupe themselves, music is not gene-
rally appreciated in tho 2nd cabin _
BALL Our weekly Ball was again postponed, owing to
the utter'impossibility of dancing on the light fantastic too on
a slippery deck in a gale of wind. This to tho ladies must be
INOENIOUriroDE OP TENANTING- A PIGSTY,
1 , . Then nontl mo » pl(,
Allthoughts of offonoo . A» nnT one nlith T
ButthSbSebndon,
Somotlmcs not a shlllWl S"f klndtSu ufMUklß* 1
IndtSmLulou *'
to oonsolo- For life thi« poor «wl«te
■£°" ?'k n n n,Vth»t the Wttlrt. So be huleheired »t tut,
fAr. iiflTn vour .lro ' Jvut to make * repMtl
That !i(ml-honrt<!doK»tm» yMron^.ho^lTwlMaJTr
”
Ilongnowlfavotrod, 21ke°no Sto'
Has got in hi. store mfiwa
Fine grantors galore Bat pr»y «wml m» two.
CURIOUS WILL.
I ( r beginning to be enfeebled in body, and
fearing I may soon be palsied in mind, having entered
on that course of intemperance from •which I have not
strength of mind to flee, and already feeling tho evils re-
sulting from it, which X have not resolution to avert, do
make and publish this, my last will and testament. Having
been made in the image of my Creator, capable of rational
enjoyment, of imparting happiness to others, and promoting
the glory of God, I know and, acknowledge my accountabili-
ty; yet, such is my fondness for sensual gratification, and
my utter indisposition to resist temptation, that I give up
myself entirely to intemperance and its associate vices, and
make the following bequests •—My property I give to dissi-
pation, knowing it will soon fall into tho hands of those
swlio furnish mo with ardent spirits. My reputation, already
tottering on a sandy foundation, I give to destruction. I
give my ability to be useful and happy in lire to annihila-
tion. To my beloved wife, who has cheered me so far in
the path of life, I give shame, poverty, sorrow, and a broken
heart. To each of my children, I bequeath my example and
the inheritance of the shame of their father's character.
Finally, I give my body to disease, misery, and early disso-
lution, and my soul, that can never die, to tho disposal ot
that God whose mercy I have abused, whose commands 1
have disobeyed, who has declared that no drunkard shall
enter the kingdom of heaven. _ .
The above was extracted from the New York Observer,
26th June, 1827,
iloir ire item to (sncenslarid, mi board tbe ‘^fusilier.”
A SATURDAY, 28RD. JULY, 1864. A : ______
SITURDAY, 23RD. JULY, 1864.
' ' JOINT STOCK COMPANY. ,
;.' Acting up to our suggestion of last week, a meeting of
shareholders was immediately held for the purpose of ap-
pointing directors for superintending the preparation of
/jU..r paper for tlie press, and' for carrying out the necessary
——/ ~ ■
arrangements on our arrival at Brisbane. _ The Captain,
the General, and Messrs. Say and Geo. Harris were elected,
and the last-named of these was also appointed Treasurer
to the Company. Mr. Thomas Lambert, bettor known as
Garibaldi, was appointed Secretary. After their election
the Directors appointed an early day, Wednesday last, lor
the payment of shares, and on that day the Treasurer and


mow WE WENT TO QUEENSLAND ON BOARD THE 'EUSILIER.’”
Secretary received the money in the Intermediate Cabin.
The full amount of the shares, with one or two exceptions,
was immediately paid up, and on behalf of the Directors
we must thank the shareholders for their prompt attendance,
and last though not least, the payment of their money.
We would remind those who were not made aware of the
fact, at the time of payment, that the written receipts must
ho kept, and presented to the printer before the paper can
bo obtained. A transfer of shares can bo effected between
parties desirous of so doing, by giving up tbo written re-
ceipts before mentioned, without any further transaction
being necessary. A day of mooting will, ho named immedi-
ately on our arrival, at Brisbane, in order that all parties
may bo enabled to have their papers before they leave the
town, or leave their address, so that no mistake may occur.
Home have complained to us that they could not obtain
shares, as they had never been asked, but it was out of the
question to ask every body in the ship, individually, and a
proper notice was given in the paper. If any shares are for
sale, wo will make' the public aware of the fact by giving
due notice in the paper., ; , _ ;
Wo are glad to find that the letter from Pickwick, in No.
0 of our Journal, on the state of the 2nd Cabin, has pro-
duced the very best offeat, as that compartment has again
resumed its former look of cleanliness' and comfort. On
Monday, a meeting of the inhabitants was. called to take
the matter referred to by Pickwick into consideration; and
although we feared that the sweeping and sanitary measures
proposed might end in mere "talk, from an attempt to raise
the question, whoso duty it was to attend to such matters,
still, the eommon-Honao proposal to help themselves—a duty
no emigrant can too early learn to practice—led to the
wishod-for result, as volunteering to assist the constituted
authorities was the rule rather than the exception; and in
the course of next, morning -and forenoon, our active and
obliging steward, notwithstanding his .already too multifa-
rious duties, found time, with his assistant and the staff of
Volunteers for the day, to put matters in a very tidy condi-
tion. 11 is the last straw that breaks the camel’s hack, say
the Arabs, and so say wo of the last few weeks of our voy-
age It was asked—'What use was there now in doing what
never had boon attempted before? Simply, wo. answer,
dirt is an accumulative nuisance; and the accumulated dirt
of 4 months may breed a pestilence we may long remember
and regret; and now is thp time for action before matters
get worse.
CORRESPONDENCE,
To the Editor,
Sir— Underneath I have' stint you the usual aecount of the
ship's run. It amounts to 145(3 miles, the best we-have had
since leaving. At this rate, a fortnight more mould take us to
oiir destination, but the less said about when we shall get there
the better, as the remaining part of our voyage is very uncertain.
I have no doubt every one is getting heartily tired of this voy-
age. lean only say wait with patience a little longer, and en-
deavor to let the remainder of our time together pass as plea-
sanity as circumstances will allow t and lam sure on our arrival
no one will give you, a heartier welcome to the land of your
adoption, than your sincere wisher, „ , nTrn c,™
I am, Sir, Yours, Ac., I). B, OAR T OSSO.
■ Captain of the Fusilier.
18G4, Latitude. , Longitude. Distance.
July 14th. 42° r/ S. 8F I' E, 219 miles,
7 15th. 42 30 85 44 210
16th. 42 35 89.28 167
. 17th. 42 28 : 94 26 ,
18th. 41 50 98 33 188
19th. 42 59 103 14 219
20th. 48 34 108 26 , 231
Total distance 1456
To the Editor,
Sir, —We are. now nearing onr desired Raven, and the
chief topic of conversation has lately been about the way
we shall enjoy orrrsejves when we land. May it not be as
the Drench proverb says —“ They dig graves with their teeth,
while the kitchen is their shrine, the.cook their pries t, the
table their altar, and their belly their God.” Now, would
it not be better, before we talk of our creature comforts, ta
render thanks to our great Creator, who has brought us
hitherto in safety through the perils and dangers ui the
mighty deep. Trusting that this suggestion will bo tub on
in the same spirit in which it is written, allow mo to sub.
scribe myself, Yours,,Ac., A WELL-WISHER.
To the Editor.,
Sir—YiHU* corespondents lu the steerage and 2nd caWn, having given yo\] r de-
scription of how they manage in each of those places, i will do the same for Um»
XntormocUate. The Intermediate is situated under the luain-hatch-way, and ad-
joins the liud cabin on one side, and the steerage compartment for married peopjß
on the other. There arc two tables fox’ the aacopunolatiou of passengers at thwir
meals, &o, af the end qf the 2nd Oabiu. We arc lighted by the maln.hatoh, which
remains open all the day, and serves the purpose of both door and window at nigh i*■
We have one lamp suspended between tbu tables, Our bertha am ranged on either
side of the 'tween decks; each berth is s fool 0 iuolioa in length, 0 foot in breadth,
and 7 feet 0 inches In height. In each there is supposed to be sulllciput accommo-
dation for two marled couples with Bor 4. Here they sloop, hoop their wearing ap-
parel, tholr rations for their week, their water, their cooking utensils, a.pfl all other
necessaries, and hero also they wash and dress themselves. About 2 feet from thu
floor is erected the first buplt or sleeping place—it is 0 feet In lepgth by 5 feet 1«
breath, and in one case contains a man and his wife and 3 children. Two and iv-half
feet above this is erected another bunk pf the same slao, and accommodated another
man apd his wife apd two children, leaving 8 feet of heiid room abort* them. There
is thus only 2]/% foot of open space in front of their sleeping places, tor it II thla popu-
lation to wash and dross in, consequently they must do so by turns. Iflhesu bertha
wore erected for the purpose they are at present used for, and arc according to th« w,
filiations of the British or Queensland Government, the arrangement is certainly
contrary to all laws of common decency or morality, audijiustbo injurious to thd
health of the passengers. Surely this might be altered, and some arrangement
made by which, at least, married families might have separate berths, however small.
There are no stops or ladder to the top berth, so that husband, wife, and children,
have to get up a height of 5 feet by climbing up a neighbour’s hunk in tho host way
they can. We generally rise at half-puat 0 o’clock, as wo have to get out water lor
the day’s use before 7 «'block, and those who have anythin; to get cooked for break-
fast, must take It to the cook before? bolls (7’iRJ) or they arc likely told they are
too late. We' have about 8 o’clock, dinner at half-past 12 o’clock, tea at
fialf-pastio’clpok. Our owu bread, puddings, Ac., are prepared 7»y mivaelves (and
unlike our neighbors in the 2nd cabin, we have no stewards to wait on us), and I here
must be at tip* cook’s or baker’s before 10 o'clock. We have salt-pork und pea-soup
for dinner, on Sundays and Wednesdays. Preserved mcatnn Monday, anil-beef and
preserved potatoes on Tuesdays and Thursdays; preserved meat and rleo on Fridays,
and salt-bccf and vegetables soup on Saturday, and with a Utile economy nresadi-
oiout for our comfortable subsistence, We give our place a good cleaning after each
meal, and since (thanks to our worthy captain) Hie sails have beenrempvml tVomthft
hold, we have got rid of the stigma of being the dirtiest place in tfioshlp, and now
flatter ourselves we are qow second to none in cleanliness. . __
INTERMEDIATE.
” GRAND REVIEW?
His Royal Highness the Duke of Cambrige, will, weather
permitting, review the Eusilier Guards in Hyde Park, on
Wednesday next, when. their new band, consisting of 12
different instruments, will parade before them, to the field
playing—•' The British Grenadier.” The Eusilier _ band
will assemble at the port.arsenal side, and the troops in the
largo space, adjoining. After the manual and platoon ex-
ercise shall have been completed, 11. E. H. will then arrive
on the ground, accompanied by his suite ; all will then pre-
sent arms, the band striking up —“ God Save the Queen
after which they will be closely inspected by tump the#
after marching twice, around the park in quick- and slow
time, will form a square to listen to jl.R.S’s speech, which
it is to bp hoped will prove satisfactory .three hearty cheers
will then be given, the band striking up “ Rule Britannia,”
after Which all will have to return to the arsenal and be
dismissed. The Duke will honor the officers and other
officials with his presence at, a dinner, ki the London Coffee
House, in the evening, An experienced surgeon will be on
the ground in case of accidents, and it is to be hoped that
no one will fire off Ids ramrod, Muskets, bolts, &o. to bo
perfectly clean, so that H. B. H, may have np ; cause to
compla , q.Ro, HARRIS, Adjutant-Gramraljoro. tm.
The Signor Benneti requests that all parties- in possession
of hooks or other property belonging to him, will return
the same to Mrs. Tampers, 47, Norfolk-atroet, btrand, as
he is now making the necessary preparations for lauding at
Brisbane. July 21,1864.


“HOW WE WENT TO QUEENSLAND, ON.BOARD THE "FUSILIER.”
Doubtless, most of our readers have heard of the tale of ' £ s. d. in-'n-n
tribe of monkeys crossing a river, tow one monkey will, 1866 10 O' 0 1870 10 0 U
, o-Aiinratinn nlinib to the ton of a bouet of a hurt . 111 6 • 817 1
Doubtless, most of our readers have heard of the tale of
a tribe of monkeys crossing a river, how one. monkey will,
in his generation, climb to the top of a bough of a high
tree, there being on the opposite side of the stream another
equally high. The monkeys then formed themselves into a
string as it were reaching to tho ground, and hanging on to
each other’s tails, they then commenced swinging, till the
one at the bottom caught a,branch of the tree on the op-
posite side, thus forming a Bridge, over which the entire
tribe passed; after which, of course, it was an easy matter •
for the sage monkey to let go his hold, and so doing they
were all dragged across in safety. Now, we are not going
to compare sailors with monkeys, though in some respects
they equal if not surpass them in feats of daring and agility,' -
for who among us lias not noted with wonder and admi-
ration the quickness and intrepidity with which setaien
perform their dangerous duty, lying on the yards in a gale:
of wind, hanging on to the rigging, as if by their eye-lids ;
but though they appear quite at home -on the main-yard,
they seam as a class entirely to neglect the main chance,
that is, laying by a proper provision for did age; Now, we
are fully aware that there are some splendid institutions for a
the benefit of seamen already existing in the old country— y
all honor and praise to their noble patrons, for we hold that; I
he who assists his brother man, performs one of the highest ; c
and most sacred duties enjoined upon him. But we wish to, a
soe the sailor noing something onhis own account, for heaven f
helps those who help themselves, and Jack, if he will link p
himself heart and hand with his brother tar, may more than t
emulate the monkey, and by co-operation and mutual as- b
sistance, attain the wherewithal to render his old age com- h
fortable, or at any rate free from want. We have though if
Seriously over the matter of late, add arrived at the con- b
elusion; though the difficulties in carrying; it out, maybe H
great,, that wrre some hundreds of sailors belonging to the o,
port of London to form themselves into a co-operative so- g.
ciety, after the manner of such institutions already exist- ■
ing among nearly every mechanical body, a great deal jT
might be done towards this desired effect. Suppose, for in- S.
stance a society was formed, and each member subscribed ;ai
£l5 per annum out of his yearly earnings, he could have oi
out of this sum, at the end of every voyage, clothes to the of
amount of £5, as of much value to him as ,£8 would have of
purchased in the usual way Jack goes to market, for H
what with boarding, master’s crimps and land sharks, that ai
always besiege and lie in wait for poor Jack, he gene- Y
rally has to pay cent- per cent, for every thing he buys m
through or of them. An efficient person should be ap- ffi
pointed as manager, whose remuneration should be liberal, L
and whose knowledge and experience in the purchase of
such articles, Should Be such as to enable him to Like ad- af
vantage of tho host markets. The remaining £lO, properly dc
invested, would at the end of 20 years, a period not too In
long to work, amount to £330 12s. 9d., at £5 per cent., w.
compound-interest (see'calculation at foot) a sum siiffi- lif
cient, at any rate, to keep the wolf from the door, and if sh
properly laid out in some little business, would’ keep Jack
comfortable for life. Nor would this be all there are of ui
the good and generous, plenty who would cbme forward fe:
and give freely towards the support of such a desirable and an
noble institutionespecially when they saw the sailor
striving to help himself. ,We are sorry that space will hot
permit our going more into'detail upon this subject, but
should these few lines, hastily thrown together, be tlie means *
of making only one sailor think seriously, we will not have M
written in vain. hr
■ 1867 10 00
1877 10 0 0
9 16 0
2‘ 3 1
1868 10 0 0
1878' 10 0 0
215 3
10 15 9
186910 00
1870 10 0 0
3: 8 0
11 16 7
1870 10 0 0
1880 10 0 0
4 15
12 18 4
1871 10 0 0
1881 10 0 0
415 e;
14 1 2
1872 10 0 0
1882 10 0 0
5 10 3
15 5 4
1873 10 0 0
6 5 9
1883 10 0 O
Total.
330 12 9
MISCELLANEOUS.
A copy of the eccentric will of Henry Trigg, of Stcarn-
age, has been sent, us, but it is too long for insertion as -a
whole in our Journal, although wo shall bo happy to show
it to any one curious on the subject. It proceeds in the
, common, old-fashioned,, semi-religions, semi-irreverent way,
at one time universally adopted (the. date is 1724), and, as
far .as *hat goes,is po excontricity, as the style books of the
: period have all similar forms given as the-.proper and right
thing then for business men to do, Henry Trigg seems to
have been most anxious,to have his remains buried upon
his own property, “ under his. hovel,” as he. calls it. This
is nothing, .very curious, either, as the writer of this article
has, within the last, 20 years, read 8 or 10 wills of more
modern date, in which, the succession depondid in every
case on the heir burying the testator at the end of the oast-
gable of his own dwelling house. The curious part wo give,
; Item: I give and bequeath unto my nephew, William
iTwigg, the sum of £5 at the age of 30 years ; to his sister
Sarah, the sum of £2O, to his sister Hose, the sum of £2O
: and lastly, to his sister .Ann, the sum of £2O, all at the ago
of 30 years ; to John Spence, of London, butcher, the sum
of 1 guinea, and to Solomon Spence, of Stevenage, tho sum
of 1 guinea, 3 years next after my. disease; to my cousin
Henry Kempton, 1 guinea one year next after my disease
and another guinea two years after my decease; to William
Waby 5a,; and to Joseph Priest 25., 6d, two years after
my decease; to my tenant Robert Wright, the sum of sa.
two years next after my decease.;: and to Ralph Lowland
John Rowes Is. each 2 years next after my decease..
Provisions, Airticlcs of tins bind on board. for Hale
are now bringing large prices. Candies': are particularly in
demand. .We Rave Been informed that some substitutes
have been talked of, such as slush lamps; biit w© would
warn all _ and sundry aghinst the use of such dangerous
lights, which are totally at variance with all the rules of tho
ship.
Joint' : Stock: Company.—Transference of Shares.—Wo
understand that some sales have been made at par. Trans-
ferences cannot, however, bo legally made ,until registered
and the amount paid up.
MUSICAL, LITERARY, AND DRAMATIC.
Band.—An instrumental band has been formed on board
the Euffilier, under the able exertions of Sigiior Redcap.
Many of the instruments have been -manufactured on
board, and do, great credit to the different makers. The
band consists of 2 flutes; 2 ctmcertihas, 1 banjo,- 1 triangle,
xi l ms ’ tambourine. Their first appearance will bo
at the review at Hyde-Park on "Wednesday next, when Hia
Koyal Highness the Duke of Cambridge will inspect tbe
ship s company and horse marinoe.
£ s. d. £ , ,i
1864 10 0 9 1874 iq 0 o
10 0 7 2 1
1865 10 0 0 , 1875 i 0 o 0
1 0 G 7 19 2


Mlo !„ W i' V ’ !aT T 0 OK.EOAM, ™ " KU.STLIK3;,"
Weekly (..'Oneorts.-* I’hoßu pleasant meetings,were bus-
pended hint week for the first time since their commenc
meat, owing to the state of the weather, and the indispo
tion of many members of the troupe, It is proposed to
give the next in the' Intermediate Cabin.
BALL.- A. Hall took place last night when the dulneas
of the evening was enlivened by a moat spirited dance
kept up for two hours, to the great comfort and satisfaction
of all who engaged in it, Much mirth, and the greatest
order _ prevailed. The only patties we pitied were the
musicians, whose fingers must have been nearly frozen off,
Mno Arts,—-The beautiful frontispiece for our Journal
has boon inspected during the last week by many on board'
and that all may have an opportunity of seeing it, the
General will bo glad to exhibit it in front of the 2nd cabin
on Monday next, during tlio forenoon.
Sunday, I,7th July, 18(54. Bolling.very much in a cross
soa, and for the first time since coming,on board, we had no
church service. Monday, 18th,—Wo had a meeting in the
2nd cabin to-day about clearing the; saloon part of it. An
animated discussion took place, in which much was said
foreign to the purpose. A, majority volunteered to assist ths
steward in giving it a thorough brushing up. Tuesday, 19th,
-The steward and volunteers turned out at 6 o’clock in
tho morning, and, in the oourso of the forenoon, the cabin
a lnore comf ort;able appearance. In the
unex P ect edly, Mr s. Wit-tv, in 'the 2nd
imi’i Srf , Wednesday, 20th.—We have run
wn f™ 8 SmCe thls da 7 wcek > and at the same rate
e shall teach Moreton Bay in a fortnight. Thursday Slat,
A disagreeably cold and wet day, which, added to the
worn out and soiled apparel of the passengers, makes us all
look very seedy. What a comfort it must have been to the
omldren ot Israel on their long journey, that their shoes
did not wear, out nor their raiment wax old. In the evening
shortly alter sundown, the fore-topgallant-sail was ripped
np and nearly half of it blown away. Friday, 22nd July,
.Nearly becalmed all forenoon. After dinner, a breeze
®P r &hg Up; We are now in 117° E. longitude. Saturday,
28rd July.-—Another fine day, but cold—the barometer
tailing,' and indicating raiu. Many of us have now been on
board 14 weeks.
A person has an 8 gallon cask of wine, which be is to
divide equally by measure between two. For this purpose,
he is furnished with a 5 gallon measure and a 3 gallon
measure. With these two, how is he to measure out 4 gal.
lons to each ?
On board the Fusilier, on the evening of Tuesday, 19th
July, the wife of W. E, Witty, Esq., of a daughter.
gam utq irmt to (s«emsland, on board tto “ Jjasiliei;”
SATURDAY, 80TH. JULY, 1864.
The Royal Fusilier Band will meet on Monday, Wednesday,
and Friday of next week for practice at the arsenal at half-
past 6 o'clock,
IMuSFhotiob.
On and after Thursday next, the 4th August, the library will
bo closed. All persons bolding books; on loan are requested to
hand them to tho librarian by that time..
Fusilier, 28th July. • S. F., ROBINSON, Librarian.
Tho 'directors bog to intimate that the unpaid capital of the
Joint Stook Company (Limited)' for the publication of “How
wo wont to Queensland,” is now payable; and the treasurer
will attend' in tho 2nd cabin on Monday next, the.lst August,
from 10 to 12 o’clock, to receive pitytheht, - All transferences
of shares must ho registered by 1 the Secretary (paid up shares
only can bo transferred), for which a fob of fid. per, share hr
payable. Parties arc requested to hand'to the secretary a note:
of tho address to which they wish their copies of the Journal
to be addressed. An office) to Which all communications baity:
be addressed, will bo, appointed in Brisbane, of which duo
notice will bo given hi the, last number Of our Journal, It
will bo sufficient if addresses are loft there.
Five shares in the Joint Stook Company. Apply to Herr
Crux, 2nd Cabin.
1864, "; r '~
~ Before, our. next publication, if .all goes well, we shall,have,
arrived atour destination. LetuS tbpnbe grateful that it has
pleased a merciful fo bless, us with such a prosper-,
ous voyage, and also bo. thankful that, our good.ship was com-
manded by, so worthy and careful,Vcaptain, whoso good, sea-
manship arid gentlemanly manners: must liayo won him the
esteem of all. Wo shall have been at sea more than Lf weeks
without either : business' or profession-.to occupy pur , raipdsr--
15 weeks of leisure such as few of 'us, if. any, oyer experienced,
before. How have wo spent that time (for we oprtainly shall
have to give an account of it) —in usefulness or idleness?'
Have wp done all we. oould in improving ourselves and others?
In fact, have wo done our duty ? , Thera has, been plenty of
work for us all—the ignorant to instruct, the poor to assist,
and the sick to visit and relievo as well as circumstances would
permit. All had a duty to perform, and there is no excuse
for any one. There is no excuse for the saloon passenger be-
cause lie or she live upon the best, have a nice room to sit in,
and, if they prefer it, can live in perfect seclusion, have the
poop to walk on sacred only to themselves, and can say, " I
have no occasion to join the society around me ;” yet it is as
much their duty to assist in the social duties we have indicated
on hoard, and, if able to do so, to join in affording innocent
amusement to their fellow-passengers, as if their position in
the ship had brought them into unavoidable contact with all
classes. If they can say. “ I have done all I could—l have
done my duty,” that thought will be a pleasure to them ever
after, and they will never look back on such scenes aud works
as having been either disagreeable to or unworthy of them.
Neither ikthat any excuse for any beneath them. They also
have the same 'duties to perform, and in addition, aro called
on, from the circumstances in which they are placed, to exor-
cise an amount of forbearance one towards another, which
would not be expected or required on shore. Even the poorest
steerage passenger lias his duties ; for if he cannot assist or
instruct others, he can ever set a good example by being ready
to learn ; something and improve himself, and even, by good
temper and willingness to oblige his neighbor in small matters,
do much to'soften the asperities of the position in which ho
may find himself placed. At sea, as on shore, no matter how
bumble a man’s position may be, be always can be useful; and
much more good is done than is supposed by the poor helping
the poor, and is in every case far preferable to the indiscrimi-
nate riving of the richer classes. How few, if any, among ug
can say they, have done their duty, and how many have done
little or nothing; for, with the exception of those who are
paid for what they do, our schools have boon managed, our
concerts given, our balls conducted our Journal carried on,
and the whole life of the ship centred in fewer than 20 out ot
upwards of 200 passengers—® small number, certainly, from
among so many to have sustained the heat and burden of the
day Our Journal will soon be finished; but we have foyr tb.


“HOW WE WENT TO QUEENSLAND, ON BOAR# THE “FUSILIER.
to for advico in g ettin S ik U P' and |? r w t 0 f
MS-assistance in putting it together We regret.tins
"T.-,.. for very soon our paper will be in the hands of the
minter, and ere long will find its Way to the homes of those
Lar friends wo left behind With how. much more pride and
satisfaction would many have sent it had there been but one
naraorapli in it of which they ooula say they were .he writer,
and °how much more would it hare been valued at home if
friends there could have pointed to one article in it of which
the absent one was the author, and' he able to say that he, at
least had spent some portion of his time in an attempt at use-
fulness when he went to Queensland on hoard the husilier.
GRAND REVIEW.
This was a great success, and came off without any acci-
' dent on Wednesday, 25th inst. The troops present wore
under the command of Adjutant-General Count Kossuth,
who subjected thorn to a close inspection and drill before
the arrival of H. E. 11. Duke of Cambridge, Commander-
in-Chief of the British forces, and addressed the troops as
follows: —Staff.—The duties which yon have to perform
here to-day will be no loss onerous than they have been
wlicn attending on me mi former occasions, ■ and should
they bo performed aa well as they have hitherto been,
I have nothing to fear from you. Officers Tour duties,
like the staff, will not be light, and I trust they will be at-
tended with that success, which a knowledge of your ex-
perience would lead me to effect. Remember the chances
of your promotion, in a great measure, 'depend Upon the
report which H. R, H. will give of this Review. Men,—
It remains with you alone to render this Review a complete
success, commanded as you are by officers of great expe-
rience. Tour conduct when serving under me in times
past in the Peninsula, in the Crimea and in India, has been
everything that could be wished for, and should you follow
up that line of conduct whioh has characterised you in your
former career. I have not a doubt, in my own mind, but
that the Royal Duke will have just cause to be proud of such
a body of men. Follow up that independent line of eon-
. duet, which is the great characteristic of the British army,
and take no heed of what your neighbour may he doing. If
you think it better to move your right foot,, than your left,
by all means do so, If you think it better to retreat when
you are told to. advance, why retreat of course, as yon may
depend upon it that the success of the British army mainly
depends on this, and has been exemplified onso many oc-
casions, and now F must leave it to yon to perform your
parts, so put your hands in your pockets, and look after
the Duke. (Immense cheering continued for some minutes.
11. R. H. and staff having been discovered by the sentinel
on the look out, nearing the field of Review on the wire of
the Submarine Telegraph, the Fusilier hand immediately
'struck up —“ See, the conquering hero comes,” and amidst
thunders of applause, H. R. H. took his place on the main
deck, tfie troops presenting arms, and the hand playing
“ Rule Britannia.” A minute inspection followed, in the
course of which H, R, H, removed a speck of soot from the
nose of one of the soldiers, and requested another to cur-
tail along straggling hair from his moustache,. which by
the way was tile only one left, or had perhaps had ever
formed a part of that necessary military appendage; ; and
having confidently and quietly said something to the Ad-
jutant-General, which we believe had some reference to the:
fine effect which the variety qf buttons on some coats pre-
sented, he addressed the, men as follows Soldiers—'Your
country’s necessities have called you together. Yon have
left the sickle in the corn, the plough in the furrow, the
web in the loom, the goose before the fire, the, lap-stone on
the stool, the bread in the oven, the beer in the cooler. In
an (.hour’s notice you have mounted the gallant cockade,
and divers as your uniforms are, your hearts are one. You
moan to do your duty, however, incapable yon are at pre-
■ sent for doing so. Her Majesty to show her high appre-
i ciation of your endeavors has, ns her love for you, so aa to
be seen of men, followed the patriarchal example _ or .l aeoh,
by clothing you in coats of many colors. Tour drill is moat
excellent, just what I like to see, all self-acting, inde-
pendent soldiers, so perfect in discipline, as to do whatever
they like best, and so obedient to orders, as not to know
their right foot from:their left., Proud may the mothers-ho
that bore ye, and here your, merits, which have been so long
overlooked at home, are fully appreciated. I consider you
a vast improvement on ‘Sir; John Falstiff’s raggod.regimeiit,
for I am glad to think there are some shirts among you,
and if anyone lias been obliged to use two towels for that
most nescessary garment, it has been done with an art and a
gra.ee that defies detection. Tour band deserves my best
eulogium, and it is admirably fitted for the purposes in-
tended, and shows the pastoral propensities-that have led
to its embodiment. The routing of cows, the bleating of
sheep, the weaning of calves, and ; the hiving of bees, are
the settler’s true niusic,- and this you have imitated to per-
fection, with the same - independent spirit you have shown
in your drill. I shall more publicly thank the Adjutant
General for his services,-and my official report shall pass
over no true merit. I have come a long way on the oleotrio
wire, and feel so much cut up by my rapid passage, that it
would have been real agony to me to have mounted my
horse, had I got one here, but as I have not, my a pology
must be like the first of 50 reasons given by an old com-
mandmant of a fort for not firing a salute, he had no pow-
der, I have no horse. Soldiers, farewell, and God speed
you, and defend the right in the just war yon are now about
to engage in. My last words are, “ Forage always on the
enemy” if yon can, if not, do it in any other way you may
think fit. At the time we wont to press, the official report
usually issued from the war office on such occasions, had
not reached, hut Wo hope to have it before the publication
'of bur next. . , ,
A BUBBLE ABOUT A LITTLE DOG’S TAIL.
It appears that there is as much need of a constable in the
2nd Cabin, as in the steerage where the.steam, as was alleged
in one of your Journals,..is always kept up at high pressure
and ready to explode. By some means or other the explosive
element communicated itself to, the 2nd cabin, and a regular
row ensued on Tuesday'.evening*, A little dog, belonging to a
young gentleman in that compartment, had got a bladder tied
to its tail by some mischievous person on dock, and in that
encumbered state, made its way. to the .door of the 2nd cabin
in search of its master.., There, it either unfortunately fell
or was thrown down the,stairs, gpeatly to the annoyance of Us
young owner, who thought that one, of his follow passengers
in that compartment had been the cause of the accident, and
he accordingly accused this party of throwing his dog down.
The passenger, however, insisted that the dog had fallen down,
although he admitted that it was he who had put the dog
within the door. Some words followed between the more hoy
and the man, and the latter, alleging that the former was
giving him cheek, struck the youth, who immediately returned
the blow, and a row commenced, in which 4 or 5 of the 2nd
class passengers joined. ! (Explications which should never sound
on the tympanum of ears polite, were freely used; but the
most wonderful thing was, that a gentleman who had been
confined to his bod all day, managed to get up, though at the
time he exhibited no sympfotas of great debility, and rushed
out of his cabin in a deranged state, of dress, vociferating—
Let him haho it! let him hate it!” and wished to know
who would dare to interfere vrith His brother. Previous alleged
insults and had feelings of an earlier date were remembered
and spoken of, and had it hot been for the gentle interference
of the ladies —a civilizing influence which, unfortunately, the
passengers in the Steerage have not the pleasure of enjoying—L
a' more striking example to the inmates of that place, who,


« HOW Wifi WENT TO QUEENSLAND, ON BOARD THE » FUSILIER.”
native land with as good a character as X., or that he may
have quite as fair a prospect before him and as worthy a name
to uphold in his adopted country as X. possibly can have.
F lam, Sir, TRUTH.
To the Editor,
Sir, —I have noticed a great many persons wallung the
deck with dirty hoots, and having a great stock of Hay and
Martin’s blacking and some first-class brushes, I intend
going into business on my own account a-s Shoeblack, and
will bo found on Saturday morning at my stand on deck
ready to execute orders daily. 1 trust that by giving the
real London polish, at the price of Id. nor pair,_ every one
will ho able to appear again on hoard the ship n usuier
respectable, and I hope that you and your friends will rush
and givo mo a good start in trade, as I am tlio only person
on board that has got the best patent blacking, besides good
brushes and willing hands to use them. “Am I right or
any other man." I remain, yours Ac.,
7 DON FBIOASSO.
All must come provided with coppers, or no business can
ho done. '
(Wo consider it our duty to state that we and our stall
have availed ourselves of Don Fricgsao’s services, and the
improved respectability of our exertions is the best recom-
mendation wo can give to the valuable institution he has
originated. N.B. —Inspection invited.
To the Editor, , . , - , , ,
Sir,—l think I’ve got a fit of the blues, ’tis about 1 o chick
in the morning, and as X cannot sleep, and have never troubled
you before with an infliction, I .ball try. and inflict something
upon you now. You state that your journal will probably,
ere long bo iu the hands of those we have left behind. Tshall,
therefore, try and give you a little advice for the benefit ot
parents and guardians iu the old country. To them i would
say and speak feelingly. If you have a charge who gives you
a deal of trouble, and you wish to cure him of his last Me, lot
him have a perfect change, and to do this send him to Bris-
bane, in Queensland, as a steerage passenger by the fiusmer,
there is nothing like i 11 can assure you. Presuming ho has
exhausted the Pic, the Argylo, the Pavilion, the Cider Cellars,
Ac., and betrays a strong liking for drink, you may, by doing
as I advise, very likely effect a “perfect cure in themis-led,
mistaken, perhaps infatuated young man. Fifteen or sixteen
weeks of leisure will throw him on his own resources for
amusement, and ho must either come out of his shell to amuse
others, and thus endeavour to be hiinself amused, or die ot
ennui-
The mornings are awfully dull, the afternoons are
worse. If a man could be a dormouse or mole able to sleep out
this derangement then there would bo some hope of doing the
voyage in comfort, but as this cannot bo done, and one cannot
look forward to anything in the shape of a lark in tho even-
ing, such as going to the Barn or Crcmorne, life becomes
wearisome in the extreme. His mind will then very pmbab y
recoil on itself, and he, perhaps, will have some sort ot thought
like this, when the ship rolls tho sea is high and rough, and
his chest, with others, is playing a most melancholy chevy
chase over the ’tween decks. “ Well I m an ass ever to hare
come hero at all ; I expect the ship will soon go to the bottom.
I suppose I deserve it; if I had been in any way circumspect
I never should have been consigned thus. Money on board
ho won’t want, for he cannot buy anything in the shape of
beer, wine, or spirits for love or money, for I can declare that
not a smell of the sort have we had for at least 12 weeks, and
as to grub there is certainly plenty to keep him alive,but Me
will sometimes ask himself when, ho gets a pannikin of ooffe
and a biscuit for breakfast-tho butter having been used
in the mesa (some might say for want of economy, but the
word our character never understood or he woiiidnotbe
in his present position) whether a better breakfast is no
given to a man doing his three months on the wheel. It he
smokes, let him have 4 lbs. of at least, he will an-
joy a pipe, and know the comfort of it when making this
long voyage, and will not smoko as he used because ,
it was the thing, hut from pure pleasure. After boiug at
sea some weeks he will very likely begin to feel hnnseli a
bore, and the people bores wo, and the only amusement no
perhaps may appreciate will be the lively one of cutting up
tobacco, for ’tis sold in sticks, 10 or 11 to the pound, ana
costs 4s. (id., which will dispel a fallacy ruling at home tuat
you can, buy the comforting weed. Oh ! how comforting
and cheaper at sea than on shore.
Before the ship casts anchor he will feel thoroughly
knocked up by the continued queries about when we shall
get there ? for the contrary winds experienced on rounding
Tasmania are enough to vex a saint. If he does not by this
time determine to try and do better on arriving at his des-
tination, then “farewell hope,” and if ho does not endea-
vour so to do all is lost. Anything hut this dull monoto-
nous task indeed it would be preferable to be “ cribbed,
cabined, and confined,” even rivetted under your very eye
worthy guardian, all day long, with' a _ chance of a little. ■
pleasure in the evening than leading a life like this. But
say you do not intend to stop in the colony, well let him
return, he will be in no hurry to do so I can assure you,
and if ho does, you will have saved something for him out
of his yearly allowance, and perhaps have effected a perfect
cure . Tours, Ac., BLASE.
% the Editor. , . .
Sir—Having seen several advertisements m your journal
from parties wishing to get articles of dress they do not
ha\e the good luck themselves to possess, 1 beg to call at-
tention to a notice in your journal of this week on the sub-
ject, hoping that among your readers some may be found
who, like good Samaritans, will come forward and lend a
helping hand to “friends in need,” as several young men
in the Commissariat Department have grown so exceed-
indy fat of lain that to their great surprise and horror
their Sunday apparel falls far short of its appropriate pur-
pose. Last Sunday, being a clean, fine day, these young
men thought they might appear smart m the presence ol
the ladies, and accordingly attempted to don their Sunday
clothes, but the very reverse of smartness was the result,
fortheircoatsworea.il on the ascending scale, up their
backs, while their vests, O horrible, would only meet at the
upper button. Bierce and furious must have been their
attempts to get into their inexpressibles and well might
they exclaim “ when legs meet hreeks then comes thutug
of war." No collars to meet within an inch and, a halt,
while an apoplectic face proclaimed the strangling piUbpen-
sities of the shirt. Being myself one of the unfortunates,
I can only sav I wish never again to endure such misery as
I did on Sunday, 31st July, 1364, for instead of my hand-
some person causing/ as the poet says, the fair sex to be-
come “as spoil bound,’’ I myself was clothes bound. Not
one of ns could move half an inch to the right or left, to
bend was totally out of the question, and in proceeding
up and down the step, to our respective dormitories we
must have reminded an observer of a. marine ot last century
who had swallowed a ramrod, but had not been able to dj-
eest it. As we cannot go on shore at Brisbane without suit-
able garments of the necessary longitude and latitude, and
as first appearances are everything, we hope some one will
pity u», and prevent our imperfect apparel from damaging.
the ottoltuhatss.
P 3 __How we managed to get so fat is our own busm ess,
but we have always believed in the Scripture precept,
“ Muzzle not the mouth of the ox that treadeth out the


“ HOW WE WENT TO QUEENSLAND, ON BOARD THE “ FUSILIER.”
Our lime together will be short ;
Wo wish you well before we part;
Prosperity nail health to all-
A happy future, to groat uiul small.
Our time, itc.
Thanks to our worthy t’aplaiu'w due,
Hia officers and jolly crew;
For their consent aud approbation*
Assistance kind, and co-operation.
Our time, »tc.
How tctt trail to (|ituii!jl;nul, jto boantl tlur
' , SATURDAY, 6TH. AUGUST, 18«4.
NOTICE.
To be Disposed of, a strong durable Canvas Tent, the
property of S. Hiokinbotham, better known as Sambo, well
suited for an emigrant with a wife and family who may bo
placed where houses cannot he got. Length, 8 feet; width,
ft feet; height, 5 feet. All the materials first-class, and
workmanship perfect. It can be taken down or put up
within 10 minntes, and is easily carried, the weight being
under 20 lbs. Ready money. The tent may bo seen on
application to Sambo, No. 1, Steerage.
NOTICE TO CONTRACTORS.
Wanted a Person to Contract for the supply of 40 Strait
Jaekets, for the use of the ship. The immediate prospect
on lauding having induced a mania for the perpetration of
practical jokes, which may so effect the risible nerves of
those on board as to prevent their being passed as perfectly
sane by the medical authorities on shore. N.B.—The crew
and other established working departments on board are
so very busy that no competent person need have any deli-
cacy in applying for the contract. Apply Single Female
Compartment, ~
HOW WE WENT TO QUEENSLAND.
The Directors beg to intimate that to facilitate the de-
liveery of copies of this journal they have made'arrange-
ments by which parties can have these forwarded by post,
ei her up the country or to England, by leaving the proper
address and necessary postage with the Secretary. Mr.
Thomas Lambert, within two days after lauding, between
the hours of 10 and 12 o’clock, at the Yietoria Hotel Bria
bane. ’
DERBY DAY.
, Acooutns of charge and discharge between the subscribers
and the Committee of Management.
Charge. Discharge. Balance
24 15 9 '
The balance in Treasiirer’s hands, Mr. Cross, will be applied
towards the expenses connected with other amusements on
board, E. G., Music for the Balls, &c. .
WANTED EOR THE COMMISSARIAT DEPART-
MENT, 5 Coats for 5 Young Men, weighing 14 stone 6
vests for ditto, ditto, ditto,, measuring 2 yards round the
waist, with an elastic back for increasing growth. 5 pairs
of trousers, length of logs not to exceed. 2ft. 3£m.,'and 8
yards round' the loins, and 2 yards at the waist. The
highest price given for the article. The advertisers won’t
grudge sea prices if they can be, furnished with suits before
landing. _ Parties wishing to gee the Advertiser, can get
every, satisfaction by applying to the Steward of the first
Cabin, pr the Baker’s Bully, both of whom being in-want
themselves have kindly agreed to , assist their, friends in
getting a refit. , .
• SATURDAY,'6TH.. AUGUST, 1864.
Our weekly labours in preparing our Journal for its issue
on Saturday are brought to a close early on that day, and
it is, if possible, with much more pleasure and with greater
zeal that wf now engage in them,, seeing that our exertions
.are so mucli appreciated by the general public evidenced by
the kind support they have given us. On shore, when on 1 ’
e 'weekly toils aro done, and that conscientiously what *
11 pleasure we leel in putting away all cares and anxieties fed’
0 one . whole day, and that the Sabbath, wisely ordained, and
i, proportionately arranged by a gracious Providence for the
d benefit of man and the rest of his creatures. The weary,
p anxious business, man closes bis desk at Satmday noon]
g with a there “ Thank God for Sunday" and away ‘ho hies
a to some favorite spot if it be summer time to smoke bis pipe
in peace and quiet, sinking the shop for the time if he bo
wise and giving himself up to a sweet repose. What a dif-
ferent feeling pervades our minds hero ; when Saturday
* comes wo have no idea of a day of quiet rest succeeding:
At sea all days seem almost alike to- us—-’tis time our crow
£ present a more smart appearance on Sunday, and as little
1 as possible is done in the way of word except what is posi-
tively necessary. Every one puts on a clean shirt if he has
v one, and washes his face on this day at least, for ’tis a fact
e that may consider it quiet; or the day not to wear out their
" face by daily ablutions.
e ; Church Service is conducted on the Main Deck by our
worthy Dr.,'but the rolling of the ship and many other
things arc apt to draw our attention from the solemnity of
the exorcise. How different are the feelings' with which wo
used to engage in this solemn duty when'entering our quiet
*’ village church at home, a hallowed sacred spot that we hope
we may long cherish in our memories, and profit by the lea-
r sons wo learned, when we recollect,' tlio’ far, the happy-
'• hours spent in that well-remembered sanctuary, Our soa-
-1 sous of rest and Sabbath repose are now greatly missed by
us, may we on again having the opportunity-of enjoying
them use them to advantage and so treasure up the lessons
taught on those occasion that when .again feeling a flenso •
, of their loss we may be able to recall something learnt
which shall conduce to our comfort and peace ‘of mind, ;
although onr Sabbaths may .not be- attended with All those
concomitants which wo think none-should deprecate; even :
if it be only for example’s sake, '
This, wo hope will bo the last mumbqr of,, our Journal
we shall edit on-board, not .that wo pro' tired of opr duties ;
but lor the sake of all, we trusty that, one ]ong>joiu , iiGy will
close before the end ol another week., ft is, however, our
intention to_ issue one number more' after.' onr' arrival in
Brisbane, without which we scarcely think “ Tlio Cruise of
the I usdier” would be complete. Wo shall, wo hope, bo
able to record the safe landing of our passengers and wind
up what has been to most of us a pleasant and interesting
y WM 0 ' An account of our first impressions of Brisbane
will term a loading feature of. our supplementary number,
_ rev l l 9win g the past we will try to show that we have -
.fulfilled our pledge and to the best of our , ability supple-
mented our self-imposed duties, but it would anticipate too ’
much were we now to say more of our valedictory article.
No doubt a series of festivities-.will celebrate the last few
clays of ourbeing together, arid these' will also be duly re-
eorded. Wo rejoice to think wo shall hot die in an effete
old, age. Truly,, like emigrants starting for the‘bush, we
nave reason to bo proud that pur Journal is yet'in its vigour, '
and shows nc’symptoms of decay. The demand for shares :
an the Joint Stock Company fornts publication is still great,


'< HOW WE WENT TO QUEENSLAND, ON BOARD THE « FUSILIER."
bnt: wo know of none now in the market. Copies of the
Journal will he however for sale, and the sooner the num-
ber required by those on board who are not suhscrbers
is known, yso much the better, as that will in some measure
guide us in our instructions to the printer, and all copies
will bo issued in accordance with the rotation of subscribers
names.
_lb will bo seen from our advertising columns that the
directors have made arrangements whereby to facilitate the.
despatch of copies, either for home or up-country, by post.
There still remains enough of time for parties who have any
communications to make to our columns to do so, which, as
hinted at in our last week’s paper may give our Journal a
double value at home.
We hope to wish our .friends good-bye for a lime, at least
in,our next, but our voyage in the old Fusilier will ever be
pleasantly remembered ■by us, for a bond, has been formed
between ua and its passengers, winch we trust will never he
brolcen-
CORRESPONDENCE.
J?) the Editor, .
Sir, —When party feelings or personalities cannot be hid-
den in public writing, it is high time the pen be laid aside.
I need scarcely tell you I allude to a letter in your last
week’s issue, m which I am told T am depicted as a bully,
a cowardly mean fellow, worthy of the monarchs deserving
to be placed on half-diet, and necessitate a constable for the
2nd cabin. Surely this is racking ill-will by the vengeance
and the authorities of the ship must think me one who needs
watching, and I'shall not he surprised to hear some person
has been to watch my future conduct.
Although no name is mentioned but brother, it implies
two brothers are in the 2nd cabin, and any one looking over
the list of names and occupations of so few must learn at
a glance who are the brothers to whom you refer. It is
true I am not the son of a gentleman, hut of a farmer
who pays 20s, in the £, and both my brother and myself
left England with characters unspotted, therefore I cannot
see the fun of being written down a blackguard by any
steerage passenger, who perhaps has no reputation to lose,
but simply does it to gain the interest of certain parties
in the 2nd cabin. Brevity is the soul of wit, but since
fortune has not allowed me an academical course of in-
struction, I. must crave your indulgence in accepting a
hearing in-vindication of my own honor and integrity in
the simple manner I must of necessity give it. First, I
will defy you to mention any one in the 2nd cabin who
has violated less of the ships rules than mvaelf, hub what
makes my conduct so egregious I reproved the son of a
gentleman. Bray what right has his being the son of a
gentleman to do with it? Whether he is the son of a
gentleman or a nobleman he is without, a doubt a cheeky
individual, and often uses language to men enough his
senior to be his father, n6t fitting for vour Journal, and
thus for his impudence to me I brought my open hand
in close contact with his maxillariea which are well
guarded with abundance of adipose tissue, hut as the moat
cruel murderer on his receiving justice excites sympathy
from a bellowing mob, so did tke reproving of this boy
cause interference and the production of a little double
Q-loster lingo from. Mr. Fourfoot, nothing who to have
had justice ought to have been treated in the same man-
ner. lam also accused of cruelty to the boy’s dog. Thy.
dog was what is commonly called tail-piped, and in this
state was bewildered by some 50 fellows yelling after bim,
and to add to the poor creature’s embarrassment a cat
was thrown on him. To relieve him from this I took him
without any intent td he cruel and placed him on the'
top of the steps and gently sent him where I knew his
owner was, the most likely person to relieve him. It is
quite true the creature fell down a few of the steps
but was not hurt, the fall was enough to excite the owner
i admit, but still he was not justified in using the lan-
guage to me He did when I considered I had done the dog
kindness, neither were the few subsequent remarks sufficient
to admit of a letter with such scandal to he published under
the head of a row in the 2nd cabin, for not one blow was
struck after reproving the hoy, and some in the cabin never
heard the commotion at all. With this I shall conolnde ap-
pealing to your sense of justice to give this publicity in your
next issue, or else withdraw the former letter.
Yours, (fee., X.
(We have carefully abstained from the use of course of foul
language in our Journal and we were somewhat astonished to
find the accusation made against us by X. in the above letter.
Bully,'cowardly, mean fellow, never before defaced our pages,
nor except in the present circumstances would they ever have
been found there. It is evident that X. writes under feelings
of great exasperation, nor would we have interfered had it not
been the,evident insinuation that we were implicated in, or at
least aiding and abetting the ill-feeling he believes to exist
against himself. Before receiving this letter we had privately
assured X.’s brother that no such feeling did exist, and this
too in a way no person, with the feelings of a gentleman ought
to have doubted. As we have failed, however, in our attempt
at pacification, we feel ourselves called upon to put the matter
right with the publio. In our first number we stated we
would avoid all personalities—a pledge wo believe we have
kept, and we- foel satisfied that we have never opened our
columns for the publication of private scandal or party feeling.
The letter we published and to which X. replies, purported
to contain a correct account of what w« agree with our corres-
pondent in thinking au unseemly scene in the 2nd cabin, m
which temper and language used which ought
not to have been. X.’e letter fully corroborates' every state-
ment made to which it refers, and having had an opportunity
of correcting any other mis-statements in the. letter trom the
steerage (which is not done) the presumption is that the whole
is correct. Personally, we know nothing more than that there
was a.row in the 2nd cabin, from what cause, or under what
provocation we know not, but we do know that hut ior tua
interference of cooler heads it would have been worse. As
such scenes in the steerage have been animadverted on in uui
columns, it would have savoured of partiality had we ret used
to receive a statement which as yet stands unchallenged, and
though we regretted the necessity', common Justice to a.l
;classes demanded its insertion. We have often inculcated the,
doctrine of forbearance, and we leave this disagreeable subject,
by reminding our readers that " A soft answer tuvueth away,
wrath,” —a saying of wisdom which may staud us m good
stead in the laud we are going to, where knives and revolvers
are commoner weapons than newspaper paragraphs. En.
To the Editor, . . T >
Sir—As one of the committee for conducting this Journal,
though not an inmate of the 2nd cabin, I tWnk: dutj to
notice, in some particulars, the letter of X. inserted in tins
paper I should uot have done so bad there keen a chance ut
the writer of a "Bubble about a little dogs tail kemg ab 1c
to do so whilst on hoard. Had X. taken the trouble to
speot the letter he refers to instead of listening to mere hear-
say I think he would not have written tlm lettei he has dom.,,
a /he would have found that in it, he is neither stigmatised as
Thullw coward, nor blackguard, seeing that it contains a mere
statement of fsets which X. does not try to refute. ThcMUit,r
of the first letter does not question X. s elwiacter, or
he is the son-of a gentleman or not, or H bis fatheypaid Ws.
in the £, neither is it stated that from X. a behaviour alone
that a constable is wanted in the 2nd cabin, and how does X.
know that the writer, although 'b. steerage paasengef perhaps,
haying au infirmity of temper like X. kuuselt, h W feet left his


"HOW WE WENT TO QUEENSLAND ON BOARD THE 'FUSILIER.’ ”
both as regards social position and intelligence, are supposed
to be beneath their neighbors, could not have been given on
hoard. Perhaps these exhibitions of superfluous steam may
he ascribed to the fact that the 2nd cabin passengers had that
day too much “ soft tack,” having had it on the morning of
Tuesday, and also at tea time, while the steerage passengers
went without it all day, although they should have received it|
on Tuesday morning. What is sauee for the goose is sauce for!
the gander, and if half rations are thought good for the tem-
per of the steerage, might not the same system bo tried in the
2nd cabin, or, aa’it is usual to punish officers and gentlemen,
who may have been guilty of social offences not exactly pun-
ishable by the , constituted authorities, by tabooing them or
sending them to Coventry, might not these delinquents, if they
cannot be put on half rations, be treated in a similar manner,
ONE WHO HAS BEEN ON HALE RATIONS.
OOIiUES PO N D K N OE.
To the Editor.
Sir,~As I understand your paper gives a true account of,
all particulars that take place on board the Fusilier, in your
paper of the 23rd inst It is stated that there was no services
held on Sunday evening, the 17th inst. Now, I beg to state
there wore services held in the steerage by Mr. Dickenson, at
6 o’clock p.m , and have been ever since the weather got too
rough to hold them on the main deck. We had a good attend-
ance of females, 2nd cabin, and other passengers.
Yours, &c„ FAIR PLAY.
Our correspondent labors under two mistakes in making the
statement ho does. We do not profess to give an account of
all particulars that take place on board the Fusilier. We in-
deed report what comes under our own observation, or what,
we hoar from trustworthy sources, that appears to us to he of
general interest; but we do not pretend to chronicle every-
thing that takes place. In our Journal ofjthe 23rd July, we
did not say that no services of any kind took place on Sunday,
17 th. July; we merely stated the fact that no Church service
had been read, as may be seen by referring to our paper, No.
11. We arc glad, however, to give a place in our columns to
the above letter, as wo believe Mr. Dickenson is both regular
and conscientious in the discharge of his self-imposed duties.
Had our correspondent even attended to the title under which
the fact that there was no Church service on the 17th was
stated (Notes from a Journal), he might have saved himself
the trouble of crying out before he was hurt.
' To the Editor,
Sir,-—Since the Commencement of your valuable paper up
till last week, you have bad hone of my co-operation in the
useful undertaking. I must therefore thank you very kindly
for your insertion of my stray lines in your Journal No. 11,
which T have no doubt you could very well have done without.
I very reasonably, conjectured you would have refused them*
had it only been on account of my tardiness in trying'-to help;,
but 1 find you have set an example worthy to he imitated by
all —a forgiving disposition.” ■ : 1 am, Ato., DANDO-
To the Editor ,
Sir—The run made for the meek Sliding Wednesday, June
27 fh, amounts to X 306 miles. To-day (Thursday), we are 160
miles from the coast of Van IHuna/tfs ,Jymd... ■ This sounds
something like nearing, our destination■ I hove several times
been longer on the passage, and.. srmetimm shorter, so that so
far, we may consider our's something like an average passage,
any rate we won’t grumble if we cun make the next 1100 miles
in so short a time as, the lust,. Eut the remainder oj thepassage,
iis I have said before, is most vueerhnn. fie must, however,
lj"ive all conjecture on one side, as no one can judge within a
wmk as to when we shall see the port oj hlureUm jay. My next
vsnort, however, I hope will be the last, and .according to the
usual run of winds , Ac., there is not much doubt about it, lam
very glad to see the spirited way in whiah your journal has been
kept. His generally difficult to find people persevering enough
to keep it up during an Australian voyage. I hope you will feel
yonrself amply repaid by the knowledge that the journal , will be
read with a great deal of pleasure by many of those we have left
behind.
1864, Latitude. Longitude. Distance.
July 21st. 44° 20'' S. Ill'' 50' S. 168 mile*.
22nd. 44 .25 117 4 226
24th. 46 3 121 28 190
25 th. 45 0 125 46 182
26th. 44 44 , 129 39 166
27th. 44 58 135 1 227
28th. 45 14 138 29 148
Total distance 1306
MISCELLANEOIJS.
A rat behind the Arras.—The inmates of Mrs. Lirripor’s
were on Thursday night much alarmed by a visit from a
rat, which in its gambols created a great disturbance, and
no little merriment. It attempted to sup on the oleagneous
matter contained in the hair of one gentlemen; another
was much curtailed in his left moustache, while a third
strongly asserted that it had pared his to6-nails. That the
rat is not yet dead for a ducat we believe certain, but as
its vagaries will form the subject of an epic poem from the
pen of a: distinguished foreigner, and which will speedily
be published, we forbear saying more at present.
Answer to riddle in last. —Fill the 5 gallon and 3 gallon
measures. Pour the 3 gallons back into the cask. Fill the
3 gallon measure from the s ; gallon. Empty the 3 gallons
also into tho cases then pour the 2 gallons, which were left
5 gallon measure, into the 3-gallon, measure. Again, fill
the 5-gallon measure, and from-it- fill up-3-gallon measure,
which already contains 2 gallons. Ton have thus 4 mea-
sured gallons in the 5-gallon measure, 3 gallons in tho 8-
gallon measure, and 1 gallon in the cask.
Notes from a. July 24, 4864, The
wind'still favorable; although the vessel rolls very much,
and occasionally ships water. -In '. consequence of-this
Church Service was read in the cabin. - Monday, July 25. A
hitter cold day. Almost ever since we doubled the Cape,
we have had dirty; disagreeable weather. Last evening,
about 6 o’clock, the weather , leech, of the fore-sail, was
carried away, and the sail split along the head down to the
middle, so that it can scarcely he repaired again. Tuesday,
26th. ■ The wind continued to increase during the night,
and about 11 o’clock p.m. Monday. —The jib was carried
away, which caused the ship to tremble in every part, and
made the nervous feel somewhat anxious. We have made
a good.run to-day, and now sailing at the rate of 180-milo ft
each 24 hours, will bring us to Moreton Bay about Friday
week. • Wednesday, July 27. The Grand ITovie w
came off to-dgy , with great eclat. Thursday and Friday,
28th and 29th July. —Nothing of importance transpired,,
the weather being much-the same,, as the preceding- part 0 f
the week. Saturday, July 30. This morning we rounded
Tasmania, and arenow, sailing almost due north, but too far
at soa to see any thing ■of the hind.' With moderate weather
we may hope to be in Moreton Bay in a week, The weather
to-day in very genial, produ cing' an elasticity of spirit we have
not experienced for- some time, although we are nearly be-
calmed. ■ - • .- ■ :■ ■
. Kind friend, I *,' farewell, our task is dune,
Our laI)QL-’H O'«r, our last song's sum;; -
-We’vedune-our.beat.to plOaeoyouaU,
And are well paid by your' approval.
Our time in tTie FvislUftv soon, Olide,
Strangers wo rru:t,let u.s part as friends.
We’ve done opr bc&i to give you pleasure,
: - .. To wlle away'your hoilre of leisure. 1 ' 1
- If weve failed from built, of skill, '
'Tis been from want of talent, not of will.
Our limo, Ac. 1 :


« HOW WE WENT TO QUEENSLAND ON BOAKD THE 'FUSILIER.’ ”
COBBESPONDENGE.
To the Editor,
Sir,' —I think that every one during the.week that is past has
felt the full truth of the maxim, “ Hope deferred maketh the
heart sick.” A week ago we had all hoped by this time to be
much nearer the end of our journey. But we must endeavour to
look on the bright side. Many a ship has been the gainer by
many thousands by arriving at her destination later than was
antiripaied. Lei us hope that a similar case will with
us and that many of time who are anxious for situations in the
colony will obtain more eligible ones by the voyage being some-
what pi'otracted.
As it is proposed to publish a supplementary paper, I shall
reserve any remarks I may have to make on the voyage for the
opportunity I shall then have. The distance made good during
we week amounts to 830 miles ; this, of course, has not been all
in (he right direction, and the course of the chart appears a very
zig.zag 3W», Ac,, D. B. GARVOSSO.
Captain of the Jtus%lx&i\
1864, Latitude. Longitude. Distance.
July 28tb. 46° 82' S. US” 27' K, 200 miles.
29th. 44 47 146 46 142
80th. 44 18' 148 82 84
31st. 42 46 148 46 93
Aug. Ist. 43 80 152 20 156
■ 6 ~ , ii no UO QK Bfi
2nd, 41 33 158 85 85
3rd. 40 32 164 15 70
Total distance 830
A SCENE IN THE SINGLE FEMALE COMPABT.
MBNT.
To the Editor.
Sir,—Most parts of the ship have been described, but we f
suppose that from the modesty of the inmates of the .•’ingle
female compartment wo have as yet had no communications
from it. There are about 4*o inhabitants in the compart-
mont, under the immediate charge of the doctor, and super- ,
intended by a matron on wbom all domestic arrangements
depend. For cleanliness and comfort, this is certainly the
first place in the ship, and the happy faces and joyous mer-
riment which continually issue- from its interior show that
much care is taken, to make their time pass agreeably. All _
■who have not scon bow female ©migrants arc managed, and
bow they are treated by all on board, would form very er-
roneous ideas on. the subject. Instead of a disagreeable,
idle, and half-prison life, the very reverse is the case. At-
tentions, which would be no disgrace to any drawing-room,
are shown them by all on board; they have lots of work,
both for themselves and for the ship, and many a little
comfort which the malopassengers of all classes enjoy comes
from the Single Female Compartment. Their place is
clo&uor than any other, and moat of the other classes eiivy
their fare, which is not only of the best, hut nicely cooked
by themselves, They have uninterrupted access to the
deck from 7 in the morning till 9 at night, ( It is during
their locked up hours we have heard that their exuberance
of spirit evaporates, and a far-off sound of their games has
sometimes reached ns. Practical jokes will always abound
among young people, and last flight (Tuesday) the sounds
of laughter, issuing from the hatchway, showed the few
smokers, who were taking their evening pipe on deck that
the young ladies Were “wiring ifffo something or some-
body In a short time the captain and, doctor both went
down to see the cause, but this only redoubled the ring a
the merry peal. Some miscluef-loymg spirits had managed
to rte out a man, which they placed snugly in one of the
berths, and the inmate, when retiring for the wmbq
doubt much astonished to find her sanctuary so invaded.
A hubbub got up, which the explosion of mirth from those
on board were in the secret, only increased, and the captain
and doctor had to descend to ascertain the cause of the un-
usual noise. By this time the mat! was displaced, and there
he lay on the floor, grinning from ear to ear, with extended
palms and supple person. The aggrieved party, however,
insisted that the authorities should so© the intruder in the
1 very position he was in when first discovered, and the
' gentleman had to be helped to bed again by those in whom
' laughter had loft any powers of action, This was oven too
1 much for the frightened fair one herself, who now joined in
• the laugh, and according to the old adage “let these laugh
who win,” the young lady thereupon possessed herself of
! her troublers handsome woollen shirt, which she will keep,
> wo presume, till she gets the true owner inside of it, then
1 to bo either merciful or severe, as her humour for the true
1 may bo.
/ This cage of pretty mocking birds must soon be opened
and the inmates set at liberty, May they never meet with
mates unworthy of them, and may the stewards of their
• happiness be as attentive to their comforts as those officers
onboard the “ Fusilier have been,
I am, Sir, yours, &c, Tiiiangljs.
A Letter fkom a Young- Man to a Touno Ladt
FOUND ON THE DECK OF THE ' FUSIMEB,’
My Dear Miss,—l shall write these few lines , to yon,
hoping dat you vill not be angry mit me, for 1. shall love
you mit mine very heart. Mine dear you have often van ted
to meet mit mo on. dat rigging, but 1 link dat aboil not do.
I tink if ve meet mit the main hatch it vood be more better
an good, Mine yowell do rename name you hah got shall
not be proper, but mine dear I. hope von verahne day I
shall make mit you von Mistnsh 1 on Tromp.
Mine dear ever since ve shall leave Londrex I shall tn.k
for you. and ebory time I trink mine tea I snail tink tor
VOU. Mine dear, if I shall net go on shore mit you, 1 vosh
die by dam. Yon ve get to Brisbane 1 shall buy mit you
von mir of sheos, Mine dear you shall not, speak mit dat
Bob, for he shall he von dam roge. - ,
I «*««**<**“^clVoS'Tßoiv
LOCAL NEWS,, ,
Concert —A most successful entertainment was given by
on Thursday evening, in the to J
largo and appreciating audience. The whole force of tnu
troupe vocal and instrumental, were present, and Aid their
hest P to make the evening pass agreeably. A slight annoy*
ftuce to the audience was given by a small
in a neighbouring compartment, but it was unworthy of
“°On° Thursday morning a revolver, belonging to Mr.
dekt happened to John Pope, yes'erday morning. Worst
attending to^ 3 “f“ iSTm£ "vA
B ’3>»Ar, to 1» <***
injury. ..- 7?.Win"Much amusement waa
Jrt? Tkma«J 1-7 1 J SffcSS
discovered aloft. jjg experiencedon that
“dCd. „d P hi. W, (i™,
day. His aguuy , lb „j- cheers as they saluted
»7 it “ 01 ciwi B.IIOJ-


« HOW WK WENT TO QUEENSLAND, ON BOARD THE " Ft'Hl LIE it.”
THE RAT IN MRS. LIRRIPER’S.
Lml, niffht as 1 lay in my bunk, il’ho Genmil ho had hie too mills
I whs Wwoon sleeping and waliins, I’iimid oloso liy this wonderful noastj
Wlum I fairly woUc up in a fault, i’or unyßoll I told wonderful talcs.
For somethin" a great, noise was maUlng, How the rat grunted oyer the least.
Sn I bothered, ami bothered again, Then out nfmy lied like ashot.
What It was I did not fuel oertain j Asked old liDger.to give me a light;
So this feel, tlmt 1 might ascertain, ]i u t Iris matches a beastly had lot,
t quietly drew bad; my curtain. Would not burn up by rubbing that
It was just at the hour of three, ulght.
TotoI" up JhKJraxlbom a'spref But the General a light he soon got,
So he spoke most nonftmndeaiy surly.
But I thought lo niysoif, now old iniiti, T,'htU on deck I niicht have a cjoocl
Since Tvo wak’d you Up in a fright; smoko.
I’ll row cio the host Hint I can, ’ ■'
To keep you awake all tho night Some more Pd have certainty told von,
mi nc «..%lrn from Rsh n«n Blit tllO HUIBO llflS ROt QUItC In a fiurfy,
Axtd tnu Oomorittce ire.-t S l ; mrp at two,
For thn brute iiad halt’eaten his oap, h 0 1 m 1,1 a dllilfi of a luury.
And ho fear’d now had gimn to his hat. j merm t, lo have told you while writing,
The steward, in hod below laughed, ■ These lines which some may call an
Told a dream at that llnio to him hap- epic;
ping ; How my pen and my ink fell a fighting,
Kiwv some one at bis window had rapped, The catastrophe almost terrific.
AU^ning BlaUj “ ~,Ulshthi' “ • Herr Crux lie may think it wna nothing,
nappn i,. But with me you’ll nnw 1 Uiiuk;
I then told them all that bad passed, j siKiil’t poem eluan skirl, and white
And how my heart went pit a pat stocking.
To think how I'd laugh to see fast R something upsetting the ink.
lu a trap this old soratuh of a rah , •
„. n „,, iwnnl thnn felt for ills linir. So T hid you adieu for the present,
And found it was nmidi uut. of order, But whenever you hoar a amalU’atllo,
Old Ornx iwi-sled his uumsiarhe ao ran?, Disturbing your rest, that a not pleasant,
Ifelt the left mm and loudly roared I ray pleuaimtlj think ol liyniu.tti.
murder.
NOTES FROM A ,! OI'RNAL.
Sunday, Hint July. —In the morning hind was discovered
bu our leo bow. This turned out to bo iVlaria Island and
Taillofer Island, near the southern, extremity of
Wo had Church Service on tho main deck as usual. If
the weather holds fair it is possible that we may land before
another Sunday. In the evening Mr. Witty’s baby was
baptized hy tho doctor.
Monday, Ist August.—We are still in hopes of reaching
our journey's end this wee,].-, but less sanguine of this than
we were. Symptoms of landing begin to show themselves,
■the houses on deck arc being cleaned, and the whole wood-
work scrubbed up and the masts scraped.
Tuesday, 2nd August.—Not making much progress to-
day, and how think of this day week as the end of our
%/ednesday, 3rd August'.—This As a beautiful day, and
we are now about 250 miles off Banks’ Straits; which lie-to
the north of Tasmania, and about 800 miles from Brisbane.
Thursday, 4th August;—The' wind
refreshed the wearied hearts .of the , paBfl6xagers,.; >
mid-day a squall blow past us,
almost tofeyerheat,/an t ad'^gits-cbh%w»ce, >
and most lugubrious face relaxod ixito a Emile.' .Sijnde'tlieu
the wind was increased steadily, laud wo hope to.make a'
good night of it. , ,
Friday, sth August .—We made a good run yesterday,
nearly 200 miles, and are now well off the Australian ppast,
nearly opposite Twofold Bay, half .way,.between |i£el6idurae
and Sydney. , ~ . ..
Satin-day, (ith August,—l2 o’clock noon. Latitude, 3‘U
South, j Longitude, 155-3- East. 'A. little to tlio North of
Sydney, and between 400 and 600 miles, sad of .More’t on.
Bay. By the middle of next week we may hope to To dis-
embarking. ,
acrostic.
F arowell fair, maidens in the ‘ Ifnsilior,’
II nwillingly we soon, alas,! must part;
S oon all too soon shall fall the parting tpfcp,;
I n sorrowing sadnop-from amoving heart." :
L ov’d ones, farewell,some more fond adieu/ ;
I nspired by feelings that I. eaun,ot quell,
E imiptured hyyoiir.eharmsnnd Jove for you,"
R epeating only Fare-ye-well, Farewell.
ENIGMA,.
There was h creature on this earth did dwell,
So sacred ; writers' npto us ..do tell ; ;
He lived, ho breathpdln this vain world ’tis true,
Though he nratberkinhed nor evil knew,
lie never shall in Heaven's highkingdoin dwell,; ,
„Or o’er he doomed to. feel ,the pangs of hell,
, Yet in him aii immortal son! there,was;
That must ho damn’d .or live among the just, '
Answer, —The whale that swallowed .Jonah,
■ How tuEj- wijiit to ow koaiji llwj “(0s^ p: :-y
■— ■ ■ : ■ 1 :. V SATURDAY, 20TI-1. AUGUST, 1864. ‘ , ;T
SATURDAY, 20th AUGUST, 1864. • freedom and discipline .never; it^^iiifs^
When we issued our first number wo little, thought that our coast in better temper or better, 'CQpdi%p,, :> sOhr. liJsf
labours would luwe been continued for so long a time, not .journal is now landed in the sea, ofapiuppp.^iii, mA.m
tlmt our duties have been disagreeable, for our self-imposed do so. with.miich hesitation, Ip, writing to
tahk has been a source of amusement to ourselves, and has address, however, wo feel, that ip .ope,
helped lo wile away many ,ah hour that otherwise might wo.fairly fulfilled the-piejmsee
liavu; hun<r heavy oil our hands, and now in addressing our We have done our best and.cp, WPW
friends of the old ‘ Fusilier’ collectively for the Hast time, our friends wonder at the
Sye feel tlmt another' liiik is broken in the chain of our ex-
ist cm do—t lie inomory of which will long survive the one
hundred ami seventeen happy days we spent together. We
believe that wb do not only speak our own feelings, hut
that we give embodiment to the general reminiscence of all
onboard when wo say we shall, never have happier times
than we had during our somewhat lengthened voyage. No
factious party feeling or: ill-wili pervaded our ship, all was
harmony, and thanks to our, esteemed captain evorythMg
that could, be done for our comfort and amusement was
done by him. The address which wo. publish in this num-
ber, truly, but imperfectly expresses the obligations under
which all the passengers -in the 1 Fusilier’ lie under to
Captain Oarvasso, aid’although his modesty prevents him
acknowledging that, it was through his .exertions that our
fihip was so happy and comfortable, still the facts are as
have been stated, that by his: judicious arrangements of
our friends wonder at the
style of our publication did' ttpy. ojdy Thixpw tlie ,dj£fiqujjt|pji
under which it was got up. \Ar ' wp. nmted, in a preyippa
number there was ho. snug. pditor’s ..room for kp.s .kp,
our calling in. In warm weather, .the ..shady side oEthij
sail, and in cold and wet opr,little in the, sepohd
cabin was our only place, of Retirement,
lamp in one hand aiid
ranged our little journal I ,' ’ { Wo .in..
her to avoid all; personalities. a‘ pledge tve ■hopp
kept, and inilobking.ovoi'The past numbers., pf.our
we see little to that, .way; 'when we, saw
or heard of anything waptuig amendment, .we did pot hes.E
tats to insert in our; paper our, animadversions op
jeetj but in no case we flaker ourselves .have.we indulged
'in any language which tHpmqst' fastidious copld find
with. : It would savor too' |ni|ch of self-praise to
that we have done all but what we promj'sediyrd


4; HOW WE WENT "I'D QUEENSLANT), .ON BOARD THE " FUSILIER.”
believe we have done with an unflagging energy and interest 1
How wo wont to Queensland in the old ' Fusilier’ is now
un effete accompli ; safely, happily, and comfortably wo found
our track across the sea, and now landed on the'soil of our
adoption, all our .energies must be called into action to keep
up the lone of fooling with which wo started on our colonial
life. Wo do not try to preach (for that; is not colonial)
nor are we fitted for it, hut lot ns over remember that on
board the ‘ Fusilier’ wo started with the text, *• Do to others
us you would lie done by,” ami that different as might be
our creed the sum of our religion, was, “ Peace on earth
and good will towards all men,” and in the same spirit let
us strive to follow out our now career.
To our friends of the “ .Fusilier,” we have our personal
thanks to render for I Loir kind ness and forbearance, as well
its for the assistance we received in getting up our paper,
and to those at home into whose hands it may come it will
hi' interesting to know that from leading .articles, dpwii'Ur
the merest trifle of mnvs wo Immd ■ contributors from (he,
first cabin to the steerage. Wo have in apologise tii pur
shipmates, if sometimes on the, Friday aflicraopn, when pre-
paring for our weekly issue wo sometimes hastily bawled
out “ (Hear the gangway,” hut as wo \vlife Workingfoi I .their
amusement, wo hope that they took-these little ebullitions
of t emper just as they wore mount for the public good., Tlie
gangway is now cleared for the hist time, anff tho door aiid;
window m onr office dosed for ever. And now dear, friends
and readers wo must say farewell -bur joditoriiil duties-are
ondod. Othello’s occupation is gone, and having wielded
the pen for a lew mouths for amusement \ve most now make
the axe ring merrily on the gitwitk of -the' forest in real
earnest on onr new homo. Wh write our fai’Owdl, to' ybif
under canvas on the. banks of the Logan, and, have per-
petuated our recollect ions of the ‘ Eusilior’ by styling our
eHlatn 1 Tanintoo,’ where all old.' frncuds slyall evbr. bO' wol--
come to share what we have either, in shelter or food,
Mother Lirriper and No. I Bleak House pointed
out in the bush, and the same feeling piawailes:. (as G-od
grant it may continue to do) tho, hpnntos. .as. AT®
went to Queensland on hoard tho * 'Fusilier,’
NOTES FROM A JOURNAL.
a few of the cabin passengers came tip to Brisbane by her in
the evening.
The inspecting officers came on board to.day, and intimated
that it might be two days before we could land. Everything
was declared quite satisfactory, and we began to write letters
for homo to get posted in Brisbane,
Thursday, 18th.—Late last night tire captain arrived from
Brisbane, and first as moat of the passengers had turned into,
bed the word was passed round that the steamer was alongside
and that all the passengers’ luggage must be ready and on
board her within a few hours, as she would start for Brisbane
at 0 next morning. Sleep of course was out of the question,
and the night was passed in a bustle and confusion which
thoso who have experienced a similar position alone can know.
Immediately after daylight we began to move out of the
' Fusilier/ and got on board the steamer, which was a queer
loplung half,American wheelbarrow affair—the paddle-wheel
liinWg'at thelStdVin All, however, were in good humour, and
: coming :up tho >riycr most of us enjoyed the very pretty scenery
omits banks,: which to usj with its new spring tints was quits
. refvdshingbftcf iour;lqbgpd(l' Vbyage, An option was given to
1 the aAfiatedpassongors cither to go on to Ipswich, where they
would-find shelternnifhb'depot or they might remainin Bris--
! bane' tMy;'dw‘p v should they feel inclined,
I must of 1 them seemed to prefer the shelter of the depot, and
L ' in add Ipswich ■ tlvih; ’ddstintitidh, On the journey up, an ad-
’ dress frolu the passenger's was-presented to Captain Carvosso,
* wlueh'willLeifouiulun^the’: pages of tlie journal, and after ft
' -.Jititonclod remaining at Brisbane were
1 landed, while .‘ths rest of the passengers steamed
un to Ipswich. ' . , . . , , '
■Thil f was now at an end, ana the inmafcos ot the
old slop, wbo liad:lived.bbob.utfortably and happily together
j\>r r 4' were'dispersed, never certainly again all to
'r jvieot on : 'bbrs' .sidKh niiqb.! Bp-ui-?re from which no man n-
I turndtli,”'
DINNER TO CAPTAIN CARYASBO.
... Qn Friday evening, the 19th Inst,, a few of Captain Car.
vosso’s friends from among the passengers on board the
,‘ Fusilier’ entertained him to dinner' at the Victoria Hotel,
NOTES FROM A JOURNAL. . Brisbane The duties of chairman wore well performed by
Sunday 7th to 14th.—A tedious yeek was spent m dodging aU(i Canning, Esq., ably supported him
tho stoma and hnmoanes prevailing on the euak at this sea-, - 1 1 The chairman proposed the health of
Son, and nothing but a monotonous roptinq id jadn'g,»“d ; ■ J ; . (-i arvo9au ,j n (umeak speech, ooneisely ’recapitulating
tacking occurred all week, tho energies ■ot ■ most. ?npn W, .. 1 ’iepaoijikW ■khtei'diWharge of his dutios as captain of the
paralysed, and towards dusk om baturday, Ihs l tlfO ) tini b him on the prosperous tormina,
excitement of seeing land by Queensland Wptain of a ship
Many remained awake all night , to goU.lm,,lust , ghin||Si ( al tljfo during the course of the even
lighten Moroton Wand, nor Wjtlimtj atioua.toap--the ship were proposed^none
pointed, as before 2 o’clock on Sunday morning response than the ” Ladies on
distinctly visible on tho port hipy, Gradually, we neared, the 0 ■,' who passed a high onlogim
land, and after signalling some time for a pilot, we receivedtor L
answer "All engaged,” so that to onr, gloat ghagrm,- -with a on ,L * in „ enlivened by various good songs, with
fair wind blowing, wc bad to he at anchor all day.
Monday 16th.. —During tho night tho wind changed, ana
the question arose whether the pilot, whom wo expected in tho
forenoon, would think, of coming up to-take us ffim the' bay.
In the forenoon, however, we were glad to sue the little soimonu
coming fast on us, bringing with it tlio pilot, who was on
board, and in spite of a head wind wo slowly Fomcssed down
the Bay. Moroton Island seems a scries ot baud Hills and
Signal Stations, while to the right wc saw tho comoal
lulls called the Glass Houses rising like the cones ot buck we
kbo at homo in Glass Manufactories and 1 ottouea.
TneSy, Wtb.-Tlio small steamer ‘ Diamond’ came down
with some officials on board, but nothing was done, although
on Jiu nip usuumj 1 i«Qoougw..o < . ,
The evening was enlivened by various good songs, with
which most of '°p«ifgers in the ‘ Fußilier are well
tioci uainted, and was wound up about 11 o’clock by the whole
party singing '* ’ re U a ' r J ,lD^l
We are very sorry to bo obliged to publish our journal with*
out our illustrations and frontispiece, but an accident occurred
to tho box containing the chemicals which _ entirely put it
bevond our newer to have these ready in time, and having
S me mail already we do not think it advisable to wwt,
with our publication until wo get a new supply from byduey
We shall, however, keep the matter in wmd, audforwaiu th<i
frontispiece when ready,


TO D. B. OORVOSSO, Esqhiee,
CaPTAXIT 01' THE BmIUBAOT SHIP “ IVaiLIEB.’ ’
BIRc—Wo, tho passengers on board tho “Fusilier,” Emigrant Ship, from London,
to Queensland, beg to congratulate you on tho happy termination of a long ana
tedious voyage. Under the blessing of Providence, you have landed ns m safely in
the country of our adoption, and wo feel that we would now fail to discharge our
duty were we not to give expression to the universal feeling towards yoursolt which
has ever pom led this ship. Wo leave It with an increasing trust In and respect for
, yourself, and wo are proud to think wo are of tho number of those who have first
witnessed and benofltted by the admirable qualities you have exhibited as . com-
mander, as well as the affability, forbearance, and kindness, as a gentleman, you
have shown to all on board. The voyage has been a long one, no doubt, but this
• has only made it more trying of your qualifications for your post, and the greater
cause is there for our thankfulness for the absence of many ol those little disagree-
ables which alpiost always renders a small community, pent up for months together,
one of tho most unpleasant situations a man can occupy. These, happily, through
your tact and sound judgment, have been avoided, and it must bo to you a cause of
satisfaction to boo and to know that ou this account at least we need not have foaroa
a longer voyage, . ...... .. ~ ..
An amount of freedom from nnduo restraint, so tar as consistent with the sni pfl
safety, has been allowed to all, and has shown that a mild but firm government Is
. 'quite compatible with strict discipline. Wo have wanted no comfort, boon stinted in
no amusement, and refused no indulgence which reasonably could bo granted, al-
though in many of these w« fear we have oftoncr consulted our own wishes than
your convenience. Wo forbear from giving expression to any particular wishes for
your future welfare, arid happiness, and success in your profession. In one word,
may your own fondest wishes be realised. And now allow us to subscribe ourselves,
' Your pinch obliged and grateful passengers,
Signed by JAMES CUNNINGHAM,
GEORGE BAY,
GEORGE HARRIS,
THOMAS LAMBERT.
And Ono Hundred and Eighty other Paasengera,
TO THE PASSENGERS PER “ FUSILIER. "
brenrtle to«=ureyour approbation, However ,X Trill
how sincerely X thank yon for yont kind expressions, and that nothing
mo creator pleasure than to have your company again at any future day. I
ehould ho sorry to receive any praise that was not shared by Hr. Ilodgklnson,
and I take Sis public opportunity of thanking him for tho able manner in,
which ho has performed his duties in the ‘Fusilier,
That you may all ho successful hero, and that your expectations may he fully ■
realised, is tho heartfelt wish of
’ yours gratefully,
; ■ o. D. U. OAItVOSSO,
August 2fl, IM*. '


a' , ;-w -OYEELAN'D, Clahencb
■■■■'!sXibr- . lIoTEii, South Brisbane, ■„
, fellrFhe above Hotel is situated in Stanley-
at ' the : Junction of the old
X-pswieh Road,
\ mIK)MAS Sttianoem’ Home Hotei,,
\ X Marearct-stroet,. North Brisbane.—-Vines, Spirits,
Ac.., of thp bout Accommodation for Travel-
\ era. '* 1
\
/ _ -k ‘ jii - _ Ist
JSiizabeba-efcreet, 15ns bane
miII3 VICTORIA HOTEL, Ipswich Road, is situated
X 3-J milcs lrom -Brisbane, and offers the best accommo-
dation. It has stabling, and every attention is paid to the
comfort of guests. " T. H ARDC ASTLB, Proprietor.
i tftood Accommodation lor Travellers. j
