

HI >v^tv
$ xt&u^O , -
Ji . 7\\ . £ i_^
(
.
*0 I f* /
- .o




7 2^>*v
y - f J o&
A y . c -^
lOW CAPT. COOK DIED.
*EW LIGHT FROM AN
OLD BOOK.
EYEWITNESS’S STORY.
Quite recently 'there has been placed on the
shelves of that splendid national storehouse
the Manuscript Department of the British Mu-
seum a little morocco-bound quarto volume (it
has not yet been indexed) that is of romantic
and thrilling interest to every Englishman.
It is labelled “ Journal of Captain Cook’s
Last Voyage, 1778-1779,” and consists of a col-
lection of closely-written letters in a crabbed
nghteenth-century handwriting. The writer
vas one John Law, who served apparently as
petty officer on board the Discovery, Captain
Jlerke, which, as all the world knows, accom-
panied the Resolution on Captain Cook’s ill-
:ated expedition to the Sandwich Islands. The
ionor is Mr. C. G. Lawrence Law, one of John
Law's descendants.
The first letter is dated Jan. 16th, 1779, that
s to say, at the interesting moment when Cap-
-ain Cook determined to anchor in Karakakoa
Bay in search of provisions, and thenceforth a
tiinute account is given of the expedition both
before and after the Captain’s tragic death.
Iho excitement among the natives was great,
io fewer than 800 or 1,000 canoes and other
’Juall craft surrounding the British vessels;
iut at first nothing in the nature of hostility
* aa encountered. On the contrary, the sailors
eadily acquired by trading such commodities
is hogs for salting, salt, and vegetables, and
m Eatoo'a,” or priest, even gave the com-
nander a sucking-pig as a peace offering. With
iCau> ,
TJi^l
**** / *3S
® sucking-pig he brought a piece of cloth,
lnd after muttering some incantation he
’°*emnly tied it round Captain Cook’s neck.


T*
v
* «~r- -J 'VJm ■*


THEFTS BY SAVAGES.
It was not long, however, before trouble be-
gan, and it was brought about in the first
place by the irresistible propensity the savages
had for stealing, or, as Law quaintly puts it,
making use of their fingers too freely. They
actually “ conveyed ” a wooden rail from the
after hatchway of one of the ships, together
with Captain Cook’s keys, a small boat’s rudder,
and other portable property. Some set to work
industriously to rub off the sheathing of the
Discovery, and, being discovered, seemed
aggrieved on being told that their conduct was
not permissible.
The immediate cause of the final catastrophe
was the trumpery theft of a pair of tongs and a
chisel from the armourer’s forge. The thief
made off in a canoe, and a party of men in a
cutter started in pursuit, while many muskets
were fired at the canoe by the men on board
ship. After this Captain Cook determined to
secure the King as a hostage, and the narra-
tive henceforth to the Captain’s death had best
be given in Law’s own words, simply modifying
the spelling somewhat.
“ As soon as he (Captain Cook) landed (from
the pinnace) with a body of nine marines,
he went to the King’s house and asked him
to go on board, which the latter very readily
agreed to. The people on shore were alarmed
at Captain Cook coming with such a body to
invite Kini Oboo aboard, and though the old
King had got down to the beach they prevailed
upon him to go back, telling him we
wanted to hurt him. One of his chil-
dren stayed in the pinnace waiting for
his father a long time till he was afraid. While
Kini Oboo was hesitating whether he 'should
go on board or stay, a man, more officious than
the rest in getting him back to his house, was
exceeding saucy, and behaved in a very insolent
manner to Captain Cook, who gave him a load
of small shot.
CAPTAIN COOK SHOOTS A NATIVE.
“At this the native took no kind of notice, but
laughed, which so enraged the Captain that he
shot him dead with a ball (having a double-
barrelled gun). This accident made the natives
prepare with their daggers and spears to re-
venge the death of the man, who, I believe, was
an Areen. Had Captain Cook come down to
the boats directly, as he was advised, it would




most probably have hindered some Diocasnea,
but he wrongly thought, as he said, that the
flash of a musquet would disperse the whole
island. Lead on by these ideas, he hearkened
to no advice till it was too late. When he got
down to the beach a man came behind him
and knocked him down with a club on his
knees.
x ‘ He immediately got up and rashly went
alone into the middle of the crowd, following
the man, who he beat with the butt-end of his
piece. He returned, and was standing on the
rocks when another came behind him, and
stabbed him in the small 'of the back, which
threw him into the water, not being able to
swim. The rabble, seeing this, rushed on with
great eagerness to the marines, and killed four,
the other five, firing away their shot, were
forced to swim off to the boats, leaving their
arms behind them. The natives pulled Captain
Cook up on shore and dashed his head against
the rocks and stabbed him in different places,
though at the same time our people w r ere firing
at them from the boats. Out of the five marines
that swam off two were unhurt. The lieutenant
received a slight wound, either with a stone or
dagger, on the left shoulder, the sergeant two,
one on the thigh and another on the head.
“ The left (the remaining man ?) was a private
who could not swim, besides having a fractured
skull, and would have sunk had not the lieu-
tenant jumped out of the boat and saved him.
It seems the natives were not ignorant of our
intentions, as while the old King was hesi
tating whether he would go on board or stay
a man made an offer to stab the lieutenant of
marines with an iron spike, at which the latter,
by Captain Cook’s orders, pushed him back.
HIDING THE SLAIN.
“ After the death of Captain Cook it was with
great difficulty the pinnace got off shore, as
the natives there were so thick about them as
to snatch their arms from them. The corporal
of marines, who was one of those killed, was
beat into the water up to his neck (not being
able to swim), and then discharged his piece,
the Indians then rushing on him, standing him
up on the rocks neck and heels, and dashing
his head against the stones. These people
seemed to take great pains in hiding their slain,
as there was not a dead man to be seen lying
on the shore, though the musquets from the
boats must have done much execution.




“At the same time Uie great* guuo were urmg
from the ships, which one would suppose might
intimidate them, as the echoing under the high
landmarks made a terrible noise, but it did not
stop them, as they fought with surprising reso-
lution and were quite desperate, snatching each
other’s iron spikes on purpose to have the
satisfaction of mangling our poor and unhappy
shipmates, who they pulled, neck and heels, up
on the rocks, and they were more particularly
enraged against Captain Cook, who they
crowded round in such a manner that before
one man had stabbed him another would
snatch the spike out of the dead body and
give it a fresh wound. After this shocking
scene of slaughter was ended, the boats re-
turned to the ships with the loss of nine stand
of arms and a double-barrelled piece of the
Captain’s.”
It will be seen that Law, while showing no
animus against Captain Cook, certainly con-
veys the impression that his sad fate might
have been averted had he displayed more
tact and patience. When the writer comes to
speak of the measures of retaliation for which
our men were responsible he does not hesi-
tate to stigmatize them as “ most brutal,”
and some of the stories he tells are certainly
of a most harrowing character.
Curiously enough, he does not even mention
the name of Lieutenant John Williamson,
whoso conduct in not going to his chief’s
assistance has been the subject of severe com-
ment. The officer in question was afterwards
cashiered for cowardice at the battle of Cam-
perdown, and this, of course, tends to confirm
the general impression with regard to what
happened in the case of Captain Cook, but it
is odd that a witness who deposes to the
minutest details should appear to have known
nothing at all about the lieutenant’s alleged
inaction.
" Girt.p'


