

QUEENSLAND LAND NATIONALISATION LEAGUE,
PRIVATE LAND OWNING
COST THE WORKER?
IS THE LAND QUESTION WORTH
CONSIDERING ?
MURRAY FRASER.
PRICE, THREEPENCE.
Brisbane:
PRINTED BY WOODCOCK AND POWELL, CHARLOTTE STREET.
MDCCCLXXXVII [.




a I, H ZZSS/r 9
HOW MUCH DOES PRIVATE LAND OWNING
COST THE WORKER?
An Essay Read as an Introduction to the Land Question.
This subject I intend to treat as a
branch of a much larger one—the Land
Question, What I have to submit to
you however, is not the argument for
Free Land, that would require several
night’s discussion for even scant jus-
tice ; what I submit to you is rather an
argument why you should study the
doctrines of free land or state pro-
prietorship. My main object in reading
this, is simply to secure your attention
for that most important subject. And
speaking in Queensland, I ought
perhaps to apologise for drawing my
data principally from the old country. But
let my excuse be—first, that I am better
acquainted with the data there obtain-
able, anti, secondly—that if we are to
examine theeffect of private land owning,
we must take the case of a community
subjected entirely thereto. In Queens-
land we are not free from private land
owning, and suffer from it, though not
to the extent to which the workers of
the old country do, but in their suffer-
ings we have a forewarning of what is
in store for ourselves, if we persist in
this shortsighted policy. Let this then
be my excuse for drawing from the old
country, a country which retains the
sympathy of every one of us, the infor-
mation necessary for arriving at an
answer to the question—“ How much
does private land owning cost the
worker T Lately it has been very common
to look back and consider our progress
during the last fifty years, but I wish
you to look back much further than
that—look back nearly 400 years, to the
year 1495. In England, laliour was at
that time highly paid. I need not
trouble you with the amount of monev the
agricultural labourer received ; a little
money went a long way then—these
were the days when the 41b loaf cost a
halfpenny, and beef was a farthing a
pound. Instead of giving you the
amount then, I will give you the
amount which the agricultural labourer
of the present day ought to receive in i
order to be able to buy as much food,
drink, clothing and housing, as his
predecessor of the fifteenth century
could buy. In order to put the
agricultural labourer of England in the
same position as regards purchasing
power, as was the same labourer of 1495,
he ought to receive twenty-four shil
lings per week and in harvest time thirty-
six shillings and his fellow labourer, the
artizan of the towns received as usual con-
siderably more, equal to about thirty-six
shillings a week Now, gentlemen, con-
sider what this means. It means that the
agricultural labourer and his fellow-
workers of the towns were able at that
time to make such a supply of hats,
coats, shoes, loaves &c., that the agricul-
tural labourer’s share amounted to as
much as would to day be represented by
twenty-four shillings a week, and the
artizan's share was considerably more.
Now don’t make any mistake as to
the fact that they really made this
quantity of useful stuff. It is a matter
of indifference what they might be
valued at in money, what we have to
lopk at is the purchasing power of their
wages, and remember the only way
they, (the workers), could get these
things of which their wages really con-
sisted, was by making them. Hats,
coats, shoes Arc., don’t come by accident,
the workers of these days, did buy these
or similar things, to the value I have
mentioned, and it is plain they must
have made them first, and not only made
as much as equal their wages, but they
must have been able to make more, for
their employers would require to get a
share as was only just. And don’t think
that this was an accidentally high wage,
for although wages touched the top in
1495, they were really high for 175
years, so that it was no accident. Well
then, the men of those days were so
efficient at their work, that they could
make so many hats, coats, shoes, loaves
&c., that the agricultural labourer's
share was worth twenty-four shillings at


present prices, and the artizan’s share
considerably more. Now, gentlemen,
what I wish you to pay attention to, is the
efficiency of these men, and you will
presently see why 1 am so anxious to
get your attention to the efficiency.
Consider how these men worked, they
worked as you might almost say, with
their bare hands. Their ploughs were of
wood, even their pitchforks were of
wood faced with iron, they knew nothing
about rotation of crops, and very little
of liming or other similar improvements ;
subsoil drainage they had never dreamt
of i their ox weighed only 4001 b., ours
weigh 12001 b or more; their sheep
weighed only 401 b., and the fleece was
meagre to the last degree. The artizans
of the towns laboured under similar
disadvantages—they had no steam to
help them ; about the only engine they
had was the foot-lathe, everything was
done by hand, and yet, gentlemen,
under these conditions, and with a
climate certainly no better then than
now, man was able to produce so much,
that the agricultural labourer’s share
was worth in present money twenty-four
shillings a week. Keep your attention
fixed on that. That is the efficiency of
labour when assisted by almost no con-
trivance whatever. Since these days,
gentlemen, some changes have occurred
—we have been inventive; we do not j
now work with our bare hands. Allow
me to mention just a few, a very few, of
our mechanical aids. There is the steam-
engine with all its myriad applications,
the spinning jenny, the spinning mule,
the power loom, the steam saw-mill,
wood working machinery, steam naviga-
tion, railways, canals, the reaping
machine, the threshing machine; there
have been introduced self acting machines
of various kinds, improved chemical’
processes, improved explosives, improved
methods of making iron and steel ; there
is the sewing machine and, important for
small industries, the gas engine, these
have mainly assisted us to larger or
easier supplies of what we already had,
and reduced our labour (that is it should
have reduced our labour). We have
also, still in the direction of efficiency,
obtained the assistance of new materials,
as. india rubber, cotton, alpaca,
aluminum, coal, gas, and its bye products
&c., and new agents as electricity,
photography &c.. while science has
advanced enormously in its powers to
assist production, and has supplied itsed'
with new instruments of research, such
as the spectroscope and polariscope, and
greatly increased the efficiency of those
already in possession ; indeed science is
almost a new growth since those days,
and in addition to the material improve-
ments, of which these mentioned are a
mere trifle, we have free-trade (I am
speaking of the old country) and greatly
extended education, and all these are in
the direction of efficiency. That a
thousand men now, can do very much
more than a thousand men then, is very
evident. But what we should try to
get hold of is a numerical estimate,
however rough, of our increase of
efficiency. In manufactures we know
it has been enormous. The sewing
machine is said to be able to do the work
of twelve women, and that is one of the
most trifling of our improvements. On
the same page as I read this information
about the sewing machine, I read also
that a thing called the Boston Boot-
maker enables a man to turn out 300
pairs of boots daily. What a horrible
machine for those who are paid accor-
ding to supply and demand, and what a
charming contrivance it would be if we
were paid as we should be, according to
work turned out. These indicate the im-
provements that have taken place in manu-
factures. From the nature of the con-
ditions, agriculture cannot benefit to
the same extent, but it has by no means
been neglected. On the same page I
read of Glen’s Californian reaper, which
will cut, thresh, winnow, and put into
bags, the wheat of 60 acres in 24 hours.
There is no sham about the increase of
efficiency, gentlemen. Go with me into a
Manchester cotton mill, and what do we
see; one man attending on a couple of
mules, each mule spinning I forget how
many hundreds of threads. Now think
that each one of these threads at one
time required a pair of hands, and the
pair of hands could not spin at anything
like the speed of the mule, nor was the
thread as good when it was done. Or,
go with me into a moden: implement


yard and consider the difference between
what we see there, and the wooden
plough of 1495. On all hands there has
been increase of efficiency. The only
question is how much. Of late, I have
sought everywhere within reach for
some numerical estimate of our actual
increase of efficiency, but without
success. Every one who treats of the
matter is agreed that our increase of
efficiency has been enormous, but never
a one puts any figures to what he means
by enormous. lam quite certain that
at home the necessary information
would, with some degree of accuracy, be
obtainable, but here 1 have failed. 1
have therefore taken the following
method of getting some figures. It is of
little consequence if the figures are
inaccurate, provided 1 under estimate
rather than over estimate. Now I think
all will be agreed that of all our large
industries, agriculture is that in which
our efficiency has increased least, if
therefore, I can arrive at the figures for
agriculture, 1 am safe in saying that to
this extent at least, our efficiency has
increased, for in manufactures the
increase is certainly greater. Well, we
find that 400 years ago, the yield of
wheat was considered very good if it
reached six bushels an acre, now the
average for the old country is, or was
lately, about thirty bushels, and in good
circumstances much more. We are
therefore producing from each hundred
acres five times as much wheat as then,
and, as we all know, employing much
fewer hands. The increase of efficiency
then of the workers so employed is
at least five times what it was when the
agricultural labourer received the
equivalent of twenty-four shillings a
week, as his share of what was produced.
Of course a larger quantity of capital is
employed now than then; so that a
greater absolute amount of produce
must be set aside for interest, repairs,
and depreciation. But as the real
average increase of efficiency over all
industry must be much greater than
five, let the difference be, in the mean- i
time, considered to represent the interest,
repairs and depreciations of the neces-
sary capital, I will return to this shortly
and show that this is allowing far Loo x
en much. In the meantime we can safely
en reckon the increase of efficiency at not
as less than five times. In the time of the
ily wooden plough, we find men made so
ve much that the agricultural labourer’s
! or share was worth twenty-four shillings a
lal week at present prices, and the artizan’s
ut share considerably more, and this shai«
he was after allowing for the employer’s
of profit, which was Larger then than noio.
er Now, that even after allowing an enor-
ns mous share for capital, the lowest
at estimate we can make is that the
311 workers are making five times as much
be as then, their share ought to be at the
1 very least five times as great. Now
ng five times twenty-four shillings a week
of is £G a week. Six pounds a week for
re an agricultural labourer! Six pounds
Ue a week ! Can the figures be right 1 ?
ik Well, I am aware of no error. The
ge statement of the value of the labourer’s
L-h wages in 1495 is taken from “Six
if Centuries of Work and Wages," by
or Professor Thorold Rogers. Professor
to Thorold Rogers does not favour land
as nationalisation, so I have not gone to a
ie favourable source for my information,
ve As to the degree of increase of efficiency
of I think a more correct estimate would
it put it decidedly higher. But if any
ic gentleman thinks he can amend this in
is anyway, I shall bo glad to hear of it.
>d For every one can see that this argument
re will have a powerful influence, in bringing
id the land question into notice, and the
a, more exact it can be made the better.
;h Six pounds a week will stand to be out
;y down a long way, before the argument
is is seriously injured; and I really think
le that a more exact investigation would
le put it higher, rather than lower. As
a yet the reference is to the old country,
i. and I therefore need not apologise for
is reading to you the following extract
a from one of our Brisbane newspapers,
e referring to the condition of modern life
3, in England. I forget whether it
l 1 appeared in the Observer , or the
II Telegraph, and neither need be cot >i-
n dered as endorsing the statements, for
i- this appeared in a letter to the editor.
While I am reading it, I wish you to
>• keep £6 a week in n-.iud TV > •
week before every clau r- ■ Edv-ard
Sullivan, Bart, slates “ i’hai 14,(j(A),(AlO


persons in England are trying to
Kve on less than half-a-guinea per
week. ” Mr. Thomas Hughes speak-
ing at Manchester about two years
ago said “ that while merchants and
manufacturers under free-trade are
being ruined, two-thirds of the people of
England are underfed, badly clothed,
and miserably housed.” Mr. Doyle the
great statistician states “ that 7,000,000
persons in Great Britain are toeing the
line of pauperism.” John Bright the
great advocate of free-trade tells that
“in the city of Glasgow 41,000 families,
averaging six persons to a family, live
in houses that have only one room.”
The Brisbane Courier of the 12th Feb.
1886, stated that “there are in England
2.000. persons who starve, and
20.000. more who had no hope beyond
a bare existence.” Professor Huxley after
travelling all over the world and seeing
the poorest of the poor amongst all
nations, savage as well as civilised, said
that “he found none so miserable and
degraded as the poor of London.”
These remarks of Professor Huxley’s are
borne out by the following extract from
a Sydney newspaper of the 20th Feb.,
1887. Even in London, 13 deaths
from starvation in 10 days seems a
pretty solid average. Yet that was
the return in December last, and to
these must be added a tolerably regular
weekly total of 50 or more fatalities
caused by fevers and other diseases,
induced by hunger. In these instances
the original trouble is generally ignored,
and the result ascribed to “ natural
causes,” but the real source is grinding
poverty and abject want, such as is
known in no other city in all the world.
Yet parochial authorities declare there
is just now “no exceptional suffering ”
•—about the most awful comment on
the present bills of mortality that could
be uttered. The suffering is chrrnic, not
exceptional, and 13 deaths from starva-
tion in less than as many days is set
down as something quite in the ordinary
course.” Yes, gentlemen, it is quite in
the ordinary course. I was looking
over some parliamentary papers the
other day, and I saw indexed as appar-
ently a regular thing: “ Deaths from
starvation in London.” These are
genera* statements, No doubt if^we
j seek for particulars we can get some-
| thing better, but we can also get some-
thing worse. Here is some of the latest
news from England —“ Cradley Heaiii is
a village of chain-makers, Chain-
making, gentlemen, is not unskilled
labour. Yet here is the result:—“A
man working 60 hours in the week can
in that time make 7cwt. of chain of
|inch diar, for which he receives at the rate
of from Is. Bd. to Is. lOd. per cwt. Even
at the highest figure of Is. lOd. per cwt,
this would only amount to 12s. lOd. Out
of this he has to pay a boy as blower 3s.
a week, also to pay 3s. 6d. for the small
coal called breeze, necessarily used in
working up this amount of iron, and Is.
has to be expended in carrying the
material to the master’s place of business.
This leaves ss. 4d. as the full wages of
a man for hard blacksmith work for a
week of sixty hours.” We need not
wonder if at these wages women and
children must take their share at doing
something to keep the pot boiling. But
if we wish to find how women’s work is
rewarded 400 years after the time of
the wooden plough, let us turn to the
East end of London. I have some notes
of some of the trades followed by women
there; while I read them try to remem-
ber what their necessary living expenses
are, such as—rent of two rooms, ss. to
6s. per week; rent of one room, 2s. to
3s. per week; rent of half a bed, Is. 2d,
to 2s. Wages of women—at marmalade
making; 4s. a week; brush drawing,
3s, 6d. per week ; artificial flowers,
3s 6d. a week ; matchbox fill-
ing, 4s. a week; shirt finishing, 4s.
per dozen, (72 buttonholes to be made
and 96 buttons sewn on for 45,); better
class shirts, sd. a shirt One woman said
“ if I work very close, and feel pretty
well, I can make one a day.” Fivepence
a day\ Women’s wages for ordinary
labour 400 years ago were equivalent to
2s. a day, and yet inventors think they
have made our labour more efficient..
Now, gentlemen, this satisfies us there
is something wrong—whatever this
something is. On this point the proof
is isfactory, Whatever the something
may be , something is wrong. What is
it % Since Professor Rogers has supplied
us with so much information, suppose
we try him for more, - He tells that tlm


profits on capital then were twenty per
cent. Many a capitalist now wishes he
could get only half of this. Nor can it
be accounted for by the greater quantity
of capital now in use ; because a very
slight acquaintance of economics teaches
us that capital cannot be employed to
such an extent as to actually swallow up
the advantage of economies. A good
example of how trifling need be the
allowance on account of capital, will be
found in the sewing machine. The
sewing machine, we are told, enables one
woman to do the work of twelve. In
case this should be exaggerated, let us
say she can do the work of five. This
will be convenient, as it is the same
ratio as we are considering generally,
It is a good sewing machine nowadays
that costs ten pounds, so that it we lay
aside two pounds a year for interest
repairs, and depreciations, we do very
well. But two pounds a year is lid per
working day. Now a woman in the
15th century was paid equal to 2s. a
day, even in needlework. Now that
she is doing five times as much, she
ought to be paid 10s. a day, less l|d the
expense of the machine, which makes
her so efficient. What does she get 1
“If I feel pretty well I can make 5d a
day .” Pretty well on 5d a day. You
see gentlemen the extra expense on
account of the extra capital is a mere
fleabite. We know that the capitalist
does not get what would account for
this loss on the part of the worker. On
the contrary, just now, capitalists and
employers of labour are looking about
themselves in actual dismay. Since
then, capital cannot be the casse, let us
see what Professor Rogers has to tell us
further. According to Professor Rogers,
at the time when wages were so high,
rent was so low, that landowners had to
work for their living. Now, when
wages are low, rent is high. This
gentlemen is a suspicious circumstance.
This 'might be a chance coincidence, but
it is extremely unlikely that a chance
coincidence would last throughout 400
years. During specially good times
both wages and rent may have risen
together, just as, during specially bad
times, both may have fallen together;
but over the 400 years the rule has been
(high wages—low r«nt—high rent—lqw
wages. This is no new discovery.
Professor Rogers himself points- out the
invariable connection, although remem-
ber he is no friend to Land Nationalisa-
tion. The suspicion that there is
causal connection between rent and
wages is certainly very strong. But
even if we consider the causal connec-
tion proved, there is still the question.
What is the connection 1 Is the high
rent directly the cause of the low wages
or are both circumstances joint effects of
a cause not yet considered. To com-
pletely answer this question is to go
into the whole matter of Pree Land or
State Proprietorship, which for reasons
already mentioned I shall not do to-night.
Leaving therefore, this question un-_
answered in the meantime, I return to the
<£6 per week. What I have now to show
you is much more serious than anything
yet touched on ; so serious that unless
you readily follow me, I had better not
enter into it; and perhaps you are tired of
figures.. Shall Igoon 1 Very well, gentle-
men. The wages of the English agricul-
tural labourer should be, atpresent, not less
than £6 a week. They are reported to
be in some parts of the country 9s. to
10s. per week, and even in Scotland
where agricultural wages are considered
high wages are only about 15s a week.
The average wages of the town artizau
is variously stated at from 235. to 28s.
per week. I am inclined to think no
allowance is made here for slack time.
But in order to allow my opponents
as good a case as possible, let me say
that they average 30s. a week. Now if
we wished to discover how much the
artizan is swindled out of each week, we
ought to deduct the 30s. not from six
pounds, but from something higher, per-
haps nine or ten pounds, as the six
pounds is only the earnings of the
agricultural labourer. But to guard
against possible exaggeration, and ta
allow my opponents as good a case as
possible, I will deduct the wage which
the artizan actually gets, from the wage
which the agricultural labourer ought
to receive, that is 30s. from £6, leaving £4
10s. Each ordinary worker then in
somehow swindled out of not less than
£4 10. per week probably a great deal
more. £4 10s. per week is over £230
per year.. Of wfiat cpu^d^call^Lord^j^rjf


workers, there are in the United
Kingdom not less than 8,000,000.
Eight million times £230 a year is—
£l,BJ/.0,000,000 a year lost somehow to
the workers, at the lowest possible state-
ment. It must certainly be a great deal
more than this. Now gentlemen, please
to follow me carefully. The landowners
say all their rents only amount to
£67,000,000 a year. Now here is an
alarming discrepancy. Well on prob-
bing this matter carefully we find that
the £67,000,000 so constantly put
forward, as the sum total of the very
outside of all the mischief that rent can
do, is, after all, only the agricultural
rent, and very meagrely stated at that,
To find out the true amount we shall
have to add all the mineral rents, and
we shall have to reckon these somewhat
differently from the usual mode, and we
must also add all the position rents of
the towns, and among several other
things, we should have to add, the tithes,
for, as every tiro in economics knows,
tithes are a deduction from rent. How-
ever gentlemen taking everything pos-
sible into consideration, 1 cannot bring
the amount of rent within sight of the
amount the people lose —the discrepancy
still remains. And I am very glad to
find it so, for before getting hold of
Professor Rogers’s figures, I hadalready
investigated the land question by an
entirely different line of proof; and one
of the results I arrived at was that the
land is worth much more to the com-
munity than it can be to any private
owners. My original investigation gave
me no clue to the amount of the differ-
ence except suggesting it was very
large. I am therefore not surprised to
find the Professor’s figures confirming
my investigation, even to the suggestion
of a high amount. I am sorry that the
independent investigation is not suited
for production at a meeting such as this.
But as you will naturally be anxious to
obtain some clue to the enormous discre-
pancy, I will give you in general terms
the key to a considerable part of it. It
turns on the word efficiency. Notice
that efficiency might be of very different
kinds. Increase of efficiency might be
increased power of making such things
as are wanted by the masters of this
jvprld, the landowners, or it might be
increased power of making such things
as are wanted by the workers them-
selves, and this kind of efficiency is the
kind we have increased in so much—the
making things in millions. But what
sort of things do the landowners want 1
They do not want machine made articles,
they wanthand made articles; and in mak-
ing things, by hand we are no more efficient
now than we were in the 15th century,
and just in the same way, a flunkey
now is much the same as a flunkey then.
Had the landowners been able to take
out their rents, altogether in increased
quantities of the same things as the
workers use, that is, the same things as
the improvements have been applied to,
this discrepancy would not have been so
glaring. There would still have been
some discrepancy, for, as you can easily
see, it is impossible for a few to use the
world so efficiently as the many. A
numerical illustration may perhaps
make my meaning clearer. Suppose
that in the 15th century a man could
make a hundred units of produce in a
year. If we have by means of mach-
inery, tfec., increased our efficiency five
times, he ought now to be able to make
500 units. But the landowners have
the power to make us serve them after
we have made as much as will keep our-
selves. Suppose that to keep things
going, each worker must be allowed to
keep 50 units, which of course he can
now make in one tenth of his time,
leaving nine tenths which the land-
owners can absorb. Now if the land-
owners in utilising the nine - tenths
employ it altogether in hand work, the
result is only 90 units of produce, the
same as in the 15th century, con-
sequently the total produce of each man is
only 140 units, instead of 500 as it
would have been had he been permitted
to serve himself. That is to say for
every 90 the landowmers gain the public
loses 450 units. Of course you will
understand these figures to be illustra-
tive merely, they make no pretentions
to exactness. In a full investigation
into the land question, this is one of the
results arrived at, that the land is worth
immensely more to the community than
it is to the present holders, or in other
words the present holders do not gain all
that the community loses, Noav, gentle*


men, I take advantage of this possibly
unexpected result to advocate the re-
demption of our land by purchase. In
this I disagree with Mr. George, and he
has used some very strong language
about those who would propose such a
thing. Nevertheless, I advocate baying
out the present holder at a full and even
overflowing valuation, not, remember,
as a matter of justice, that might be
disputed, but as a matter of expediency
alone. Mr. George has stirred in this
matter for not less than ten years, and
to judge by the poor progress he has
made, with the influential part of the
community, he may stir in it for ten
times ten more before he wins success.
Now I think that an argument accom-
panied by a proposal to pay even an
overflowing price for what we want
will meet with much readier attention,
and attention to the matter is all that is
necessary. And that that attention has
never been given is proved by the constant
failure to distinguish between the doc-
trines of free land and the doctrines of
socialism Dismissing this apparent
discrepancy, let us return to our <£6. a
week Cut this down as much as you
please you do not injure the argument,
for the fact remains staring everyone in
the face— that in spite of our undoubted
improvements in the arts , wages are
lower now than Jf.oo years ago. Men
are able to make ever so much more , and
are getting less. The argument does not
turn on the six pounds. Anyone wish-
ing to rebut this argument will find that
if he should succeed, which he won’t do,
in showing it to be only say £4, he will
have done less than little injury to the
argument— he will have actually streng-
thened it by proving out of his own
mouth that there is an enormous wrong
being perpetrated. Such a glaring wrong,
at least a wrong in appearance, has of
course not gone on unnoticed. The
peculiar phenomenon of enormous ad-
vances being made in the arts, and the
industrious making no progress except
backwards, was sure to gain attention.
And accordingly we find it taken notice
of in the writings of every economist,
since at least the days of Ricardo. Now
these gentlemen were not called on to
explain this apparent contradiction, they
might merely have recorded that it was
so, and so have left it. However, they
did attempt an explanation, and they all
agree wonderfully well in their diagnoses
of the trouble. Anyone might be
taken almost at random ; I have John
Stuart Mill at hand, and as he has
done more than any other to form gen-
eral opinion, on economical subjects, his
explanation will be specially appropriate,
Mr. Mill’s explanation is that low wages
are the result, not of the injustice of
man, but of the niggardliness of nature.
The meaning being that our numbers
have increased so much that we have to
waste our strength on niggardly parts
of nature to suca an extent as to neut-
ralise all our improvements; to more
than neutralise them, for we have gone
backwards. And anyone followingon these
lines would direct our attention to the
fact that England now has a population
fully ten times as high as she had then,
and they would ask how can you expect
a dense population to be so well off as a
sparse one, we must now be using land
very much worse in quality than we
were using then—hence the loss. Well,
gentlemen, I have three answers ready
for this. First, even if we grant that
this might be true in Great Britain,
it is not true in Greater Britain,
it is not true in Australia. In Australia
it is not possible that our numbers can be
forcing us to use inferior soil, unless
indeed, the private owners are with-
holding the most useful from us. And
if that is their explanation of low wages
let them stand boldly forward and say
so. Let them say—“ We know perfectly
well what is keeping the reward of
labour down. It is that you waste
your undoubted efficiency on inferior
soils. The most useful are ours.” Let
them say so. Let them be so frank.
It is perfectly true. But this is not the
niggardliness of nature. No, gentlemen,
the “ niggardliness of nature ” is nc
explanation in Australia. But secondly
it is no explanation in Great Britain.
Great Britain is, so far as food supplies
are concerned, merely an outlier of the
United States. Dakota is Mrs. Mother-
country’s back garden No, it is not
true even of Great Britain. It has been
well said that the people of many parts
of the world would go supperless to bed,
before Great Britain would want.


ID How Much hoes Fm vate Land Owning Cost the Worker ?
Thirdly, gentlemen, it never can in any
case be true that the niggardliness of
nature will lower wages, and in con-
sidering this third case, I must appeal so
you for the closest attention. It may
be somewhat dry, but it will repay your
pains, for on the demonstration of this
turns the real settlement of the land
question. It is important to prove that
whatever may lower wages it can never
in any case be the “ niggardliness of
nature.” There is no occasion to deny
the niggardliness of nature; in the sense
in which the niggardliness is meant, it
is certainly true. The meaning is that
as our numbers increase, we must
steadily take in hand natural resources
of worse and worse quality or position.
That is true. It is also true that as our
numbers increase we can work more and
more economically than before. A
large number will, through division of
labour, &c., work more economically
than a small number. We have thus
two opposite effects from increase of
numbers. They must therefore to some
extent neutralise each other, and a sur-
plus may be left on either one side or
the other. Now, gentlemen, these two
effects might be combined in three dis-
tinct ways. First, the economy from
increased division of labour might be
always greater than the loss from having
recourse to inferior soils. If this were
true the larger the population, the better
the result; the best result being only
reached when the world was crowded so
thick that people jostled each other.
I think this combination of the two
effects has only to be so stated to be
immediately condemned as contrary to
fact. It is perfectly plain that long
before we had reached that stage, the
loss from deficiency of nature would
completely overshadow the gain from
increased division of labour. This com-
bination must therefore be given up.
A second combination would be that
the loss from proceeding to inferior soils
would be even from the beginning
always greater than the gain from
co-operation and division of labour. If
this were true, then the best result per
head would be produced when men were
bo sparse and situated so far apart
as to be practically isolated. This com
tpp, has, I tlirqk, to be only so
expressed, in order to be at onge dis-
missed, as not in accordance with fact,
Everyone knows that no amount of
fertility will make up for want of
co-operation. We are therefore driven
to consider the third combination,
which is, that at first there is very little
loss on account of using soils, inferior
either as regards quality or position, but
this loss, small at first, becomes propor-
tionally greater as the extension goes on,
while the gain on account of numbers,
on the other hand, though great at first,
becomes at least proportionally smaller,
until at some stage it is just matched try
the loss from inferior soils No wit is obvious
that at this stage, when they just match
production per head, is greater than at
any other stage, either denser or less
dense. So far the argument is mathe-
matical and unimpeachable. Well.
I continued this argument still
mathematically. I set myself a
task in the differential calculus. I asked
myself at what density this best result
or highest wage would occur, assuming
a particular degree of efficiency on the
part of the workers, for it is evident it
depends on their efficiency, how far
they can proceed on the bad land with-
out loss. Well, gentlemen, I got the
answer, and to make sure it was right, I
tried a case on either side of it, and
found of course a smaller return per
head, than at the maximum. Encouraged
by this, I went a step further. I asked,
is there any tendency for the population
to keep at or near the density which
gives the best return, the highest pos-
sible wage The figures I had already
used gave me the answer almost at once.
The population would automatically
come to a balance at the point of maximum
return. Not that there was a hard and
fast line which the population could not
pass, but if numbers transgressed on
either side there was immediately called
into play a force which grows stronger
the longer the transgression is persisted
in, until it must overwhelm all resis-
tance, and drive back numbers to the
proper density; whether that might
mean a greater density or a less. For
instance, if through a misapprehension
of the text Be fruitful and multiply
and replenish the earth.” Preachers
should inculcate reckless increase of


numbers, and if their preaching took none no increase would take place. But
effect there would, just at thetime of the practically there is always some more to
introduction of this new erase, certainly be extend upon and accordingly numbers
undue increase of population, and a verage
wages would be to a slight extent lowered.
Increase would occur because the introduc-
tion of this new doctrine has made a sud-
den change in the forces acting on men.
But if this preaching were to he main-
tained, it would be found that at the j
sceond or third generation the population j
had quietly and imperceptibly returned ’
to the best density, and the highest wage , j
aad after that the preachers might
continue their efforts for ever without
effect. Indeed, I am very doubtful if
the effect would ever in any case be per-
ceptible. And on the other hand, if from
misapprehension of St. Paul’s judgment
would again increase until another den-
sity was reached, which now gives a
higher wage than any density either
higher or lower, and at that density
population would again balance and the
highest possiblewagesbemaintained. And
what would be the wage at that new
maximum 1 More than double what it
had been, before the introduction of the
improvements which doubled their
efficiency. Now gentlemen this is an
interesting and important result For
it is another instance showing that
extension on inferior soil does not reduce
vjagss. A mechanical increase of
efficiency to two-fold more than doubles-
marriage was just next better than wages,
burning, men should inculcate celibacy.
Then just at the time of the change of
doctrine there might be a slight lowering
from the best density, with the result of
lower wages, but in two or three genera-
tions numbers would in spite of all their
efforts be at the best density, and wages
the highest possible. It is thus impos-
sible that the reward of labour can ever
be lowered by the niggardliness oj nature.
Has the niggardliness of nature no effect
then 1 Oh yes. It limits numbers
when it does come into play, but it
never lowers wages. It has not come
into action in any part of the world yet.
Not even in Great Britain, and certainly
not in Australia Of course you will
understand that it is only in the case of
free land that the position of balance is
the position of highest wages. Under-
private landowning the whole thing is
upset, and the tendency of population is
to indefinite increase, limited not by the
niggardliness of nature, but by what
the landowners can find, a use for. Well
gentlemen just one step more for to-
night. Encouraged by so much success,
I applied the calculus to this question.
What would be the result if man’s
efficiency were doubled, owing to the
introduction of machinery for instance 1
The answer was remarkable. First,
there was shown a tendency to increase
of numbers. Whether or not that
increase would take place would depend
on whether or not there was any more
bad land to extend upon. If there were
More than double wages for as
the numbers have increased there is on
that account additional economy.
You will now understand why it
is that I so confidently claim that our
wages ought to have risen not less
rapidly than our efficiency, and I hope
you now have some slight conception of
the extraordinary height your wages
would be if you had fair play, Four
hundred years ago wages were equal to
not less than 245. a week and the course
of wages under free land is always
upward and onward , there is no possi-
bility of lowering , unless indeed you
Jorget your arts. You have now before
you, gentlemen, as much as we can do
justice to in one night, and I will
therefore point out three distinct parts
of this argument, and indicate the value
of each. The most important certainly
is that which I have discussed last,
namely, the automatic regulation of
population, and the application of this
is, that it appeals directly to all students
of political economy It has long been
noticed that if improved condition of
the worker is to be immediately followed
by an increase of their numbers, with
the result of reducing their wages to
the old level, the improved condition is,
on these terms, not worth having. If
the choice is only between 20,000,000 in
misery and 40,000,000 in misery we
may just as well be content with the
20,000,000, and you will even find in
the writings of some economists that a


better division of wealth than at present
obtains is deprecated on this very
ground. What is the good 1 What is
the good 1 In a generation they will be
as ill off as before and more helpless,
and taking that view of the matter, they
are certainly right, and as long as land
is private property they are certainly
right. So long as land is private pro-
perty, improved condition of the mass
means, only and certainly, more rapid
increase, until they are as bad as before,
with a tendency always to become worse.
Even the Observer, the Brisbane Observer,
is quite aware that it is only our vast
unoccupied tracts that save us at pre-
sent from being in the same condition as
the European populations. And I noticed
one leader in which it was distinctly
stated that when these tracts failed us,
we had nothing in prospect but the
degraded condition of the European
populations, and the legitimate conclu-
sion was drawn, that the only rational
course was to have a jolly time of it before
the eternal frost set in. And, Gentle-
men, the Observer is right, if land must
be private property. But if the ingen-
uity of mankind can devise a scheme by
which the land can be used while all
proprietory rights remain vested in the
community then the aspect is entirely
changed. Then increase of wages has
no absolute effect in encouraging increase
of population. It will be found, that on
this matter of the regulation of density,
the actual settlement of the land ques-
tion will turn. When I prove this, lat
once gain to my side all students of
political economy. Did I fail in proving
this, then I should deservedly fail in
gaining any attention for the theory of
free land ; and would besides be strongly
blameworthy for raising hopes in the
workers breast that must in such a case
be doomed to bitter disappointment.
For, no statesman with the slightest
vestige of self-respect would dream of
doing what would raise wages to such a
pitch, if the inevitable result were to be
final misery, through overincrease of num-
bers. I am, therefore, under no delusion
when I assert, that on this will
turn the settlement of the whole matter.
And my only reason for not detailing
the proof before you is, that I think a
proof dependent so entirely on figures is
unsuitable for such a discussion as can
be obtained here. And besides, to do
the subject justice, I should have to go
over all the main branches of politic™!
economy. For you may be sure that
such an important matter as he land
affects everyone. Important as this
part of the subject is, therefore, 1 will
proceed no further with it to-night.
But direct your attention, next, to the
possibly unexpected result, that the
landowners do not gain as much as the
people lose, and to the policy I propose
to erect on this, that we should offer the
full price to all present holders of the
land. Those of you who are acquainted
with George’s writings will recognise
that this is a characteristic departure
from the policy he has so long advo-
cated. In thus suggesting purchase
rather than confiscation I do not in the
least enter into the question of which
would be the just course. I am guided
merely by expediency. By offering to
send out the spoilers with a full hand,
we may be quit of them fifty years the
sooner, and I think the difference
“ worth the money. ” The ease with
which we can redeem our land by
purchase might be shown numerically,
though with no greater exactness than
the figures within our reach permit of.
The amount which the landowners of
the United Kingdom acknowledge
receiving amounts to loss than Is. per
week per head of the population.
Taken per head of the workers this will
be less than ss. per week. Many are of
opinion that the landowners do not tell
the truth in this matter, so to meet the
views of such doubters, let us double
the amount and say the landowners
gain 10s. a week per head of the workers.
The amount which the workers lose per
week is at the lowest estimate £i 10s.;
those who doubt the landowners veracity
are inclined to put this much higher, as
no doubt it really is. But taking it at
its lowest estimate £4 10s., this is the
amount which the workers are asked to
purchase by a payment which is equiv-
alent to 10s. a week, showing a gain at
the very least of £i a week. Now it is
plain that if purchase will hasten the
reform by even a few years, say three,
the workers will be actual money gainers
by the purchase, and, remember, there,


are far more serious matters than money
depending on the reform. Every one
can see the application of this part of
the argument. And in this place I
would protest against a practice, only
too common, of imputing to landowners
actual malice in holding land, while all
the time conscious that landowning
does the mischief which we have found
that it does. There may be exceptions,
but I do not believe that it is in human
nature to be so utterly callous to the
suffering of others. I firmly believe
that every holder of land and all their
supporters are perfectly honest in their
contention—that private landowing does
no harm whatever, but, on the contrary,
is the only effectual method of getting
nature brought into use. I am well
acquainted with the arguments used in
support of absolute ownership, and, al-
though those arguments are certainly
false, they possess a semblance of truth
to such a degree that I arn perfectly
ready to acknowledge they would deceive
the very elect. A great part of their
strength however is derived merely from
the fact that we have all grown up in
contact with these associations. The
next generation will hardly conceive it
possible that rational men could have
thought that the world could be given
away to a few , and the rest of mankind,
not suffer. Once the battle is won this
simple statement will be the most
obvious and striking argument for the
condemnation of the old policy. But
during the fight, I acknowledge this
simple argument has no weight what-
ever. The third part to which I have
to direct your attention, is the high
wages that would be enjoyed under free
land. For my part, I consider this the
least important part of the whole inves-
tigation. But lam not blind to its
power as an argument. The true law of
population will undoubtedly he the '■
fulcrum , but this will be the motive •
power. Now, gentlemen, please to I
understand exactly the force of this
argument as to £6 a week and probably
more. It is not impossible that a more
exact investigation would give a differ
ent multiplier than five—lt might be
more or it might be less ; but whatever
it is the true law of population shows
that the improvement i*- the condition
of the workers must always be m,ore than
the technical improvement. There never
can be any loss on account of the nig-
gardliness of nature. And here allow
me to give you a warning. Supposing
that five is the proper multiplier, and
that at present prices your wages ought
to be six pounds or more per week, it
does not follow that six golden sover-
eigns would be paid into your hands
each week, for the change would be ac.
coinpanied by a change in prices-
What is meant is that your wages
would have as much purchasing power
as <£6 per week at present prices; the
actual sum in gold might be either more
or less. Do not think, however, that in
thus qualifying the naked statement, I
feel any doubt about the amount. All
the data that I have been able to
examine; since meeting with Professor
Rogers’s figures leads me to anticipate it
would be more rather than less. I
appeal on this point of the increase of
efficiency to every artisan here. Is it
not the case that within your own time
the amount of work put through hands,
: with the same or a smaller number of
I men has enormously increased in some
cases as much as two or three-fold
within your own knowledge! Is it not
the case that we cannot lift a paper such
as the Scientific American, or the En-
glish Mechanic, without meeting such a
, sentence as this, —“this will enable one
| man to do the work of four.” Remem-
ber, gentlemen, that every one of these
labour-saving contrivances means under
free land a rise of wages. Remember
that under private landowning every
one means a fall of wages for those who
are kept, and no wages at all for those
who are dismissed. This promise of
something like £6 a week is no fairy
tale. The improvements in the arts
i have been enormous and only require
opportunity to realise what has been
the dream of many an inventor-. Ease
and escape from drudgery for the whole
of mankind. But so long as the land
is private property every labour-saving
contrivance means that you are less
necessary than before, and you will be
paid less accordingly. You will wonder
perhaps that I speak of this so quietly,
i You will wonder if I believe it myself-
I when Tam so cool over it, Gentlemen,


this is too serious a matter for declama-
tion. This is a subject for the most
painstaking investigation that man ever
gave to anything. On this depends not
only your own escape from drudgery,
but also that of your children. For
remember, that as long as land is pri-
vate property no future improvements in
the arts, no matter how great, will ever
raise the condition of the worker one
iota. The action is just the reverse.
My estimate that we are now making
enormously more than we receive, is
confirmed by one who to judge by his
writings might be considered the arch
enemy of the worker. I refer to W. H.
Mallock, a writer, whose idea seems to
be that the best division of wealth is—
as much as possible to a few and as little
as possible to the many. The many
being of course the workers. This man
thinks slavery a good thing, but he
thinks free labour very much better.
And why 1 Because under slavery the
slave had to do as much work as about
three times his keep. But the free
labourer is enormously more efficient
while getting very little if any more
than his keep. And the man actually
gloats over the present condition of
things as being such a close approach to
what he would consider best. That a
man should have such opinions or
having them, that he should publish
them to the world is almost incredible.
But you will find them for yourselves in
a book entitled “ Social Inequality.”
In this book he actually says “ Ine-
quality is civilisation.” This man’s idea
of civilisation is—one man doing the
work and another enjoying it. I would
call that theft. But he distinctly says
it would be theft to attempt to put the
matter right. This shows that I do
not stand alone in thinking that at the
present day the worker makes far more
than he receives. Well, gentlemen,
How much does private land owning cost
the worker 1 Were the land free, wages
would rise in full proportion to every
improvement in the arts, and these
improvements have been enormous.
The difference between this and the
wages you receive is —How much does
private land owning cost the worekr !
Let each man reckon this for himself.
So much for “How much private land
owning costs the worker.” Now, gentle-
men, grant me just a minute or two for
a few words on “ What does private land
owning cost the worker 1” The conse-
quences of free land are so startling
that, with your present association of
ideas, much of which I say may appear
incredible. But, gentlemen, Ido not
go back from a single point. To-night I
speak of nothing but of what I have the
proof of already written out. Much
more equally startling I know to be true,
but I will confine myself to the points on
which I have actually written down the
proof. Well with free land there is
no such thing as scarcity of employment.
Not only would your wages be high, but
at these high wages employment would
never fail you. With private land
owning on the other hand, the want of
employment is chronic. The uncertainty
of employment is not the least wearing
anxiety in the workers life. You know this
is true. At present, when, as the Observer
very well expresses it, there is not
enough employment to go round, if a
man from any personal necessity seeks a
larger share of employment than his
neighbonrs, that is, work harder than
usual, he must thereby diminish some
other body’s share of the scanty supply.
But with free land, if a man having to
support his widowed mother for instance,
wishes to work harder than usual the
extra employment is there for him, and
no one is injured. With your present
association of ideas, this will sound to
you absolutely incredible, but it is
exactly true and mathematically exact.
In connection with scarcity of em-
ployment. Here is some of the
latest news from America, The
Illinois Bureau of Labour Statistics in
its latest reports, shows that of the
working men of that state only 20 per
cent are employed full time, and 30 per
cent work less than half time. Gentle-
men, if the subject were not so serious
these reports would be ludicrous. Is
there not something actually comical in
the idea that these men want to make
for themselves or each other hats, coats,
shoes, loaves, &c., and at the same time
capitalists are not only willing, but
positively anxious for the sake of the
profits to supply the necessary mach-
inery and material, and yet these men


say they have no work to do 1 W ere it not
such a serious subject this would be act-
ually laughable. If they want to work why
don’t they 1 There is something to do in
their own wants, when they have sup-
plied these they will not be over anxious
for more work. If under these circum-
stances they can’t work, it can only be
that some third party has the power of
saying no. Well, who is that third
party ? I know. Don’t you 1 At pre-
sent there is a fear taking possession of
your hearts, that John Chinaman will
drag you down to his level and with
private land owning he certainly will.
But with free land Johnny will rise to
your level without injuring you in the
least, but on the contrary almost cer-
tainly to your benefit. Is it not ridic-
ulous to be jealous of Johnny who never
yet sold you a cabbage so cheap as you
wanted to buy it, while you are ready to
welcome those who have shown their
readiness to sell 60 hours of hard black-
smith’s labour for 64 pence? Another
fear which troubles you is the fear of the
rich man. And no wonder,, for your
experience of him is, that he steps in
and takes before you every opportunity
that seems to open. But with free land
this fear and consequent dislike is per-
fectly baseless. The rich man cannot
take one opportunity without giving
another. Absolutely can not. And
closely connected with this is the fallacy
implied in the expression “ the race for
wealth —the struggle for riches.” The
common idea appears to be that the
search for wealth is a race, a struggle in
which if one wins another must lose.
With private landowning, this is true :
but with free land there is no struggle ;
with free land one man’s riche® cannot
be the cause of another man’s poverty.
With free land it is like sitting down to
a well-appointed dinner. There is no
struggle—there is more than enough
for all, there is enough for the heartiest
eater as well as for the daintiest. With
private landowning, it is like being
adrift in a boat with insufficient sup-
plies, and aggravated by want of
discipline, so that the strong rob the
weak. Nor, gentlemen, is the worker
the only one interested in free land.
When does the storekeeper make his
pile ? Is it not when the workers have
money to spend 1 When does the mer-
chant flourish 1 Is it not when the
retailers are busy 1 When do the
manufacturers defy competition 1 Is it
not when wages are good and trade
busy ? If then such slight spurts as we
have occasionally felt are of such value
to the storekeeper, the merchant and
the manufacturer, how much more
would they not enjoy and rejoice over, a
perpetual summer of high wages
and constant employment 1 This
is what free land or state proprietorship
offers you , and you cannot get it other-
wise. These are a few of the results
which can by the ordinary methods of
Political Economy be deduced from
the customary postulates, or rather in-
ductions with the addition of one,
namely, that the land is free. You will
easily understand that in one evening it
is quite impossible to enter into full
proof of these consequences of free land.
What I have given you is only, and is
only meant to be an indication of the
proof that is available, simply an index
to the doctrines of free land. But,
gentlemen, I am much mistaken in you,
if you do not resolve from this night to
probe this matter to the bottom. There
is more in this than merely a matter of
wages. But even putting it on that
lowest ground ; is not £6 a week for the
agricultural labourer, and more for
others worth looking after 1
The Discussion.
The discussion turned mainly on the
question of purchase, or no purchase,
and it was readily acknowledged that
taxation up to the limit of value is con-
fiscation by whatever name it might be
called.
One difficultv in the way of purchase
seemed to be where the necessary money
was to come from. As I agreed with those
who opposed me on this matter of pur-
chase, that as long as private land-
owning continued the workers would
never get more than a bare living.
How, it was asked, could they ever buy
out the landowners ? I can only attri-
bute this question to a difficulty in at
once accepting the novel idea that under
the present arrangement the people lose
more than the landowners gain, so that


they could afford to reverse matters by
purchase, credit being made use of for
the actual transaction.
A reference was also made to Mr.
Gladstone’s failure to buy out the Irish
landowners But so far as I understand
Mr. Gladstone’s attempt it was a very
different proposal from what I here
advocate. I understand that Mr. Glad-
stone attempted to buy the land from
one set of owners in order to sell it to
others, an arrangement which would be
no improvement at all from a Land
Nationalist’s point of view. And there
was I understand the additional diffi-
culty, that it was feared, that the
proposed new owners would refuse to
pay as much as it cost to buy out the
old. No wonder a financier, even such
as Mr. Gladstone failed under these
conditions. Mine however is a very
different proposal, and in the figures
given in the text there is sufficient proof
that we could carry the transaction
through, and gain by it; and as I
indicate, this is only part of the reason
for expecting a pecuniary gain from the
purchase.
It was also suggested that to buy out
the landowners was to compound a
felony. But why raise artificial diffi-
culties of that kind in the way of a
rapid settlement of the question 1
In the text, I say in reference to the
proposal of purchase c ‘ every one can
see the application of this part of the
argument.” But in this I was disap-
pointed. I think no one did. I con-
sider that the chief advantage in offering
purchase is the remarkable narrowing of
the field of argument which results. I
have read very extensively the criticisms
which George’s arguments have been
subjected to, and in hardly any case, if
indeed in any, is the main question
faced. The main question is—is the
present land system passably good or is
it irredeemably vicious 1 Now, instead
of facing this question nearly all, I
think all, of George’s critics have run off
on side issues, the favourite one being
the proposed confiscation, for confiscation
it is—there is no need to be afraid of a
word
I jive here specimens of the criticisms
Land Nationalists are subjected to on
account of this unfortunate proposal.
Mr. Mallock says that if you knock a
man down and run off with his purse,
he allows you will be richer than before,
but he thinks any booby could have
told you that; the discovery of that
fact did not require a man of Mr.
George’s ability.
The Pittsburg Chronicle writes.—The
whole theory is communistic and sub-
versive of the best interests of society.
It sounds well in argument, and can be
presented in a way to attract the atten-
tion of those who have never been
industrious enough to acquire property
of their own, because of its alluring
promise of obtaining something from the
people who have been thus industrious
—of getting something for nothing
Again the Altoona Tribune writes.—
Pope Leo XIII. very properly condemns
the heresies of Henry George which
have been accepted and are being
preached by Dr. M'Glynn. In this
view he will be sustained by Christians
of all names. Robbery is antagonistic
to all religion.
Now these writers are avoiding the
main question. The first thing to settle
is, whether or not the present land
system is responsible for the amount of
evil which we nationalists lay to its
charge. If men become satisfied in the
affirmative on this point, and if also
they should find it impossible to redress
the matter except by confiscation,
then undoubtedly confiscation it
would be sooner or later. But still the
first question is the main question, and
until it is settled the critics are riding
off on a side issue, when discussing
confiscation.
Unfortunately the question of confis-
cation is so important in the eyes of
most men that they fail to recognise it
as secondary, and yet if they would only
think of what they are seeking to main-
tain they would see that all they had to
establish is, that the present system is
passably good, or still better if they can,
that it is the “ best of all possible
systems.” If they establish this they
may neglect all side issues whatever, for
no further question can possibly arise.
This is the point on which we are
anxious to join issue with them, and if


by proposing purchase we deprive them
of the opportunity of riding off on this
side issue, they must face the main
question, and attention to the main
question is all that we need for success.
There is yet another difficulty connec-
ted with the proposed confiscation.
Any one who has attended a meeting
of Henry George’s, or read much of
what is written by his supporters, can-
not fail to recognise that among those
supporters there is a large body who see
only this, —“ Here is a chance to shift
taxation from off our own shoulders
to some otherbody’s ” A line of con-
duct on which men have been only too
ready to act in all ages. Now men of
ordinary honesty notice this motive and
are repelled by it from even considering
any of George’s arguments, for they
cannot help regarding it all as a phase
of the longstanding quarrel between
the have-nots and the haves. And men
of such quality are the very men we
ought to desire in our ranks; we have
many such already and we may easily
get many more. For if we propose
purchase such men are forced into
thinking. “Well whatever mistake
these men are making it must be
an honest mistake ; there is no question
here of getting rich by taking from
another: if there be anything in it at
all, it must in some way be analogous
to making an improved use of our
abilities, and the natural resources.”
And if they thought thus, they would
think aright. It is exactly equivalent
to an enormous stride in production.
The offer of purchase leaves our op-
ponents almost no alternative but to
face our main theorem proving the
irredeemable vice of the present system;
and I think that the saving of time,
from thus narrowing the field of debate
will itself be worth all the purchase
money.
My main reason for offering purchase
is the speedy settlement of this serious
matter. But it ought not to be forgot-
ten that many of those in whose power
this settlement will ultimately lie, still
pray “ Forgive us our trespasses (in the
same manner) as we forgive those that
trespass against us.” Such men are not
likely to settle the matter merely accor
ding to justice, and indifferent to all
consideration of mercy. There can be
little doubt therefore that in the end
the general consensus of opinion will be
in favour of purchase, and the saving
of time and misery will be considerable
if Land Nationalists will take the
most direct route towards this desirable
goal. At present lamin an apparently
hopeless minority in this point, yet I
have no doubt that within a very short
time the minority will be changed into
an almost unanimous majority; for I
find that Land Nationalists have only
to become familiar with the idea that
the purchase will cost us vastly less than
the certain gain, and they soon see the
advantage of an early settlement; even
if they have to yield the strict claims of
justice and gain their end by purchase.
While holding such opinions however,
I may with advantage, explain how I
can unite loyally with the majority
who see no escape out of our troubles
but by confiscation. lam so fully per-
suaded by the immense advantages,
material, mental, and moral, which will
follow from the adoption of State owner-
ship of land, and so vividly impressed
with the evils caused by our present
system that I will welcome any solution
of the difficulty ; and will join with any
who are moving in that direction, and
will act loyally with them. And prac-
tically the only movers in this matter
are those who advocate confiscation,
with whom therefore I cordially join.
But at the same time will retain my
freedom to impress on both associates
and opponents, the advantage of the
policy of offering purchase.
So far in urging a policy calculated to
lead to the speedy settlement of this
question. I have confined myself
mainly to pecuniary considerations. But
there is at least one more serious matter
to be considered.
Mr. George has been sneered at for
asserting that the abolition of land-
lordism would stop prostitution. I do
not say that, but this I do say, that as
long as landowners desire prostitution
you cannot stop it do what you will. 1
spoke on this matter after serious consi-
deration, so serious that as I may hr
challenged to proof, I had written dov i
what I had to say.
The oower of the landowners to get


my thing which can be supplied by this
vmrld or the people on it is irresistible.
5o long as they desire prostitution no
ne can stop it. Education or training
. utterly valueless against the pressure
hich the landowners can bring to bear
the community. It is a matter of
lifference whether you train your chil-
m in the straitness of Puritanism, or
i liberality of Broad Churchism, if
e landowners desire it some must
ffd. The utmost you can do is to
ike the mental agony and the moral
■uggle more acute, the end is the same.
ie economical action of landowning is
evitable, whatever landowners want
ist be supplied if the world can
pply it. Fifty years ago this was
)ticed. Fifty years ago Dr. Thomas
Chalmers, father of the Free Church of
Scotland, used these words in reference
o the power of the landowners “He
hat is master of that which I cannot
is master of my services.” Yes,
here it is in less than twenty words,
He that is master of that which you
annot waul is master of your services,”
. hether he wants you as a seamstress
rfor any other purpose.
“ He that is master of that which you
annot want is master of your services.”
There is the whole Land Question in
less than twenty words. Though I
spoke for hours, though I wrote
volumes, I could not say more than
that. All that I can add is to show,
that what Chalmers saw to be true in
the mass is true in every detail. And I
assert with all the confidence derived
from proof already prepared, that as 1
long as there are landowners among I
those desiring prostitution you are
utterly powerless to stop it. Utterly
powerless—if I could use stronger words I
would.
Now that is serious enough. But
there is a much more serious conse-
quence. If there is a demand which
must be supplied, what are you doing
when you rescue one out of that terrible
pit ? Do you not see that if you rescue
one you merely make a vacancy which
another must fill ?
All the effect of the rescue work is to
pass a greater number more rapidly
through this frightful hell. What then
you will ask do I advise. Are you to
stop your rescue work ? What shall I
say? I shall ask your advice on this
point. Can you tell me how long it
will take to settle the Land Questio n ?
If you can tell me that I can tell you
whether or not to continue your rescue
work. If this land question can be
settled in a few months then by all
means keep your organisation alive,
victory is within grasp, but that victory
is not on this side of the settlement of
the Land Questions.
But if the Land Question is not to be
settled within fifty years then on you
who attempt rescue work rests a fear-
ful responsibility. Now that this view
of the matter has been raised you must
test the matter thoughtfully. You can-
not put this matter aside with the
determination to do that which lies
nearest to your hand. If there be, and
this I am ready to prove, if there be an
irresistible demand for a supply of such
women, your efforts are merely in-
creasing the number who fall. Ear
better would it be if you would leave
them—leave them to die in it; there
will be the fewer of them. It is a
merciless conclusion, but under land-
owning there is no mercy.
We have here gentlemen a strong
argument. To those who are ignorant
or indifferent it is an argument why
they should study the! Land Question.
To those who are studying the Land
Question it is an argument in favour of
Land Nationalisation. To those who
are already convinced it is an argument
in favour of adopting the readiest means
of settling this Question. Surely with
such an awful responsibility resting upon
us it is our duty to take the readiest
means of escape. It is foolish to say
we are buying stolen property. Why
waste time considering that question
with such a hideous evil at our very
door.
I appeal to you gentlemen as fathers,
you may die before your children are
There is no escaping the conclusion. J grown up, before your daughters are
If the power of the landowners be what i settled in life. Is it your will that they
I confidently declare it is, every one j should be left under conditions that
rescued means that another must fall, j make it certain that some must fall, —it


may not be yours, but it must be some
and it might be yours 1 Or even in
your own life you may have the bitter
experience of the change of that purest
form of human love—the love of a
father for his daughter—yes, you may
experience the change of that love into
loathing, contempt and shame. I appeal
to you yourg men. You may have left
sisters in the old country exposed to
temptations—how strong you may
never know—are you content ? Ladies
I appeal to you—mothers in Queensland.
Is it for this you nurture your innocent
babies. I appeal to all. Will you not,
even though it should hasten the victory
by only one year—even for that one
year will you not buy your freedom,
will you not secure the purity of your
women 1
No^e.—My attention has been called
of that which I cannot want, &c.” This
-a Scotticism ; an Englishman it is said
to the expression : “He that is master
use of the word “ want ” is I am told,
would understand by it “He that is
master of that which I cannot desire,” a meaning which does not suit the
context. To a Scotchman the meaning is perfectly clear :“ He that is master of
that which I cannot do without is master of my services.” I have attributed this
Scotticism to Dr. Chalmers, but I may be in error as to his exact words as it is
twenty years since I read his work.— Mur ray Fraser.


