

HOW TOPLAN
FINANCE
BUILD YOUR
HOME
temple GWf Lourne ...




THE SIGN OF SERVICE.
To you who are not really happy living in a
house of someone else’s planning—to you
who really want to give expression of your-
self in wood and stone; to you who wish to
have a real home, whether large or small, is
this book sent forth. With it goes an invi-
tation to you to come and discuss your
problems—finance is probably one of the
biggest of them—with us. We want to help
you. The Sign which appears at the top
of this page is one of Service. Let
us be of Service to you.


Table Of Contents.
(Clje pome
the Jotn£
(Choosing tlje Pome Jiite
Securing the limit JSitc
planning tlje
(Constructing pe
decorating 8c
pe pome
Che pome getting


The Home
3S the home a mere protection from weather?—a method of preserving
privacy? Even the gunyahs, and mud huts of savage tribes are both
of these. a'jJl
The earliest records of moves toward civilisation—those of Chaldaea
and Egypt—give evidence of a pride in the family abode. Care was
expended not merely on making the house sound and safe, but also on
making it beautiful. We may sum up the idea in the words of Vitruvius,
the only ancient writer on the art of architecture, whose works have
come down to us. He lays down three qualities as indispensable in any
fine building—stability, utility, beauty. We all agree that a home must,
to mere strength, add comfort and ease of working, and, last but not
least, joy in its appearance.
The greatest joy in this place, where we spend more time than
anywhere else, can come only from making it, and owning it ourselves.
Thus only can we give expression to our own taste and character—
external design with a welcome in the very look of it, embowered in
greenery and flowers that we have known from the seed up—rooms of
the size, shape, and colouring we desire, furniture of our own choosing
in a fitting framework.
“Quite right,” you may say, “but that sounds very expensive for
one thing—and for another, I don’t know anything about bricks and
timber and metal work. I have ideas, but the connection between them
and actuality seems to be very ‘remote’.”
Taking the last difficulty first, there are two people whose business
it is to help you—they are the architect and the builder. All down the
ages, these two functions have been carried out by different men —the
architect is the artist, he puts ideas on to paper and into technical words
—the builder is the tradesman, just as essential, but with a training which
gives him skill in working timber and metal, brick and stone.
If you glance round our city and its suburbs, you will see houses
costing very little, and others running to thousands of pounds, but —it is
not always the most expensive that is the place that you would like to
live in. The real “homey” places are those where there has been a
three-cornered partnership between the man and the woman who were
determined to have a home, the architect who helped them, and the
builder who put in careful, sound work because he had a job in which
he could take a pride.
"Yes, I certainly ought to employ an architect, but it will mean more
expense, and I don’t quite see how I am going to get anything like what
I want with the money I have.” It is one of the objects of this book to
show you that the cost of an architect’s service can be saved many times
over, and that expert advice in the use of your funds will make them go
much farther than you think possible.


Financing the Home
3T is hard to decide which phase of the big subject of home-getting
should be talked about first, because each one depends to a large
extent upon the others. We choose the question of purchase as
being the one which often looms largest, and an easy mind in this con-
nection makes consideration of the other phases less difficult.
There are hundreds of people to-day who have been paying rent for
years, and the total amount of this rent money would probably have
paid completely for a beautiful home had they taken the step necessary
to set them on this home-ownership road —namely, a small deposit and
rent repayments. They know thrift is good and that systematic saving
for a definite purpose —a home—will yield its fruits in good season, but
they don’t acknowledge this by action. If it be possible for a landlord
to make money on the rent he charges you for the privilege of living
in his house, it is only reasonable to suppose that you will be able to
save money on a home of your own.
The whole question hinges on the fact of making a start. It is
remarkable how few rent payers are aware of the fact that with a
small deposit, a home of their own could be purchased and paid off by
weekly payments which work out very little in excess of, and in some
cases, less than the amount of rent they have been paying week-in
week-out for so many years. In our experience as Architects we
continually come in contact with this home finance question, and thus
can advise quite assuredly as to what this means, and can show you
just how to go the right way about it. We quote, for example, the case
of a young couple who had paid off a block of land worth one hundred
and fifty pounds (£150), and decided to erect a modern home to cost
eight hundred and fifty pounds (£850), thus making a total of one


thousand pounds (£1000). The home site, on inspection, was found
to be satisfactory, and was fixed for these people as deposit, the balance
of the money being raised in such a way that principal and interest was
repaid at the rate of 4/- per £lOO per week. The actual rental value of
this type of home was 37/6 per week, so you see how advantageous
their weekly payment of 34/- became. It ultimately provides the home
rent free and at the same time creates a solid asset; the value of which
might so easily have been thrown away in rent.
Think what a privilege it becomes to begin investment in this way,
for in every district round the towns and cities of Victoria, property
values have steadily advanced. You may or may not need further
direction as the years go on, but in any case, there is a solid asset ready
for rainy days.
You now see the way in which the purchasing power of your money
can be increased, but we are not for a moment pretending that there
is no limit. If you attempt to finance a home beyond your means, you
may encounter trouble in making your payments. On the other hand,
it is a great pity to skimp your operations unnecessarily to the extent
of omitting modern conveniences. If these are put in at the time of
building, it does not represent a very great extra cost, and they always
add more than their cost to the value of the home when selling. If
viewed from an investment standpoint at the time of building, the home
will always become an appreciating asset, its selling value much higher
than its cost.
We would again emphasise the fact that neither the smallness nor
the largeness of your funds is any bar to your availing yourself of our
services.
Financing the Home


Choosing the Home Site
J£AVING shown how we may help you to make the best use of your
l!tf money from the purely financial side, let us next consider the
question: “Where am I going to build?” There are quite a large number
of factors to be taken into account: —
First, the actual size of the lot. Yes! you want as much
room as you can get to provide space for a lawn and a garden—a frame
for the picture of the home you will be carrying in your mind. Good
breathing space is essential, but in the case of the small home builder, it
must not be more than one pair of hands can keep in trim.
Second, the neighbourhood. Is the environment likely to be
congenial, and will you be among homes of the type you anticipate
erecting? It is wise to consider the site with reference to future devel-
opment of the town or city: Its position as regards essential conveniences
such as Church, School, and mode of transport, and the all-important
advantages of sewer, gas, water, and electric light.
Third, the building restrictions. Is it possible that a factory
will be erected in the vicinity or some other structure out of harmonv
with the general plan? Do the by-laws of the Municipality insist that
the house to be erected shall cover a certain floor area, thus compelling
you to erect a bigger home than you can afford? Are the ideas that you
have dreamed of, regarding your home and the materials to be used,
likely to be cast out because of certain regulations which are not common
to all municipalities? Is there any clause insisting that every home
erected in that district shall be constructed of brick or concrete, thus
eliminating the cheaper forms of construction? All these and many other
points have to be looked into before a satisfactory purchase can be made.
Fourth, the landscape. What will your outlook be, when, in
your quiet moments, you are able to look round you from your porch or
garden, or even when you glance out from your living rooms? Beauty
makes a lot of difference to everyday things. If trees are on the site,
would it not be possible to use them in the plan? They may prove, under
the hands of skilled designers, a source of real benefit, joy and comfort.


Fifth, the future garden. The prettiest house in the world will
look barren and uninviting without a garden—a little wider lot with a
patch of green here and there to soften the hard lines of the building
will make a vast difference to the appearance of your home. Your next-
door neighbour’s garden, not the same: yours will help him, his will help
you. All aiding life to be beautiful.
Sixth, soil and slope. The character of the soil should be
learned. Clay is not desirable because of its soggy character. Loam
and sandy soil is more porous, absorbs moisture quicker, and is more
productive of good lawns and gardens. Drainage, too, must not be
overlooked. Where does the drainage go? Are you going to suffer
from the next-door neighbour’s seepage?
The hillside or elevated plot is good because it makes the house
more attractive when completed. So are irregular shapes of land, because
they give the Architect something to work with. He is able to visualise
the house as it will appear when finished, and can therefore work in little
individual touches.
Seventh, the relation of position to the cost of building.
Land in settled areas has a distinct advantage, because values are more
readily assessable, and financing is much easier. Cheap land is not
always good land, and most investors and institutions will not lend money
on land that is in an isolated position.
You will agree that all the above factors are of great importance.
If you can decide upon a site which fulfils them all as nearly as possible,
you can go on to the next step—securing the Home Site. If you feel a
little bewildered and don’t quite know which way to turn, try what this
firm can do to help you come to a decision.
Choosing the Home Site


Securing the Home Site
TVTOW, having fixed in your mind the site you feel will suit you, follow
the practical commercial man’s mode of doing business:
(a) Obtain an option of purchase for thirty days.
(b) Call in an expert in design to discuss the relation of your ideal
building to the site selected. This is another side of our "sign
of service.” Have a sketch prepared of the most suitable home
you could erect; also avail yourself of the other services, so
that you are in a position to consider and determine the financ-
ing proposition and have the home planned in conformity with
local building by-laws and regulations.
These points being settled satisfactorily—then, and not till then—
are you ready to have your contract of land purchase drawn up. Let
our executives search the title to satisfy you that you are buying all that
you are supposed to be buying, and that there are no encumbrances,
easements, or other details that are going to worry you. This should be
done within fourteen days of the signing of the contract, for after this
period, no objections can be taken to any matters affecting the title.
A good point to be observed also is that of survey, by which the
block can be identified with the land described in the Certificate of Title.
The surveyor’s certificate should be always on hand when
(a) The builder wants to ascertain boundary points.
(b) People financing want proof of measurements.
(c) The time comes that you want to sell or dispose of the property.
The wide-awake human being always wants to do the right thing
in the right way. The conversion of your ideas to concrete form can
be safely left in the hand of the Architect, but the choice of the home site
usually falls to the prospective home builder, though he is wise to get
counsel.
THESE POINTS, HOWEVER, HAVE BEEN COMPILED
WITH THE OBJECT OF GUIDING THE HOME BUILDER IN
THIS CHOICE; OF PROTECTING HIM AGAINST FUTURE
DEPRECIATION IN THE VALUE OF HIS PROPERTY AND
DETERIORATION IN THE CHARACTER OF THE NEIGH-
BOURHOOD WHERE HE HOPES TO RESIDE.


HE followirg pages contain a number of designs of homes
treated in various styles of architecture, each having its own
particular point of interest, and a careful study of these
pages will go a long way toward the solution of a type for
YOUR home.


DESIGN No. 00/05
It would be difficult to offer to the home-
builder a more charming general arrangement
of plan and treatment of exterior than is illus-
trated on this page. It comes within the scope
of the smallest pocket, and still carries an
individuality all its own. The design is based
on the Georgian model featuring a central
pillared entrance porch wherein can be had the
warmth of the winter sun in season, and alike
the shade of summer days.
The planning is unique, and comprises a
central hall twelve (12) feet wide, as well as
five other rooms and large Sleep-out. The
Lounge and Dining-room are both served with
double glass doors and provide excellent recep-
tion accommodation so much asked for to-day.
The cost of this home is approximately £695,
according to location wherein same might be
erected,


DESIGN No. 00/15
Homes of Spanish character are fast finding
solid footing in the eyes of the Australian
people. Whether it is the similarity of con-
ditions between the two countries or not is
hard to say, but it would be very difficult to
find a small home more pleasing and attractive
than the above design. One could almost say
it breathes the old world. Yet it is so dis-
tinctly modern, providing the home-seeker with
his every requirement, and not asking him to
pay a large sum for it. For the exterior treat-
ment a rough plaster finish is anticipated,
colored in a rich cream and surmounted by a
Spanish tile roof. The ornamental or twisted
cement work enriches the character of the
home, and with the little touch of wrot-iron
combines to make it a work of originality.
The lay-out is full of interesting points, and
the details which one would expect to find in
a home of this style have not been forgotten. A
big Lounge and Dining accommodation is pro-
vided, along with sleeping quarters in the form
of two Bedrooms, with bath adjacent, and the
whole with all conveniences, expressing utility
and comfort to the last word. Just such
a home could be erected
at approximatelyEl 050.


DESIGN No. 00/31
This house is very compact, exceedingly
well planned, and easily one of the most appeal-
ing types of houses that can be built. It has
been designed step by step with a view to
economy, and the upper storey utilised in such
a way that the maximum amount of space is
available at the minimum of cost. The half-
timbered treatment shown stamps this home as
of English origin, and the well cut up roof and
quaint entrance and dark stained window
frames and sashes against the light background
add interest to the general effect of the house.
The building as illustrated is built of frame
with stucco over metal laths, and is set low on
the ground, offering the impression of maturity
and blending itself well into the picturesque
setting.
In interior arrangement, the Living and
Dining Rooms extend right across the front of
the house, and each contains a fireplace of
pleasing appearance. The Library or Den is
situated at rear of Living Room, and is entered
from an Ante by the Stair Hall.
The Sun Parlor, Kitchen, with
Breakfast Room supplement, and
three Bedrooms, comprise the re-
mainder of space. This home can
be built for £llOO.


DESIGN No. 176
In general character of Italian style, but in
adaptation modern Australian, this home pre-
sents its own claim to popularity. It consists
of five rooms and bathroom, and has been ex-
cellently planned. The Living Room is spacious
in size, and features a large fireplace at the
end of the room so placed that the maximum
effect of pleasing vista is obtained by a glance
through the double doors from the Hall. Adja-
cent to the Living Room is the Dining Room —
quite a cosy place with immediate access to
the Kitchen, which is roomy and modernly
equipped. Both Bedrooms are fitted with
built-in clothes closet.
For the exterior treatment the use of brick
covered with stucco in light pink tone is sug-
gested, and a roof of color blend Mission tiles.
The staining of the woodwork to the effect of
weather pine, with a light blue treatment on
the shutters and a warm grey tone on the wrot-
iron railing of the terrace and lamps at entrance
would present a pleasing color note. The
arched entrance with buttresses at side is both
pleasing and attractive.
At a cost of approximately £995
this home is not expensive.


DESIGN No. 00/19
This home might have been transplanted
entire from the barren, ruddy colored hills of
Spain, for the atmosphere surrounding it is
distinctly Spanish.
The wrot-iron grille opening in the entrance
door is a reminder of the old-time thirst for
protection, and the lamp, a symbol of welcome,
might also serve as a safeguard against
intrusion.
The planning is a decided variation from the
usual type of bungalow design, but is a most
compact and charmingly comfortable one.
A small vestibule is entered direct from out-
side, before coming into the Hall proper, and
is unusual. All rooms are served from the Hall
and Ante inside. Linen, coats and clothes
closets are amply provided, and the kitchen
equipment is quite modern.
The chimney piece on front, with its tiled
back, bird bath or drinking fountain, is quite
novel.
At £ll5O this home finds many admirers.


DESIGN No. 00/21
This bungalow is of a type more or less
universal, as it adapts itself quite admirably to
the many and varied climatic conditions of this
country, being suitable for either city or coun-
try. While there is a growing tendency in
modern design towards eliminating the long
run of verandah, as shown on this illustration,
there are still a good many home-seekers who
cling to this arrangement, and so the bungalow
is planned on this preference.
Considerable light and shade is thrown about
this design, which gives somewhat a roving
character to the general appearance of the
house, but from a planning point of view there
is much to commed it. The rooms are all
grouped in a most workable manner, and every
convenience is provided throughout. We could
not but recommend this if only from a planning
standpoint, but to the lover of the bungalow it
must have a good appeal. Cheap construction
cost is a strong factor in its favor.


DESIGN No. 00/35
To say that £1195 will build this most attrac-
tive home of English character seems like
offering the impossible, but it can be done. It
it one of those delightful homes which depict
the designer’s art in a most pleasing way.
At a glance one is immediately attracted with
the typical character of the roof line, and the
gentle merging of the side gable and chimney
piece into the rubble gateway at side is a most
charming feature. The planning is excellent,
and with the large Living Room entered
directly from the Hall, with Fireplace centrally
placed at end of room, one is enabled to curtail
the Dining Room slightly from the standard
size by opening it with Portiere arrangement
from the Living Room. Double doors from
Dining alcove to Porch, and small cupboards
built in at corners, are pleasing details.
Such designs as this are rarely found
amongst the low-priced homes, and think what
a privilege it would be to own one. The heart
of the owner in welcome to visitors is exempli-
fied in the distinctly unique gateway with
wrot-iron lantern over, adding cheer where
seldom it is to be found.


DESIGN No. 00/43
Northern Italy has served in this instance to
furnish the suggestion for this beautiful small
home. Its construction is of brick, with stucco
treatment over, and the usual gutter tile roof.
The somewhat broken lines of the design dis-
tinguish it from the usual type of two-storey
house, and the arched doorway entrance, the
trellis around the window, and the roof treat-
ment give it character hard to find in this type
of home.
In general finish, one would prefer to see the
stucco tinted a deep cream with the woodwork
a bluish green, all brightened up by the color
blend of the roofing tile.
Practicality is the keynote of the planning,
and all rooms are accessible from each other,
thereby minimising housewife’s labors greatly.
The Living Room is interesting, with its beau-
tiful fireplace and bookcases built in at either
side. The Dining Room is well lighted, and
handy to Kitchen. Bedrooms are all placed on
second floor, and have ample clothes closets
built in. Balcony and Bathroom complete the
suite.
This type of home is not outside the reach
of even a small pocket.


DESIGN No. 00/54
We rather like to say that this charming and
distinctive home is essentially modern Austra-
lian in character. It is so eminently suited to
our climatic and general living conditions, that
no foreign style whatever can be claimed for
it. Warmth in the sun parlor for the winter
afternoons, shade from the summer sun on the
Lozzia, and protection from all weathers for
the passenger of the automobile beneath the
portecochere, are delightful details. No home
is said to be modern to-day or in any way
complete without a commodious and comfort-
able Living Room, and within the walls of
this design is to be found the most cosy and
attractive room of large proportions. Dining
Room, with Kitchen adjacent, and serving
space, help to combine maximum comfort and
utility with minimum amount of waste energy
on the part of the housekeeper.
A Den, wherein the tired home-comer may
relax both body and mind, is provided, as are
the usual three (3) Bedrooms, Bath and Maids’
Rooms. How better could the professional
man house himself than in such a home?


DESIGN No. 00/61
In studying the design of this home, one is
attracted first by the pleasing character of the
roof line and its style as distinctly English,
the shingle tile roof accentuating the color har-
mony which the warm toning of timber treat ■
ment against the dead white stucco ground
gives the home.
The deep overhang at front entrance extend-
ing right across the building is perhaps one of
the most charming features. The arrangement
of the rooms leaves little to be desired, the
reception suite comprising Entrance Hall, Big
Lounge, and Den, or Smoke Room.
The Sun Parlor from the Lounge will be
much appreciated.
Three Bedrooms and Bathrooms, Servants’
Quarters, and Kitchen are all well placed and
modernly planned. No one could fail to
appreciate this beautiful home, and the moral
effect of owning such would be worth far more
than the money invested to produce it.


DESIGN No. 252
People have often observed how different
types of houses carry different impressions,
ffouses should have as much personality as
people, and this house not only bespeaks per-
sonality, but expresses genuine comfort in
every way as well. It is ideally planned with
Reception, Dining and Bed Room Suites
grouped in a most workable manner.
The Hall is entered through a pair of
bevelled plate glass doors and gives access to
the Den, Lounge and Dressing Room, forming
a complete and isolated reception unit.
The Den is treated in a manner most befitting
a utility room, but the Lounge is somewhat
more elaborate, the Adam period design being
used for beautification. The whole is treated
in old ivory with chrome shadows and relieved
with motifs and sconce lighting to great effect.
Service conveniences have all been included.
The external treatment is Georgian in char-
acter, and color blend bricks and tiles with
stucco renderings add greatly to the charm of
the home.
A home owner of this design would be a
privileged person.


DESIGN No. 129
The Colonial style of treatment has been
used to furnish a basis of design for this most
delightful two-storey home. Relieved of any
unnecessary decoration and ornament, the plain
quiet treatment forces recognition, and the
single roof lines assure one that to be unosten-
tatious and not to lose dignity and harmony.
The circular portico at front is a unique feature
of the design, and, with the terrace walling,
breaks down any severity there might other-
wise have been. Small balconettes to the win-
dows on first floor may ask for recognition
Eight rooms are provided in this home, with all
conveniences, and the building cost is so low
as to be almost out of proportion to the accom-
modation provided.
The modern home-seeker cannot afford tc
pass this design by in his search for some
thing different and something better.


DESIGN No. 184
To offer the home-seeker anything much
more pleasing than the home illustrated here-
with would indeed be difficult. A typical family
home, planned with Reception and Dining
accommodation on the first floor, whilst the
second floor is given over to sleeping quarters,
with necessary accommodation.
Entering the small entrance porch a most
pleasing vista is to be had through the colon-
nade treatment to the Lounge.
The Den is planned for comfort, with built-in
bookcases and attractive wall finish, and the
Dining Room placed in its most serviceable
position. A Maids’ Sitting Room, Man’s Room
and other servants’ accommodation is provided
The balcony treatment on second floor gives a
restful feeling to the home. Two-car garage
is provided, which with the small trades en-
trance gate at the side, cuts off the rear portion
of the property.


DESIGN No. 196
In these days of strife for economy the two-
family home is receiving marked attention. Just
such a house is this delightful illustration.
Borrowing from the Colonial style, we com-
bine the every-day needs in a manner which
bespeaks genuine comfort and utility, without
retracting in any way from the most modern
of design.
Mother wants to provide a home for the
only daughter, just married, and realising that
it is best for her to be away, yet at hand, how
better could she do it.
Each suite contains Lounge and Dining
quarters with two Bedrooms and all conveni-
ences. Separate entrances although under the
one roof are self-contained, and apart in every
way, thus filling the most necessary demands
made on this class of structure. There are
many claims made for just such a house as
this, and those who adopt this style are most
happy.


DESIGN No. 210
The apartment house or flat was originally
brought about as a means for providing relief
for the housing situation, and to enable families
to live in comfort without having a large
amount of money invested in a home of their
own. It offers to the modern housewife relief
from much of the drudgery and many of the
cares of housekeeping, and enables her to keep
well in touch with her social life without any
palpable neglect of home duties.
Shown herewith is a very modern interpreta-
tion of the desires of just these people. Each
flat has its own entrance and service lobby, and
is so constructed that each tenement remains
the equivalent of an isolated house in every
particular. Every convenience should be pro-
vided, and hot water with good plumbing fix-
tures is almost a necessity. Herein is embodied
the large living room; small, but adequate,
dining quarters: sleeping portion carefully
planned adjacent to bath rooms: and the
kitchen par excellence.


DESIGN No. 212
From the investor’s point of view the Apart-
ment House is a great success, provided he
makes provision to meet the various demands
of the people in this type of dwelling. From
an economical point of view it is sound. The
cost of land and of building per family is
reduced to a minimum simultaneously, and
operating costs shared by each tenant become
a mere fraction of the upkeep costs of a private
house.
From the aspect of co-operative ownership the
apartment house is becoming markedly popular.
It consists of ownership by those who occupy
the apartments, and the cost of purchase of the
apartment under this scheme works out less
than the nominal rental which could be charged
for such an apartment from the landlord’s point
of view.
For the enterprising and far-seeing mind who
endeavours to promote this type of dwelling
there is a big future, and some very interesting
points can be shown to back up this statement.
The block of buildings shown above is an
example of what may be done in modern flat
design.


Planning the Interior
SHE dominant note in any real home is comfort combined with beauty
This result of course depends in large measure upon the personality
of the "home-director,” but there is much that can be done in the planning
of the house from the foundations up to make sure that that personality
has full opportunities to make itself felt with a minimum of physical effort.
Perhaps the fundamental considerations are family requirements and
climatic conditions, but these involve many factors—the sizes and
arrangements of rooms, the location of doors and their relation to
windows and fireplaces, the placing and slope of stairs, and the use of
labour-saving devices. On all of these the advice of the skilled designer
cannot fail to be of very great value.
Houses to-day must be compact in plan, but they must meet the
demands that will be made on them. Here is an outline of the opinions
of some successful modern women—in their capacities both of home-
makers and of hostess—living rooms must be well lighted and spacious
and at the same time comfortable; dining quarters need not be large but
must be easily accessible from the kitchen; sleeping rooms should have
bathrooms adjacent —and provisions for sleeping out should be made
whenever possible: a breakfast nook for rush meals and cosy fireplace
ingles with built-in wood and coal boxes are valuable; other built-in
cupboards for linen, china, and books save furnishing costs, and always
look well. A sun parlour for the winter afternoons is an asset when it
can be had, and a similar effect can be produced by double casements
opening from a lounge room on to a secluded garden.
The kitchen deserves a special paragraph to itself as it may be
called the "efficiency factor” in the house. All unnecessary work here
must be eliminated. The supplies, work-table, sink and range must be
placed so as to save steps for the housekeeper. The kitchen must be
well lighted both by daylight and artificial light, and must be well venti-
lated. The correct design of the chimney fireplace will take away all
cooking odours. The kitchen should be cool in summer and warm in
winter, and its relation to the dining room and rear entrance should not,
as is often the case, be left until all the other problems of the house have
been solved. It must be well equipped, and much thought given to the
fixtures, since frequently the pantry in the small home is omitted. It
should have built-in cupboards, working tables, shelves, storage spaces
for non-perishable foods, and in many instances large storage closets
where perishable foods may also be stored.
The walls of the kitchen must be both light in colour and easily
cleaned. Perhaps, the most satisfactory finish is a hardwall plaster
painted in a dull enamel, and the woodwork brought up to harmonise.
Its efficiency will depend upon the proper grouping of utensils and sup-
plies. and the things used most often are those which should always be
close at hand. It is only by successful planning that any degree of
comfort and ease of working can be obtained.


Constructing the Home
77THE idea that an Architect’s services are unnecessary has cost
W hundreds of people hundreds of pounds. They want a home, and
are anxious to get the best that is possible for the amount of money they
have to spend, but cannot appreciate the work that is entailed or the
skill required to give this result, and so they pass the architect as unneces-
sary, and call in the local builder. The result of this is always unsatis-
factory because the builder is called upon to begin a phase of home con-
struction that he has not been trained to do, namely, planning and design.
The outcome is almost always increased cost and disappointment at the
result.
Everyone has certain fixed ideas in his mind as to particular details
desired in the home. It is, however, the skilled designer, who, by study-
ing his clients and their ideas, that can embody in a material way, that
which stamps the individuality of the owner on the home, producing an
atmosphere of self-expression of which he is so justly proud.
The materials that go to make the home are a matter of great import-
ance and the home builder has a very wide range from which to select.
The essential qualities in this respect, however, are permanence, strength,
and beauty, but each has to be considered according to the availability
and suitability to the location of the home and their comparative costs as
regards service.
The most permanent and suitable material for the home is brick as
it lends itself to such easy manipulation, and in addition to its value of
permanency, the danger of fire is lessened.
In comparing the timber house with the house built of brick, it is not
the initial extra cost that needs first consideration, but the upkeep or
maintenance and depreciation which every wooden home has to bear.
The timber house will always depreciate at a far greater rate than a bnc
house, and from a re-sale point of view, it has not the same possibility
of natural appreciation in value, which is a point worth noting. i. he
timber house, however, can be designed to give a most pleasing and
artistic appearance, and for rural districts is most fitting in the sur-
roundings and decidedly cheaper to build because of the availability of
the timber. The log cabin has a charm that the nature lover must appre-
ciate if it is treated in the proper manner, but it is not a style much u


to-day. From an insurance point of view, the timber house is more
costly than brick. With the use of brick, a great deal of variety can be
had, and carefully selected colour work presents an attractive finish.
Roughcasted stucco finish may also be used over brick to great advan-
tage.
Hollow tile and cement block construction have met with favour
of late years, but, as yet, are not much used. They are best
adapted to houses where it is possible to have the blocks manufactured
on the premises. The architect is given good opportunity in design, and
is not restricted, in using this form of construction in the designing of an
attractive home.
The roofing is an important point in which good scope is offered.
The terracotta roofings are made up in different treatments with styles
to suit the different period homes. The Mission tile of Spanish origin is
unique in its appearance and gradually becoming more widely used, but
it is more costly than most other roofings, as is also the shingle tile, but
this drawback is more than made up for in the charm of their appearance.
The English home is well roofed if the shingle tile be used. There are
many varieties of the Marseilles pattern tiles, and the commonly used
roofings. Cement and concrete tiles are also in vogue, and can be had
in greys and greens. These tiles are much cooler in summer than the
terracotta roofings.
The plumbing of the home should be given a lot of thought. The
home of to-day is not modern unless it is completely equipped with baths,
lavatories, sinks, and laundry troughs, all installed in the most sanitary
manner. The fitments should be of good quality, and the extra cost of
the best in this connection is a never-ending joy to the home builder.
The bathroom is usually the one room in the house which the Master of
the Home does appreciate, and he looks eagerly for a means of making
this room nice. His enquiries lead him along the lines of little fitments
for holding shaving water, toothbrushes, soap, etc., glass shelves for
holding odds and ends, and a shaving cabinet: he wants a built-in bath,
and would like a pedestal basin, if there were not the risk of the children
pushing and breaking it. “Can it be securely fixed?” he asks. The
towel airer from the hot water system for drying off the towels and an
independent shower. What type of hot water service should be
installed—and numerous questions he curries up to be answered intelli-
Constructing the Home


gently. He looks to the architect for advice, and that is where tie
should get it.
Central heating is demanded largely to-day in the home, and one
wants to consider this phase of home comfort when building. Many
systems are known and give satisfactory results, but each job has to be
treated in its own way. So much comes in to alter calculations, such as
climatic conditions, the placing of windows to doors, air currents, etc.,
that only mention can be made of its possibility.
Electricity in the home we cannot forget. To-day, it serves two
purposes—that of illumination and the operation of appliances and
labour-saving devices. To get the best results, the home must be
properly wired and planned with the necessary outlets for the work it
may be called to do. The vacuum cleaner, dish-washer, small hand-iron,
clothes-washer, and other devices so much used to-day, to say nothing
of hire portables. Percolator, toaster, grill, waffle irons, samaran, kettle,
reading lamps, standards, etc., are all items that need to be planned for
or considered at the time of building.
All these points and hundreds of others must come up when the
question of home-building is raised, and very few people consider the
possibilities of mistake to say nothing of the needless expense connected
with building even the smallest home without well-prepared plans and
without a clear understanding of what home building involves.
All too frequently, the builder supplies totally inadequate plans and
such meagre details and specifications that the opportunity is there (if
he wants it) to give reasons for extra costs, etc., which invariably prove
a source of worry to the owner at the final settling of accounts.
The only way to obviate this position is by adhering to certain
definite laws, chief of which is properly prepared plans, specifications,
details and documents, and a clear understanding of what the home is to
be. It must be supervised to see that this work is carried out.
Constructing the Home


Decorating and Furnishing the Home
l{tt|E have been a long time arriving at that most important matter--
MU the decorating and furnishing of the home. This, though usually
considered to be the last matter that need come forward for discussion
virtually, needs decision at the time the plans are being prepared, and
the money cost allocated to the respective parts of the house. By this
means, the architect is able to assist and advise on this most important
phase, and carry through to the completed whole that harmony of line
and colour that should characterise the rooms in which you are to live.
The architect can be of very great assistance in this matter. If he
knows the style of furniture you already have, or that you intend to buy.
he can arrange the proportions of the rooms and the divisions of the
available space to suit. He can pay attention to the designing of mantels,
the placing of windows, the shape of the windows, the materials of doors
and other woodwork. He can tell you all about the possibilities of built-
in furniture. Even such details as the standard sizes of carpets are
worth remembering, so that there will be a fine range for selection, and
the margins can be arranged round same to give that snug look you
love in homes you visit.
All too frequently, no mention is made of the decorating and furnish-
ing of the house until it is nearly completed, when it is found that almost
every penny has been devoted to the actual building, with the result that
an adequate sum of money is not available for the interior essentials.
Obviously, a beautiful home, poorly decorated and furnished, will never
be a successful home.
The plan of the house should form the basis of proper furnishing,
and by a careful study of this, one is able to assure there being ample
space provided for the important pieces of furniture, particularly in the
bed and living rooms, and to apportion to each room its share of expense.
This would cover the treatment of the walls and ceilings, the floor cover-
ings, curtains, draperies, and furniture. Suitable and effective colour
schemes for the various rooms should be thought out. and assistance
given by the architect in the selection of appropriate drapery fabrics,
floor coverings, and furniture. The result is a complete and satisfac-
torily furnished interior, having an artistic unity rarely obtained when
the owner attempts to carry out the decorating and furnishing without
professional advice. It would, no doubt, be interesting to detail a little
of this fascinating art, but it is rather too wide a field to indulge in these
pages, in more than a bare outline.


The background to the whole scheme of furnishing is in the walls
and ceilings, and a great deal of consideration should be given to them,
to ensure harmony, and safeguard against possible detraction from the
value of the furnishings.
The treatment may be carried out with either paint or paper, and
both have their virtues. Painted walls and ceilings in a flat finish or
brush stippled treatment are very satisfactory and more sanitary than
wall paper, though with the latter, some very interesting effects can be
had. Painted walls, too, have the advantage of being easily washed
down when soiled, and give a fairly wide scope for decorative treatment.
They may be painted in plain colours or two-toned blended effects, and
perhaps a discreet suggestion of gold or silver dust added, might produce
an interesting feature. The success of this treatment, however, depends
largely upon the proper selection of colours which harmonise with the
woodwork in the various rooms and the advice of the architect who is
experienced in this work, should be carefully considered. The walls
forming the background for the furniture, mirrors, and paintings, should
be of light neutral colours, such as cream, warm grey, buff, putty, etc.
In small homes, dark colours should be avoided, as they absorb the light
and contract the rooms. On the other hand light colours reflect light,
and increase the apparent size of the room. Colour is also an important
factor from the standpoint of health and happiness, so that, in addition
to being an indication of good taste, a certain amount of restfulness and
peace of mind is assured in living in rooms with proper ceilings and
walls.
The draperies and floor coverings are the next consideration, and
of course depend upon the wall treatment. It is generally conceded that
draperies of figured materials should be used when walls have solid
colours, and that plain fabrics are preferable against a patterned wall.
Window draperies are often the dominant colour note of an interior,
and correct use is essential, both in regard to suitable fabrics and style
of treatment. Colour once again plays an important part at this stage,
and the exposure and lighting of the rooms must be considered. Rooms
having a southerly aspect, become more cheerful and livable, when
treated in warm colour schemes, such as mulberry and fawn, rose and
French grey, corn yellow or old gold: while interiors having a northerly
outlook are usually more satisfactory when draped in blue and dark grey,
green and gold, turquoise and fawn, orchid, and other cool colour
schemes.
Decorating and Furnishing the Home


For the main rooms of the small house, casement curtains made of
silk gauze or sunfast casement cloth, and arranged to draw, are very
satisfactory. This type permits unobstructed views if desired, and gives
complete privacy at night, unless a thin gauze is used.
The bedrooms can always be treated with sash curtains of plain filet
net, cretonne or taffeta valance and tie-backs introduce a happy colour
note.
Care must be taken, however, that the windows are not overdraped,
for each window presents its own problem. In a small house, with
window casings stopping at the sills, light weight fabrics should be used,
and the guaranteed sunfast materials have their advantages. Heavy pile
fabrics such as velours and velvets should not be used in small rooms
with short windows and low ceilings. These are only suited to the big
home with large and formal rooms. Valances improve the decorative
treatment of wide windows in two or three sections unless they are very
low. They also serve a useful purpose in hiding the rods and shade
rollers.
Coming to the floor, which is the foundation of the whole room, we
have to treat it as of primary importance. Its covering should first be
darker than the walls, and secondly be neutral and quiet in colour and
general effect. On such a floor covering, furniture will show up to
better advantage and allow greater scope in the choice of upholstering
fabrics and draperies. If the carpets or rugs of adjoining rooms are all
of the same colour, it will increase the apparent size of the interior, which
is an important consideration in a small house.
From a decorative point of view, plain or two-toned rugs and carpets
are best for the small house, especially if the walls have a design.
Figured walls, figured carpets, and figured furniture coverings, often
result in a confusion of patterns and colours. Genuine Orientals are
usually too expensive for the small home builder, but their excellence
needs no comment. In the small home, their use is usually confined to
small mats on plain neutral coverings—perhaps in front of the fireplace,
piano, or settee —although polished floors with Orientals produce most
pleasing effects.
The selection and arrangement of the furniture should be done under
guidance from the trained mind that has made a study of furniture styles,
and is familiar with the various modes and upholstering fabrics used.
Furniture, nowadays, must be comfortable, and the manufacturers are
aiming to produce goods superior in design, construction, and finish than
has hitherto been obtainable.
Decorating and Furnishing the Home


The furniture should match the woodwork of the room. Rooms
with enamelled woodwork and mahogany polished doors are best fur-
nished with mahogany or walnut furniture, and bedrooms of this treat-
ment are very fittingly furnished with enamelled suites to match. Where
the interior walls are finished with rough sand plaster, as found in
Spanish, Italian, and early English houses, and having dark stained
woodwork, the call is for oak or walnut furniture given a dull polish.
The general character of the furnishings of the living room should
be in keeping with the architecture of the house, although strictly Period
rooms are not advocated because of their suggestion of formality—a
little variety lends interest, provided the harmony is there.
The small home is more often best furnished with no more than one
chair to match the settee and a few odd chairs. Overstuffed settees and
awkward lounging chairs are not fitting, especially the pieces with big
wide spring arms, which are bad in design, clumsy looking and
ungraceful.
Simplicity and good proportion should be the keynote in the furnish-
ing of the small house, and the home builder should seek the following
qualities in his furnishings—utility, comfort, simplicity in design, con-
struction and finish. The possession of these features will be a source of
never-ceasing pleasure, and a good investment indeed.
In conclusion, it might be said that while original cost is an important
point, it should not prove the bar to quality and service, which count
most in the long run. The cheapest often proves to be the most expen-
sive in the end. Start with the most-needed pieces and have them good,
then add suitable pieces occasionally, as funds become available. The
importance of having the home tastefully and harmoniously furnished
cannot be too strongly stressed, for environment is a potent factor in
man’s development. It is in the home that the major part of one’s life is
spent, and it is there that the child receives its first impressions. It is
only by attractive surroundings that we can hope to develop our artistic
sense and refinement of taste.
Decorating and Furnishing the Home


The Home Setting
Which should come first—the garden or the house? This is not a
restatement of the old dilemma about the hen and the egg, but a really
serious question. How often do you see a house that would be beautiful
if only it were not spoilt by carelessness, or lack of thought about the
way the trees and shrubs are grouped about it, and about the use of
angles and slopes in the area it is built upon.
The point of the question is that before a house is built, the ground
is there, more fertile or more easy to work in some places than in others;
slopes are there which will influence the drainage of flower beds and
lawns, possibly some trees or shrubs are there, already growing well.
These mean that if the garden is not actually in existence before the
house, many regrets are saved by having the garden plan prepared
before a sod is taken out for the foundations. An example occurred
recently of a house in the midst of an old garden. The owner especially
desired a straight approach from the gateway to door, a hedge had
beautifully grown, and some fine old bushes were in satisfactory
positions. Because the house had been built 3 feet in the wrong
direction, the present gap in the hedge must be filled in, and a fresh
one made, while some of the shrubs have had to go.
It is a simple thing to move a house about on paper until the very
best position is discovered. Let us now consider some of the factors
that should be taken into account in moving it about.
1. What is your idea of a garden? Is it merely to provide good
views from the windows, or is it to be a place of seclusion where you
can “walk in the cool of the day,” or where quiet hours can be spent?
Even small plots of ground can partake of either quality—some of both.
Are you thinking of nothing but flowers and shrubs, or would you like
a kitchen garden as well? Is the garden to be a hobby of your own —
do you want your labor reduced to a minimum—or will you have the
services of a gardener?
Decisions on these points will affect the type of beds you will need,
the extent of lawns, and the retention of any trees or shrubs that are
at present on the site. Roses require one treatment, shade trees another;
annuals, a third—all must be considered as far as possible in advance.
Next we may think of the nature of the ground itself—the type of
soil—here, clay: there, sand; in one place, poor; in another, rich; it will
lead you to a vision of possibilities. Perhaps the soil to be taken out
for the foundations can be used. Where will it be placed? One spot
will grow a shade tree; another can be easily trenched for sweet peas
and other annuals. An area with rock close to the surface might pro-
duce a good lawn with little trouble. Your favorite flower may need


a southerly aspect, or should be sheltered from prevailing winds. Some
plants require much water —we can place them in moist areas and decide
where stand pipes are to be. But this leads us to the next point.
On the natural grades depend not only the draining of the various
parts of the garden, but also the appearance of the massed greenery and
bright colours when the plants are grown. Much can be done by the
thoughtful use of slopes—flatness has its own attraction, and doubtless
you will think of one level piece of turf at least for chairs and table;
but “the bank on which the wild thyme grows” is only one of many
references from the poets to the joy flowing from a contemplation of
a slope of colour.
Low bushes which might be hidden can be placed high and add their
quota to the beauty of the whole.
Planting.
One of the most famous gardeners of to-day, Miss Gertrude Jekyll,
has said: “I am strongly of the opinion that the possession of a quantity
of plants, however good the plants may be, and however ample their
number, does not make a garden, and it seems to me that the duty
we owe to our gardens and to our own bettering in our gardens is so
to use the plants that they shall form beautiful pictures: and that while
delighting our eyes, they should be always training those eyes to a
more exalted criticism.”
It depends entirely upon the planting whether a garden shall become
a dream of beauty, “a place of perfect rest and refreshment of mind and
body,” or a place in which everything is jarring and displeasing. Every
plant must be placed with such thoughtful care and distinct intention
as to form part of a picture or series of pictures.
The Home Setting.
So often a tree or shrub is placed just where there happens to be
room for it, with no thought for its neighbours, and the effect they will
give together. The garden designer uses plants as an artist uses his
paints. The list of plants drawn up by the former is frequently ridiculed
by practical gardeners, who think in terms of “specimens,” and expensive
varieties of plants that are hard to rear! He has a secret scorn for
the plant that “you can’t kill with an axe.” On the other hand, the
designer is delighted when the plants that are going to give the desired
effect possess this quality. Then he knows that with a minimum of
attention the plantings will flourish and the garden develop in the way
that his imagination had pictured.
The Home Setting


Such a lot of plant material goes to the making of a picturesque
garden from the prostrate growing thyme, growing between paving
stones, to the trees that form the background for the house and garden.
Not until the planting, that is going to ensure us a garden, no matter
how we neglect to plant annuals, is done, can we stop to consider the
things that will be far more beautiful with a good background. 1 refer
to roses, gladioli, dahlias, and all those plants that are collected with
an enthusiasm that is sometimes inclined to forget the background and
enframement for them.
Perhaps the most important thing to stress in the designing of
gardens is the necessity for more trees; a little observation of the
pictures of some of the most beautiful gardens in the world will show
how indispensable they are, and how impossible to achieve similar effects
without planting trees.
Neglected Opportunities.
Two opportunities that are frequently forgotten are the use of open
water as beautiful in itself, and the provision of places for resting to
enjoy the surroundings. Not every garden has room for an actual
fountain or bank, but where possible and desired, one of these can be
the very heart of the garden.
A garden is a Lovesome thing. God wot!
Rose plot,
Fringed pool,
Ferned grot —
The veriest school
Of peace; and yet the fool
Contends that God is not —
Not God! In garden! When the eve is cool?
Nay, but I have a sign:
’Tis very sure God walks in mine.
— T. E. Brown.
The Home Setting


The water color drawings and decorative art work
in this publication have been executed in our studio
by Mr. F. H. Sanders, and is an indication of the
service that awaits you. The printing has
been done by the Alliance Printing Co.,
43-47 Lonsdale St., Melb.
