

TWOPENCE.
Patriotic Pamphlets.
No. 11
HOW
GERMANS
INTRIGUE
Some of Russia’s
Difficulties.
1/5/16.
CRITCHLEY PARKER,
Australian Statesman and Mining Standard,
Melbourne and Sydney,
1916.


HOW GERMANS INTRIGUE.
An article by Dr. E. J. Dillon, which appeared in the “Contem-*
porary Review” for February, is of more than ordinary interest
to us in Australia, although its subject was “Some of Russia's
Difficulties,” because it shows the way in which Germany, under
the mask of friendship, caught Russia in a net of intrigue, which
threatened to ruin her. Russia, in the first place, was kept in
the grip of German financial institutions; secondly, German colo-
nies scattered throughout the Empire, w r ere kept in close touch
with one another and with Berlin; thirdly, there was direct med-
dling with and control of Russian politics; fourthly, Russia was
made absolutely dependent on Germany for its munitions of war.
Some of the facts put forward by Dr. Dillon are simply astounding.
There is the fact, for instance, that Miinnich, the famous soldier
and Minister of the Tsarina Anna, nearly two hundred years ago,
when he established a school of officers in Petrograd, eliminated
Russian history from the programme as superfluous, but allowed
German history to remain. While only eighteen out of 255 students
studied the Russian language, 237 of them studied German. This
Teutonic supremacy continued down to the outbreak of the present
war, and year by year the servants of the Kaiser pursued steadily
their work of bringing the Empire of the Tsar mqre and more into
subjection. To quote Dr. Dillon: “At the Court they have always
been well represented, and in the ranks of the inarticulate and
Parliamentary Opposition they have also been playing a noteworthy
part. In factories and other industrial and commercial institutions
they arranged strikes, called meetings, and hatched conspiracies
at critical junctures when it was to Germany’s interest that Russia’s
attention should be riveted upon home affairs. No Parliamentary
Bill could be privately drafted, no railway scheme could be secretly
discussed, no Ministerial measure could be canvassed, nay, seldom
could a confidential report be drawn up to the Emperor himself
without the knowledge of the Berlin authorities and the occasional
intervention of their agents in Petrograd. It is interesting to note
that in 1914 a secret memorandum of a highly confidential char-
acter, from a statesman to the Tsar, found its way to Berlin soon
after it had been presented, and had a certain influence on the
decisions which led to the war.”
There are many other amazing facts told in the course of this
interesting article. One of them is that amongst the privileges
extended by the German Emperor to those of his subjects who went
to settle in Russian Poland was, strange to say,_ one permitting the
young men to dispense with their annual service in the ranks of
the German army so long as they discharged that duty under Ger-
man officers in Russian Poland. This privilege, it will be seen, is
of the same order as that extended under the Delbriick law to Ger-
mans who had settled in foreign countries and become naturalised.
The German colonies throughout Russia were numerous and ex;
tensive, and they retained their own language and sense of nation


ality. The descendants of Germans who settled in Novgorod 150
years ago still speak German, and consider themselves Germans,
and had the temerity when Russia was suffering her severe reverses
last year to display their joy over them. These colonies controlled
several of the Zemstvos, and contrived to gain considerable influence
in the election of the Duma, and there is reason to believe from
other sources than this to which we are here referring, that land
taken up by these Teuton colonists was very frequently taken up
with a view to the helping on of German strategy in the event of
a war. , . ,
In the business world the same thing happened. As throughout
the British Empire the entire metal market was collared Uy the
Germans, so they monopolised metallurgical works in Russia. And
consider this“ Contracts in Russia were appropriately drafted in
the German language, being directed to the promotion of German
interests. Incipient and even long-established Russian firms were
either killed by unfair competition or compelled to enter the syn-
dicates and forego their national character. Inventions and new
appliances were tested, plagiarised, and employed in tlm service of
the Fatherland. And while preparing for the war which was to
set Germany above the nations —Deutschland liber Alles —these syn-
dicates followed the policy dictated from Berlin, sowed discord be-
tween Russian firms and various State departments, organised strikes,
and paid the strikers in competing establishments, and thus de-
prived the Russian State of industrial organs on which it would
necessarily have to rely in war time. To give but one example
of this cleverly devised attack, the cotton industry of Russia was
in the hands of the Germans when war was declared. Another of
the most important groups of Russian industries is that of naphtha.
When this precious liquid is dear, many of the lesser works have
to close; when it is cheap, even small industrial enterprises are
able to go on working. By way of obtaining complete control of
this vital element of Russia’s industrial life, the Deutsche Bank
went to work to form a syndicate, had a number of private wells
bought up, united them in one, acquired numerous shares in Rus-
oil companies, and had the manager of another German bank
—the well-known Disconto Gesellschaft —made a member of the
Board of the Russian Nobel Company. One of the results of this
ingenious deal was a sharp rise in the prices of all products and
some of the by-products of naphtha. The increase continued at an
alarming rate, filling the pockets of the German shareholders, whose
syndicates received the oil at cost price for their own consumption,
whilst Russian firms were forced to acquire it at fhe market value
or to shut down their works. Among the worst sufferers from
these anti-Russian tactics were the steam navigation companies of
the Volga, which had jealously warded off all attempts to Ger-
manise them.”
It is hardly necessary to say that the very defence of Russia was
in German hands. Dr. Dillon declares, for instance, that “half
the shares of the celebrated Puteloff munitions factory are said
to belong to the Austrian Skoda works. At the outset of the pre-
sent warj when Russia’s needs were growing greater and more press-
HOW GERMANS INTRIGUE.


ing, the works controlled by Germans and Germany’s agents dim-
inished their output steadily.” In fact, Germany has played much
the same game with Russia as she has played with France and Great
Britain. As in France and Russia she has subsidised revoluntionaries,
so in Great Britain she has worked through that section of the
Liberal party which sought to destroy Britain’s power by cutting
down her Navy; as she had her spies and her agents everywhere
throughout Great Britain and France, many of them in positions
of trust, so in Russia she had employees and accomplices in the
very highest circles: as she had representatives in nearly every
commune of France through which hep troops were likely to pass
and in the British House of Commons, so in the Russian Duma
and in the Russian Court she possessed an influenue that was alto-
gether opposed to the interests of Russia. Does not the story of
her intrigues in all these countries make it obvious that no country
that has any desire to live and to retain its independence can afford
to retain within its midst any of the subjects of this treacherous
and unscrupulous nation? —Statesman and Mining Standard, April 27,
1916.
The following is the. text of the article referred to;—
SOME OF RUSSIA’S DIFFICULTIES.
Of the three Entente Powers challenged by Germany in 1914,
Russia was by far the worst equipped for the unwonted effort which
the European War demanded of each. For her liberty of action,
and, in some cases, even her liberty of choice, was hampered by a
financial, economic, and political network which Germany had slowly
and almost imperceptibly woven over the entire population. In the
fine meshes of this net several organs of national life were caught,
immobilised and connected with the Fatherland. And it was not
until they strove to move and discharge their functions that the
Russian nation became fully conscious of its desperate plight. Ger-
man intrigue and subterranean scheming, under the mask of sym-
pathy, now for the autocracy, now for socialism, had effected far-
reaching conquests in the Empire, which few even among observant
politicians appear to have realised. These innovations were em-
bodied in the thraldom of Russian banks to German financial insti-
tutions; in the splendid organisation which kept old German colonies
that were scattered over the Tsardom in touch with each other and
co-ordinated their action; in the eloquent advocates and influential
dignitaries who contributed to the furtherance of German ideas and
interests and swayed the policy of the State; and in the depen-
dence of the great Russian Empire on its enemy for munitions, and
almost every other technical necessary of war.
From the days of the great Peter this Teuton influence had been
creeping imperceptibly over the Slav race like some cancerous soul-
growth, It infused a subtle poison in the State organism, the most
appalling effects of which are only now assuming visible shape. Two
palace revolutions were brought about by a national reaction against
the predominance of this foreign influence, which was resented by
the people not merely because it was alien, but largely also because
HOW GERMANS INTRIGUE.


of its unscrupulous and ruthless character. Some of the most
atrocious cruelties which students of Russian history associate with
court and political life in the Tsardom during the best part of two
centuries had their sources in the sheer malignity of Teuton Minis-
ters who spoke and acted in the name of the autocrat of the moment.
It is characteristic that the Minister Munnich, in the school for
officers which he founded in Petersburg, had Russian history elimi-
nated from the programme as superfluous. German history being al-
lowed to remain; and that out of 255 students, only eighteen
studied the Russian language, whereas 237 applied themselves to
German. The first Sovereign to rebel against this Teuton supre-
macy in his Empire was the late Alexander 111., who made no
secret of his profound dislike for German -ways. But as the Rus-
sian proverb has it, “one man in the field, is not a soldier.” Her-
cules, to cleanse the Augean stables, had need of the water of a river,
and the anti-German Tsar could not hope to purge his dominions of
the Teuton poison without the co-operation of his army of officials.
And as passive resistance was their attitude, his reform scheme
was fruitless. As a matter of cool calculation, the only hope of
freeing Russia from the meshes of the German net was a war be-
tween the two peoples. And all radical legislation had to be post-
poned until then.
In the meanwhile, the Germans, having organised and primed their
agents, have been Teutonising Russia cunningly and effectively.
With the precious assistance of their own kith and kin settled in the
Baltic provinces and elsewhere, they employed the never-failing ex-
pedient of taking an active and, when possible, a leading part in
domestic Russian politics, and invariably on both sides. At the
Court they have always been ■well represented, and in the ranks of
the inarticulate and Parliamentary Opposition they have also been
playing a noteworthy part. In factories and other industrial and
commercial institutions they arranged strikes, called meetings, and
hatched conspiracies at critical junctures when it was to Germany’s
interest that Russia’s attention should be riveted upon home affairs.
No Parliamentary Bill could be privately drafted, no railway scheme
could be secretly discussed, no Ministerial measure could be can-
vassed; nay, seldom could a confidential report be drawn up to the
Emperor himself without the knowledge of the Berlin authorities
and the occasional intervention of their agents in Petrograd. It is
interesting to note that in 1914 a secret memorandum of a highly
confidential character, from a statesman to the Tsar, found its way
to Berlin soon after it had been presented, and had a certain influ-
ence on the decisions which led to the war.
The work af economic interpenetration carried on under the aegis
of such powerful patrons and resourceful coadjutors was greatly
facilitated by the German colonies scattered over Russia. Many
of these foreigners had been invited by Catherine 11., receiving large
grants of land and various privileges which enabled them to flourish
at the expense of the native population, on which they loaked down
with open contempt. In Poland there were w T ell over 500,000 Ger-
man colonists, besides a large number of newcomers, whose unwrtiten
“privileges” included, strange to say, occasional permission to their
HOW GERMANS INTRIGUE.


young men liable to serve a few years annually in the ranks of the
German army to discharge that duty under German officers m Rus-
sian Poland! In the Ukraine and the most fertile districts of the
Volga basin hundreds of thousands of Germans lived, thrived, an
upheld the traditions as well as the language of the Fatherland,
under the eyes of tolerant local authorities. ,
Hard by old Novgorod, the once famous Russian republic ana
cradle of the Russian State, a number of German colonists settled
some 150 years ago. The population of two of these settlements now
numbers several thousand souls, descendants of the original settlers,
in the fourth or fifth' generation. They had time enough, one would
think, during that century and a half, to assimilate Russian ways
and to acquire a thorough knowledge of the Russian tongue. Well,
these colonists do not yet speak the language of the country in which
they and their forbears have been living for over 150 years iney
still consider themselves German, and if you ask them who their hove-
reio-n is they answer unhesitatingly—Kaiser Wilhelm ! During Rus-
sia’s recent military reverses, which threatened for a time to culmi-
nate in the capture of Riga, and possibly of Petrograd as well, these
parasites in the body politic of Russia displayed their joy in various
unseemly ways, which aroused the indignation of their Slav neigh-
bours. In one of their schools the Russian visiting authorities were
received with demonstrations of hostility. It is usual for Die por-
trait of the Russian Tsar to be set up in every school in the Empire.
In one of these educational establishments it was discovered in the
lavatory with the eyes gouged out. ,
Lon<* before this war Berlin had became alive to the importance
of these colonies as factors in the work of pacific interpenetration
and political propaganda. Wandering teachers from the Fatherland
were accordingly sent among them to link them up with their breth-
ren at home, and fan the embers of patriotism which long residence
in the Tsardom had not quenched. Little by little, the political
fruits of these apostolic labours began to show themselves: the colo-
nists, whose main preoccupation had ever been to occupy the most
fertile soil in the district, began to take over the approaches to Rus-
sia’s strategic plans, and to display an absorbing interest in Russian
politics. Several Zemstvos fell into their hands, and were practi-
cally controlled by them, and they contrived to gain considerable in-
fluence in the elections of the Duma.
The chance of a useful part for these German colonies to perform
having thus unexpectedly arisen on the horizon, they seized it with
promptitude and utilised it with the thoroughness that characterises
their race. The number, prosperity, and influence of the colonies
grew rapidly, land that had belonged to the Russian peasantry was
taken over by these foreign parasites, and while the Tsar’s Ministers
were toiling and moiling to transport hundreds of thousands of
Russian husbandmen and their families in search of land beyond
the Ural Mountains to the virgin forests of Eastern Siberia, there
in the very heart of European Russia were hundreds of thousands
of intruders, who. with the help of their German Colonial banks,
were acquiring additional tracts of land from which their native
owners had been ousted.
HOW GERMANS INTRIGUE.


I pointed out this anomaly over and over again, and long before
the war I described it in an article in this “Review.” The well-known
German Professor, Hans Delbriick, replied shortly afterwards, also
in the “Contemporary Review,”* denying point-blank the truth of
my statements, which were drawn from official sources, and con-
firmed by the evidence of my senses. For I had visited several of
the colonies in question. Besides these German settlements, there
had also been a number of German industrial and commercial
establishments in the Empire, which, at first nowise harmful, were
taken in hand by emissaries from Berlin, linked up together, affili-
ated to one or other of the great financial houses of Germany, and
transformed into redoubtable instruments of Teuton domination.
Capital was subscribed, syndicates were formed, railway-building
and electro-technical industries were organised, Russia’s railway
policy was modified, and metallurgical works were monopolised by
the Germans. Here again financial institutions discharged the func-
tions of motive-power. At the beginning, about thirty million
roubles were subscribed for the creation of banks, and by dint of
push, importunity, secret influence and intrigue, these institutions
received on deposit the savings of the Russian peasant, merchant,
landowner, and official, which' finally mounted up to several hundreds
of millions. With this money they were enabled to control the
markets and constrain Russian institutions and individuals to bow
to their will.
Contracts in Russia were appropriately drafted in the German
language, being directed to the promotion of German interests. In-
cipient and even long-established Russian firms were either killed by
unfair competition or compelled to enter the syndicates and forego
their national character. Inventions and new appliances were tested,
plagiarised, and employed in the service of the Fatherland. And
while preparing for the war which was to set Germany above the
nations —Deutschland liber Alles —these syndicates followed the policy
dictated from Berlin, sowed discord between Russian firms and vari-
ous State departments, organised strikes, and paid the strikers in
competing establishments, and thus deprived the Russian State of
industrial organs on which it would necessarily have to rely in war-
time. To give but one example of this cleverly devised attack, the
cotton industry of Russia was in the hands of the Germans when
war was declared. Another of the most important groups of Rus-
sian industries is that of naphtha. When this precious liquid is
dear, many of the lesser works have to close; when it is chean, even
small industrial enterprises are able to go on working. By way
of obtaining complete control of this vital element of Russia’s indus-
trial life, the Deutsche Bank went to work to form a syndicate,
had a number of private wells bought up, united them in one,
acquired numerous shares in Russian oil companies, and had the
manager of another German bank —the well-known Disconto Gesell-
scbaft —made a member of the Board of the Russian Nobel Company.
One of the results of this ingenious deal was a sharp rise in the
prices of all the products and some of the bye-products of naphtha.
*Cf. “Contemporary Review,” February, 1911.
HOW GERMANS INTRIGUE.


The increase continued at an alarming rate, filling the pockets of
the German shareholders, whose syndicates received the oil at cost
price for their own consumption, while Russian firms were forced to
acquire it at the market value or to shut down their works. Among
the worst sufferers from these anti-Russian tactics were the steam-
navigation companies of the Volga, which had jealously warded off
all attempts to Germanise them.
In conditions as restrictive as these, it was well-nigh impossible
for Russian industry to hold its own, much less prosper and grow.
And only the most vigorous and best-organised enterprises in the
Empire, like that of the Morozoffs in Moscow, managed to pursue
their way unscathed. In Russian Poland, where textile industries
flourished, and the total annual" production; was valued at 294 million
roubles, more than one-third of these industries belonged to the
Germans, whose yearly output amounted to more than one-half of
the grand total, i.e., to 150 million roubles.* In all these industrial
and commercial campaigns the German prime movers had carried
out their operations more or less openly. But where interests directly
affecting the defences of the Empire were concerned, caution was
the first condition of success, and, as usual, the Teutons proved
supple and adaptable. By way of levying an attack against the
ship-building industry, they pushed shaky Russian concerns into the
foreground, while studiously keeping themselves out of view. Thus
in one case new Russian banks were founded, and old ones in a
state of decay were revived by means of German capital, and encour-
aged to form a syndicate with the Nikolayeffsky ship-building works
and certain foreign banks. An official inquiry, presided over by
Senator Neidhardt, lately revealed the significant fact that each firm
of this syndicate had bound itself to demand identical prices for
Russian ships, and under no circumstances to abate an iota of the
tender. And it was further agreed that these prices should be so
calculated as to yield to the members of the syndicate one hundred
per cent, profit.
That allegation is not a mere inference, nor a rumour. It is an
established fact. Neither is the proof circumstantial; it consists
of the original agreement in writing signed by the authorised repre-
sentatives of the institutions concerned! The data were laid be-
fore the members of the Russian Duma by A. N. Khvostoff.t Thus
the Russian peasant is taxed for the creation of a fleet, and the
Duma patriotically votes a credit of, say, 500 million roubles for the
purpose. If the ship-building companies and their financial bankers
were honest, the aim could be achieved. But in the circumstances
what it comes to is that the nation must pay 500 millions more, in
order to get what it wants. And this tax of a hundred per cent, is
levied by German parasites on the-Russian people. One might ran-
sack the history of corruption in every country of Europe without
finding anything to beat this Teutonic device, which at the same time
gratified the cupidity of the money-makers and dealt a stunning
blow at the Russian State. Half of the shares of the celebrated
*Cf. Duma debates of August, 1914.
tCf. “Novoye Vremya,” August 17th, 1915.
HOW GERMANS INTRIGUE.


Year.
Germany supplied.
Britain supplied.
1898-1902 .. .
34.6 per cent.
18.6 per cent.
1908-1907 . . .
37.2
14.8
1908-1910 , . .
41.6
13.4
1911
45.4
12.2
1912
47.5
12.6
1913
49.6
13.3
Puteloff munitions factory are said to belong to the Austrian Skoda
Works.
At the outset of the present war, when Russia’s needs were grow-
ing greater and more pressing, the works controlled by Germans and
Germany’s agents, diminished their output steadily. In lieu of
turning out, say, 30,000 poods of iron they would produce only 5000,
and offer instead of the remainder verbal explanations to the effect
that lack of fuel or damage to the machinery had caused the dimi-
nution. Again, one of these übiquitous banks buys a large amount
of corn or sugar, but instead of having it conveyed to the districts
suffering from a dearth of that commodity, deposits it in a safe
place and waits. In the meantime prices go up until they reach
the prohibition level. The people suffer, murmur, and blame the
Government. Nor is it only the average man who thus complains.
In the Duma the authorities have been severely blamed for leaving
the population to the mercy of those money-grubbers whom German
capital and Russian tribute are making rich. “Averse to go to the
root of the matter,"’ one Deputy complained, “the Government
punishes a woman in the market for selling a herring five copecks
dearer than the current price, and at the same time it permits the
Governors to promulgate their own arbitrary laws regulating imports
and exports from their own provinces, so Russia is split up into sixty
different regions, each one of which pursues its own policy un-
checked.”
The importance of the role played by the banks financed by Ger-
man capital in Russia can hardly be overstated. By their very
character they advance money on the crops and take railway and
steamship invoices as guarantees—they are centres of information
respecting everybody and everything that goes on in the district and
the province. I write with personal knowledge of their working, for
I watched it at close quarters in the Volga district and the "Cau-
casus with the assistance of an experienced bank manager. Their
political influence can be far-reaching, and the services "which they
are enabled to render to the Fatherland may be appreciable. As
extenders of Germany’s economic power in the Empire they merited
uncommonly well of their own kindred. Thus of Russia’s total im-
ports in the year 1910, which were valued at 953 million roubles,
Germany alone contributed goods computed at 440 millions. They
consisted mainly of raw cotton, machinery, prepared skins, chemical
products, and wool.
How steadily our rivals kept ousting the British from Russian
markets by those means may be gathered from the following com-
parative tables. The percentage of Russia’s requirements supplied
by the two competing nations varied during the fifteen years be-
tween 1898 and 1913, as follows:
HOW GERMANS INTRIGUE.


In the year 1901 Germany provided 31 per cent, of the total value
of Russia’s imports; in 1905 her contribution was 42 per cent; and
the increase went steadily forward, reaching over 50 per cent in the
year 1913. If we add to this the net profits of German industrial
and commercial undertakings in the Russian Empire, we may form a
notion of the appropriateness of the comparison which likened the
Tsardom to a vast German colony. The entire economic system
of the country was rapidly approaching the colonial type. And to
these economic results one should add the political.
At the outset the main motive of this industrial invasion was the
quest of commercial profit. Subconsciously political objects may
have been vaguely present to the minds of these pioneers, as indeed
they have ever been to the various categories of German emigrants
in every land, European and other. But in the first instance the
creation of German industries in Russia was part of a deliberate
plan to elude the heavy tariffs on manufactured goods. It has been
aptly described by an Italian publicist* as legal contraband, and
it supplies us with a striking example of German tenacity. For it
attained its object fully. About three-fourths of the textile and
metallurgical production in the Tsardom, the entire chemical indus-
try, the breweries, 85 per cent, of the electrical works, and 70 per
cent, of gas production were German. And of the capital invested
in private railways, no less than 628 million roubles belongs to Ger-
mans. Even Russian municipalities were wont to apply to Germany
for their loans, and of the first issues of thirty-five Russian munici-
pal loans no less than twenty-two were raised in the Fatherland.-}-
The necessity of waging war against this potent enemy within the
gates intensified Russia’s initial difficulties to an extent that can
hardly be realised abroad, and was a constant source of unexpected
and disconcerting obstacles. Some time before the opening of the
war, a feeling of restiveness, an impulse to throw off the German
yoke, had been gradually displaying itself in the press, in commer-
cial circles, and in the Duma. These aspirations and strivings were
focussed in the firm resolve of the Russian Government, under M.
Kokofftseff, to refuse to renew the Treaty of Commerce which was
enabling Germany to floo3 the Empire with her manufactures, and
to extort a ruinous tribute from the Russian nation. Two years
more and the negotiations on this burning topic would have been
inaugurated, and there is little doubt in my mind—there was none
in the mind of the late Count Witte —that the upshot of these con-
versations would have been a Russo-Germart war. For there was
no less drastic way of freeing the people from the domination of
German technical industries and capital, and the consequent absorp-
tion of native enterprise.
When diplomatic relations were broken off and war was finally
declared, Germany was already the unavowed protectress of Russia.
And when people point, as they frequently do, to the war as the
greatest blunder ever committed bv the Wilhelmstrasse since the
Fatherland became one and indivisible, I feel unable to see with
♦Virgrinio Oayda.
■{•“Stampa,” September'2nd, 1915.
HOW GERMANS INTRIGUE.


them eye to eye. Seemingly, it was Indeed an egregious mistake, but
then so obvious were its probable consequences that even a German
of the Jingo type would gladly have avoided it. But appearances
are deceptive." We are to forget that in Berlin it was perfectly
well known that Russia was determined to withdraw from her
Teutonic neighbour the series of one-sided privileges accorded to her
by the then existing Treaty of Commerce, and that this determina-
tion would be persisted in, even at the risk of war. And for war
the year 1914 appeared to be far more auspicious than any subse-
quent date.
Handicapped by those foreign parasites which were systematically
deadening the force of its arm, the Russian nation drew the sword.
Improvisation —the worst possible form of energy in a war crisis
—was now the only resource left to the Tsar’s Ministers. And
problems of a financial order had first of all to be faced. In this,
as in other spheres, the country was bound by and to Germany, so
that the task may fairly be characterised as one of the most ardu-
ous that was ever tackled by the Finance Minister of any country—
even if we include the resourceful Calonne. And M. Bark, who had
recently come into office, was new not only to the work, but also to
the politics of finance in general. Happily, his predecessor who,
whatever his critics may advance to the contrary, was one of the
most careful stewards the Empire has ever possessed, had accumu-
lated in the Imperial Bank a gold resetve of over 1603 million
roubles, besides a deposit abroad of 140,720 roubles. Incidentally
it may be noted that no other bank in the world has ever disposed
of such a vast gold reserve.
Although one of the richest countries in Europe, Russia’s wealth
is still under the earth, and therefore merely potential. Her burden
of debt was heavy. For at the outbreak of the war the disturbing
effects of the Manchurian camp.aign and its domestic sequel, which
had cost the country 3016 million roubles, had not yet been wholly
shaken off. And, unlike her enemy, Russia had no special war fund
to draw upon. As the national industries were unable to furnish
the necessary supplies to the army, large orders had to be placed
abroad and paid for in gold. At the same moment Russia’s export
trade practically ceased, and together with it the one means of ap-
preciably easing the strain. The issue of paper money in various
forms was increased, loans were raised, private capital was with-
drawn from the country, various less abundant sources of public
revenue vanished, and the favourable balance of trade dropped from
442 million roubles to 85% millions. Germany had her war fund,
in addition to which she had levied a pronerty tax of a milliard
marks a year before the outbreak of hostilities; she further drew in
enormous sums in gold from circulation, and generally mobilised her
finances systematically.
But Russia was compelled to improvise and make bricks without
straw. Her war on a front of two thousand versts Ion? had to be
waged with whatever materials happened to be available. Japan
who. I have little doubt, will be found at the close of the great
struggle to have acquired territory as well as pecuniary profit for
her pains, exerted herself to provide munitions for her new friend
HOW GERMANS INTRIGUE.


and ally. The United States, Great Britain, and France also con-
tributed their quota. For many of these orders placed abroad gold
had to be exported, and as Russia has no other natural way of im-
porting gold but by selling corn, a sensible depreciation of the rouble
resulted. Great Britain and France have also had to make heavy
purchases abroad for their military needs, but these two countries
can still export wares and keep the payments in gold within certain
limits. Even Italy receives a noteworthy part of her annual reve-
nue in the shape of emigrants’ Remittances from abroad. But
once Russia’s gates were closed and her corn had to remain in the
granaries, elevators, or at railway stations, the shortage in her reve-
nue became absolute. During the first three month's of last year
the value of Russian exports over the Finnish frontier and the Cau-
casian coast of the Black Sea was only 23 million roubles, showing
a falling off of about 93 per cent., as compared with the worth of
the produce exported during the corresponding three months of the
preceding year.
It is a curious fact that part of this reduced trade continued to be
carried on with Germany for months after the war had begun. A
Russian publicist has remarked that at the opening of the campaign
the voice of the nation was heard saying: “Corn we have in plenty,
and vegetables and salt. It is we who feed Europe. Germany
will therefore starve without our corn. Our armies may retreat,
but our corn will go with them, and the more the Germans advance
into Russia, the further they move away from their bread.” In
this the average Russian saw a pledge of victory. But before six
months had elapsed, the everyday man grew indignant. For he
learned that his corn was being conveyed through Finland and
Sweden into Germany, and in such vast quantities as had never be-
fore been heard of. Here is a street scene illustrative of this traffic
and the feelings it aroused. A long string of carts laden with flour
blocks one of the Petrograd streets leading to a bridge over the
Neva. A Oeneral, walking with his wife, stops one of the drivers
and asks: “Wherever are you taking the flour to?” “Where do
you suppose? Sure, we’re taking it to the Germans. We have to
feed the creatures. They are a bit faint.” “There you see!” ex-
claimed the General to his wife, “didn’t I tell you? And every
morning without fail the same long line of carts blocks the streets
while our corn is being taken to the Germans!”* It is to be
feared that this commerce has not yet wholly ceased.
That that story of trading with the enemy is no idle anecdote is
evident from the circumstances, based on official Russian statistics,
that during ten months from August, 1914, to May, 1915, Russia
bought from Germany no less than thirty-six million roubles’ worth
of manufactures. That is one of the almost inevitable consequences
of improvisation. Some months after the outbreak of the war the
Imperial Government levied a duty of a hundred per cent, on all
commodities coming from Germany, Austria-Hungary, and Turkey.
That was assumed to be a prohibitive tariff. But it failed to keep
our imports from the Fatherland. In the one month of April last
*Cf. “Novove Vremya,” February 24th, 1915.
HOW GERMANS INTRIGUE.


year, Germany sent three million roubles’ worth of manufactured
goods into Russia, and in May two and a-half million roubles’ worth.
.The explanation of this anomaly lies in the unforeseen and enormous
rise of prices in the home markets. Some metal wares, for instance,
various kinds of instruments and of wire appliances, etc., are not
to be had in Russia for love or money. Consequently a hundred
per cent, duty is but a heavy tax paid by the consumer, not an
effective prohibition.* Since then, lam assured, the Government
has adopted stringent measures which some people believe to have
put an end to that form of trading with the enemy.
it is hard for foreigners to realise the plight to which Russia has
been reduced by the closing of her gates. As the Nile waters were
the source of _ Egypt’s prosperity, so abundant Russian harvests
constitute the ichor which flows in the veins of the Russian nation.
Without superfluous corn for exportation, the State would be unable
to meet its obligations, maintain its solvency, or provide the motive
power of progress. The exportation of agricultural produce was
the fountain head not only of Russia’s material well-being, but of her
moral and cultural evolution. Everything, in a word, depended
upon plentiful harvests. And, suddenly, the gates were closed,
the corn was stored, and the nation left without its revenue. No-
body but a Russian or one who has lived long in the country, can
realise fully all that this tremendous blow connotes. Parentheti-
cally, it may be remarked that it adds a motive, and one of the
most potent, to those which inspire the heroic sacrifices of the
people, quickening the flame of devotion to their cause. For Russia
is now literally fighting for her own liberty, for escape from the iron
circle that shut her off from the sea, and isolates her from the
Western world in which it is her ambition and her mission to plav a
helpful part. J
One needs no further explanation why the Russian Government
put pressure upon -M. Delcasse and Sir'Edward Grey to open the
Dardanelles route for the Russian corn. Neither is it to be won-
dered at that while the allied forces in Gallipoli were still grappling
with the Turks, the Tsar’s Minister should have thrust & into the
foreground the question of Constantinople and the Straits, and in-
sisted upon an immediate pragmatic settlement. True, that was
not statesmanship; it was anything but political wisdom; but at
any rate it was human on the part of all concerned. If this Titanic
struggle, in which Russia is perhaps the greatest sufferer, is to bring
her any palpable and enduring advantage, this, it was urged, can
take but one form—freedom from the preposterous restraints ’ that
bar her way to the sea, and through the sea to the outside world.
This and other pleas were powerful; but for that very reason and
for the purpose of realising her natural striving, I personally would
have negatived the Russian proposal, and left nothing undone to
ensure its withdrawal. For if I were asked to point to the efficient
cause of the Allies’ present lamentable plight in the Near East, I
should single out this premature arrangement and its necessary con-
sequences. Roumania and Bulgaria were at the moment as bitterly
*Cf. “Utro Rossiyi,” August 28th, 1915.
HOW GERMANS INTRIGUE.


opposed to Russia’s overlordship in the Dardanelles and her pos-
session of Constantinople as were France and Great Britain in the
days of yore. And they embodied their opposition in acts.
But besides her yield of corn, Russia also relied upon the State
railways and the vodka monopoly for a large contribution to her
annual income. The railways, many of which had formerly been
exploited at a loss —which increased with the growth of traffic
were in recent years being administered on relatively sound lines and
with growing profits. In the year 1913, Russia’s ordinary receipts
reached the astounding figure of 3415 million roubles, of which 813
millions were derived from the railways and 900 millions from
alcohol.
And here, again, the war brought stagnation and loss, Ihe
military needs of the Empire reduced ordinary traffic on the railways
to a minimum. Indeed, the amount of rolling stock available for
the conveyance of corn, coal, sugar, flour, meat and other supplies, is
so utterly inadequate that the pinch of want has been felt in some
of the most populous centres of European Russia. Wood fuel rose
in price by as much as 400 per cent, in Petrograd; a dearth of salt
made itself felt in various towns, including the two capitals; sugar
could not be had there at any price for a considerable time; meat
is still scarce in Petrograd; and corn was sold in many cities and
districts at exorbitant prices, while in other places it was literally
rotting. The embargo jdaced by the Government on the railways
was the chief cause of these severe privations. Lack of foresight
and enterprise, coupled with the greed of the middleman, also con-
tributed to the same results.
Even in normal times, Russia suffers frequently and severely from
insufficiency of ways of communication and means of transport.
All the northern zone of Siberia, for example, a country which,
seven times larger than France, is watered by one of the world’s
five greatest rivers, has but one line of railw'ay leading to the mar-
kets of Europe and Asia. Russia grows one-fifth of the world’s
grain supplies, yet money’s worth of the harvest at home is
always greatly depreciated in consequence of inadequate means of
conveyance. And over and over again the curious phenomenon had
attracted the attention of the Government and prompted legislative
measures, that Russian corn exported into Germany was regularly
re-exported thence into Finland and the Baltic provinces, which had
no cheap and direct access by rail or waterway to the centres of
export.
Again, Russia produces thousands of quintals of coal-tar; yet in
the "year 1913 she was obliged to import 2500 poods of it from
abroad, solely because the cost of importation was less than the cost
of transport in the interior! And already during this war 80 per
cent, of the textile industries of the Empire, which gave employment
to one-third of the total of Russian operatives, have had to be dis-
continued because coal and raw cotton could not be conveyed to
them in sufficient quantities. In Siberia, corn is so cheap that it is
to be had almost for the asking, and farmers there are passing
through a severe crisis. In Petrograd, on the other hand, it is
HOW GERMANS INTRIGUE.


being sold at famine prices; and in no case is more than 400 gramme*
delivered to a purchaser.*
It was in the face of these portentous losses and under the bat-
tering shock of doom that the Tsar, responding to a heroic impulse,
gave definiteness and compression to the vague yearning of the
Russian people to rid themselves of the vice of drunkenness and rise
to the higher life. And by a stroke of the pen he put a sudden
end to the “drunken budget,” prohibited the sale of vodka, and closed
the Government spirit shops. This entailed one of the most sud-
den and serious losses suffered by the Ministry of Finances. For
in the year 1913 —the last that concerns us here —the sale of vodka
had yielded 900 million roubles, and was steadily increasing. In
Great Britain and France, there is also a liquor question which
now and again claims the attention of reformers. But neither there
nor in any other country on the globe would such a drastic solution
as absolute prohibition be possible. The Russian people accepted
it willingly, and in numerous cases hailed it with joy.
The effect of this measure on the well-being of the population
has been superlatively beneficent. Materially and morally this en-
forced sobriety has revived all that was best among the latent ele-
ments of the national character. The war having taken away from
the rural districts a large percentage of the labourers who tilled
the fields, one might expect to see signs that the people have grown
poorer on that account. But the contrary is the case. The land-
tax is being paid with a punctuality that challenges admiration, and
it should not be forgotten that the tax in question is 250 per cent,
higher than it was before the opening of the war. During the
seventeen months that have gone by since July, 1914, hardly any of
the soldiers’ wives or families have petitioned the authorities to
allow them to defer payment. And not only are there increased
taxes to pay, but also obligatory contributions to the Zemsky fund,
out of w’hich the families of soldiers at the front are assisted.
These dues are also discharged with exemplary regularity and wil-
lingness.
And in addition to these patriotic efforts, the people are saving
money. Deposits are considerable, and are increasing. One
Zemsky institution writes: “The money confided to the co-operative
“societies already amounts to half a million roubles.” The indus-
trial chiefs of Moscow instituted an inquiry a short time ago into
the effects of the vodka prohibition on the operatives of the Moscow
district during the first three months as compared with the three
corresponding months of the preceding year. Replies were re-
ceived from 172 firms, which give employment to 2,147,000 m#i, or
about one-fourth of the entire working population of the Moscow
industrial province.
During those three months, the number of drunken bouts was less
by 13,457,000 working hours, or, say, 31 per cent. In the metallur-
gical works, the loss of productivity from the same cause had fallen
from 4to 2 per cent. The number of accidents had also decreased
by 8.7 per cent. The fines inflicted on workmen for disorderly con-
duct and negligence had dropped from 46,048 to 26,560 roubles, and
*Cf. Virginio. Gayda, “II Mattino,” November 20th-21st, 1915.
HOW GERMANS INTRIGUE .


the productivity of the men had risen by 4.4 per cent. The general
productivity of all hands had gone up by 7.1 per cent. On the
other hand, hunger and thirst for knowledge display themselves in
various and quaint ways. The demand for books can hardly be
satisfied. A desire to be able to write to their men-folk at the front
stimulates women and children to learn to read and write. Re-
sponding to a. general desire the authorities are opening after-
dinner schools for grown-ups. In the free reading-rooms provided
by the Zemstvos, the demand for books on Russian history, geo-
graphy, and war is considerably in excess of the supply. The halls
in which lectures are occasionally given are crowded, and the news-
paper has penetrated into the most sequestered country places.
There can be no doubt that sobriety is having a most salutary
effect on the Russian people, from whichever angle of vision one
may study the phenomena. They are become thrifty to a degree
calculated to surprise those who know them as wasteful and slovenly.
During the first twelvemonth of the war the savings banks deposits
increased by more than a milliard roubles, despite the increased
taxation, which had been regulated on a base that allowed for in-
creased savings in consequence of the vodka prohibition.
Meanwhile, however, the financial needs of the Government are
pressing, and the expedients by which they are being met must of
necessity partake of the character of an improvisation. And none
of them has had the desired effect of checking the depreciation of
the rouble, which is become a source of serious embarrassment.
Some Russian publicists hold that the unfavourable foreign exchange
is a result of the lack of an international financial convention, which,
if conceived in a spirit of generosity and carefully drafted, would
reduce the depreciation and raise the rouble to its specific level.
But theories of this extreme simplicity about problems so intricate
are valueless. The causes of the fall of the rouble are numerous, and
some of them almost elude analysis. Consequently, no simple formula
can cover them. One obvious ground is the blocking of Russia’s
normal way of importing gold which was by exporting part of the
harvests. Another is the suspension of the law introduced by the
late Count Witte, regulating the proportion between gold reserve
and paper currency. Witte often remarked to me that the sus-
pension of that law would have for its immediate effect a much
greater depreciation of the rouble than even financiers imagined.
At present the gold reserve is still considerable, but the fiduciary
issue of notes is much too large to encourage attempts to restore
such a ratio between them as would revive confidence and improve
the foreign exchange on Petrograd.
To my thinking, finances will play a more decisive part in the
present European struggle than is generally assumed. But Russia,
in spite of her present bewildering difficulties, thanks to her vast
economic resources and her unsuspected recuperative powers, is
likely to recover far more quickly than most of the other belligerents.
E. J. DILLON.
Wholly Set-up and Printed in Australia by Statesman and
Mining Standard, Pty. Ltd., Melbourne and Sydney.
HOW GERMANS INTRIGUE.
