

HOW TO
Read Tea Cups
Copyright Regd.
PRICE, 3d.


Buy Juicy Buds
Tiny Leaves for Flavor
Before they
unfurl in
their first
freshness,
tiny young
bud leaves
are full of
flavor.
In each packet of Bushells Blue Label Tea these
tiny leaves are carefully cured to imprison the rich
flavor, and multi-refined to assure purity. From
a pound packet you get more than 200 cups. This
means 7 big cups of delicious tea for less than Id.


Tea Cup Reading
The reading of tea cups is as old as the drink-
ing of tea. In ancient China much study was
given to foretelling of the future by tea-cup
reading.
In England during the last century it was quite
a fashionable cult, and the ladies of fashion took
as great an interest in reading tea cups as they do
to-day in playing Mah Jongg or Bridge.
Perhaps the chief reason for the continued
popularity of fortune-telling by tea leaves is that
it satisfies an innate desire to know what the
future has in store for us. Remarkable coinci-
dences have followed readings of the cup. But
aside from this, there is a fascination about it
which adds to the enjoyment of a chatty half-
hour over the tea cups. Everyone likes to take a
peep into the future, whether seriously or in fun.
If you believe in the language of symbolism,
you will take cup-reading seriously. You will
divine things from tea-leaves that would not sug-
gest themselves to others, and the accuracy of
your forecasts and observations may surprise
people.
The more cups you read, the more possibilities
you discover. One of the sources of mystery in
tea-cup reading is that no two formations are ever
exactly the same. Since the cult of tea-leaf read-
ing came out of China many hundreds of years
ago, it is doubtful whether any two cups have
ever been the same.


First Principles
In your first attempts at tea-cup reading, you
may find the leaves shapeless and meaningless in
the cup, even with the diagrams to guide you. It
is only gradually that you begin to recognise
familiar emblems. This is because the shapes
and signs are rarely exact; frequently they are
the merest suggestions of familiar objects.
Unless, therefore, you have an acute imagination
and a natural instinct for “ making pictures you
will find your progress slow at first.
If you wish to become an accomplished reader
of tea cups, you must learn to trust your own
impressions. An irregular formation of tea-leaves
may suggest a “Bush” to one person, or a Tree
to another. Perhaps to you it may look like a
“ Flower.” Stick to your own impression.
Your impressions will be influenced to some
extent by the person for whom you are reading;
perhaps not consciously. In opening your mind,
as you should, to a calm reception of impressions
from all available sources, the personality of an
individual is bound to work a subtle influence.
Finally, be sure to use good tea. One authority
says: “ . . . the cheaper mixtures which contain
so much dust and twig are of no use when read-
ing a fortune, as they cannot form into pictures
and symbols that can easily be distinguished.
That is perfectly true, but the importance of good
tea lies even deeper than that. A tea like
Bushells Blue Label, selected as it is from tender
young leaves, cured with care to retain their rich


flavors, and multi-refined to assure purity, puts
you in the right mood. It soothes the senses and
refreshes the spirit to a greater extent than coarser
beverages.
Preliminaries
The cup should be slowly drained and held by
the bottom. It is then placed upside down in the
saucer and given three circular turns from left to
right, the person who wishes to have her fortune
told repeating the while, one phrase with each
turn: —
“ Best by day. Best by night.
Best by fire or candle-light.”
The superfluous parts now being drained off,
the figures required for fortune-telling have been
formed. The cup is then picked up with the
handle held in direct centre front of the cup-
reader.
The Emblems sometimes relate to the past,
especially if they are in the bottom of the cup;
but they more frequently foretell future, their
remoteness in point of time depending on the
distance from the bottom of the cup. Thus, if
they appear near the bottom, they are near at
hand; if near the top they will be deferred.
Situated at or near to the bottom, they always
relate to the person whose fortune is told, but
near the top they may relate to a friend or mem-
ber of her family, which may be generally deter-
mined by the emblems near it. The position of
the emblems not only determines the time of the
events which they signify, but also other things,
as the following will show.


ROADWAYS
Or irregular shaped lines, if
covered with clouds, are marks of
future reverses; but if striking out
in the clear of the cup, are tokens
of some fortunate change at an
early date. If edged by dots
they foretell an accidental gain
of money.
ARCH
For the arch to appear in the cup,
with its foundation to the bottom
of the cup, foretells that your
main future plans will meet with
opposition. For a young lady to
have this unwelcome sign in her
cup is a warning that she will be
annoyed over a love affair,
possibly by entreaties and im-
promptu meetings of her lover’s
rival. Should the arch appear at
any angle, your future actions will
be changed.
THE MOON
If it appears in the clear, denotes
happiness and honours; if at the
bottom, the consulting person will
be fortunate on land or water.
Should it be encircled and broken
in outline, with scattered dots, it
implies sadness, which will, how-
ever, pass quickly away.


SLANDER
If at the bottom of the cup there
appear several heads as if speak
ing close to each other, and a
separate head or person standing
alone, you can well conclude that
there is an unpleasant talk going
on, and that the consultant will be
wise to avoid any acquaintances
in whom she does not feel con-
fidence.
TEARS
That tears will be shed is indi-
cated by the presence of liquid tea
in the cup after the cup has been
inverted, as instructed early in
the book. Should this liquid
gradually drain down from a
group of dots and streaks on the
side of the cup, it foretells that
unsettled conditions will cause
tears and sadness; but if the
liquid is already in the bottom of
the cup, as soon as turned up-
right, and if the liquid flows
around quickly without coarse
leaves, etc., it betokens happiness
and wealth.
DWARF
These misshapen creatures gener-
ally bring sorrow. Either you will
be accused of some dishonest
action, and have difficulty in
proving your innocence, or you
will be involved in a family quar-
rel, not necessarily your own
relatives.


THE TREE
One only, if it be in the clear or
thick part, points out good health;
several trees denote that an im-
portant wish will be accomplished.
If one tree is accompanied by
dots, it indicates that you will
make money at a distant point
where you will eventually reside.
A SHAMROCK
Is, in this instance, as is usually
the case, a lucky sign. It is the
different disposition in the cup
alone that makes the difference.
When it is on the top, it shows
that the good fortune is not far
distant, but it is subject to delay
if it is in the middle of the bottom.
Surrounding clouds show that
many disagreeable circumstances
attend the good fortune. In the
clear it tells of serene and undis-
turbed happiness of the most im-
portant event that is at the time
in the consulter’s mind.
ARROW
To see an arrow in flight on the
side of the cup promises well for
any business or love affair that
will follow. If, however, the arrow
is directed to the bottom of the
cup and is broken or irregular in
the shaft, you may expect trouble
from one you greatly esteem.


UNSETTLED
CONDITIONS
These can be foretold by the first
glance at the cup. If well covered
with dots, streaks, etc., the con-
sultant may well expect to be un-
settled for quite a while; if a lot
of dots appear at the end of a
horizontal line, it is a fair indica-
tion that there will be slight
trouble at the end of a journey.
ACTRESS
The figure of an active lady, one
in a dancing or sprightly attitude,
if on the side of the cup close to
the handle, foretells that a single
person should guard against
jealous quarrels. A married per-
son may look for temporary dis-
cord in domestic affairs. If in
bottom circle of cup with many
outlines that suggest people, much
time will be spent in pleasing
company.
BOX
Should this appear at the foot of
the cup so that you can see the
inside, betokens unhappiness and
trouble in love; if it be on the side
near the handle and quite full,
showing a clear outline, the oppo-
site may be expected.


MOUNTAINS
If these commence with a long
trail of fine leaves and then rise
abruptly, they indicate a journey,
at the end of which the consultant
will find favour with people of in-
fluence. Should several moun-
tains be grouped by themselves
with no trail at the foot, they are
a sign of powerful enemies.
THE WOMAN
If facing the handle of the cup,
full figure, it indicates that you
may expect a visitor shortly; if
the head is surrounded by dots,
she will have quite a lot of news
to tell you; but should such a
figure appear in the clear, hurry-
ing away from the handle of the
cup, you may expect an impor-
tant message that will speedily
take you out from home, also that
you should be cautious concerning
your words to an unexpected
visitor lest she betray your con-
fidence and cause trouble amongst
your friends.
THE STAR
Denotes happiness if in the clear
of the cup. If clouded or in the
thick, it advises long life though
exposed to more than the usual
share of troubles. Should dots
be about it, fortune and high re-
spectability, etc., will eventually
be your lot.


THE HEART
If in the clear part of the cup
signifies future happiness. It
promises joy at receiving some
money, should it be surrounded
by dots. If a ring encircles it, or
if a second heart be near it, it
signifies a future wedding. If the
second heart be irregular in out-
line, it foretells a friend’s growing
affection for the consultant.
BOUQUET
If in a young lady’s cup, a bouquet
appears on the side, and with the
blooms inclined to the handle, it
is a sign that her course in love
will be interrupted by her lover;
he will be given to flirting with
others during her absence. If the
bouquet appears in the bottom
circle of the cup, both unmarried
and married ladies may rely on a
prosperous future, and that any
prevalent trouble will come right.
BOOKS
To see many books, as if piled to-
gether, especially if near bottom
circle of cup, foretells unhappi-
ness; but if in the circle at the
bottom, and a person is seen read-
ing a book, then you will be
happy, and respected by a large
number of friends.


THE RIDER
On horseback denotes good news
about money matters, if it appears
by itself; but surrounded by dots,
it betokens hasty news that will
make you alter your plans quickly,
or regret not doing so.
THE FISH
If in the bottom part of the cup,
the consulter will unavoidably
seek trouble by placing confid-
ence in things that others had
trusted and found disappointing.
If in the clear, it denotes success-
ful results to the consulter’s efforts
in any direction to which they are
applied. Surrounded with dots in
any section of the cup, it denotes
that new conditions will call the
consulter to a distant place.
DRIVING
To see a human figure driving
down from the side near cup
handle to circle at foot signifies
that some speculation you have
made will turn out unfavourably;
if the figure is fully contained in
the bottom circle, you are placing
confidence in someone unworthy.


SMALL CREEPING
ANIMALS
Such as mice, etc., are emblems
of theft or robbery. If in the clear
of the cup, it infers that you will
soon have returned to you your
lost ease of mind or missing pro-
perty; but if in the thick, it im-
plies that you can give up all hope
of such consolation for a while.
THE CROSS
Be it one or more, generally pre-
dicts adversity; its position varies,
and so do the circumstances. If
it be at the top and the clear, it
shows that the misfortune of the
party will soon be at an end, or
that she will easily get over them;
but if it appears in the middle or
at the bottom of the thick, the
party must expect some severe
trials. If it appears with dots,
either in the clear or thick, it
promises a speedy change in one’s
sorrow.
BANNER
To see a banner in the cup, any
position, is a good omen; it signi-
fies a speedy rise in position by a
man, and a happy future for a
woman.


THE BUSH
Shows benevolence, and favours
of all to the consulter’s friend. It
gives hope of attaining the honour
or favour the consulter wishes for.
The bush showing branches and
twigs only—that is, without foli-
age—is a token of the caprice of
fortune; in the clear section it
foretells of an unexpected remit-
tance of money.
ARTIST
To be able to picture an artist at
work in your cup, if at foot, de-
notes that you are over-suscep-
tible to flattery, and warns you to
be wary of those that fill your ears
with praise. If at side of cup
facing the handle, you may con-
clude that to your home some-
thing of an ornate nature will be
sent.
THE BIRD
In the clear signifies that the
troubles with which the person
shall have to combat will soon be
over; in the thick, it is a sign of
good living and a successful jour-
ney or voyage, which, if there are
dashes, will be directed to a great
distance.


THE ANCHOR
The emblem of hope and com-
merce implies successful business
arrangements if on the bottom of
the cup; at the top and in the clear
part it shows affection and un-
shaken fidelity; in thick cloudy
parts it denotes sincerity, but tinc-
tured with fickleness.
ARM
To see a human arm in the side
of the cup, and if thin or incom-
plete in formation, foretells sick-
ness and discomfort in the family.
Should two arms appear, one thin
and the other swollen, your sick-
ness will be the means of better
health than ever later on. If only
one arm appears, and plainly at
the foot of the cup, you will re-
ceive favours, and more than
usual joy.
A JOURNEY
Is foretold by a straight horizontal
line running around the side of
the cup. Should the line termin-
ate in mountains, you will travel
and meet people of influence and
high respect, and should a circle
appear unbroken near the moun-
tains, your most important wish
will be gratified.


Nature’s Magic
in Tea Leaves
Whether fortunes can be accurately foretold by
tea leaves must be left to individual experience.
People who have given much study to the subject
insist that future events can be forecasted. Others
declare that telling fortunes by tea leaves is a
harmless amusement to be entered into only in a
spirit of fun.
But it is certain that there is something about
good tea itself, which has never been fully
explained. How is one to account for the
genuine affection in which good tea is held by
nearly half the human race? Or, to put the ques-
tion in another way, what is there about good tea,
so enjoyably refreshing to the spirit, that most of
us have come to regard it almost as a personal
friend?
As nearly as one can come to it, the answer
seems to be this: The Magic Chemistry of Nature!
Sunshine and Dew upon rich-soiled Hilltops of
the East!
According to Chinese Mythology, the dis-
covery of tea as a beverage of many virtues dates
back to 3000 8.C., while another legend tells that
it was brought from India into China by a wander-
ing Ascetic about 500 A.D. And, ever since, its
popularity has been spreading throughout the
world, simply because of its magic qualities in
aroma, flavour and natural stimulation.


With this growth in popularity has come, of
course, increased discrimination among millions
of tea drinkers. It is now a matter of common
knowledge that bouquet, flavour and richness in
tea vary according to the kind of leaf that is
plucked, and the manner in which it is cured.
Tender young bud-leaves, snapped from the tea
bush at dawn, with the dew still fresh upon them,
are richest in delicate sap. They contain more of
Nature’s magic— at its best. And when these
fresh young leaves are cured with slow care,
magic juices are imprisoned in perfect condition,
not to escape until infused in the teapot.
Once tea-lovers have tasted this young tea so
carefully cured, they prefer it to coarser grades.
In Australia they make sure of getting it by insist-
ing on Bushells Blue Label. For not only is
Bushells selected exclusively from tender bud-
leaves, rich in magic fragrance and flavor, but
its purity is assured by multi-refining.
Most grocers sell it, but if you should happen
to meet one who does not, you will find it worth
while to search, rather than accept something sup-
posed to be “just as good.” If by any chance you
are not able to get your packet of Blue Label,
send us your name and address. We will arrange
to have you supplied.


THE PEDESTRIAN
If walking hurriedly in the clear,
denotes pleasant news, good busi-
ness, recovery of lost things.
Should the figure be walking away
from the handle of the cup, it im-
plies that you will be entrusted
with important news to tell to
another person.
THE CIRCLE
If unbroken in outline and stand-
ing out boldly in the bottom of
the cup, is an excellent emblem
that your main present wish will
-be fulfilled. If broken in outline,
it is evident that there will be de-
lay in the wish being fulfilled, and
a possibility of disappointment.
In the clear of the cup, it denotes
happy friendship.
WILD ANIMALS
Signify all kinds of good luck with
people of influence—that is, if
the figure be in the clear section
of the cup; at the bottom, it warns
the consultant to avoid the new
company they at present wish to
maintain.


CLOUDS
If they be more light than dark,
the person will have a good result
from wishing; but if black, the
wish must be given up. Sur-
rounded with dots, they bring suc-
cess in trade and in all under-
takings; but the brighter they are,
the greater will be the happiness.
THE LILY
Is a shape so easily formed that
its prevalence carries a worth-
while meaning. In the clear sec-
tion of the cup, the Lily foretells
absence from illness, and long
life; if at the bottom, it foretells
the opposite. If clouded or sur-
rounded by many dots of various
sizes, it advises trouble and vexa-
tion, especially on the part of
relatives.
A CHILD
In the clear part bespeaks
innocent friendship between the
consulter and another person; in
the thick part, cases in love affairs
attended with great expenses.


THE SUN
The greatest emblem of happiness
if in the clear, but in the thick
denotes sadness because of lost
opportunities; surrounded by dots
and dashes it denotes that an
alteration from usual conditions
will take place.
A SURPRISE
Is indicated by the presence in the
clear part of the cup of a line run-
ning at any abrupt angle; if
straight up and down it foretells
a sudden surprise. If broken or
irregular, it implies that your sur-
prise will come from suspicions
first rising in your own mind, and
that several surprising discoveries
will be made at intervals.
GARDEN OR WOOD
Signifies mixing with many
people. In the clear part of the
cup it indicates good friends; in
the thick, or if surrounded with
streaks at various angles, it warns
the consulting person to be cau-
tious and to think twice before
making close friends of recent ac-
quaintances who profess sincerity.


ARMY
In any position in the cup an army
of soldiers denotes that there will
be a falling off of your friends,
through reasons over which you
have no control.
THE SERPENT
Is a general sign of an enemy. At
the top, or in the middle of the
cup, it promises to the consulting
party triumph over enemies, but
not so easily obtained if the ser-
pent be in the thick or cloudy part
of the cup. Should any letter of
the alphabet appear near the ser-
pent, the consultant may be able
to determine just whose initial
this is, and purposely watch that
person s movements.
# THE ROSE
Denotes success in cultivated
ideals, such as professions, indus-
try, music, art, etc.; also if in the
clear and in a bunch of two or
more, tell of enjoyment that may
be expected in old age.


EAGLE
To see an eagle perching on the
cupside is a sign that laziness—
not necessarily your own —will
cause you trouble. If, however,
the bird is flying, you will have
success in life, and the higher the
bird soars on the side of the cup,
also the nearer to the handle, the
greater and quicker your triumph.
EGGS
If you see shapes of eggs in the
bottom of the cup, keep a guard
on your tongue—plain speaking
will not prove profitable.
THE HOUSE
Indicates, at the top of the cup,
happiness and success in the con-
suiter’s enterprise. If the prevail-
ing situation is not a happy one,
be patient, for a change for the
better is ahead. In the middle of
the cup, it suggests the wisdom of
keeping a very close eye on the
movements of everybody in con-
-sultant’s home circle, for this
alone can prevent an injury ahead.


Emblems and their Meanings
ABBEY, future ease and freedom from worry.
ACORN, improvement in health, continued health, strength, and
good fortune.
AIRCRAFT, unsuccessful projects.
ANGEL, good news, especially good fortune in love.
APES, secret enemies.
APPLE-TREE, change for the better.
ASS, misfortune overcome by patience; or legacy.
AXE, difficulties overcome.
BADGER, long life and prosperity as a bachelor.
BASKET, an addition to the family.
BAT, fruitless journeys or tasks.
BEAR, a long period of travel.
BEASTS, other than those mentioned, foretell misfortune.
BOAT, a friend will visit the consultant.
BOUQUET, one of the luckiest of symbols; staunch friends, success.
a happy marriage.
BRIDGE, a favourable journey.
BUILDING, a removal.
BULL, slander by some enemy.
BUTTERFLY, success and pleasure.
CAMEL, a burden to be patiently borne.
CANNON, good fortune.
CAR (Motor), and Carriage, approaching wealth, visits from
friends.
CART, fluctuations of fortune.
CASTLE, unexpected fortune or a legacy.
CAT, difficulties caused by treachery.
CATHEDRAL, great prosperity.
CATTLE, prosperity.
CHAIN, an early marriage; if broken, trouble in store.
CHAIR, an addition to the family.
CHURCH, a legacy.
COCK, much prosperity.
COFFIN, long sickness or sign of death of a near relation or great
friend.
COMET, misfortune and trouble.
COMPASSES, a sign of travelling as a profession.
COW, a prosperous sign.
CROWN, success and honour.
CROWN AND CROSS, signifies good fortune resulting from death.
DAGGER, favours from friends.
DEER, quarrels, disputes; failure in trade.
DOG, a favourable sign; faithful friends, if at top of cup; in
middle of cup, they are untrustworthy; at the bottom means
secret enemies.
DONKEY, a legacy long awaited.
DOVE, a lucky symbol; progress in prosperity and affection.
DRAGON, great and sudden changes.
DUCK, increase of wealth by trade.
ELEPHANT, a lucky sign; good health.
FALCON, a persistent enemy.
FERRET, active enemies.
FLAG, danger from wounds inflicted by an enemy.
FLEUR-DE-LYS, same as LILY (q.v.).
FLOWERS, good fortune, success: a happy marriage.
FOX, treachery by a trusted friend.
FROG, success in love and commerce.
CALLOWS, a sign of good luck.


GOAT, a sign of enemies, and of misfortune to a sailor.
GOOSE, happiness; a successful venture.
GRASSHOPPER, a great friend will become a Soldier.
GREYHOUND, a good fortune by strenuous exertion.
GUN, a sign of discord and slander.
HAMMER, triumph over adversity.
HAND, to be read in conjunction with neighbouring symbols and
according to what it points.
HARE, a sign of a long journey, or the return of an absent friend.
Also of a speedy and fortunate marriage to those who are
single.
HARP, marriage, success in love.
HAT, success in life.
HAWK, an enemy.
HEAVENLY BODIES, SUN. MOON AND STARS, signify happiness
and success.
HEN, increase of riches or an addition to the family.
HORSE, desires fulfilled through a prosperous journey.
HORSE-SHOE, a lucky journey or success in marriage and choos-
ing a partner.
HOUR-GLASS, imminent peril.
HUMAN FIGURES must be judged according to what they appear
to be doing. They are generally good and denote love and
marriage.
INTERROGATION (mark of), doubt or disappointment.
IVY, honour and happiness through faithful friends.
JACKAL, a sly animal who need not be feared. A mischief maker
of no account.
JOCKEY, successful speculation.
JUG, good health.
KANGAROO, a rival in business or love.
KETTLE, death.
KEY, money, increasing trade, and a good husband or wife.
KITE, a sign of lengthy voyaging and travel leading to honour and
dignity.
KNIFE, a warning of disaster through quarrels and enmity.
LADDER, a sign of travel.
LEOPARD, a sign of emigration with subsequent success.
LETTERS, shown by square or oblong tea-leaves, signify news.
Initials near will show surnames of writers; if accompanied
by dots they will contain money; if unclouded, good; but if
fixed about by clouds, bad news or loss of money.
LINES, indicate journeys and their direction, read in conjunction
with other signs of travel; wavy lines denote troublesome
journeys or losses therein.
LION, greatness through powerful friends.
LYNX, danger of divorce or break off of an engagement.
MAN, a visitor arriving. If the arm is held out, he brings a
present. If figure is very clear, he is dark; if indistinct, he is
of light complexion.
MERMAID, misfortune, especially to seafaring persons.
MITRE, a sign of honour to a clergyman or through religious
agency.
MONKEY, the consultant will be deceived in love.
MUSHROOM, sudden separation of lovers after a quarrel.
NOSEGAY, the same as BOUQUET (q.v.).
NUMBERS, depends on symbols in conjunction with them.
OAK, very lucky; long life, good health, profitable business, and a
happy marriage.
OWL, an evil omen indicative of sickness, poverty, disgrace, a
warning against commencing any new enterprise. If the con-
sultant be in love he or she will be deceived.


OBLONG FIGURES, family or business squabbles.
PALM-TREE, good luck; success in any undertaking. A sign of
children to a wife and of a speedy marriage to a maid.
PARROT, a sign of emigration for a lengthy period.
PEACOCK, denotes success and the acquisition of property; also
a happy marriage.
PEAR, great wealth and improved social position; success in
business, and to a woman a wealthy husband.
PHEASANT, a legacy.
PIG, good and bad luck mixed; a faithful lover but envious friends.
PIGEONS, important news if flying: if at rest, domestic bliss and
wealth acquired in trade.
PINE-TREE, continuous happiness.
PISTOL, disaster.
RABBIT, fair success in a city or large town.
RAT, treacherous servants; losses through enemies.
RAVEN, death for the aged; disappointment in love, divorce,
failure in business, and trouble generally.
RAZOR, lovers' quarrels and separation.
REPTILE, quarrels.
RIFLE, a sign of discord and strife.
RING, a ring means marriage; and if a letter can be found near
it, this is the initial of the future spouse. If clouds are near
the ring, an unhappy marriage; if all is clear about it, the
contrary. A ring right at the bottom means the wedding will
not take place.
SAW, trouble brought about by strangers.
SCALES, a lawsuit.
SCEPTRE, a sign of honour from royalty.
SCISSORS, quarrels: illness; separation of lovers.
SHARK, danger of death.
SNAKES are a sign of bad omen. Great caution is needed to
ward off misfortune.
SPIDER, a sign of money coming to the consultant.
SQUARES, comfort and peace.
STEEPLE, bad luck.
STRAIGHT LINE, a journey, very pleasant.
STRAIGHT LINES are an indication of peace, happiness, and long
life.
SWALLOW, a journey with a pleasant ending.
SWAN, good luck and a happy marriage.
TIMBER, logs of timber indicate business success.
TOAD, deceit and unexpected enemies.
TRIANGLES, always a sign of good luck and unexpected legacies.
TRIDENT, success and honours in the Navy.
TWISTED FIGURES, disturbances and vexations; grievances if
there are many such figures.
UMBRELLA, annoyance and trouble.
UNICORN, scandal.
VULTURE, bitter foes.
WAGON, a sign of approaching poverty.
WAVY LINES, if long and waved, denote losses and vexations.
The importance of the lines depends upon the number of them
and if heavy or light.
WHEEL, an inheritance about to fall in.
WINDMILL, success in a venturous enterprise.
WOLF, beware of jealous intrigues.
WORMS, indicate secret foes.
YACHT, pleasure and happiness.
YEW-TREE indicates the death of an aged person who will leave
his possessions to the consultant.
ZEBRA, travel and adventure in foreign lands.


Other Emblems
With practice you will begin to discern more
emblems than have been described in this book-
let. Then you will be quite safe in attaching your
own meaning to these new emblems. Usually
they will explain themselves to you by reason of
their nature and character. For example,
“Apples” indicate health and happiness; “Sheep
mean success and prosperity; “Ship” signifies a
journey, or news from overseas; Sword means
danger; and so on, indefinitely.
Combined Emblems
Perhaps the most interesting part of telling
fortunes by tea leaves is in the interpretation of
combined emblems. As an illustration, imagine
the presence of the emblem of a Garden or
“ Wood,” meaning mixing with people, good
friends, etc.; then if “Mountains” appear, there
will be a journey, etc.; then a Circle, signify-
ing that your present main wish will be fulfilled;
therefore, the full reading of the emblems to-
gether is that you will mix with good friends and
pleasing company, then undertake a journey,
maybe through the influence of one of the friends,
and that later your most important wish will be
fulfilled.
Another illustration is where a “ Small creep-
ing animal ” among thick tea leaves indicates that
your wish for the recovery of something will not
be fulfilled; then a “ Roadway ” will tell, if lead-
ing from the bottom of the cup, that a fortunate


change will take place at an early date, and your
loss will soon be forgotten; add to this the
emblem of a “ Woman,” with head surrounded
by dots, meaning that you may expect a visitor
shortly, and that she will have quite a lot of good
news to tell you, etc. The full meaning in this
instance, then, foretells of something lost or to
be lost, and which you will not recover, but by
your patience you will eventually give up all
hope of recovery, and turn your mind to other
things; in these you will meet such success and
happiness as to make your earlier loss a thing for-
gotten; and, further, that a lady visitor will con-
vey good news to you.
At first it is a trifle confusing, this combining
of several emblems, but here, again, the impor-
tant thing is to proceed with calmness and con-
fidence, always relying upon your own impres-
sions. By observing the influence each new
emblem has upon its surroundings, you can con-
clude that the whole formation has that added
meaning.
Final Advice
Do not try to accomplish too much in the be-
ginning. Proceed slowly by committing a few
emblems to memory, and then gradually add
others as you advance. Even if you only know
half a dozen emblems, you can make yourself
most interesting and entertaining. Later on, as
your confidence increases, you will be amazed at
the romance and adventure you can find in an
ordinary tea cup!


amessage of Vital Nature
to all Mothers
Your children’s stomachs are
delicate organs. The little ones
must depend on you, Mother, to
see that their food is not only
appetising and wholesome, and
easily assimilated, but by all
means pure and free from any
injurious ingredients.
Famous food analysts certify
that Bushelts Cocoa is absolutely
free from injurious properties
which careless or unscientific
refining processes create in
ordinary brands of cocoa.
And you may feel absolutely
certain in demanding that your
grocer deliver Bushells Cocoa
that you not only give your
children a beverage possessing
the highest food value of any
cocoa on the world’s markets,
but a cocoa which more than
meets with the most stringent
requirements of all Pure Food
Laws.
The ingenious criolate process
by which Bushells Cocoa is
refined yields an absolute
maximum of rich, wholesome,
nutritious cocoa-butter from the
cocoa beans without depriving
this delicious beverage of an
atom of delicious chocolaty
flavor.
Children love Bushells Cocoa
for its rich, smooth, chocolaty
taste, while its superlative
nourishing qualities make it an
ideal beverage — a true tissue-
ibuilding food — eminently
suitable these cold winter days.


Make these Delicious
Cakes Yourself
You will enjoy making these cakes, puddings,
custards and sweets. The directions are clear and
simple. The results will delight you.
Your cooking successes with these recipes will be
partly due to Bushells Cocoa. It is so fine a powder
that it mixes thoroughly with other ingredients and
melts smoothly. Its chocolaty flavour is delicious.
Chocolate Mould
2 oz. Bushells Cocoa
I Pint Milk
J oz. Gelatine
2 oz. Sugar
Pinch of Salt
Vanilla
Method. Dissolve the cocoa in the milk with the gelatine,
but do not let it boil. Add the sugar, salt and vanilla. Stir
occasionally until cold. Strain into a wetted mould.
Cocoa Cream Dessert
(Six to Eight Persons)
I oz. Granulated Gelatine
1 Cup of Milk
2 Cups of Bushells Cocoa
I Cup of Sugar
I Cup of Thick Whipped
Cream
I Teaspoon of Vanilla
Extract
Method. —Soak gelatine in milk for % hour. Place in a
double saucepan with cocoa and sugar until dissolved, strain
into a basin, and when cold add cream and vanilla. Place in
a wetted jelly mould and place on ice to set.
Cocoa Fruit Mould
2 Dessertspoons Granulated
Gelatine
1 Cup Sugar
2 Dessertspoons Bushells
Cocoa
Pint Milk
Cup Raisins
Cup Sultanas
Vanilla Essence
Method. Dissolve the gelatine in a little cold water.
Blend the sugar and cocoa with a little milk. Pour on the
boiling milk, return to the saucepan and cook for a few
minutes. Add the fruits and vanilla; cool slightly. Then
add gelatine, mixing in well. Pour into moistened mould.
Place on ice to set. Serve very cold with custard or cream.


Lamingtom
For Cakes
5 oz. Butter
5 oz. Sugar
2 Eggs
4 Tablespoons Milk
Vanilla
10 oz. S.R. Flour
For Icing
3 oz. Butter
8 oz. Icing Sugar
I Tablespoon Bushells Cocoa
Vanilla
Desiccated Coconut
Method for Cake.—Cream the butter and sugar, add
beaten eggs with milk and vanilla, and lastly the sifted flour.
Place mixture in greased baking tin or 2 coconut bar tins.
Bake in moderate oven 30 to 40 minutes. Turn on to a
cake cooler, leave till next day, then cut into squares.
Method for Icing. Make the icing by creaming the but-
ter and sugar, add the blended cocoa and vanilla. Cover the
squares of cake with the icing, then roll in browned coconut.
Serve on a plate on a paper d’oyley.
The coconut should be spread on a swiss roll tin and
placed in a slow oven till a pale brown.
Cocoa Eggnog
2 Teaspoons Sugar
1 Teaspoon Bushells Cocoa
2 Tablespoons Water
i Cup Milk
I Egg
Method.—Mix together sugar, cocoa and water. Separate
the egg, beat the yolk light, and combine, adding the milk.
Pour on to the stiffly beaten egg white, beat well, and serve
at once in a tall glass.
Cocoa Rolls
12 oz. Self Raising Flour
4 Tablespoons Bushells
Cocoa
2 oz. Butter
8 oz. Sugar
Scant \ Pint Milk
Method. —Sift the flour and cocoa well together. Rub in
the butter till like fine crumbs. Add the sugar, mix into
soft dough with the milk. Place in two well greased nut
roll tins. Place in hot oven for 5 minutes; lessen heat and
cook slowly for 45 minutes. Turn on to cake cooler. When
cold, cut into thin slices and butter.


Chocolate Shortcake
About \ lb. Short Pastry
Raspberry Jam
2 Tablespoons Flour
2 Teaspoons Bushells Cocoa
3 Dessertspoons Castor Sugar
1 Egg
2 Small Tablespoons Butter
Method.—Roll pastry, and line a deep sandwich tin with
it. Decorate the edge, and spread a thin layer of jam on
the bottom. Mix flour and cocoa together. Whisk the castor
sugar and egg together until thick and creamy. Stir in the
flour and cocoa and lastly, the butter just melted. Put this
mixture over the jam and spread evenly. Bake in hot oven
for about 15-20 minutes. Cool, Dust with castor sugar
before serving.
Baked Cocoa Pudding
4 Tablespoons Bushells
Cocoa
\ oz. Cornflour
I oz. Castor Sugar
1 Pint Milk
2 Eggs
Vanilla
Method.—Mix cocoa, flour and sugar with a little milk
into a smooth paste. Put it into a stewpan with the re-
mainder of milk, and stir well until it boils. Add yolks,
beat well, and flavor with vanilla. Whisk the whites to a
stiff froth, and stir them in last. Pour all into a buttered
pie dish, and bake in a moderate oven for about thirty-five
minutes. Serve very hot with custard sauce or cream.
Bushells Cocoa is as good as Bushells Tea
When children come home from school and want
something to eat, give them a cup of Bushells Cocoa.
It keeps away their “ between meals hunger ” and
satisfies in a healthy way their natural craving for
sweets.
Children who dislike milk will drink, and enjoy,
Bushells Cocoa made with milk, because of its rich
chocolaty flavor.
WHOLLY SET UP IN AUSTRALIA BY BUSHELLS LTD.. AND PRINTED BY
THE SPECIALTY PRESS PTY. LID.. MELBOURNE


Tea bud flavor
Young leaf buds
picked fresh, then
cured slowly and care-
fully to imprison the
delicate flavor of the
fresh, juicy tea-sapS
That’s what makes
Bushells Blue Label i
Tea yield such an V,
enticing flavor.
The more fragrant
sap-juice retained in
the leaf the less tea is
required to the cup.
That is why Bushells
Blue Label Tea goes
so much further than
ordinary teas with
a finer flavor as well.
