

HOW WE
WERE
SAVED
NISBET








Pears Soap
The Last Step of Civilisation
ES, mates, I have been
into many a hair-raising
scrape in my life before and
since, but this appeared to be the
m'r ver Y worst; here we stood, live
men and a boy on the sands of
New Guinea, with our cutter forty
fathoms under water, her bottom
ground to matchwood on the
cruel reefs, and ourselves without a weapon of defence, in the
midst of the most savage tribes of man-eaters which the habitable
globe could produce, weapon-less, foodless, and with only wdiat we
had upon us when the cutter down, waiting for the day to
dawn to be discovered and trussed up like a row of winged ducks.
“It had all happened in a moment: rough water outside,
we thinking to get past the reef into a haven of rest, a sudden
shock and crunching like rats’ teeth, time only to jump over-
board and swim ashore as best w r e could, while our little ‘ Sarah *
went down like a thunderbolt, and left us helpless.
How we were saved
A New Guinea Experience
// <[a p»er'• s.rv ■
W ES, mates, I have been '' llllj
into many a hair-raising’ II
scrape in my life before and i
since, but this appeared to be the f
very worst; here we stood, five
men and a boy on the sands of
New Guinea, with our cutter forty
fathoms under water, her bottom
ground to matchwood on the
■ cruel reefs, and ourselves without a weapon of defence, in the
midst of the most savage tribes of man-eaters which the habitable
globe could produce, weapon-less, foodless, and with only what we
had upon us when the cutter \vent down, waiting for the day to
dawn to be discovered and trussed up like a row of winged ducks.
“It had all happened in a moment: rough water outside,
we thinking to get past the reef into a haven of rest, a sudden
shock and crunching like rats’ teeth, time only to jump over-
board and swim ashore as best w r e could, while our little ‘ Sarah *
went down like a thunderbolt, and left us helpless.
“We were at the mouth of Cloudy Bay, which, if any of you
knows the geography of those parts, meant slow roasting alive as
soon as the natives woke up in the morning and got a peep at us.


“ A splendid country as far as scenery went, but, Lord bless
you ! what was scenery to us, watching through the long night,
wet, miserable, and without a quid of tobacco to stay the pangs
of hunger, knowing, as we all did, what was before us as soon as
daylight came to show up those beautiful mountains, valleys and
forests behind us, as we stood shivering on the sands.
“ ‘ God help us,’ I muttered, as I saw the daylight at last steal
ghost-like over the blue-grey hilltops, and then turned seaward in
the vain hope of a distant sail —nothing, only the snow-white surf
breaking over the murderous coral reef, and the tumbling black line
of water beyond. Yet, within the reef I did see something—a case
of some sort, slowly drifting with the inflowing tide to shore. In
a moment every man was active, wading and swimming out to secure
the treasure. We had it ashore in no time, and prised it open with
our fingers and nails, thinking it might be meat or tobacco.
“ I appreciate the comforts of a nice bath and good soap to
wash with as well as any man, but to find, instead of tucker or
tobacco, a case of Pears’ Soap, on a cannibal land, as we then
were, was a disappointment which language fails to express, although
we all at the moment used it pretty strong.
“ * Close round the case, boys; they are coming,’ I shouted, as I
saw the sun lift itself over the peaks, and in front of us, about fifty
mop-headed savages armed with bows, arrows and spears, rushing
round the promontory pell-mell upon us. On they came at a run
until about fifteen yards distant; then, seeing us all standing quietly
waiting upon them, they paused, and after a minute or two of
palaver amongst themselves sent out their chief to talk to us.
“ Seeing this I grabbed up an armful of the soap tablets and
advanced from my men to meet him. He was a savage looking
fellow, stark naked excepting for some shark’s teeth round his
neck, but as he noticed the load I carried I saw his eyes lighten
up at the amber-like cakes which the sun was now shining upon;
thus I felt a little hopeful. This was a novelty in the land, and
novelties, when they do take the popular fancy, mean success
both in savage and civilized communities.
“ Going straight up to this noble man-eater I held out a cake
for his acceptance. He took it, smelt it, and afterwards tasted
it, but did not seem to take to it in that fashion, for he turned
upon me with a heavy scowl.
Then I hastened, by pantomimic action, to show how it was used
amongst us. Ah, that took, for if the Papuan is fond of anything,
it is of washing and bathing himself. Seeing a little fresh-water
stream running near by, I led the chieftain by the arm over to it,


then giving mm the tablet to use himseh.
“ What a scrubbing took place for the next ten minutes
amongst these copper-skins, and how they glistened in the
sun afterwards! Bows, arrows and spears were pitched
headlong down, while they lathered one another, and
tossed fresh water over their bodies.
“ We were saved and made medicine-men of the tribe
on the spot, while the Dubo house was decorated with the
pictorial advertisements of this great firm, and ourselves
treated to the very best in the village. Two weeks after-
wards, when we were rescued by Her Majesty’s cruising
war-sloop, we left behind us at least one tribe in New
Guinea who had taken with the first leap the last step of
civilization. They were happy in the possession of Pears’
Soap, and disconsolate that the stock was getting low, for
they used nearly the same words, when they bade us
farewell and implored us to return with more, that the
accomplished Jersey Lily writes: ‘lt had become a neces-
sity which they could not live without.’ ”
From “A COLONIAL TRAMP,”
vol. 2, pp. 3, 4 & 5
By HUME NISBET,
Author of “Bail Up," &c., &c.
first washing my own hands to show him the way, and
then giving him the tablet to use himself.
“ What a scrubbing took place for the next ten minutes
amongst these copper-skins, and how they glistened in the
sun afterwards! Bows, arrows and spears were pitched
headlong down, while they lathered one another, and
tossed fresh water over their bodies.
“ We were saved and made medicine-men of the tribe
on the spot, while the Dubo house was decorated with the
pictorial advertisements of this great firm, and ourselves
treated to the very best in the village. Two weeks after-
wards, when we were rescued by Her Majesty’s cruising
war-sloop, we left behind us at least one tribe in New
Guinea who had taken with the first leap the last step of
civilization. They were happy in the possession of Pears’
Soap, and disconsolate that the stock was getting low, for
they used nearly the same words, when they bade us
farewell and implored us to return with more, that the
accomplished Jersey Lily writes: ‘lt had become a neces-
sity which they could not live without.’ ”
From “ A COLONIAL TRAMP,” |
vol. 2, pp. 3,4& 5 \
By HUME NISBET,
Author of “Bail Up," &c., &c.


HONEST SOAP.
The Testimony of Half-a-Century.
so, P
INDISPUTABLE EVIDENCE of SUPERIORITY.
From Dr. REDWOOD. Ph.D.,F.CS..F.I.C
Late Professor of Chemistry and Pharmacy to the
Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain.
BEING authorised by Messrs. Pears to purchase at any
and all times and of any dealers samples of their
Soap (thus ensuring such samples being of exactly the same
quality as is supplied to the general public), and to submit
same to the strictest chemical analysis, I am enabled to
guarantee its invariable purity.
My analytical and practical experience of Pears’ Soap
now extends over a lengthened period—NEARLY FIFTY
YEARS—during which time—
/ have never come across another
Toilet Soap which so closely realises
my idea! of perfection,
its purity is such that it may be used with perfect confidence
upon the tenderest and most sensitive skin—
even that of a New Born Babe.”








