

HOW WE RAISED THE
FIRST HUNDRED THOUSAND
AN ACCOUNT OF
TWO YEARS WORK
(1915-1916)
FOR THE
EDUCATION DEPARTMENTS
WAR RELIEF FUND
VICTORIA.
COMPILED FOR THE COMMITTEE BY
GILBERT. M. WALLACE.
MELBOURNE AND SUDNEY
1917






INTRODUCTION.
requests have been received from
many sources for an authentic account
of the work of the Education Department in
connexion with war relief. The Executive
Committee of the Department’s War Relief
Fund therefore decided to publish this booklet
in the hope that it might become a permanent
record of a worthy and most significant bit of
war work. The profits on the sales will be
paid into the Fund. Mr. Gilbert M. Wallace,
sub-editor of the Department’s publications,
was asked to prepare the booklet, and he has
carried out his task ably and sympathetically.
The thanks of the Executive Committee are
accorded to him for his honorary services.
FRANK TATE,
Director of Education.
Melbourne,
9th January, 1917.


How we Raised the First Hundred
Thousand.
AN ACCOUNT OF TWO YRARS’ WORK FOR THE EDUCATION
DEPARTMENT’S WAR RELIEF FUND, VICTORIA.
I. — FOREWORD.
“The 'primal virtues shine aloft like stars;
The charities that soothe, and heal, and bless,
Lie scattered.at the feet of men like floivers."
“The primal virtues” is, perhaps, a vague term; hut,
if the word “virtue” retains something of its primal
meaning of manliness—personal valor and unselfish
endurance —we can
say without boast-
fulness that the vir-
tue of Australians
has been tried and
proved on the slopes
of Gallipoli, the
desert sands of
Egypt, the fields of
France, the flooded
engine-room of the
Southland, and in
hospitals of Lemnos,
All the world has
recognized the fact,
and acclaimed it.
Leaving the more
shining record to the
historian and the
poet, let us tell in
these pages the
humbler story of
“the charities that
soothe, and heal,
and bless,” as exem-
plified in the efforts
Little Helpers.


for war relief exerted by the children of Victoria dur-
ing the first two years of the great conflict.
II.—The Call to Serve.
“ Let us have it to our credit in the better days to come,
When the dove of peace is brooding once again,
When the clash of arms is silent, and the leaden chorus dumb,
That Australian children helped Australia's men."
When, on the 4th of August, 1914, the Empire’s
banner was unfurled in a cause that Australians held
to be just, the young manhood of our State began to
rally to the colors. Among the readiest to come for-
ward were our school-teachers, many of whom have
since sealed their belief in their life-blood. The older
Christmas Day at Lemnos, 1915.
men of the profession, the women teachers, and, above
all, the children, were not less eager to help. Here,
then, were potent forces to be directed into proper
channels, a widespread willingness to serve only wait-
ing to be recognized. Would the leaders rise to the
occasion ?


III. — The Beginnings of Organization.
“ Behold how great a matter a little fire kindleth."
The hour came, and the men —and the women. In
the very month that saw the outbreak of the war, the
Victorian Minister for Public Instruction authorized
“the raising of a patriotic fund from State-school
teachers, pupils, parents, and friends,” and exhorted
the teachers to form classes for the study of first aid
and nursing, as well as sewing classes to provide com-
forts and special clothing for Australian soldiers at the
front. On the 15th of September, a mass meeting of
metropolitan teachers, convened by the Minister and
the Director of Education, met in the Melbourne Town
Hall, and a central executive committee was elected.
The declared objects were to provide comforts in the
way of special clothing, etc.; to supply sick-room aids
and hospital appliances; and to obtain money that
might be used, as need arose, to afford relief to those
on whom the Avar must inevitably bring suffering and
want —the broken men, the widows, and the orphans.
An energetic lady, a teacher and an organizer of
swimming classes in Victorian schools, was appointed
to take up the duties of secretary to the movement,
in addition to her ordinary activities. Inspectors of
schools undertook to call meetings of teachers in vari-
ous rural centers, and endeavor to systematize the
work in the provinces. So the machine was started.
All the details were not yet perfect, but it was started.
Like the untried ship that Kipling describes, it had
yet to find itself.


Send-off to Members of the Education Department, enlisted for the War, Melbourne, 10th Sept., 1914.


IV.—A Central Depot.
“ All the rivers run into the sea, yet the sea is not full."
Emulating the Melbourne meeting, similar gatherings
of teachers were held throughout the State. The
schools got busy from the Murray to the sea, from the
east nook of Croajingolong to the farthest Thule of
the Mallee. Everywhere the click of knitting needles,
the clink of pennies in the collection box. Sewing
circles wrote impatiently for material not to be ob-
tained in the bush. A stream of finished articles began
to trickle citywards. A central depot for the receipt
and dispatch of goods became necessary.
From the Depot to the Railway Station.
So a room was fitted up in the Montague-street
school, South Melbourne, and certain teachers were de-
tailed for special duty. Let one of them tell the story
of the day’s work:—“When we arrive in the morn-
ing, the correspondence has to be attacked. Notices
have come in telling us that schools have forwarded
finished articles, and lists are enclosed. The men on
the staff take the truck to the Montague railway sta-
tion. When they come back, the contents of the par-
cels are checked against the lists, and the work is care


fully examined by two women. Many little messages
from the children to the soldiers are found sewn on
the garments or pushed into the toes of the socks.
These, of course, are not removed. Garments not pro-
perly finished, lacking buttons or tapes, or having
seams with raw edges, are put aside to be returned to
the school sending them in, or, in the case of small
omissions, to be sent to two city schools, where the
big girls supply the deficiencies. We deal with Cri-
mean flannel shirts, flannel belts, socks, scarves, cuffs,
mittens, gloves, Balaclava caps, handkerchiefs, invalid
shirts, and nightingales, according to the requirements
of the Defence Department.
“Articles unsuitable or too small for our soldiers are
put into the ‘Belgian Box’ (they may be useful to the
orphans and destitute), so you see nothing is wasted.
Tobacco and hospital stores or foods are weighed.
Perishable goods, such as eggs, are sent out to the Mili-
tary Camp at Broadmeadows.
“Then, while the garments are being tied up in tens
and the handkerchiefs in hundreds, one of the men
enters in the receipt-book all that has come in. The
list sent in from the school is stamped and initialed
by the checker, and returned to the head teacher.
“‘When is your lunch hour?’ we are sometimes
asked. Well, the schools have theirs at the same time,
so we have a succession of visitors—teachers who come
to the Cookery Center for lunch, others who come to
see the depot, boys with parcels of finished articles,
members of the firms who are cutting out garments
free of charge, who speak very highly of the work we
show them, and interested friends who bring in small
parcels of books.
“A messenger comes to the door —some one is wanted
at the telephone. At the Education Department’s Office,
arrangements have been made for the delivery of im-
mense packages of wool, shirts are on the way from
one of the factories, or perhaps one of the staff is
needed at the office, where the administrative work of
the League is carried on by the Minister of Education,


the heads of the various branches of the official staff,
the organizing secretary, and a small, ever-active body
of teachers temporarily withdrawn from their schools.
“After lunch, we proceed with the dispatching of par-
cels to the schools, where even the ‘tiny tots’ of the
First Grade take a share in the work, while their grand-
mothers knit and sew for us at home.
Children’s Gifts Ready for Transport to Egypt.
“Each application is taken in the order in which it
was received, and the share allotted to that particular
school is made up for dispatch. You will understand
the work entailed when you read that each Crimean
shirt consists of twelve separate pieces, and an invalid
shirt requires nine. These must be counted, have a
pattern and instructions enclosed, then be tied up. A
special label is addressed and put on, and a notification
sent to the teacher that a parcel has been forwarded
to him at his nearest railway station, with a statement
of the contents. The sloyd centers we supply with
wood and calico for splints.
“Then one of the women enters in her dispatch book
the name of the school and the amount of material
forwarded.
“While three members of the staff are thus employed,
the other is hard at work making up bales of cloth-
ing fcr shipment. These contain garments in


hundreds; handkerchief bales contain 1500. When
several are completed, one ol us dons an all-
enveloping apron, and sets to work to paint on each
bale the name and number of its contents. On the other
sides are painted, ‘From Victorian State Schools/
‘Gifts of Clothing for Issue to Australian Imperial
Troops Abroad, on Hoard, or in England/ according
to instructions received from the Defence Department,
and the consecutive number of the bale.
“At four o’clock, a willing army of young patriots
volunteers to carry all the parcels. Ihe truck is again
brought into use, and triumphantly escorted to the rail-
way station.”
ISTow this account was written in November, 1914,
almost at the outset. To see how the work expanded,
let him who loves a sonorous exercise in elocution read
aloud the following list of the gifts that came rolling
full spate into the depot a year later. It suggests the
famous muster-roll in Homer, or Kipling’s—
“ Send up Unity, Claribel, Assyrian, Stormcock, and
Golden Gain!”
or Banjo Paterson’s —
Quobbotha, Girilambone, and Terramungamine,
Quambone, Eunonyhareena, Wee Waa, and Buutijo,
Nimitybelle, Conargo, Wheeo, Bongongolong.
Here it is:—“Arrowroot, brushes, hoot-laces, balacla-
vas, bags, boracic acid, bed-socks, corn-flour, cushions,
crutches, coffee, Condy’s fluid, cocoa, calf s-foot jellj,
condensed milk, cuffs, envelopes, fountain pens, groats,
games, honey, handkerchiefs, herrings, jams, jellies,
linen thread, lanoline, magazines, matches, maizena,
milk-covers, pencils, pocket-knives, quoits, razors, shirts,
socks, singlets, sheets, salmon, salve, shaving brushes,
syrup, splints, slippers, towels, tea, tobacco, tooth-
powder, tomato soup, vaseline, wadding, walking-sticks,
writing cases, washers, and wallets.’


V. —How the Little Schools Helped.
You know the dominie. I mean, our brother in the bush;
Yon know the lonely row he has to hoe
Along the Goulburn Valley, in the melancholy Mallee,
Down Orbost tray, and up by Otneo,
By Koo-wee-rup, and Wee-wee-rup, and Toombullup, and Boon,
From Condah Swamp across to Forest Hill,
Away out back o' Bendigo, along the Little Indigo,
By Nar-nar-goon and Narracoortc and Nhill.
That the bush is the heart of Australia the bush
schools have proved in their efforts for war relief.
In glancing over the published list of subscriptions, and
noticing what has been done by schools of under 50
pupils, one sees amounts like these recorded:—£lol
18s. 9d.; £l4O 14s. 10d.; £223 7s. 6d.; £269 Bs. Now
these sums did not drop into the hat of the bush school-
master, or the apron of the schoolmistress, as the gold-
dust drops from the wattle. They represent resolu-
tion, effort, perseverance, self-sacrifice. A bush teacher
tells the story of the work in the far North-east: —
“ When not engaged in doing things for the
A Bush School.


Cause, we employ ourselves in telling people how we
do them, and explaining that it will satisfy all that
is nobler in their natures if they help us to do more,
and yet more. ‘A duck lays an egg and says nothing;
a hen informs the neighborhood. Everybody buys
hen eggs. Who worries about duck eggs?’ Here is a
sparsely populated district with not a single really big
school in it —just little band-boxes dotted here and there
on hillside, in valley, by trout-stream, overshadowed by
mountain, or on half-deserted mining plains, each out
of reach of its neighbor, so that group-work is, in
the main, impossible; a district of big distances and
high mountains. By the way, a member of Parlia-
ment, who spoke the truth, told me once:—‘This con-
stituency is the size of Tasmania. Roll it out, and it
equals Australia!’
“Our loyal youngsters, Heaven bless them! Hun-
dreds of them have never seen a railway train.
Hundreds of them had never seen a picture show until
a teacher clambered out of a trap, bearing an unparal-
leled home cinematograph, and showed to round-eyed
young patriots such marvels in motion on one never-
to-be-forgotten evening!
“How they have worked! In one school, in a very
poor locality, a big lad took a job for the holidays.
He earned Ten Shillings (capitals, please), and, when
the teacher re-opened school, the Greater Briton
marched out with the only money of his own he had
ever handled, tied up tight in a piece of rag. ‘I can’t
take it all, Jim’ (Jim will do for a name), said the
teacher; ‘give me half and keep the rest.’ ‘They want
it more than me, sir,’ was the sturdy response.
“They have gathered bones, fat, bottles, wool from the
fences and scrub, iron, kerosene-tins; they have snared
and skinned rabbits, trapped foxes, caught fish, dug
gardens, cleared tracks, caught horses, done odd jobs
before their home duties commenced in the morning,
given up holidays, handed in all their pocket money,
swept schools, cleaned chimneys, caught frogs and
leeches, worked by moonlight when school-work and


home-work filled all the daylight hours. Don’t look
down on the children, gentle reader; look up to them!
“And what of the teachers? They don’t quibble,
don’t hunt for something to grumble at, don’t blame
the War Office and offer carping criticism of the con-
duct of the fight, don’t need to be told ‘Quit your fool-
ing and get on with the war,’ for they got on twenty-
eight months ago when the Fund started, and they
have been getting on ever since. They have their bit
to do, and they do it. The man in each center wins
the township by his loving attention to the kiddies, and
The Sloyd Workers Help.
(Young wood-workers made crutches, splints, bed-rests, ward tables, etc.,
by the thousand.]
the township in return shepherds and sees to his Fund.
And why not? There is nothing better the township
■could be doing. The teacher travels far and wide to
help his neighbor, works till midnight, then rides
hack fifteen or twenty miles, thinking out some new
scheme for his own little center. Night after night,
some teacher harnesses up his moke to visit another
settlement with a picture-show, the visited school tak-
ing the proceeds. On a mountain-top, he pauses to tie
a log to the back of the trap to ease the descent. Once
a vehicle containing two teachers and a picture ma-
chine collapsed on an unspeakable track. One teacher
remained behind to look after the turn-out; the other,


carrying the cinematograph and films, trudged on for
three miles through mud and drizzle to keep faith with
the audience and do his best for the boys.
“As for the women teachers, if Thackeray’s man took
off his hat every time he saw a petticoat on a clothes-
line, I don’t know how he would show his reverence
for them. No task is too great for them, no trouble
too severe. In numerous instances, they have abandoned
holiday trips to keep at work. The depth of such a
sacrifice no one can estimate. ‘Gone the song of
Gamelyn’—gone the long-looked-for trip to the city,
with waiting friends, and social functions, and the
stir and gaiety that mean so much as a tonic for those
that have been long rusticated. Shall I tell of the
girl that waved her wand over the parents and caused
a temporary concert hall to spring up in four days in
the playground; of the girl that rode thirteen miles,
with a big bundle of rabbit skins, to make waistcoats
for shivering soldiers; of the girl that commandeered
the clergyman and his chariot and made him a collector
of ‘comforts;’ of the poor girl that struggled up from
a sick-bed, and, with a brave attempt at convalescence,
started to make up arrears ? No, there are some
things too sacred for publicity. One can only stand
bareheaded, and wonder.
“Now, about the school committees; their share is a
big one in the work done. They do anything and
everything to help—take the doors, take the cash, take
the rostrum as amateur auctioneers, take —take any-
thing they can lay their hands on for the Cause. See
a stalwart committee-man, a cigar box full of loose cash
tucked under one arm, riding a young horse twenty
miles over the mountains to deliver his financial state-
ment and get a receipt! ‘Well, so long! I think we’ll
do ’em yet!’ and back he goes,
“The old teachers (they don’t all wear out .before
sixty, though they’re not so spry as they used to be)
are powerful organizers, and powerful in exhortation
when things seem to slacken. As regards the inspec


tors, they’re human when they’re off duty. There’s
not much against a man who inspects during the day,
lectures at night, and in leisure time tramps to almost
inaccessible corners to examine aspirants for the A.1.F.,
helps with his cash, aids with his car, and gives full
credit to the efforts of his associates.”
| he patriotic efforts of the teacher and committee of
a little school in the Mallee have been thus recorded:—
“First, the meeting of the school committee. Miss
Ribbons, with brazen, determined tread and quaking
heart, accosts seven solid-looking, bearded, toil-worn
farmers, to whom Flower Day means as yet ‘one
them money-givin’ affairs.’ War with its horrors has
as yet barely touched these old sons of the soil. ‘Ye-es,
we’ll help you, but how?’ Miss Ribbons explains that
she wants them to leave their farming and shearing
lor one whole day, and bring ‘the Missus’ and all the
family to the school. Carried! But bring alsu
flowers, vegetables, chaff, hay, sheep. This is a differ-
ent proposition; but brown eyes, a feminine tongue, and
the element of surprise prevail. The second trench is
carried. The day is fixed for Saturday fortnight.
“Confronted with the awful task before her, Miss
Ribbons loses heart, and twenty times her courage fails.
She thinks of pleading illness, and going home-22 miles
by coach plus 200 by rail. But no, she must do or
die. She begins to train the children. Every afternoon,
thirty drill and sing and march, and recite and make*
things. Miss Ribbons, like most teachers, teaches and
worries in her dreams at night.
“The day before the battle, and what a day! A dull r
unlovely room to be transformed into a fairy bower,
or something suggestive of the gorgeous East. Up with
the Allies’ banners on the walls; hide dead wood
with living leaves; let flowers bloom everywhere. Set
out the children’s handiwork to the best advantage;
craftily dispose the turnips; let no Turk’s-eap blush
unseen. Thud goes the hammer all day long, and, at
night, a spectral hammer thuds.


“Dawn, a clear sky, and Miss Ribbons’s best brown
dress. The official opening—a string of little girls in
white frocks, and boys in their Sunday suits, a bulky,
nervous president, at home witl sheep and horses,
clumsy, but well-meaning, when it comes to word-spin-
ning. A squeaky little speech from the teacher. The
door is flung wide, and the crowd on entering gives
honest expression to its feelings of delight. Memory
recalls the day as a medley of sound and color, the
dominant notes being happy laughter and the jingling
of coin. A little toddler, who hears a piano for the
first time, asks his mummy what machine is the woman
driving.
“Lads who far from here are borne.”
“At length tea is served, and then the floor is cleared
for the inevitable dance. The young folks caper gaily.
Even the ‘boss’ is dragged out by his youngsters, and
finds in their fun at his clumsy antics a little of his
own lost youth. ‘Mum’ sits peacefully, holding her
hands in her lap and smiling at all. At 10 p.m., Miss
Ribbons, weary but happy, helps her seven fellow-con


spirators to count the spoil. The amount is £l9 Os. 3d.
Rain is now falling, but who cares? Children go home
sticky, tired, wet, and proud of their work. The
elders are pleased with their outing. Miss Ribbons is
elated at the prospect of sending the money, with no
deductions, to help ‘those dear lads who far from here
are borne, boys who in days have lived
through many years, wise to see life through death’s
familiar face.’ And yet, so small a thing is life, her
thought before sleep overtakes her is, T knew Tilly
Smith would go wrong in the marching.’ ”
VI.—How the City Schools Lent a Hand.
“ A little off the dusty street,
With trails that seem to suck the heat
From fierce December skies,
With scarce a tree to break the glare
That makes an oven of the air,
The city schoolhouse lies.”
It was said previously that the bush is the heart of
Australia. What of the city, where parliaments meet,,
and government departments have their headquarters,
and the daily press forges its thunderbolts? The city
should be the brain, the thinking and directing center,
whither come impressions, whence issue flashes of guid-
ance. It will not do to strain the analogy overmuch.
Melbourne has done well in directing and organizing
the War Relief movement, but Melbourne children have
been as quick to feel and as ready to help as their
bush cousins. They couldn’t, of course, hunt rabbits,
trap foxes, and milk cows for the Cause; but they
have sewn and knitted, made paper and leather flowers,
fashioned things of wood and wire, grown wonderful
beans on pocket-handkerchief allotments, planned con-
certs and bazaars, taken gifts to the military hospitals,
and arranged all kinds of entertainments for the
patients.


Young Workers of a City School.
Writes a metropolitan teacher, who knows all about
it; —“On every Wednesday afternoon, about twenty-
five pupils from each of three or four of the city schools
assemble at the Caulfield Hospital, under the direction
of their teachers, and, for an hour or thereabouts, pro-
vide musical items, recitations, etc., in the recreation-
room. These entertainments are much appreciated by
the soldiers, and keen disappointment was expressed by
them on the one occasion when, through some error,
the usual concert did not take place. ’
Among the most successful efforts made by metro-
politan schools to raise money for the Fund were the
public displays of physical culture in November, 1916.
The marching, the folk dances, the maypole dances, the
tableaux, were highly appreciated by the spectators.
They are wonderfully fine children, the Australians. If
they were seen in company with parties of children from
other lands, they would doubtless attract as favorable
attention, by reason of their splendid physique and gal-
lant bearing, as their big brothers seem to have done
at Gallipoli and elsewhere.


The mention of Gallipoli recalls another means by
which the Fund has been augmented. On the first
anniversary of the Anzacs’ landing, that historic event
was commemorated by the striking and issue of a
bronze medallion. It was an artistic piece of workman-
ship, which found a ready demand throughout Victoria
and neighboring States. One hundred and seventy-
five thousand medallions were supplied and circulated,
and the profits from the sales added some £2OOO to
the Fund.
The Anzac Medallion.


VII. — Helping the Caulfield Military Hospital.
In the financial statement set out on another page
appears the item “Caulfield Hospital, £10,000,” and
around this brief entry cluster many little stories of
practical kindness. When, about a year ago, the De-
fence Department decided to found a hospital at Caul-
field for the treatment of wounded and convalescent
Australian soldiers returned from abroad, the Commit-
tee of the Schools War Relief Fund agreed to make the
grant before-mentioned for the erection of wards. The
result is told by the inscription on a notice-board set up
at the Hospital to greet the eye of the visitor: “Wards
A Ward at the Caulfield Military Hospital.
1 to 14 were presented by the State Schools Patriotic
League.” When one considers that there are 22 wards
in all, the extent will be seen of the schools’ proprie-
tary interest in the establishment. But that is not all.
Since the grant was made, the schools of the State, dis-
trict by district, have taken turns month about at pro-
viding additions to the hospital rations. At present,
the patients are probably as well housed, as well fed,
and as well cared for as any similar body of con


valescents in the world. A visitor, after making a tour
of the establishment, is apt to commune with himself
thus: “Were I not a hard-working civilian, I would be
a convalescent soldier at Caulfield.”
What has he seen? He has seen an enclosure of 25
acres in a clean and airy suburb. The grounds and the
mansion (now used as quarters for the nurses) were
once the city home of a wealthy squatter, and were
acquired by the Defence Department at a low price. He
has seen rows of long, iron-roofed buildings, flanked by
spacious vei’andas, and separated by lawns and flower-
beds. Within, he has noticed the scrupulous cleanli-
ness of the rooms, and the tastefulness of the decora-
tions. He has been shown over the kitchen, the steam
laundry, the store-rooms where the State-school gifts are
laid out, the mess rooms, the Red (Toss Rest House with
its reading and recreation rooms and post office, the
A.I.F. Garrison Institute, a kind of temperance can-
teen and general store, where the soldiers buy small
luxuries at a low price. He has seen the men themselves
clad in their blue flannel hospital uniforms sunning them-
selves on the lawns, resting under the trees, and chatting
with friends and relatives. After Gallipoli and h lan-
ders, Egypt and Mesopotamia, the change must be very
welcome. There were about 350 patients in the hospital
at the end of 1916, but another 300 were expected to
arrive in January.
Everyone at the Hospital has a good word to say of
the school children. The storeman points with pride to
the shelves whereon appear the home-made jams and
jellies, pickles, sauces, tins of cocoa, etc., and produces
a note from Mt. Hoorat, wherever that may be; “Dear
Soldier, —We will be thinking of you and hoping you
will enjoy the jelly crystals and maizena I am sending.
I wish you a Merry Christmas and a Happy Hew Year.
With kind regards from a Hoorat schoolgirl.” The
Quartermaster speaks gratefully of the Christmas poul-
try sent from the Warrnambool inspectorate. Some 1650
birds were sent to the various military hospitals and
camps, and were served up in fine condition.


To give the reader an idea of the magnitude of the
schools’ contribution to the hospital larder, let us quote
from one of the monthly lists;—Jams, preserved fruits,
honey, and syrup, 7913 lb.; sauces and pickles, 890
bottles; potatoes and turnips, 15,198 lb.; apples, 4974
lb.; oranges and lemons, 13l7 1 /2 dozen; cigarettes, 2149
packets; cake and biscuits, 1147V2 lb.; raisins, 708th
lb.; eggs, 11521/2 dozen; and so on with fowls, rabbits,
bacon, butter, cheese, etc.
No wonder only five deaths have occurred at the Hos-
pital since its inception.
VIII.—The League of Young Gardeners.
Give fools their gold, and knaves their power;
Let fortune's bubbles rise and fall;
Who sows a field, or trains a floiver,
Or plants a tree, is more than all." — Whittier.
“ He'd stimulate an inch of soil to do the work of three,
Or make a metamorphic rock sprout into cabbagee."
—Brunton Stephens.
A plan for increasing the Fund—a plan that has had
marvellous success from a financial point of view and
far-reaching educational effects—was conceived and put
into operation by the Department’s supervisor of school
gardening, who determined to utilize to the utmost the
help that children could give to the Fund if they were
to begin tilling little garden plots at their own homes.
So, with the sanction and help of his chiefs, he launched
the Young Gardeners’ Patriotic League. The members
must undertake to cultivate during the war a certain
area at home for the growth of flowers and vegetables.
No flowers or vegetables are to be taken from the plot
for home or any other purpose without payment at
current market rates. If Dad wants a salad from Tom’s
plot for his Sunday meal, well, Dad can have it, but
he must pay what he would pay the Chinaman. If
Mum wants a bunch of sweet peas from Mary’s plot,
she meets a resolute demand for “Tuppence, please!”
Of course the sales were chiefly to outsiders.


A School Garden.
It was arranged, that each home plot should be not
less than 100 square feet—say, 10 by 10, or 20 by 5.
Thousands of these plots came into being; there was
something in the notion that caught the fancy alike of
parent and child. But how were children to succeed
who might not know a calceolaria from a cauliflower,
or might want to plant pumpkins at the wrong period?
That difficulty was got over by the publication, in The
School Paper, of a series of brightly-written articles—
truths embodied in a tale —telling the young folks month
by month how to prepare the beds, how to drain and
manure them, what to plant, how to get rid of insect
pests, how to prepare floral sprays and bouquets, and so
on. The work went on, the rain descended, and the buds
sprouted, and then came the idea —why not have a
public display throughout the State, and let the people
of YictoVia see what the Young Gardeners are doing
at school and at homo? Let us have a Children’s Flower


Certificate of the League of Young Gardeners,


Day. So this was arranged for the 3rd of November.
The day was fine, and the demonstration was in every
way successful. A school holiday had been proclaimed.
An exhibition of cut flowers, opened by the State Gov-
ernor, was held in the Melbourne Town Hall; button-
hole bouquets, flowers in mass, pot plants, vegetables
were sold at street stalls and by peripatetic vendors in
the Melbourne streets and in country towns everywhere
throughout Victoria. It was a great day for the chil-
dren, and it brought in over £25,000. But that is not
all. The garden plots are still productive, the money
keeps coming in for the Fund, and, most important of
all, the children have got the gardening habit, and may
retain it.
IX.—The Young Workers’ Guild.
“ What can a little chap do
For his country and for you?- ’ ’
Badge of the Young
Workers’ Guild.
Shortly after the formation of
the Young Gardeners’ League, a
wider field for juvenile effort was
thrown open by the creation of
the Young Workers’ Patriotic
Guild,” the members of which are
pledged to personal labor for the
War Belief Fund, but not necess-
arily to gardening. The boys and
girls may select what payable
hobby they choose, and he or she
who earns £1 by “personal productive effort” is rewarded
with a handsome certificate in colors, signed by the
Minister and the Director of Education. More than a
thousand of these have already been issued.
It may be interesting to readers to learn the exact
nature of the efforts that won the certificates. The
following is an incomplete selection:—Chopping wood;
caddying; growing flowers; growing vegetables; collect-
ing bottles, rags and bones; helping mother with house-
work; making and selling a quilt; selling newspapers;


cutting lawns; cutting chaff; selling home-made feeders
and milk-jug covers; making pillow cases, tea-towels,
and bags; cleaning boots; making and vending wire-
work; knitting socks; sweeping the school; wool gather-
ing; raffia work; milking cows; marking sheep; feeding
horses; house cleaning; chair making; selling waste
paper; selling a hide; digging potatoes; sale of a pet
lamb; selling young trees; setting and minding hen;
gathering eggs; making cushions; baking scones; feed-
ing stock; making floor mops; building fowlhouse; sell-
ingchips; modelling
maps; churning;
helping grandma;
emptying the ash-
hucket ; making
shirts ; nursing
babies; makingdoll’s
clothes; gathering
thistles for the pony;
rearing and selling
ducks; sale of pet
pigeons and rooster;
washing buggies;
carpentering; grow-
ing mint or lavender;
milking for uncle;
making plaster pla-
ques; collecting and
selling frogs and
leeches; growing,
making, and selling
brooms.
This is the kind
of effort that needs
every encourage-
ment. To “cadge”
is easy, but it saps
the ch ara c t er;
Cen[?]cate of the Young Workers’ Guild.
to earn and then to give of what has been honestly
come by is not so easy, but the effect on the giver is
ennobling.


X. —Letters Inward and Outward.
‘ ‘ As cold waters to a thirsty soul, so is good news from a,
far country."
“ A stamp and a scrap of paper, a hag with a Government brand,
And the heart of a nation is streaming out in quest of a distant
land;
The letter may shine and sparkle, or it may be a yearning cry,
It may be a clerkly manuscript, or Egypt spelt with an ‘ i
It may be lost, and it may be sunk; but at last it may get through,
For the sake of telling Gallipoli Bill ' our dear, dear love to you.' ”
The best thing the youngsters have done is to send
a steady stream of letters to men at the front. When
the girls of the sewing circles finished a pair of socks,
a little letter would be folded up and slipped into the
toe; when the boys put the final polish on a home-
made walking-stick, or boxed a set of checkers, a brief
note would be attached, addressed perhaps to men they
had never seen, and destined to be received amid sur-
roundings they could not imagine.
Where bill received his Letter—Anzac Cove.


A remarkable thing happened when an eight-year-old
lad at Diamond Creek sent a letter with the vague ad-
dress: “To a Lonely Soldier.’’ It fell into the hands
of the boy’s own father, twelve thousand miles away,
who had for some time failed to receive his home letters.
Picture, if you can, the soldier’s expression as he
scanned the innocent lines.
Look, too, at this communication forwarded by an
Australian officer from a desert oasis, two hundred miles
west of Luxor: “Honestly, I think the little notes
pinned to the garments are the best part of the lot.
It may not strike you perhaps as forcibly, but, after
living for so long among dirty mud huts, flies, mon-
grels. and stinking natives, to get something that re-
minds us of the clean, smiling homes of Australia,
where people we have uever seen are working to send
something away for The boys,’ makes the whole busi-
ness seem worth while after all. Some of our men
have not seen a home or the inside of a decent house
since November, 1914, or even earlier, and the impres-
sion these gifts make on them is always rather pathetic.
One sees some villainous-looking ruffian, burnt almost
black (the sun in these parts is no slouch), with a
shirt in one hand and a note in some little girl’s writing
in the other, murmuring to himself,, ‘Well, God spare
me days!’ and I think that is almost a prayer.”
XI.—Auxiliary Forces.
“He doeth well that serveth the common good.”
Let it be repeated that the First Hundred Thousand
of the Education Department’s War Relief Fund was
mainly a children’s gift to the soldiers. But it would
be wrong to omit from this account all acknowledg-
ment of the generous assistance and encouragement of
older folk, not only the parents, teachers, inspectors, and
school committees, to whom reference has already been
made, but also to the members of the clerical and pro-
fessional staff at the Education Office, who have given


regularly and freely; tlie superannuated teachers and
inspectors, who have come in cheerfully to lend a hand;
the staff of The School Paper and the Education
Gazette, who, by record and suggestion, have helped to
keep the torch alight; the wholesale clothing manu-
facturers of Melbourne, who have cut out thousands
of garments free of cost, that were afterwards sewn
together in the schools; the Singer Machine Company,
which gratuitously permitted the use of a number of its
sewing machines; the tobacconists, who gave cigar boxes
for packing purposes; the booksellers and jewellers, who
displayed in their windows notices of school entertain-
ments, sold tickets, and furthered the sale of badges
and medals; Commissioner Budden and his staff in
Egypt, who received and dispatched the goods to the
soldiers, and always sent full and interesting communi-
cations to the Central Executive; the Kailway Depart-
ment, that carried goods free to the Schools’ Central
Depot; members of shire and town councils, and mem-
bers of the State and Federal Parliaments, who showed
a sympathetic interest at all times; and last, but not
least, their Excellencies the State and Federal Gover-
nors and their wives, who gave many proofs of
their pleasure in being associated with the work of
the children.
XII.—Debit and Credit
‘ ‘ Such n coining and a going! ’ ’
Below is given the financial statement showing how
the Hundred Thousand was made up, how a portion of
it was expended, and what remains. It will be noticed
that there is no narrow provincialism in the expendi-
ture. The bulk of it was for Australian troops, but
practical sympathy has been shown for the needs of
other nations—Belgium, Serbia, Montenegro, Poland,
France, Russia.
What is remarkable about this balance-sheet is the
almost entire absence of expenses of management. The
task was a labor of love.


Receipts.
Contributions
Accrued interest on deposit with Treasury
30th June, 1915
£46
30th June, 1916 . . .
525
571
Total
. . £100,000
Australia fo Belgium.
FINANCIAL STATEMENT
To 25th October, 1916. Amounts are shown to the
nearest £l.
Expenditure.
Cabled to Agent-General—
Belgian Fund £lO,BOO
Serbian Fund 5,850
Montenegrin Fund 300
Polish Funds 2,000


France 200
Anzac Buffet 400
19,550
Purchase of Motor Ambulances through Agent-
General and cost of cables re same . . . . 2,069
Grants to Organizations working in
connexion with Camps—
Church of England Home Mission
Tent £lO
Y.M.C.A 372
Salvation Army 620
1,002
Special Grants—
Camberwell Rest Home £37
Belgian Babies’ Milk Fund .... 70
Australian Wounded Soldiers’ To-
bacco Fund 15
Australian Red Cross 12,207
Australian Red Cross ( Beds) . . 1,057
Victorian Red Cross 1,256
French Red Cross 3,250
Societe d’Assistance Maternelle et
Infantile 1,500
Caulfield Hospital 10,000
Belgian Relief (through Consul). 247
Belgian Children’s Fund (through
Consul) 500
Brigade Depots and Rest Homes 200
French Ambulance 500
Edith Cavell Fund 50
Lady Mayoress’s Fund 9
Repatriation Funds 5,239
Russian Appeal 1,000
Navy Fund 100
26,237
Striking of Anzac Medals 1,750
Postage, including amount paid for Stamps
from Petty Cash Account . . 420


Material for Troops, including labor, packing,
etc
Balance
11,500
37,472
Total
£100,000
XIII.—What of the Future ?
“ That which the;/ have done but earnest of the things that
they shall do.”
In an open letter to the children of Victoria, pub-
lished in April, 1916, in The School Paper, the Director
of Education said:—“For years and years yet,
the sorrows caused
by the war will be
with us —the sight
of maimed and dis-
figured men in our
streets, and, in the
background, the
suffering in our
homes. ... In the
years that follow
after, you boys and
girls will be the men
and women who are
doing things here
in Australia. You
will have to shoulder
the debt we have
incurred to our
brave men ; you will
have to pay it in
kindness and true
charity. The men
and women of to-day
must pass on to
you the obligation.
Peace and Justice.


The best way to fit yourselves to pay your debt to our
soldiers and their families in the future is to practise
helping now.”
He remarked elsewhere: “The war is a very evil thing
—one of the greatest evils that have afflicted mankind.
Still, ‘There is some soul of goodness in things evil,
would men observingly distil it out.’ The Education
Department has endeavored to find this soul of goodness
in things evil; to make of the war a great opportunity
for training our girls and boys in habits of unselfishness
and devotion to a common cause, in zeal for community
service. Surely the great amount of unselfish action
liberated by the movement will produce a permanent
result in character. In this sense the war has been, the
teacher s opportunity. We have to take thought of the
future. Our broken men and their dependents must be
cared for by a people full of sympathy for their suffer-
ing, full of pride and gratitude for their services, and
full of the spirit of brotherhood. To prepare for such
a future is the teacher s obligation.”
To have gathered £lOO,OOO for war relief was a
great achievement. At first, no one dreamed that the
schools could raise half the amount; now no one dares
set a limit to the possibilities of the future. The
hundred thousand was reached before the end of last
October. At the present time (the end of November),
the total has increased to £125,000. By the end of the
year, we may have a third of the second hundred
thousand.
If the war were to end soon (and God grant it
may!), the Fund might still be kept open, with others
of a like nature, till all the hale men should be back
at productive labor, all the cripples so placed that
the wind would be tempered to the shorn lamb, all
the widows and orphans provided for. But that time
seems far distant.
In the meantime, the schools’ efforts cannot, and must
not, be relaxed.


THE RETURN.
[POST SCRIPTUM. —Owing to unforeseen circumstances, the
publication of this brochure has been deluged till January of the
new year. One result of the retardation has been to enable the
compiler to state that the total amount of money that has flowed into
the Victorian Education Department's War Relief Fund up to the
31st of December, 1916, exceeded £149,000. The number of articles
of comfort made or given by the school children and sent abroad to
the soldiers was, on the same date, about 330,000. The varied
nature of these gifts has already been indicated .]
St. Abbs Press, Melbourne— 89447


Price 3 d
