

' %$£*«£' 4 ■ JmSst
W 1 ' ; v . V I.
: £r^tf:- ; ft
>4 i| K \ '**■ . ■
v. ., ,n w
RP




HOW
THEY COLOURED
AUSTRALIA
AND OTHER STORIES
Written by W. H. Honey
PUBLISHED BY THE W. H. HONEY PUBLISHING GO.
31 CUNNINGHAM STREET, SYDNEY
[Copyright]


“All kinds of bush folk with paint pot and brush”


j>k»-
HOW THEY COLOURED AUSTRALIA
Willie the Wagtail and Bluey the Wren
Found an old hut in a beautiful glen,
In need of repair and shabby and old.
“This is ours,” they said, most fearless and bold;
“This is the place we have looked for so long;
I’m sure we can get it for a mere song;
Come let us at once peep through that big crack,
And see what there is inside the old shack.”


They looked through their treasure from front to b
Found many a mousehole, many a crack.
“We’ll do the place up,” said Bluey to Bill
“And spray it with colour from sink to sill;
We’ll thatch a new roof, and lay a new floor,
And mend the windows, replace every door;
We’ll polish the floors with sticky beeswax
And varnish the woodwork and fill all the cracks.”
back,


So they called in Ted and their old friend Roo
And asked their advice on what they should do.
Said Roo, “With Teddy I’ll hop off to town,
And bring back at once some paints of renown.
For paint as you know makes old things look new.
And Roo with vision suggested a few
Of many gay tints that they could procure.
They’d make a good job, he felt very sure.


<a>5pjl y
Early next morning before the cock crowed
Roo galloped with Teddy off down the road.
Though Roo very soon got into his stride,
Teddy said later, he’d had a rough ride.
For he found it most hard to keep his seat;
He said he could find no place for his feet.
Every stride Roo took, Ted bounced in the air
He groaned “It was no way to treat a bear.”


They bought paints and brushes of fine horse hair;
A sprayer to spray the paint in the air;
Got good advice from a queer old fellow;
Who showed them large pots of red, blue and yellow.
When they had quite finished making their round,
They looked at their goods piled high on the ground.
They wondered if they would ever get home
And wished they were close to an aerodrome.


Great was the joy when they reached the abode,
Although they had dropped some goods on the road.
They carried the parcels into the shack,
Roo said the job nearly broke his poor back.
\ oung Teddy was stiff and felt very sore,
And said, “Such a ride will tempt me no more.”
They all decided without more delay,
To make a good start the following day.


' I j
al lfr
Old Roo, who was tallest, painted the roof.
Teddy the sleepy one stretched out aloof.
Willie the Wagtail did the inside.
Now and then Bluey sneaked off for a ride.
In front of the hut was quite a large gate
Where Bluey the lazy one swung in state.
“I’d much sooner play than do any work,
I never liked toil,” he said with a smirk.


The helpers of course did nothing but growl,—
Peter the Possum and Horace the Owl,
A Jackass, an ant and a white cockatoo, —
They made such a noise and such a to-do.
Cocky received the full blast of the spray
When Peter squirted her, early that day.
She screamed and she squarked “You horrid bad thing
I hope that the ant will give you a sting.”


They worked hard from dawn till dark for a week.
Each hole received a small daub and a streak
Of colour and putty to mend the cracks.
“We’ll make it,” they said, “the finest of shacks.”
They rigged a staging to get the work done
And toiled at it heartily every one;
They engaged a team of versatile ants,
Who smeared the putty and paint on their pants.


' " m^M -"I- . ■' P* « . I " ’ .1
■ . ■ I *****^
i
1 ~■ ,h
When it was finished they all gathered round.
You never have heard such a joyful sound.
“A wonderful job,” cried the fat wombat,
‘‘lf you can do better I’ll eat my hat.”
The sun shone brightly around the new home.
There was none as fine where’er you might roam.
It looked very cosy and snug and strong.
Said Bluey to Bill, “We were not far wrong.”


They invited their friends who lived around
And everyone came, sped over the ground;
All eager to see this bright coloured hut;
’Twas funny to see the capers they cut.
They tied an old car together with string;
It had worn out wheels, not even a spring.
But it did good work and altogether,
It filled the bill in spite of the weather.


' 1^iF*^ e<ei1 * <V 7/ \ { *’ 7 ——^^
The news of their skill was spread far and wide.
Indeed, impossible it was to hide
The colourful deeds of these doughty fellows,
Especially Ted’s, for he mixed the yellows.
So they stood for their portrait one fine day.
They were all dressed up in their best array.
When finished they hung it high on a wall
For their friends to see when making a call.


The folk of the bush decided together
To retouch the trees, brighten the heather,
Polish the new flowers and repaint the old.
“Make the place pretty,” was what they were told.
So early next morning active and keen,
Away in the distance there could be seen
All kinds of bush folk with paint pot and brush,
Each doing his best to brighten the bush.


A S'f cl U C,
This story is queer to you all I’m sure.
But queer as it is there’s none that’s truer.
You’ll find every spot in this land of ours
Teaming with colourful trees and flowers.
So now when you walk through our fair country,
Which sparkles with colour in flower and tree,
Remember good people that thanks are due
To Bluey and Willie and Teddy and Roo.


THE RAID OF THE GRASSHOPPERS
It came from the east, it came from the west,
Alarming news of the much dreaded pest.
A Magpie had seen, reported a band,
Crossing the frontier of the backland,
Of grasshoppers which were not far away.
In fact she said they’d arrive any day.
Already they’d started to eat the bush
And lay waste the land in their rav’nous rush.
“We’ll have to look out,” screamed a cockatoo,
“I don’t know what ever we all will do.”
“We’re sure to be starved,” said the old Jackass,
“But what does it matter if we all pass
Out of this bustle and trouble and strife.
As long as we’ve made the best of our life.”
“Let’s hope for the best,” piped Bluey the Wren,
“And forget our troubles and act like men.”


The tidings like fire spread through the whole land;
Wherever they crept they grew and were fanned
Into a huge flame and made such a stir,
Such a to-do amongst feathers and fur.
But some of them said with a sniff and flout,
“There’s nothing to worry about.
We really can’t see, why make such a fuss,
Much better to wait till the foe strikes us.”


But wise old heads who had been there before—
Who’d won distinction in the last great war
Who had been through it, its muddle and mess.
“It was awful too,” they had to confess.—
Sent forth their instructions to one and all,
That everyone had to list to the call,
To arm and to fight, e’en die at his post,
Engage to the last the vast greedy host.


Roo was made Chief, and as head of the State,
He sent forth orders to little and great,
Created heads of departments galore,
Dug up new jobs, which he gave by the score
To all his old comrades, tried and picked men.
‘‘Old Roo’s a marvel,” said Bluey the Wren,
“It’s wonderful, really, what he can do
Their never was such a fellow as Roo.”


— - 1 **» , „-, , ,.«
Roo called for an army of fighting men,
Who rushed to the spot to fight there and then.
They came in droves in all manner of ways,—
’Twas most surprising, did really amaze,
To see the response to the SOS call,
As they came in thousands to join.—what a brawl!
In drays and buses and broken down carts,
Carefree and cheerful and all with brave hearts.


Grey wallabies large and wallabies small
Hopped with alacrity, answered the call.
Magpies and tomtits and wombats so fat,
Jackasses, dingos, a stray tiger cat.
In fact every beast, and bird of the air
Came at the double, with never a care
Some from afar off some from quite near,
To fight for the homeland they held so dear.


' '* 1 ' S>> "
- r m—m I I 1 —|—
The ants came in millions from everywhere
To be in the ranks and hoping to bear
The brunt of the battle upon their head,
“For glory and freedom we fight,’’ they said.
They drilled with a will and soon the bushland
Had a trained army that naught could withstand.
And the planes and tanks and armoured divisions
Stood ready to act on Roo’s decisions.


Young Bluey was made the Air-Commodore,
And always you’d see him well to the fore
Of his fleets of wasps and hornets and bees,
As he raced his squadrons amongst the trees.
“I’ve many brave men in these ranks of mine;
No planes could be better or half so fine;
I have good reason to throw out my chest;
We’ll fight to the death, get rid of this pest.”


Jin ■ " ' ■ hi ■— i—. . ii — ■-—HIHLiMi
“I’ll lead a division of armoured men,”
Said Slowcoach the Turtle, who there and then
Slung over his back a very large gun
And went off to get the foe on the run.
“A machine gun for me,” spoke Sniffy the Snail.
“I’ll stiffen all hoppers that cross my trail,
I’ll teach them to stay in their own backyard,
If any get home, they’ll be riddled and sirred.”


“Sweet pretty creature,” squeaked Willie Wagtail,
Away in the distance perched high on a rail.
“I’d far sooner play than be in a fight,
But if I must fight I’ll fight for the right.
I’d far sooner hop and fritter away
My life with frolic and fun any day.
But hoppers when dead will make a fine feast;
There’ll be shoals of dead’uns, I’m sure, at least.


When Roo looked for Ted, he could not be found.
They asked the squirrels who guarded the ground.
Roo knowing, that Ted spent most of the day
On tree-tops sleeping his whole life away,
Searched in the branches of all the tall trees,
Which gracefully swayed and bent to the breeze,
And found young Teddy enjoying a feed
Of sweet young gumtips with evident greed.


“Incendiary bombs will fall from the air,”
Quoth the old Kangaroo, taking the chair
At an N.E.S. meeting called in haste.
“Fm hoping there’ll be no ruin or waste,
For Horace the Owl all wardens will lead.
And you will receive the service you need.
The dingos know when to sound the alert.
When it sounds, take shelter, do not get hurt.”


IM. I — | __ | _ L _ |J J _ 1 _ | L_—^_J
“The shelters, we’ll build far under the ground.
I’ll need all the workers that can be found,
Like rabbits to dig—there should be no dearth
Of those who know how to burrow the earth.
*
The platypus, too, although quite a freak.
A splendid shelter can build on the creek.
So jump to the job, and make yourselves snug,
Bomb-proof and safe, like a bug in a rug.


When all the departments were ready to fight,
The army advanced in, in the dead of night.
The foreguard wirelessed the enemy slept,
So on to them quickly the whole lot leapt,
They tackled and fought them all together
In spite of the fact of very bad weather.
The hoppers were slaughtered in shoals and shoals
And filled to the brim the furrows and holes.


The fight was deadly but did not last long,
The invaders collapsed, gave in to the strong,
They could not stand up to the awful pace,
That Bluey’s brave airmen set in the race.
The grasshoppers all were beaten and crushed
And home from the fight the victors came flushed,
Covered with glory and honour, renown,
Truly triumphant and gods of the town.


And then the Magpie remarked, “Nevermore—
The foe ne’er again can come to our door;
We’ve entirely clipped his wings for a fight;
We know we have ended broken his might;
We can put our guns and armies away;
Live in security day after day.”
Said Horace the Owl, with a smile, “We’ll see—
No one can tell what the future will be.”


THE
Willie and Bluey and Teddy and Roo
Were having afternoon tea.
They chatted away ’bout all kinds of things
Gossiped hard as could be.
Roo hated small talk, he thought it beneath
Such brainy people as they.
“Let us build a school for children,” he said,
“I’m sure that a school would pay.”
“A splendid idea,” said Bluey the Wren,
“A work that surely would be
Commended, I’m sure, it’s needed as well.”
Said Bill, “That’s how it strikes me.”


“Our children grow up most empty and dull,
Just fritt’ring their time away.
At a school like that, we’d teach them all well
And they could pay by the day.
Now Roo whose head is full of good sense,
Headmaster, of course, would be
And Bluey and I could each take a class
And teach them their A.8.C.”
Teddy declared that he’d much rather hug
The tree-tops, getting the heat
Of the sun’s warm glare and close to the tips
Of gumleaves, juicy and sweet.


However, ’twas ruled a school they would build.
They’d start it at once. Indeed,
The very next day, they went into town
And bought all the goods they’d need.
They called for helpers to dig in the ground.
Some rabbits living close by
Offered to burrow the holes they required.
“Thank goodness,” said Ted with a sigh.
As day after day the great work went on,
Roo watched its fast growth with pride,
Saw each beam was placed, the flooring well laid,
Each board nailed home side by side.


And then all the birds with much mirth and noise
Gathered young twigs close at hand,
And thatched a fine roof to keep out the rain.
Roo said, “My word it looks grand.”
“I’m pleased, most pleased, with the job that’s been done.
We’ll finish it off with paint,
A dash and a splash we’ll fill up the cracks
And leave no room for complaint.”
And then to their joy the great day drew nigh
And so they should not offend,
A letter was sent to all the bush homes,
Asking them all to attend.


I I \\ \ \
At last the day dawned, the sun shone on high,
No cloud broke the clear blue sky.
Roo stood most stately in front of the school
Feeling so proud, but so shy.
Willie and Teddy and Bluey, of course,
Wanted to be to the fore.
So they placed themselves where they could be seen
With Roo outside the front door.
Some very nice things were said of them all
By those who were there that day.
Everyone cheered when the Mayor of the town
Called for a “Hip-Hip-Hooray.”


Roo had employed quite a number of means
To help each child on its way.
He eagerly heard from their Pas and Mas
What each and all had to say.
Those, who were able, endeavoured to help
And took to the school a load.
“I wish that I could, but really I can’t
Do anything,” said the Toad.
They came on Emus and Wallabies strong.
Traffic that day was brisk.
A goanna brought five fat little frogs,
Who travelled at their own risk.


Old Roo invited staid Horace the Owl
To teach in the school, so he
Arrived as the door was opened that mom,
Punctual he ever would be,
Roo had oft heard what a clever old bird
Was Horace, so you can tell,
Why he was chosen to teach in the school
The sums and hist’ry as well.
A possum taught how to hang by the tail
And not fall off any trees.
The Lyre bird tried to teach them its tricks
In the mild midsummer breeze.


One small Koala, a most naughty boy,
Never came early— not once—
And you will be sorry to hear, I know,
At lessons he was a dunce.
He never would learn home lessons, you see.
He said he’d far sooner play.
You’ll grieve I am sure when I tell you the truth,
What happened to him one day.
Into his office Roo took him, annoyed,
He said, he would stand no more.
He birched him, a dunce’s cap placed on his head
And stood him out on the floor.


The school went ahead in great leaps and bounds,
Pupils came fast from afar.
And everyone said, “It’s wanted you know,”
No one its progress did bar.
A turtle each day did quite a good trade
Carrying small scholars to school.
He said his broad back took ten at a time,
Perhaps more —but ten as a rule.
And dear old man Roo was happy and bright—
Wearing a mortar board too —
For scholars were sent from far in the bush.
None was more pleased than old Roo.


And Roo one day gave the children a treat;
He took them down to the sea.
They splashed in water and played on the sand
Happy as Larry, carefree.
They had a wonderful time with a seal,
Who taught them all how to swim.
They all had a try ’cept Sally Wombat
Who said she was trying to slim.
They quite enjoyed themselves riding the waves,
When somebody called out, “Shark!”
Such a to-do, till the cockatoo said,
He’d done the thing for a lark.


Two young opossums were wicked young scamps,
Gave teacher such a bad time.
They used to throw darts all over the school,
Ne’er list to reason or rhyme.
Often as well they’d be caught wagging school,
And spent their time climbing trees.
Teacher has seen them quite often, she said,
Swinging on boughs in the breeze.
The worst of their pranks, and this is quite true,
They’d dip their tails in the ink
And then, with a swish, they’d throw it around,
Over their neighbours and wink.


Three little beetles were sent off to school
One wonderful summer’s day.
Spotty and Stripy and Timothy John
All dressed in their best array.
Their mother had bade them a fond goodbye.
But her heart went pit-a-pat.
She never knew what would happen to them
What mischief they might be at.
Of course they did not go straight to the school,
They played on the way—they would.
They were made to stand out against a wall
And told that they must be good.


Now Bluey and Roo decided to have
A sports day for every one;
And every scholar according to age
Competed, having much fun.
A sack race was won by Jack Wallaby,
Who knew too well how to hop,
Whilst in the nut race—nuts being in line—
A squirrel came out on top.
The fastest race of the day was perhaps
Between a swallow and wren.
The swallow beat Blue by three easy lengths—
Said he could do it again.


'~ WW ■ ||lllll|lll|| ■■*
And so this queer school progressed, day by day;
Then came the end of the year.
And Roo said to Bill, “A speech day we’ll have,”
Said Blue, “That’s quite an idea.”
“We’ll do up the school with bunting,” said Roo,
Brighten the place quite a bit,
We’ll give prizes too, to all boys and girls,
Who have proved, to get them they’re fit.
We’ll invite the mayor of the town to come.
Speeches we’ll have by the score.
In fact we’ll have a most wonderful day.
It’ll place us well to the fore.”


1
\ \ I
'
The speech day arrived and Wombat the Mayor
Sat on the stage with old Roo.
The Mayor, bedecked with his gown and gold chain
Stood up the honours to do.
He said that it gave him such a great thrill
To be with them all that day.
He praised them and hoped that Roo and his school
Would last for ever and aye.
He called for three cheers for Roo and his men
Who’d made the school a success;
He said it had been a help to the bush
“A boon”— he had to confess.


m i / H I I |/ R
~~ - -" x ~ci
“So Willie, Bluey and Teddy and Roo
Sat down in the setting sun.
Agreed with each other, quite satisfied,
Another job had been done.
Said Willie with pride, “We always attempt
To do the best that we can.”
“In fact,” said Bluey, “there isn’t a thing
Which isn’t worked out to plan.”
And Teddy the bear, just stretched his small
“A sleep I need, yes I do.”
limbs,
“Without my firm friends, I’d be naught at all,”
Said Roo, the old Kangaroo.


The / 'T' 'vK,
BUSHi'ICMC
One day Willie Wagtail perched on a fence
Was wagging his tail with glee.
He had just thought of a splendid idea.
“Sure it’s a winner,” chirped he.
“Why can’t we do what the humans all do,
Have sports and side-shows and tea,
The bush folk round here don’t have that much fun,
I’m sure they’d enjoy a spree.
We could use the field that’s back of the barn,
There’s not a better in view.
What fun we could have—l’ll fly cross the road
And talk it over with Roo.”


“Oh, how do you do?” said Willie to Roo,
Who sat in his chair at ease.
“Let’s have a bush fair with races and things,
One of those bush picnic teas.”
“That is a good thought, let’s push it along!
Call a meeting together.
“But,” added Roo with a most doubtful glance
“Think we can fix the weather?”
“Don’t fuss about trifles,” cried Bill with scorn.
“The rain bird I’m sure will warn.
I’ll fly off at once, —tell Bluey and Ted—
See you again in the morn.”


Of course there was ever so much to do
Before the day could be set.
They held a meeting with Roo in the chair,
When all of the bush folk met.
There were dingos, lizards, and wild bush cats,
And Goannas—one or two
Jackasses, Magpies, and all kinds of birds,
And many a Kangaroo.
They all agreed ’twas the brightest idea
“How smart of Willie Wagtail,”
They said, “On my word success is assured.
We cannot possibly fail.”


Willie the Wagtail, they all were agreed
Must superintend the fete.
Whilst our little fat friend well known as Ted
Was placed in charge of the gate.
Old Roo was made ‘Director in Charge’—
He certainly looked the part.
Squirrel as starter was given the gun,
The noise of which made him start.
Arrangements were made for special police
With Pete the Possum as chief.
He had to direct the traffic of course
He hoped his job would be brief.


f~ -I
At last the day came —a beautiful one —
No cloud even marred the sky.
The rain bird was silent—other birds sang
With joy in the tree-tops high.
Willie and Bluey and Teddy and Roo
Repaired to the field at dawn
The bunting most bright was a lovely sight
The turf was smooth as a lawn.
“Oh, come to the Fair!” carolled Bluey the Wren.
“For every penny you spend,
Will go to the aid of the poor and sick
And help their fortunes to mend.”


They found it hard to get transport that day
With many off to the Fete.
And a lot, you know, lived out in the bush—
Nobody wished to be late.
A Tortoise who had an ingenious mind
Fitted himself with a sail,
He wore a cap with a nautical air,
Made light of the dusty trail.
Why even today old stagers will say
They’ve ne’er before or since seen
Such a crowd as that day—going one way—
Bound for the Fair on the green.


The Merry-go-round did such a huge trade
They flocked to it one and all.
Bluey who ran this most paying concern
All through the hot day did bawl.
“Come along, come along join in the fun.
Oh, come just threepence a ride.
You really don’t know that you have been born
Until you’ve been on,” he cried.
“Oh, list to the tune it merrily plays,—
‘Waltzing Matilda’, you know, —
Everyone come to the Merry-go-round
Why buck at threepence a go.”


Shut up in a tent, marked “Fortunes told here.
Was Maggie the Magpie staid.
“Come inside and into your life I’ll look
And tell you your fate,” she said.
“I’ll tell you the truth without any guile,
Yes everything I can see —
If you will have luck or trouble ahead—
Come in and pay me the fee.
And if your life is to be rosy and bright
I’ll see all that in my glass.
I’m able to tell when married you’ll be
So enter my lad and lass.”


C iL- -St
All kinds of bright shows delighted the crowd
That flocked to the Fete that day.
Good shows for the old, bright shows for the young,
All were most merry and gay.
And there was one show at this great display
In a corner of the course —
A Lyre bird coyly danced on a stage,
And made himself, oh, so hoarse.
He mimicked old Roo, to Willie he said,
“Sweet pretty creature am I.” s
“Really,” said Willie “that’s going too far
Still not so bad for a try.”


<~s>
A Mantis who was most proud of his pace
Challenged young Sniffy the Snail
To a race once over the course and back.
Sniffy replied, from a rail—
“I do not aspire to running at all;
I am no sprinter, you see;
I think you’d do well if you were to try
A sprint with a Bumble Bee.”
And then poor Sniffy drew into his shell.
He had no backbone you know.
The Mantis felt snubbed and mournfully glared
At Sniffy from down below.


And then came the great event of the day
One that decided the cup—
When five young striplings of Wallabies ran
With five young Koalas up.
The race was to be three times round the course
For a lovely cup of gold.
The cup was a present from old man Koo,
A work of art to behold.
The “steeds” and their riders came to the post
Weighted, according to size.
The riders were splendent in bright gay hues —
A feast for everyone’s eyes.


They certainly looked a wonderful sight
As they sat with seat so true,
There was Red, Dark Green, and Purple and Gold
And Orange and a Pale Blue.
Their mounts gave trouble before they lined up
Ready to start in the race.
But all of them made a spectacle gay,
As each of them took his place.
Pale Blue was the favourite of the day
You see he’d raced before
And he was well known all over the state —
Had cups and prizes galore.


I
“They’re off” all cried as the barrier rose,
One roar from a mighty host.
The field got away no bother or fuss,
No one was left at the post.
The favourite Pale Blue lay close in the van
And calmly waited his chance,
He said to himself, “I’ll hold myself in,
Then make it a song and dance
I’ll hang to their tails, keep all for the last—
How well my Jockey can ride—
As we turn the comer into the straight
I’ll pass the mob in a stride.”


0
- •« r v>
:#'v^feisr */mJ&Li
“Pale Blue, it wins, yes, Pale Blue by ten lengths”
Pale Blue had done it, that’s true.
He’d run as he said and waited before
He shot like a bolt from the blue —
For as they had turned, were into the straight,
He said to his rider “Hold tight.
You must not fall off till we’ve passed the post.
Hang on with all of your might.”
And then he leapt forth, they seemed to stand still
He passed them by, one by one.
The rest of the field just straggled along
As Pale Blue raced home and won.


And at last the sun sank far past the hills
The dusk crept up everywhere.
“What a day, What a day.” Everyone said
“A most tremendous affair.”
They all were so tired but happy too, they’d
Been at it hard since the morn.
Each one just wandered away to his home,
Ready to sleep till the dawn.
The fete had been a most outstanding win,
Wherever you went, you’d hear,
They all agreed they’d repeat it again,
Sometime the following year.


«3a -■!> *S >•> j.
v'"' jV it > | ’">-'
«r> f ~ L S * > V) CT
I often wonder as I sit and smoke,
Whatever the bush would do
If there were no Willie, Blue, Roo, or Ted
I am most worried, aren’t you.
You see they stand in all manner of ways
For strength to their great renown
Wherever you go you always will hear
Their names lauded high in town.
Whatever they do be sure it is right.
They are straight and staunch and true.
They think out their schemes, have no foolish dreams
Our Bill, Ted, Bluey and Roo.


• r
\


Published by
W. H. HONEY PUBLISHING CO
31 Cunningham Street,
Sydney.


