

LA. n i i tr^x r / v
/
f
'it
Y\


■
% i
3 »5


HOW THE BUNNIES
GOT TO
AUSTRALIA
G. MAXWELL BAKER
{COPYRIGHT)
ALPHA PRINTING COMPANY
71-73 Hardware Street, Melbourne,


■. ft
o , (
' BBa^
, " " ’ ' ! '""■
G. N
Bak6 Vhe
1*80333*
B* 420A2^


* <* • V A *
*— ‘V f \ s','*.-.
HW oDfixtA CAaJLITpmo/
This is Pinkeye Tuffytail speaking
I am going to tell you my story of how Mister
Rabbit became civilized and learnt a new way of living and mainly
how in course of time, he got to Australia.
You are to remember it is only the year of 1787.


. I


iNow the waterfront township of Burrow-
ville, on the island of Seaspray, boasts one main cobbled street, from
which four streets lead down to the waterfront.
In between these smaller streets are the ship-
building yards.
The houses facing the main street are all alike.
These homes are false fronted. By this I mean that the houses, made
to the liking of the builders, show the way firstly into a room, then
leading from this 100 m is the cosy living Quarters of the burrow
These houses are built at the foot of a rather
steep slope, so that this type of building could be done.
The street is a half-moon shape, as the lay of the
land was followed by the builders.
There are very few shops in Burrowville, as the
people have an idea of their own. They deal in exchange. I mean
by this the exchange of their own sought goods with one another. In
this way the women folk, after finishing their household duties, go
from one neighbour to another, and so pass the time of day, while the
men folk do the heavier work of shipbuilding, fishing and farming.


NOW I AM GOING TO
INTRODUCE YOU TO THE CHARAC-
TERS OF MY STORY:—


, n_n
f m r/rt y I
—’■'.? -~-»~ __ . . . ' . JL
• i i * * *
rL i —
9


v aBSBwK.' - \^^.TjP^^HHp3^3^»8BBftKaB8^^^S]B


NOW the sun is just setting and its last rays
shine in a deep red across the sea. The ships in the water are very still
and they are red from the setting sun. The shadows between the ships
are dark purple.
Most of the ships in the shipbuilding yards are
getting the last rays also, and the shadows here are growing darker.
The tops of the houses are tipped with a red still
growing darker while the main cobbled street is darker than anywhere
in town.
Then all of a sudden the sun disappears and lights
are going on in the homes as the little town begins to settle down for
the night, after a hard day’s work.
The light shining from each home is the only means
of street lighting.
Now everything is very quiet in the main street.
and there is not a soul about.
At this time each evening the town crier appears
and announces the Governor s word.
Now I can just see him in the distance with his


lantern in his hand. He is walking slowly in the middle of the street
from one house to another, crying His Excellency’s tidings. I can just
hear his voice long and drawn out.
“Our shipbuilding plan is doing
we ll and His Excellency thanks everybody for
their good work.’’
Then walking to the next place and stopping, the
crier turns and the shadow he casts in the light of his lantern moves
quickly across the cobbled street.
His light flickers as if it will soon go out. And
he cries again in his long and drawn out voice.
“Our shipbuilding plan is doing
well and His Excellency thanks everybody for
their good work.”
Now the voice of the crier is heard by the people
in the home of Mister and Mrs. Rabbit. Their son Bunny is there and
so is Furrycoat, Mister Rabbit’s close friend.
All are seated, and their chatter has ceased, as with
the news each are quiet with their own thoughts.
Then Bunny speaks.


M Uf <BT
>-, Sc bto 1 'jBBffyiffyjr--W qWwftCty L^hJjj^^^~T.x [
AbbBB -'^B -■ v>ii-</ tS
VnflflM B B ~‘j3wSfc4i>ffi3^r\*^ i y ~T i? Bi'i'rnMl PtiM btiFj
82 1 nl ■■
Hiv "j 7 j^rl^^fc~*riL


“You spoke of seeing the Captain today, Father.
Did you speak to him?
“I saw him son. but I did not speak to him. He
was with the Governor at the time so I did not trouble him.
“I saw him too,” says Bunny. “I wonder what
they have in mind besides the Captain and his wife going to Australia?
Before anybody can answer Mrs. Rabbit enters
into the conversation.
“I do not know if it is right, but the talk between
the women folk today while you men were at work, sounded very much
in the way of a raid by the Press Gang.
“Surely they can get enough sailors from the
mainland without raiding us.” says Furrycoat severely. "Besides, we
are nearly all shipbuilders.”
“But you have to remember.” says Bunny, our
shipbuilding plan is almost finished.
“But there will always have to be ships. Bunny,
my dear fellow! says Furrycoat.
“Well,” says Bunny, standing and walking about


the room and facing Furrycoat, “could we carry on with less men?”
“Yes, Bunny,” answers Furrycoat, “we could, but
when men become sailors they do not return and so as to keep our
country a shipbuilding one they will not send the King's men. I cannot
imagine the arrival of the Press Gang!”
“Unless,” says Mister Rabbit, “they are very short
of sailors. But we are only talking of what Mother has gathered from
the trend of the talk between the women folk.”
“Yes,” says Furrycoat, “let us have some music.
And getting up, he places his chair at the piano. “Mrs. Rabbit, leave
your darning for now, and play a few tunes for us. I will play the
violin and Bunny and his Father can sing.”
Well this is the start of the usual evening in the
home of Mister and Mrs. Rabbit.
Mrs. Rabbit plays very well and Furrycoat peps
up the rhythm on the old violin.
Fits of laughter burst from Mister Rabbit and
Bunny as they stand about the piano when Furrycoat plays off key.
Mrs. Rabbit keeps on playing and soon Furrycoat plays in harmony.
Then Mister Rabbit and Bunny sing until Furrycoat goes off key again.


111 i w M \\ M
VI K I s *" / A I M I Jjk 1
ri_ /


“Ho, ho, ho.’’ They all laughed, except Furrycoat.
“Here, you have a go, Bunny. I usually do all
right, but then I am on my own and not playing with a musician.
“Yes,” says Mister Rabbit, sitting down again,
“and your audience does not know or care whether you are on or off
key.’’
“Never mind, Furrycoat,’’ says Mrs. Rabbit, “we
will get better with a little practice!”
Then Mrs. Rabbit and her son Bunny prepare for
the tune they are to play, when they are interrupted by a knock at the
door.”
It is all right, Bunny, I will see to it,” says his
mother, rising from her chair and going to the door.
Good evening. Are you Mrs. Rabbit?” inquires a
nice young lady.
“Yes, my dear. Do come inside.”
The young lady enters the room and they all look
at her.
Where do you come from and what is your
name? asks Mrs. Rabbit in a voice almost as soft as the young lady’s.
“My name is Brighteyes, Mrs. Rabbit, and I am


the new maid to Captain Longears* wife, but I originally came from
the Mainland.”
‘‘Well/’ says Mrs. Rabbit, “here on my left is
my husband, Mister Rabbit. Over in the corner we have Furrycoat, a
close friend of the family, then we have my son, Bunny.”
“How do you all do? I can assure you lam very
pleased to meet you,” says Brighteyes in her soft sweet voice.
“Will you join us for a while, Brighteyes?”
asks Mrs. Rabbit.
“I would like to, Mrs. Rabbit, but I am afraid I
have come to break your evening up for you. as the Captain sent me
down for Mr. Rabbit!”
“Oh well,” says Mrs. Rabbit, “we will see you
another time.”
“I am sorry, Mrs. Rabbit, for I am sailing to
Australia with Captain Longears and his wife at dawn tomorrow.”
“Well,” says Mister Rabbit, getting up from
his chair, “I will go down with you, Miss Brighteyes, and see the
Captain.”
“All right, Sir,’’ answers Brighteyes.
And the two leave.


HI
B U NN y MEETS slight etyes"~1 ~ |j|


All is quiet for a while. Then Furrycoat takes up
the violin and plays lightly, a ditty of the sea, while Bunny plays
another tune on the piano with one finger.
And Mrs. Rabbit goes on darning.


\
f
A
THE PRESS GANG ARE MEN
ATTACHED TO THE ROYAL NAVY
THAT PRESS INTO SERVICE MEN WHO
LOITER IN PUBLIC PLACES.


Now you can picture the little town, late into the
night and all entertainment going well.
The only noise to be heard is the music coming
from the homes as the strains enter into the night and waft out to sea.
With everything so peaceful the King’s ships show
on the horizon, and approach the harbour of Burrowville.
The ships are taking the town by surprise, and
they are reefing sails and are about to anchor in the bay.
They anchor.
Now the long boats have been lowered and men in
dark uniforms, with plain white braiding on their collars, lapels and
cuffs, wearing hats level with their brows, are quietly being rowed
shoreward. These men sit erect and their bayoneted guns point
skyward.
They land a little beyond the main waterfront and
beach the boats and move quietly in the direction of the town.
Now men in every part of the world are known
to gather together, apart from the women folk, and make merry in a


manner of their own. There is singing and music, but with this also,
is drink, which makes the men carefree, and such a place I am going to
introduce you to, the Hare and Thistle,’ an inn at the southern end
of the town.
In past the swaying sign, hanging on the front of
the inn, we find all the men making merry.
In a loud voice somebody starts a song of the sea,
and the piano and violins join in and soon everybody is singing.
Then all of a sudden the piano player stops and
listens to what someone, who has hurried to his side, has to say to
him.
Then the singing stops.
And the violins stop also.
All is quiet as the news is whispered from man to
man.
“The Press Gang is coming!”
Then. Some linger and drink the remainder in
their leaden pots, whilst others leave full pots, and hurry towards the
door.
But the news had arrived too late, and before


V y? \^i v \ I
Vv ■
y/
\ 1 |\ MM f- m
«ffiHMH9|BY \ 1 ■ \ * T I v^stti9flnv i f\ / x|
yjl^B
wIiIbhPBl. vffif / \ I I
D 17


anyone has a chance to make their way out, the first lot of the King’s
men enter the inn.
What a scurry this causes! Men barred from the
doorway leap for the windows, and quite a few are making a getaway
in the, fray which is going on, while many men just stand idly by not
appearing to care what will happen next.
Soon everything quietens down, and the men are
put into line and marched in the direction of the beached boats


Mister Rabbit arrived at Captain Longears place
with Brighteyes, and has been there an hour now.
The Governor is there, and with the Captain s wife
we have the whole gathering.
As music is the main source of entertainment in
all homes in Burrowville, and His Excellency likes good music, the
Captain’s wife plays to them for quite a while.
At this stage Brighteyes is out preparing supper.
Quiet now, for here she comes with the refreshments.
She gives Mrs Longears her cup of tea first, then
the Governor his, then Mister Rabbit and the Captain each take a cup
of tea from the tray. Brighteyes takes hers, and sitting down beside
Mrs. Longears, receives her nod of approval.
Then the Governor starts a conversation:
“I am sorry, Mister Rabbit, that you do not like the
idea of going to this new land. It will in time prove very worthwhile,
as I am told the land is very fertile.
It is not as though you are going to a land where
you will not know anybody, for the Captain and his wife are going.


il A I ff iti*,'
i I /1 | I B v- M tT<
I J I\ j I IB I w'a m' '


Mister Rabbit calmly sips his tea, and the others
await his reply. Then taking his own time, he answers:
“Your Excellency, I am glad you have so kindly
asked me to join my friends in the settling of this new country of
Australia. But lam so attached to our own island home, I cannot
imagine being so content anywhere else.
“Well, it amounts to this," says the Governor. ‘‘Of
course you may not look on the position as I do, but this new land of
Australia has been founded now for many years, and it is about time
something was done about it!
“Excuse me. Your Excellency," says Captain
Longears, “Maybe if we were to mention the fact that we expect the
Press Gang some time this evening. Mister Rabbit would realise that the
Government means business.
“Oh yes. Mister Rabbit,” says the Governor, "the
Press Gang is expected.
“But, Your Excellency, the men the Press Gang
take will be for the war on the enemy across the Channel?”
“Not this time, Mister Rabbit,” continues His


Excellency.
“What we want crews for this time, is for sailing convicts
to our new colony.”
Then Mister Rabbit goes on to say:
“Your Excellency, this war is going to be a long
one, is it not?”
“Quite so, Mister Rabbit, quite so!” he answers.
“Well, you will want ships for the war?” asks
Mister Rabbit.
“Our Navy,’’ answers the Governor, “is now
quite large and has the situation in hand, and
But before His Excellency can finish, a shot breaks
the silence of the night.
They all sit still, and glance from one to the other.
the Captain being the first to speak.
“The Press Gang is here!” he says.
“More likely leaving,” said the Governor, rising
from his chair.
Thank you for the very nice evening, Mrs.
Longears. It is quite late, and I must be getting along.” Then he
takes up his coat, and turning to Mister Rabbit, says:


I ••
■■«>« II m\m**m >■ ■ »\^_
. i


“If you change your mind, Mister Rabbit, you will
find passage with the Captain and his wife. Well, I will be getting
along now. Good evening, all.”
And the Governor goes.
Then Mister Rabbit goes also, leaving the
Captain, his wife, and Brighteyes.
“What are you looking at me like that for,
Brighteyes?’’ asks Mrs. Longears.
“To think I could be so privileged to go along
with you, as your maid, on such an adventure—” answers Brighteyes.
“My dear,’’ says Mrs. Longears, embracing her,
“your company is delightful. Now we must get to bed, as we will
all be up before daybreak!”


Now Mrs. Rabbit is home waiting for Mr. Rabbit
to return from the Captain’s home.
She is sitting at the table sewing, with all her work
before her.
She lifts her head from her work, and rests back
in her chair as Mr. Rabbit enters the room and sits down at the table
opposite her.
"Where is Bunny?" he asks.
"He has gone out to see what caused the disturb-
ance in the town." she answers.
"And Furrycoat?" he again inquires.
"Oh he left soon after you," says Mrs. Rabbit,
"and I might mention that he took the violin with him."
"Well!" says Mr. Rabbit, placing both hands on
the table. "So he went to the Hare and Thistle."
"What was the disturbance?" Mrs. Rabbit asks
quietly.
"The Press Gang, mother, and now I am afraid
Furrycoat will be a sailor very soon,"


< (Hi mSm mm
rfl ® [ 6 J N N ~! ret Hi IIH
*ijBsr


“He may have left the inn before the Press Gang
got there/’ says Mrs. Rabbit.
“I don’t think so,” answers Mister Rabbit, as
Bunny enters the room.
Bunny closes the door and stands facing his mother
and father, holding the violin in one hand, and the bow in the other.
Each look slowly from one to the other.
Nobody speaks, until Bunny, walking to the table,
places the violin and bow before them, and Mister Rabbit says:
“Mother, are you prepared to go to a new land
and settle down?”
Here Mrs. Rabbit carries on with her sewing.
“To Australia?” she finally asks.
“Yes, to Australia,” answers Mister Rabbit.
“If you would like to go,” says his wife, “I would
be pleased to go with you.”
“Bunny!”
“Yes, father,” answers Bunny.
“Come and help me pack, for tomorrow at dawn
we sail with Captain Longears!”


TO
BURROWVILLE j
/r\


A ship appears on the horizon. It is not yet
daybreak, but the ship has two lantern lights and slowly it nears the
harbour of Burrowville.
In a stiff breeze and half side on, the ship’s lights
reflect on the sails as it comes closer.
Majestically the King’s ship glides into the wharf
as sailors finish reefing sails.
The name of the ship can now be seen on the
stern, and in the light of the lanterns, in gold lettering, is “H.M.S.
Adventure.”
There is a lull about the wharf as Captain
Longears goes aboard and takes over from the first mate.
Then Mrs. Rabbit, Mrs. Longears and Brighteyes
go aboard, followed by Doctor Whitehair, Mister Rabbit and Bunny.
When all are aboard the Captain gives his orders
before leaving for below with the first mate, and in a voice ringing
with authority, he cries:
“Up the rattings, you lubbers!” And the sailors
obey.


t V^fe5BBBB^^fe3r*fc~ 1 ’ TWS^flP^SS^&^r^^y-^y£ffi8r £X ~ . K*^—v-3.
Ff *? ■ jjBKcfclB
»P^ ' a v!?yV3ifrv£ , ' ; 'A&SaSl


“Shove off and
bear
west
Mister
Blackcoatl”
And the second mate answers, “Aye, Aye, Sir!”
Then the Captain, in a new stride, borne since he
put foot on deck, and with his hands placed firmly behind his back,
goes below.
There is no cheering at the wharf as the ship sails
away.
The people would like to have cheered, at dawn
with everything looking so fresh and beautiful; but they could not,
for they thought of the convicts below the deck, under hatches.
However, His Majesty’s ship Adventure sails out
of the harbour on an even keel, on a black coloured sea, and under
a dark blue sky, with its two yellow lanterns shining on the sails and
reflecting slightly on the dark water.
The people stand there and gaze
The ship gets smaller and smaller
It is now daylight, and the people begin to move
quietly away, as a Royal Ensign flag waves, and the tips of the masts
dip over the horizon.


At Sen


\ SB \ v\ Ts wX jPaU-A


Now since the people watched His Majesty s ship
Adventure go over the horizon, six months have passed, and everybody
aboard by now can be called a real sailor.
But the trip, to date, has not been without its
trials, for now we find Brighteyes laid up with fever, and she has
been this way for a week.
Bunny has come to know her very well, and is
now waiting outside her cabin to see her, after Dr. Whitehair comes
out.
The Doctor comes out with Mrs. Longears, and
he nods to Bunny, saying:
'“You may go in, Bunny.”
“Thank you. Doctor,” answers Bunny.
He enters the cabin and walks slowly to Bright-
eyes, who is lying cosily in her bunk, and sitting down on the chair
at the foot of the bunk, asks:
“How are you feeling now, Brighteyes?”
“Not too bad, thank you, Bunny,” she answers.
“What did Doctor Whitehair have to say to you
today?”


“He said I would be up and about in another
week.’ answers Brighteyes quietly. How is Claw getting on?
Now Claw is down with fever also. Claw
Whitetail is his full name and he is a convict. Brighteyes used to
look after him, but now Bunny attends to him for her.
With this question, Bunny is very quiet, as a host
of questions crowd his mind. For of late Brighteyes had grov n
distant towards him and they were never together as much, as for
hours on end she would sit and care for Claw Whitetail. Bunny
answers:
“He is doing fine, but he was lower than you.
and you will be up much before him.’’
“Bunny,” says Brighteyes. “it is terrible to think
that when he gets better he will have to go below again.
“Yes, it is not so good, Brighteyes.”
Now there is silence as both are quiet with their
own thoughts Then Bunny says:
“You love Claw Whitetail, don't you, Brighteyes?”
“Yes, Bunny,” she answers, "he is not a real bad


convict though, for when we were on the mainland he was a good
citizen, and still is, but like all boys, he got up to mischief and he was
caught.”
“What did he do, Brighteyes?” asks Bunny.
‘‘Well, Bunny, he let his friend out of the stocks
dressed as a Constable, but unfortunately the Constable he got the
uniform and keys from, knew him in the dark, and he was sentenced
to penal servitude for life.”
'This friend he let out of the stocks enlisted in the
army with him. It was only natural for them to go to the local inn,
but as time went on his friend got worse and he broke all the windows
in the inn. And he was put in the stocks, the local Constable taking
the form of punishment in his own hands!”
So now I know it all,” says Bunny quietly.
“No, Bunny, I haven’t told you all. I had better
tell you the whole story, says Brighteyes, in her quiet spoken manner.
ou ma Y have noticed my being in Burrowville for such a short
time before sailing on this ship, that a plan was worked to, so as I
could be with Claw.”




“Now that you mention it. Brighteyes. it was
rather noticeable, but I never gave it a thought before."
“Well, I thought it impossible to get on the same
ship as Claw until one day I heard the master of the house I was
working at mention Captain Longears’ name. On the mainland the
Captains of the ships are published, so upon hearing Captain Longears’
name mentioned, I got an idea. I asked Mr. Pinknose, the master of
the house, for a letter of recommendation to Captain Longears. When
I got to Burrowville. I was accepted into the household, and treated
more like their daughter than just a maid, and a complete stranger at
that.
“And after a lot of attempts, I asked the Captain
to get Claw on his ship, and he did."
"You are a brave young girl, Brighteyes," says
Bunny, rising from his chair. "I must go now, Brighteyes. and I will
keep an eye on Claw for you. And thank you for telling me every-
thing. I look on things very differently now."
"You still like me, Bunny?" asks Brighteyes, as
he is leaving.


“Yes. Brighteyes, I admire you all the morel
answers Bunny.
And he leaves the cabin.
Some time has passed since Bunny saw Brighteyes.


V !/
O'
C 3
I L




Brighteyes is now up and about, and Claw
Whitetail has recovered also, and is now down with the other convicts.
Captain Longcars has treated these convicts very
well, and between them, there has been contentment up to a point, as
each day a group of men have been brought up on deck, out of their
small and dark quarters. Rations have been the same all round, the
Captain having the same amount as the roughest convict.
Once again it is evening and the ship is sailing
along in a steady breeze.
The lanterns are extra light on this moonlit night
for the people gathered at the aft of the ship.
Two sailors are playing on violins, while the others
present are singing with all their hearts.
The melody sounds light and sweet in the open
air, and the singing very clear.
Captain Longears, Mister Rabbit and Mrs. Rabbit
are there, and also Bunny and Brighteyes, while the first mate, Mister
Blackcoat, is at the wheel steering the ship.
A new tune is beginning; it is a lively one, and


Mister Rabbit getting up, jigs round and round. Then Brighteyes
getting up, joins him. Then Bunny, Mrs. Rabbit and Captain
Longears join in.
Soon they are all arm in arm in one circle, singing
and dancing as they move round.
In the excitement nobody notices the arrival of
storm clouds until Mr. Blackcoat cries:
‘‘Storm approaching
aft!”
The music stops. A gust of wind makes the ship s
timbers creak, as it lurches in the strain, and almost upsets all on deck.
The women folk arc quickly taken to their cabins.
and Bunny and his Father climb quickly up the rigging with the sailors
as the Captain cries:
topsails!” and in the rising wind
‘‘Reef the
his voice can just be heard.
Then the rain comes and the sea grows fierce and
the ship rolls and dips as it goes.
With the topsails reefed and the Captain and Mr.
Blackcoat holding the course, the ship steadies and is under control.
But the storm still rages


_____ j


Daybreak is
All night the storm howled
here, and it still rages.
A mast has gone, leaving only the main one
standing.
Everybody is tired and Mister Blackcoat and the
Captain are still at the wheel.
A sailor up the rigging has sighted land, and he
is calling as loud as he can in the howling wind and sweeping ram.
“Land Ahoy! Land Ahoy!” But alas! as
he is calling, the main mast is taken away by a large wave, as it sweeps
over the fore of the ship. Mister Blackcoat and the Captain are still at
the wheel, but little good they can do now, for the ship in its state, is
at the mercy of the sea.
The second mate struggles against the wind
and the rain to get to the Captain to receive his orders.
“Open the hatches!” cries the Captain.
“Aye, aye, Sir!” answers the second mate.
“Mister Blackcoat. you hold the wheel as well as
you can and keep us running with the storm. I will get the convicts
on deck.” Then running to the quarter deck, he cries to the second
mate: “Get the axes, it will be quicker; if we don’t get them out soon,
they will never get out.”


The second mate wasted no time m getting the
axes, and breaks open the hatches, and the convicts stream out on to
the rolling deck.
Men! ' cries the Captain. It's every man for
himself. Land is ahead and you are welcome to the timbers of the
ship, and I wish you all good luck.”
Then the axes bite into the ship’s railings.
It is now broad daylight and the storm still rages.
and Bunny, though tired and weary, makes his way to his Mother’s
cabin.
Alas! she is not there.
Where can she be?
He hurries out on to the deck again and gazes out
to sea. As he does, he sights his Mother and Father and Mrs.
Longears on a large raft just before they disappear on the other side
of a wave, only to appear on the crest of another.
Then he thinks of Brighteyes.
He rushes past all the convicts to her cabin.


A piece of mast and other timbers have to be moved
before he can get in. Then he flings the cabin door open and enters.
“Brighteyes!” he cries, “why didn’t you call for
help?”
“I did,” says Brighteyes, holding her dress just out
of the water, “but the water would keep pouring through the port-
hole.”
“Come, now,” says Bunny, “we will get away
from the ship before it is too late.”
Leaving Brighteyes holding to what remained of
the mast, Bunny quickly got an axe and hacked off the door which
led to the Captain’s quarters. Then he throws it overboard and taking
Brighteyes in his arms, he goes to the poop-deck and leaps into the sea.
Together they disappear under the water, but soon
they both cling to the door, and quickly they go from one wave top to
another, as they settle themselves aboard their raft.
At first, as everybody in turn leapt into the sea,
they were in sight of each other, but soon they were scattered, and we
find Brighteyes and Bunny far from the others.


f *• J- * , , "f S' 1 s ft * ; I I ■ P jj. ■ I ' V . g TjJF M li " *■•'
T |ll ■ V'K
r !■ Bf
■BHr
VO 6 E t H E iC THEY LEAIP in>Tq fH-£ SEA


Now the sea is starting to settle down, and
the wind is losing its force, while the rain has stopped.
Bunny is holding Brighteyes on the raft, as her
arms have lost their use with the cold.
Hope is almost lost for Bunny as he worries for
the safety of Brighteyes. Then he sights tree-tops in the distance.
“Land,” he sighs to himself, and lays his head to
rest on the raft.
As the sea calms down they are left high and dry
on the beach, but they both remain on the raft too tired to move after
their ordeal.
Bunny, though tired, is worried about Brighteyes,
for she just lies there with her eyes closed, without moving.
After watching her for some time, hope rises in
Bunny when he sees her move ever so slightly. Then she cries:
“My Brother! My Brother! Let him out —He
will—
Then Bunny’s thoughts go from worrying about
her, as she opens her eyes and sits up. “Where are we?” she asks,
looking at Bunny.


; ' -■••/'•••••I - -
V 6UNNY feRlGHTEVES IN AUSTRALIA | "M U
L_1 __ I


“We are in Australia, but the main thing is that
we arc safe!”
“Yes, Bunny, “we are safe now. Can I ever repay
you for saving me?”
“You repaid me a little while ago,” says Bunny.
“How, Bunny?” she asks, rising steadily to her
feet with his help.
“You said, ‘My Brother! My Brother! Let him
out,’ and I thought of the time you said you loved him —you meant
Claw when you said your brother, didn’t you?”
“Yes, Bunny,” she answered, “he is my brother,
and I love him very much. Ido hope he is safe.”
“He will be safe, Brighteyes; they all have a chance
to be free again in this lovely country. Look at it!”
And in their embrace they look around at
their new land.




l ;|B
* »
■»
81676
