

jo-i s -7082.
HOWTO
BECOME
A
VENTRILOQUIST
WILL ANDRADE
276 Gollins Street, Melbourne
(Only Address)


ANDRADE’S MAGIC ★ PLAYS
Great New Magic Book
SLEIGHT OF HAND
WILL ANDRADE.
Featuring . . . Complete and Compre-
hensive Descriptions and Illustrations
of ALL THE BEST Sleights and
Tricks with Sleights.
Card Magic Billiard Ball Magic
Coin Magic Thimble Magic
Cigarette Magic
Silk, Rope & Miscellaneous Magic
EVERYTHING FULLY EXPLAINED.
BECOME A GREAT MAGICIAN.
Send NOW for this—the Best Book
of its kind ever written.
25/3, postage.


GREASE PAINT ★ NOVELTIES
Ventriloquism and the
Vcntrilo
The wonderful instrument, "The
Vcntrilo,” and this little book will
enable anyone to become a ventriloquist
and mimic provided he is ready to
devote a little time and practice to
the art. The more time he puts into
his work the better, and it is to help
the beginner to understand what he
has to do that this book has been
written. Read the instructions on page
4, and practise holding it in your
mouth.


ANDRADE’S MAGIC ★ PLAYS
THE WONDERFUL DOUBLE THROAT OR
Swiss Warbler Bird Call
Only Original Bird Call and Prairie Whistle.
DIRECTIONS FOR USE.
Soak in water until thoroughly saturated,
then place on your tongue with reed nearest
the teeth and finished side of leather upwards,
and hiss gently at first; keep increasing the hiss
for a louder sound. In giving imitations of
Birds and Beasts, you make variations with the
tongue and lips. Any person following these
directions we will guarantee they can imitate
any Bird or Animal in a few minutes.


Before giving instructions relative to the
different voices, I would call your attention
to a very important point. attention of
the audience must always be attracted to the
point from which the voice is to come.
If you but turn your head, after having
made an announcement that “Mr. So and So
is up there/' the attention of the audience will
be immediately attracted to that point, and
before you have uttered a word they will be
impressed with the idea that the voice is to
com*, from the suggested direction. With the
audience in this expectant state it does not take
much of the so-called "power" to deceive them.
As a beginning, the student should strain a
little from the chest, as if in making c
prolonged grunting sound in a high key. Let
the air escape slowly, keeping the lips and
teeth slightly apart. Having tried this a few
minutes, attempt to say such words as; "Oh—
oh, dearl" "I say!" "Halloo!" etc., straining
a little all the time-


This will give you the exact location from
wheats this voice is to be started. After a few
trials, you will be astonished at the proficiency
you have already attained. It will be of great
help to the student to note the effect produced
by a person calling from the distance. Observe
the sound carefully, and try to reproduce it by
the method laid down. After a few trials, you
will be able to execute the sound with scarcely
an effort. The sound should be somewhat
muffled. The hardest point to overcome is to
make the voice appear to come nearer* As this
voice is usually represented as coming from a
box or cupboard, a suggestive movement of the
lid or door will help the illusion. As the lid
is gradually raised, the sound must be heard
more distinctly. To effect this, the student
should gradually relieve the strain on the chest,
making the sound farther up in the throat, so
that when the lid is fully raised the sound
will come directly from the roof of the mouth.
In closing the box, the same principle reversed
will apply.
From the time the lid is raised until it is
closed, use only the 4 ‘distant voice/’ Do not


interrupt it with the natural tone. You will
find this, too, difficult to overcome without
long practice. Before you open the box, you
can hold a conversation with the supposed
character inside, or even, opening the box and
allowing the lid to remain up, have your
dialogue; but, as the tone is changing all the
time the lid is in motion, it must be evident
that the introduction of your natural tone only
tends to make it more difficult. It is better
to keep up a continual talking in the mimetic
voice while opening and closing the box than
to break up the speech. A very good exhibi-
tion of the “distant voice" can be given by
bidding “good-night" to a supposed person
outside. As the voice upon the outside grows
faint and appears to go away with the dis-
tance, the natural tone of the performer should
grow louder in equal proportion. In order
to carry out the deception, it must be made
to appear to the audience that the outside man
could not hear your voice unless you called in
a loud tone.
As an experiment, I have located this voice
in a box, and, turning around, used the sam*


ANDRADE’S MAGIC ★ PLAYS
VENTRILOQUISM.
voice as if coming from above. According to
the statements of the audience, it appeared to
have an entirely different sound and to repre-
sent two distinct persons. This can be easily
accounted for. The audience were deceived by
my suggestive movements-
Having made up their minds that they
were to hear a different person, they did not
realise I was using the same voice.
The trick is to alter the natural tones of the
voice , so as to make a very apparent distinc-
tion between it and the mimetic (or distant)
voice . This can be done so skilfully that the
audience will not realise the change. This is
one of the greatest secrets of the .
If your mimetic voice is to be low, you
must raise the natural tone in your announce-
ment relative to where the voice is to come
from. You will find that by making your
reply in the mimetic voice, in a tone but a
trifle lower than the natural one, the difference
or transition will be so great that the mimetic
voice will appear very deep in comparison.


If you arc to continue the dialogue, and the next
voice is to be high, do not let your natural
tone be but a trifle higher than the one you
have just given as the low voice. This will
make another marked difference. The whole
secret is in making these jumps or "transitions/*
without its being apparent to the audience. A
little care is all that is necessary.
You must have such control over the muscles
of the face that not a movement can be detected
while the voices arc being heard. To become
skilled in this portion of the art, the student
should practise before a mirror.
It is best to learn to produce the sounds
first without any attempt at holding the mouth
still. Having mastered this, observe the follow-
ing directions;—
Keep the Ups in a natural , opened
but a little. The teeth should almost touch
each other; hold the jaws , and in this
position, you will find that the tongue can be
used almost as readily as in ordinary conversa-
tion. There should be no apparent effort. The
countenance should appear perfectly at ease.


This rule will apply to all the mimetic voices
used. At first it will seem impossible to pro-
nounce certain words without moving the
lips, but when the method is known whereby
certain sounds (resembling distinct pronuncia-
tion) arc substituted, it will appear very easy.
In pronouncing the alphabet the sound of V is
substituted for B. Mis pronounced like eng.
For P use fee, W, duggle-you Words difficult
to articulate should be avoided as much as
possible. In rendering a popular song, the
performer cannot well substitute words of his
own, but must adhere closely to the original.
The fact of a song being popular is of great
help to the performer. The audience being
more or less familiar with the words are not
apt to watch the pronunciation so carefully.
Occasionally, very troublesome words will
occur, and the exhibitor must substitute a sound
resembling the original. Thus: Babies on our
Block should be rendered Vavies on our Vlock;
a big piano, a vig fiano; My Mary Ann, Ngi
Ngary Ann, etc.
A valuable adjunct to an exhibition is to
have several "character" dolls with movable


jaws. There is no limit to the variety of
characters that can be introduced in this way;
old or young, male or female, Irish, Scotch,
Negro, and, in fact, almost any character that
may suggest itself. (See Will Andrade's List.)
NEW VENTRILOQUIAL PATTER
Here are nine new acts especially written for
you. Positively EXCLUSIVE to us, and yours
for 1/6 EACH, or NINE for 10/6.
TRAVEL TALKS—a Riot of Fun 1/6
VICTORIA CROSS—“How I Became
Famous" 1/6
GURGLING GUFFAWS Ideal Tor
Smokos 1/6
A KNEASY ONE—Suitable for Chil-
dren's Shows 1/6
YOUR DAUGHTER, PLEASE—Up-
to-date Humour 1/6
MOTORS—AII About Cars 1/6
HOT AERlALS—Humorous Patter Story 1/6
JUST FANCY—Three Pages of Mirth 1/6
WILLIE'S STUDIES—SchooI Days are
Here Again 1/6


1 ANDRADE’S
i
f
I for
i ENTERTAINMENT
| Write for Lists
| No.
I 1. Long Plays.
j 2. Short Plays and Revue Sketches
j 3. Plays and Monologues for
} Males, Cross Talk, Patter,
j Minstrelsy.
| 4. Plays for Women and Girls.
| 5. Monologues and Recitations.
I 6. Operettas, Musical Comedies,
j Children's Cantatas and Plays
| 7. Make-up Requisites and Books
t of Instruction.
J 8. Tricks that Anyone Can Do.
| Jokers' Novelties.
i
i
i
i
o
f
I WILL ANDRADE
| 276 COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE
Wilke and Co. Pty. Ltd., Printers. Melbourne.
NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA
