

Carnet Walch,


HUDDART, PARKER & GO.
LIMITED.
Steamship Owners & Merchants.
List of Fleet.
Registered
Tonnage.
Remarks.
ALERT
BURRUMBEET
COOGEE ...
COURIER...
DESPATCH
EAGLE (Tug)
ELINGAMITE
EXCELSIOR
FALCON:(Tug)
HYGEIA ...
LINDUS
NEMESIS
SANTO N
WASTWATER
WENDOUREE
Speed, 12J Knots.
Speed, 14 Knots.
Speed, 16 Knots.
Speed, 20 Miles.
Speed, 11 Knots.
Speed, 13 Knots, (Ocean-going.)
Speed, 14 Knots.
Speed, 14 Knots
Speed, 10 Knots,
New Saloon P/S, Speed, 23 Miles.
2400 tons d.w. Cargo boat.
2000 tons d.w. Cargo boat.
Carrying capacity, 12,000 bales Wool.
Carrying capacity, 12,000 bales Wool.
Speed, 13 Knots.
HEAD
OFFICE
: 525 COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE.
Branch Offices,
Victoria
,—Geelong, Moorabool Stre, .
Do. do. Ballarat, Lydiard Street.
Do. do. Portarlington, Wharf,
Agencies, Victoria — Port Albert, Mr. F. C. Shaw.
Do. Cunninghams (Lakes Entrance), Mr. A. Murray.
Do. Bairnsdale, Mr. L. W, King,
Branch Offices, N.S.W.— Sydney— Foot of Margaret and Sussex Sts.
Do. Newcastle —Scott St. (near Custom House).
Agencies, Tasmania — Launceston —Tasmanian Woolgrower; Agency
Company Limited.
Do. Hobart— C. Piesse & Co., 7 Elizabeth Street.
lading Co. Ltd.
r


| ‘ HUDDART, PARKER & CO.'S
GUIDE
TASMANIA
pARNET y^ALCH
My Own, My Native Land.”
Jftclbcmrnc:
HUDDART, PARKER & COMPANY LIMITED
AND ALL BOOKSELLERS.
[■Copyright Bem'ied, ]


IDeMcafcD
By the Author and Compiler
g)to xif the
IN TASMANIA
In Hearty Recognition of their Tireless Labours
For the Advancement of
Jtelani).
McCarron, Bird and Co., Printers, Melbourne.


M&'SS/F lo(,zg
preface.
a year conies round but what I find myself quoting the poet
Hj| who exclaims, “’Tis oh! to be in England now that April’s
there!” with a substitution of the words “ Tasmania” and
“summer” for “England” and “April” respectively ; but alack-a-day,
though a Tasmanian born, one who inhaled the Island’s beauty with
his infant breath, it has been my hard fate season after season to bid
good-bye to throngs of my friends bound for Tasmania, while I
remained fast chained by some duty that never galled me so much as
it did on those occasions. Judge, then, of my delight when Messrs.
Huddart, Parker and Co.—my everlasting benison upon them —
offered me the opportunity, not only of revisiting my native country,
but of revisiting it on so popular a mission as the compilation of a
new Guide Book—this same little volume—destined I trust, to be
the means, however humble, of doing some trifling good for the land
I love with all my heart.
That such a book was needed I infer from the fact that when I
recently inquired at several of the leading booksellers in Melbourne
for a “Guideto Tasmania” the only work of the kind forthcoming
was at least four years old, and four years, as we know, means a
good deal in these bustling times—yes, even in Tasmania, where
several new lines of railway have been opened during that period—
so, to make a long story short, I accepted Messrs. Huddart, Parker
and Co.’s offer, packed up, and started.
To quote myself,* I may here restate that from my earliest youth
my beau ideal of happiness has been the combination of pleasure
with business. Hence the compilation of this book, involving as it
did a series of excursions to all parts of the Island, and the meeting
with relays of agreeable people, has been a source of the keenest
pleasure. To travel from point to point, picking up nuggets of
information, viewing gems of scenery, and interviewing the men and
women who in different districts and in varied spheres are building
up the future of the colony—this in itself is pleasing. But to be
received everywhere literally with open arms as one who is trying to
do good for others as well as for himself, this is simply soul-
satisfying. Matter-of-fact considerations of profit lose their sharp
edges, and have their harsh outlines softened into dreamy beauty
when seen through the glamoursome mist of philanthropy and
surrounded by a halo of patriotism. Under such circumstances
pleasure coalesces with business as thoroughly as the twin-powders
of a Seidlitz draught, and one feels almost as self-contented as a paid
* Victoria in 1880,


member of Parliament, whose salary is an “ honorarium,” and whose
perquisites are “ the richly-deserved amenities of public life.”
Then the writing of the book has been another delight. Tethered,
so to speak, to the central stake of Fact, I have still had sufficient
freedom to enable me to crop a little of the surrounding thymy
herbage, with here and there a wild Tasmanian flower in all its simple
beauty. The forget-me-not blue of morning skies, the vert tendre
of springing grass and budding foliage, the sheen of wind-
swept, sun-tipped gum-tree leaves; the “caller” air that woos
the wandering wayfarer, all these—each in its turn—have
ministered to me. If Henry Kendall, of whose tender muse New
South Wales is justly proud, can find fit subject for a poem in a
flake of moss, and tell us how —
“Swift gleams across its petals run,
With winds that hum a pleasant tune,
Serene surprises of the Sun,
And whispers from the lips of Noon,”
surely I, in my halting prose, may be allowed a word or two, even
in a Guide Book, in appreciation of the wider glories of wood and
wold, river and waterfall, stern cliff and smiling strand.
And what a theme a man has in Tasmania ! From tiny fern-clad
dells to dense forests ; from peeps of sylvan solitudes to views of
snow-clad mountains far away ; from trickling rivulets to rushing
torrents and cascades ; from moonlit midnights, rosy dawns, and
golden noons to ruddy sunsets, setting all the woods aflame ; from
depths of dreamy loveliness to heights of noble grandeur, the
whole Island teems with freshness and beauty. No wonder that
the summer and autumn mouths should find this paradise of
tourists —easily reached from Melbourne in less than a day—
made musical with the laughter of happy groups, all enjoying
to the top of their bent the vigour imparted by out-door exercise in
the bracing island air.
There is one stipulation I make—when you accompany me you
muse be in the best of all possible spirits. Leave your liver-pad
and all your worries, commercial or domestic, behind you. I won’t
allow Black Care to be seated even on the crupper of my winged
steed. “ A merry heart,” you know, “ goes all the day,” so bring
a merry heart wilh you, and let the rest of your anatomy be in due
keeping. Another matter. lam not a Philoxenus—the gentleman,
you will remember, who wished to possess the neck of a crane, so
as to be longer in tasting the pleasures of the table—but I do like
what our American friends designate a “good square meal;” and
so, if I cannot exactly say, as the “ Maiden-mit-nodings-on” said
to Ritter Hugo, “You shall haf a shplendid dinner eef you
trafels along mit me,” I can promise you, at least, decent fare
wherever we put up at. I could not quite test all the hotels
and boarding-houses, you know, but I inspected a good many,
and was really agreeably surprised at what I saw. Hotels
such as there are now both at Hobart and Launceston, and
boarding establishments like “ Westella” or “Pressland House,”
in the former city, would do credit to any community, how-
ever fastidious. I suppose there is no need of me in this present
year of grace to explain that the old idea of travellers being
“ fleeced” in Tasmania—as it has been put to me—is quite exploded.


At any rate, the tariffs everywhere are fixed quantities, and from
my, not very limited, experience elsewhere are as reasonable as
they should be.
Do not, by the way, expect perfection in this Guide Book. I have
simply done my best to furnish the latest and most reliable
information I could glean during my personal tour, and there were
times when in a hurried visit to some scene of solemn grandeur I
felt very small I can assure you —something, shall we say, like a
literary blue-bottle buzzing about in a cathedral window. But, I
repeat, I have done my best. Ido not anticipate that I shall please
all; but I hope to please some, and there an end. I have not
thought it necessary, par txemple, to go into very minute details
about certain matters. I rather fancy the average tourist can
dispense with such items as the whereabouts of police offices,
slaughter-houses, powder magazines, or even Salvation Army
barracks. If he cannot he must apply elsewhere for the model
guide book of his wishes. A model guide book forsooth ! With
some people nothing would satisfy short of a volume printed on
extra-superfine, double-milled, hand-made paper, with steel-plate
engravings, and a flap pocket full of £lO notes ! “ And all,” to use
showman language, “for the exceedingly low charge of sixpence.”
Go to—we do but jest.
Where all is so beautiful or so grand I have refrained from
marking out any special tour to be made to the exclusion of others.
“Look here, boss,” said an intelligent coach-driver to me, “ people
that come over here find themselves like the little boy in the pastry-
cook’s shop—they don’t know where to choose;” a prosaic, but
forcible way of expressing the phrase embarras de richesse. Speaking
for myself, and as a Tasmanian, what impressed me most, from a
material point of view, were the great strides made by those two
districts—the North-West Coast and the Huon. The former was
simply a revelation—the latter was meeting an old acquaintance
ever so much handsomer and richer than in by-gone days. And I
hope with all the fervour I can gather together from the corners of
my being that what I report of these localities now may soon be
the truth regarding every other part of Tasmania. The West
Coast in particular holds out great promises in the shape of minerals.
May all those promises be more than fulfilled, and the sentiment
printed on the cover of this book, “Advance Tasmania,” prove a
foregone conclusion ! There will be no talk of “annexation” then,
as there is no need of it now. What Tasmania wants is her legiti-
mate place in the coming Federation of Australasia, with an open
intercolonial market for all her produce, and a voice, proportionately
with her importance, in federal affairs. “ Federation,” we are told,
“is in the air.” For Tasmania’s sake may it speedily be implanted
in solid ground. As her Agent-General, Mr, E. N. 0. Braddon,
said at a recent meeting of the Royal Colonial Institute in London:—
“ With a splendid soil to allure the farmer, with magnificent pro-
spects for the miner, with promising industries yet undeveloped,
or only in the first stage of development, with a climate
and people second to none in the world, and physical beauties
that few countries can rival, Tasmania should have a great
future in store for her to which Mr. J. G. Davies, M.H.A.,
Tasmanian Commissioner to the Paris Exhibition, pertinently added:


of the yeoman and mining class, and also the assistance of British
capital. ”
The mention of these names reminds me that, in addition to those
gentlemen—and one lady—whose kindness I have acknowledged in
the body of the book, I am under obligation, for information supplied
and courtesies extended, to the following:—The Hon. A. T. Pillinger,
M.H.A., Minister of Lands and Works; Mr. H. B. Mugliston,
M.H.A.; Mr. C. H. Grant, Engineer in-Chief and General Manager
Tasmanian Main Line Railway ; Mr. Alexander Morton, Curator,
Hobart Museum ; Mr. W. H. Smith, Town Clerk, Hobart; Mr. F.
W. Piesse, Hobart; Messrs. A. T. Harvey, T. Hogarth, and A. W.
Birchall, of Launceston ; Mr. Thos. Sullock, Penguin; and others
whose names may escape me at the moment, but not forgetting the
proprietors and editors of the various Tasmanian newspapers, and
certain members of my own family, who, for obvious reasons, are
here left unnamed. Will they, one and all, accept my warmest
thanks.
And now a few words, mainly for the benefit of my Tasmanian
friends, as to the firm who have inaugurated this new steamship
service and the immediate causes of their so starting. And here, to
avoid the slightest suspicion of dictation, I shall give chapter and
verse for each statement, culling my information from the public
press of Victoria and Tasmania, with but a few remarks of my own to
thread the various items together.
First, as to what is thought about Messrs. Huddarb, Parker and
Co. in the city where thej r have established their head-quarters, and
worked their way up to the position they now occupy. Says the
Melbourne Evening Standard of 25th June last: —
“A firm which holds so conspicuous a place in Australian shipping circles,
Messrs. Huddart, Parker and Co. is one that every Australian should be proud of.
As with most undertakings of the kind in these colonies, the original organisation
had a somewhat humble beginning ; but sound and enterprising men were at the
head of it, and it gradually expanded until now it ranks with the most im-
portant firms of the kind in Australasia. A great deal of the prosperity which
has attended the company’s operations in later years is undoubtedly due to the
capable management of Mr. James Huddart, to whose energy and knowledge such
additions to the fleet as the Courier, Coogee, Burrumbeet, Corangamite, and Elinga-
mite are, and not unjustly, mainly attributable.”
Following this, we have the Melbourne Age. of the 7th October last
devoting a lengthy article to Messrs. Huddart, Parker and Co., in
the course of which the journal says :—“There is little doubt of their
now occupying the position of the largest colonial steamship
company. Their fleet also has the proud distinction of having
amongst them the fastest vessels trading out of Melbourne.”
This then was the recognised position of Messrs. Huddart, Parker
and Co. when, in August last, they were invited by Mr. A. T.
Harvey, on behalf of the Tasmanian Woolgrowers’ Agency
Company, to convey a cargo of valuable stud sheep from Launceston
to Melbourne in the interests of some of the largest sheep-owners in
Tasmania, the understanding being that this was to be, so to
speak, the test trip towards further developments in the shape of a
regular service. The boat chosen was the Burrumbeet, and the
Melbourne Argus, of 15th August last, reports that the following
were the principal shippers by her :


"Messrs. Chas. and P. W. Archer, W. H. Bennett, J. 0. Boyes, J. W. Brumby,
T. G. Bisdee, Finlay Bros., W. Gibson and Son, James Gibson, R. 0. Gibson, J. B.
Gibson, Thos. Gibson, Thomas Gatenby, W. A. Qatenby, H. Gatenby, A. Gatenby,
William Gatenby, W. G. Hogarth, H. S. Hewitt, E. H. Hazlewood, G. W. Keach,
F. E. Lawrence, F. Lyne, D. Mackinnon, G. Parramore, Thomas Parramore, H. S.
Smith, R. Taylor, Jas. Vlney, R. Viney, W. H. Whitfield, E. Walker, W. H. Gibson,
James Lyne, T. B. Blyth, E. J. R. Parker, B. Archer, G. F. Rigney, Adam Taylor,
W. Pitt, jun., Chas. Best, T. Riggall, C. B. Grubb, R. 0. Kermode, R. Hall, and S.
H. Grueber. Sheep were also shipped to Brisbane by the same opportunity by the
following breeders:—Messrs. VV. H. Gibson, P. W. Archer, Thos. Gatenby, Wm.
Gatenby, Herbert Gatenby, W, H. Bennett, Donald Mackinnon, A. and G. L.
Finlay, Thomas Parramore, Hon. James Gibson, W. Gibson and Son, Geo. A.
Jones, and Robert Taylor. Mr. James Huddart, managing director of Huddart,
Parker and Co., and Mr. Traill, also a director of the company, went across in the
Burrumbeet in connection with the business.
“ The appearance,” continues the Argus, "of so large a steamship in the Tamaras
the Burrumbeet was duly noted in the Launceston papers, and by way of cele-
brating the occasion, Messrs. Huddart and Traill invited a number of the leading
citizens to lunch on board the steamer. There was the usual speech-making
inseparable from these functions.
“Mr. Huddart, in responding for the firm, said that when they were
approached by Mr. Harvey, manager of the Tasmanian Woolgrowers’ Agency
Company, about sending vessels to Tasmania, they stated that they were quite
prepared to do business upon business lines, and upon such lines the transactions
were conducted. The little island needed only development, for it was one of the
richest spots beneath the sun. As to competition, he would remark, even if
another steam company did enter the lists, there would be no necessity for the
shareholders of the T.S. N'. Company to sell out. Increased steam commun cation
meant increased trade.”
In addition to the sheep, the “ Burrumbeet” took to Melbourne
all the stud sheep-breeders who were visiting the sales that year.
Whilst going up Hobson’s Bay, Mr. A. T. Harvey, acting for the
charterers and shippers, invited Messrs. Huddart and Traill, as
well as the officers of the steamer, to join the shippers in a glass of
champagne; and, in proposing the health of the firm of Huddart,
Parker and Co., said that his company had very much to thank
them for over the present shipment. He went to them in a diffi-
culty, feeling the weight of an old monopoly, which was endeavour-
ing to advance already high rates of freight, and hampering the
extension of business ; and it gave him pleasure to state that
the present transaction had been a most satisfactory one for his
company, and had brought them into friendly relations with
Messrs. Huddart, Parker and Co. that he hoped to see cemented
into a permanent connection in the near future.
Mr. Huddart, in responding, said his company had been pleased
to meet the Tasmanian sheep-breeders, and he could promise them
that, so long as his company had a boat to spare, they should never
feel that they were held fast by any monopoly. (Applause.) The
only part of the business he felt was not being carried out to his
liking was the fact that his company was carrying them to Mel-
bourne, and they would have to go to another company to take
them home again, unless they could see their way to put up with a
picnic trip, in which case he would place the steel screw yacht
“Coogee” at their disposal, to leave Melbourne at a time and date
to suit themselves, for the bare cost of fuel and expenses to run her
to Launceston and back. (Continued applause.)
Mr. Wm. Gibson, jun., of Scone, said that, as the largest shipper
of sheep, he might be allowed to say that the treatment the shippers
had received at the hands of Messrs, Huddart, Parker and Co. in
the present transaction was most satisfactory, and he would be


delighted to see them continue in the trade. Their offer of the
“ Coogee” was more than the shippers expected, and he proposed
that the offer be accepted, and that the shippers exert themselves
to make the earnings of the special steamer more than cover the
cost of the trip.
This trip of the “ Coogee,” and her subsequent run back to Mel-
bourne with the T.S.N. Company’s “Pateena”—and the six or seven
hours both spent in the fog outside Port Phillip Heads will still be
fresh in the memory of many people—was followed by the same
steamer being put on the line between Melbourne and Launceston,
and subsequently by the establishment of the weekly service
between Sydney, Melbourne and Launceston, initiated and main-
tained by the “Burrumbeet” and “ Elingamite.”
This called forth several press comments highly in favour of the
undertaking, the general gist of which may be gleaned from the
following extract, taken from a leading article in Upton's Trade
Journal of 27th August: —
“No doubt,” says the paper in question, “pastoralists, agriculturists, and
business people in Tasmania—especially in the north—have noted with satisfaction
the enterprise of the Tasmanian Woolgrowers’ Association in arranging with
Messrs. Huddart, Parker and Co. to run one of their steamers between this port
and Melbourne as often as inducements warrant. At present a fortnightly ser-
vice is being carried on. The need for opposition to the T.S.N. Company has
long been felt, but up to the present there has not been found any syndicate or
company willing to undertake the risk. But at last the matter has been taken in
hand by a powerful company, and it is probable that sufficient encouragement will
be accorded to the venture to make what is yet an experiment an established fact
attended with successful results. The knowledge of wielding a monopoly—it
matters little in what line of business—tends to make the possessors arbitrary, and
even tyrannical, in their dealings with their customers ; and these characteristics
have, it must be confessed, been exhibited in connection with the T.S.N. Company
in a more or less marked degree in the past. Healthy rivalry and opposition must
prove beneficial a’l round. In the instance under notice it will mean cheaper
freights, lower fares, and more courtesy to shippers and consignees—three con-
siderations much to be desired ; and no doubt the advantages above stated will be
appreciated sufficiently to warrant the company in establishing a permanent ser-
vice between Melbourne and Launceston.”
Of course, where a monopoly of long-standing was thus threatened,
there naturally ensued a good deal of correspondence in the press,
and the advocates of the old order of things found all sorts of
amusing reasons, emanating doubtless in most cases from their own
bank-books, why high passenger fares and freight rates should be
maintained. The reply to this style of argumentum a particulari ad
universale, as our legal friends w T ould put it, was well set forth in a
letter signed G. C. Jackson, which appeared in the Launceston
Examiner of the 9th September. I have only room for the writer’s
closing remarks, as follows ;
“In conclusion, sir,” writes Mr. Jackson, “ I would say to the business people
of Launceston and the travelling public generally, if you are opposed to mono-
polies as inevitably existing for the unfair aggrandisement of the few out of the
pockets of the many ; if you desire to see a great stimulus given to the interest
that Australians feel in us, and a step taken towards intercolonial federation; if
you desire to reap the benefit of a great augmentation of the number of visitors
from the adjoining colonies, and enjoy more comfortable and more economical
travelling yourselves, support the enterprising firm of Huddart, Parker and Co.,
who are enabling you to participate in advantages to which you have too long been
strangers. It is a distinction to be proud of, and a boon to be grateful for, that
this firm should send two such splendid steamers as regular traders to this port of
Launceston.”


The next stage in the progress of affairs is reported thus in the
Launceston Examiner of the 19th September ;
“ An unusual event in connection with Tasmanian shipping occurred yesterday
in the extraordinary public demonstration to welcome the arrival of the first of a
new line of steamers running between this port and the sister colonies. Some time
ago we mentioned that a committee of shippers and others had collected subscrip-
tions for the purpose of engaging a band to play on the wharf on the arrival of the
Burrumbeet, but it was not expected that the demonstration would assume anything
like the proportions it actually reached. The first programme was slightly altered,
and the welcome was postponed until the evening of the arrival of the steamer
which initiated the service, and permission was obtained from her owners, Messrs.
Huddart, Parker and Co., to have the use of the steamer for a promenade concert.
The St. Joseph’s band was engaged, and about 700 invitations were issued by the
committee, the admission to the concert being by ticket The weather proved
most suitable, and, in accordance with arrangements, the band marched through
the principal streets of the city last evening in torch and coloured light procession,
escorted by a large crowd who assembled en route, and by the time they arrived
at the Town Pier many hundreds had collected, in addition to hundreds more who
had already passed up the gangway of the Burrumbeet, which was brilliantly lighted
by electricity. Most of the ticket-holders had brought their own or somebody
else’s family with them, and fully 1500 people must have been on the steamer, while
a dense crowd, probably numbering a couple of thousand or more, availed them-
selves of all the standing room on the Town Pier. Promenading on the steamer
was out of the question, but the band played some excellent selections, and the
order maintained at the gangway prevented much inconvenience of ingress or
egress. In the intervals of the concert, rockets and fireworks were discharged,
and Messrs. Huddart, Parker and Co. have no reason to complain of lack of local
interest in their new enterprise.
“ At the conclusion of the concert a number of the visitors and the members of
the band adjourned to the saloon, where refreshments were handed round. Mr.
James Huddart, a member of the firm of Huddart, Parker and Co., was present,
and, in the course of a short speech, expressed his pleasure at the grand welcome
which had been accorded to the steamer, and said the company would not be de-
terred in the slightest degree by any reduction of rates on the part of the T.S.N.
Company. They had come here to do business, and meant to stay, and regarded
this trade as capable of great development. He had addressed a business-like
letter to the T.S.N. Company, with the object of discussing the question of rates,
so as to arrive at an amicable understanding, but the letter had been very curtly
acknowledged, and no reply given as to the decision of the directors ; but the first
intimation be received was the announcement of these greatly reduced fares. It
would be the constant endeavour of the new company to study the requirements of
shippers. He believed they would receive support, and be able to pay a dividend
even out of the present very low prices.”
The arrival of the s.s, “Elingamite” the following week was
taken advantage of by Messrs. Huddart, Parker and Co. to invite
the citizens of Launceston to a return concert on board her, and it
is only necessary to say that, so far as attendance and cordial feeling
could make it, it was a repetition of the pleasing reception that
welcomed the “ Burrumbeet” the previous week.
Public enthusiasm was now at white heat, and culminated in a
very pleasant expression of feeling, which the Examiner of 30th
September, 1889, records thus :
“On Saturday afternoon about seventy prominent citizens of Launceston,
numbering amongst them representatives of all branches of commerce and trade,
sat down to a luncheon at the Club Hotel, given by them to Mr J. Huddart,
managing director of Messrs. Huddart, Parker and Co., owners of the fine steamers
Burrumbeet and Elingamite, which are now running between this port and
Melbourne and Sydney. Mr. A. Webster occupied the chair. The usual loyal
toast was acknowledged with honou s. The chairman, in proposing the toast of
their guest, said that some people were inclined to sing somewhat reproachfully,
in reference to the T.S.N. Company, “Should auld acquaintance be forgot?” but
he considered that both their hearts and their trade were amply large enough for
both firms. Increased facilities for trade naturally created increased expansion of
trade, and if the public were granted fair rates and freights they would be con-


tented. It had been said that the result of competition would be the ruining; of
one or both parties, with no permanent benefit to the public. Similar statements
with regard to the Launceston and Western and Main Line railways had been made
and falsified. If he might drop into verse he would say—
‘Those would now travel who ne’er did before ;
And those who travelled, travel now the more.’
Mr. J. Huddart, who was received with loud applause, thanked those assembled,
on behalf of his Company and himself, for the kind way in which the toast had
been received. His firm came here as the instruments for emancipating the trade
of Launceston from the trammels of a monopoly. As belonging to the party of
intercolonial free-trade, he was ashamed of the hostile tariffs which had been
inaugurated in Victoria ; but as the Victorian Parliament increased the duties his
firm endeavoured to minimise them by reducing freights, and though he had not
actually figured it out, he thought that would be the effect of the last addition to
the Victorian tariff. He maintained that as a result of their starting business here
produce was now going away which would otherwise have remained in the stores,
paying rental, and probably deteriorating. One thing he could say that though
the T.S N. Company’s trade might have decreased, theirs had very materially
increased. He was sure that frequent communication would lead to an interchange
of idea®, which could not but help to bring about that federation which he was per-
suaded was for their common welfare. He felt very kindly disposed towards the
North, as it was here his firm had received the first grip of brotherhood. It had
been stated that they had not come here to remain, but that a cheque for £10,(00
would induce them to retire. Now, he wished to state publicly that £lOO,OOO
would not induce them to retreat, and they were quite prepared to pay (if neces-
sary) £lO,OOO for the goodwill of the business they were likely to do. Mr.
Huddart then proceeded to eulogise the scenery and climate of Tasmania,
which were so well calculated to attract crowds of tourists. As long as the people
of Tasmania gave his firm a fair share of help he was confident that the expansion
of trade would enable them to work at a profit. He knew well that they had
entered into a serious duel with the T.S.N. Company, but the matter had been
well thought out. He was the only man in his company who thought before
writing the letters that had been made public that the T.S.N. Company would
listen to reason, more especially as they had had experience of fights before.
However, they thought that Messrs. Huddart, Parker and Co. were only trying to
bluff them, and so preferred war to peace. All he asked for was fair play; but
they would not submit to any special legislation directed against their company.
The T.S.N. Company had always been granted every facility in Victoria, and his
firm asked only for the same thing here. If when they came here they had been
told they were not wanted, they might not have remained ; but they had been
pressed for years to take up the service, and they would indeed be wanting in
common pluck if they were not to remain when they had received such great
encouragement from all quarters. In the south they had also met a warm
reception, and had at once reduced the freights on fruits by 6d. a case. They
had not come as Nihilists to destroy, but as friends, hoping to build up. He had
been told by fruit-growers in the south that even if the T.S.N. Company shipped
for nothing they would still support Huddart, Parker and Co.”
It remains but to be further recorded that towards the close of
October Messrs. Huddart, Parker and Co. added the fine paddle-
steamship Newcastle to the Tasmanian boats, and are supplementing
her by the swift steel steamer-yacht Coogee, which has been specially
altered to suit the requirements of the travelling public. One of the
company’s boats calls every alternate week, coming and going, at
Formby and Emu Bay, and the wants of Hobart are being attended
to by the fast steamships Burrumbeet and Wendouree, See.
So much by way of prologue—now for the play itself. Whatever
the faults of the dialogue, I’ll warrant the scenery to be good.
Prompter, ring up !
GARNET WALCH.


TABLE OF CONTENTS.
VICTORIA TO TASMANIA
LAUNCESTON
Alphabetical Guide to Societies, Public Institutions, Companies, &c...
Walks, Drives and River Excursions (from Launceston)
Via Franklin Village to Cocked Hat—Evandale—Gee’s Sugar Loaf—
White Hills—Corra Lynn—St. Leonards, &c.
Barnard’s Creek and Back
Perth, Lopgford, Pateena, &c.
Via westvrardroad to Hadspen, Garrick, Hagley, Westbury,
Deloraine, &c.
Scottsdale by road
The Cataract Gorge
Corra Lynn—Devil’s Punch Bowl—Distillery Creek
Trevallyn—lnvennay—Windmill Hill
Prince’s-square—Sundry Beauty Spots (St. Leonards, Clarke’s Ford,
Dalrymple’s Bend, Roeher’s Lane, The Waterworks)
Down the Tamar
TO THE NORTH-WEST.
Launceston to North-West Coast, Mount Bischoff, &c.
Perth Longford Westbury Deloraine Chudleigh Caves—
Latrobe—Formhy—The Don— Hamilton-on-Forth— Ulverstone
—Penguin—Emu Bay—Table Cape—Circular Head—Mount Bis-
choff—The West Coast
TO THE NORTH-EAST.
Launceston to Rinoarooma.
A New Railway—Scottsdale and Intermediate Stations—Bridport—
Branxholm—Brothers’ Home—Moorina—Ringarooma, &c.
THE FINGAL RAILWAY.
Launceston to the East Coast.
Conara Junction to Avoca—Ben Lomond—Fingal—St. Mary’s—St.
Mary’s Pass—Falmouth —St. Helen’s
TO HOBART BY RAIL.
Tasmanian Main Line Railway.
Launceston to Conara—Campbell Town —Ross—Tunbridge—Antill
Ponds—Parattah Junction—Jerusalem—Campania— Brighton—
Bridgewater—Glenorchy—Hobart
HOBART
Alphabetical Guide to Societies, Public Institutions, Companies, &c. ..
Some of the “ Lions” (in and near Hobart).
Franklin-square—Museum—Public Library—Town Hall
Houses of Parliament—Queen’s Domain—Botanical Gardens
Government House—St. David’s Cathedral—St. Mary’s Cathedral—
Christ’s College—Hutchins School—Castray Esplanade
Military Barracks—Cemeteries


Walks, Drives, &c., in the Neighbourhood of Hobart.
Lansdowne Crescent Knocklofty Salvator Rosa Glen Lady
Franklin’s Museum .. .. .. ..70
Cascades—Fern Tree Bower—Sandy Bay—New Town—Carnelian
Bay and New Town Esplanade—Lindisfarne Bay—Watchorn’s
Hill—Moir’s Shot Tower —The Waterworks .. .. 71
Huon-road, Summerleas-road and Brown’s River-road—Derwent
Lighthouse .. .. .. .. ..72
Single Day Excursions.
Brown’s River—North-West Bay .. .. .. 72
Glenorchy—Kangaroo Point—Mount Rumney .. .. 73
Rokeby—Sorell—Richmond, .. .. .. .. 74
Mount Nelson—Risdon Ferry—Mount Direction .. .. 75
Mount Wellington .. .. .. .. .. 76-78
The Huon.
D’Entrecasteaux Channel—Oyster Cove Bruni Island —Peppermint
' Bay—Long Bay—Three-Hut Point—Port Cygnet—Shipwrights’
Point —Geeveston —Franklin—Huonville—Longley, &c. .. 78-84
The Derwent Valley (New Norfolk, Salmon Ponds, &c.) ... .. 85-88
Hobart to the East Coast.
Hobart to Campania—Buckland—Orford—Triabunna (Spring Bay)—
Maria Island—Pontypool (Little Swan Port) —Swansea, Ac. ... 88-91
Port Arthur.
Frederick Henry Bay—East Bay Neck—Forestier’s Peninsula—Nor-
folk Bay—Tasman’s Peninsula —Port Arthur—Eaglehawk Neck
—The Tesselated Pavement—The Blow Hole—Tasman’s Arch, &c. 91-93
The Lake District.
Hobart to Antill Ponds —Interlaken—Lakes Sorell and Crescent—
Arthur’s Lakes—Great Lake —Lake Echo—Lake St. Clair .. 94, 95
Green Ponds, Bothwell, &c. .. .. .. .. 96
Hamilton and the Ouse .. .. .. .. ..96
Coaches, Steamers, Omnibuses, &c,, throughout Tasmania (Itine-
rary prepared expressly for this work) .. .. 97-101
Cab Fares, Watermen’s Fares, Hobart and Launceston 101,102
Telegraphic, Telephonic, and Postal .. .. 102, 103
Hints for Tourists .. .. .. .. ... 104
Fishing, Shooting, &c. .. .. .. .. ..104
Races, Regattas, <tc. .. .. .. .. .. 105
Heights of Railway Stations above Sea Level .. .. 105
Advertisements .. .. .. .. 105-120


IDictona to
tajf/HE thermometer has been registering somewhere between 90
and 100 in the shade for a couple of days, and Ellery
the Great is prophesying “ a continuance of fine weather
with northerly winds”—we all know what that means—when
we finally make up our minds to try if a few degrees of what
the sailors term “southing” will not deduct a proportionate
number of degrees from the temperature. In other words, we deter-
mine to betake ourselves forthwith to Tasmania, and so, making our
way leisurely to 525 Collins-street, and ascertaining that the s.s.
“Elingamite” sails on the morrow, we are fortunate enough to secure
one of the few remaining berths. That evening we are dipping once
more into the pages of “ His Natural Life,” as a sort of preparatory
appetiser for our trip, and come across the passage in which Marcus
Clarke speaks of the climate of Tasmania : —“No parching hot wind,”
he writes, “ the torment of the continent, blows upon her crops and
corn. The cool south breeze ripples gently the blue waters
of the Derwent, and fans the curtains of the open windows
of the city, which nestles in the broad shadow of Mount
Wellington. The hot wind, born amid the burning sand of the
interior of the vast Australian continent, sweeps over the scorched
and cracking plains, to lick up their streams and wither the herbage
in its path, until it meets the waters of the great south bay ; but in
its passage across the Straits it is reft of its fire, and sinks,
exhausted with its journey, at the feet of the terraced slopes of
Launceston.” Enough ! It shall bear us with it. Our resolution
was a wise one; our passage-ticket is in our pocket, our portmanteau
is packed. For Launceston, ho !


The “ Elingamite” leaves the wharf punctually at the hour named,
and, with a final churning up of the pea-soupy horrors of the lower
Yarra, bears us smoothly between the parallel banks of the New Cut,
a name, by the way, suggestive of an unsavoury locality in a bigger
city than the one we are leaving. And now, while the huge steamer
bores her way at half-speed Williamstown-wards, and our fellow-
passengers are settling their belongings, let us make a little tour
of inspection and jot down what we see. The “Elingamite”
and her sister ship, the “Burrumbeet” are the largest passenger
steamers employed on the Australian coast, the “ Elingamite” being
also fitted as an armed cruiser. Her Main Saloon extends the full
width of the ship. It is floored with carpet-covered encaustic tiles,
walled with oval mirrors set in satin wood panelling, and furnished
throughout in a style at once both luxurious and comfortable.
Dining at one of the several tables in this spacious apartment,
attended upon by watchful and obliging waiters, and with all motion
of the vessel reduced almost to nothingness, you fancy yourself in
the dining hall of some large first-class hotel, an illusion further
carried out by the excellence of the fare. Up above, and leading on to
the spacious promenade deck, is the Ladies’ Drawing-room, elegantly
furnished in plush and ornamental woods, with fine piano, choice
flowering plants, &c. A little further forward is the Smoking-room,
with its tiled floor, polished marble walls and tables, morocco-covered
lounges, and white-and-gold ceiling ; altogether, the beau ideal of a
fumoir. The cabins themselves, situated where they feel the motion
of the vessel least, are roomy, and fitted up with every convenience,
not even omitting a life-belt under each pillow, though this
latter (the life-belt, not the pillow) is an article little likely
to be called into requisition in any of Messrs. Huddart,
Parker and Co.’s boats. Bathrooms, lavatories, &c., are all on
the same complete scale, and the use of encaustic tiles as flooring
throughout not only adds materially to the cheerful look of the
passages and apartments, but enables the most scrupulous cleanli-
ness to be observed. Then the electric light, which is everywhere,
above and below deck, is another great improvement. “Sweetness
and light,” indeed, appears to be the motto of the company through-
out, not only in the “ Elingamite,” but in her sister vessels. Of these,
in addition to the “ Burrumbeet,” there are at present engaged in the
Launceston trade that clipper “steel-steam yacht” of 800 tons the
“Coogee,” celebrated in Melbourne for elegance of fittings, combined
with every possible arrangement for the well-being of passengers,
and noted further for the quickness of her passages ; and the “New-
castle,” another sea-greyhound of the latest modern type.; With such


swift-running ocean palaces at their disposal, tourists to Tasmania
now certainly enjoy the maximum of comfort with the minimum of
cost, a consummation ever most devoutly to be wished.
It will be remembered, while in this connection, that Messrs.
Huddart, Parker and Co., possess the largest interests in the Port
Phillip Bay Excursion trade, their steam-ships “Excelsior,”
“ Alert,” “ Despatch,” and “Courier,” being all built especially for
running between Melbourne, Portarlington, Geelong, Queenscliff,
Sorrento, &c. The “ Courier,” up to date of present writing, is, in a
double sense, the “ fleetest of the fleet,” her triple expansion engine
indicating 3000 horse-power, and propelling her with ease at the
rate of twenty miles an hour. Some idea of her popularity may be
gained from the fact that in a single month she has carried as many as
30,000 passengers to and from Melbourne and Geelong. But even
the “ Courier ” is to be outstripped by the new steamer now building
for the company at Greenock, and guaranteed to steam no less than
twenty-three miles per hour ! Voyaging with a vengeance ! With
such a boat to carry his hero, Jules Verne might alter the title of his
well-known work to “Round the World in Forty Days,” and Phineas
Fogg, Esq., would still win his plucky wager.
Down the New Cut, then, we steam, past unsightly beacons,
clumsy punts, and huge unwieldy dredges, bearing such apt names as
the “ Crocodile,” the “ Platypus,” and the “ Bunyip,” with mud in
heaps, mud in sloppy swamps, mud in barges, slimy mud, oozy mud,
half-dried caking mud; mud, mud, mud everywhere; until at
length, dismissing our river pilot, we glide into the wider waters
off Williamstown, hear with pleasure the order given for “full
steam ahead,” and so bear proudly on our course. The evening
sees us through the Heads with a farewell curtsey from the trim
pilot schooner ever cruising thereabouts, or a flag-lowered salute from
some inward-bound comrade of the seas, and away out into the
Straits. The Schanck light fades upon our port quarter, the stars
peep out in the twilight mist,
“ Glittering like a swarm of fire-flies
Tangled in a silver braid,”
and as we pace the promenade deck, after a hearty meal—enjoyed
with an appetite that only sea-air can give—we fall to pitying our
semi-stifled Melbourne brethren, and to congratulating ourselves on
the happy thought that has resulted thus. A soothing pipe, and
perchance a hand at cards in the Smoking-room, if we be males, or
a tune on the piano, a song, or a dip into the latest novel, if we be
of the softer sex, and so turn-in time comes round all too early, and
we retire to our “ state-room”—no misnomer in this case—to sleep
the sleep of the just and snore the snore of the satisfied.


Next morning betimes we are up, “tubbed,” and about, to find
the land not only in sight, but considerably in evidence, and it is
not long before we slacken speed as we near the lighthouse on Low
Head, and lie-to off George Town for the Customs officer—a gentle-
man who forthwith boards us, and, “ drest in a little brief
authority,” goes “on the rummage” with a zest which we fail to
admire. But then, as the French lady said of her premiere faute,
“he is such a little one.” In other words, he is so young, so
carried away by the fact that he can dictate—and smoke a big cigar—
while full-grown men and women tremble at his nod—that we
forgive him ; nay, we even thank him for furnishing an item for our
note-book. Happy, adolescent representative of Tasmanian red-
tape, cultivate thy nascent moustache and fitful importance in
peace. Thou art embalmed for the benefit of all and sundry readers
of this booklet, and whether thou beest shifted or promoted to
higher glories still, we shall recognise thee wherever and whensoever
thou Grossest our wandering path !
To our right, as we proceed up the Tamar River, we are pointed
out Port Lempriere, the site from whence runs the now dismantled
railway to the iron mines, in which—owing to the impregnation of
chromium, and the consequent impossibility of working the iron to
a profit—a Melbourne company lost a great sum of money. The
locality is now the scene of a somewhat curious industry, popularly
known as the paint mine, or, to speak more technically, woiks for
turning out manufactured paint, and “ochres, umbers, and
calsomines” in a raw state from the vast deposits of high-class
oxides of iron here existing. No less than 287 colours have been
produced, “in which,” says Mr. F. G. Duff, who has published a
pamphlet on the subject, “not only the oxide of iron, which is
mainly used as the base of the paints, was brought into operation,
but the colouring pigments afforded by decomposed asbestos, ozoline
(which is obtained from decomposed serpentine), ochres, and other
constituents found in the wonderfully blended deposits of the
Asbestos Ranges” close handy. An exhibit of these “ chromate and
asbestos paints” was a prominent feature in the Tasmanian court at
the Melbourne Centennial Exhibition. Not far from Port Lempriere,
on the same side of the river, is Beaconseield, where that
phenomenal gold mine, the “ Tasmania”—elsewhere alluded to—is
situated.
We are now fairly in the channel of the Tamar, and pass in rapid
succession lovely islands, rounded slopes, that await the neat villa
of the future, and fertile flats, on which tall specimens of ti-tree
seem to thrive amazingly. And hereabouts we catch our first
glimpse of the hawthorn, with its verdant foliage, intermingled—in
due season —with masses of snow-white blossom. And so, between
narrow ; ng banks that disclose some fresh beauty at every turn, we
approach the city, and verify the truth of Marcus Clarke’s words,
for the hot wind of Victoria, of a verity, “sinks exhausted,” nay
dead, as we ourselves laud, mightily refreshed, “at the feet of the
terraced slopes of Launceston.”


>
1-4
T
1
i
1
145
i
.icy
tv ”
£yfi»sid,T*
i>
SstSammt-T* r~
A »\
FLINDERS [1/
. f
JbmmockJCfp Arthursj\ ISLAND 1
, J/OaOylth^Jh^
TASMANIA -A J
OuaptELJ ’/% K O^Eis^rattVqjA
*#&* ta^s
n v 7
/ \ Sthree HUMMOCK 1*
■pt V
)8AR»EM!»
islands
x-r n* / CAPE 1 , Aj** ya *
C.Szr Jwuu J 1
V._/ —vr—', >-A ' CtBarrens
./CLARK&'
f2ve;«\ f yS .Tarty (As 1.
\ Xovkr A{tKk$s~~\ (MarjAsbyB
ft**** 4
r\^
S . R
h
BANKS STRAIT
SS»>J4»
■aSSSSh r
**-*1 U.teo\ L > *,.<>•
jjj' 4 ’v/"" t/ tff
S S T
•
Tostfr I. „ V-li«feJSwjr*
C PortlasU (/'\ ® lt
jf pyMxtertwusel. }7 S/Sfc s.
\>! >> 7/ RtNCAttOONA pXrAltHouTH /- ..
i LA
JBttOMZr' ( V
)»£&< ( >
i LUmWSMM&i jVA (V
|V H XS
jjy L , v. \ L 1 jXx wwirw
,, f y / 'if JlX, N 1 / jP'
j'#« 6u, * w \V \ xppr-p n
} HOLAJtB iS.i*MAC£ jLiv^S
y V>i X «s 'L3LL.i.rt >.
W UISTON1 S
_ „v. **
V y<Mso£Ln, r s
\X w * 1 >>* w*ili
) p- yjf Op*-- Ji
iwwtffi* <?» X, /■£X / )A r
r fL Tw- \ tsn /j k<ta £ k#
fe /A\"
7 SMM.L f€sx&F s*sC,
-,A-?V
MIEKW").
Av !f
'I
K'
/Xa
r^7i
fi
X«A
A
¥
/ m(r JgjT\ / j\ ! '
\ ) f) li vz&L**
® J 1V# 1 a#" X f 7
#Jj7v % A"“
1 T\ / Afyi- A/
r ' X
$)/ (?$* *S(3PMx .-•%'■ SSEL. _ «mr6
■«C OtiPWAV j /W'\, _h' -/ ' • / ~ • Aj, >N V. ki
j?C.\ "7rHX7#tw
%!\\\('| yr 4ff&r y XW- v -f *' (7
..-AaV/ •««-«*
'k\W?«/ ;)t vMnm ' tr " i " J-<% / ftb*#
A\®£?/ A' J /"■ Of^sSt
lumces^^^XX^ m \
- uJS
«Lwm
a\> MrMotikdv ;, , dC
c / /N i\,,'-^sfciEvc!.A*i)p t - > — r-J\\ st faiUs?/ T 11
A i W^/w
tSmtysXo&OvO f%\ j \ \ Uj f\
. X ' \ ' / uifurhA K.AflWW’
f— X/ f^iCL
S '^ ,K pfb\y>f- A *-Tf~-,,A \ / ffiuttmnr&i WKUmat
Zp\ o*J~"* jj R?'\ L 4 ,?r /
r
\ wy
fcj
@rarwtL
VJ W lr
|5p2> PP N A>\ $
h ’ ¥
k/fy** 1 ' i \\
tj xA,«rr s
4 A t .rr^
'Ur-J 2l r /«ta.'^AJ £ r&ffsXa#
\JSbUt l I \r* '~ /
:1 Am3if
c 0 L A H Aw Af* \i
•±>f -l„„... cl
v, \ h.w- v 1 \ <\ „ _. Nfeass >a. -JS
\/k Ttort** \ A a r v / S OlfS/E* oR S EftT Jb&< ■$ -A^i.
ujr .. i w s '/i ' i-p ! ' - AT a V wJ |P', *\T N „WCi. //[_ ne & i ’\i&a « ?( y£>'
Mj**'
vasst*\ m* v rrV''' >
y£s? ,i &£Sjl
hi? 'faiQtjt
\ r f
\ VcL.feTffl .A
4%fSi; V l*j j/ l\ c / j ~ v S % A,j4Sorenj jr
K «A u Y''W'i zn V AT' WW -
Lwlyf '
6 W ■$
3 CXo ' m ' da ®
-3 ysutys
I>™**” S»cW^A«
/ OYSTEK ) permits'.-
fffi'l® /TREYCIHET’t
W / PENINSULA
■
) U'' / t is
NA gf j y^
| ) :&&vu*m\ jfUukfidst^\fi t &njCIi r W • TnjABUHitnr{ (
A v« r*3&A Lr«- JAfecr-
h\ \\i \ h w \K\ f # g4u v tr
\ MOM 1 C ]6 M E fLV /Al /. A :4 * jjp v Rl M o 1C E
\ itdy' — (■ K /f / 2emson'\%ffi~U *7 i\ A J$s / J M*S8§SSS5j^ W %1cmB)trtt'- * A B »■ ~\E.
A-jtfpA ■ -‘-A //s' i\ f /i tC.) r& Kir J v u v»w».
U« Ar f/V [§ v \f *C, , r ,i ®
CTJi \A’, V ‘ ' '*"' /" \ X/ ' A.,..A.u? K§H^^UE«£mL-
A/A,
-V 1
JtxAyTP{ii-^- ■-,_ /A j A?
• ;• %c *
) 1/ v -fe> ,'sSS^K» f i*«»i
/aogro^^'^yc SumUt
f.Thot/sCove- P , n A‘“\ A/t,
r A, R 't
Ufcj,
REFERENCE
A \ wAl >>'■ <^ sf S wn Tvj^AWC
( -■ V- I V-« \ V X v /.aT/F aO’JTHBftJOOECt-' A' v/. J^ ,l t^ EM 1 1 ▼! / p\
A/oVe ' ~* —
* V
ATI U JTO 1 I 1 ?', \ p:-- 1 TRANX
7h Af^v/ *o
''i\V\% • /rAv. xL-r «
1 A„ «£> is Jr** $ “«»Msg
Si-iK ’, '’%*"/■ J>T-
y&r-L&r "lA nsImt
9* -
y "'\y v
• 1 l jf&» aa^Arffcawms..
vSk 1 \ k y \ Tf
T I
\ A L ' ScmJuioaAi.f/ti
) , AS'\ C C« t’A
'X// v X^, e ,'A*#
/V a^^^'AAA
4 / .Ztefe- J.CyJ^Jkj
♦•'* &Jz-Ctr+4
Bf&vSrr**' aa/wa^ta/swans
„_.. ‘^fpx^fNihtfeuu
;C7 L STCkM v/iimLTX \
v )WH»»voiL^
w'Xxi w
re fM *»<,„„/!? x / aXt»w™
j 'S&Tl /Sfl a? S CJiacuL-
,iCI: fe)v«T 3 W 'p+A K'fADVENTUk£
■y*E%£ C%£ I
w. /Atr'- br un iA
XX WR /W.x.
a> f “ ty^rh
hrih 4 $£%?**
&y f
\ Jgppclpic Rapis
K rSortfJ's**'J>
t-s^CJCiay
%}bC.mar
%2astnaru X^
I*' c|wi?
Town# seuL/uL and-partially so delorai ml /
To*'isR. srj "yes SMiHOrcH
JtuzJMays amsisaxted end hemp conJtruct-cd
SxdLways proposed
Jixtads —
Coaniy Twimdariss — • — — ■ ' l ' f
i
i
lM»nia-j>:
Ki
i4S W-7
140




Xauncestou.
Estimated Population, including Suburban Districts, 23,000.
WJfB/ HE city of Launceston, the mother of Melbourne—for it was
IP from here both John Batman and Fawkner sailed—ranks as
second in importance only to Hobart, and treads closely upon
the heels of the capital. Launceston is situated at the junction of
the North and South Esk Rivers, where they both merge into the
wider waters of the Tamar. With its river frontage, the many fine
buildings congregated on the fiat forming the city proper, the
numerous handsome villas dotting the picturesque hillsides close
by, and the solemn mountains holding watch and ward over all in
the blue distance, Launceston presents a most attractive appearance,
and this, be it said, improves on further acquaintance. Lighted
throughout with gas, blessed with an abundant supply of excellent
water, brought by gravitation from a crystal river some sixteen miles
afield, and regulated by a corporation who evidently know and do
their duty, the city is both cheerful and clean, and visitors have no
need, as in other Australian centres, to seek lodgings in the suburbs.
The hotels* are many and comfortable, the charges ranging from
12s. 6d. down to 6s, per diem, and there are several good boarding-
houses. Further particulars of these and other matters are given
in the following pages, in which, be it understood, conciseness and
correctness have alike been made a study.
The Main Streets of Launceston run in the following order ;
From East to West : William, Cimitihre, Cameron, Patterson,
Brisbane, York, Elizabeth, Frederick, Canning, Balfour, and
Frankland streets, these being intersected from North to Soidh by
Tamar, George, St. John, Charles, Wellington, Bathurst, Margaret,
Bourke, and Hill streets, with High-street running along to the
west of Tamar-street.
Blpbabetical ©tube to Societies, public institutions,
Companies, £c., in
Agricultural and Pastoral Association (show in September).
Alms Houses. —High-street. Anglers' Association (meet at T.E.
Club Hotel). Banks. —Australasia, corner of Brisbane and St.
John streets ; Van Diemen’s Land, St. John-street; Commercial of
Tasmania, Patterson-street; National of Tasmania, Cameron-street;
* The three leading hotels are the Launceston (Huston), the International (Barber),
and the Brisbane (Deleuse). The writer stayed on several occasions in the second
of these, and willingly bears testimony to the excellence of the arrangements there
to be found.


Savings Bank, Patterson-street; Union Bank, St. John-street,
Baths. —Ackerman’s, Charles-street; Town Baths, near South Esk
Bridge. Bowling Club. —lnvalid Depot Grounds, Patterson-street.
Club (the Launceston). —Brisbane-street. Cricket Clubs. —Various.
Cycling Clubs. —Two. Horticultural Societies —Northern. —Exhibi-
tions in Town Park in February, April, and December ; Chrysan-
themum—Annual Show in April. Fire Bell Station (high tower). —
Brisbane-street. Football Clubs. —Various. Gaol.—Patterson-
street, Gii'ls’ Industrial School. —Wellington-road. Grammar
School. —Corner Elizabeth and George streets. Gymnasium. —
Rifle Regiment. Hospital. —Near Frankland-street. Huddart,
Parker and Co.’s Steamer Office. St. John-street. Insurance
Companies. —Various. Invalid Depdt. —Patterson-street. Masonic
Hall. Brisbane-street. Mechanics' Institute ( 14,000 vols.,
large variety newspapers, &c. Visitors may subscribe for one
month). —Corner St. John and Cameron streets. Museum. —
New Building. Musical Societies. —Various. Newspaper Offices. —
Examiner and Daily Telegraph, both in Patterson-street. Poultry
Society (show in September). Smelting Works (Mount Bischoff
Tin). —Wharf. (Memo. —Visitors would do well to inspect these
works. Inquire particulars from Mr. H. Ritchie, manager.)
Tamar Rowing Club. —Boat-house, West Tamar. Tamar Sailing
Club. Tennis Clubs. —Cricket Ground and Invalid Depot. Tas-
manian Turf Glub.—CAwh Room, Brisbane Hotel. Theatres, &c, —
Academy of Music, George-street; Gaiety Theatre; entertainments
also at Mechanics’ Institute. Town Hall. —Corner St. John and
Cameron streets. Woolgrowers' Agency Company. —St. John-street.
Working Men’s Club. —Elizabeth-street. Young Men's Christian
Association. —Quadrant.
Places of Woeship in Launceston. — Church of England. —St.
John’s, in the street of that name; Trinity, George-street; St.
Paul’s, near south end of Charles-street. Presbyterian. St.
Andrew’s, St. John-street. Wesleyan. —Patterson-street, Margaret-
street. Congregational. —Tamar-street, Frederick-street. Free
Church of Scotland. St. John-street. Baptist. —York-street;
Tabernacle, Cimitifere-street. Primitive Methodist, — Frederick-
street; Memorial Church, Wellington-street. Christian Brethren. —
Oddfellows’ Hall, St. John-street, &c. &c. Roman Catholic. —
Church of the Apostles and Presentation Convent, Margaret-street.
Jewish Synagogue. —St. John-street.
Parks, &c. —People’s Park (12 acres), Inveresk-square, Wellington-
square, Albert-square, Victoria-square, Princes-square, St. George’s-
square, Market Green, &c.
Races, Regattas, etc.—See end of Book.
maUis, Drives, anO IRiver lEjcursions from Xaunceston.
Though the Northern Tasmanian railways give access to many
enjoyable outings, the numerous well-made roads leading from
Launceston open to the tourist grander and more diversified
scenery. The railroads, of necessity, follow the valleys and plateaus,


easy grades and level country being the sine qud non of connection
between the city and the several other termini; whereas the road
surveyors of the good old times, while they had the confluence of
the tidal water with the fresh as a starting point, had no hard-and-
fast rules laid dow r n for grades and curves, but were left very much
to their own sweet will. As a consequence, what to the severely
practical pedestrian, bicyclist, teamster, or whip may in places seem
toilsome ways begotten of bad engineering, are but increased sources
of delight to the excursionist on pleasure bent, for the mounting of
hills, and anon descending into valleys, unfold an ever-varying
charm ; a far-away prospect of mountain, of forest and of field, grand
in the expanse of its magnitude, picturesque in a lesser range of
vision, restful and homely on a nearer approach.
Twenty-seven Miles’ Drive.
Launceston, via Franklin village to —Cocked Hat — Evandale — Gee's
Sugar-loaf —White Hills—Corra Lynn — St. Leonards — Launceston.
This is par excellence the full-day drive out of Launceston, but has
hitherto been seldom undertaken by visitors. Livery-stable keepers
who know the road do not like it, for it is hilly ; many cabmen have
never been over it, and, indeed, only within the last three or four
years has it been passable for ordinary vehicles of hire, about one
and a-half miles of road from Hose’s Rivulet to White Hills village,
previously rugged and waterworn, having been formed and roughly
metalled within the period named. A good two or four horse team
should be engaged for this trip, with au efficient brake on the
vehicle. An after-breakfast start should be made, and an early
lunch ordered over-night by wire to the Clarendon Hotel, or Ward-
man’s Hotel, Evandale, unless the party prefers a picnic basket,
when either the banks of the South Esk River at Evandale, or
Rose’s Rivulet, three miles further on. can be chosen. Both of these
afford suitable camping ground. If the river is selected, the water
will be found pure and excellent, but should the rivulet he made the
halting place, it is advisable to provide a pinch of soda as an adjunct
to the inevitable billy of tea appertaining to all well-regulated
Australian out-door menus. The creek water being hard, i.e.,
slightly impregnated with magnesia, has a medicinal effect on
persons not native to the locality. Boiling, soda, tea, and sugar
render it safe and palatable.
The old coach road to Hobart is taken on commencing this
journey. The site of the Sandhill turnpike, now non est, is passed
at two miles from the city, and Franklin Village (four miles),
with its remnant of two converted hotels—converted, be it said, not
through the example of the State of Maine or Australian local option,
but from the inexorable want of business owing to iron roads super-
seding macadam. This old road of 120 miles from Launceston to
Hobart reveals, when read historically, memories of happy days
and miserable moments in a tangled web of good and bad. As a
road in the early days of Australian life it had no equal for excel-
lence, and is still a standing monument of what has been done in
Tasmania. At eight miles, and after passing the mansion and
estates of Mr. C. B. Grubb, Strathroy, the hamlet known as the


Cocked Hat is reached, when the Hobart-road is quitted, and the
branch road leading eastward four miles to Evandale is taken.
From Strathroy to Evandale the land is of the very best descrip-
tion, and has been cropped continuously for sixty or seventy
years, some of the fields never having had manure.
Indeed, this locality, taken with the White Hills and the northern
portion of the Evandale district, is admittedly the most lastingly
fertile portion of Tasmania as agricultural land. The quality is not
uniform throughout, but is broken into irregular patches of red
basaltic soil, black clayey drift, yellow clay, and sandy loam.
Where the basalt and black soil overlap each other its enduring
fecundity is marvellous compared with any other portion of Tas-
mania. By-the-way, notwithstanding the much and justly-vaunted
fertility of the colony, it is more from texture, rainfall, and climatic
advantages than from inherent plant food. Though this is a digres-
sion from orthodox guide-book lore, the information, we trust, will
prove interesting and suggestive to the many Australian agri-
culturists who, amongst others, annually visit the island.
To the left, on passing the Cocked Hat, is seen the farm homestead
of Raeburn, where a small choice flock of Leicesters, well-known in
show-yards, are owned by one of the Messrs, Hogarth. From this
point the landscape to the eastward embraces a large agricultural
area, with numerous small homesteads as a foreground, supported by
tier upon tier of bush hills in the distance, backed by Mount Arthur
N.E., Mount Barrow N.E. by E., and Ben Lomond easterly. The
homestead and estate of Glairville, belonging to the Cameron family
of old colonists, owning much land, is passed on the right, while to
the left is Kirkdale, farmed by the proprietor, another of the
Hogarth family, who devotes some attention to a flock of South-
downs, which are well-known locally, and have of late been intro-
duced into Victorian flocks. This portion of the drive has a
thoroughly English appearance; more so, it is often observed, than
anyplace in Australasia. On the Kirkdale property the Launceston
and Western railway line is crossed, and a mile further on the
Hobart line. On the right is the Leighlands farm, where one of the
Messrs. Gibson grazes a choice flock of Leicesters as stud sheep.
The South Esk comes into view here to the right, where a pretty
piece of scenery opens out, taking in a reach of the river with the
extensive midland plains—the home of the world-famed Tasmanian
merino—in the distance, backed by the western tiers of mountains.
To the east the eye rests on the eastern mountain chain already
named ; and turning to the west, the western chain is also visible,
many varying scenes of beauty and grandeur developing themselves
as the road undulates and reveals a charming vista on every side.
Evandale is now reached, some 800 feet above Launceston, and
twelve miles distant. The township is prettily situated on an
eminence overlooking the river, w'here good trout fishing is to
be had. Two neat little churches, both modernised in architecture
of recent years, and belonging respectively to the Presbyterians and
Episcopalians, adorn the village. Other sects have their places of
worship as well, though less pretentious in style. A reading-room,
free to visitors, with library attached, affords mental food to
villagers and farmers. All the institutions are of early origin, and
fitting accompaniments to this, one of the oldest colonial villages.


After rest and refreshment at Evandale—if the full drive is deter-
mined on—the party must issue instructions to take the White
Hills road, leading easterly. On emerging from the township care
should be exercised to inquire if the right road is being followed, as
the intricacy of the old-fashioned manner in which the streets have
been laid out might lead to loss of way. For two miles the road
runs at right angles to that travelled from Launceston, and faces the
eastern slope, with splendid scenery all around. This point lands
the traveller at the head of the valley of Rose’s Rivulet, a tributary
of the North Esk, the watershed of the two rivers Esk—N. and S.—
occurring at Evandale. An angle is again made, northerly, leaving
Harland Rise, with its stud flocks of merinoes owned by the pro-
prietor of the farm, Mr. H. Smith, so well known in the annual sheep
sales of the sister colonies. Behind Mr. Smith’s farm lie the extensive
estates of Mr. D. M'Kinnon, also a merino breeder of no mean note.
The road now runs down the valley with numerous small homesteads
on each side, that of Mr. Thos. Hogarth, of Launceston, being across
the rivulet to the right, situated amongst luxuriant clover fields, where
a choice herd of stud Ayrshire cattle are depastured, and a dairy is
worked with all the modern appliances for butter-making. Gee’s
Sugar-loaf, a peculiar small hill, now opens to view, where the road
makes another right angle to the right, and a steep ascent of half a
mile has to be climbed. The hill surmounted, a grand panorama
meets the vision, the waters of the Tamar being a prominent far-
away feature in the landscape. The White Hills village is soon
passed, and the descent of a longish hill lands the party at Corra
Lynn (elsewhere described). The journey to Launceston (eight
miles) is made on a good road down the valley, with some pretty
views, both before and after passing through St. Leonards. The
North Esk is again crossed by Hosier's Bridge, two miles from
Launceston, and the railway line close to the same spot, the round
drive of twenty-seven miles leading into the city via Elphin-road and
Brisfcane-street east.
Twelve Miles’ Drive.
To Barnard’s Creek (six miles) and Back, This is a favourite
morning or afternoon drive ; the road is good, and the scenery, on
the back journey especially, has a charm of its own, taking in as it
does a panoramic view of the city and also the surrounding hills
dotted with cottages, villas, and gardens. This six miles is on the
road to George Town, and runs down the east side of the Tamar
Valley, a mile or so from the river bank. The Tamar bridge is
crossed at the foot of Tamar-street, leading to the suburb of
Tnveresk ; thence through Invermay and up Mowbray Hill,
passing the racecourse on the right, with the residence of the late
Hon. Mr. Grubb on the left; onward up Pinkie Hill and homestead,
where resides the venerable W. B. Dean, one of Launceston’s oldest
inhabitants and literary exponents of the city’s good and evil,
together with the ancient and modern history of the colony in
general. A half-hour’s chat with this still mentally vigorous old
gentleman can be made a treat if an introduction can be secured and
a congenial theme hit upon. On Pinkie Hill a few minutes’ stoppage
to view the surrounding country will, to the lover of Nature’s


charms, be time well spent. On top of the hill the Piper’s River-
road turns short to the right and crosses the Scottsdale railway line
at a mile or less distant. Should a long drive be wished for this
road, fairly good, leads for twenty miles into bush upland country,
where the air is fresh and keen. Continuing on the George Town-
road, Barnard’s Creek is reached in two miles. A further five
miles of a rather uninteresting hilly, well-made road stretches to
Dilston, where the road touches the river, at a point known as a
pretty picnic resort.
Drives of From Twenty-four to Forty Miles.—Full-day
Drives, &c.
To Perth, Longford, Pateena, &c. —By taking either the old
Hobart turnpike or the western highway, and deviating at one or
other of the various inland branches, numerous pleasant drives are
found. Under the heading, “A Twenty-seven Miles’ Drive,” the
Hobart-road is mentioned as far as Cocked Hat (eight miles). Con-
tinuing, the township of Perth is reached in three miles, where the
old bluestone bridge spans the South Esk River at the entrance to
the grounds and mansion house of Scone, occupied by the proprietor,
Mr. Wm, Gibson, junr. The Scone merinoes are a household word
in Australia, and Australians interested in sheep can always get an
introduction here. Everything on the estate is in perfect taste—house,
grounds, and farm alike. The South Esk water force is utilised to
generate an electric light installation for the homestead and house.
From Perth, Longford is reached in four miles, from whence a
return, via Pateena, on to the Western-road, can be made, reaching
Launceston (twelve miles) —a round journey, without going over
any of the same ground twice, of twenty-seven miles, all on a good
road and through interesting country, mostly occupied by small
holders.
Launceston, via westward road to Hadspen, Garrick, Hagley, West-
bury, Deloraine , &c. —The first seven miles, to Hadspen, is over
poor hilly country, the best bit of scenery being from the hill outside
the city. At Hadspen the South Esk is crossed opposite Entally, the
estate and residence of the Hon. Thos. Reiby, Speaker of the House
of Assembly, and a native of the colony, though educated in England;
a veteran sportsman and genial host. The Entally horses and dogs
are the pride of a few colonial youths, and have been liberally sup-
ported by the owner, more for the enjoyment of his friends than for the
venerable gentleman’s own pleasure, the cares of State and his study
occupying his time to the exclusion of outdoor sports. Garrick, eleven
miles from town, an old roadside village, and, before the days of
railways, a brisk business centre, has now nothing thriving but its
flour-mill, where Mr, T. W. Monds and his son do a large business,
the motive power for the machinery being derived from the Liffey
Rivulet, a tributary of the Meander, which flows into the South Esk
on the Entally property. From Garrick the westward road continues
on to Hagley (six miles), passing through the well-known Quamby
estate—recently divided and sold in farms of about 200 acres each—
formerly belonging to the Dry family, of whom the late Sir Richard
was the last owner. Another three miles brings the traveller to
Westbury (twenty miles), one of the leading Tasmanian townships,


and the centre of a large agricultural area, occupied by holders of
about an average of 200 acres each. Deloeaine is reached in another
ten miles, but as it is, like Westbury, intersected by the L. and W.
railway, travellers usually choose the rail to reach either place. The
railway makes a detour to get the agricultural traffic, Launceston to
Deloraine being forty-five miles by rail and only thirty miles by
road.
Returning from Garrick—eleven miles from Launceston—the
tourist can choose the Bishopsboume-road, branching to the south-
ward from that point, the Oaks-road at twelve miles, the Glenore-
road at fourteen miles, or the Hagley-road at sixteen miles, all
running southerly, and by driving across the agricultural areas, on
good roads, the cross roads radiating from Longford can be reached,
and the home journey made via that township in a full day’s drive.
Either of these routes is a most enjoyable drive through cornfields
and pasture paddocks of small size, compared with those of the
other colonies, reminding the visitor of British scenes—if a Britisher
—and to the colonial affording an idea of what an English agricul-
tural county is like.
To be explicit in mileage, the round journey from Launceston and
back, via Garrick, Bishopsbourne, Longford, and Pateena, is thirty-
six miles ; or, if Perth is substituted for Pateena, forty miles. The
tour is fully worthy a day’s time. Well-horsed cabmen or livery
stable drivers, if engaged the previous day, will not object to the
journey when fairly paid.
The same remarks apply to the trip via Travellers’ Rest,
Longford, Bishopsbourne, through Como Lane, to Oaks, Garrick,
and back (forty miles).
All of these trips afford many interesting objects. Three-fourths
of the journey is over the inland plateau of agricultural land, sub-
divided into small fields, in many places with live fences. The
holdings are generally small, the occupants thrifty, and an air of
settledness and content prevails, which strikes the stranger used to
the large areas, scant population, and migratory habits of con-
tinental colonial rural life. The western and eastern ranges of
mountains are in sight most of the time, and a variety of aspect
enchants the dwellers of less rugged countries.
Launceston to Scottsdale by road, via St. Patrick's River, twelve
miles; Pattersonia Rivulet; fifteen miles; Mount Arthur Inn,
eighteen miles; Myrtle Bank, twenty-three miles; crest overlooking
Meredith Valley, thirty-one miles; bottom of valley, thirty-three
miles ; Scottsdale Township ( Tucker’s Corner), forty miles.
A mail coach travelled this road daily, each way, before the
recently-opened railway diverted the traffic. The road is still kept
in good repair, though very little vehicular traffic passes over it
between Myrtle Bank and Meredith Valley, this section being
uninhabited, covered with a dense forest, scrub, and undergrowth, and
broken into ravines and hills. The eight miles from Myrtle Bank to
the top of the valley has an average altitude of about 2000 feet above
Launceston. For forest scenery this drive is unequalled iu Australia.
In some respects it is somewhat like the old road over the Blue
Mountains of New South Wales, with this difference, that the limit-
less prospects of the New South Wales mountains and vales are here


curtailed ; but the verdure, the foliage, the variety of ferns, shrubs,
small trees, and forest timber, all growing together, intermixed,
twined in Nature’s tangled masses of luxuriance, which art might
conceive, but never execute, more than compensate for the lack of
wider view.
But let us revert to the track, taking it in sections as they appear
in the heading to this tour. To St. Patrick’s River (12 miles)
is, in some respects, a most enjoyable drive. At three miles from the
Post-office the ascent commences, about 600 feet being attained in
the next three miles. This renders the air clear, crisp, and enjoy-
able in the hottest weather ; an effect very apparent as the traveller
proceeds on this road. Altitude alone does not cause this invigorat-
ing feeling, but the proximity of the eastern range of mountains,
which draw the currents of wind from the north-west and create a
cool draught.
The vdew from Harden Hill (three miles from the city), looking
back over Launceston and the Tamar Valley, is very fine. At this
point a few minutes’ stoppage is well repaid. On reaching the top
of the next ascent by the Paisley Farm Cottage, the few minutes’
stoppage should again be taken for similar objects. Another ascent
quickly follows, which is surmounted on coming in sight of the next
small homestead, Caswell’s, where the few minutes can again be
enjoyably repeated, care being taken to stop on the very top of the
hill, from winch point only a very charming and extensive scene
opens out. The six-mile post is here passed, when four miles of
rather uninteresting pastoral greenstone hills intervene before a
sharp hill is again encountered, at the top of which Mount Edgecombe
farm is seen, surrounded by bush hills, while the Bidlocks’ Hunting
Ground, fronting on St. Patrick’s River, lies opposite. The tourist
will now find himself well up into the hills, and longing desires
for the picnic basket will be felt by the most dainty subject, the
mountain air of the island having this effect on the poorest appetite.
Another one and a-half miles brings the turn off to St. Patrick’s
River, and the fountain head of the Launceston waterworks, a
capital spot to camp for a few hours. Brown trout are plentiful in
this stream.
Continuing on the main road, several small bush farms are passed,
and in two miles another capital picnic spot will be found at the
Pattersonia Rivulet, a tributary of the St. Patrick. The drive should
be extended to the bridge crossing the stream, where trout abound,
but the best spot to rest is on the hill a few chains before reaching
the bridge. The two mountains, Mount Barrow and Mount Arthur,
are to the right and left. The country is wooded, but some grand
glimpses of wild mountain scenery can be found by strolling around.
This fourteen miles out and in can be done in a day easily, even
should a halt be made for an hour or more at the waterworks as well.
Mount Arthur Inn, eighteen miles from Launceston, a hostelry well
known to travellers on this road, respectably, but plainly conducted,
is the point from whence parties should start whose ambition proposes
the ascent of either Mount Barrow or Mount Arthur. Host Millwood,
or more correctly, Farmer Millwood, is the pink of good nature, but a
terror for hard work, and has always some big job on hand, so it is
necessary to give him at least two days’ notice to provide a guide.
[Note. —Do not trust to a regularly mailed letter, but see the mail-


boy in town and send a parcel-letter, as the boy always calls at
Millwood’s, and the regular mail is not always sent for to the Post-
office, some little distance off.] A party, all in good form, could
very well do Mount Arthur, or even Barrow, and return to the
city in the day by making a five a.m. start. But the easier way is to
reach Millwood’s overnight and make a morning march, when a
very ordinary pedestrian need not be afraid of the journey. A
couple of saddle horses are an acquisition, to be taken as far as the
tracks will allow and hitched till returning. Millwood can
generally provide these.
Our next point is Myrtle Bank, twenty-three miles from
Launceston. This journey and back can also be done in a day,
but tourists are advised to engage a team that can be relied
upon for endurance, as nearly 2000 feet of an ascent has to be
made, this being within 50 feet of the altitude of the bush paddock,
three or four chains above the stopping place at Faulkner’s,
where accommodation of a very similar kind to that at the Mount
Arthur Inn obtains. Parties going to Faulkner’s for the day should
advise a couple of days before, when a plain substantial meal will
be in readiness, and directions given where to stroll to view the
mountain scenery. At this point the line between the two
mountains named is passed, and the eastern sides are viewed instead
of the western, as from Launceston. The invigorating air of this
region is remarkable. The dense forest and gigantic trees are alone
w r ell worth the time and expense of the trip.
Meredith Valley (thirty-one miles) could not be done in one day,
but a small party can be accommodated at Myrtle Bank, and from
thence a delightful excursion could be made, the eight miles be-
tween Myrtle Bank and Meredith Valley being across the tops of
innumerable ravines at an altitude of 2000 feet all the way. The
road for the whole distance is a series of curves, many of an
infinitesimal radius, heading the ravines, and every point of the
compass is traversed while making the eight miles. At the head of
the valley, five minutes’ walk from the ruins of the Sideling coach-
ing stables, a view of the Gorge, with the Scottsdale country 2000
feet below, and Bass’ Straits for a background, presents one of the
grandest landscapes in Tasmania.
Scottsdale (forty miles). This locality is described in another
chapter as approached by railway, but this route, though good in its
way, is not to be compared to the drive via Myrtle Bank.
To Scottsdale and back in two days, by road, is a simple matter
enough, and all of the objects of interest indicated can be taken as
they are reached, including the ascent of either of the mountains
named.
[ For accommodation at Scottsdale see railway trip].
XLbc Cataract (Borge.
This justly celebrated and most romantic scene is within a few
minutes’ walk of the city—towards the eastern end of Patterson-
street. A light iron bridge spans the South Esk. Rest here a few
minutes, and you obtain a good view of the city on the one side and


the Gorge on the other. If you are fortunate enough to see the
cataract when swollen by recent rains, its turbulent flood as it tears
against its rocky sides and plunges on to meet the Tamar will long
be remembered ; but even in calm weather, the stream gliding
between huge rocks several hundreds of feet in height forms a living
picture of great beauty. Boats may be hired at the wharf or here-
abouts, and a pleasant row upon tire bosom of the river brings the
excursionist to the foot of the Falls, about a quarter of a mile further
on. A clamber over the rocks by a zig-zag road leads to the Fikst Basin,
where many picnic parties are content to stay. Hardier climbers
may proceed about a mile or so onwards to the Second Basin, and
there is even a Third Basin considerably further up the river, and
entailing some hard work on the part of the individual in search,
like Dr. Syntax, of the picturesque. An alternative and easier route
to the First Basin is by way of the Esplanade, and the Third Basin
is also accessible from a point on the Westbury-road.
Corra X£nn.
To leave Launceston without visiting Corra Lynn is to stay in Borne
and ignore St. Peter’s, or to do Paris and forget the Eiffel Tower. Not
to lay yourself open to such an imputation of stupidity, take trap, or,
scorning such luxury, tramp sturdily to the suburb of St. Leonards,
and some three miles further on you reach the bridge over this
celebrated gorge. From this point the series of cataracts below,
and the noble rocks clothed with lovely vegetation, make up a
beautiful picture. An omnibus runs from Launceston to Corra Lynn
in the summer season.
ZTbe Devil’s punch ffiSovvl.
His Satanic Majesty has a good deal to answer for in the nomen-
clature of many localities throughout this wicked world, and the
number of his punch bowls in particular, is, like his own name,
Legion. Recent writers of the class “who never mention hell to ears
polite” have chosen to omit the “ naughty” part of this title, but it is
to be found fully given in works of reference as far back as the
beginning of this century, so we shall hardly follow a stupid example
for the sake of euphony of the “prune and prism” order. To be
brief, the Devil’s Punch Bowl is a rugged rocky amphitheatre,
situated on private laud (the Penquite Estate), between two and
three miles from Launceston. Passing along High-street, and over
Windmill Hill to the old main Hobart-road, one comes to a gate on
the left-hand leading to the estate, and so on to the precipice with
its picturesque surroundings. The visitor can return by the Valley
and Penquite-road, and thus enjoy a variety of scene.
Distillery Creefc.
If we are too lazy to walk, an omnibus will take us near this
favourite picnic spot, which is only a couple of miles from the city,
on the St. Leonards-road. Not far from here are the Waverley
Woollen Mills, a local industry of considerable proportions,


and well worthy of inspection. There is no difficulty in obtaining
admission, as the proud proprietor welcomes the tourist, and shows
that inquisitive creature the inmost secrets of the factory utterly
regardless of consequences. The mill and electric light installation
connected therewith are both worked by water-power. The Dam
on Distillery Creek, four and a-half miles from Launceston, from
whence two 15-inch mains supply the city reticulation, is 314 feet
above sea-level, the water being brought from St. Patrick’s River,
some ten miles further afield. The works cost £65,000, and the
daily consumption of water is 2,000,000 gallons. Some extensive
hill-top views are obtained during the trip to and from the Dam.
£re\>all£ii.
Trevallyn is the prettily-situated suburb on the right of the
arriving steamer before she slowly turns the bend to her berthing
place. It connects with the city by means of the bridge over the
South Esk, and contains many charming villas rising in tiers up the
hillside.
Snvcrmag,
In verm a v is the suburb on the North Esk, reached by way of
Tamar-street and a bridge over the river. On the right, leaving
town, lies Invermay Park, where the Launceston volunteers execute
their manoeuvres and compete in rifle matches. Other suburbs are
Inveresk, Windmill Hill, South Launceston, and St. Leonards.
mm&rnlll Dill.
Windmill Hill, only a stone’s throw from the main streets,
commences with a grassy slope, dotted with convenient seats, from
whence a comprehensive view of the city and surroundings is bad,
and where a delightful lounge may be enjoyed. The various parks
and prominent buildings can be identified from this point of vantage,
with the river flats beyond, and, perchance, some huge steamer,
such as the Burrumbeet or Elingamite, slowly nearing the wharf, and
thus proving by ocular demonstration how thoroughly dredging
operations have been carried on during late years to enable vessels
of such tonnage to steam right up to the city without let or
hindrance. A walk on the crown of the hill reveals several charm-
ing views, notably one from a fine sloping villa site on a spot known
as Corbett’s Paddock, at the corner of George and Union streets.
Continue further along, past the Scots’ Church Burying Ground , and
you see at your feet the new suburb of South Launceston, and
away in the distance the Western Tier of mountains, with the South
Esk shining in its winding course. In the hollow below are the
Hospital, Knight’s Foundry, the Roman Catholic Church, Convent, &c. t
while towards the south lie Franklin Village and Young Town.
As a residence, Windmill Hill and neighbourhood are decidedly to
be coveted, and the only wonder is that every corner of this


delightful locality has not been already built upon. All things con-
sidered, the current price of land hereabouts is still remarkably
cheap—a fact worthy of note by those from the mainland, whose
dreams of the future lead them Tasmania-wards.
fences’ Square.
Princes’ Square, in the very heart of the city, is worthy of
special mention. It is planted with both English and native trees,
and studded with comfortable seats. A particularly fine bronze
fountain, with a handsome basin stocked with gold fish, and
ornamentedJ with aquatic plants, is a prominent feature of this
favourite resort.
SunDrs 3i3eaut£ Spots,
St. Leonards. —As elsewhere explained, this suburb can be
reached by rail, but is a pleasanter trip on foot or by trap. An
excellent hotel. Surrounding scenery extremely pretty. Return
fare by omnibus, Is.
Clarke’s Ford, a few minutes’ walk from St. Leonards railway
station, where the North Esk is spanned by a wooden bridge, is a
favourite resort for picnic parties. A waterfall and profusion of
willows here help to make up very pretty surroundings.
Dalrymple’s Bend. —A curve of the South Esk River, with pre-
cipitous and rugged banks, between which the waters tumble along
merrily. The usual mode of reaching this spot is by the Westbury-
road, turning off to the right at the Rising Sun Hotel, and, obtaining
permission from the proprietor of the residence shortly after seen, to
pass through his land. Total distance from Launceston, about five
miles.
Rocher’s Lane, on the East Tamar-road, six miles from Launces-
ton, and accessible also by the Scottsdale railway, is another of the
many charming drives or walks within easy compass.
The Waterworks, fifteen miles from Launceston, on Scottsdale-
road (see Distillery Creek).— Beautiful bush scenery. Inquire at
keeper’s cottage in reserve for directions as to reservoir, water-
channel, tunnel, &c.
Down tbe {Tamar.
Two or three small steamers make frequent trips down the
River Tamar during the week. (See particulars at end of
book.) Amongst their calling-places may be mentioned the
following, viz., Roseyear’s Point, about twelve miles from
Launceston. Good hotel and general accommodation. Within a
quarter of an hour’s walk is Brady’s Look-out, christened after a
celebrated bushranger of olden days, who lurked in certain caverns


hereabouts. From the summit of this rocky eminence a noble view
may be had. Gravelly Beach, a few miles further down the river,
is another favourite summer resort, where boarders can stay or fur-
nished cottages be hired. Bathing-house and shed, capital beach,
boats to let, an abundance of fruit, &c. Good fishing and shooting
in neighbourhood. Stony Creek, Egg Island, and Supply River all
within easy distance. Post and telegraph office, &c. At Beauty
Point, about thirty miles from Launceston, passengers land for
Beaconsfield, three miles beyond, in order to inspect the famous
works of the Tasmania Gold Mining and Quartz Crushing Company ,
incorporating with the Beaconsfield the Florence Nightingale,
Lefroy, and Dailey's United Companies. From the date of its
formation up to the close of 1889 the company has, roughly stated,
crushed some 200,000 tons of quartz, yielding about 250,000 ozs. of
retorted gold, out of which a total of dividends of between £500,000
and £600,000 has been paid. [Memo. —Before leaving town it is
advisable to secure an order of admission to view the works from
the legal manager of the company, who has his office in Launceston].
George Town, lying on the opposite bank of the Tamar, is the next
point of call, and has all the charms of a seaside residence, combined
with the opportunity of excursions inland. A trip to Low Head
Lighthouse and the Submarine Cable Station, or a jaunt to the
Lefroy mines, will well repay the tourist. Boating and bathing can
be indulged in to the heart’s content. There is excellent fishing to be
had at and near George Town, and the fruit of the neighbourhood
bears a high reputation. Comfortable accommodation for boarders,
and suites of furnished apartments.
Note. —Rosevear’s and Beaconsfield on the one side, and George
Town on the other bank of the Tamar, can also be reached by road,
the distance by which is much shorter than by water. Travellers
here therefore find a pleasant means of varying their experiences.


Co tbe flortb-mHest
Launceston to North-West Coast, Mount Bischoef, &c.
Perth—Longford—Westbury—Delnraine—Chudleigh Caves—Latrobe Formby
The Don —Hamilton on Forth Ulverstone Penguin— Emu Bay—Table
Cape—Circular Head—Mount Bischoff—The West Coast.
IH1 E leave the Government station (just across the bridge
\OU| at the foot of Tamar-street) at eight a.m., and settle
down comfortably in a corner with a good outlook as
the train slides out of the station and bears us over the North Esk
and so to St. Leonards. From thence we speed onwards between neat
villas and trim gardens, luxuriant hedges of hawthorn or briar-rose,
and waving crops of many tints of green, or yellow, as the case may be,
to Breadalbane. Here the landscape becomes more English in
appearance than ever, bearing a strong resemblance to portions of
Somersetshire, with the Mendip hills in the distance, the hedges
between the fields of rich grass or ripening grain marking the
boundaries in the softest and least prosaic manner, suggesting rather
than enforcing the rights of ownership, and combining utility with
beauty in a most satisfactory degree. We are soon at Evandalk
Junction, where we turn sharply to the west and into open country
near the South Esk Elver. We next reach Perth, on the old
coaching road to Hobart, round about which quiet village are nestled
several homesteads of well-to-do colonists. A snug little place
enough to spend a day or two in, with many a peep that would
delight an artist. Perth has its esplanade by the riverside, its
English Church, Baptist Chapel, Temperance Hall, school, hotel, &c.
At Perth we cross the South Esk, and running down a gradient of
1 in 70, pass over an exceptionally fine iron bridge 400 feet
long to Longford, 18 miles from Launceston. We do not see
much of Longford from the station, but there are cabs in waiting,
and were we to take one of these we should speedily find ourselves
in a very comfortable hotel, with plenty in the surroundings to
interest us for awhile. The most prominent building is the Anglican
Church, surrounded by a 10-acre enclosure, and boasting of a clock
presented by no less a personage than King William IV. of England,
a stained-glass window, and well-kept grounds. Behind this church
is a stone beneath which reposes the mother of the first Tasmanian-
born child of European parents. Other churches and chapels,
public library, schools, assembly-rooms, good hotels, a bank, &c., are
also to the fore. A regatta is held here in March, and an agricultural
show every October. In the vicinity are several noted estates with
their mansions, such, for instance, as “ Panshanger,” “Brickendon,”
“Norley,” “Woolmers,” and “Entally.” The estimated popula-
tion of the electoral district of Longford, taken with that of its
neighbour Cresst, is about 7000.


Leaving Longford, the line runs between some goodly meadows
and cultivated fields on both level and undulating ground, inter-
spersed with lightly-timbered park-like land, and, passing the
wayside stations of Wilmoee’s Lane and Little Hampton, brings
us to Bishopsbourne, round which there is a large area of agricul-
tural and pastoral country—the latter well fitted to fatten some of
those Tasmanian sheep of whose fleeces we read as weighing up to
24 lbs. each—on past The Oaks and Glenmore, amidst fields
stretching away towards the mountains, until we reach Hagley,
thirty-one miles from Launceston, a district that has little to
enliven it nowadays beyond picturesque surroundings and the
memory of a more prosperous past. Bolling meadows and grain
fields continue to please the eye from here onwards to Westbury,
situated upon the Quamhy Brook. Two churches and several other
neat buildings, including a public library and hall, are here to be
found. Westbury, as the centre of a farming district, has its annual
agricultural exhibition, held in November. Racing and coursing
clubs also meet here, and there is fair shooting and fishing in the
neighbourhood. Exton is the next station, and then the hills close
in a little as we approach Deloraine. Some idea may be gained of
the roundabout way we have come by comparing the distances by
road and rail. By the former it is but thirty, by the latter forty-
five miles from Launceston. At Deloraine those who have the time
to spare would do well to break the journey, first to enjoy a little
rest at an excellent hotel, next to inspect the numerous buildings
affording practical proof of prosperity, thereafter perchance to try
one’s luck with rod and line in the Meander River (with a strong
chance of catching a fair basket of delicious grayling or “cucumber
fish”), and, finally, to take the new branch line to Chudleigh in
order to see the justly-celebrated Chudleigh Caves.
The landlord of the inn at Chudleigh will furnish horses for those
who wish to ride, together with candles, matches, &c., for exploring
the caves, which are situaited about six miles from the township,
a good track leading through beautiful country, and close to “a
mountain of variegated marble.”
West, in his History of Tasmania, says —
“ The entrance of the principal cave, which is considerably more than two miles
in length, is in the limestone rock, at the upper extremity of a narrow ravine,
down which flows the stream which issues from the mouth of the cave, and
extends throughout its whole length. The opening is 30 feet high, and 50 or
60 in width. At a considerable distance from the entrance light is admitted by
two openings in the roof—the only ones throughout the whole extent of the cave—
and when they are passed the full beauty of the scene breaks upon the view of the
visitor. Stalactites of every form hang like icicles from the roof, some presenting
the appearance of inverted cones, others that of glistening semi-transparent tubes,
about the thickness of a pipe-stem, and several yards in length. In some parts
the stalactites, meeting with their opposite stalagmites, form pillars, in appear-
ance supporting a roof of immense height. In other places they assume the form
of elegant and flowing drapery thrown over the huge rocks that project from the
sides of the cavern. The fringes of this drapery, when struck by any hard sub-
stance, give forth a ringing sound, and every variety of note, high or low,
according to their respective length. The floor is covered with stalagmites of
every form, and it sparkles as if paved with diamonds. If the visitor extinguish
his torch, myriads of glow-worms are seen to cover the roof and walls, emitting a
faint blue light, and making the stalactites appear like spectres in the gloom. As
the spectator proceeds new objects of wonder appear. In some places the
stalactites, shooting out in all directions into innumerable small fibres, appear
like fur-work along the roof; in others like masses of elegant drapery, extending
fold above fold to the height of 30 or 40 feet from the floor to the roof.


Near the entrance of the cave they are of a grey or brownish colour, but in the
interior they are of a pure white. There are several chambers, some of great
beauty, which branch off from the main passage, and have been formed by the
rivulet which passes through the cave.”
Since Mr. West’s time fresh caves have been discovered, which are
those the visitor wdll most likely be recommended to see, as being
drier and having suffered less from the attacks of tourists troubled
with that truly British complaint the itch for “ specimens.”
Anthony Trollope, seldom enthusiastic in the expression of his
opinions—rather, indeed, inclined to grumble throughout his Aus-
tralasian travels—says of the Chudleigh Caves, “they are very
wonderful.” This, too, after certain experiences in the shape of
groping, wading, and scrambling which, to an elderly, heavily-built
man—such as he was when he visited Tasmania—must have been,
to say the least, somewhat uncomfortable.
Mole, Greek and Brookhead are other beauty-spots hereabouts of
whose attractions more may be learnt while in the vicinity.
Travellers alighting at Chudleigh-road station, or, for the
matter of that, those staying in Deloraine, are within easy
distance of a particularly fine waterfall on the Meander River,
the volume of water being very considerable, and the depth of the
fall some 50 feet. The Red Hill Hotel, not far from the main
Dgloraine-road, offers accommodation at reasonable rates, and
furnishes a further starting point to the Dairy Plains, an agricul-
tural district that may be profitably visited.
The caves duly explored and wondered at, return w T e to Chudleigh
township, thence to Deloraine, and so resume our train journey to
the North-West Coast.
Amongst the mountains visible from Deloraine are the twin giants
Gog and Magog, separated by a magnificent gorge, through which
the River Meander forces its resistless path seawards, and over this
river we now glide by means of a splendid bridge. Passing the
stations of Chudleigh-road, Dunorlan, and Whiteeoord Hills
we begin to realise that upwards of fifty out of the fifty-five
miles we have now travelled on the main Western line have been
through one continuous stretch of agricultural and pastoral land of
high quality. We begin almost to weary of so much cultured
verdure and to wish for a change. We soon get it as we strike the
down grade through bush and brake, with a merry little creek
keeping us company as far as Kimberley —not the Kimberley of
North Australian gold-rush renown, but a cheerier and brighter
Kimberley by far —where, in crossing it, we get our first glimpse of
the Mersey River, and so rattle aloug to Railton —a pushing little
township. Seven miles from Railton station, reached by coach for a
couple of shillings, and possessing many attractions, amongst which
good hotel accommodation may fairly be included, is the township
of Sheffield. Mount Roland, Mount Claude, Melrose Creek, The
Nook, Paradise, and Promised Land may be given as sample names
of “show places” in this neighbourhood. But at present we must
adhere to our railway carriage. More bush for several miles, until
agriculture begins to reassert itself, and we approach the first in
order of the North-West Coast towns, Latrobe.
Situated on the Mersey, surrounded by a fertile plain, with a
background of noble hills, and giving ample evidence of brisk


business, Latrobe is at once both poetical and practical. Banks,
Custom-house agency, Chamber of Commerce, Gas Company,
Public Library, Public and Oddfellows’ Halls, a Board of Health,
an Agricultural Association, a Hospital, sailing and steam craft,
several well-managed and comfortable hotels, coffee palaces, livery
stables, foundry and carriage works, boot factory, flour-mill, steam
carpentering, brick and pipe works, together with any number of
excellent shops and stores—what more can the heart of the tourist
desire. Add to these the capture near the town of a 23-lb. English
trout, as placed upon official record, and vouched for by the highest
authority, and we have surely said enough to induce a break of
journey at this point. Or shall we cap the climax with the promise
of such food for sporting powder as kangaroo, wallaby, rabbits,
hares, quail, bronzed-winged pigeons, wattle-birds, and wild duck.
Go to—we do not romance— Siste, viator ! and try your luck.
For our own poor part, however, our duty as public recorder
calls us away, and so to train once more and forward to Tarleton,
and thence to Spreyton. At one time it was thought that Spreyton
was destined to become a formidable rival to Latrobe ; but now,
alas! like Hamlet, Spreyton “lacks advancement.” Leave we it
after the way of a world that abandons a failing cause, and hasten
to its flourishing next-door neighbour, and present terminus of the
line, Formby.
Lying in the centre of the cup-like depression formed by the
northern coast of Tasmania, with grand agricultural, mineral, and
timber-growing country developing behind and on either side of it,
a broad estuary leading to its wharves, and a noble river tapping
the interior, this favoured locality could hardly fail to prosper ; and
yet it is only of comparatively late years that it has acquired the
vital force it now displays. Not so very long ago Formby was but
a suburb of Torquay, which trebled it in population, and that
treble only amounted to 180 souls. Now the tables are turned, and
with a vastly increased population on both banks, Formby is the
town, Torquay the subuib. It is the Dundrearian example of the
tail wagging the dog. Whether the new bridge across the estuary,
which Torquayites talk of as imminent, will once more alter this
state of things, remains to be seen. What is it that Victor Hugo
says, “Weymouth, a hamlet, was once the suburb of Melcombe Regis,
a city and a port. Now Melcombe Regis is a parish of Weymouth.
The village has absorbed the city. It was the bridge which did the
work. Bridges are strange vehicles of suction, w r hich inhale the
population, and sometimes swell one river bank at the expense of it*
opposite neighbour.”* Be this as it may in the near or remote
future, the Formby and Torquay of to-day go together to make a
“ congeries of commercial particles” that it does one good to see.
There is no mistaking the evidences of wealth and solidity to be
noted on all sides. From the dredge hard at w r ork demolishing the
bar at the harbour mouth, to the smart buildings where those
benevolent Tom Tiddlers, the bank clerks, are “picking up gold
and silver” for their customers, there is an air that is more
revivifying to many than even the sea air for which Formby is
*“ L’Homme Qui Hit,” Book 111., Chap. 4.


noted. Need we say that we refer to the “ air of business.” The
Custom-house returns for 1887 give the exports of Torquay (under
which head Formby is still officially included) as £60,190, and the
imports as £67,781, figures that speak for themselves. The Government
quarters, such as police office, court-house, &c., are on the Torquay
side of the estuary, and so too are some capital baths, but Formby
has the principal wharves, the railway station, the Giblin Memorial
Hall (in grateful recollection of the late W. R. Giblin, Chief Justice
of Tasmania, a very handsome structure, built upon a commanding
site), and Formby has also a Public Hall and Skating Rink, the
banks already alluded to, a library, several roomy churches, four or
five hotels (amongst which Goslin’s Sea View Hotel, and the newly-
finished Ocean View Hotel, may be specially mentioned), two coffee
palaces, and last, but not least, in the North-West Post, the only
Tasmanian newspaper out of Hobart and Launceston. The Post is at
present published every Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday, but
should Formby continue to grow as it is growing now, will probably
soon develop into a full-blown daily. May this be speedily the
case. As for the Formby shops and stores, they are many and
good. Town allotments, we are told on inquiry, have changed
hands at from £6 to £9 per foot, though these, of course, are
extreme prices, consequent on special positions. With regard
to the attractions held out to the sportsman, what we have said
of Latrobe refers equally well to Formby. The neighbourhood
of the town is full of picturesque spots, notably up the river
and along the new railway extension to Ulverstone, where some
large engineering works are in progress. A favourite rendezvous
for picnic parties is also the Mersey Bluff, about a mile from the
town, surmounted by a substantial lighthouse. Small coasting
steamers and sailing vessels, fussy little steam launches, yachts, and
boats of all kinds dot the waters of the harbour, and Messrs.
Huddart, Parker and Co.’s large steamers land the visitor from
Melbourne in a little over seventeen hours.
Eleven miles to the eastward of Formby lies Port Sorell and the
township of Burgess, on the estuary into which the Franklin and
Rubicon rivers debouch. The road to Burgess runs from Latrobe,
and there is much on the way to please the lover of fine scenery.
It was at Port Soi’ell that Mrs. Meredith, the talented Tasmanian
authoress—elsewhere more specially alluded to —spent two or three
years of her happy and useful life, and it is of a ferntree “temple in
the wilderness” in this district that she writes as follows :—“ In
one place we found a perfect living model of an ancient vaulted
crypt, such as I have seen in old churches or castles, or beneath St.
Mary’s Hall in Coventry. We stood in a large, level space devoid
of grass or any kind of undergrowth, but strewn with fern leaflets
like a thick, soft, even mat. Hundreds, perhaps thousands, of fern-
trees grew here of nearly uniform size and at equal distances, all
straight and erect as chiselled pillars, and springing from their
living capitals the long, arching, thick-ribbed fern leaves spread
forth and mingled densely overhead in a groined roof of the daintiest
beauty, through which not a ray of light gleamed down, the solemn
twilight of the place strangely suiting with its almost sacred
character. Openings between the outer columns seemed like arched
doors and windows seen through the “long-drawn aisle,” and stray


gleams of sunshine falling across them were faintly reflected on the
fretted vault above us. ”*
But the Emu Bay coach has been waiting for us while we finished
lunch, and the driver’s cry of “ad aboard” is no longer to be disre-
garded. Leaving behind us then the contingent of our fellow-
tourists who will make this their resting-place for several happy
days, we climb into our seat and “ off she goes.” Turning out of
Formby, on a good uphill road, we pass by the large new stores and
offices of the Don River Trading Company, and the new Wesleyan
school, and gain the open country. Four miles further on we come
to the River Don, from whence a tramway, many miles in length,
runs inland and taps the forests of excellent timber, a freestone
quarry, a coal mine, and a large area of fine agricultural land.
Nearer the sea is the Don Settlement, where are saw-mills, two
churches, a mechanics’ institute and lecture hall, a public school,
and several handsome private residences. The Don River Trading
Company issue their own currency in the shape of orders, ranging
in value from ss. to £2, and these are circulated generally in the
same manner as bank notes.
Crossing the Don Bridge the coach bears us onward between
flourishing farms, and bracken-fringed slopes, with ever something
new and fresh to please and interest us. We notice in particular
one curious effect on the left-hand side of the road, where a tall tree
is growing up from the middle of a ragged old stump, encased in it
for several feet as in a wooden strait-jacket, but threatening soon to
burst its ligneous envelope by the sheer force of its lusty youth.
Down into a fertile valley now, and snugly in its lap lies
Hamilton-on-Forth, known locally more briefly as Forth, a
small township, but none the less inviting to the tourist, who can
here enjoy his ease at his inn, can obtain a guide, or boat and
tackle, and will probably meet with goodly sport. Observe here
some grand willow and poplar trees, not forgetting the English
blackberry bramble which runs riot all over the place, much, we
are told, to the disgust of the farmer, who prefers potatoes and oats
to the finest blackberries that ever enraptured the souls of a picnic
party. After a brief halt at the Bridge Hotel, the horses trot
across the bridge itself, leaving on the right a road leading to the
Heads. Nice gardens hereabouts, and chocolate soil that makes
the agriculturist’s mouth water. Was it not in this district that
there grew the pelargonium, of which Mr. Braddon, the Tasmanian
Agent-General, boasted so deservedly at the meeting of the Roy?I
Colonial Institute in London in May 1889. Said he : “The
pelargonium one gets in England for 2s. or 2s. 6d. is a plant whose
height is some 14 inches, whose leaves may be counted without
difficulty, and whose trusses do not number more than a dozen—
that plant you must keep under glass during the best part of the
year. My pelargoniums”—oh I the pride with which he must have
emphasised that possessive pronoun —“my pelargoniums were
bushes that stood out in the garden through, and flowered, if I
allowed it, in all seasons. One of them was 4 feet 6 inches in
height. One spreading bush had a circumference of over 27 feet,
and off one plant I cut at one time 1050 dead trusses.”
*“ My Home in Tasmania,” Yol. 11., p, 164.


Ulverstone, the point for which the new railway is making, is
our next stopping-place. Here debouches the Leven River , and here,
by wharf and in well-kept streets, are many signs of active com-
merce. Here are two banks, churches, a Customs office, two skating
rinks, public baths, saw-mills, good hotels, and a coffee palace (every
little township seems to have its coffee palace nowadays), and shops
and stores as per usual. Ulverstone holds its annual regatta,
Ulverstone has its lawyers, its doctors; in a word, all the amenities
of modern life. From here branches oft the road to Castra (sixteen
miles), a reserve of 50,000 acres, made by the Tasmanian Govern-
ment specially for Indian officers at the instigation of Colonel
Crawford, who himself took up land here, although his brother
army-men have been slow to follow his example. A rocky gorge
up the river, known as the “ Lever’s Gates,” is a scene of
most romantic beauty. Both river and seaboard abound with
fish, and boats and fishing tackle can be hired. As many as sixty
dozen ling have here been taken in one haul. Vehicles are pro-
curable at moderate rates.
Leaving Ulverstone, fthe road skirts a fine beach, bracken and
gorse fringed, the shallow waters near the shore lending their
contrast to the varied shades of green, with every tint from orange
to purple, while puffs of gracious sea-air fan the traveller’s cheek
with wooing welcome. Now we mount by the side of a foliage-
clothed cliff, and far beneath us see the rank and file of the waves,
headed by their “dashing white sergeants,” pressing on to the
assault upon some outlying rock. When the wind is northerly,
and of the quality known to seamen as “ fresh,” though to landsmen
it may seem worthy of a less innocent adjective, a fine commotion
of waters is to be seen from this elevation, and the breakers, as
they leap over the reefs and dash against the shore, cannot but
remind one of Adam Lindsay Gordon’s stirring lines—
“ Oh ! brave white horses ! you gather and gallop ;
The storm sprite loosens the gusty reins ;
Now the stoutest ship were the frailest shallop
In your hollow backs or your high-arched manes.”
Hereabouts are pointed out to us close in shore a couple of small
islands, or, rather, rounded rocks, thinly covered in parts with
vegetation. They are known as the “ Two Sisters,” but even a
pipeful of the finest “Victory” that ever solaced the palate of a
Jehu fails to extract from our driver anything as to the raison
d’Stre of their title. Surely there should be some legend attached
to these hard-featured twins. Why should they not be the Sal-
prunella and Blousabella of the story turned into stone and
anchored in the deep, within full gaze of passers-by, as a punish-
ment for their cruelty to poor Cinderella and a warning to wicked
half-sisters for all time ?
And now, curving downwards towards the horn of a crescent bay,
we gain a distant view of Table Cape and its lighthouse, with
minor headlands between us and it. To our right, “out on the
rocks when the tide is low,” or, for the matter of that, equally in
evidence at high-water, are visible proofs that man has been
exercising his mole-like instincts in the search after the hidden
secrets of the earth. This is indeed the Neptune mine, which, teste
Mr. Cosmo Newbery, yields 15 per cent, copper, 5 per cent, cobalt,


3 per cent, nickel, and 38 ozs. 10 dwts. 4 grs. of silver to the ton.
That the mine should be idle at the time of our passing is explained
by the statement that it is in a transition state ; Melbourne capital,
that super-concentrated extract of Fortune in the eyes of
Tasmanians, being even now on the point of infusing new life into
the dormant veins. Oh ! for some mining Brown-Sequard to do
the like for each and every Tasmanian mine now languishing for
need of the vital fluid. The simile is surely not too far-fetched.
There should be some connection between guinea-pigs and gold !
But here we are at the seaside settlement of Penguin, perching,
or rather nestling, like its feathered namesake, amongst the rocks.
The parallel, however, holds no further, for Penguin township is
neither clumsy of movement nor unable to take such flights of
prosperity as townships should. The deposits of the Neptune mine
are not the only resources of the district. Many are the indications
of riches still to be developed, and systematic prospecting will yet
discover more. Silver is found in various directions —notably at the
Dial Ranges, seven miles from Penguin—and so, too, are gold,
copper, tin, galena, and manganese. There are vast beds of fictile
clay, suitable for the manufacture of terra-cotta, majolica-ware, and
the like, and the timber of the neighbourhood includes blackwood,
lightwood and pencil cedar (varieties of the blackwood), celery-
topped pine (so useful for masts and spars), and the beautifully-
grained myrtle. For Penguin, as for the hereof high tragedy, “the
day will come ; ’twill be a welcome day !” There is a sort of half
dock, half jetty at Penguin, alongside which we see some stout
schooners loading, and notice further, by the said craft being, at the
time of our visit, high and dry, how great the fall of tide must here
be. Tourists eager for good sport in the way of fishing, and those
desirous of exploring the beauties of Nature, will do well to put in a
few days at Penguin. There are boats and vehicles for hire, and
shops where the most exacting customer can be supplied. As
regards accommodation, there are three hotels and a boarding
establishment Watcombe House, patronised by the best Tasmanian
families, and worthy of cordial recommendation. “Give ’em their
heads, Charley—so much for Penguin !”
Our way still leads along by the margin of the ocean, giving us a
full view of two or three most inviting beaches, one of which, known
as Preservation Bay, is especially noticeable for the sharp line of
demarcation between the sand and the water-worn pebbles and
boulders at either end. A similar peculiarity is observable in a
field on the landward side of the road near Sulphur Creek, which we
now pass, one-half the field being good soil, with a growing crop of
potatoes, while the other half, marked off as by a rule, is sand and
worthless weeds. Climbing some fairly steep hills, clothed with a
thick undergrowth, interspersed with young gums and native cherry
trees, affording every possible gradation of greenness, we cross a
bridge over the Blythe River, noted for the large deposits of iron ore
near its banks and the plentifulness of fish in its waters. Now we
plunge into the woods for a space, but only to emerge again upon a
fresh scene of beauty, and now we wind along the side of some tall
cliff, with the murmur of the waves far below us. There is but one
thing we miss in this coast drive, and that is the rich agricultural
land lying at the back of the hills, and extending for miles inland


all along our route. And now, three miles or so distant, Emu Bay,
our present destination, smilingly beckons us, and we make haste
to accept the invitation as we rattle down-hill, over a substantial
bridge spanning the Emu River, round the sweep of a glorious bay,
and into the township of Bdrnie. Here the coach pulls up at
Wiseman’s Bay View Hotel, where, or at the Commercial next
door but one—kept by another member of the Wiseman family—
the tourist finds most comfortable quarters for himself and his family.
It is but five of the clock, and we have time before dinner to
stroll along a few hundred yards to Blackman's Point and view that
chief glory of Burnie, the Breakwater. This great undertaking,
which has transformed an open roadstead into a perfectly secure
harbour, is the work of the Tasmanian Government, who are
expending from £20,000 to £30,000 on its construction. The break-
water, stretching about 400 feet in an easterly direction, is formed
of huge concrete blocks, measuring 12 feet x 5 feet x 5 feet, and weigh-
ing 25 tons each, which are deposited by the divers, aided by an
enormous crane, on the bed of the ocean, and so piled one on the
other, and interlocked, as to form a mole some 25 feet in width,
presenting a bold and impervious front to the fiercest breakers.
Along the crown of the breakwater run two sets of rails to facilitate
loading, which the largest vessels here effect with ease and rapidity.
It is at this breakwater Messrs. Huddart, Parker and Co.’s direct
steamers from Melbourne to the North-West Coast make their first
call, landing passengers in less than twelve hours from Port
Phillip Heads. The concrete forming the artificial masonry of
which the blocks are composed is made on the spot from a mixture
of crushed bluestone, cement, and sea-sand, poured into huge
moulds, where they speedily harden and are ready for use. The
stone thus utilised is obtained handily enough from a quarry hard
by—a quarry in itself a natural wonder, formed, as it is, of polygonal
columns of basalt, wedged together after the fashion of the well-
known rocks found at the Giant’s Causeway in Ireland. The general
appearance of these closely-packed columns, their regularity of shape,
and the sections into which each individual monster is divided, form a
study for the geologist, and call forth many haphazard conjectures
from the ordinary observer. The formation extends, in the one direc-
tion, far into the hillside, and, in the other, slopes down beneath the
seething waters off the Point in a tessellated pavement of gigantic
design.
Scrambling to the extreme verge of the Point, aided by the tufts of
grass and shore-loving plants—such as the homely “ pigface”—that
fill in the spaces between loose-lying boulders, we gain a view
westward of another charming beach, with the bulk of Table Cape
looming far beyond ; then a long gaze out to the blue of the Straits,
and finally we turn once more to the exquisite bay behind us, and
then, hark !
“That all-softening 1 , overpowering knell,
The tocsin of the soul—the dinner-bell.”
After dinner, aided by a full-orbed matronly moon, we get a little
deeper into the confidence of beautiful Emu Bay. We walk along
that silver strand beside those plashing wavelets, and imagine what
verses we could here compose had we but a touch of the fine frenzy.
Failing such outlet of expression, we drink deep draughts of [the


quiet loveliness of the scene and wander on and on, while Our Lady
Moon, reclining on her mist-encurtained, cloud-quilted couch,
scatters liberal largess of silver all around—this gratefully received
alike by glistening sand and ripple, dew-kissed rock and tree.
Next morning betimes we have ample opportunity of studying the
more commercial aspect of Burnie, and of ascertaining several facts
worthy of record. We notice near the breakwater a number of
myrtle logs, 4 feet in diameter, and find that they are for shipment
to England, where a demand for this highly ornamental wood is
springing up. We further learn that Burnie possesses, inter alia,
churches, schools, a Customs office, a bank, a town hall, racing,
cricket, and rifle club, and sundry other concomitants of advanced
civilisation, not forgetting a‘ ‘ Dickey-bird Society,” for the protection
of small birds. Bravo ! Burnie, if this does not place you in
the van of modern enlightenment, what shall ? May a thankful
chorus of merry twitterers sound your praises day by day, and the
Cockney sportsman from Melbourne ever stand in due awe of the
terrors of your wrath. To resume. In Burnie are saw-mills and
brick-yards, shops and stores galore, two other hotels besides those
we have mentioned, and several boarding-houses. As regards fish,
the Emu River, like Paddy’s trout stream, is “ shtiff wid ’em,” and
big hauls are also sometimes made in and near the Bay. Taken
altogether, Burnie, prosperous, bright, and essentially beautiful, is
a place that all tourists to Tasmania should visit, whether they come
by direct boat or make the tour as we have set it down.
From Burnie a daily coach connects with Table Cape, or Wyn-
yard, as the township is called, the road still running by the sea,
with splendid views throughout its course. Four miles from Emu
Bay we pass Somerset, on the River Cam. At the wharf we see
vessels loading with timber, and understand that besides the saw-
mills this betokens there are many growing industries ■which time
will expand. Eight miles further brings us to Wynyard, at the
mouth of the River Inglis, with its contingent of wharves and
saw T -mills, two banks, Customs office, stores, hall, library, and
assembly-rooms, clubs, and social comforts generally, not forgetting
three considerable hotels and a coffee palace. Fresh and salt water
fish as per usual on this prolific coast. The lighthouse at Table Cape
deserves a visit.
Circular Head, with its township Stanley, is the furthest point
on the North-West Coast likely to be reached by the average tourist.
Familiar to us for many years in connection with the best potatoes
offered in the Melbourne market, the name Circular Head has carried
little with it beyond that association. Visit the locality itself, and
we shall find much else to interest us and not a little to admire.
The best way of reaching Stanley is by specially-hired vehicle in lieu
of the less comfortable mail cart that traverses the road. The
traveller has a thirty-seven mile drive before him, partly along the
shore and partly inland, passing through the Flowerdale agricultural
district, where apple orchards are also making their appearance, and
thence by high barren hills and patches of dense myrtle forest to the
vicinity of Rocky Cape. Detention River Bridge is a halting place
eighteen miles this side of Circular Head, where accommodation may
be had at the farm-house of Mr. Robert Dallas. Concerning the
little community here gathered together, Mr. T. C. Just—whose


admirable series of papers on the North-West Coast have had a
large circle of readers, and who has long been knowm to the writer
as a litterateur of repute—chronicles the following historiette :
“ I am afraid there has been a falling from grace at Detention. Not far from
the public school is a neat little conventicle, nestling at the foot of the hill, which
was erected some years back by the Evangelists. I asked whether it would be
open in the evening, but was informed it had been closed for a long time. When
it was first started people attended from the districts all around, coming many
miles to worship, and there was quite a flourishing congregation. Suddenly it
flashed across the minds of some of the young people that the chapel would be a
splendid place for a dance, and they lost no time in applying to the trustees for
the use of it, but somehow those obtuse old parties did not think it would be in
exact accord with the eternal fitness of things, so they refused. The flourishing
congregation at once withdrew their patronage, and the chapel has been closed
ever since. Probably some day it will be sold and converted into a skating rink,”
From Detention Eiver the road is not, at date of present writing,
all that could be desired, and, where practicable, the firm sand of
the seashore is to be preferred, especially in driving along the
narrow peninsula where the journey ends. The encroachments
made by the sea are here painfully visible, and emphasis given to
the loud appeal which the Stanleyites make for harbour improve-
ments. Indeed, to go by Mr. Just, who seems to have tested the
political feeling of the district, the majority of its prominent men
are in favour of annexation to Victoria. “ They are beginning,”
says Mr, Just, “to realise the fact that they are nearer to Victoria
by 120 miles than they are to their own capital, so far as distance is
concerned.” There is force, too, in the thought that by means of
the new and reguk l ' steamship service which Messrs. Huddart,
Parker and Co. arei naugurating, the resident of Stanley can reach
Melbourne in about one-quarter of the time it takes him to get to
Hobart.
The all-pervading feature of Stanley from a picturesque point of
view is, of course, the curious table-topped mass of greenstone
rock which Bass and Flinders christened Circular Head, while
likening it in their report to the shape "of a Christmas Cake.”
Locally it is irreverently known as the “ Nut.” Its sides are steep
in the superlative degree, but the summit is accessible from certain
points, and the climb of 500 feet is well rewarded by a magnificent
view. Westward stretches the coast line to Bobbin’s Island and
Cape Grim —from the last-named of which points the extreme length
of Tasmania (to South Cape in a S.E. direction) is about 230 miles—
while eastward we look back upon the landmarks of our pleasant
jaunt.
The aborigines of Tasmania were particularly enamoured of this
locality, and many traces of their residence are found in a cave
near the township. The trade returns of Circular Head for 1887
show a total of imports £8615, and exports £16,992, the latter made
up mainly of potatoes, thoirgh wheat, barley, oats, hay, hops,
apples, pears, &c., all have their share in cultivation. The general
all-round average of the potato yield is officially given as about five
tons per acre, though instances are by no means rare of fifteen, twenty,
and even a larger number of tons produced to the acre. It is in
districts such as this that we hear of farmers clearing off all encum-
brances in a single good season, i.e., with fairly high prices ruling
in the Australian markets. Like most of the coast towns we have
visited, Stanley has its Customs office. It also possesses three


churches, three hotels, a bank, a reading-room and public library,
rifle, turf, cricket, and football clubs, a band, a harmonic society,
an Oddfellows’ lodge, and so on. It further boasts of a G.0.M., the
initials, familiar to most Englishmen, being in this instance
affectionately attached, by those qualified to judge, to a gentleman
whose acquaintance the intelligent visitor should court. And now,
leaving others so inclined to cry Westward Ho ! and to proceed to
Smithton and the flourishing settlement at the Montagu, thirteen
and twenty-five miles respectively beyond Stanley, we must fain
return, by a train of thought, to Emu Bay, ready for a start
Mount Bischoff-wards.
We have a mountain climb before us to-day, but one that will
make no call upon our thews and sinews, for we shall accomplish
it seated at our ease in a comfortable covp4 on a private railway
line, that for management and maintenance, aye, and for profitable
results as well, compares favourably with any Government line in
Tasmania, and many elsewhere. Thanks to the courtesy of Mr. J.
W. Norton Smith, the manager of the railway, we are in a position
to while away the few minutes before we start by recounting certain
particulars, not only regarding this railway, but also of the larger
company of which Mr. Smith is the local representative, and from
which the railway is an off-shoot enterprise. Briefly put, the Van
Diemen's Land Agricultural Company was established in 1825, when,
and subsequently, in consideration of'certain extensive and expensive
improvements made by them, they received a Crown grant entitling
them to a total of 370,000 acres of land in the north-west of
Tasmania. This they chose as follows :—150,000 acres at Wool-
north, the extreme north-west corner of the island, 10,000 acres at
Bobbin’s and Trefoil Islands, 10,000 acres at Middlesex Plains,
20.000 acres at Circular Head, 10,000 acres at Hampshire Hills,
150.000 acres at Surrey Hills, and 20,000 acres at Emu Bay. From
the date named, until the present day, the company spent large
sums of money on the property thus acquired, and are only latterly
beginning to reap the harvest thus sown, their town allotments at
Circular Head and Emu Bay now rising in value daily, and changing
hands up to as much as £IBOO per acre, though the company’s upset
price is considerably lower. Out of the requirements of the Mount
Bischoff mines, and passing for nearly its whole distance of forty-
eight miles through the company’s land, has arisen this excellent
private line.
But before the railway, came the tramway. Previous to the
construction of this Mount Bischoff was almost cut off from the rest of
Tasmania during six to seven months of the year, the only road
being a bush track which had been opened by the Van Diemen’s
Land Company in the early days. The state of this road, made on
rich basaltic soil and shaded on both sides by luxuriant forest
growths, was such that it was impossible to get tin-ore from or
provisions to the Mount during the long winter except on pack-
horses at heavy cost.
Foreseeing the immense benefits which would follow to the
agricultural lands of the coast from the working of a mine such as
Mount Bischoff promised to be, the directors of the Van Diemen’s
Land Company offered to give the necessary land to any company
who would undertake the construction of a tramway between the


Mount and Emu Bay. Negotiations were opened up with persons
in Tasmania and Victoria without avail, and in 1875 the Van
Diemen’s Land Company determined to construct a tramway them-
selves, which was opened for through traffic in February 1878, and
worked till November 1883, when the conversion of the tramway
into a railway was commenced, being completed in July 1884.
The tramway thus superseded was of the ordinary bush type,
with wooden rails, but ballasted and kept in sufficiently good order
to permit a (comparatively) fast car being sent throughout the line
each way daily for the conveyance of passengers and mails. The
goods waggons were two and a-half days completing the journey.
The traffic service was kept up continuously throughout the con-
version. The gauge of the tramway was 3 feet, that of the railway
is 3 feet 6 inches.
So much for the line we are to travel upon —a line having this
special peculiarity, that from terminus to terminus it has not a single
intermediate station ; and now for the trip itself. Like the true
fate-compellers of life, we rise from the very start, and are soon
amongst the foot-hills near Emu Bay, winding our way by the side
of gullies and along wooded slopes, round sharp curves, and between
heavy timber, some idea of which may be gleaned from a glimpse we
gain of a monster whose butt has been measured, and found to be 23 ft.
6 inches in diameter. Near the tenth mile post Mr. H. Lynch, the
company’s inspector, who happens to be in the same carriage, informs
us that by giving due notice tourists may alight here and make
their way to a highly picturesque waterfall, haying a clear leap of
159 feet, and situated on the Darling Creek, two miles from the line.
It is easily accessible by a good track. [Picnic parties leaving
Burnie by the eight a.m. train can spend some five hours at the
fall, and catch the return train at the same point at four p.m.].
From the outset, each side of the lino has shown us ranks of fern
trees of varying height, and these, we may as well at once state,
accompany us to our journey’s end, myriads of them extending back
right and left into the recesses of the forest, their exquisite fronds
charming the eye with grace of form and beauty of colour. Here
could a Guilfoyle replenish his stock as often as he pleased without
making any impression on the lavish abundance of Nature ; here
would poetry be instilled into the mind of even a Melbourne
Inspector of Nuisances or a Fiemington Bookmaker.
Twenty miles or so from Burnie, ever rising, we pass through the
Hampshire Hills, and at a halting place of the old tramroad, see one
of the vehicles displaced by our comfortable railway carriage. It
impresses us with a deep sense of thankfulness for present blessings.
We next have an opportunity of seeing a specimen of the dense
myrtle forests of this region, and of appreciating the difficulties
experienced by the pioneers to whom the north-west of Tasmania
owes so much. Thirty miles from Burnie. myrtle gives way to gum,
dotted about in park-like spaces, and at the thirty-three mile post
we cross the Wey River—shortly afterwards getting a good view of
Valentine's Peak. A fair proportion of the laud we are now thread-
ing our way through has already been alienated from the company,
and is of a quality that will probably yield a fair x-eturn for the
purchase money. Within eight miles of Mount Bischoff we cross
the Hellyer River, a rapid stream that should know something of


the ways and manners of our friend the trout. A new railway
bridge, just substituted for the old one, carries the line over this
river. The mountain air has been growing more and more bracing
with every hundred feet or so we have ascended, and now positively
blows sharply. Our appetite keeps pace in keenness with it.
Patience ! we are near both dinner and destination.
The Mount Bischoff mine draws its water supply from a series of
dams constructed, with considerable labour and no little engineering
skill, within coo-ee —to use an aboriginalism suited to these semi-
wilds —of the works. We see some of these dams from our carriage
window, and also the outlet tapping them and conveying the water,
by a tunnel, to the point where it is utilised. As we glide into the
Waratah terminus, Waratah being the name of the township, the
chaos of fallen and fire-blackened timber marking the verge of
civilisation gives way suddenly to a wide open space, and passing a
large handsome building, which we learn is the Mechanics’ Institute,
we come to a standstill at Waratah station, some 2500 feet above the
level of the sea.
Making our way to the Waratah Hotel (there is another excellent
hostelry—Alford’s—close by), and noticing, as we pass, the novel
effect gained by leaving huge ten-foot coal-black tree trunks—upright
orprostrate, as the case may be—on vacant allotments between houses,
we indulge in a mighty wash, and then, while neat-handed Phillis
lays the cloth, we take our first comprehensive view of Waratah —a
town of weatherboard and galvanised iron, but of weatherboard and
galvanised iron so artfully put together, so cunningly embellished,
as to look far better than your dull red brick or sodden stone.
And then the surroundings. Stand here on the hotel balcony and
look ! “Just cast your other eye over that !” as John Stofel says
to Deacon Skinner in the play. Your other eye, friend —meaning the
eye you sometimes use for contemplating the true, the beautiful,
the noble, the grand, as contradistinguished from the eye you so
persistently keep on the main chance, your weather-eye—your nun-
quam dormio, ever-open Ego eye, aha ! Well ! what do you see ?
“A deep vale shut in by”—No ! that's Claude Melnotte ; try again.
A country-township street, on the one side of which you are
standing, while on the other, within a rod or two of you, almost
at your feet, there opens a wild gorge that would be the headlong
horror of your dreams to-night were it not clothed with tangled
growth and stately trees, and thus robbed of the terrors of its
naked form. Over yonder, where the great wheels revolve and
the crystal water flashes in the sun, an orderly procession of big,
prosaic, precise buildings, stepping down, terrace after terrace,
from the lip of the precipice to its depths below, as if in leisurely
descent for some most practical purpose—and, indeed, this is the
case. Then the gorge again, deeper and more mysterious, as it
passes majestically on between the waiting hills, and wraps itself
in its purple robe of distance. This to the right and front of the
picture. To the left the street once more, and beyond it a mountain
that is a mountain no longer, but a chopped and chipped, a hacked
and hewed, a sliced and slivered apology for one ; a Brobdingnagian
cake that Glumdalclitch has more than commenced for the benefit
of some of her intimate young court friends; a pudding that
Gargantua has had his greedy will of, and has thrown aside for


daintier cates ; in a word, the great Mount Bischoff, which we have
come many long miles to see, as it appears after several million tons
of its bulk have been quarried and “treated.”
The story of Mount Bischoff—the richest tin mine in the world—
the mine with the largest output and the most compact “ dressing
sheds” for extracting the ore—is full of interest, more especially in
its early days, but can only be briefly given here. The mine was
discovered in 1872 by Mr. James Smith, of Westwood, Forth —
“Philosopher Smith,” as he is locally styled—after a search involving
years of the most arduous solitary wanderings in the dense forests
of this region. Samples of the ore submitted to Tasmanian specu-
lators failed to rouse them to any degree of enthusiasm, and the
discoverer crossed over to Victoria, from whence a mining expert
w T as sent to inspect the Mount. His report was, however, most
unfavourable, and the Victorians refused to speculate. The project
languished until Mr. W. Ritchie, of Launceston, took it in hand
and floated a company. But even now matters did not wear a very
bright aspect, and the first few years of the mine’s existence saw the
company heavily involved in debt. Fortunately they obtained
timely help from a Tasmanian bank; the yield improved, labour-
saving appliances enabled the tin ore to be “ dressed” at a lower
cost, and the Bischoff began to pay noble dividends. From that day
to the present it has pursued its victorious course, and already,
with less than £30,000 of capital paid-up, has handed to the
lucky shareholders upivards oj a million pounds sterling in divi-
dends ! “Philosopher” Smith, whose perseverance and pluck
are as indomitable as ever (he still, at upwards of sixty years
of age, frequently starts off for many days prospecting new
areas of the primeval bush) has been allotted a pension
of £2OO per annum by the Tasmanian Government, and very justly
too, for to him not only does the Bischoff mine owe its opulent
existence, but through his exertions Tasmanian mining generally
received a powerful impetus. Of course “ nobody who is anybody”
visits Waratah without inspecting the works and machinery, a
favour willingly granted on the payment of the small sum of ss.
(handed over by the company to the local hospital), which secures a
pass entitling the holder to visit the works as often as he chooses
during his stay. At night, when they are illuminated by the
electric light, is perhaps the most interesting time to go through
these works, for there is then less to distract one’s attention from
immediate surroundings. Accompanied by a courteous guide, the
visitor descends from level to level through the series of “sheds,”
or rather halls, in which, by means of the latest appliances in
crushing, “washing,” and “saving” machinery (much of this
patented by Mr. H. W. F. Kayser, the well-known manager of the
company), the tin ore is separated from its earthy envelope and
prepared for transmission to the smelting works in Launceston.
Some 2500 tons of tin ore are thus produced each year, and as it
takes upwards of 100 tons of “ stuff” to leave a residuum of one ton
of ore, some idea may be gained of the vast mass of material
passed through the machines in a day, a week, a month, a year.
The great battery of seventy-five stampers, pounding away in
cyclopean double-shuffles wdth a deafening hubbub, the huge water-
wheels, the calmly revolving, enormous “ dressing tables,” that seem


ever to quote how “the mills of the gods grind slowly, but they
grind exceeding small,” these and the score of other great
machines that work unceasingly from midnight on Sunday to mid-
night on Saturday, year in year out, require but the supervision of
a mere handful of men and boys, so thoroughly is the meaning of
“ labour-saving” understood by Mr. Kayser. Here in these gaunt
ante-chambers to the palace of the great Ore King are few attendant
gnomes, and the very absence of workmen lends a weird suggestiveness
to the scene—a hint of diablerie behind one’s back, of familiar spirits,
flitting to and fro. stirring the muddy masses of “slime” tin, tracking
out the reluctant ore, gliding hither and thither, silent, invisible,
all-powerful.
But if there is a lack of humanity noticeable at the “sheds,” this
is more than counterbalanced by a superabundance of that article on
the Mount. To this scene of high-pressure activity, this practical
proof that “works” as well as “faith” can be relied upon to
“remove mountains,” we pay a morning visit, riding up the some-
what steep incline from the township, a mile or so in length, on the
natty little 25-horse power engine used for hauling trucks of “ stuff.”
In the absence from Waratah of Mr. Kayser, it was Mr. Littler (in
charge of the sheds) who so kindly piloted us down below last night.
It is Mr. Schell (manager on the Mount) who receives us to-day, and
who accompanies us from plateau to incline, from “shoot” to
“tunnel,” from crushing machine to sluice-box, from “ lode” to
“ face,” from dam to “ settling-pit,” explaining everything as we go
in the most painstaking and lucid manner. Here is the celebrated
“red face” from which so much has already resulted, so much
more is still expected; here is the little “pocket” from which
£30,000 worth of tin, nearly pure ore, was taken in a few days;
here is a shaft sunk 100 feet or so beneath the present workings,
and going to prove a continuance of good things in the future.
Here are Hell’s Gates, so christened by the men owing to some
extra trouble hereabouts experienced ; and here, there, and every-
where are the men themselves to the number of 240 (the Bischoff
employs altogether some 400 men), and every Man Jack of them as
yellow as to garments as though dipped in mustard. Everything,
indeed, that is brought into contact with the “celebrated red-face”
—itself really yellow—acquires this golden hue. The “yaller dog”
of the American humourist is here running to and fro in the canine
flesh ; “yellow boys” assist the yellow men; yellow spades fill yellow
trucks that are wheeled along yellow rails and tipped down yellow
shoots to yellow “hoppers ” far below. Great pools of yellow water,
bordered by yellow mud, try hard to reflect the sky, and make a
yellow mess of it. There should be goldfish in these pools and yellow
hammers on the trees—there are plenty of yellow picks about—to
make the scene complete. If it were not that we knew much better,
we might almost fancy all these quarries, so to speak, in quarantine,
condemned to fly a yellow flag and show a yellow badge. The very
notes, Mr. Schell tells us, that change hands in Waratah are yellow
as the gold they typify. Enough ! Let us change the colour—the
subject, we should say.
At least 75 per cent, of the population of Waratah de-
pends, in one way or another, upon the Bischoff mine, the said
population being between 1700 and 1800, all told. Long may they


have this grand stand-by, say we, and may Philosopher Smith and
his merry men—for he does not always travel alone nowadays—
discover yet another Bischoff—an’ it be possible—for the profit and
glory of Tasmanians generally, and plucky speculators in particu-
lar ! From the summit of the Mount we enjoy a magnificent view
of the surrounding country, the mine and the township at our feet,
with the busy little engine puffing between, and beyond them again
a picturesque circle of country —a circle having a radius of at least
fifty miles. Prominent are such mighty landmarks as Valentine’s
Peak (E.), Black Bluff (E.S.E.), Cradle Mountain —the highest
mountain in Tasmania—(S.E.), Mounts Murchison and Read (S.),
and Mount Ramsay and the Parson’s Hood (S.W.) Even Heems-
kirk is faintly visible on the far south-western horizon.
Descending to Waratah and more prosaic details, we are fortu-
nate in gaining an introduction to Mr. C. JH. Hall (now of Emu
Bay), who has been a resident of the township ever since it was but
in its swaddling clothes, and whose experiences, together with his
opinions on men and manners, mines and minerals generally, are
placed at our disposal with a bonhomie not easily to be forgotten.
It is chiefly from Mr. Hall and a friend of his (Mr. George Whiley,
travelling inspector for the Mutual Assurance Society of Victoria),
that we learn exact particulars concerning the trip to the West
Coast, which we have no time to make ourselves, the interests of
the large body of tourists who are to follow closely on our mercurial
heels calling us in another direction.
According to both our informants this overland trip to the West
Coast is by no means the serious and difficult undertaking it has
been represented to be. The track is thoroughly defined, being cut
mainly through peaty soil, showing white quartz beneath, and so
visible from a considerable distance. There are certainly unpleasant
portions of the road, such, for instance, as the corduroy section out
of Waratah, but there is no danger of the most obtuse traveller
losing his way, unless, indeed, he takes it into his head to try a new
departure through the “ bauera” and “ horizontal’' scrub, when the
fate of the historical ‘'mm who jumped into a quickset hedge,”
multiplied a good many times, will be his. Surveyors and pros-
pectors have certainly had, and still have, rough times of it in these
regions ; but, like the poet, these pioneers must expect to “learn
ia suffering what they teach,” if not “in song,” at any rate
in official reports and newspaper articles. Taken altogether, then,
it needs neither a Livingstone nor a Stanley to “do” the West Coast
trip, and if the testimony of a pair of unmentionables worn by
Mr. Whiley during a five weeks’ tour of the district will be received
as evidence by this honourable court, an utter avoidance of
the “looped and windowed raggedness” pictured by some roman-
cists of the Tasmanian “wild west,” as a resultant of the trip, is
not only possible, but easily feasible.
Those who are in a great hurry, and do not mind a pedestrian
tour de force , can reach the Mount Zeehan silver fields in less than
two days. Leaving Waratah after the arrival of the 11.30 train
from Emu Bay—say at one o’clock — the Heazlewood Hotel (sixteen
miles on) can be reached by six p.m.; and an early start and steady
tramp the next day will accomplish the remaining forty-four miles
to Zeehan, and place the traveller on the silver field late in


the evening. The better plan, and one more suited to modern
muscle, is to be satisfied with a twenty-four mile trudge on
the second day, thus making the Pieman River (Corinna), and
leaving the balance of the trip for the third day, so as to reach
Zeehau field in full daylight. Or, the road can be followed for twenty-
eight miles from Corinna to what the Tasmanian Secretary of Mines
in a recent report styles, “the hole in the rocks, yclept Trial
Harbour ,” where there is good accommodation, Twenty-two miles
further on lies Strahan, the township on Macquarie Harbour, and
here there is much to warrant an extended stay. The harbour
itself is a magnificent sheet of water, second only to Port Jackson,
and with more picturesque surroundings. It teems with fish,
which can be caught “ by the bucketful” within a short distance of
Messrs. Gaffney and Harvey’s excellent hotel. A recent visitor to
Strahan graphically describes the splendid hauls made by himself
and companions, and pictures the hotel cook as exclaiming—“ For
the love of Hivvin, jintlemin, don’t catch any more ! I’ve done
nothing but clane and cook fish all the wake !” Sarah, or Settlement-
Island, situated at the south-east corner of the harbour, is the locale
of the old convict buildings, the remains of which are still to be
seen, but there is nothing else to remind the spectator of those
episodes of “man’s inhumanity to man,” so vividly portrayed by
Marcus Clarke in “His Natural Life.” The 30 acres of ground
comprised within the area of the island are covered with a luxuriant
crop of grass, affording shelter to a few hares and pigs, and inter-
spersed with raspberry canes, whose fruit, once cultivated, still
grows to a goodly size. From Strahan may be made several
excursions to points of interest. The Mount Lyell, King, Queen, and
Princess River districts, with their deposits of gold, silver, copper,
iron, and other minerals, upon which, together with the Mount
Zeehan mines, the future hopes of Tasmania so largely rest, are all
within reasonable distances over tolerable roads; and the new
railway to Mount Zeehan will do great things in the way of opening
up the country. If but a small percentage of the wonders told
concerning the Mount Zeehan silver deposits is true, then must
Broken Hill look to its laurels, for a greater than it is here.
Strahan, we must not omit to state, can be reached by water as
well as by land, steamers leaving both Hobart and Launceston for
Macquarie Harbour at frequent intervals. Those twin leviathans,
Mounts Heemskirk and Zeehan (or Zeehaan, as it is more correctly
spelt), “crouched,” as Marcus Clarke puts it, “like two lions
keeping watch over the seaboard,” were named by Bass and Flinders
after Tasman’s vessels.
Having taken this perforce but cursory glance at that coming
Eldorado, the West Coast, we return to Waratah, and thence along
the “back track” Launceston-wards, or we can vary the route by
waiting at Emu Bay for Huddart, Parker and Co.’s steamer, and so
gaining a closer acquaintance with the northern Tasmanian littoral.
There is thus a very pleasant alternative before the traveller, the
whole tour to be accomplished with, comparatively speaking, little
expense. “ Another way,” as the cookery books have it, is to follow
the example of a certain newly-married couple w 7 e wot of who spent
theirJhoneymoon in a buggy trip along the North-West Coast, and
drove even as far as Mount Bischoff itself. Under such circumstances.


and with such scenery on all sides, what a charming counterpart of
the “Strange Adventures of a Phaeton” might be written —“two
souls with but a single thought, two hearts that beat as one,” and all
that sort of thing, you know.
Summing up the entire experiences of the journey through an
agricultural area that has but to be “ tickled with a hoe to laugh
with a harvest,” and from town, to town each vying with the other
in the evidences of solid prosperity, one cannot take leave of the
North-West Coast of Tasmania without re-echoing the poet’s wish —
“ Earth’s increase and foison plenty,
Barns and garners never empty ;
Trees with clust’ring branches growing ;
Plants with goodly burthen bowing ;
Spring cpme to you, at the farthest.
In the very end of harvest!
Scarcity and want shall shun you ;
Ceres’ blessing so is on you.”
The rhymes, Mr. Shakspere, might be better, but
is quite the thing, and “suits our book precisely.”
the sentiment


XTo the Iftortb=o6ast.
Launceston to Ringarooma.
A New Railway—Scottsdale and Intermediate Stations—Bridport—Branxholm—
Brothers’ Home—Moorina—Ringarooma, &c.
©N another page we give particulars as to how the tourist can
' reach the district of Scottsdale by road, but for those who
prefer an easier means of transit there is the new line of railway
—opened in August 1889 —which traverses some splendid scenery,
and taps an area ever growing in importance both from a mining and
agricultural point of view. To Scottsdale by rail is a journey of
forty-seven miles, occupying about three hours. The morning train
starts from the Government station at 7.30, and an exceedingly
comfortable train it is, the first-class carriages being quite models of
what railway carriages should be, with their morocco-covered seats,
panels in polished woods of contrasting colours, nickelplated
fittings, &c., altogether a great improvement on the carriages of the
Main Line Railway, where age and economy are both more
observable.
To Mowbray, a couple of miles from the city, the line runs
through land in a high state of cultivation, hawthorn and briar-rose
hedges being a special feature, and the River Tamar a pleasant
accompaniment to the scene. Negotiating a horseshoe bend of so
abrupt a curve as to necessitate considerable speed-slackening, the
train skirts a series of low hills, sparsely covered with small wattles,
and allowing a good view of Launceston, sitting throned in all her
glory. Should it be moist weather, the course of the Tamar is
marked at this early hour by a line of mist, as though the city,
feeling the genial glow of the morning sun, were laying aside a
swansdown boa, no longer needed as a protection against the chills
of Night. As we pass Rocheu’s Lane, a locality already alluded to
as within walking distance of Launceston, the wattles become
denser, and are framed by the sombre rifle-green of gum trees at
their back, and then, the country rapidly growing rougher, we
round a rocky hill and so into woodland scenery that proves more
and more interesting with every furlong.
At the eighth mile-post we obtain, between the trees, another fine
view of the Tamar, with its opposite shore and farms and hills be-
yond; but this is soon shut out by the deep cuttings with walls of
solid rock, giving way again to a stretch of country so ribbed with
rock and peppered with stones' that it is a wonder how the “great
gaunt gums” ever secured a foothold. Even the very telegraph
poles and fencing posts have in many places to be propped up lay
cairns of boulders in default of a sufficient depth of earth wherein
they may be sunk. If, as Mr. Congreve assures us, music really


has charms to soften rocks, the Victorian Orchestra might give a
few concerts here to the advantage of the locality. After awhile
this adamantine quality grows less obtrusive, and the woodland
more inviting as the train crawls cautiously round a sharp curve,
through a cutting or two, and draws up at Turner’s Marsh, thir-
teen and-a-half miles from Launceston. Twelve miles from here,
by road, is the Bangor Slate Quarry, owned by a Victorian syndi-
cate, but not latterly at work.
A couple of grand gorges now, “barred with level beams of light,
across black gulfs of shade,” as the train descends by two trestle
bridges to Karoola, a tiny, pleasantly-situated settlement, with a
neat station and appliances that tell of the loading of “stock.”
Uphill again, through forest land, between deep cuttings and along
high embankments, with an occasional patch of cultivation, and we
swoop down upon Lilydale —a name recalling cheei’ful recollections
to Victorians —and here labelling a spot that reflects no disgrace on
its namesake over the Straits. At Lilydale we meet the up-train
from Scottsdale, and then pursue the by no means even tenor of our
way between long ranks of skeleton trees, whose vitality has been
sacrificed on the altar of Civilisation, and across a bright little
stream purling through a fern-tree gully. A race over fairly level
ground, and then the slackened speed and laboured puffs that tell of
a toilsome ascent. Cutting after cutting, and now the Tunnel
station, shortly after which, disdaining all further compromise, the
train plunges boldly into darkness and the heart of the mountain,
giving us a couple of minutes to devote to meditation amongst the
glooms. Do not omit, oh ! festive followers in our wandering wake,
to close the carriage windows at this juncture, or grit in eye and
smut on cheek may be your portion ere you emerge into the gladsome
light of day. The contrast between the Egyptian darkness of the
tunnel and the fern-tree gullies and verdure-clad slopes succeeding
it is most refreshing and keeps the traveller on the look-out until
Lebrina is reached—twenty-eight miles from Launceston.
The fern trees, ever with us for the past few leagues, now assert
themselves in greater numbers, and beautify the spaces between the
dead and bleached gums that betoken the presence of that Vandal,
that tree-ringing animal, Man. Some of the fern trees have been
actually utilised as embankment buttresses, and signify their
contempt of such practical application by shooting forth fronds
even in their recumbent position. Many snaky curves—the
sun appearing now on the one, now on the other side of
the carriage—a steep descent and a six-mile run through
a perfect garden of flowering shrubs, threaded by clear mountain
brooks, the latter vainly impeded by a chaos of fallen timber,
bring us to Golconda —why so transcendently named we fail
to ascertain, not even a black diamond being perceptible to our
unassisted vision. From Golconda the train continues its downward
course past the small stations of Lisle-road and Lietinna, and nears
its destination through a species of scenery that is quite bewilderingly
uncommon to Victorians. So numerous are the fern trees, so finely
proportioned, so rich in their waving plumes of fronds, so regular in
their ranks, that they seem as if purposely planted by some philan-
thropic body determined to treat the new arrival to a perfect feast
of beauty. Amidst such surroundings we enter Scottsdale in


triumph. No monarch on “progress,” no victorious general, no
people’s idol ever had his pathway lined with richer or rarer forms of
loveliness ; no artist ever imagined a more magnificent reception in
his fairest dreams.
A conveyance in waiting drives us in a few minutes to Lord’s
Hotel, a hostelry that deserves special mention by reason of that
always acceptable combination—extreme moderation of charge and
super-excellence of board and lodgment. In Mr. Lord Victorians
will find an old Melbourne boniface, who prides himself on doing
things in Melbourne style, and, assisted by the taste of his good
lady, succeeds admirably in his efforts. Vehicles may be here hired,
or arrangements made with the driver of the conveyance from the
station for an excursion to Bridport, thirteen miles distant, by an
easy road. Sea-fishing at Bridport, or nobler sport in the Forester
and Brid Rivers, including blackfish up to 6 and 7 lbs. in weight.
From the hotel balcony we obtain an admirable view of the adjacent
country, with Mounts Stronach and Scott bounding the horizon ; and
we notice our friends the fern trees in every direction, not omitting
mention of another old favourite of ours, though a great enemy of
the farmers, the blackberry bramble, which here, as along the North-
West Coast, is a perfect Paul Pry of plants, intruding everywhere
where least wanted.
Scottsdale is the centre of a good deal of commercial activity. It
has its bank, churches, mechanics’ institute, public library and
reading-room, several friendly societies, agricultural and pastoral
associations, cricket and football clubs, “ Cuckoo” club and musical
union, &c. There are also two hotels (Smith’s and Counsel’s) in
addition to Lord’s.
From Scottsdale we proceed by coach to Branxholm and other
townships lying between this district and Ringarooma, the furthest
north-east point included in the trip. The coach leaves shortly after
the arrival of the morning train, and being lucky enough to secure
the coveted box-seat, we “view the shining landscape o’er” through
the contemplative medium of a “cool tobacco cloud,” as Gordon hath
it. Downhill at first past the local brewery, and so on to a large
stretch of road lying between a considerable area of white sandy soil,
which is, however, no desert, for it grows a profusion of bush flowers—
lilies, heaths, brooms, &c. —and manages to support some fair-sized
trees. Shall we moralise a moment here and point out the analogy
between this region and certain individuals who, incapable of
sustained business effort, still have their fitting place as searchers
after a high ideal, or as exponents of the True and the Beautiful, as
Bulwer Lytton puts it. The world would not be complete without
its occasional poet and dreamer, its enthusiasts, its theorists, though
Heaven deliver us from too large a percentage of these gentry, for
one cannot live on flowers, and flowers alone. During which
soliloquy we have scampered past two or three miles more of our
bush garden, and are now on rising ground, the road leading
through a break in the ranges by a long steep pull. We begin to
find even the Tasmanian sunshine somew’hat oppressive, and those
tiny pests, the sandflies, quite as inquisitive and persistent as their
Australian congeners. We are amongst the gorges once again, and
the glorious ferns tower on either side 10, 20, 30 feet in height.
We are even told by a communicative gentleman next to us on the


box-seat of a fern tree no less than 70 feet from the ground, but
subsequently discover that the fern in question grows out of the
tall top of a decayed trunk, itself nearly 50 feet in air, so that our
affable friend “has” us for the nonce.
Rather more than nine miles from Scottsdale we pull up at the
Camp Hotel for dinner and a change of horses, and when we resume
our seats we find that the next couple of miles—to the crown of what
is euphoniously styled the “ Big Billycock” rise—is a remnant of
the past, in the shape of a bit of “corduroy” road. We are
assured by our driver that by the time this book is in print this
example of the survival of the “ unfittest” will be replaced by
Christian macadam. Meanwhile, we bump and jolt over it, and
forget all about the lovely scenery in desperate endeavours to keep
both our temper and our seat. When we have leisure we shall write
some verses on this subject, say to the air of the “ Misletoe Bough,”
commencing somewhat as follows :
The passenger hung by his eye-lids in air,
And the horrid bush swished him on forehead and hair ;
With his heart in his mouth, and his boots at his nose.
He jerked forth a refrain that gave vent to his woes.
Oh ! the Corduroy-road ; oh ! the Corduroy-road !
Chorus ad lib.
But all things have an end, and our corduroy troubles are no
exception to the rule. At the top of the rise we meet the up-coach,
and exchange drivers, and soon after arrive at Branxholm, between
which township and Moorina lie the Brothers’ Home and other
tin mines. Prominent amongst the money-making mines of this
district is the celebrated Briseis, owned by a Melbourne company.
The Briseis tunnel pierces the dividing range between the valleys of
the Cascade and JRingarooma Rivers, and is driven for 1182 feet
through solid rock. The Briseis appears likely to have a great
future before it.
We are now near Weldborough ( Thomas' Plains), and from there
could make our way through Gould’s Country to St. Helen’s (George’s
Bay) ; but leaving the latter locality to be dealt with in a different
tour (see trip to St. Mary’s), we inspect one or two other tin claims,
and then retracing our road to the junction near the Big Billy-
cock, proceed to Eingarooma. This prettily-named township, as
elsewhere stated, enjoys regular steamer communication with
Launceston, so that after a stay in accordance with his desires the
tourist can vary his route by a brief sea trip. For our own part, we
have to hurry back per coach, corduroy road notwithstanding, and
so reach our Launceston hotel in less than four days from the time of
our departure thence ; but everybody is not so tied to time as we, and
a little loitering on the route we have just marked out will result in
a return of solid satisfaction.


Zhc jfmoal TRailwa^.
Launceston to the East Coast.
Conara Junction to Avoca—Ben Lomond—Fingal—St. Mary’s—St. Mary’s Pass—
Falmouth—St. Helen’s.
WS Launceston is but thirty-five miles from Conara Junction,
where the Fingal railway branches off from the Main Line—
% whereas Hobart is nearly 100 miles distant —it is but natural
that we should make the former city our starting-place for this trip,
although, as a matter of fact, or “ to tell the frozen truth,” as Mark
Twain expresses it, the present writer set out from Hobart with a
brief rest at Parattah Junction by the way. But here again it
wasa question of “ catch-as-catch-can” with regard to trains, and
the reader of this veracious Guide is not supposed to be in a violent
hurry, nor anxious to “ break the record” in the matter of fast
travelling. With commendable impartiality the Tasmanian
Government have so arranged the time table that on three days of
the week it suits the early passenger from Hobart, and on the other
three fits tourists leaving Launceston at 8.30 a.m. Amongst these
latter we find ourselves one bright morning bent upon extracting as
much pleasure as possible out of a journey which we are assured
embraces many charming features.
We have already described the line as far as Evandale Junction,
From here to Evandale proper, a distance of two miles, we pass
through undulating country, mapped out into cultivated fields, the
thick soft green of the springing crops lying on the gentle slopes like
a rich plush mantle on the rounded form of a beautiful woman. The
very railway cuttings—such depressing bits of ugliness in Victoria—
are here coated with a generous growth sufficient to feed a hungry
flock. The hypochondriac and the dry-as-dust, matter-of-fact
worshipper of the common-place may take us to task for making a
mere railway cutting a peg for laudatory remark, but we who have
free souls regard not his cynical humour. Nay, we will even
pander to his statistic-loving soul by setting down, in addition to
facts stated elsewhere concerning Evandale, that it is a rural
municipality, and the centre of an electoral district containing some
4000 inhabitants.
Crossing the South Esh Biver, over a long pile bridge, we thread
our way through fairly level country, with a panoramic view of
mountains on either side, foremost amongst these to our left being
that handsome giant Ben Lomond, whose closer acquaintance we
shall make later on. Here and there we see a hawk sailing high in
air, a conclave of solemn crows discussing some grave question of
corvine economy, or a flock of chattering magpies—the Lower
House of Crowdom Parliament—squabbling, as Lower House


representatives are apt to do when their own private interests are
involved. Farther on trees begin to assert themselves, first singly,
and then in groups, with high hawthorn hedges, hedges of briar,
hedges of gorse, anything in the shape of land boundaries rather
than the hideous posts and rails of the Australian continent.
Clarendon and Snake Banks are quickly passed, and now we
come to a taste of the Tasmanian Bush, mostly wattle and gum
hereabouts, and halt for a brief while at Epping Forest Station.
And for what, pray, is Epping Forest noted? The only item of
interest we can discover in connection with it lies in a paragraph
culled from a work of reference (Walch’s Tasmanian Almanac),
which is our constant travelling companion throughout the island.
The paragraph runs as follows : — “Epping Belief Fund. —For the
relief of the families of Wilson and Holman, who were murdered at
Epping by bushrangers on 9th and 11th April, 1883. Capital,
£1875 Is. 3d.” Capital! indeed. We leave it to our readers to
recall the incident, tragic enough in all conscience, which originated
this fund.
Cleveland Station next, and then, at 10.40 of the clock, we are
at Conara Junction. Here we change into the more comfortable
carriages of the train which is waiting for us on the Government
branch line, and are shortly on our journey eastward, the train we
have just left proceeding on its way southward to Hobart.
Stony Creek, the first station from Conara, is rightly named.
There are stones everywhere, lying broadcast over the fields, piled
in rough heaps, or more methodically arranged in boundary fences
that would delight the heart of the typical “ man from Galway” of
Lever’s novels. Stony Creek is neither much to look at nor “a
good ’un to go” nowadays. Formerly it was a place of some
importance, but the railway has killed it, and even its one hotel has
collapsed under the pressure of circumstances, and is now, oh !
picture it, ye roysterers of the good old coaching days, the local
post-office ! Hanleth siding, eleven miles from Conara, appears to
owe its existence mainly to the proximity of the residence of Mr.
Charles Parker, a great sheep-breeder, or a breeder of great sheep—
whichever phrase you prefer—one of those gentlemen, presumably,
who value their stud animals by the 1000 guineas per head, and
whose sheep remind one of a paraphrase on a well-known song
(the immortal “ Paddy Miles”), inasmuch as “ what should have been
mutton—is nothing but—wool,” The vicinity of Hanleth is a
perfect paragon of grazing grounds, and the homestead itself, to
judge by a distant view, is what the mansion of a prosperous flock-
owner should be. As we rattle along towards and past Eastbourne,
mighty Ben Lomond, in his court suit of blue and silver, for there
are still epaulettes of snow on his venerable shoulders, is now and
again visible between intervening ranges, and seems to beckon us
majestically to approach his august presence. Sire !we hasten to
obey.
Avoca —shall we insult the intelligence of our readers by explaining
why so called—is picturesquely situated in the valley at the junction
of the South Esk and St. Paul’s Bivers—there, it would out!— and
though still as pretty as ever, is not so well off, having come down
in the world since the opening of the railway, that rough wooer
which, when, like the bold dragoon, it but “ kisses and rides away,”


leaves ruin behind it. On the left-hand side of the line is seen Bona
Vista, the residence of Mr. J, F. Iligney, whose grass paddocks are
a very paradise for the valuable sheep they contain. But grass
paddocks do not mean farmers, and hence Avoca is not exactly the
populous place one would like to see it. It rests with the present
landowners to make an improvement in this direction by cutting up
the aforesaid paddocks into small holdings—but why anticipate the
millennium ! Meanwhile Avoca does not flourish, and not being pros-
perous, it is the reverse of lively. Nevertheless it has one great
attraction, of a negative character it is true, but still an attraction.
It is the point from whence Ben Lomond, that monarch of mountains,
may be scaled. At Mr. Foster’s Union Inn, Avoca, the tourist can
consult the pages of that oracular work, the Visitors’ Book, and
consulting it find a fund of information concerning Ben Lomond
and the ascent thereof, not elsewhere obtainable for love or money.
This volume, which contains for Victorians many names familiar in
their mouths as household words*—and alas ! several but serving to
recall friends long since gone over to the great majority—opens with
certain classical quotations (a “little Latin and less Greek”)
signed “ tt \ivdos,” —which quotations, by the way, a subsequent
visitor has had the audacity to correct —and follows on with several
really interesting literary sketches, having Ben Lomond as their
subject. Dr. Morrison, who is enthusiastic about the mighty moun-
tain, gives the following practical advice, which we print for the
benefit of all and sundry contemplating the climb:—“Parties
desirous of visiting Ben Lomond,” writes the learned gentleman,
“should take up their quarters at this very comfortable hotel, and
the only arrangement they need make for climbing the mountain is
to tell Mr. Foster the number and nature of their party, who will
provide every necessary, and even nicety, that can be desired for
such an expedition. An early start is desirable in order to reach
the camping ground in time to erect tents and make all arrange-
ments for a comfortable evening meal and a good night’s sleep.
While Mr. Foster is attending to these matters the party may climb
the hill by the rise a short distance above ‘ Gemmell’s Rest,’
whence on a clear evening a beautiful view is obtained. Next
morning an early start should be made, in order to have plenty of
time to go round under the foot of the Organ-pipes, so as to see
the perpendicular height from below. The Lake should also be
visited. The whole undertaking is by no means an arduous one, as
the ascent is easy, and visitors are amply repaid for whatever
trouble is involved in it by the grandeur of the mountain itself and
the extent and variety of the views obtained from various points of
the summit.”
The conditions have somewhat changed since Dr. Morrison wrote
the above, but in the main his clear and concise instructions may
still be followed. Other visitors speak of the ride to the base of the
mount, and thence to the camping ground, as occupying about four
* As, for instance, Dr. Alexander Morrison (a frequent visitor), Sir James
M'Culloch, Messrs. F. W. Haddon, Hugh M. C. Gemmell, J. R. Tuckett, Alfred
Cornish, Alfred Felton, Sam. Gillott, G. P. Smith, G. V. Smith, Andrew Lyell,
James Orkney, T. J. Finlay, J. E. Tenison-Woods, Professor J. Laurence Rentoul
(who gives his address as “von Weissnichtwo”), Dr. Fulton, and many others,
including a number of ladies, who have ascended the mountain.


hours, and being “not very fatiguing.” Some record having done
the entire trip in one day, “although two days are preferable.”
Another describes the summit as “an extensive table-laud, in which
are tivo lakes. “ Brand precipices,” says another, “ some of which,
by means of stone-dropping, we calculated to be over 700 feet sheer
fall.” Later on Dr. Morrison again writes, stating that he has twice
visited the district since his first remarks in the book, and urging
all visitors to Tasmania to do likewise. A still more enthusiastic
tourist writes ;—“ The Valley of Avoca, and the country generally
about here, as far as Falmouth, seems the best and most beautiful in
Tasmania, and Foster’s certainly one of the best and most comfort-
able hotelswhile the editor of the leading daily journal of
Australasia, who visited Avoca accompanied by Drs. Fitzgerald and
Aubrey Bowen, gives a most graphic and humourous description of
the trip up Ben Lomond, and after enumerating the mountains to
be seen from the summit of their huge brother, continues as follows:
—“The Biver Tamar, with some of the houses near Launceston, *
could also be discerned through Mr. Foster’s excellent telescope,
and, though we fully expect this part of our story to be disbelieved,
we desire solemnly to record the fact that a boat sailing on the
Tamar was also distinctly visible. Altogether a more magnificent
panorama of mountain, sea, river, and woodland scenery than that
which met our astonished and delighted gaze from the summit of
Ben Lomond it would be hard to equal or excel in any other part
of the world. No visitor to Tasmania should leave the island
without making the ascent, which may be accomplished with far
greater ease than that of Mount Wellington. The tourist may
ascend to within a few' hundred feet of the pinnacle on horseback,
and the whole excursion, if properly organised, may be made to
take the form of a most enjoyable picnic. The arrangemei ts may
be safely placed in the hands of Mr. Foster, who will provide
everything requisite and accompany the party as guide. ” Having
quoted which consensus of opinion on the part of the very highest
authorities, we make our bow to His Serene Majesty the Mountain
Monarch, and return to our train.
Ormley and Tullochgorom—the latter a noble mouthful for a
sucking Demosthenes of a railway porter to practise upon—are the
two next stations, and between and around them we notice a good
deal of dead timber, both standing and fallen, relieved by fields of
waving grain and some glorious willows and poplars. A little over
an hour from Avoca and we are at Fingal, the principal town along
the line. The very look of the station buildings, the signs of busy goods
traffic, and the well-dressed ladies on the platform, all confirm what
we have heard about Fingal. A church, a bank, a State-school, a
gaol, two good hotels (the Tasmanian Inn and the Talbot Arms), a
rifle club, and several friendly societies are to be found in this com-
munity.
Mangaka and Mathinna, six and seventeen miles respectively
from Fingal, are gold-mining centres, but the chief feature of the
district is the coal mines, of which there are several in full
work, turning out an excellent quality of coal in large quantities; in
fact, the three next stations —Break o’ Day, Mount Nicholas, and
Fully thirty miles off, as the crow flies.


Cullenswood—are all identified with the coal interest, and in close
proximity to coal mines, as evidenced by the laden trucks awaiting
the return trip of our train. Continuing past this coaly trio, and
across a fertile plain, we arrive at St. Mary’s, the eastern terminus
of the line, where we find a conveyance waiting to take us to
M'Ginnes’ Criterion Hotel, a most delightfully-situated hostelry,
with first-class accommodation for from fifty to sixty people, private
rooms, billiard-room, &c. From our bedroom window we catch a
glimpse of a fascinating mountain-born stream close by, while in the
distance St, Patrick's Head, or Paddy’s Head, as the big hill is
familiarly styled at St. Mary’s, rears his huge bulk in the clear, cool
air. After a dinner to which we do ample justice, we make
inquiries concerning our further movements, and find that we
can either hire a vehicle to take us on forthwith, or wait for the
coach leaving for St. Helen’s at nine in the morning. We
choose the latter alternative, and spend the remainder of the after-
noon in a walk to that lion of the locality, and, indeed, of Tasmania
generally, St. Mary’s Pass. We stroll along beneath a perfect
avenue of over-arching wattle trees—at the time of our visit in full
bloom ! —and up a gradually ascending road till lo ! the Pass is before
us. As an old description of the scene—on which we can hardly
improve—puts it—“ Here the traveller stands at 1050 feet above the
level of the sea, the horizon of which is soon seen far in the distance
as he begins to descend the Pass. The road winds round the steep
mountain side of this romantic glen, on the right towering high
above, while on the left is seen the precipitous descent to the
chasm below, relieved from a forbidding aspect by the variety of
the rich foliage opened to the view—the different species of gum
trees, blue gum, peppermint, stringy bark, iron bark, also mimosa
(or wattle), sassafras, myrtle, box, fern trees, and grass trees, with
their elegant and graceful fronds. These offer themselves to the
view in the deep, dark hollow far below, on which you look almost
perpendicularly down ; while on the opposite side of the glen the
mountain side rises steeply and abruptly, towering far overhead,
clothed with thick forest, the sombre hue of the trees adding to the
gloom of the romantic ravine.”
Next morning we travel in the coach still further down this
magnificent piece of Nature’s handiwork, which extends in all for
fully eight miles, each turn in the road disclosing some new phase
of grandeur or loveliness, some fresh and irresistible demand for
admiration and delight. Midway we gain a clear view of the sea
and the coast line towards which we are descending, and so we con-
tinue downwards, downwards, till we reach the sandy plain beneath,
and drive into the little village and port of Falmouth. There is
not much here to detain us, either actually or in thought, and
we have a heavy, if not a hard road to travel before we can reach
St. Helen’s, for the route runs largely between the sand dunes of the
coast, and over swampy land for the greater part of the sixteen miles.
The boom of the surf close by makes a deep bass accompaniment to
the hoof-beats of the horses as the big rollers follow each other in
successive lines, proudly curling their jade-like semi-transparent
combs one moment in the sun, then breaking with a thunderous
thud upon the glistening sands. At low tide the rocks in this
locality are full of beautiful surprises in limpid pools of all shapes


and sizes, lined with the most delicate forms of marine vegetation,
with sea anemones, and hosts oi living shell fish. No wonder this
should be a favourite summer resort, more particularly for those
numbering several children in their family circle.
Those who had the christening of towns and townships, rivers and
mountains in Tasmania, i.e., since the names given by the earliest
explorers, have drawn largely upon classical sources ; and here are
a couple of examples in the Styx and Scamander, the former rightly
enough an unpleasant stream, or, rather, aggravated swamp, but
the latter a river worthy of the name. We are not aware whether
its waters have the singular property which caused Mesdames
Minerva, Juno, and Venus to bathe in its prototype prior to
appearing before Paris for his celebrated “judgment.” Probably
not, or the hairdressers of the modern Paris —or, for the matter of
that, of our Paris in little, marvellous Melbourne—would long since
have advertised “Scamandrine : A magic mixture for beautifying and
preserving the hair. Imported direct from Tasmania. ” Be the chemical
properties of Scamander water what they may, there is one thing
at least for which this Tasmanian stream bears a high reputation.
It abounds in fish, and fish that willingly respond to the angler’s
invitation. Drop them a line and they will be with you. Perch,
bream, and mountain trout are to be had according to the spot you
choose, the river being frequently flushed with salt water near its
mouth. Diana’s Basin, an inlet of the sea about eleven miles from
Falmouth, is another good fishing ground, superadded to which is
the fact that it is the favourite haunt of large numbers of wild duck
and teal. Five miles further on is St. Helen’s, on the shores of
George’s Bay, where the big bream afford most excellent sport and
test the strength of the fisherman’s rod to the utmost,
St. Helen’s is largely patronised in the summer season, and its
hotels afford very good accommodation. It boasts of a bank,
churches, court-house, school, police station, and, as a matter of
course, a post and telegraph office. In addition to the bream in the
bay, flounders and crayfish abound, and oysters are to be had for
the dredging. A bridge spanning Jason’s Gates between St. George’s
Bay and Medea’s Gove (was not Jason Medea’s cove himself, by the
way —but this is frivolous) is much frequented by local anglers, and
we have it on the best authority that the sport is here frequently
fast and furious. The bay is about five miles in length, varying in
width from half a-mile to a mile. From St. Helen’s to Ordnance
Point, on the West Coast, Tasmania measures her greatest width,
a distance of some 190 miles. There are several most picturesque
scenes within easy reach of the township. Of two of these, Mr. S.
H. Wintle, F.L.S., the well-known geologist and botanist, writes
as follows in the Australasian Sketcher :—
“ Leda Falls.—These falls are situated on the Saxelby tin claim, seven miles
from George’s Bay, and in the centre of the tin mining district. A stream which
takes its rise in the high granite hills of the district, after flowing through button-
grass marshes, and dense thickets of bauera, cutting grass, and ti-tree, suddenly
plunges down a deep, romantic, rocky gorge. Here it is broken into numerous
miniature falls—now eddying round the walls of a granite basin which it has
carved out through untold ages, and anon babbling among the moss-covered stones
which interrupt its course, till when half-way through the gorge it leaps over a
deep, vertical precipice with deafening roar. At the verge of this precipice the
stream is intercepted by a projection of rock, which divides it and causes it to fall
in two streams into a depression of the granite. At the sides of the ravine huge


■overhanging masses of worn granite, some of them thousands of tons in weight,
give rise to numerous recesses of sepulchral gloom. Over their portals hang
festoons of delicate climbing plants, and feathery-fronded ferns grow in profusion,
and gum trees, acacia, dogwood, and others, whose branches meeting overhead
form a canopy which excludes the noontide sunshine. Truganini'a Throne is
distant about one mile from Leda Falls, on the western bank of the same stream.
It is a remarkable example of weathered granite, about 40 feet high. _ Large gum
trees grow out of the joints of the rock 70 to 80 feet in height. This is also well
worth a visit from the tourist.”
Truganini’s Throne, we may add, was so christened by Mr.
Wintle himself, after Queen Truganini, the last full-blooded
Tasmanian native, who died a decade or so ago, and over whose
unfortunate remains, it may be remembered, there was a choice bit
of body-snatching scandal amongst certain Hobart medicos.
From St. Helen’s the traveller can coach it across Gould’s Country
(see last chapter) to Moorina, and so connect with the Scottsdale
railway, or he can await the arrival of the regular coasting steamer
Warrentinna and proceed southward to Hobart via Bicheno, Maria
Island, &c., or northward to Launceston, as the case may be ; or,
finally, he can return by the way he came, and so enjoy a few days’
stay at any of the many seductive spots he but passed through in
going. Under any circumstances the tour of the portion of Tasmania
briefly described in the foregoing pages is one that should form part
of every thorough tourist’s programme.


Zo Ibobart b\> IRail.
Tasmanian Main Line Railway.
Launceston to Conara Campbell Town Ross Tunbridge Antill Ponds
Parattah Junction Jerusalem Campania Brighton Bridgewater
Glenorchy—Hobart.
fHE quickest and most conveniently-timed train from Launceston
• to Hobart is the one leaving the former city at three p.m. daily,
and starting from the terminus of the Tasmanian Main Line in
Cimitidre-street. As we have already described the route as far as
Conara Junction, we resume our story from that point;. We are
now about 700 feet above the sea-level, speeding along through an
agreeable alternation of woodland and open country, with our burly
friend Ben Lomond placidly contemplating us from a distance as
who should say—“Oh! fussing, fretting, fuming human creature,
why rush to and fro in this frantic manner; why not settle down
contentedly as I have done and contemplate the littlenesses of life
from an honourable retirement?” Well, Ben, perhaps you are
right. We’ll think it over at any rate. Meanwhile we have been
running through a strip of barren, stony, red soil, evidently of
volcanic brigin, but which, we are assured by a communicative
fellow-passenger, only needs irrigation and the removal of the
surface stones to become of solid practical use. Irrigation, by the
way, should be neither a difficult nor a costly matter, seeing that
not so many miles off are mountain lakes, from which the w’ater
could be brought by simple gravitation. That irrigation pays here,
even as it does in other countries, is proved by the fact that a farmer
in this neighbourhood sold £3OO worth of potatoes from one 8-acre
field in a single year as the result of irrigation, which he undertook
on a small scale by the help of a handy river.
Campbell Town, our next station, can tell us something more on
the water question, for the enterprising authorities of this munici-
pality, backed by the wishes of the citizens, have erected a dam at
a cost of about £12,000, and thus formed a lake of 1200 acres, with
an average depth of 15 feet, ensuring a perennial stream in the
Elizabeth River, furnishing Campbelltonians with a liberal supply of
w r ater for domestic purposes, and, in addition, irrigating a large area
of land. This artiticial lake, we are informed, “literally swarms
with wild ducks and swans.” Good news, oh ! proud owners of
those “ choke-bore,” “hammerless,” straight-shooting, never-missing
weapons which we see so liberally advertised. As regards
population, the Campbell Town electoral district coritains some
4000 souls, and the towm itself has many recommendations, including
three churches, a hospital, schools, a literary institute (with a library
of 4000 vols.), a bank, a mill, a brewery, shops and stores in plenty,
good hotels, and several social clubs. The Midland Agricultural


Association holds an annual exhibition of stock, dairy produce,
implements, &c., at Campbell Town, on the tirst Wednesday in
October. The church, seen from the station, embosomed in trees,
is the Presbyterian ; that built of rather staring brick is the Church
of England. There are a number of large estates and handsome
private residences round Campbell Town.
Ben Lomond, disgusted probably with our persistent inquisitive-
ness, now withdraws his presence as we run through undulating,
lightly-timbered country to Ross. A foreground of cottages,
smothered in banksia roses, and surrounded by trim gardens,
leads the eye, by gradations of colour, to the town in the
middle distance, and so on to the deep blues and purples of
the mountains in the background. As for Ross itself, it is a
pretty little township, its chief features being the long and strong
stone bridge over the Macquarie River, a stream subject to
freshets from the mountains, aud the handsome Church of England,
showing off to advantage the fine freestone for which the Ross
quarries are celebrated. Several large landed proprietors are
settled in this neighbourhood, conspicuous on the left-hand side of
the line a few miles from the township being Mona Vale, a
princely residence, built by the late Mr. R. Q. Kermode, the father
of the present owner. This splendid mansion is surrounded with
conservatories, gardens, and grounds generally, in keeping with its
proportions, and on the artificial lake in front are to be
seen fine specimens of swans. Mona Vale was fitted up regally
to receive the Duke of Edinburgh when he visited Tasmania.
It is told as a curious coincidence —on which some future writer
will surely found a romance—that on the very day when the work-
men began to demolish the old house formerly on this site half of
the “Look-out tower,” a mile distant on the same estate, fell to
the ground untouched, and without warning.
But before sighting Mona Vale, and on the opposite side of the
line, we have passed another lion of Ross in that renowned insti-
tution, Horton College. This popular educational establishment was
founded by the Wesleyan body in 1855, but is open to Protestants
of all denominations. The land and a considerable sum of money
were the gift of the late Captain Horton. That Horton College turns
out at least plucky lads, and doubtless learned ones as well, is
sufficiently evidenced by a paragraph we recently read in a Tasmanian
newspaper relating how an individual, who shall be here nameless—
but who is “ an old Horton College boy”—achieved the hazardous
exploit of ransacking an eagle’s nest 120 feet Rom the ground,
having to be hauled up to that dizzy height, and while dangling
there meeting with a series of obstacles that would have daunted
all save a hero of the “ One niche the highest” type.
Nine miles from Ross is Tunbridge, on the Blackman River, a
tributary of the Macquarie. This township is chiefly noted as being
one of the points from whence visitors can strike out for the Lake
District, of which romantic region we shall have more to say in
another section of this book. There is good accommodation at Tun-
bridge. The next station of any note is Antill Ponds. From
Antill Ponds railway station Mr. Page's new and comfortable four-
horse coaches run—on Tuesdays and Fridays—to Interlaken House,
at the junction of Lake Sorell and Lake Crescent, At Interlaken


there is plenty of accommodation for tourists, with boating, fishing,
and shooting.
We now begin to climb the hills in earnest, and in another
thirteen miles, passing through York Plains and Eastern
Marshes, reach the highest point on the line, Parattah Junction,
1413 feet above the sea level. It is six o’clock, the mountain air
has put a keen edge on our appetite, we have no less than twenty-
five minutes at our disposal, and a dinner bell is ringing hard by. We
follow its sound, step across a few yards of gravel, and find ourselves
in the refreshment-room and dining-hall of the Parattah Hotel, a
room of some 60 feet in length, furnished with a goodly array of
tables, laid with handsome appointments. Here we enjoy an excel-
lent dinner at moderate rates, and have leisure thereafter to inspect
the remaining accommodation of the hotel, which we find to be
furnished and kept throughout in a style that speaks highly for the
enterprise of the company. Staying here a night later on this
favourable opinion is fully confirmed. Visitors from Hobart to the
Lakes do well to remain at Parattah overnight, proceeding to Antill
Ponds by the early morning train to catch the coach.
A branch line runs from Parattah Junction for a distance of about
five miles to Oatlanhs, an important town with a municipal
council, courts of general sessions, road trust, rabbit board, &c.
There are two banks at Oatlands, a handsome town hall, with
literary institute and library, assembly rooms, several churches and
schools, rifle, cricket, and other clubs, friendly societies, &c. Table
Mountain, with its flat summit and precipitous termination, is an
important and self-assertive factor in the landscape to the westward.
Leaving Parattah in a peaceful and appreciative mood, we resume
our inventory of “objects of interest,” the first of these being
Lake Tiberias, a swamp exactly 640 acres—one square mile—in
extent; a sort of neglected, unkempt Wendouree, so overgrown
with rushes that there are but few patches of water visible. Eels,
we are told, “abound in this lake,” and “wild fowl, rabbits, and
wallaby are plentiful in its vicinity.” It is, further, the source of
the Elver Jordan. We are now on the down grade, through rugged
and picturesque scenery, with deep gullies to our left and a steep
hill close to our right; then comes a cutting, a warning shriek from
the engine, and we plunge into Flat Top tunnel, named after the
hill which it pierces. A couple of minutes of darkness and we
emerge into a scene of wild and majestic beauty, accentuated by
the steep gradients and sharp curves followed by the train,
affording ever-changing glimpses of magnificent gorges filled with
stately trees, and bright bush flowers, and shining water-courses,
with now and again a peep beyond, showing still further “misty
mountain summits faint and far.” As we sweep onward and down-
ward amidst the luxuriant foliage we are reminded of the railway
approach to Adelaide, though here the verdure is surely richer and
softer, the air purer and more bracing. Jericho-road Station
flashes by us, and at Rhynhaston we do not deign to halt, but swoop
on for the full sixteen miles to Jerusalem, having reduced our
altitude by some 800 feet since we left Parattah.
Nothing particularly golden about this Jerusalem, nor have we
time to inquire as to the milk and honey of the district, but there
are evidences of coal in a tramway to the mouth of a mine whence


that useful mineral is extracted. Still on a headlong course down-
ward, we now negotiate several exceedingly sharp curves—one of a
radius of only five chains—round which the train winds along like a
great snake, or, rather, with the stiff-jointed sinuosities of a huge
centipede, and so brings us at last to the fertile slopes of Campania.
At this station passengers for Richmond, Sorell, and the East
Coast alight, as we shall have a future occasion of proving. At
present ail our anxiety is to reach Hobart, w T hile there is yet
sufficient light to see the manifold beauties that await us there.
Very considerately our driver ignores the blandishments of
Richmond Road and Tea Tree, and our next brief stay is at
Brighton. Every Australian colony seems to have its township
named after the celebrated English watering-place beloved of Beau
Brummel’s “fat friend,” and in most cases there is some faint
likeness to warrant the appellation ; but the Tasmanian Brighton
seems to be christened on the lucus a non lucendo principle, for it has
neither Pavilion nor Chain-Pier, salt spray nor shingly strand. It
is, in short, quite an inland town, although one of some importance,
figuring on Government documents as Pontville, with its affairs
regulated by a municipal council. Scanning the lists of officials
published in the Tasmanian Red Book, we find that one gentleman
in Pontville —an old friend of ours—holds seven different appoint-
ments ; but he is beaten by a certain individual at Emu Bay—
curiously enough, another of our boyhood’s chums —who is set down
for no less than eleven distinct billets. Lest our readers should
inveigh against these as examples of hyperpluralism (good word
that !), let us hasten to point out that the appointments in question
only look big on paper, the “emoluments” attaching to most of
them being probably small, not to say infinitesimal.
Before we reached Brighton we had a distant view of Mount
Wellington and Mount Direction, two landmarks of Hobart, and in
another ten minutes they seem close upon us as we glide into
Bridgewater Junction, and pull up within a stone’s throw of the
glorious Derwent.
Though deep, yet clear ; though gentle, yet not dull;
Strong without rage ; without o’erflowing full.
But let us reserve our raptures over this noble stream until we
can make his acquaintance more leisurely, as we intend to do ere
long. Over the Bridgewater causeway then, itself a wonder of the
olden days, past sundry suburban stations, including Glenorchy,
Newtown, and Eisdon —all historical beauty spots—a wide curve by
Carnelian Bay, Government House, and the Queen’s Domain —the
line lovingly hugging the river all the way, and the calm night
settles down upon the broad waters beside us, the long poem of our
six hours’ journey closing as the orange lights of Hobart swim into
our view.


Ibobavt.
Estimated Popidation, including Suburban Districts, 32,500.
we are here at last. We have had a good night’s rest
W under the shadow of the mighty Mount, and stand in the
early dawn watching the sunlight creep downwards from the
Pinnacle ; down the fluted columns of the Organ Pipes ; across the
Ploughed Field ; athwart the sombre depths of the mountain woods,
giving everywhere light and life with his touch; then transfiguring
the lower slopes, and so gliding on, awakening and beautifying,
until he reaches the garden where, in silent adoration, we await
his coming—the garden of a happy home that nestles almost at the
foot of the everlasting hills; a garden rich in many a form of foliage
and flower, faint with the odour of spring-time, walled in by high
hawthorn hedges—the dear old English hawthorn—whose blossoms
massed together playfully imitate the snows of the dead and gone
winter. And then, basking in the radiance, we watch the golden
glory travelling onward down the clean, clear hillside streets, by
the cosy villas, past the taut shipping at the wharves, and out
across the tossing wavelets of the league-wide river, on whose broad
bosom white sails begin to fleck the surface of the blue, while over-
head big fleecy clouds move slowly up, as if to pack Fair Nature’s
jewels in a nest of cotton-wool. Oh! the grace, the tender beauty
of such a scene ! The infinite repose; the thankfulness for mere
existence that it inspires !
There is a pear tree in this same garden, the stem and curving
branches of which have, without injury, been so utilised as to form
supports for a platform and rustic seat amidst the foliage, and up
into this we climb until breakfast-time, when we pull ourselves out
of our reverie and prepare to face the duties of the day. A solid
Pickwickian repast done justice to—and our hostess’s tomato sauce
is the materialisation of a poet’s dream—let us to our business as
the reader’s guide, philosopher, and, we trust, very good friend.
One moment; before we enter into common-place details, so
necessary, of course, but so wearying to enumerate, let us find room
for Mr. James Smith’s description of Hobart from the Derwent as
set down in that talented author’s “Impressions of Tasmania.”
Says Mr. Smith:—“l have heard the view of Hobart from
the water compared to that of Genoa from the Gulf ; but while fully
acknowledging the architectural superiority of “Genoa la Superba,”
with its magnificent palaces rising from the water’s edge, and
ascending, tier above tier, like the seats in an amphitheatre, I must
candidly confess that the natural beauties of the capital of Tas-
mania are superior to those of its Italian rival. The semi-circular


sweep of the Riviera is very fine, but the irregular outline of the
estuary of the Derwent, with its jutting promontories and swelling
hills and background of mountains, is, I should imagine, perfectly
unique; while the undulating surface of the city conduces
immensely to its picturesqueness. And over all there looms the
gigantic figure of the mountain, with its head in the clouds and its
feet in the sea, filling the eye with its vast proportions, and impress-
ing the mind by its awful majesty. I can scarcely describe the
feeling of mystery and grandeur excited by the disappearance of this
imposing object from view for hours and days together. Gathering
around its massive head that impenetrable veil of clouds, it seems
to withdraw itself in haughty isolation, or in meditative self-
communion, from the world.”
The Main Streets of Hobart run in the following order :—From
East to West —Warwick, Patrick, Brisbane, Melville, Bathurst,
Liverpool, Collins, Macquarie, and Davey streets ; these being inter-
sected from North to South by Park, Campbell, Argyle, Elizabeth,
Murray, Harrington, Barrack, and Molle streets.
alphabetical ©uibe to Societies, public Justitutions,
Companies, £c., in Ibobart.
Agricultural and Pastoral Association. —Southern Tasmanian
(show in October). Assembly Rooms, Concert Halls, &c. —Exhibition
Building, Lower Macquarie-street; Hadley’s Rooms, Macquarie-
street; Hobart Hall, Harrington-street ; Freemasons’ Hall, Murray-
street; Mechanics’ Hall, Melville-street; Memorial Hall, Brisbane-
street; St. Peter’s Hall, Collins-street; Tasmanian Hall, Har-
rington-street ; Town Hall, Macquarie-street. Banks. —Australasia,
Macquarie-street; Commercial of Tasmania, Macquarie-street;
Savings, Murray-street, opposite Post-office ; Union, Macquarie-
street ; Van Diemen’s Land, corner of Elizabeth and Collins streets.
Baths. —Hobart Bathing Association (salt and fresh baths, hot and
cold), Queen’s Domain; Subscription Baths (salt water), Sandy
Bay ; Turkish Baths, corner of Harrington and Collins streets.
Brewery. —Cascade Brewing Company, office Collins-street. Caledo-
nian Society (recently formed). Canine. —Hobart Kennel Club (show
in November). Chamber of Commerce. —Town Hall. Charitable Insti-
tutions (for males and females). —New Town. Chess Club (meets Press-
land House, Melville-street). Church Institute. —Corner of Macquarie
and Harrington streets. Clubs. —Tasmanian Club, 44 Macquarie-
street ; Hobart Club, Collins-street; Working Men’s Club, Liverpool-
street. Confectionery. —Tasmanian Confectionery Company, Collins-
street. Cricket Clubs, —Various. Custom House, —Morrison-street.
Cycling Clubs. —Two. Educational. —Christ’s College (late High
School), Domain ; City School, Macquarie-street; Hutchins School,
Macquarie-street; Officer College, Glebe Town ; Scotch College,
corner of Brisbane and Elizabeth streets ; together with sundry
private schools. Electric Telegraph Office. —Macquarie-street.


Fireball Tower. Bathurst-street. Football Clubs. Various.
Gaol. —Campbell-street. Government Farm. —New Town. Govern-
ment House. —Domain. Horticultural Society. Hospitals. —General,
Liverpool-street; Insane (male criminal lunatics), Cascades.
Huddart, Parker and Co.’s Steamer Office. —Fiesse and Co.,
Elizabeth-street. Improvement. —Various (meet principally in
winter months). Industrial Schools. —Boys’ Horae, Lansdowne
Crescent; Boys’ Training School (Reformatory), Cascades, upper
Macquarie-street; Girls’ Training School (Reformatory), Barrack-
square ; St. Joseph’s Orphanage and Industrial School,
Harrington-street. Irish National League. —Branch Office,
Macquarie-street. Laboratory (Government). Barrack-square.
Library. —Tasmanian Public Library, Town Hall (open daily,
Sundays and public holidays included). Marine Board. —Franklin
Wharf. Markets. —Fish, Dunn-street ; Hay, Corn, &c., New Wharf ;
Vegetables, &c., Lower Macquarie-street. Museum and Aquarium
Corner of Macquarie and Argyle streets (open daily, Sundays
included, but closed on public holidays). Musical. —Orchestral Union,
Orpheus Club, Crow Club, St. Andrew’s Choral Association.
Parliament House. —Morrison-street. Post-office (General) —Mac-
quarie-street. Public Buildings (Government departments generally).
—Macquarie-street. Newspaper Offices. — Mercury (daily, morning)
and Tasmanian Mail (weekly), Macquarie-street ; Tasmanian
News (daily, evening), Murray-street. Poxdtry, Tasmanian
Poultry Society (show in August). Public Works Office. —Davey-
street. Racing. —Tasmanian Racing Club. Rifle Association. —
Tasmanian ; first intercolonial rifle meeting held in the colony under
auspices of association December 1888. Rowing. —Derwent Rowing
Club Boat-houses, Domain, near Baths ; Mercantile Rowing Club
Boat-sheds, Domain. Sailing Club. —Derwent, forty-three yachts ;
races every Saturday during season. Telephone Exchange. —Open to
non-members. Tennis. —Court, Davey-street; Lawn Tennis, Upper
Cricket Ground. Theatre Royal. —Campbell-street, near Collins-
street. Trade Societies (various). —Meet at Working Men’s Club,
Oddfellows’ Hall, and Mechanics’ Hall. Young Men’s Christian
Association. —Rooms, corner Liverpool and Murray streets.
Places of Worship in Hobart. — Ch urch of England. —St. David’s
Cathedral, Macquarie-st.; St. George’s, Battery Point; Holy Trinity,
Warwick-street; St. John’s, Goulburn-street ; All Saints, Mac-
quarie-street ; Mission Chapel, Campbell-street; New Town, St.
John’s; Bellerive, St. Mark’s. Presbyterian. —St. Andrew’s,
Bathurst-street; St. John’s. Roman Catholic. —St. Mary’s
Cathedral, Harrington-street ; St. Joseph’s, Macquarie-street.
Free Church oj Scotland. —Chalmers, Bathurst-street, Wesleyan. —
Melville-street, Davey-street, High-street, Sandy Bay, and New
Town. Congregationalist. Memorial Church, Brisbane-street;
Davey-street, Bathurst-street, New Town, and Bellerive. Baptist. —
Tabernacle, Elizabeth-street. Primitive Methodist. Collins-
street. Undenominational. King-street. Brethren. People’s
Hall, Bathurst-street. Disciples of C7tm£.—Collins-street. Society
of Friends. —Meeting House, 143 Murray-street. Jewish Synagogue.
—Argyle-street. Mariners’ Church. —Franklin W T harf.
Races, Regattas, dbc, — See end of Book,


Some of the “lions”
IN AND NEAR HOBART.
Franklin-square.
It can hardly be said that Hobart requires anything in the shape
of a public square, for the city is all “sweetness and light;” or,
as Phil. Robinson puts it, “ the whole of Hobart is one beautiful
garden.” This notwithstanding, by way of gilding refined gold,
there has been provided in Franklin-square a place for the
delectation of the citizens that is to the wider beauties surrounding
it as a love sonnet to an epic—a “ panel” to a full-sized canvas. The
Square is planted with choice trees, under which are comfortable
seats, and broad paths intersect the trimly-kept beds. In the centre
is an ornamental basin, from which springs rockwork supporting the
pedestal of a bronze statue of Sir John Franklin, the celebrated
Arctic explorer, at one time Governor of Tasmania. Another statue
—of Dr. W. L, Crowther, formerly Premier of the colony—has been
more recently erected by public subscription, and eloquently testifies
to the esteem in which that gentleman was held. When shall we
see a statue to any of our Victorian Premiers ?
Museum.
This institution certainly deserves special mention, more parti-
cularly for the excellent representative collection of the Tasmanian
Fauna to be found in a room set apart for that purpose. The whole
of the specimens are so arranged, with clear and concise printed
descriptions attached, as to serve an educational purpose. A Picture
Gallery has recently been added, where excellent examples of
Tasmanian art may be studied, notably a number of talented
productions from the brush of Mr. Piguenit. Tourists will find in
Mr. Alexander Morton, curator and secretary, a gentleman who takes
the liveliest interest in his work, and is ever ready to welcome
visitors. The building is open to the public from ten to five in the
summer, and from ten to four in the winter ; Sundays from half-
past two to five p.m. There is an Aquarium in connection with the
museum, open during the same hours.
Public Library.
Under the able management of Mr. A. J. Taylor, librarian and
secretary —himself a literary man of acknowledged ability —this
useful institution is a highly popular resort. The library contains
some 11,000 volumes, and the reading-room is supplied with the
principal English and colonial newspapers, periodicals, &c. Open
daily ; on Christmas Day, Good Friday, and every Sunday from
two p.m. to six p.m.; every other day (including public holidays)
from ten a.m. to half-past nine p.m.
Town Hall.
In addition to the usual municipal offices inseparable from such a
building, the Hobart Town Hall contains a spacious apartment
utilised for important public meetings, concerts, balls, and enter-


tainments generally. When filled with a gay assemblage this
brilliantly-lighted and tastefully-decorated hall presents a fine
appearance. It contains an organ of large dimensions, noted for its
power and sweetness.
Houses of Parliament.
The building in which the Collective Wisdom of Tasmania evolves
those sapient measures which are the wonder of the elder world
enjoys a well-chosen position facing the harbour. It contains, in
addition to the two large chambers for the Legislative Council and
House of Assembly respectively, a number of other apartments,
such as committee-rooms, refreshment-rooms, and library. The
last-named has some 10,000 volumes on its shelves, and is
liberally supplied with newspapers, &c. The Parliament Houses are
open to visitors from ten to six daily. The use of the library and
admission to the debates when either of the Chambers is sitting is
by order procurable from the President, Speaker, or any member of
Parliament.
Queen’s Domain.
“Away back, in the fifties” this extensive public reserve was
known as the Government Paddock, but with the growth of social
culture iu the community came the necessity for some more
aesthetic name, and so the above patriotic title w T as duly chosen.
Having the Derwent for its chief boundary, and running back into
a park-like extent of bush land, the Domain has ever been a
favourite rendezvous. Here have been held anti-transportation
mass meetings and other large political gatherings ; here have taken
place reviews and “ sham-fights” innumerable ; here have been con-
tested great cricket and football matches ; here do battalions of
Sunday-school children enjoy their picnics ; and here—not to make
the list wearisome—is the scene of the great annual Hobart Eegatta,
held to commemorate the discovery of the island by Tasman in
1642. One of the pleasantest drives from Hobart is round the
“upper” and “ lower” roads threading this spacious reserve for a
total distance of about eight miles. Every variety of scene can be
enjoyed en route, from small vignette views framed by over-arching
trees to wide-spreading landscapes, embracing the noble expanse
of the harbour or the lake-like waters of the Derwent with their
towering precipices or shelving sandy beaches backed by wooded
slopes. Near the junction of the Upper and Lower Domain roads
there is a drinking fountain, erected as a memorial of the Hon.
Charles Meredith, who, during many years, took an active and
prominent part in the administration of public affairs, and both
initiated and carried out numerous important undertakings. In
him Tasmania had a whole-souled patriot whom she still, and justly,
delights to honour.
Botanical Gardens.
These are situated in the Queen’s Domain, within easy walk of
the city, close to Government House, and are washed by the waters of
the Derwent. The gardens, which will bear favourable comparison
with any on the Australian continent, contain a great variety of
lovely flowers and plants. Open to the public daily from seven a.m,
to six p.m., and to sunset in the winter ; Sundays, Christmas Day,
and Good Friday from two p.m.


Government House.
Ever since 1858 Hobart has been in possession of a Government
House, which, alike for external proportions, internal arrangements,
and beauty of site, cannot be surpassed, if indeed equalled, in any
of the other colonies. On the basement are all the apartments
appertaining to the domestic economy of a great establishment.
The ground floor comprises three large entrance halls, reception-
rooms, Governor’s and aide-de-camp’s offices, library, breakfast,
drawing, and dining rooms, billiard-room, ante and waiting rooms,
&c. A corridor running through the centre of the building com-
municates with the ball-room, 100 feet x 30 feet, with conservatory,
ladies’ boudoir, &c. A grand staircase leads to the floor above, on
which are supper-rooms, state and other bedrooms, dressing-rooms,
bath-rooms, &c. The cost of the entire building, fittings, and
furniture, together with the outhouses, laying out of grounds, &c.,
was but little short of £70,000 —a liberal sum for so small a colony
to expend on its Governor’s residence, but the money’s worth in
more ways than one. Receptions and At Homes are held at
Government House throughout the season. The State Apartments
can be viewed by arrangement.
St. David’s Cathedral. —The foundation-stone of this edifice
was laid by the Duke of Edinburgh on 6th January, 1868. There
are already several stained-glass windows to the memory of
prominent colonists, and the organ is considered a fine instrument.
St. Mary’s Cathedral (Roman Catholic). —This building is
erected on a commanding site, and is an imposing piece of
architecture. The interior is richly ornamented and adorned with
paintings. A handsome stone pulpit, stained-glass windows, and
large organ are features worthy of note.
Christ’s College. —Until August 1885 this establishment—which
is the most prominent building in the Domain, and can hardly fail
to attract the notice of the visitor arriving by train —was known as
the High School, and under that title it was conducted by the Rev.
R. D. Poulett-Harris, M.A., who held the position of rector for
nearly thirty years, and now enjoys a well-earned rest, the school
having been taken over by the Church of England authorities, The
original building cost £4OOO, and has been subsequently considerably
enlarged.
Hutchins School. —ln reality but a trifle the senior of the
High School, this establishment named after Archdeacon
Hutchins —looks much more venerable, a fact which did not escape
the keen observation of Mr. James Smith, who says—“ There is an
edifice in Macquarie-street—the Hutchins School, I believe —with
diamond panes in the windows, with a reverend collegiate aspect
about it, and with ivy clambering up its walls, which would not
have seemed out of place among the branching stems of a green
monastic close in one of the cathedral cities of England.”
Castray Esplanade and St. George’s Hill. —By following down
Murray-street to the harbour you reach the New Wharf, and
proceeding past the Government stores, arrive at the Castray


Esplanade, a pleasant walk by the side of the Derwent. After a
rest on one of the here thoughtfully provided, and a good
look around, continue still further along to the right, and you mount
St. George's Hill, from whence you gain a fine view of Sandy Bay,
Then striking along Hampden-road you reach Davey-street and the
city by another route.
Military Barracks. —The quarters supplied for the regiments
successively stationed at Hobart, in the days when the British
Government expended such fat sums annually in the island, go to
prove that the soldiers had nothing to complain of in the way of
lodgment. The barracks occupy an elevated position, from whence
a series of magnificent views can be obtained.
Cemeteries. —Although we have no desire to edit a new series of
41 Meditations Among the Tombs,” we cannot help drawing atten-
tion to the fact that an hour or two may be profitably spent in any
of the larger and older of the Hobart “ God’s acres.” In St. David's
Cemetery, Davey-street, will be found many interesting monuments,
amongst them one to the memory of Sir John Kardley-Wilmot,
Governor of Tasmania from 1844 to 1847. St. George's Cemetery
is worthy of a visit for a like object, and further commands fine
views of Mount Wellington on the one side and Sandy Bay and the
estuary of the Derwent on the other. Carnelian Bay Cemetery should
also be seen when in the vicinity.
Malhs, Drives, &c., in the neigbbourboob
of Ibobart.
Lansdowne Crescent. —A drive or walk of about three miles in
extent can be enjoyed by proceeding along Elizabeth-street to Queen-
street, thence via Arthur-street to the Crescent, and returning by
Upper Goulburn-street to the city. From the Crescent, which is on
a considerable elevation, there is a fine view of the harbour, &c.
Knocklofty. —This comparatively low hill, which lies westward
at the back of Hobart, affords good training for higher climbs to
come, and furnishes a comprehensive view of the city and its
surroundings.
Salvator Rosa Glen. —This picturesque spot is close to the
city, being reached by Upper Goulburn-street, whence a few
minutes’ walk lands the visitor in the entrance to the glen, which
develops fresh beauties with every rod traversed.
Lady Franklin’s Museum. —This building, now used as a store,
was designed by Lady Franklin for a museum, and was used for
that purpose during several yeai’s. Its picturesque situation renders
it still a spot worthy of a visit. To reach it, proceed along the
New Town-road as far as its junction with the Augusta-road, and
then follow that road to the building, which lies in the valley of the
New Town Bivulet, Distance from Hobart about three miles.


Cascades. —The brewery here, at the foot of Mount Wellington,
supplies Hobart and many inland townships with the celebrated
Cascade A'e. For particulars as to inspecting the brewery
inquire at the towm office.
Fern Tree Bower.— A fairy-like retreat close to the Fern Tree
Inn on the Huon-road, reached either by the regular Huon coach
or by a specially-hired vehicle, the distance from the city being
about five miles, and the road excellent all the way. There are
tables and benches at the Bower for the use of picnic parties.
Sandy Bay. —Follow the Browns River-road for about three
miles to the Long Beach of this suburb, and you will be well
rewarded, not only by the view, but possibly by certain treasures of
the flotsam and jetsam order in the shape of seaweed and shells. A
very pretty place for a quiet picnic of the non-pretentious kind.
New Town.— A pretty suburb, three miles from the Hobart Post-
office. Easily reached by train or bus, or, better still, on foot,
with delightful views all the w'ay, and much that is beautiful to
look at on arrival. The Charitable Institutions for Males and
Females occupy a large extent of land, and afford accommodation
for 500 males and 200 females.
Carnelian Bay and New Town Esplanade. —A road at the
north-eastern side of the Queen’s Domain leads to this much-
frequented locality. The sward at Carnelian Bay is somewhat
restricted, but its contiguity to the railway, which has a stopping
place close to the water, and the beauty of the surrounding scenery,
combine to make it a favourite resort. The walk by the riverside
from Carnelian Bay to New Town Bay, especially if taken during a
summer evening, will disclose such a succession of beautiful scenes
as will satisfy the most exacting lover of Nature’s charms.
Lindisfarne Bay. — A lovely spot, just across the Derwent,
opposite Government House. A boating party can here find every-
thing they wish for in the way of a picnic ground.
Watchorn’s Hill. —About eight miles on the Huon-road, and
1600 feet above the sea level. The view here is very fine, and the
bush in the vicinity full of beauty.
Moir’s Shot Tower. —This prominent landmark from the water
is situated near the h’ghest point of the Brown’s River-road, some
seven miles from Hobart, and may be inspected by permission of
the owner. The tower, from pinnacle to basement, is about 200
feet high.
The Waterworks. —The sources of the Hobart water supply are
derived from Mount Wellington, the most distant being the Plains
Rivulet, about eleven miles from the city. A pipe-head well is
constructed on this stream, commonly called St. Crispin's Well
(after Mr. Mayor Crisp), at an altitude of about 2000 feet above
sea-level. From thence the water is conveyed five and a-haif miles
to the “Bower” basin (1521 feet), picking up branch supplies on its
way, and from the Bower for two miles by sol'd freestone and rock-
cut aqueducts over the “Gentle Annie” falls into the “receiving
house,” from whence it is distributed, via storage and distributing
reservoirs, through the mains and reticulation pipes. The
“receiving house” is the point generally chosen by visitors for


inspection. It is reached by following the telegraph wire along
Davey-street, keeping it in sight when it leaves the main road, and
tracing it step by step until it leads direct to the caretaker’s house,
distant about three miles from the centre of Hobart—altitude, 510
feet above sea-level.
Huon-road, Summkrleas-road, and Brown’s. River-road.—
The central portion of this route is as yet hardly well enough
“ made” to be suitable for carriages, but for equestrians the twenty
miles round furnishes a most enchanting variety of mountain, forest,
and river. A portion of the road is at an elevation of some 1200 feet.
The turn-off to the Summerleas-road is at the Fern Tree Inn (see
Fern Tree Bower).
Derwent Lighthouse (twelve miles from Hobart). —There are
occasional fishing trips as far as here during the season. In olden
days this lighthonse—or was it the rock on which it stood ?—was
known as the Iron Pot, but nous avons change tout cela. [There was
a rumour once that gold had been discovered at the Iron Pot, and a
Hobart steamer took down a load of enthusiasts Math picks and
shovels, who landed on the bare rock, pecked awhile at its adamantine
surface, and then returned home sadly discomfited, to find that they
had been the victims of a cruel hoax.]
Sycurstons*
brown’s IRivec (Ikingston).
In the happy days of hobbledyhoyhood the writer of these pages
has frequently started from Hobart of a Saturday afternoon, and,
accompanied by half-a dozen congenial spirits, has walked to the
locality above-named, enjoying a hearty tea at the Kingston Hotel,
and returning by moonlight along the splendid road by the margin
of the broad estuary of the Decent. Nowadays such a trip—a
good tM'enty miles in all—would call for careful consideration,
with the result of a decision in favour of a drive, and this is the
method of transit most of our readers are likely to employ. But
whether they M’alk or drive, one thing is indisputable —they must
not leave Hobart without visiting Brown’s River. The river itself
has attractions for the angler, and the beaches are the ne plus ultra
of M r hat beaches should be. Then there is the Blowhole to see, hills
to climb, seaweed and shells to gather, perchance a bathe in the
briny, ozone ad libitum , a keen appetite, a sweet night’s rest,
pleasant dreams, and an ever-abiding recollection of one of the most
enjoyable trips a mortal could make.
IRortMmest (flSag.
About five miles from Brown’s River, and accessible by a good
road, is Margate, on the shores of North-West Bay , a village noted
for the excellent vegetables, fruit, and dairy produce which it sends
to market, A magnificent cascade, knoM-n as Donohee’s Falls,


on the Snug River, can be reached by a stiff walk through the bush
from North-West Bay, care being taken either to secure a guide or
to have very definite local directions. The following extract from a
Tasmanian journal, published several years ago, gives a good idea
of the grandeur of these falls :
“ You descend upwards of 200 feet, and. looking up, behold a clear fall of over 100
feet. ... On all sides rise stupendous precipitous walls in the shape of an
almost perfect cylinder, the fall being received in a bowl at your feet, perpetually
moist with the vapour from below, and covered with the most exuberant mosses
and creepers ; lofty trees stretch their tall tops level with the cliffs around ; and
the place is remarkable fur a dense, luxuriant, and almost rank vegetation. It is
altogether a most grand and magnificent scene.”
(Blenorcbp.
A lovely suburb, distant five miles from Hobart, celebrated for its
fruit, and certainly “ a place to spend a happy day.” It is situated
on the main road, and to reach it the visitor passes through New
Town and over O'Brien’s Bridge, crossing Humphrey’s Rivulet. In 1872
Glenorchy was the scene of a huge landslip, when a body of earth*
estimated at no less than 100 acres in extent, slid down into the
narrow bed of Humphrey’s Kivulet, carrying with it thousands of
big trees, and forming a dam, which, bursting later on with a
terrific explosion, poured forth a resistless body of water, inter-
mingled with rocks, trees, and debris, bearing everything before
them, and strewing the banks of the rivulet for three miles with a
chaos of timber. Fortunately but one life was lost, but the damage
done to property was very great, and even at the present day the
course of the torrent is plainly marked, leading the eye to the source
of all the mischief, the landslip, showing as “ a long yellow line
running nearly horizontally along the blue sides of Mount Wel-
lington. ”
IRangaroo point anb dfcount IRumncg.
Of late years the charming suburb of Kangaroo Point
(Bellerive) has grown into great favour as a place of residence,
especially with those whose families include children. The neat
and swift little steamers owned by the O’May Brothers and appro-
priately named by them in the order of construction the Enterprise,
Result, Success, Victory, and Silver Grown, are kept constantly busy
throughout the day conveying passengers to and fro, and in summer
time the ordinary traffic is largely augmented by flocks of pleasure-
seekers. There is a noble beach at the back of Bellerive, reached in
a few minutes’ walk, and affording a splendid run for youngsters and
“ children of a larger growth.” From Bellerive also the tourist can
reach Mount Romney either on foot or by means of the Sorell
coach, which passes close to the Mount. The point of departure
from the road is at about four miles from Bellerive, at a red gate,
where three tracks diverge. The centre one of these leads past a
series of “ blazed” trees—which be careful to keep in sight—and on
to the Mount. The view from the summit is superb, and is con-


sidered by many to surpass even that obtained from the top of
Mount Wellington, so extensive and varied is it, embracing some
hundreds of miles of coast line, and every well-known inlet and
peninsula to the outer ocean. [Note. —Mount Eumney being on
private land, permission to ascend should be obtained from the
owner of the property, and visitors should carefully abstain from
taking dogs with them.]
Tlokkby ( Clarence Plains) is five miles beyond Bellerive, and is
beautifully situated on the shores of Ralph's Bay, while four miles
to the eastward is Frederick Henry (Fredrik Hendrik) Bay,
interesting as having been visited by Tasman in 1642. The small
settlements of Cambridge and Muddy Plains are in this neighbour-
hood. Splendid spots for picnic purposes are to be found at Seven-
mile Beach, Cox’s Beach, Drouthy Point, and Single Hill.
Sorcll.
A coach leaves Bellerive twice daily for Sorell, a district that
deserves a visit, and is of sufficient importance to claim a special
railway, the survey for which has been made. The road runs
through the township of Clarence and crosses Pittwater, an inlet
from Frederick Henry Bay, by a causeway no less than three miles in
length, completed in 1876 at a cost of nearly £30,000. Sorell has
its municipal council, its churches, schools, public library, institute,
&c., &c. The settlements of Forcett, Lewisham, Carlton, and
Bream Creek are in this district, which is noted for excellent salt-
water fishing. There are also oyster beds at Carlton.
TRicbmond.
As we have already seen, this oldest favourite amongst all the
rural townships, lying within easy distance of Hobart, can be reached
from the Main Line Railway by alighting at Campania. It also has
a daily coach service to and from Hobart; bat by far the pleasantest
method of travel and most picturesque route to follow, are enjoyed
by the tourist who hires him a vehicle at his own disposal for the
day, and takes the road leading from the eastern bank of the Der-
went after crossing that river at Eisdon ferry. By this route we
pass over Grass-Tree Hill, famous in olden days, as was Shooter’s
Hill in England, and for the same freebooting reasons—a “capital
place for sticking up,” in short. From the summit of this bill,
nearly 1800 feet above the level of the sea, there is a view somewhat
similar to that to be had from Mount Direction, with the valley of
the Goal River extending to the right as the road descends. Over
this river we pass by a substantial bridge into the township, where
there is ample accommodation. The little Roman Catholic cemetery
at Richmond is most romantically situated, and contains some head-
stones that suggest life-stories. “ From this spot,” we are told, you
look across the fields “ to the house inhabited by Smith O’Brien, and
to the footpath by the river which was his favourite haunt in exile.”


Mount IKlelsou.
Choose a clear day, gird up your loins, and set out either before
lunch with, or after lunch without, a picnic knapsack, along the
Sandy Bay-road to the foot of the Mount. The climb—about 1200
feet —is not too stiff, and the reward on gaining the top outweighs
the labour fifty-fold. The officer in charge of the Signal Station on
the summit of the Mount will permit you to use the large telescope,
and with it you will be enabled to pick out any special objects, but
without it, well, we cannot improve on Mrs. Meredith’s words. She
tells us that the observer looks down—
“ On the whole fair estuary of the Derwent, on white-winged outward-bound
ships, gliding away almost imperceptibly, and on fussy, puffing steamers, leaving
forked wakes behind them as they hurry into port; on the city and its environs,
with the grand mountain amphitheatre behind, from Mount Wellington to Mount
Direction ; the Domain and Government House; and over the many-beached
shores and wooded hills, rising clear-mirror’d in the glassy waters, with many &
graceful sweep and curve, sea above wood, and wood o’er sea again, as South Arm
and the narrow stretches of land about Sorell and Fredric Hendrik Bay show their
fantastic shapes, and look, as the sunlight dances on the glittering waters, and
drops soft shadows over hill and vale, rather like the fantasy of a painter’s dream
than portions of the solid, sordid world we work and weep about. Betsy Island,
glorified in golden light, seems poised in air, above a pleasant realm of bays and
inlets, slopes and points, silver-specked, as sea birds float athwart them, and
studded with round, dark, compact shapes in groups that we know are sheoak
trees in every-day life, but now have a glint of elf-land as they shadow that rocky
nook, where we might see the long-haired mermaidens combing their sea-greeu
tresses, if only that fisherman’s boat were not so obtrusively on the romance-
preventive service ! Rising from a sapphire sea, like a fairy citadel built of pearl,
shines the islet, beloved of mariners, where the friendly light gleams forth its
guiding radiance through murky night and gathering storm ; and trending into
distance, on either hand, the grand coast outlines of Bruni Island and the Black
Bluff fade into blue uncertainty.”
There ! If such a scene, mermaids and all, is not worth climbing for,
better abandon the rdle of tourist for the future and cultivate the
gout in slippered and inglorious ease. Stay ! A hint. A ’bus runs
from Hobart to the foot of the Mount.
TCisOon dFcrrp anfc .Mount Direction.
Risdon, originally Restdown, is a point on the Derwent where
from time immemorial the river has been crossed by a punt,
primitive enough in the early days, but now more in keeping with
these modern times. To reach it follow the main road as far as the
Maypole Inn, thence tun to the right along the Risdon-road, pash
New Town Bay to the f ry. The ferry-boat, propelled by a wheel-
and-rope engine of one-man power, was worked for several years by
Mr. Jennings— the Jennings of Tasmania, who, being an occasional
visitor to the other colonies, is probably known to several of our
readers as the broadest and heaviest gentleman they have ever seen,
or are likely to see. We forget his exact weight, but it is not far
short of a quarter of a ton. Arrived at the opposite shore you are
at the foot of Mount Direction, and our next direction is mount !
You will find it a steep climb (about 1500 feet), but the view at the
top will well repay you. You can, of course, come as far as Risdon
by rail, and so considerably shorten the walk if you wish.


/ißount ‘CClclUngton.
The crSme de la creme of all walking excursions from Hobart is
decidedly the trip to the summit of Mount Wellington. Hour by
hour since your arrival this monarch of mountains has been the
dominant note in the lovely landscape ever around you. His benign
presence has overshadowed you as with a mighty w T ing, his noble
proportions have awed you, his manifold glories, seen through the
violet bloom of distance, have em-aptured you. You are ever
longing to gain closer access to his throne, to saturate your soul
with the effulgence of his person. And there is no reason why,
blessed with a fair stoutness of limb and hardiness of muscle, you
should not indulge your desire to the fullest extent. There are
always those in Hobart who are ready to renew their acquaintance
with Mount Wellington, to attend the “receptions” he so graciously
accords, so that you should have little trouble in getting together
a party, small or great, of mountain climbers.
Leaving Hobart in the early morning, and proceeding—by vehicle
if it so please you—for some four miles along the Huon-road, you
arrive at the track leading onward and upward, and requiring no
special guide, so wide and clear is it, so plainly the way you have
to go. On either side of you is the grand primeval forest, the huge
butts of the gum-trees alternating with vegetation of a lesser growth,
and the underwood starred everywhere with bush flowers and
berries, amongst which, according to the season, will be found the
waratah, the clematis, the native fuchsia, the lily of the valley (in
moist places and ravines), the white bedstraw, the dwarf musk, the
“wax cluster,” many heaths, the lovely blue-flowering veronica,
the curious white-flowering “grass tree,” with its cone of pearly,
rice-like blossoms, the native honeysuckle, and a score of others, not
forgetting ferns, mosses, and lichens innumerable. Various stages
of the ascent have their local names, but such appellations as
“ Break-neck,” “ Long-pull,” and “ Billy-the-Bull’s Flat” are surely
hardly in keeping with the scene. We leave it to our lady friends
to christen them more euphoniously.
About half-way up the Mount you reach the Springs, where there
is a sort of accommodation cottage, under whose hospitable roof,
should you prefer it to the open, you may enjoy a refreshing cup of
tea, and spread out the contents of your knapsacks, for by this time
you will probably have an appetite, and a good one at that. A
mountain rill close by offers crystal-clear, icy-cold water in the
hottest days, either as a beverage or for a cooling “ sluice” of hands
and face. Refreshed and rested, and having duly enjoyed the fine
view from this point, you resume your journey some half mile or so
along level ground, and thence by a steep and stony track, past a
belt of dead saplings, fringing the way like a hop garden sans the
vines, and so on and on until you reach the “Ploughed Field,”
where acres of huge boulders, each many tons in weight, lie heaped
and jumbled together, as if the giants of “those days” had made
the place a sort of Corporation Reserve, and Titanic rubbish had
been “shot here” with a vengeance! Over this, leaping from
boulder to boulder, aided no little by an impromptu alpenstock,
and keeping the sheer precipice of the Organ-Pipes to your right,


and you laud upon a rock-strewn, pool-dotted incline leading to the
table-laud of the summit, and the pile of logs known as the
“ Pinnacle,” formerly used in connection with the trigonometrical
survey of the Island.
Mr. James Smith, whose word-painting we do not attempt to
improve upon, writes of the view from the Pinnacle in the following
glowing terms : —“ Of the magnificence of the prospect from Mount
Wellington one may say, as Mark Antony said of Cleopatra’s beauty,
“ Age cannot wither it,
Nor custom stale its infinite variety.”
The vastness of the field of vision, the lucid transparency of the
atmosphere, and the interchange of mountain, valley, sea, and
river combine to fascinate your gaze at the [time, and to haunt
your memory for ever afterwards. And the very clouds which
occasionally blur the scene confer additional beauties on it;
for sometimes as they break away to seaward they disclose
one of the islands in the estuary so completely detached from
the line of the horizon as to appear as if suspended in the
heavens ; and sometimes a strong sunbeam striking on the valley
of the Huon, while all around is mist and purple shadow, kindles
the tract of country it illuminates into such a lustre that it appears
to be absolutely transfigured, and recalls to your recollection the
light which abode upon the Land of Goshen, when impenetrable
darkness had settled upon the rest of Egypt. As it flashes in the
sunlight, or fades in the shadow, the Derwent gleams like a sheet
of burnished silver, or assumes the colour of a turquoise; while the
undulating country inland seems to advance towards, or to recede
from you, according as it vividly reveals itself in the light, or grows
indistinct in transitory gloom. The city itself, sloping to the
water’s edge, looks like a collection of the tiniest of toy houses
dropped by a child in careless play ; and the altitude at which you
stand, coupled with the amazing extent of country comprehended
in the view, enables you to realise the prospect visible from a
balloon.”
A sad warning to stragglers is conveyed in a monument erected
near the summit of the Mount to the memory of a gentleman who
strayed from his party and lost his way in a dense fog, his body not
being discovered by the searchers for five days, when it was
found within three-quarters of a mile of the Ploughed Field. The
inscription on this monument runs as follows :
Sacked to tub Memory
OF
JOHN SMITH, M.D.,
Surgeon of the Derwent Water,
Who was lost on this mountain 23rd January, 1858, and found at this
spot 28th January, 1858.
Erected as a token of regret for his untimely end.
J. McP.
A magnificent waterfall, 210 feet deep, and known as the
“Wellington Falls,” can be reached by following the course of
the North - West River, which takes its rise in the mountain, or by a
less arduous tramp along a good track from the Springs. The base
of Mount Wellington is also noted for its numerous lovely fern-tree


gullies. Here, perchance on either side of a merry brooklet, and
towering far above like the fretwork of some fairy dome, rise the
interlacing fern fronds, tier on tier, almost shutting out the sunshine
which here and there forces through, flecking the surface of the tiny
stream, and splashing the moss-grown stems with gouts of gold ;
or a film of mist caught from the edge of a passing cloud may hang
awhile, like a gossamer veil, amongst the ferns, and frost their
fronds with diamond-dust. All around is either verdant life or soft
decay—a harmony in russet brown and green, a picture fresh from
Artist Nature’s hand. Seated amidst the dreamy beauties of
some such exquisite glen, what wonder if you fall into a reverie,
wherefrom awakened by twitter of bird or rustle of leaf, you would
not be the least surprised to see the fair Titania standing a-tiptoe on
a tremulous spray of “maiden-hair,” or her prankish followers,
Puck, Peasblossom, Cobweb, and Mustardseed, chasing a vagrant
zephyr amongst the foliage. To be brought under the influence of
such a scene as this is to forget the myriad ills of life, to feel only
the ecstasy of living.
tlfte Ibuon.
Manifold as are the attractions within the immediate vicinity of
Hobart, and numerous the inducements to prolong one’s stay in
that captivating city, there are several excursions, occupying from
two days to a week, which those really desirous of seeing every
phase of natural beauty in Tasmania should not fail to make.
Foremost amongst these is a trip to the Huon River and district.
The visitor can go by steamer and return by coach, or vice versa.
In either case he will have a good opportunity of viewing a great
variety of scenery, much of which is charming, and all interesting.
For our part, actuated somewhat by the advice of friends, we begin
our tour of the Huon by water.
Leaving Hobart at half-past eight am. we steam down the
Derwent estuary past the Castray Esplanade, Battery Point, Sandy
Bay, and Brown’s River, to the entrance of D’Entrecasteaux Channel,
where a couple of white cottages on a grassy slope to the right mark
the location of a pilot station, whose two officials certainly have no
want of fresh air or picturesque outlook to complain of. Passing
North-West Bay (elsewhere alluded to) we reach Oyster Cove, and
Little Oyster Cove, where there is accommodation for visitors;
and then heading across the channel pay a visit to Barnes’ Bay,
Bruni Island, in which land-locked little harbour we find several
settlers most snugly located. Bruni Island, by the way, extends south-
wards for about thirty miles, and has an area of 90,000 acres; its
southernmost point being Tasman’s Head, with a lighthouse on a
neighbour foreland known as Bruni Head. Our next place of call is
Woodbridge (Peppermint Bay) on the western shore of the channel,
a beautiful nook under the shadow of lofty hills, and rapidly rising
into the front rank as a place not only of summer resort, but for per-
manent residence. A substantial jetty, with tramway attached, affords
shipping facilities to the many fruit-growers in the neighbourhood.
At this jetty we land several passengers, who have been loud in their


praises of the place, and indeed, even from the water, we see much
that prepossesses us in favour of the trim township. There is, we
understand, good boarding accommodation to be had, and many
social advantages enjoyed, in Woodbridge. To us. personally, its
chief attraction lies in the fact that it is the home of the Rev. R. D.
Poulett-Harris, a scholar and a gentleman, to whom (see “Christ’s
College, Hobart,”) the cause of high-class education in Tasmania
owes a considerable debt. As a valued contributor to the literature
of his adopted country, Mr. Harris has a further claim on public
esteem.
Five or six miles from Woodbridge we come to Long Bay, or
Middleton, as it is officially styled, but there is little here beyond
the jetty to claim our attention, most of the cultivated land lying
back from the bay. Gordon ( Three-Hut Point), three miles further
on, is a place of more importance, inasmuch as it boasts a Custom-
office, with a real live tide-waiter, though whether anything besides
the tide ever rewards his Micawberish patience we are not in a position
to state. Coal has been found at Gordon, but has not yet been
worked to a profitable extent. The fern-tree gullies and woodland
glades of this neighbourhood are favourite camping grounds for
picnic parties from Hobart, and the Point is celebrated as the,
fishing ground of the channel. On the opposite shore lie Isthmus
Bay and the extremely narrow neck of land connecting North and
South Bruni. Cross this two or three hundred yards and you are
at the centre of that glorious crescent, Adventure Bay , with Cape
Frederick Henry and Fluted Cape for its northern and southern
horns respectively, Cape Raoul and Gape Pillar in the far east, and
the wide ocean beyond.
Turning westward from Three Hut Point we now make for the
mouth of the Huon River, crossing a wide part of the channel,
and gaining an uninterrupted view of the open ocean to the south-
ward. Hereabouts are several interesting little islands, such as
Arch Island, a huge rock which the waves have tunnelled from
east to west, and Huon Island, about 100 acres in extent, and an
Emerald Isle in miniature as regards fertility.
Steering to the right we enter the inlet known as Port Cygnet, at
the head of which lies Lovett, as the township is officially called.
At Port Cygnet the tourist would do well to make a stay. At
Harvey’s Hotel he will find accommodation second to none in
Tasmania, and suited to an essentially flourishing community.
The trade of the district is here represented by a Custom
office, saw-mills, a jam manufactory, and several fine apple
orchards, which, as the steamer approaches, show like vivid
green patches on Nature’s more sombre gown. Inspecting one
of these orchards, and taking it as a type of the hundreds now
dotting the whole course of the Huon, we find it to be a model of
careful cultivation. The trees are planted a rod apart each way,
giving an average of about 160 trees to the acre. They begin
to bear when four or five years old, and are in full bearing at their
tenth year. From bushels per tree and upwards may be reckoned
upon as a fair yield, although there are some old trees from which
as much as 15 to 20 bushels are gathered. We hear also of a pear
tree (Winter Nelis) that gave £l3 worth of fruit in a single season.
From 3s. to 4s. per bushel is quoted as the market price for apples at


the Huon, and at the time of our visit we are told that, owing mainly
to what Trollope calls “ those damnable Victorian tariffs,” it costs
another 3s. 7d. per bushel to land the fruit in Melbourne, where the
demand is principally for the later varieties only. New South
Wales and Queensland are hence the best markets at present for the
Huon apples, although England and the Continent of Europe, it is
to be hoped, will soon rank as regular customers. It costs,
in many instances, as much as £IOO per acre to clear the land and
reduce it to the fine tilth —“as fine as an onion bed,” as our
informant puts it—necessary to produce the best fruit. To this
initial cost must be added the interest on money for the time until
the trees begin to bear, so that apple-growing takes both capital and
patience, as well as watchful care, and no small degree of labour.
Fortunately, at the Huon there are as yet no signs of that dreaded
scourge, the “ codlin moth,” though “scale blight” is somewhat of
a nuisance, and requires judicious treatment. Before quitting this
subject, and proceeding with our tour, we may mention that the
present annual output of apples from the Huon district is between
150,000 and 200,000 bushels. Every season sees a considerable
addition to the orchards planted out, and the industry, as a whole,
is developing rapidly.
South of Port Cygnet are Dover ( Port Esperance), Hythb (South
Port), Hastings ( South Port Narrows), and Ramsgate (Recherche
Bay), the two first-named being townships of importance, to which
steamers run regularly, while Recherche Bay is an old harbour of
refuge for whalers, and still offers acceptable shelter to vessels in the
rough weather sometimes prevailing off the coast.
From Port Cygnet we return to the wide waters of the Huon,
and, passing no less than five jetties, land, an hour or so later, at
Shipwrights' Point, leaving the steamer to pursue her way to
Franklin, of which town, the capital, so to speak, of the electoral
district bearing the same name, we shall have more to say anon.
Shipwrights’ Point is the site of a jam factory and other industries,
but is chiefly known to Hobartonians by its annual regatta, an event
taking place every New Year’s Day, and frequently attracting as
many as 2000 visitors.
There is good hotel accommodation at Shipwrights’ Point, but of this
we do not avail ourselves on the present occasion, our object being to
push on a little further to Geeveston. A conveyance is in waiting,
and into this we mount, a very pleasant drive of three or four miles
bringing us to our destination, where, thanks to the hospitality of a
leading resident (Mr. Richard Geeves), we are most comfortably
lodged for the night. [Note. —Geeveston is a temperance township,
and has consequently no hotel ; a coffee palace is, however, talked
of, and is certainly needed.] There is still sufficient daylight on
our arrival for us to mount a gentle ascent near Mr. Geeves’
house, and to obtain from thence a comprehensive view of the
central portion of the township, from which four valleys radiate,
each wich its quota of settlement and cultivation. The main
industry of Geeveston is the timber trade, the Messrs. Geeves
owning two large saw-mills, with tramways running far back into
the forests, and down to jetties in the Kermanclee River, at the
head of which Geeveston proper is situated. In addition to the
saw-mills, various branches of the Geeves family “run” most of the


stores, &c., supplying the population of 700, of whom no less than
120 are directly related to Mr. John Geeves, the founder of the
place, a sturdy patriarch, with whom we enjoy a lengthy and most
interesting conversation later on in the evening. The literal and
thorough-going manner in which the Geeves family have obeyed the
Scriptural injunction to “be fruitful and multiply, and replenish
the earth”—so that the proverb concerning leaves in Yallambrosa
might be locally rendered “as thick as Geeveses in Geeveston”—
will probably lead to curious complications in the future. One
pictures to oneself, for instance, a cause cdkbre of the Geeveston of
the next century, with His Honour Mr. Justice Geeves on the bench, a
select jury of Geeveses on the panel, the case tried “Geeves versus
Geeves,” barrister Geeves instructed by solicitor Geeves on either
side, reporter Geeves taking notes, a cloud of witnesses Geeveses to
a man, and a court thronged to the doors with Geeveses of all ages
and stations in life.
We have seen that, by forbidding the sale of intoxicants in the
township, the Geeves family provide for the moral welfare of the
Geevestonians, and that temporal wants are equally well met is
surely evidenced by the fact that the cattle slaughtered—by a
Geeves—for the use of the residents are always the pick of the
herd. Indeed, we interview one noble beast—destined to be beef
in the imminent future—and learn that for this prize ox no less
a sum than £4O was given—solely with a view- to its assimilation by
this lucky community. Geeveston ? Beeveston, forsooth ! Joking
apart, in this model township, with its well-ordered homes, its
prosperous citizens, and its commercial vitality generally, the visitor
sees much both to respect and admire, the outcome of one man’s
plodding industry in the days when most of us were young. All
honour then to John Geeves and the working bees of his busy hive.
While at Geeveston we study some of the statistics of the Huon,
and learn that, apart from its expanding wealth in the shape of fruit
—and Geeveston has its orchards as well as other localities—there
are no less than fourteen saw-mills in the Franklin district alone,
while twenty-two including three steam ketches, trade
between the Huon and Hobart.
At the back of Geeveston, twelve miles distant, lie the Hartz
Mountains, towards which the timber tramways are gradually
eating their way, but the adventurous tourist, who would penetrate
to these forest fastnesses, will pause when he learns that the twelve
miles mean two days’ hard work, so dense is the “ horizontal” or
“banyan” scrub, already alluded to in our reference to the West
Coast trip. There are lakes on either side of the Hartz, and, credo
Mr. Eichard Geeves, much to admire in the way of scenery, a
fuller description of which is, for obvious reasons, held over for a
future edition of this work.
The Hobart coach leaves Geeveston, the furthest point to which
it comes, in the early morning, and with our usual good fortune we
secure a box-seat, having —another stroke of luck—two belles of the
district as our fellow occupants of the post of honour. Without
waiting for an impossible introduction, we three, and the genial
driver, are soon very much at our ease, and the long journey to
Hobart is enlivened by many an innocent jest that need not
here be set down, much of the fun, however, arising from our note-


book betraying our calling, and the consequent desire on the part of
the ladies to supply us with information of a fictional character.
The tiny settlement of Liverpool, otherwise Honeywood, is on our
way to Shipwrights’ Point, and from the latter place we drive
along the western bank of the Huon upon an excellent road bordered
with flower-spangled glades and slopes, and here and there a leafy
orchard or a snug farm, and fresh peeps of the noble river between
the over-arching foliage. At Castle Forhes Bay we sweep round a
steep fern-clad hill, and so ever by the margin of the Huon, by high
hawthorn hedges and tall poplars, into the long street that means
Franklin, where we enjoy a brief halt while horses are being put
to a larger coach, into which we transfer at this point.
Franklin, well worthy of an extended stay, offers numerous
attractions to the visitor. There is ample hotel accommodation and
plenty of sport in the way of fishing, for the Upper Huon is stocked
with imported fish. It was not very far from here that the largest
English salmon yet legitimately caught in Tasmania fell to the
victorious rod of the present Governor, Sir Robert Hamilton, the
fish itself being embalmed and on view at the Hobart Museum. We
use the word “ legitimately” advisedly, for—whisper it—although
Sir Robert’s fish is a monster—the exact weight has slipped our
fickle memory —we hear—in strict confidence, mind you—of even
bigger salmon and salmon trout—up to 30 lbs. weight—that, alas !
without leave or license, have been brought to bank, either
captured by net or, in the case of the trout, cunningly coaxed to
their doom by the process known to old-world poachers as
“tickling.” Dividing the stream opposite Franklin is Egg Island,
much favoured by boating excursionists ; and on the further shore
lies the settlement of Woodstock. The river here is full of
beautiful effects. As a local enthusiast writes : —“Every object is
reflected with wonderful accuracy of colour and minuteness of
detail; the overhanging trees and foliage in all their fantastic forms,
the tints of the clouds and colour of the sky, with the green of the
orchards and gardens beyond, together form a picture which will
never be forgotten, and will be frequently recalled to the mind’s eye
as ‘ a thing of beauty and a joy for ever.’ ” Truly, as another local
scribe, with a happy blending of the poetical and the practical,
hath it —
“ Tasmania, oh ! Tasmania, thou’rt blessed with lovely scenery,
With flowers and fruit, and coal in seams, and streams to turn machinery !”
Shortly after leaving Franklin our attention is drawn to the great
landscape * ‘ lion” of the whole district, the Huon Belle or Sleeping
Beauty,* a mountain range in the distance ahead of us, whose out-
line bears really a remarkable resemblance to a recumbent female,
form, face, bust, and body being all traceable, and visible, we
are told, more especially when snow-crowned, from far out at sea.
Looking wonderingly and thoughtfully at this curious formation,
we cannot refrain from pulling out the legendary stop of our mental
organ once more and imagining this gigantic figure to be the
* Just as we are going to press we learn that the Tasmanian Government have
opened a new track leading from Huonville, through a valley near the Sleeping
Beauty, to New Norfolk, the bush scenery on the said track being “something
exquisite,’’ so our informant says.


“'simulacre ” on a large scale of the never-to-be-forgotten heroine
whose lengthy nap was so delightfully disturbed by the happy lover
of her dreams. What does Tennyson tell us about the after-conduct
of this then very wide-awake young lady ?
‘‘And on her lover’s arm she leant.
And round her waist she felt it fold
And far across the hills they went
In that new world which is the old
Across the hills, and far away
Beyond their utmost purple rim,
And deep into the dying day
The happy princess followed him.”
And is not this, from a southern point of view, the utmost purple
rim of all the mountains of the world, or, at any rate, that portion
of the world fit to live in ? Rattling over a fine iron-girder bridge
across the Huon we enter Huonville (formerly Victoria), five miles
from Franklin, Here the waters of the Upper Huon become con-
tracted, and lead on into gorges and gullies of the most romantic
description. The birth-place of the Tasmanian Nightingale, Amy
Sherwin, is, we understand, not far from this point, Huonville,
the change of name being necessitated by the frequent miscarriage
of letters, —“ and now those stupid Victorians have actually named a
place in their colony ‘Huon,’” —Huonville is another of those
enticing spots where the traveller feels inclined to cast in his lot—
and his line too, be it said—for a day or two, and the charms of the
village are emphasised by the excellent accommodation to be had at
the Picnic Hotel. Mr. W, J. Baily, whom we take this opportunity
of thanking for considerable information concerning the Huon
generally, is a gentleman to whom the sojourner should obtain an
introduction, when much more than we can possibly find room for in
this booklet will, we vouch for it, be willingly placed at his dis-
posal. Make a note of this friends, if you please. Mr. Baily, by
the way, claims the honour of being the first local shipper of fruit
to England.
Having changed horses, we are ready for a mountain climb, and
this we shortly commence, the road growing steeper and steeper
until we are in the heart of the ranges and begin fairly to appreciate
the great engineering difficulties that presented themselves to the
Huon roadmakers. To the Hon. Claarles Meredith, elsewhere
alluded to in justly laudatory terms, belongs, we believe, the credit
of planning this road, which was mainly constructed during his
tenure of office. A memorial-stone by the roadside, seventeen
miles from Hobart, records in set terms “the indomitable courage”
of those who assisted in the undertaking, completed in the year
1855. A road, also planned by Mr. Meredith, leads to the Sandfly
Basin, likewise in this region, and affords another charming coach
route from Hobart.
Well worthy of all that has been said and written in its praise is
this Huon-road, as it winds upwards between gorge and mountain,
rocky scarp and deep defile, flowery terrace and bracken-clothed
slope, with huge forest monarchs here and there towering aloft in
all their majesty. Now, as we round a horseshoe bend, we are on
the very edge of a perfect gulf of big tree ferns, a sea of feathery
fronds in billowy greenness stretching downwards to the depths
below; now the coach passes through an avenue of clustering over-


arching ferns, that brush us as we sweep by, luring us with fairy
fingers to dismount and rest awhile in their cool embrace; now a
crystal sheet of water comes sparkling and sliding down a smooth
black face of rock, slips through some channel beneath our feet, and
dashes away in rainbowed spray to meet the brook in the valley ;
and now, perched on the mountain side, some half-a-dozen grass-
grown graves mark a bush cemetery, where the happy dead lie in the
flower-strewn lap of Nature, lulled by the breeze that sighs amongst
the tall tree-tops, soothed by the sound of falling waters and the
song of birds. We feel that we too should like to have this as our
last resting-place—but not just yet.
Vince’s Hill, and Mr. Vince himself, the “champion chopper’'
of the country side, are features animate and inanimate of this
portion of the road ; and indeed it must need no ordinary degree of
strength and skill to fell, dismember, and divide such monsters as
the swamp gum, 345 feet high, and thick in proportion, which w'as
one of the trees lately operated on. Labor omnia vincit is probably
the champion’s motto. We meet the down coach hereabouls, and
change drivers, soon afterwards pulling up at the Half-way House,
Longley, where the owner of the coaches, Mr. Webster —both our
drivers his brothers—dispenses hospitality at moderate rates to travel-
lers all and sundry. To those whose time is limited, and w'ho cannot
therefore undertake the full Huon tour, we would suggest a trip
from Hobart to Longley and back in the one day, the coaches, as we
have shown, being so timed as to render this an easy matter. There
is some good fishing to be had near Longley.
After a hearty dinner we are off again, and accomplish the
remaining eleven and a-half miles to Hobart in fine style. At High
Peak , the site of a new mansion, built by a prominent Tasmanian
railway official, we are 1650 feet above the level of the sea, and
from here the down grade commences, taking us at a brisk rate
through every variety of superb mountain scenery, with wide pano-
ramic views here and there, over the sloping sides of Mount
Wellington to the Fern-tree Inn, hard by the Fern-tree Bower.
“ And here, from month to month, the time
Is kissed by Peace and Pleasure ;
While Nature sings her woodland rhyme,
And hoards her woodland treasure.”
In another mile or two we turn a sharp corner, and lo! beneath us
Hobart, in all its exuberance of loveliness, shimmering in the after-
noon sun between blue sky and bluer river, like a string of pearls
lying in a casket of lapis lazuli. Truly of such a scene as this it may
be said—
“ We gaze, and turn away, and know not why,
Dazzled and drunk with beauty, till the heart
Reels with its fulne-s,”


XTbe Bevwent IDallev,
New Norfolk, &c.
“ Beautiful are some of the waters of Queensland. . . . Beautiful is the
Goulburn . . . and grand are the river cliffs where the Hawkesbury and the
Nepean plough their way among the precipices of Kurrajong. But the prince of
Australian rivers for sustained beauty and grandeur is the Derwent, from its
cradle to its grave. Its course is short, but ever changing; grand where it is not
beautiful, and beautiful where it is not grand.”—J. J. Stutzer.
IM LTHOUGH it would be difficult to proceed ten miles in a given
direction in any part of Tasmania without encountering
scenery of a picturesque nature, there are certain localities
that may be spoken of in this connection in the superlative degree.
Foremost amongst these must ever stand the valley of the Der-
went, along which the Government have constructed a branch
railway, running from Bridgewater Junction to Glenora, a total
distance from Hobart of some thirty-eight miles. It is thus easy
for the tourist to travel to Glenora and back in one day, or in a
single afternoon for that matter; but unless his movements are
extremely hurried he should make a point of staying a day or two
at New Norfolk, returning thence either by road or river. Or he
can take steamer from Hobart in the first instance, pick up the rail-
way at New Norfolk, and return from the latter point by road, thus
gaining a triple experience of a peculiarly pleasant description. In
our case we set out by rail, leaving Hobart at eight and Bridgewater
Junction at 8.40 a.m.
The Bridgewater Causeway is no less than three-quarters of a mile
in length, and was constructed by convict labour, as many as 600
men being employed on it at one time. Two-thirds of the Cause-
way is solid earthwork, the remainder a bridge with a practicable
opening for vessels to pass through. Railway and roadway run side
by side, and the two together form an object worthy of inspection.
From Bridgewater the Derwent Valley line runs close by the margin
of the river, the effects of light and shade on the noble stream itself,
and on its background of mountains, continually forming some new
combination to delight the eye. Passing one or two minor stations,
we soon draw near to New Norfolk, the river narrowing and the
rocks growing steeper, until at last the train runs on a mere strip of
land, with deep water on the one side, and on the other, within
reach of a stretched-out hand, a high perpendicular precipice of
great grandeur. Indeed, it was necessary in constructing this line
to remove one huge overhanging monster known as the Pulpit Rock,
and the loss of this most picturesque object is still deplored by those
to whom it was a familiar landmark. But the safety of Her
Majesty’s lieges was the first consideration, and Pulpit Rock
succumbed.


We are at New Norfolk by a quarter past nine, and so have the
whole day before us here did we wish to stop, but our intention is
to push on to Glenora, and return to New Norfolk for lunch ; so we
keep our seats, have just time to admire the bridge spanning the
Derwent, and the general appearance of the town from the station,
and are whirled away past Hamilton-road and across a substantial
bridge, over some swirling rapids, to the Plenty, where the river
of that name joins the Derwent, and in which neighbourhood are
situated the celebrated Salmon Ponds, to be referred to later on.
There is much to interest us all the way, not only in the purely
picturesque scenes which every fresh turn discloses, but in the
evidences of solid prosperity, the hop gardens and kilns, the
orchards white with blossom or heavy with fruit, the fields of
waving corn, the sleek cattle and comfortable-looking sheep,
the cosy cottages and more pretentious homesteads embowered
in trees, half-hidden by high hedges of hawthorn or
briar rose. Macquarie Plains, the next station of note, is
the point where travellers for Hamilton and the Ouse (localities
dealt with elsew T here) meet the coach, but there is no coaching for us
to-day, much as we long for our pet box-seat in preference even to
this snug smoking carriage. Our outward journey, however, is
drawing to a close. The valley, which has latterly narrowed con-
siderably, now opens 'out again, and crossing another very solid
railway bridge we draw up at Glenora. Time, 10.5 a.m. We
have a couple of hours to spend before the return train leaves, and
these pass most enjoyably in a stroll to the crest of the hill, and a
long look at the surrounding landscape from every point of view.
The valley in the foreground beneath us, with the Derwent winding
away in the distance, between verdant fields and leafy orchards, is,
of course, the chief feature ; but far as the eye can reach there are
the everlasting hills with their violet-velvet robes and crowns of
golden light; and so, steeped to the very soul in beauty, we stroll
back to the station and return to New Norfolk.
There are several good hotels in New Norfolk, the best known
being the Bush Hotel, with its well-stocked fruit garden sloping to
the river ; and here all arrangements can be made for visiting the
Salmon Ponds, &c. But a saunter round the town itself is first
advisable, and will amply reward the saunterer. In this connection
we cannot refrain from once more quoting Mr. James Smith, whose
pen is a perfect cyclorama in itself. He says : —“There is a green
lane at New Norfolk than which I know of nothing more thoroughly
English in the pages of Mary Bussell Mitford ; or on the canvas of
Gainsborough, Constable, or Creswick ; or in the beautiful county
of Kent itself. All the elements of the picturesque are there—the
lofty hedgerows, white with blossom in the spring, and crimson with
berries in the autumn ; the luxuriant foliage, the winding lane, the
sweet breath of the new-mown hay, the sweep of the scythe through
the long grass, and the rustic bridge spanning a brawling brook.
The hop-gardens, with their long-drawn aisles of vivid green—the
delicate curves and spiral movements of the graceful vine—the
sunshine dropping in golden rifts, and the shadows falling in dark
brown lines : all hint of good old Saxon Kent. So do the gurgling
runnels, that wind away in secrecy and darkness among the
pollard willows, until they empty their waters into a stream, cool,


shadowy, transparent, and impetuous—such as 1 Sir Humphrey
Davy or Christopher North would have delighted to angle in, and
old Isaak Walton would have loved to have written about. But
the blue over-arching sky, and the bright, bland, balmy air are
redolent of Italy; while the glorious mountains which enclose and
frame this charming picture recall to recollection some of the softer
parts of Switzerland.” To descend to more prosaic details, New
Norfolk is the centre of an electoral district of about 4500 inhabi-
tants. It has churches, schools, a Ibank, a public library, rifle,
racing and cricket clubs, a municipal council, &c. One of the chief
institutions in the town is the Hospital for the Insane, containing
some 300 inmates, costing about £II,OOO per annum for mainten-
ance. A visit to this admirably-conducted asylum, where enter-
tainments are frequently given for the amusement of the patients,
will prove interesting, and can be arranged without difficulty.
The importance of New Norfolk as a fruit and hop growing
district is shown by the fact that no less than 50,000 bushels of
apples and pears, and upwards of 1,000,000 lbs. of hops, have been
exported in a single year. The hop grounds of Mr. E. Shoobridge
are especially well laid out, and visitors from the neighbouring
colonies are cordially welcomed by the hospitable proprietor. The
ardent fisherman, duly provided with a licence, procurable in the
town, stands a good chance of securing a basket of trout during his
stay ; and the botanist can fill his case with choice specimens.
The student of human nature will also probably have an oppor-
tunity of observing the habits of the newly-paired of his own
species, for New Norfolk is the very paradise of Edwins and
Angelinas from all quarters.
And now a word or two as to the Salmon Ponds. These we
could have reached, of course, from the Plenty Station, but we
prefer the drive from New Norfolk, along six miles of a road that
runs mainly by the river. The ponds, hatching-houses, and
channels have been in use since 1864, the first trout being hatched
on the 4th May in that year, and the first salmon on the following
day. The first salmon was caught on the 4th December, 1873.
There are generally several big fish in the ponds, and on throwing
in some of their favourite food—boiled liver or gentles —they may
be clearly seen darting across to the feast. The following humorous
lines on the successful introduction of the salmon appeared in the
Yeoman, and may be allowed to conclude this section of our
tour :
THE SALMON PONDS.
‘ Hurrah ! Hurrah ! we’ve hook’d our fish,
By Jupiter of Ammon ;
As sure as ever eggs are eggs,
We’ll hatch colonial salmon.
“ And here’s a health to every man
The credit rests upon ;
The fellows who sent out the eggs,
And those who egged ’em on.
“ The Murray trout may swim about.
With unmolested cod ;
And Yarra herrings from that day
Need never fear the rod.


“ The sole may live with no sole fear,
The flounder flounder free ;
The eel may feel secure in mud,
John Dorj f safe at sea ;
“ When once o’er rich pink-meaty fish,
Our hungry praise we utter ;
And salmon see—colonial bred.
Swim in colonial butter.”
Ibobart to tbe East Coast.
Spring Bay—Maria Island—Swansea, &c.
IN' visiting St. Mary’s, Falmouth, and St. Helen’s we have already
touched the eastern littoral of Tasmania, but what is generally
spoken of as the East Coast lies further to the southward, and
is not at present blessed with a line of railway of its own. None the
less is it a district having large claims upon the tourist’s attention,
and he will do well, all things being equal, to run across to it. He
can accomplish the trip—provided he be not seduced into a lengthy
stay—in a couple of days, returning to Hobart, or proceeding
onwards to Launceston, via Avoca or Campbell Town. Let us
briefly describe the route.
We leave Hobart by the eight o’clock express on a Tuesday
morning (the coach service outward is on Tuesdays, Thursdays, and
Saturdays), and arrive at Campania at ten minutes past nine. Here
we find our coach in waiting, and ere long are bowling along open,
undulating country, with nothing in the immediate vicinity calling
for special mention until we are some few miles from our starting
point, when we enter a more romantic region of the true Tasmanian
type —gum trees and gullies, rocks and ravines, flowers and ferns,
streamlet and sward, shadow and shine. Black Charlie’s Opening
is the common-place name of the long defile we now pass through,
emerging thence to Brushy Plains past the Runnymede estate,
and on into the mountains again with but a brief halt at one or two
points on the way. Buckland, the centre of several fine estates, is
seen to advantage as we descend towards the stream known as
Nelson’s Greek, which we cross by means of a rocky ford. A mile
or two of fairly level ground bring us to the township itself, where
there is a small hotel, a church, a school, post and telegraph office,
a police office, and a number of scattered cottages, which go to make
up this not very extensive community.
Leaving Buckland we cross a bridge over the Brushy Plains
Rivulet, which, with several other streams, joins the Prossor’s River
near the village. Numerous are the delightful surprises in the
shape of scenery as we wind along the rock-cut road on the southern
bank of the river, each turn disclosing some fresh beauty. Of the
Oyster Bay pine, a tree peculiar to this district, Mrs. Meredith
writes as follows:—“Perhaps not always deserving the epithet


beautiful, because often reft of its fair proportions by fire or acci-
dent, but always eminently picturesque, whetherj springing singly,
spiring up aloft a verdant obelisk, or in a group, where the
unspoilt symmetry of fresh, luxuriant young trees contrasts with
the gaunt, grand, half-draped torso of some mighty ancestor, noble
even in decay. The rich green hue of the foliage, the brown
clusters of cones, and the usually ashen tints of the bark form an
exquisite bit of colour. Some of the trees are 100 to 150 feet in
height, straight as arrows, and tapering from base to summit like a
ship’s mast. Their usual habitat is limited to a range of about forty
miles along the East Coast, extending perhaps ten or fifteen miles
inland. They are not indigenous in any other known part of the
island, but are readily raised from the seeds abundantly produced by
the ripe cones, and when grown in shrubberies or other protected
spots are among the handsomest of the pine family.” The Tas-
manian Tiger, an animal somewhat resembling the hyena, and with
a sad penchant for the sheep of the settler, infests the mountainous
country to the north of where we are now travelling. Specimens of
these animals have been shot measuring upwards of 6 feet from the
nose to the tip of the tail. The Tasmanian Devil, also found in this
locality, is a much smaller brute, very fierce'and mischievous, with
large jaws and powerful teeth. Mrs. Meredith mentions that on one
of her father’s stations the shepherds caught in a pitfall during one
winter no less than 143 devils ; but this is many years ago, and as
settlement spreads, both devils and tigers are becoming less numer-
ous. Kecurrent mention of Mrs. Meredith, together with the fact
that we now cross the Meredith Bridge—named in honour of her
late husband, and close by which is a cottage once formerly occu-
pied by the highly-respected, truly patriotic couple—gives us an
opportunity of saying a few special words concerning this lady, to
whom Tasmania certainly owes a deep debt of gratitude. It was in
this district then that she passed several years of her married life,
finding time in the midst of her many duties as wife, mother, and
most hospitable chatelaine to write those admirable works familiar
to all acquainted with Tasmanian literature. Possessed of a happy
faculty of observation, together with a reverent love of Nature,
Mrs. Meredith drank in the spirit of her surroundings, and, both
in prose and verse, transferred that spirit to the pages of her works.
There'glow through all these the warm-hearted impulsiveness of
womanhood, the tender grace of maternity, the sweet optimism
of one who, being content, would fain have the whole world in unison
with her, not a discordant note marring the chorus of human grati-
tude for Divine generosity. Such a woman, highly educated, and
accustomed in her early youth to the amenities of English life, might
well find some cause for repining when brought to the semi-wilds
that here lay around her. On the contrary, we find her writing
thus :—“I believe, in truth, that to appreciate fully and completely
the blessings of happy homes, children, friends, and books, a trial of
lonely bush-life for a few years is indispensable. Such partial
solitude does the spirit good.” Discovering in feelings of this nature
“a very well-spring of delight,” she not only quaffed of the bright
waters herself, but, through the medium of her popular works,
distributed refreshing draughts around. The name of Louisa Anne
Meredith will ever be cherished by true Tasmanians as that of a


woman who devoted her genius freely and fully to the welfare of her
adopted country.*
Orford, the little village which has given rise to the foregoing
remarks, lies at the head of Prossor’s Bay, and is chiefly to be noted
for its freestone quarries, stone from these figuring in several of our
largest Melbourne buildings. The road now runs round the shores
of Spring Bay, and in another four miles we are at Triabdnna,
where, with the reader’s good leave, we will take the Maria Island
Company’s little steamer and cross over to Maria Island. This
island, at one time the place of detention of Smith O’Brien and
other Irish political prisoners, is now the scene of brighter doings,
having been leased by a Melbourne company, who are determined
to make it a favourite resort. To this end they have established a
most commodious and comfortable hotel, replete with every modern
convenience, and accessible by means of their small steamer, which
runs regularly to the mainland to meet the coaches. The
culture of the vine is being pursued with some success at
Maria Island, and the visitor will find many other objects of
interest in addition to the numerous natural beauties of the
place. Direct steamers from Hobart and Launceston call here at
regular intervals.
From Triabunna to Pontypool, at the head of Little Swanport, is
a distance of twelve miles, through somewhat monotonous country ;
but from Little Swanport onwards the road improves from a
picturesque point of view, and the route through the Rocky Hills is
full of grandeur. Indeed, Dr. Alexander Morrison, of Melbourne,
whose opinion we have before quoted, speaks of the drive (from
Avoca) through Swansea, Triabunna, &c., as involving “the
grandest part of Tasmanian scenery.” The close proximity of the
sea lends an added charm to this particular portion of the way.
By eight o’clock in the evening we are at Swansea, and glad to
avail ourselves of the hospitable shelter of one of its comfortable
hotels. Next morning betimes we inspect the township, and enjoy
the magnificent view so well described by Mrs. Meredith ;
“ There lies the bay, blue as the heavens, save where a passing
cloud drops a shadow and weaves a green ribbon across its broad
bosom. On the opposite side, twelve or fifteen miles distant, rise
the granite peaks of the Schouten Mountains—all cliffs, ravines, and
many-folded slopes, with turret rocks and towers that Cyclopsean
architects may have fashioned for the pre-Adamites, and deep
gorges, curtained and canopied by forests of our sombre evergreen
trees and shrubs. On clear sunny days, the sea-washed crags and
stretches of snowy quartz-pebble beach are all seen perfectly clear
and sharp from the other side of the bay.
“Nearer to our shore, we see flocks of gannets, either skimming
along high above the sea, or poised for an instant like silver stars ;
till, one after another, dozens of them pounce down on the shoal of
fish below.
* We are not aware whether the Tasmanian Government have yet acknowledged
Mrs. Meredith’s silent, but none the less sterling, claims on the gratitude of the
country. If not, they should make a speedy opportunity for so doing. The
bestowal of pensions on the discoverers of mineral treasures is very good in its
way; but the Eve who spins, and spins most radiant fabrics of thought, is, we
think, as deserving of honour as the Adam who delves.


“Three little reefy points of black trap rock jut out into the bay to
the south ; and above this, rising clear and purple, is the distant
lofty crest of Maria Island, thirty miles off. How grandly beautiful
all these black points and broad sandy beaches are when a southerly
gale sets in, and the giant waves come rolling on and on, one behind
another —an awful amphitheatre of angry foaming billows, plunging
over the dark crags in cataracts of spray—only those who have
dwelt in such a spot can tell.”
Swansea has the honour of being the first-proclaimed rural
municipality in Tasmania, and has all the advantages, politically
and socially, of a well-ordered district. Several families, amongst
whom are the Merediths, the Lynes, the Amoses, and the Cottons,
have been settled here for nearly three-quarters of a century. It
will further interest the tourist to remark that there is a splendid
beach of hard sand ten miles in length, where shells and seaweeds
are found in great variety, and a jetty extends for 700 feet into
Oyster Bay, the noble gulf between the mainland and Freycinet’s
Peninsula. Fish abound here, amongst those usually caught being
trumpeter, flounder, mullet, rock cod, native salmon, flathead,
perch, barracouta, &c., &c. Excursions may be made from Swansea
to the Peninsula, Great Swanport, Bicheno, &c., while the return
to Hobart (or Launceston) may be, as already stated, either by coach,
via Avoca, or across country to Campbell Town, the whole round
only occupying two days, although worthy of two weeks.
port Hi'tbuv.
one who has read Marcus Clarke’s powerful romance, “ His
l| fij Natural Life”—and what Australian worthy of the name has
not ?—but would like to see for himself the actual localities—
the scenic effects, so to speak, of that drama of real life. And, once
in Tasmania, he can easily satisfy his wish, partly if not wholly. He
may not have sufficient time at his disposal to visit Macquarie
Harbour —although even that, as we have shown in the preceding
pages, is not difficult of access —but Port Arthur is a much simpler
matter. The little steamer “ Taranna” runs twice a-week (Mondays
and Thursdays) to Tasman’s Peninsula, and, as every schoolboy
knows, Port Arthur is the southernmost harbour in that much-
indented, all-but island, “ hanging,” as Clarke puts it, “like a huge
double-dropped earring from the mainland.” “ Port Arthur,”
however, is not to be found, as a township, in the local itineraries.
It is a name, with all its disagreeable associations, better relegated
to the limbo of the past, and so in its place we have “ Carnarvon.”
The steamer leaves Hobart at half-past eight a.m., and heads
southwards, passing Ralph’s Bay and South Arm, until the Derwent
lighthouse is reached, when the course is north-easterly past
Franklin Island, Capes Contrariety and Deslaco, and Slopen Island,
through Frederick Henry Bay, and so due easterly to Dunally, a
settlement in the Sorell district, close to East Bay Neck, the narrow


isthmus joining Forestier’s Peninsula (the upper portion of the
“ double earring”) to the mainland. After a brief detention at
Dunally the steamer heads southward once more into the wide
land-locked waters of Norfolk Bay, passing Garden Island and
paying calls at Saltwater River, Premaydena ( Impression Bay), and
Koonya {Cascades), and finally landing the tourist at Taranna
shortly after four o’clock. There is good hotel accommodation at
Taranna, but should the traveller decide to push on forthwith to
Port Arthur he can do so by a conveyance which meets the steamer,
and a drive of seven miles brings him to Carnarvon, the site of the
old penal establishment, where he will find plenty to interest him.
For nearly half a century (1833 to 1876) Port Arthur was occupied
by prisoners, as many as 3000 having been detained here,
and most of the old buildings are still standing, though
several begin to show signs of decay. Some of those which
were the officers’ quarters are now private residences —for numerous
settlers have taken up land here of late years—aud there is even a
“ proprietary school” in the heart of this scene of old-time horrors.
The weed-grown prison yards, the open cells—“sunshine and
hope” everywhere where once reigned darkness and despair—the
crumbling, flower-kissed walls, the sound of children’s laughter—
all these are fitter accompaniments for bright sky, blue sea, and
wooing breezes than the clank of chains, the curses of brutalised,
lash-driven, hopeless men, the dismal tolling of the prison bell.
Enough. “Let the dead past bury its dead,” and turn we to the
contemplation of the “ living present.”
A day or two may be pleasantly spent at Carnarvon —making the
hotel one’s headquarters—and radiating thence in several directions.
Towards the south the inlet opens out to the two great headlands
Capes Pillar and Raoul, and four miles from Carnarvon there is a
Blowhole, “ from which a fountain of foam, about 30 feet high, is
discharged when a strong southerly wind prevails.” To the west-
ward lies Nubeena ( Wedge Bay). Both shooting and fishing are to
be had for the seeking, and the scenery is all that the most
exigiant lover of the picturesque can desire.
But the lions of Tasman’s Peninsula have not yet been half
exhausted. Returning to Taranna we can hire either horse or boat,
or proceed by regular conveyance to Eaglehawk Neck, distant about
five miles. As we round the point where the bay runs up towards
the Neck the sea opens to our view, over a small low bar of sand
200 feet long by 60 feet wide. This is the Neck. We now come
to a level sandy beach. Here some twelve or fourteen huge dogs
used to be chained across the bar, presenting a most terrific barrier
to further advance. They were so arranged as to complete the
cordon across the Neck. Barrels inverted formed their kennels, and
lamps were fixed on posts in the sand in front of their line. Two
sentries were posted in front of this formidable array, and two more
in the rear, so that to escape was virtually impossible ; still it was
often attempted. Once four absconders faced the rolling surf (three
English and a negro). The white swimmers were seized by ano less
vigilant guardian of the water than the rapacious shark. The
darkey got safe to land, but was taken by the outlying picket. The
dogs, by the way, were treated somewhat like soldiers, receiving
their regular rations of 1 lb. of bread and 1 lb. of meat each per day.


On the rise of the hill, some 500 yards from the Neck, were
formerly the barracks. A pathway conducts us from this point to
the beach. On the left is a very extraordinary natural curiosity,
the celebrated Tesselated Pavement, “a platform of silicious clay,
divided into slabs from 3 to 9 feet long, and from 4 inches to 6 feet
broad, or 18 inches square, having their margins frequently bordered
in relief, and with the interstices filled with a substance resembling
cement. These slabs are peculiar from their geometrical arrange-
ment and common bearing (E. by N.), ‘ due probably,’ says Ross in
bis ‘Voyage of the Erebus and Terror ,’ ‘to some re-arrange-
ment of the particles coining under the influence of electro-
magnetic forces while passing into a solid state.’” On
the right extends for three miles a very beautiful sandy
beach of semi-circular form, called Pirate's Cove, Proceeding along
this we pass the Neck, and leaving the sands, scramble over the
rocks on to sands again. Then, a few yards further on, we arrive
at the Blow Hole; the deep sound of the waves warning us of its
vicinity. It is not, in certain respects, as grand as its huge fellow
to the south of Port Arthur, but like Mercutio’s wound, “’twill
serve.” It is a perfect tunnel, opening inland some 120 yards ;
and as the rolling swell of the ocean rushes through this chasm the
sound is like the booming of distant ordnance. On the sea side it
appears only as a deep cave; the rocks around its mouth being deep
and precipitous.*
Retracing our steps to the beach, we turn back to a pathway
leading for nearly a mile, and arrive at a chasm some 40 feet by
200. From here we see the ocean as through a telescope, spread
out to our view under a most majestic arch of about 200 feet in
height and width. This is Tasman’s Arch, in itself more than
worth the whole trip from Hobart. Anthony Trollope speaks of it
as the grandest piece of rock-construction he ever saw, and there
are many who have travelled further afield than he ready to back
his opinion. The rolling wave thundering in this mighty vault,
and sending its spume almost to the top, produces an effect that is
not easily forgotten. But visit this chasm when a strong gale is
blowing ; when the mere act of standing upright requires an exertion
of strength ; when the great breakers, lashed into madness by keen
wind-whips, leap at the solid rocks until the foam from their
ravenous jaws mingles with the gusty rain-drops far above, till,
driven for the moment back, the baffled storm-hounds tear and
mumble at the loosened stones below, rolling them over and over in
the seething surge. Then, between a wrack-filled sky of grey and
snowy sea, the spray-dashed front of Tasman’s Arch is grand indeed.
And yet, in the midst of all this marine pother, mark you, those
essentially cool customers, the seagulls, appear perfectly at their
ease as they flap, dip, and glide about, seemingly in a state
of intense enjoyment, with their sealing-wax legs tucked up
under them, out of the way of all harm, or squabble noisily in the
water over some possible dainty dear to sea gull palate. However,
do not take our word for it, friends —visit Tasman’s Peninsula and
see for yourselves.
* The scene of John Rex’s escape. His Natural Life, Book 111., Chap. 26.


XLhc %nkc
HE lakes of Tasmania cover some 75,000 acres, those discharging
® southerly occupying by far the greater part of this area, and the
chief characteristic of the majority being their great altitude.
Thebest known of these magnificent sheets of water are Great Lake ,
Arthur's Lakes, Lakes Sorell and Crescent, Lake Echo, and Lake St.
Clair. With regard to the Great Lake, we have shown in a former
chapter how this may be reached from the northern end of the
island; but it also forms the terminal point of a new Lake Tour
which—thanks to the enterprise of a gentleman bearing a surname
inseparably associated with old Tasmanian coaching days (we refer
to Mr. Algernon H. Page)—can now be undertaken with a maximum
of comfort at a minimum of expense.
By proceeding as far as Parattah Junction in the evening train from
Hobart, we can enjoy a comfortable night’s rest at the excellent
hotel we have before referred to, and continue our journey leisurely
next day, or we can go right through by the early morning train to
Antill Ponds, where let us exclaim with Ghrononhotontologos in
the play—
“ Go, call a coach, and let a coach he called.
And let the man who calleth be the caller ;
And in his calling’ let him nothing call,
But coach ! coach ! coach ! Oh, for a coach, ye gods !”
when promptly at our elbow, and, indeed, without such burlesque
nonsense, we find the coveted vehicle. So far as present
arrangements are concerned we must time our visit, please
remember, for a Tuesday or a Friday, but as soon as the tour
becomes better known there will probably be a daily coach.
Satisfied, however, with concessions already made we climb into
our seat, and are borne onward through ever-changing
scenery for eighteen miles up the Western Tier, arriving
early in the afternoon at Interlaken House, situate near the junction
of Lakes Crescent and Sorell, and affording every accommodation that
we require. At Interlaken House boating, fishing, and shooting
parties can be organised, and fishing means, in this instance, some-
thing more than catching the native trout, for noble imported fish
have been placed in the lakes, and may be landed by the cunning
angler. Ducks and teal are also to be had, though not so plentiful
as in days of yore, when heavy bags were the rule rather than the
exception. The circumference of the two lakes is about fifty miles,
Lake Sorell being by far the larger of the two. It is considered by
many to be the most beautiful lake in Tasmania. “Numerous
mountain peaks surround it far and near. Islets dot the surface of
the lake, and tempting bays and sheltered coves invite the visitors to
put off in boats, and to explore the shores and islands. The diamond
beach, on the west, is strewn with quartz, carnelian, and agate


pebbles,” a perfect jeweller’s shop in the rough. “Thomas Francis
Meagher,” we are told, “known in the Irish insurrection of
1848 as ‘ Meagher of the Sword,’ lived on the shore of this gem of the
Tasmanian highlands during part of his exile.” From Lake Crescent
the j Clyde, River flows to the southward through Bothwell, and a
Water Trust, by creating a dam on the west side of the lake, not
only reserves a greater depth of water in both lakes, but causes the
flow of the river to be “uniform and perennial.”
At Interlaken arrangements may be made for conveyance to —and
accommodation at—Laycock’s Lake and Mills, Arthur’s Lakes
(twenty-five miles), and Great Lake (thirty miles). Arthur’s Lakes
(there are four of these) are perhaps the least interesting of the group.
Near them is a large morass, known as the Lagoon of Islands. Great
Lake is, however, a full reward for the journey. It lies no less than
3883 feet above the level of the sea, and has a circumference, taking
all its many indentations into account, of nearly 100 miles. The
River Shannon flows out) of this lake. A local enthusiast writes
as follows :—“England may vaunt her Windermere, Scotland chant
the beauties of Loch Lomond, Ireland proclaim the graces of
Killarney, but not with a truer or prouder tongue than Antipodean
Tasmania may boast the mountain glories and glowing waters of her
own sweet lakes, than which none is fairer or sweeter than the
majestic Clarence” —presumably an alternative title for Great Lake.
We must not omit to mention, by the way, that there is another mode
of reaching this interesting district, viz., via Green Ponds, a letter
or telegram to Mr. Reynolds, at that address, securing his convey-
ance, which will meet tourists at the Brighton station.
Lakes Echo and St. Clair are more difficult of access, and require
special arrangements, camping-out material, &c. St. Clair is the
source of the Derwent, and lies 113 miles from Hobart, between
Mounts Ida and Olympus. Of this lake the late J. J. Stutzer speaks
as follows :“A hundred years hence, when Australia has its tens
upon tens of millions of people, and summer tourists by thousands
wander over its recesses, Lake St. Clair will be as famous as
Killarney is now, and deserve it more. It is as grand as the Lake
of Lucerne, though on a smaller scale. Houses will then dot its
shores, and boats will glide gaily along from point to point.” So
mote it be. Great-great grandchildren make a note of this.


(Breen iponbs, Bothwell, &c.
A new branch from the Main Line railway at Brighton leads to
Green Ponds and Apsley, and will supersede an interesting coach
route, which followed a portion of the old Main-road from Hobart to
Launceston. Green Ponds, or Kempton, as the township is officially
called, is approached through the Bagdad Valley, from whence the
line takes a sweep to the westward to avoid Constitution Hill,
thereby missing a most magnificent view enjoyed on the coach
journey. Kempton has a good public library, churches, schools, &c.
Flagstaff Hill and Gorringe’s Sugar Loaf are eminences from whence
a comprehensive survey may be taken of the surrounding landscape,
and of numerous estates in the district. Four and a-half miles
beyond Kempton, at Melton Mowbray, the road branches off to
Bothwell, a township of some importance, where there is good
sport for anglers, the Rivers Clyde and Shannon being well stocked
with trout, perch, and eels. There is a fine cascade on the Clyde,
near the township, “ where the whole volume of water pours over a
perpendicular cliff 40 feet in height, with a roar that is heard to
a great distance. The deep gorge through which the turbulent
stream rushes onwards for about a mile is one continuous scene of
wild and romantic beauty.” Bothwell, which is one of the oldest
townships in the colony, possesses good hotel accommodation.
IbamUton anb tbe Qtm.
To reach this favourite fishing locality, the tourist proceeds by
train as far as the Macquarie Plains* station, and thence by
coach (leaving at 10.10 a.m. daily), reaching Hamilton at lunch
time. The village lies on the south bank of the Clyde, near its
junction with the Derwent.
* Some curious specimens of opalised wood are to be obtained in the neighbour-
hood of Macquarie Plains.
Note. —For exhaustive information concerning any and all of the
districts throughout the Island, the tourist is referred to “ Walch’s
Tasmanian Almanac,” or “ Red Booh,” published annually.


Coaches, Steamers, ©mnttmses, throughout
Tasmania.*
HOBART SUBURBS.
Battery Point.—Omnibuses leave Collins-st. every half-hour from 9.30 a.m. to 6
p.m., and Battery Point (angle of St. George’s Terrace) every half-hour from 9.45
a.m. to 6 p.m. Extra Sat. night ’bus; From Hobart, 9 and 10 p.m.; from
Battery Point, 9.15 and 10.15 p.m.
Bellerive (Kangaroo Point). Steam ferry boats “Success,” “Enterprise,”
“Result,” “Victory,” and “Silver Crown” leave Waterman’s Wharf, Hobart,
in summer half-hourly, in winter hourly, from 8.30 a.m. to 12.30 p.m., from 2
to 6 p.m., and again at 7.30 and 10 p.m., returning from Bellerive at similar
intervals. Fare, 6d. return. The twin ferry steamer “ Kangaroo” also plies
between the Franklin Wharf and Bellerive several times during the day, but is
mainly for carts, horses, &c. Passenger fare, Id.
Campbell and Argyle Sts.— Omnibuses leave Collins-st. at 8.30, 9, 9.30,10,10.30,
11, 11.30 a.m., 12, 12.30, 1, 1.30, 2.30, 3, 3.30, 4, 4.30. 5, 5.30, 6 p.m. Leave
angle of Letitia-st., 8.45, 9.15, 9.45, 10.15, 10.45, 11.15, 11.45 a.m., 12.15, 12.45,
1.15, 1.45, 2.15, 2.45, 3.15, 3.45, 4.15, 4.45, 5.15, 5.45, 6.15 p.m. Sat. nights:
Leave office, 9, 10 ; leave angle of Letitia-st., 9.15, 10.15. Fares, 3d. each way ;
12 tickets, 2s. 6d.
Lansdownb Crescent. —Omnibuses leave Elizabeth-st., next Bank V. D. Land,
from 9 a.m. to 6 p.m.
Macquarie -st. and Cascades. —Omnibuses leave Liverpod-st., opposite Miller’s, at
9, 10, 11 a.m., 12, 1,2, 3,4, 5,6, 7 p.m., and Cascades 9.30, 10.3 Q, 11.30 a.m.,
12.30, 1.55, 2.30, 3.30, 4.30, 5 30, 6.30 p.m. Sat. nights; From city, 7,9, 10.
From Cascades, 7.30, 9.30, 10.30. Fares, 3d. to and from Glen House ; 6d.
beyond.
New Town and Glbnorchy.— Omnibuses for New Town (3 miles) and O’Brien’s
Bridge (5 miles) run from Albion Hotel, Elizabeth-st., 9.30, 10, 11 a.m. 12, 1,2,
3, 3.15, 4*. 4.30, 5, 5.30 f 6, 19 p.m. Leave O’Brien’s Bridge 8.40, 10.20, 11 a.m.,
12, 1.40, 2.10, 2.45, 4.40, 6.45 p.m. Sat., 7 p.m. Leave New Town, 8.30, 9, IP,
10.45, 11.15 a.m., 12.15.2, 2.30,3,3,45,4.30, 4.45,5.15 p.m. Sat., 7 p.m. Sun-
day—Leave Hobart, 3,6, 9 p.m.; leave O’Brien’s Bridge, 4.45 p.m.; leave New
Town, 1.45, 2.5, 5 p.m.; leave Hobart to Cornelian Bay Cemetery, 2.30 p.m.,
returning 4.30 p.m. Fares, 3d. and 6d.
Sandy Bay.—Omnibuses leave Collins-st. every half-hour from 9 a.m. to 7 p.m.;
on Sun., 12.30 p.m., and every half hour from 2.30 p.m. to 5 p.m.; and
from Sandy Bay every half-hour from 9 a.m. to 7 p.m.; on Sun. at 10.30 a.m.,
and every half-hour from 2.30 to 5 p.m. Fares, 3d. and 6d.
LAUNCESTON SUBURBS.
The Launceston Omnibus and Tramway Co.’s omnibuses pass the G.P.O. daily,
leaving the Square at 8 a.m., and every hour in the morning for Mowbray, and
every hour in the afternoon.
To Newham.—Morning and evening only, 8 a.m. and 4 p.m.
To Sandhill. —Morning, leave Ynrk-street at 8.30 a.m., and afternoon at 1 and 2
p.m., and every hour starting at 3.10 p.m. from Wharf, and 6.1 p.m. in the
evening.
ToNbwstbad. —Leave York-street at 8.10 and 9.10 a.m., and in the afternoon at
1,2, 3.15, 4.15, 5.10, and 6.1 p.m.
The 8.10, 2, 5.10, and 6.1 p.m. omnibuses go to Distillery Creek. All regular
omnibuses return to Launceston starting place within the hour.
To Corra Linn. —Omnibuses for Corra Linn leave the Company’s Yards at 2.15
p.m. on Sunday afternoon.
* Several of the coach services mentioned in this itinerary will probably be run
more frequently during the summer season. Tne proprietors are always ready to
put on extra vehicles should there be a sufficient demand.
t New Town only.


COUNTRY AND COAST DISTRICTS.
Avoca (see Swansea to).
Beaconsfield.— Coach leaves post-office, Launceston, every Mon., Wed., and Fri. at
11 a.m. Leaves Beaconsfield every Tues., Thurs., and Sat. at 9 a.m. Steamers
“Centennial” and “Indignant” leave Launceston for Beaconsfield, George
Town, &c., daily (Sun. excepted) at 11 a.m.; leave George Town 9 a.m.,
Beaconsfield 10 a.m. daily (Sun. excepted). S.S. “ Corio ” also runs between
these places.
"Black Marsh (see Brighton Station to Bothwell).
Boobyalla.—S.S. “ Wakefield” between Launceston and Boobyalla weekly.
Bothwell (see Brighton Station to)
Bracknell. —Conveyance to and from Oaks Station to meet trains.
Branxiiolm (see Scottsdale to Ringarooma).
Bream Creek (see Sorbll).
Bridgewater (Derwent). —S.S. “ Monarch” calls here on her way to New Norfolk
to receive and land passengers.
Bridport. —S.S. “Dorset” between Launceston and Bridport (for Scottsdale and
Ringarooma ) every fifth day.
Brighton Station to Bothwell, via Green Ponds and Melton Mowbray.— Leaves
Brighton station on arrival of Hobart express train 9 a.m., Green Ponds 11,
Melton Mowbray 11.30 a.m., Black Marsh 12.20 p.m., arriving at Bothwell 2
p.m. Leaves Bothwell 3 p.m., Black Marsh 4.10, Melton Mowbray 4.45, Green
Ponds 5.30, arriving at Brighton Station at 7.45 p.m. to catch express train for
Hobart.
Brighton Station to Green Ponds. —Leaves Brighton station (on arrival of 5 p.m.
local train) 6.9, arriving at Green Ponds 8.30 p.m. Leaves Green Ponds
7.35 a.m., Constitution Hill 8, Lower Bagdad 8.45, Brighton Bridge 9.25,
arriving at Brighton Station 9.55, to catch local train arriving in Hobart
11.10 a.m.
Brothers’ Home (see Scottsdale to Ringarooma).
Brown’s River (Kingston), 10 miles.—Coach leaves Graham’s Hotel, Melbourne-st.,
Hobart, daily, 9 a.m. and 4 p.m. (Sunday 9.30 a.m.). Leaves Kingston Hotel,
Brown’s River, 9 a.m. and 4 p.m. (Sunday 4.30 p.m,).
Brhni Island (see Huon steamers).
Buckland (see Campania to Spring Bay, &c.)
Campania to Richmond.— Coaches leave Campania for Richmond daily at 9.30
a.m. and 7.30 p.m., returning from Richmond at 8 a.m. and 6 p.m.
Campania to Spring Bay and Swansea. —Coach to Swansea, via Buckland, Orford,
and Triabunna, leaves railway station, Campania, on Tues., Thur., and Sat.,
after arrival of express train from Hobart; arrives at Triabunna at 3.30p.m.;
leaves Triabunna for Swansea at 3.45, and arrives at Swansea at 8 p.m. Leaves
Swansea Mon., Wed., and Fri. at 8 a.m.; arrives at Triabunna at 12.50 p.m.;
leaves Triabunna for Campania at 1 p.m., and arrives at Campania 7 p.m., and
connects with express train for Hobart.
Carrick. —Conveyance to and from Bishopsbourne Station to meet trains.
Castra (see Ulverstone to)
Chudlkigh. —A brake arrives at Deloraine from Chudleigh at 10 a.m., and leaves
at 11.30 a.m
Circular Head (see Stanley).
Constitution Hill (see Brighton Station to Green Ponds).
Cressy. —Coach, leaving Cressy at 7.30 a.m. and 4.30 p.m., meets the morning and
evening trains at Longford.
D’Entrecasteaux Channel (see Huon steamers).
Don (see Formby to Emu Bay).
Dunally (see Tasman’s Peninsula steamer).
Eaglehawk Neck steamer to Taranna (see Tasman’s Peninsula), thence as
directed locally.
Emu Bay (see Formby to). —S.S. “ Herbert,” from Launceston every Tues. Hud*
dart, Parker and Co.’s steamships from Launceston every alternate week
leaving Emu Bay for Launceston every alternate week.


Emu Bay to Wtnyard. —Coach leaves Burnie (Emu Bay) at 5.15 p.m. for
Wynyard (Table Cape), leaving Wynyard ou return at 3.15 p.m. for Bumie.
Evandale and Lymington. —Coach leaves Sydney Hotel, Elizabeth-st., Launceston,
every Mon., Wed., and Sat. at 3 p.m. Leaves Lymington same days 7 a.m.,
and Evandale 8 a.m., arriving in Launceston 10 a.m.
Falmouth (see Maria Island, &c.)
Fingal to Mathinna.— Coach tor Mathinna leaves on Tues., Thur., and Sat. at 4
p.m., returning from Mathinna on Mon., Wed., and Fri. at 10 a.m.
Forcett (see Sorell).
Formby. —Huddart, Parker and Co.’s steamships leave Launceston for Formby
and Emu Bay every alternate week. Leave Emu Bay and Formby for
Launceston every alternate week.
Formby to Emu Bay. —Coaches leave Formby for the Don, Forth, Leven, Penguin,.
and Emu Bay on arrival of morning and afternoon trains from Launceston,
Leave Emu Bay for Formby at 9 a.m, and 6 p.m., calling at Penguin, Leven,
Forth, and Don, arriving in Formby at noon and 11.30 p.m.
Forth (see Formby to Emu Bay).
Franklin (see Huon steamers and coach).
Geeveston (see Huon coach). A conveyance also meets each steamer at Ship-
wright’s Point.
George’s Bay (St. Helen’s). —See Maria Island, &c., also St. Mary’s to St. Helen’s.
Gould’s Country and Wei.dborough. —Coach from St, Helen’s (George’s Bay)
Mon., Wed., Fri., Sat., 5 a.m.
Green Ponds (see Brighton Station to ; also Brighten Station to Bothwell).
Hadspen.—Conveyance to ajid from Bishopsbourne station to meet trains.
Hamilton (see Macquarie Plains to Ouse).
Hamilton-on-Forth (see Forth).
Huon River, Ports in D’Entrecasteaux Channel, &c.—The s.s. “Cygnet”
leaves Hobart every Wed. at 8.30 a.m. for Port Cygnet, via Taylor’s Bay and
all Channel Ports, returning every Thurs.; and on Sat. leaves Hobart for Port
Esperance and South Port, via Port Cygnet, at 8.30 a.m.; returning ou Mon.
S.S. “ Tamar” leaves Hobart on Tues. and Fri. at 8.30 a.m. for Channel Ports,
Port Cygnet, and Port Esperance, returning Wed. and Sat. To Huonville (for-
merly Victoria), Shipwright’s Point, Franklin, &c. —S.S. “ Huon” leaves Hobart
for Shipwright’s Point and intermediate ports on Mon. and Thur. at 8.30 a.m.,
returning Tues. and Fri. To Huonville , Franklin, Shipwright’s Point, and
Geeveston (40 miles).—Coach leaves British Hotel, Liverpool-st., Hobart, daily
at 9 a.m., arriving at Huonville 1.30, Franklin 2.30. Leaves Geeveston daily
7.30 a.m., Franklin 9.30, Huonville 10.30, arriving at Hobart 3.30 p.m.
Huonville (formerly Victoria). (See Huon River steamers and coach.)
Impression Bat (Premaydena). (See Tasman’s Peninsula.)
Kingston (see Brown’s River).
Koonya (Cascades). (See Tasman’s Peninsula.)
Antill Ponds Station to Interlaken House. — Junction of Lakes Sorell and
Crescent, 18 miles. —Coach leaves Antill Ponds Tues. and Fri. Visitors are
also conveyed from Interlaken to Lay cock's Lake and Mills, Arthur’s Lake
(25 miles), and Great Lake (30 miles).
To Great Lake direct.— In the summer months Reynolds’ coaches meet tourists (by
arrangement) at Brighton Railway Station , the road to Great Lake being
through Green Ponds, via Bothwell (address, Green Ponds).
Lbfroy. —Coach leaves post-office, Patterson-st., Launceston, daily 11 a.m. Leaves
Lefroy 8 a.m. More’s coach leaves Royal Hotel Tues., Thur., and Sat. gtlj
a.m.; another conveyance from Commercial Hotel. also daily ko
and from George Town.
Leven (see Formby to Emu Bay). , \ \
Lower Bagdad (see Brighton Station to Green Ponds).
, _ ~ , x . a \ '■
Lymington (see Evandale and Lymington).
Macquarie Harbour.— S.S. “ Koonya” leaves Hobart every Wed. at 8 a.m., return-
ing to Hobart ou Sat. S.S. “Devon” leaves Launceston for same port every
ten days.


Macquarie Plains to Ouse. —Coach leaves Macquarie Plains Railway Station
daily 10.10 a.m. for Hamilton and the Ouse, arrives at Ouse 2 p.m. Leaves
Ouse daily 9 a.m., and arrives at Macquarie Plains Station at 12.40 p.m., con-
necting with Derwent Valley Line.
Maria Island, Bicheno, Falmouth, George's Bay, Launceston, and Return. —
S.S. “ Warrentinna” fortnightly.
Maria Island and East Coast Ports. —S.S. “Myall” leaves Hobart every Tues. at
4 p.m. for Maria Island, Spring Bay, and Swansea. Leaves Swansea Fri. for
Hobart, calling at Spring Bay and Maria Island.
Matiiinna (see Fingal to)
Melton Mowbray (see Brighton Station to Bothwell).
Moorina (see Scottsdale to Moorina and St. Helen’s to Moorina).
New Norfolk. — Steamer “ Monarch” leaves Hobart (Brooke-st. Pier), every Mon.,
Tues., Thurs., Fri. at 3 p.m., Sat. at 2 p.m.—Leaves New Norfolk daily (Sun.
and Thurs. excepted) at 8 a.m.
Norfolk Bay (Taranna). (See Tasman’s Peninsula.)
Old Beach (Derwent).— S.S. “ Monarch ” calls here on her way to New Norfolk
to receive and land passengers.
Orford (see Campania to Spring Bay, &c.).
Ouse (see Macquarie Plains to).
Oyster Cove and Little Oyster Cove (see Huon steamers).
Port Arthur (now Carnarvon). —Steamer to Taranna (see Tasman’s Peninsula),
thence by conveyance 6 miles.
Port Cygnet (see Huon River steamers).
Port Espbrancs (see Huon River steamers).
Penguin (see Formby to Emu Bay).
Peppermint Bay (Woodbridgb). (See Huon steamers.)
Perth. —Coach leaves Sydney Hotel, Elizabeth-st., Launceston, every day (except
Wed.) at 3 p.m.
Richmond (see Campania to). —Conveyance also leaves British Hotel, Hobart, daily
at 3.45 p.m., and Richmond at 8 a.m.
Ringarooma (see Scottsdale to ; also Bridport).
Sandfly and Longlby. —Coach leaves the Man-at-the-Wheel Hotel, Liverpool-st.,
Hobart, every day at 4 p.m., and leaves Sandfly 7.30 a.m., Longley at 9 a.m.;
arrives in the City at 10 a.m., winter months Tues., Thurs., and Sat.
Saltwater River (see Tasman’s Peninsula).
Scottsdale to Ringarooma. —Coaches leave Scottsdale daily on arrival of morning
train from Launceston for Branxholm, Brothers' Home, Moorina and Ringa-
rooma.
Sheffield. —Brake for Sheffield meets every train at Railton.
Shipwright’s Point (see Huon steamers and coach).
Sorkll. —Coach leaves Bellerive (near Hobart) daily (Sundays excepted) 9 a.m.,
4.30 p.m., arriving at Sored 11 a.m. and 7 p.m.; leaves Sorell 8 a.m. and 3p.m.,
except in winter, when it leaves at 2 p.m., arriving at Bellerive 11 a.m. and
4.30 p.m.; on Sun. leaves Bellerive 10 a.m. and Sorell 3 p.m. Another
conveyance also leaves Bellerive daily (Sun. excepted) 4.30 p.m. and
Sorell 8 a.m. Conveyance leaves Tattersall’s Hotel, Hobart, alternate Wed.,
8 a.m., to attend stock sales. Conveyances to Forcetf on arrival at Sorell of
coaches from Hobart. Conveyance to Bream Creek Mon., Wed., and Sat,
Southport (see Huon steamers).
Spring Bay (Triabcnna). (See Maria Island, Ac.; also coach from Campania (q.v).
Stanley (Circular. Head). (See Wynyard to).
St. JjjiLEN’s Bay). (See St. Mary’s to ; also Maria Island, &c.).
St. Helen's aux> Moorina. —Coach leaves St. Helen’s for Moorina on Mon., Wed.,
and Fri., returning from Moorina on Tues., Thurs., and Sat.
St. Mary’s to St. Helen’s.— From Oct. 1 to March 31.—Coach leaves St. Helen’s
bn Mon., Wed., and Fri. at 4.45 a.m., and St. Mary’s at 9 a.m. on the return


trip. On Tues., Thurs., and Sat. leaves St. Helen’s at 3 a.m., and St. Mary’s
at 4 p.m. on the return trip. From April 1 to Sept. 30, leaves St. Mary’s for
St. Helen’s on Mon., Wed., and Fri. at 9 a.m., and Tues., Thurs., and Sat.
at 2 p.m.; leaves St. Helen’s for St. Mary’s on Mon., Wed,, and Fri. at
8.45 a.m., and on Tues., Thurs., and Sat. at 10 a.m.
Strahan (see Macquarie Harbour).
Straits Islands.—S.S. “Warrentinna” monthly from Hobart, s.s. “Linda” from
Launceston.
Swansea (see Maria Island, &c.; also coach from Campania (q. v.)
Swansea to Avoca.—Mail conveyance leaves Swansea for Avoca Tues., Thurs.,
Sat. 7.30 a.m., arriving: at Avoca 3,30 p.m. Leaves Avoca Mon., Wed., Fri.
12,30 p.m.; arrives at Swansea 8.30 p.m.
Table Cape (see Wynyard).
Tasman’s Peninsula.—S.S. “ Taranna”leaves Hobart for Tasman’s Peninsula and
Dunally every Mon, and Thurs. at 8.30. Leaves Tasman’s Peninsula (Taranna)
for Hobart every Tues. and Fri. 10 a.m. Calls at Dunally, Saltwater River,
Impression Bay, Koonya, and Taranna.
Taylor’s Bay (see Huon steamers).
Three Hut Point (Gordon). (See Huon steamers).
Triabunna (see Spring Bay).
Trial Bay.—Steamers “Meteor” and “Minx” run between Macquarie Harbour
end Trial Bay.
Ulverstonb (see Leven).
(Jlverstonb to Castra.—Coach leaves Ulverstone for Castra at 3 p.m. daily, and
Castra for Ulverstone at 8 a.m.
Wedoe Bay (Nubeena). —Steamer to Taranna (see Tasman’s Peninsula), thence as
directed locally.
Wbstbury.— Coach leaves Central Hotel, Launceston, every Tues. and Fri. at
noon. Leaves Westbury same days at 7.30 a.m., arriving at Launceston 10.20
a.m.
Wynyard (Table Cape). (See Emu Bay to) —S.S. “ Cambria” also leaves Launceston
for this and intermediate ports every Friday.
Wynyard to Stanley (Circular Head). —Conveyance leaves Wynyard at 5 a.m. for
Stanley, and leaves Stanley at 7 a.m. for Wynyard daily (Sundays excepted).
S.S. “ Herbert” from Launceston every Tuesday.
CAB FARES, HOBART.
By Distance. s. d.
For any distance not exceeding 1 mile .. .. ... 10
For every additional half-mile, not exceeding five miles 0 6
Return fare, if the same party (and not having detained the cab more than
fifteen minutes), to be half the above. No cab can be compelled to go
further than five miles from the stand.
By Time.
For any time within 30 min. „ .._ 2 0
Above 30 min. and not exceeding 45 min 3 0
Above 45 min. and not exceeding 1 hour .. ._. 3 6
Above 1 hour and not exceeding 1 hour and 20 min. .. 4 6
Above 1 hour and 20 min. and not exceeding 1 hour and 40 min. .. .. 5 6
Above 1 hour and 40 min. and not exceeding 2 hours 6 6
Above 2 hours and not exceeding 2 hours and 20 min 7 0
Above 2 hours and 20 min. and not exceeding 2 hours and 40 min 7 6
Above 2 hours and 40 min. and not exceeding 3 hours 9 0
Above 3 hours and not exceeding 3 hours and 20 min _ ~ .. 9 6
Above 3 hours and 20 min. and not exceeding 3 hours and 40 min 10 6
Above 3 hours and 40 min. and not exceeding 4 hours 11 0
And for any further time after at the rate of 6d. for every 20 min.
One-half more than the above fares between 10 p.m. and 6 a.m. Card of fares
to be kept suspended inside cab. Time or distance at option of hirer, but he must
decide at time of hiring, or else the fare will be calculated by distance.


CAB FARES, LAUNCESTON.
By Distance. s. d.
Under half-a-mile, for one passenger 06
Under half-a-mile, for two or more passengers 10
Above half-a-mile, and not exceeding a mile, for the whole cab .. ..10
For every additional half-mile for the whole cab, not exceeding five miles .. 0 6
Return fare, if the same party land not having detained the cab more than
fifteen minutes), to be half the above.
By Time.
Not exceeding half an hour 16
Exceeding half an hour, but not exceeding three-quarters of an hour .. 2 3
Above three-quarters of an hour, but not exceeding one hour 3 0
For every fractional part of every subsequent hour in the same proportion..
Every package carried outside the cab 03
One-half more of the above fares being payable for any period between the hours
of ten o’clock at night and six in the morning. The hirer of any cab may elect to
pay the fare by time or distance, but must do so at the time of hiring, or else the
fare will be calculated by distance. Fares beyond the said five miles to be in the
same proportion as within the distance unless otherwise agreed upon ; but no
driver can be compelled to go beyond the said five miles unless he has agreed to do
so. No return fee payable if the cab remains empty; but if the hirer returns in
the cab half-fare only to be paid.
WATERMEN’S FARES, HOBART. s. d.
To or from a vessel in harbour, each person 10
To a vessel in harbour, and back again .. ..16
To a vessel in harbour, and back again
Luggage—Under 50 lbs., free ;50 lbs. and under 100 lbs., fare for one adult; for
every additional 50 lbs., half such tare. If a vessel is lying in the stream unmoored,
half as much again. The limits of the harbour shall be a line drawn from Mac-
quarie Point to Sandy Bay Point, intersected by a line bringing the two flagataffs on
Battery Point in one. No waterman to be compelled to take his boat higher up the
river than five miles, or lower than Sandy Bay Point, and the same distance on the
side of the river opposite to Sandy Bay Point.
WATERMEN’S FARES, LAUNCESTON.
From the Queen’s Wharf, to or from a vessel within the Bar, each .. .08
To or from a vessel below the Bar, and not beyond the Cattle Wharf.. .. 10
To or below the Cattle Wharf, and not beyond the One-Mile Beacon .. ..26
To or below the One-Mile Beacon, and not beyond the Tea Tree .. ..3 0
To or below the Tea Tree, and not beyond Stephenson’s Bend ~ .. 5 0
TTalf Fares for returning. No licensed boat to be compelled to go beyond
Stephenson’s Bend, except by special agreement.
By Time.— For the first hour, for each person, 25.; for every additional half-hour,
half that rate.
Luggage.—Less than 50 lbs., free; 50lbs. and not exceeding 100 lbs., one-half
passenger rate. For each 100 lbs., the fare for one person.
Detention, if beyond 15 min., to be paid at the rate of Is. 6d. per hour.
Electric tTclesrapb*
Office hours from 8.30 a.m. to 8 p.m. Hobart and Launceston offices, from 8.30
a.m. till midnight. Open on Sundays from 8.30 a.m. to 9.30 a.m., and from 8.30
p.m. to 1-0 p.m. Submarine cable open on Sundays from 8,30 to 9.30a.m, and 9to
10 p.m.
Railway Lines of Telegraph. —Offices for the receipt and despatch of tele-
grams afall the stations on the Government Lines of Railway and the Tasmanian
Main Line Railway. Messages are received at any Government station to any
station on the Tasmanian Main Line Railway and vice versa.
Scale of Charges.
Inter-Tasmanian Telegrams—Ten words and under, Is.; every additional word.
Id. Minimum charge after usual hours, Is. 6d. Rates for messages between


central and suburban offices in Hobart and Launceston, 6d. for first ten words ;
Id. each additional word. Press messages for publication, 100 words and under,
Is. 6d.; each additional fifty, 6d.
'lntercolonial.— Ten words or under, from Tasmania to Victoria, 25.; each addi-
tional word, 2d. From Tasmania to New South Wales, 2s. 6d.; each additional
word, 3d. From Tasmania to South Australia, 35.; each additional word, 3d,
From Tasmania to Queensland or Western Australia, 45.; each additional word. 4d.
Address and signature must not exceed ten words.
To New Zealand. —Ten words or under, 125.; each additional word, Is. 2d,
Address and signature charged for at per word.
To London.— 9s. lid. each word. Address and signature charged for. Words
containing more than ten letters count two words.
Reuter’s Telegraph Company. —Agents, Hobart, Nickoils & Simonds, Elizabeth,
street; Launceston, James Steer, Brisbane-street.
Urgent Messages.
Urgent telegrams, upon which double rates are paid, are received for trans-
mission within the colony only, and take precedence of all other business both in
transmission and delivery. Delayed telegrams are charged half rate, with postage
added, and are posted from the nearest telegraph office within the colony to their
destination the evening of the day on which they are handed in, for delivery the
following morning.
Telephone Exchange, Hobart.
Telephone Exchange, Launceston.
Telephone Exchange, New Norfolk. —Connected with Hobart Exchange.
Non-Subscribers admitted to the Exchanges for the purpose of holding com-
munication with any subscriber on payment of Is. for first 10 min., and 6d, for
each additional 5 min., or fraction thereof.
post ©trice*
POSTAL RATES,
Town Letters, for every half-ounce or fraction of half-ounce
Suburban Letters, ditto ~ „ 0 1
Inland Letters, ditto ~ ~02
Ship Letters for the Australian colonies, New Zealand, or Fiji, ditto .. ~0 2
Book Packets. — lnland or to any of the Australian colonies and New Zea-
land, for every 4 ozs. or under ~ .. „ 0 1
Inland Packets and Ship Packets for the Australian colonies and New Zea-
land, for every 2 ozs. or under ~0 1
Parcel Post. —To the Australian colonies, New Zealand, and Fiji, not exceed-
ing 1 lb., fid. For each additional pound or fraction thereof, fid. (Exclu-
sive of carriage to be added in each case.)
Newspapers—
1. Newspapers printed and posted in the colony for delivery at any place
within the colony beyond the boundaries of the city or town at
which they may be published, and posted within seven days from the
date of publication * Free
2. Newspapers printed and posted in the colony for transmission to the
Australian colonies and to New Zealand, if posted within seven days
from the date of publication Free
3. Newspapers printed and posted in the colony after seven days from
the date of publication each 0 OJ
4. Newspapers posted to any place other than Tasmania, the Australian
colonies, or New Zealand ~ each 0 0§


HMnts for XEoudsts.
Hotels and Boarding Houses.— Special attention is called to the fact that,
in addition to the information conveyed in the advertisements at the end of this
hook, Messrs. Huddart, Parker and Co. have opened a “Register of Hotels and
Private Boarding Establishments in Hobart and Southern Tasmania,” which may
he consulted at the head office, 525 Collins-street, Melbourne, and at the company’s
branches and agencies In the various colonies.
. Engage your berth early both going and returning. The plans are always
opened several days in advance.
During, the height of the season it is advisable to write or telegraph ahead to
hotels, &c., to secure accommodation.
The same advice applies to seats in coaches, more especially box-seats. Address
your letter or telegram to driver of coach from to , naming day
and hour of proposed arrival at starting point and how far proceeding by coach.
Do not overburden yourself with luggage, particularly in coach trips, where the
“ free allowance” is frequently only 14 lbs. There are excellent shops and stores
throughout Tasmania, where sudden requirements can be met at moderate prices.
Should you prefer carrying cash to a draft or circular-letter, and have an
objection to burdening yourself with gold, you can generally rely upon obtaining
Tasmanian notes at one or other of the Melbourne banks, no charge being made
for the accommodation.
For rough walking excursions, and visiting such places as the Chudleigh Caves,
be sure to have with you a suit of old clothes. A flask of wine or spirits is a
stand-by in case of over-fatigue, or the rarer possibility of an accident, and a
pocket compass is also a handy little companion.
When the way to your destination lies through private property, ask the owner’s
permission to proceed, and be careful to avoid taking dogs with you where the land
is enclosed.
jfisbing, Sbootina, &c.
Seasons. —Wild duck, teal, widgeon, plover, emu, black swan, ground dove, and
Cape Barren goose shooting begins 11th January, ends 31st July. Pigeon shooting
begins 11th February, ends 31st July. Quail shooting begins Ist May, ends 30th
July. Wattle-bird shooting begins 24th May, ends 31st July. Native white
magpies and nearly all native birds must not be killed nor eggs destroyed ; and
they must not be bought nor sold under a penalty of twenty shillings. Kangaroo
hunting begins 31st January, ends 31st July. English perch (Hobart
reservoir) begins Ist' January, ends 31st August. Salmon and trout fishing, with
rod and line only, begins Ist August, ends SOth April. The Governor-in-Council
may appoint close season for salmon and trout other than the days already fixed.
Salmon net fishing begins 2nd September, ends 28th February. Flounders must
not be taken of a size less than 9 inches in length. The fresh-water cucumber
mullet and silver bream must not be taken with any kind of net or other engine,
instrument, or device, excepting rod and line.
Regulations restricting netting exist in relation to the following rivers :
Derwent.—Netting entirely prohibited above a line extending from the'
Semaphore, Battery Point, to the Bluff at Bellerive. “ Graball” nets may be used
up to this line between sunrise and sunset only. “Seine” nets and any other
nets can be used at any time up to a line extending from the mouth of a creek-
south of One-Tree Point on west bank of river to Droughty Point on the east bank.
Huon or Tributaries.—Netting prohibited above an imaginary line from southern
side of Castle Forbes Bay to a point due east on the other shore. North Esk,
South Esk, Scamander. —Netting strictly prohibited. Tamar.—Netting entirely
prohibited from the Cattle Wharf at Launceston upwards, shrimping nets alone
excepted.
Pishing Licenses.— Licenses to fish with rod and line for salmon and trout may
be obtained from W. Cahill and O. Blookey, New Norfolk; Thomas Perkins,
Bothwell; P. L. Bowden, Westbury; J. T. Weaver, Hobart; C. W. Rocher, Town
Clerk, Launceston; J. Fitz Gerald, Deloraine; at the Salmon Ponds; H. S.
Hutchinson, Longford; Jas. Higgins, Ouse; J. T. Cooley, Bridgewater; W. J,
Daily, Huonyjlle, Huon; H. Dyne, Fingal; J. W. Palmer, Campbell Town;


HEIGHTS ABOVE SEA-LEVEL OF STATIONS ON TASMANIAN MAIN
LINE RAILWAY.
Feet.
Feet.
Hobart
.. 21
Ross
Glbnorciiy ..
.. 45
Campbell Town
.. 655
Bridgewater Junction
.. 18
Conara Junction ..
.. 690
Brighton .. ;;
.. 101
Epping Forest
.. 660
Campania
.. 242
Evandalb
.. 509
Jerusalem
.. 680
Evan dale Junction
.. 539
RlIYND ASTON ..
.. 1363
St. Leonards
.. 28
Parattah
.. 1413
Launceston ,.
.. 15
Antill Ponds
.. 924
A. Johnston, St. Helen's; J. Warburton, Geeveston; R. J. Harris, Kingston;
W. Price, Ross; J. L. B. Tabart, Oatlands; C. Krushka, Ringarooma ; C. e!
Beddome, Eastbourne ; and of the Secretary of the Fisheries Board, Mr. P. S.
Seager, Hobart, for 10s. each for the season, ss. for one month, and 2s. 6d. for one
week. Permission to fish for English perch in the Old Storage Reservoir, near
Hobart, may be obtained from Mr. W. H. Smith, Town Clerk, Hobart, the tickets
(price 55.) entitling the holder to use one rod and line on four occasions.
IRaces, IReaattas, &c.
Racks.—Bangor, March or April; Beaconsfield, January ; Bishopsbourne, races
generally held in March; Bracknell, May; Branxholm, 17th March or 24th May;
Brighton, New Year’s Day ; Burnie, March ; Carrick Racing Club, Boxing Day, and
Autumn Meeting probably Queen’s Birthday ; Colebrook Racing Club (Jerusalem),
November; Cressy, January; Deloraine Turf Club, Easter Monday; Dunally,
March or April; Evandale, April or May; Fingal, generally April; Forcett, Decem-
ber ; George’s Bay, Easter Monday ; Hobart Trotting and Racing Club, races about
every six weeks; Latrobe Turf Club, 17th March; Midland Jockey Club (Oatlands),
December and March; Mount Biscboff, Boxing Day ; Moorina Racing Club, Decem-
ber ; New Norfolk, November; Ringarooma Pacing Club, November and April;
Sorell, March; Stanley Turf Club, March; Table Cape Racing Club, March ; Tas-
manian Racing Club (Hobart), Spring, November; Summer, February; Autumn,
date not fixed ; Tasmanian Turf Club (Launceston), Spring, October; Summer,
February; Autumn, April; Turner’s Marsh Racing Club, January; Westbury Turf
Club, New Year’s Day.
Regattas.—Hobart, January; Huon (Shipwrights’ Point), January; Launceston,
Tamar Regatta. February; West Tamar Regatta, November; Longford, March;
Mersey (Formby); Ulverstone.
Agricultural Shows. Midland Agricultural Association, Campbell Town
September; Northern Agricultural Society, Longford, October; Western Agri-
cultural Association, Westbury, November.
Ploughing Matches.—Bishopsbourne, Cressy, Longford.
SCOTTSDALE, TASMANIA.
Lord’s Commercial and Family Hotel,
The above Hotel offers First-class Accommodation for Visitors
from the adjoining Colonies. First-class Table. Kind attention
and every facility offered to Tourists.
BEST OF WINES AfiD SPIRITS KEPT If< STOCK,
JOHN M. LORD, Proprietor.


fasmanian Wool Browers igencg 10. ltd.,
LAITUCESTO ZCsT.
Directors.
CHARLES B. GRUBB, Strathroy, Chairman.
Hon. JAS. GIBSON, Belle Yne. I W. H. D. ARCHER, Briekendon.
CHARLES YOUL, Symmons Plains. I DANIEL ARCHER, Longford Hall.
H. R. FALKINER, Wickford,
®ool anb -probiia brokers,
AUCTIONEERS,
COMMISSION m SHIPPING AGENTS.
Managing Agents for—
THE TASMANIAN STUD SHEEP BREEDERS.
Agents at Launceston for—
LUND’S LINE OF STEAMSHIPS i TO AND FROM
ANGLO AUSTRALASIAN Do i LONDON
HUDDART, PARKER & CO.’S Do. Do. ... > intercolonial
AUSTRALASIAN UNITED S.N. Co.’s Do. Do. 3 LINES
LOCH LINE OF CLIPPER PACKETS
T. B. WALKER’S Do. Do. ... I TO AND FR OM
GIBBS, BRIGHT & Co.’s Do. LONDON
Weekly Sales of Wool, Skins, and Hides.
Weekly and Bi-weekly Sales of Fat and Store Stock throughout the country.
PERIODICAL PROPERTY SALES
PROPERTIES reported on, or Valued; and Purchases negotiated for
Constituents out of the Colony.
LONDON AGENTS—
Messrs. Redfern, Alexander and Company.
Messrs. Dalgety and Company Limited.
New Zealand Loan and Mercantile Agency Co. Ltd.
Messrs. John Terry and Company.
ALEX. T. HARVEY, Manager.


PRIVATE BOARDING ESTABLISHMENT
PRESSLAND HOUSE AND COTTAGES,
MELVILLE STREET, HOBART, TASMANIA,
SUITES OF APARTMENTS, EACH CONTAINING A PIANO.
TABLE D’HOTE.
TERMS—Per Day or WeeJe, according to Arrangement,
Public Drawing-room, and every convenience appertaining to
Eirst-class Establishment.
fin AmwmA&T T-mmmm court.
Recently laid out for the convenience and amusement of Visitors.
Pressland House commands a splendid view of the River, and
is within five minutes’ walk of the Railway Station, Wharves,
and centre of the Town.
Mrs. CLEMENTS, Proprietress.
HEATHORN’S HOTEL
Near the Railway Terminus.
This Family, Tourist, and Commercial Hotel is situated close
to the Railway Station, Domain, Theatre, and Sea Water Baths.
suites otv&ooms with sepattate attendance it Bequi^ed.
WELL LAID:OUT GARDEN AND BOWLING GREEN,
For exclusive use of Visitors.
COMMERCIAL GENTLEMEN AS ARRANGED.
HOT AND COLD BATHS, &c,
T. HEATHORN, Proprietor,


OUEEIB’S
Jfmnilg an& Connnercial Ijotel,
MURRAY STREET,
OHOBAKT.O
This Hotel is the most popular in Tasmania, and contains the
largest amount of accommodation, with
Suites of tyooms for Private Families & Splendid Public tyooms.
THE BATH ACCOMMODATION
Is unequalled in Tasmania; also first-class BILLIARD ROOM,
with attentive Marker.
The above Hotel is the most centrally situated in the City, with
BEST ATTENDANCE AND MODERATE CHARGES.
EDWARD CURRIE,
Proprietor.
N.B.—Commercial Gentlemen will find it to their advantage
to use this House, where first-class sample rooms are provided.


“WBSTELLA,”
ELIZABETH STREET, HOBART,
PRIVATE FAMILY HOTEL
BOARDING ESTABLISHMENT.
This Mansion commands one of the finest positions in the City, and is within
easy access of Government House, the Public Buildings, and Places of
Amusement, and embraces extensive views of the beautiful surrounding scenery
of Mount Wellington and the River Derwent.
The rooms are large, lofty, and elegantly furnished, including Handsome Puh‘
lie Drawing Room, Dining Hall, Smoking Room, and Billiard Room, with one
of Alcock’s Best Tables.
Private Suites for Families. Large Flower and Fruit Garden, Fernery and
Tennis Lawn.
All Letters and Telegrams promptly attended to.
TERMS£2 2s. per week, or Bs. per day.
During Summer Season £3 3s. per week, or 10s. 6d. per day.
Every attention paid to Invalids.
The Cuisine is under the Best Professional Management.
GOOD STABLING.
HOT, COLD, AND SHOWER BATHS.
Telephone attached, No. 99.
Mrs. W. WESTGARTH, Proprietress.


National Bank of Tasmatiia Limited.
Capital .... ,£150,000,
Paid-up ■ • £lOO,OOO. Reserve Fund - £lB,OOO.
(with special power to increase.)
Head Office:
ST. JOHN STREET, LAUNCESTON.
Directors:
RICHARD GREEN, Chairman.
JOHN GUNN. ( ROBERT GARDNER.
Chief Manager : GEORGE HORNE.
Accountant: ARTHUR EVANS.
Brandies:
Waratah (Mt. Bisokoff) • - Manager : JAMES SEAGRAVE.
Beacor\sfield - - - Manager : HUTCHESON INGLEDEN,
Mooriria (florth-East Coast) - - Manager :E. E. BOMFORD
Ririgarooma .... Manager: J. H. HEATHORNE
Sheffield .... Manager; C. C. SPOTSWOOD,
Wynyard (Table Cape) - - - Manager : R. H. Y. RUDGE.
Stanley (Circular Head) - - Manager :C. A. STACKHOUSE
Derby (Brothers’ Home) - - - Manager ; R. CASBOULT.
Strahan (Macquarie Harbour)- - Manager; B. C. BASSTIAN,
St. Mary’s (Fiqgal District) - - Manager: H. J. HARRISON.
Zeeman (Silverflelds) .... Manager :R. HOGARTH.
Receives Deposits, issues Notes and Drafts, Discounts Bills, makes
Advances on Approved Securities, and Transacts every other de>
scription of Banking Business.
AGENTS:
' Melbourne
Sydney.
Commercial Bank of Australia Limited Adelaide.
Brisbaqe.
„ Londoq.
Colonial Bank of New Zealand - - . Jtew Zealand.


By Appointment to His Excellency The Governor,
HATTON & LAWS,
SlEljolfsale an& Retail Druggists,
IMPORTERS AND AGENTS,
BRISBANE STREET, LAUNCESTON.
Branch Establishments at—
LATROBE, SHEFFIELD, and BROTHERS’ HOME.
Our Assistants being all qualified Dispensers, and our Wholesale
and Retail Business extensive, the public can depend upon the
quality of the Drugs used, and the accuracy of our Dispensing.
F. Holmes, ) D • . „
Thos. Carr, [ Pro P netorSl
HENRY LAW & CO.,
FINANCIERS,
Jfletal anb Joining Agents,
ARBITRATORS, &0.,
BARCLAY’S
BUILDINGS,
LAUITCESTOIT.


ALFRED HARRAP & SON,
WHARF, LAUNCESTON,
Custom pouse, Sjjip, Insurance, Jforfoarbing
anb Commission Agents.
Goods cleared through Customs and forwarded to any part of
Tasmania.
Shipping Clerk attends the arrival of all Intercolonial Steamers.
Agents s.s. Centennial, which leaves Launceston for Beacons-
field, George Town, and all parts of the Tamar, every Tuesday,
Thursday, and Saturday, at 11 a,m.; leaving George Towm on the
return every Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, at 9 a.m.
The “CENTENNIAL”
Makes an Excursion to Rosevear's every Wednesday Afternoon,
leaving the Wharf at 2.30 p.m., returning to Town at 6 p.m.
Also Moonlight Excursions on the Tamar ; see Advertisements in
Daily Papers.
WALTER S. BELL & CO.,
WHARF FRONTAGE, LAUNCESTON,
Ship, Commission, Custom Ibouse, insurance
anb iforwarbina Events,
BARK AND PRODUCE MERCHANTS, <&c.
Agents for —
The South British Fire and Marine Insurance Co. of N.Z.
Eastern and Australian Steam Shipping Co.
Also Agents for the following Fortvarding Firms—
G. W. Wheatley & Co. (Globe Parcels Express). ■)
Sewell & Crowther. Davies, Turner & Co. v Of London.
W. R. Sutton & Co. j
City Carrying Co. Wright HeatoH" & Co. ... Of Sydney.
Tate’s Parcels Express. Broadbent Bros. & Co. )
W. McCulloch & Co, Permewan, Wright & Co. j e^ourne *
Goods or Parcels received or forwarded to or frorq any part of the World.
Passengers’ Baggage cleared through the Customs
ar)d Stored if required.


LAUNCESTON
CHURCH GRAMMAR SCHOOL
H)eab
Rev. A. H. CHAMPION, M.A.,
Exhibitioner and Prizeman of Trinity College, Cambridge,
<Scconb piaster:
0. W. ROCK, 8.A., Scholar of Glare College, Cambridge.
plaster:
D. J. THOMAS, Melbourne University.
grill instructor — Sergeant-Major WELSH.
The Honours gained 1887-9 include—
Three Tasmanian Scholarships, One Gilchrist Scholarship,
Four Minor Scholarships.
The Boardinghouse is under the direct supervision of Mrs. Champion.
D3ESMTA.Ii.
Mr. ALFRED J. HALL
DENTAL SURGEON,
May be Consulted daily at his Surgery,
ST. JOHN STREET, LAUNCESTON,
T -A. S -A- I -A-.
Mr. Hall’s Assistant visits the N. W. Coast
and other districts .


TASMANIAN LIVERY STABLES,
QUADRANT. LAUNCESTON.
JOHN RANKIN
Has cm Hire, Horses and Carriages for Wedding Parties, and all
kinds of Buggies, Tilburys, Broughams, Four-in-hand Break, the
Best in the city.
■jpattonistb hg H)ts Pagnl highness tht Ipukc .of (Ehinhurflh.
Gentlemen using his Stables may rely upon receiving every
attention, and the best turn-out that can be provided. Carriages
and Horses at a moment’s notice. Stabling for Thirty Horses.
Good accommodation for Horses at Livery.
Visitors wishing to enjoy the delightful scenery and beautiful
drives round about Launceston cannot do better than patronise the
above Stables.
Irving & MacEachern,
Mboleeale Grocers,
WINE & SPIRIT MERCHANTS,
BRISBANE STREET,
Launceston, Tasmania.
By Appointment to His Excellency the Governor.
M. ALLEN,
IMPORT Ell OF
latches, tfewellerg, Hate and Optical Seeds,
BRISBANE STREET, LAUNCESTON.
Jewellery Manufactured to Order and Watches Repaired
by Skilled Workmen,


THE RIVER DON TRADING COMPANY
LIMITED.
FORMBY, TASMANIA,
Import anb (Srport glewljants.
Orders for Tasmanian Produce executed and despatched to all
parts of the Colonies. The Red-skin Potatoes a Specialty.
AGENTS FOR-
The P. and 0. S. N. Company Limited.
The Aust. V. S. N. Company Limited.
The Adelaide S. S. Company Limited.
Huddart, Parker and Co, Limited,
The Colonial Insurance Company of New Zealand (Marine).
The Mutual Insurance Company of Tasmania (Fire).
SYDNEY AGENTS:
John Henry & Co., 257 Sussex Street.
MELBOURNE AGENT
John Hatch, Elizabeth Street.
BRISBANE HOTEL,
LAUNCESTON, TASMANIA.
AUGUSTUS DELEUSB, FfOprietor.
This well-known Hotel has been rebuilt and refurnished. Ladies
Drawing Rooms, Private Suites of Apartments, affording Visitors
and Travellers the comforts of a
FIRST-CLASS HOTEL.
Cleanliness ar\d Civility, combined with Moderate Charges, are tRe rule
of the House.
French and Italian Spoken—Cuisine Franchise.
Specialties:
WINES, FRENCH LIQUEURS, & HAVANNAH CIGARS.
BRISBANE STREET, LAUNCESTON, TASMANIA.
Near the Post and Telegraph Offices, the Banks, Mechanics’
Institute, Mining Exchange, &c.


COMMERCIAL HOTEL,
GEORGE STREET, LAUNCESTON.
G. C. GILHAM, Proprietor.
Visitors to Tasmania can rely upon good Accommodation at very
Moderate Rates, with kind attention and civility.
The above Hotel is nicely situated within two or three minutes’
walk of the Post-Office.
NOTHING BUT BEST BRANDS OF LIQUORS KEPT.
This Hotel is noted all over the Island for its Delicious Cool
Sparkling Draughts of Tasmanian Ale.
Omnibuses pass the Door every few minutes, to Railways and
all parts of the City and Suburbs.
HOT COLD BATHS
Telegrams addressed as above will receive prompt attention.
THE TERMINUS HOTEL,
TAMAR AND WILLIAM STREETS,
ZO^TJINrCIESTOikT.
JOHN TYNAN, Proprietor.
This Hotel is very suitable for Visitors to Tasmania, having
lately been rebuilt and refurnished. Large Dining Hall, Com-
mercial Room, and nice Sitting Rooms, with well-kept Ventilated
Bedrooms.
Within three minutes’ walk of Railway and Wharf.
PRIVATE BILLIARD ROOM
And all Conveniences and Modern Appliances for the comfort
of Guests.
Kind attention with Moderate Charges.
NONE BUT BEST BRANDS LIQUORS KEPT IN STOCK.
HOT -A_TTTD COBH BATHS.
Telegrams addressed as above will receive prompt attention.


CRITERION HOTEL,
ST. JOHN STREET,
SUPERIOR ACCOMMODATION FOR VISITORS.
HOT AND COLD WATER BATHS, PIANO, &c.
Wines & Spirits of the Best Brands & Quality.
LATEST SPORTING TELEGRAMS POSTED,
Terms — 6s. Per Day.
J. McQUEEN, Proprietor.
GLOBE HOTEL,
GEORGE STREET, LAUNCESTON.
A. EDWARDS, Proprietor.
This Hotel is centrally situated, being within three minutes’ walk
of Post Office and Railways.
Omnibuses pass the door every few minutes to all Parts of the
City and Suburbs.
Excellent Table with Choicest of Liquors.
Comfortable aud well-ventilated Bedrooms, Commercial Room
Drawing Room, Sitting and Smoking Rooms, with large Dining
Hall. .
The Proprietor is confident of giving every satisfaction to
guests who patronise him.
TERMS MODEBATE.


s:oxel.
INVERESK, LAUNCESTON,
H. A. BEAUMONT, PROPRIETOR.
First-class /\ccoir\modatioii for Families and Single Boarders,
NOTHING BUT BEST BRANDS WINES & SPIRITS KEPT.
The above Hotel is pleasantly situated on the Invermay Road,
opposite Invermay Park, few minutes’ walk of Railway Stations
and Wharf. Omnibuses pass every half-hour, detween the Post
Office and Invermay, where visitors can enjoy, amongst charming
lanes and rural scenery, healthful relaxation.
The Hotel has recently been put in first class order, and the
Proprietor has every confidence in giving full satisfaction.
THE TERMS ARE MODERATE
AND ARRANGEMENTS MADE FOR BOARDERS.
CENTRAL FAMILY HOTEL
CHARLES STREET, LAUNCESTON.
T. MORTON, Proprietor.
Superior accommodation for Visitors to Tasmania at Moderate Rates.
Billiard. Room and O-ood. Sta/tolingr.
HOT AND COLD BATHS.
Telephone No. 26.
“MOUNTAIN VIEW VILLA.”
Private and Select Boarding Establishment,
TREVALLYN, LAUNCESTON, TASMANIA.
Conducted by Mrs. PINNINGTON and Daughters.
This beautifully situated Villa is replete with every convenience for the accom-
modation of Visitors from the neighbouring Colonies, combining all advantages
with the desirable comforts of a well-regulated Homo.
The situation is simply lovely—a perfect little Eden— surrounded with beau-
tiful grottos s, fernery, water, and flowers ; the perfume therefrom combined with
the cool soft balmy breeze, scenery, and loVely surroundings, make it a paradise
to dwell in.


TYNAN’S NEW HOTEL,
TAMAE BEIDGE, LAUNCESTON.
P. TYNAN, Proprietor
Excellent Accommodation for Visitors at IVJoderate Elates,
Furnished with all the Latest Conveniences for the Comfort of Guests.
Spacious and Well-ventilated Bedrooms ; Newly-furnished
Sitting and Smoking Rooms.
HOT AND COLD WATER BATHS.
FIRST-CLASS TABLE, WITH CHOICE LIQUORS.
The Hotel is situated within two minutes’ walk of both Rail-
way Stations, and commands a magnificent view of the River
Tamar.
CITY HOTEL,
ST. JOHN STREET, LAUNCESTON,
One door from Central Brisbane Street.
T- ZLv<E. DA.VIES, IProprietor.
This Hotel is most conveniently situated in the centre of the City
and is replete with every convenience, combined with the comforts
of a home, for Visitors from the Neighbouring Colonies.
Noted for its Superior Liquors and Beautiful Sparkling Draughts
of lasmanian Ale, Special Brews. 8
TELEGRAMS PROMPTLY ATTENDED.
Telephone No. 148.


LAUNCESTON COFFEE PALACE
£To. 1.
This Hotel is centrally situated and contains all the
Modem Appliances of the Australian Coffee Palaces.
SUITES OF APARTMENTS AND SPECIAL ACCOMMQ.
DATION FOR FAMILIES.
Nice Recreation Grounds, <&c. TERMS MODERATE.
I’lease Sote tlie Address—
SUTTON’S COFFEE PALACE,
S. J. SUTTON, Proprietor. Brisbane st., Launceston.
DAVID COCKED & CO.,
Customs, Shipping, Forwarding and
Insurance Agents,
CUSTOM HOUSE H]SE 3 ILAAT:T^.JOHI
LAUNCESTON,
Agents for the United Insurance Co . [Fire and Marine]
Sydney.
Goods Received for Transmission to all parts of the Island.
Goods for Shipment abroad Received and Attended to.
