

\ An Australian




fa JUk




HUM, OF THE FOREST


For LORONE NANCY
First Impression: July, 1931


HUM
OF THE FOREST
By
JOYCE OWEN STARR
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA:
EDWARD A. VIDLER
MELBOURNE
Registered at G.P.0., Melbourne, for transmission through the Post as a Book


CONTENTS
The When, Why and Wherefore
Chapter I.—IN WHICH Peter John lets me into a secret .... 8
2. IN WHICH I meet Hum Bumble 13
3. _IN WHICH Hum introduces Top Tip and Root-
Under-the-Ground 18
4. IN WHICH Hum and I go adventuring and meet
some more folk 23
5. IN WHICH the problem of Koala’s buttons is solved 29
6. —IN WHICH The Forest has visitors 36
7 _IN WHICH an Ambuscade is built, and a war is
fought 41
B—IN WHICH we hold a Grand Farewell Party 45
9. —IN WHICH many things happen, and we say good-
bye * 1


and Wherefore
The When, Why
ERHAPS you are one of those folk who make it a point
of inquiring the "When, Why, and Wherefore of
things. And perhaps you are one of the other kind
of folk, who make it a point to accept things as things
are. If you are one of the first division you will
undoubtedly want to know the "When, Why, and
Wherefore” of the "Hum” of this book.
And if you are one of the other division —well, skip over these
pages and start straight away on "Hum” himself. „
Because for the satisfaction of the "When, Why and Wherefore
inquiring ones, I’m going to tell all that I know (and that isn’t such
a great deal) concerning this "Hum” person in question.
I’ll take the "When” first, because its answer is so simple that I
can say it in three words: "Does it matter?” That, you will protest,
is not answering the question properly, but I will reply by asking you
the same that you asked me —"When?”
I know that you know (for yourself, at least, as you could not
know mine any more than I could know yours) because Hum days
are such impossible-to-forget days, that they stay in your memory
for ever and ever.
And you did have or have got a "Hum, I am certain, because out
of every three million babies, two million nine thousand nine hundred
and ninety-nine are born with a "Hum kind of person hovering around
them. And the other one?
He acquires it before he is two.
So —Perhaps I had better add that it is no more necessary for
"Hums” to bq called "Hums” than "Hums” to be like "Hums.”
Does that sound confused?
Well, what I really mean is, you could just as well have a pet gnu
and call him Frederick.”
Perhaps you did have a pet gnu and called him "Frederick!
Perhaps you had an elephant as big as your thumb and called him
"Boris!” ....
You might have even had a giant, who would skip-skippety-skip
clumsily alongside you when you went down the village for the groceries.


But wasn’t he a comfort when you had to go back for that bar of soap
you had .forgotten? And such company!
' - M • v • % TTTT
Of course most of us grow out of our "Hums.” We discard them
with golf-socks and hair-ribbons. But some of us keep them forever.
They are handy to slip in our pockets on a journey, and they sit
on the railing and talk to us in bed.
So,by this, you will see what I want you to see regarding "When.”
Was it when you were five —or fifteen —or fifty?
I know when mine was. And you?
And the "Why.” Well, why?
Is it because they make incomparable companions and never mind
changing their sizes and shapes to your whim, from a something that
might step over a tree-top with ease, to another something that will fit
inside your porridge-spoon quite comfy?
Then the "Wherefore.” This is truly difficult.
With a gnu you have a gnu; and with an elephant you have an
elephant, even though he be as big as your thumb and quite handy for
popping into your handkerchief box at night for safety.
But with a Hum —Mind, I could get over this difficulty by answer-
ing—as did Peter John when I asked him —"a Hum is a Hum,” and tilt-
ing my head, walk off as though to say, "and that’s that!”; but as by
the beginning of this Introduction, I set out to satisfy those readers of
the "W. W. and W.” Brigade, I will endeavour to explain all I know
personally of the come-about of Hum.
It all happened by Hum annoying the Fairy Queen. That, of
course, was when Hum was a fairy—a boy-fairy.
Hum, though he was not Hum, those times, but something between
"Silverwings” and "Flitaway” and "Thistlefluff” and "Pansykin,” held
the honoured position, in partnership with another boy-fairy, "Candy-
tuft,” of BUSHLAND BABY DELIVERER (all in capitals).
There were, and still are, many branches of the Bushland Baby
Department in Fairyland: Order and Mail Section, Quick Transport
Division, Correct Delivery Executive, and so on.
Hum, for such we will call him, had the managing of the C.D.
(Correct Delivery).
He was a smart elf, and should have progressed, but—Hum was;
not an ordinary sort of fairy-boy with ordinary boy-fairy ambitions!
For instance, he took the deepest interest in different things—gumblos-
soms, bathurst burrs, toadstools, and pink puddings, and especially things


that weren’t there but you liked to think were. In fact, he was that
sort of boy-fairy.
When he was very young, the older fairies just nodded and smiled
and said: "He’ll grow out of it,” but as he grew bigger (and worse),
they stopped nodding and smiling, and commenced shaking and frown-
ing instead.
Then came the climax! An awful thing! Hum muddled up one
of his deliveries, and presented Mrs. Blue WFen with a possum baby,
and Mrs. ’Possum with a wrenling!
Of course, there was an investigation. The Mail Specialist pointed
out emphatically that the orders had not been received that way! The
Selection Committee reported that matters had not been arranged that
way! The respective representatives of the ’possum and wren families
announced that they had not expected matters to be executed that way!
Mrs. ’Possum threatened to deal elsewhere. Mrs. Wren took
hysterics. And the Fairy Queen —the Fairy Queen was furious.
"You are not fit to be a Baby Deliverer,” she said sternly to Hum
at a Grand Inquiry; "in fact, you are not fit to be an elf at all.”
Then she waved her wand and said a few magic words, and Hum
turned into a —well. Hum.
Naturally, he was terribly concerned. Who would not be, being
changed very suddenly into something that wasn’t? He begged the
Queen to relent, but she locked Fairyland’s gates relentlessly upon him.
Hum banged and banged, and stamped and stamped at the gates,
tearfully.
"You might tell me what I am,” he called out. "It’s bad enough
being a something, but it’s much worse being a nothing.”
The Queen looked coldy over the top of the gates. "You are
whatever the first person who sees you calls you,” she decreed.
That first person was Peter John. Adventuring one day in The
Forest, he came across the nothing-something.
Peter John scratched his head. Peter John rubbed his chin.
"H’mm,” said Peter John.
So "H’mm” became Hum, because you say it that way, and "Hum”
became the nothing-something’s name.
That’s really all I know, and so that’s all I really can let you know.
If you feel dissatisfied and still want to find out just exactly what, all
I can advise you to do is to find out (if you can). As for me I will
say "Hum is Hum,” and tilting my head walk quickly away, as though
to say "And that’s that!”
So now, you "When,” "Why,” and "Wherefore” folk—


CHAPTER ONE
IN WHICH PETER JOHN LETS ME INTO A SECRET
N THE day before he went away to the seaside to spend
a holiday with Anne-of-Next-Door and Anne-of-
Next-Door’s folk, Peter John invited me to The Forest.
I accepted his invitation humbly, for though I had been
stopping at Peter John’s home for two weeks, I was
not on confidential terms with Peter John himself. I
sadly suspected I had forgotten just how old Peter John was, and just
what age I should treat him. It is much worse, you know, to treat five
three than two six.
But here was Peter John, brown of eye and yellow of hair, asking
me to accompany him to that strip of blue gums on the hill, which his
Mother had told me, was to her son a place of Great Importance.
"String,” said Peter John, "I ask you to come to The Forest.”
I must tell you first that my name is not String, but something
much more imposing, and with an "Uncle tacked on in front for my
two nephews. But Peter John scorned that title and stuck out at his
own absurd fancy. "You must not call Uncle James String, Peter dear,”
had said his distressed Mother many years back, when Peter John had
been a scant thimbleful.
Peter John had tried to catch an especially curly sunbeam. "String,”
he insisted for no apparent reason.
Peter John was two then. Two is rather adorable. So I resigned
myself to String.
"You don’t mind, do you, Jim?” begged my sister. "It’s really
just his form of endearment —and he is a pet.”
I had minded. String was a not-at-all-dignified thought. How-
ever —that was all when Peter John dwelt in the City. I had lived
with Peter John’s folk, and Peter John and I had become Close Comrades.
"As man to man, String,” had said Peter John one day (it was
one of his best-loved phrases), "I’d like you for my Firm Friend.”
"As man to man, Peter John,” I answered, with my head tilted, "I
am both honoured and dee-lighted.”
So from that day on —P.J. was three then—there had been a Bond
of Sympathy between Us Two.
Then the Doctor Man sent Peter John’s folk and Peter John, and
Peter John’s baby brother, Splash (because he did, you know) to the
country, and there was a Very Sad Parting between Peter John and
myself.


"I’ll write to you every day, String,” promised Peter John, "and —
ooh! you’re leaking down my neck.”
"I am not,” I said indignantly, "and anyway, you’ve been cry—”
And then I remembered the Pact. The Pact was something we had
agreed upon as to Not Noticing Things.
"I’ll see you my next vacation, Peter John,” I said presently.
Peter John sniffed. "Yes,” he sighed, "oh yes, your next vacation.
String, you must never forget—you know what. ’
"Yes, I know.”
"And always ’member —you know.”
"Yes, I know.”
"And, er, well, as man to man, String, goodbye.”
It was indeed a Sad Parting.
After that I received many letters from Peter John, but as he
couldn’t write my way, and as I couldn’t read his way, we were unable
to discuss any Matter of Real Importance.
I just gathered that
meant "please send some jellybeans,” and
"you can try chocolates this time. Jellybeans fine.”
Peter John afterwards told me that my interpretation was Quite
Right.
Six months later, I went up to Peter John’s home to idle away my
holidays. I was looking forward to a whole soaking of Peter John, and
a few splashes of Splash, who was turning two. Two is rather adorable.
But —
This is the Difficult Part.
Peter John had changed. Or at least, I thought he had. It turned
out later that he was just Watching.
Mind, he was very polite, and even kind. But he called me Uncle,
and never once during that fortnight did he mention The Pact —or
Things.
"Anne-of-Next-Door is going down to the seaside for a few weeks,”
said Peter John’s Mother the first morning in my second week, "and her
mother has asked me to allow Peter to go as a comrade for Anne. I
think I will let him, too. It would do him a world of good. They are
leaving on Friday.”


"Oh,” 1, said, and looked long and reproachfully at Peter John.
Then, on the Thursday before the Friday, Peter John asked me to
The Forest.
I was terribly jealous of that strip of blue gums on the hill that
was a place of Great Importance. But I was curious, too. And very
humble. So after Peter John had secured Splash to a post to prevent
him from following us, and given him the dictionary to read so that he
would not make too much of a hullabaloo, I followed Peter John up a
track to the hill.
"This,” explained Peter John, "is The Path.”
I nodded wisely.
Soon we entered The Forest. The Forest spread over an acre of
hilltop. Its trees were so big you felt like an ant beneath a very tall
hollyhock.
It was September, and the grass was rosy with pink puddings. Peter
John pulled two of these, very carefully tore off the surrounding petals,
and offered me one.
"String,” he said, "have you wondered?”
"I most certainly have,” I replied.
"And have you felt surprised?” I nodded.
"And disappointed?” I nodded again.
"And hurt?” Again.
"Well, said Peter John, "I hadn’t forgotten. I was just Watching.”
"Watching?”
"To see if I could trust you. You see, it was something of Very
Special Importance.”
"Surely, Peter John, you could —”
“But, String, this was EXTRAspecially special. I had to be certain
first
'Oh!” "Now you’re cross, aren’t you, String?” "Well, er —”
"I knew you would be, but it had to be done. Anyhow, I’m going
to tell you everything. It’s Very Secret. I wouldn’t let anyone know
but you —not even Anne-Anne.” (Peter John always called Anne-of-
Next-Door, Anne-Anne. "You must have something after Anne,” he
would argue. "Why it’s just like calling Splash, The. Hullo The! Nice
Day The! Did you ever!”)
"Is it something to do with The Forest?” I pressed. "Yes.”
"Fairies?” "No—” "Birds?” "Hardly—”
"Animals?” "Not quite—” "Then what?” I persisted.
"It’s very had to explain. It’s name is Hum.”
"Hum?” "Yes.” "But what is a Hum?” I asked.


"Not A. Hum, String, just Hum. His surname is Bumble. So that
makes H. Bumble. See?”
"Oh yes, but what is he?” I asked. "He’s Hum,” said Peter John
After a doubtful pause, I felt I must know more.
"Like a bird, to look at, of course,” I asked casually. "Not exactly,”
said Peter John.
"Something like a bear?” I suggested. "In places,” he replied.
"Fairylike?” I suggested. "Sometimes,” he acceded.
I had a happy thought. "Peter John,” I said, "I knew a Hum, too
about a hundred years ago, when I was young.”
Peter John was delighted. "I knew it, I knew it,” he said jubilantly.
"I wonder if your Hum was anything like my Hum.”
"What is yours like?”
"Oh, he’s hard to explain. He changes too. You know.”
"Yes, I know.”
"And, anyway, you’ll be seeing him soon.”
"I will?”
"Yes, I’ve told him all about you. I wanted to introduce you, but
now —” "You’re going away.”
"Yes, I’m going away. And I meant to write and tell you all about
it, but well —”
"I know, Peter John,” I said.
"Yes,” went on my companion, rather pink in the face, "it is
rather hard on us not understanding each other on paper. Mind you,
though, String, I’m up to Tat Pig.’ ”
"Splendid,” I said with admiration. "You’ll soon be into the Second
Primer.”
"Though,” continued Peter John, "Fat Pigs are not Hums. If I
had written The fat pig is in the pen,’ you would have never guessed I
meant about a Hum sort of thing, would you?”
"Hardly,” I said. "And
means jellybeans, doesn’t it?” "Yes,” I acknowledged.
"And
chocolates, doesn’t it?” "So you see —” began Peter John.
"Yes, I see, Peter John,” said I.
There was a little silence, then Peter John crept nearer to me.


i 'SfL
"As man to man, String,” he said, *Tm quite fond of you.
"Thank you, Peter John. I like you, too. Very much.”
"I know you’ll look after Hum for me, continued Peter John,
"and The Forest and —you’ll find out the rest. String, you must let
me know Everything that Happens.”
"But if I write a letter, you couldn’t read —” I began to say, then
remembering The Pact about Not Noticing Things, I changed the
subject.
"Do you like Anne-Anne?” I questioned.
"She’s a girl,” replied Peter John cryptically. There was a little
silence. Then Peter John said slowly, "String, I’m sorry I’m going away
to-morrow.” "So am I,” said I.
"You’d better not write, String; Anne-Anne might get hold of the
letter —you never know. And besides, I can t understand your letters.
"What will I do then?”
"Oh, just tell me Everything when I come back. I won’t be so
long, you know.” . , ,
The sun dipped beyond the mountains. In silence we leit Ine
Forest, and made our way along The Path. Something rustled between
the grasses. Peter John looked at me, and I looked at Peter John. Our
eyes telegraphed one thrilling word to each other —
Hum.”


IN WHICH I MEET HUM BUMBLE
N THE day after Peter John’s departure with Anne-of
Next-Door to the seaside, Splash came up to me and
said gravely: "We’s going out, Mummie an’ me.” Peter
John’s Mother came up behind him. "Yes, Jim. Do
you mind? I’d take you, too, but it’s a Church Jumble
Sale, and you’d be terribly bored. You can sit in the
garden and enjoy the sunshine. It’s a perfect day
I agreed eagerly. It was a perfect day, and the garden looked
enticing. Then, too, there was The Forest. This was my chance to
make the acquaintance of Hum. I replied: "Oh, don’t bother about
me, I’ll find lots to do.”
So at two o’clock, I made my way up The Path with a book in
one hand, and a thermos flask and a parcel of cakes in the other.
I had been loath to accept the refreshments, for, not being friendly
with Hum, I did not know whether he took his cocoa sugared or not,
and whether he preferred sandwiches to cakes, or cakes to sandwiches.
But on the other hand, cocoa and cakes under a tree in a gum forest on
a September afternoon sounded attractive to me.
I found The Tree and made myself comfortable against its broad
trunk, and waited for Things to happen. Then as they didn’t, I started
reading my book. I had just turned the third page, when I heard a
voice somewhere near me. It was a thin, pipey, quick little voice—
very high and determined.
"It might be, and it might not be,” said the voice, and at the last
word a figure detached itself from my thermos, which was standing
upright at my side.
"It is remarkably smooth for one,” continued the voice, "and de-
cidedly small. No bark and no foliage, either. Unique, I call it. I
wonder if that silver thing on top is a nest.”
"No,” I said. "It’s just the lid. The thing is a thermos.”
A. Thermos. Well! Well! I’m H. Bumble. Hum for short.”
"Hum? Yes, I’ve heard of you.” "From Peter John?” "Yes.”
"He’s my very close friend. You’re String, aren’t you? Pleased
to meet your acquaintance, String.”
"Honoured, Hum,” I said.
"Well, well,” said Hum, rubbing his hands together, "and you’re
String. What do you think of me, String? Honestly now. No
flattery.”


You’re shortish, rather,” I contributed.
"Not for me. What else?” Hum spoke rather sharply.
"Er —er, your wings grow in a funny place,” I ventured.
"Certainly not. Any Hum would tell you that proper wings grow
out of one’s ears.”
"Are there any other Hums?” "Of course not, silly. Well?” "The
back of you —all fur.” "My own idea For Winter.”
"And the front of you—feathers.” "Why not? They’re wonder-
fully cool in January.”
"And your face —an elf face.” "Any complaints?”
"And your legs and arms and bits between —just nothing.”
"By all means. Anyhow, you’re the same with your clothes off.
Anything else?” "No.”
"Then why all this talk?” "But it was you who started —” But
H. Bumble was not listening.
"Good afternoon, A. Thermos,” he said politely. "Good afternoon.
Good Afternoon. GOOD AFTERNOON. String, is A. deaf?
"He is a vacuum flask,” I attempted to explain.
Hum looked disgusted. "Why didn’t you say so at the start,” he
complained. "Our people never speak.”
"There’s cocoa in it. Do you like cocoa?” "Cocoa? Cocoa?”
"You drink it. It’s hot and sweet and chocolately.”
Hum’s eyes brightened at the "chocolately.”
"I know them,” he said, "they’re brown and ’licious. Peter John
used to share his with me quite often. A dear child, Peter John.”
"Will you have some cocoa?” "Oh no, please,” said Hum, then
added, "Very well, one lump and no lemon. Isn’t it a nice day?”
I opened my parcel of cakes. There were four. One currant slice,
one sultana cookie, one cream puff and one jam tart.
Hum watched me with feverish interest. "Funny,” he remarked,
"how every afternoon at three under a tree in The Forest I feel eleven-
o’clockish.”
"Do you have your dinner at eleven?”
"Oh, no, not till five.”
"Then why do you feel eleven-o’clockish at five?”
"Because I feel five-o’clockish at eleven. See?”
But it isn’t five yet.”
"No, but I’ve altered the time to three —(it is three now, isn’t it?)
I’m starting from to-day! In fact, I’m starting from now!”
"Three? That’s a funny time. People don’t have their dinners at
three.”


“Hums do.”
“Oh! The trouble is,” I said, “what can I put your cocoa in?”
“How about the shiny thing?”
“Excellent. We’ll put yours in the top.”
“Top—Top! So you know Top, too.” “Top who?”
“Top Tip, of course. He lives on the highest branch of The Tree.
His real name is Tip Top, but he prefers to go by Top Tip. Much more
select, too, isn’t it?”
“Yes, it is rather. Now which cake will you have?”
Hum looked wistful.
"I’m not sure if I could manage a whole one.”
“Oh come. You must.”
“P’raps we could share,” compromised Hum. “Now this thing with
the black dots in it, I’ll eat out all the dots for you and leave you the
cake. That’s kind of me, isn’t it?”
“You may as well eat out the sultanas from the other one,” I said
disconsolately.
“Very well,” agreed Hum brightly. “First the black dots, then the
sula—sultas, er, the other black dots; then the snow from that cake;
and then the sticky stuff from this one. No, I don’t mind truly. I’m
not greedy. You’re welcome.”
For five minutes there was silence. Then Hum licked his fingers
lovingly, drank up his cocoa, and sat down on my legs, leaning himself
against the toes of my boots.
“Well, well, and you’re String,” he said for the second time.
““String! String! A funny name, that!”
“Hum’s funny, too,” I defended.
“’Scuse me; I beg your pardon, Hum is not. Hum is a wonderful
name. Everybody uses it. In fact, it’s a Most Remarkable name. Did
you ever hear anyone give a speech without 'hum-ing’ first?”
“That’s 'h’mm.’ ”
“Well, 'h’mm’ is just short for Hum. Anyone knows that. And
what do you think of this? Once the King of England made a speech,
and guess the first word he said?”
"H’mm?”
“Yes, 'h’mm,’ and that is 'Hum,’ of course.”
“What were you, to begin with?”
“A fairy.”
“With animal and bird aspirations?”
“No, just a face and legs and fur and feathers.”
I see.


"Of course you can see them. Everyone can. That’s the shame of
it all. If only I had an invisible cloak now —”
"Can’t you get one?”
"They’re all used up. 'Bluebell and the Fairy Queen’ took the last.
Have you read it?”
"But how could a story possibly take an invisible cloak?”
"How couldn’t it? Things don’t keep on forever. It’s a shame.
If I had my way, I’d burn up all the books in the world.”
"Why?”
"They’ve done enough mischief already. Look at Fairyland—a new
queen everyday, so to speak.”
"How do you mean?”
"Oh, String, surely you know that every time a story is written,
someone is snatched into Storyland. How many times have you read
'Once upon a time there was a Fairy Queen’? Well, there’s another gone,
and another royal place to be filled.”
"Oh.”
"Even the trees are getting scarcer, and there’s hardly anything left
of the winds!”
"Terrible!”
"Yes, and that’s the real reason Tip Top changed his name to Top
Tip. But even then he was in peril the other day. Someone wrote, 'on
the top tip of the red gum,’ but changed it later to 'the top leaf.’ Poor
Top, he was alarmed.”
"Doesn’t he want to go to Storyland?”
"Oh, yes, but he’s waiting for the rest of us?”
"That’s kind of him.”
It is rather.”
"Do you want to go?”
"I almost went once. That was when Christopher Robin lived in
The Forest, and Pooh and Tigger and Eeyore and Kanga and Roo and
Rabbit and Rabbit’s Relations lived here too. Those were the days.”
"I’ve read about them.”
Of course you have. They’re in Storyland and have been for
years. How Mr. Milne came to leave me out of his book, I can’t imagine.
It was very disappointing.”
"But did he? Pooh was always 'humming’ in the book I read.”
"There are Hums and "h’mms,” replied H. Bumble with dignity.
"But you said before—” I began to argue.
"I didn’t,” replied Hum pinkly. We both sulked for a while.


"I’ve got an idea,” I declared suddenly.
"Where is it? Show me,” said Hum eagerly. "Has it got sula, sulta,
black dots in it?”
"Hum, I’m going to write a story about you. Would you like it?”
"Oh, String!”
"The only trouble is, what can I write about?”
"Write about? Oh, there’s Top Tip and Root-Under-The-Ground
and —”
"Very well, I’ll commence the day after to-morrow.”
''The day after to-morrow’s Friday. That’ll suit me very well.”
'The day after to-morrow’s Monday,” I corrected.
"Not here, we’ve only got Friday, Saturday and Wednesday left.
Storyland again, you see. The worst of it is, no refills.”
"As you like then, Friday for you and Monday for me.”
Oh, it’s all going to be splendid, I’m sure. String, do you get
hungry writing stories? I do—specially in The Forest under The Tree
of an afternoon.”
So that is how I became Official Chronicler of H. Bumble, Esq. Bird
Animal and Elf.


CHAPTER THREE
IN WHICH HUM INTRODUCES TOP TIP AND ROOT-UNDER
THE GROUND
OWN in the village they were selling jam at eleven-
pence the tin. I took ten minutes wavering between
greengage and marmalade, and then walked off with
golden syrup at tenpence-halfpenny. So, at two
o’clock, armed with an exercise-book, three sharpened
pencils, and the tin of golden syrup at tenpence-half-
e Hum Bumble whilst I got to work, I started up The
penny to amuse
Path to The Forest. . ,
Hum was very busy nailing mushroom rivets into the ground.
"Good morning, String. A beautiful afternoon,” he said pleasantly.
"Lovely.” t
"I see you have brought your pencils,” commented Hum, and
your book, and —and —a tin?”
"Oh, yes.”
"I see. A tin. Well! Well!”
"This tin holds syrup.”
"Really? Syrup? Well! Well!”
"Syrup,” I explained, "is sweet, sticky stuff not unlike jam, and not
unlike honey, but nevertheless different.”
Hum looked intrigued. "Funny,” he sighed, "how I always did
fancy syrup under a tree in a forest of an afternoon.
"H. Bumble,” I said pompously, "I purchased this tin of syrup for
you. It cost tenpence-halfpenny-from-the-store-in-the-village.
"Well! Well! Tenpence-halfpenny-from-the-store-in-the-village.
I’m sure, String, lam more than obliged. In fact, lam deeply grateful.
I think I will have a little something now, because Top Tip and Root-
Under-The-Ground are calling on me to be introduced to you, and
though I’m not a greedy kind of Hum, three into a tin
"Won’t go.”
"Just what I was wanting to say,” beamed Hum. "You are clever,
String, and no mistake. How is your book going?”
"As yet it hasn’t started,” I replied. 'Beginnings are difficult
things.”
"There are ways and ways,” said Hum thoughtfully. "Here is one
I made up myself: 'Once upon a time,” and you follow it on with there
was such and such.’ See? And while on the subject, String, I was
a handsome baby. A very handsome baby. You might jot that down.


I obediently noted "handsome babyhood.”
At this moment, there was a flutter and quiver in The Tree foliage,
and down floated a slender, green-clad form.
While Hum hurriedly jammed the lid on his tin of syrup, the new-
comer and I gazed at each other with interest. I thought I had never
seen anything so long and swaying and greenly graceful.
Hum introduced us. "T. Tip meet —(what neeshell, String?)”
"J.” "T. Tip meet J. String.”
Top Tip bowed effusively. 'Tve heard of aG. String,” he re-
marked. "Are you any relation?”
"No, I’m just J.”
Hum, who had been concealing his tin behind a clump of bachelor
buttons, came up behind Top.
"What do you think of String?” he said pleasantly.
"His ears offend me,” answered Top,” and his feet are big.”
Hum looked distressed and rather annoyed.
"String,” he demanded sternly, "what do you think of Top?”
"A graceful fellow,” I replied generously.
"But rather greenish?” "Not exceptionally.”
"And thinnish?” "Not outstanding.”
"Longish?” "Not that you’d notice.”
"Well, Top, that’s String for you. You really should apologise.”
Top was walking round and round and repeating joyously to him-
self "Not exceptionally! Not outstanding! Not that you’d notice! A
graceful fellow! Me! Yes, he was referring to Me!”
Hum shrugged his shoulders pityingly.
"Everyone always calls him names,” he explained, "because he is
so long and lanky. Top is really very sensitive, but no one would guess
it. You’ll be his friend for life now. Though I will say he doesn’t
deserve kind words, after what he said about you”
"Oh, that was self-defence,” I excused graciously, "and if you had
been in his position, Hum —”
But Hum was not listening. He was occupied with a projecting
root of The Tree, at which he seemed to be pulling intently.
Top ran up behind him, and placing his long arms round Hum’s
chubby waist, joined in the labor. Puff! Puff! Puff!
"It’s harder than last time,” gasped Hum. Pant! Pant! Pant!
"Rut must reduce,” grumbled Top. Puff! Puff! Puff!
"Too much sap,” commented Hum. Pant! Puff! Pant!
"And gum bixits,” said Top. Puff! Pant! Puff! Pant! Gasp!
(many times). There was a bursting, splitting noise, and from some-


where beneath the tree emerged a plump, brown person not unlike a
roly-poly grub.
"Root-Under-The-Ground —String; J. String,” introduced Hum.
We bowed.
"We call Root-Under-The-Ground by his neeshells R.U.T., you
know, and add the 'G’ for his surname,” explained Top in a loud whisper.
"That makes Rut G. The other is too long. Don’t let him depress you.
He’s always doleful.”
J ~ ~ - _ .. . ■* • • m rr t 1
"And bad tempered,” added Hum. "And impatient.” "And
exasperating.” "And talkative.” "And—
"l thank you, one and all,” broke in Rut G. with suspicious sweet-
ness. "Generous as ever, Top. A good word for everyone, Hum. No,
don’t apologise, I despise effusion. How are you, String? Well, you’ve
had a good look. Now, what do you think of me?”
“Very—er —nice,” I replied uncomfortably.
"That’s right,” said Rut G. "Keep the truth from me and, when
my back’s turned, run me down. It’s lucky I have broad shoulders. Ah
well! Such is life!”
"You look very capable, any way,” I determined
Rut was a little mollified.
"I can work with anyone,” he admitted proudly. "May I ask how
you earn your living, String?”
"I add up figures,” I replied humbly.
"Oh! Do you know what I do? I maintain the life and virility
of the trees of The Forest. I see that they get their food-supply in
Winter, and their food-supply in Summer. I tend them in the Spring,
and I guard them in the Autumn. I regulate their habits, and keep
them healthy. I tunnel passages for new roots, and keep the old roots
firm and taut. lam responsible for —No, Hum. No, Top. I will not
be silenced. String is interested in my work, aren’t you, String? There,
I knew so. Now, if Top wasn’t such a frivolous streak of lankiness (all
he does is dance and play around), he might be a better listener. The
same refers to Hum. Hum is intolerably lazy. He sleeps for hours
under the trees, that I —Rut G., mind you —work all day to maintain.
Work hours at a stretch! Work my fingers to the bone! Work —”
Top and Hum were indignant.
"It took me three days to paint all the leaves last Autumn,” de-
clared Top, "and teaching the branches to dance is no small job, I can
assure you. Besides, your fingers haven’t got any bones in them. Not
that you’d notice, anyway.”


"And I’m not lazy,” said Hum aggrievedly, "I’m delicate, and that’s
why I don’t work.”
"Huh,” sneered Rut G. "Humagination, I expect.”
Hum nodded importantly. "Yes, it gets me in the back of my neck
in July.”
"If you knew what I have to put up with,” groaned Rut G., with
tears of self-pity. "Rootitis, Sapiglitis, Agrubicitis—”
Here Top and Hum clapped their palms over their ears, and sang
in shrill notes until Rut sulked himself into an insulted silence.
To make things happier, I found a bullseye in one of my pockets
and offered it to Rut, He shook a dismal head.
"Reducing,” he explained, "only sap and gumbixits.”
"You drink too much sap,” commented Hum. "And eat too many
bixits,” added Top.
"So long as I’m not so clumsy as you, Hum, and not so grotesque
as you, Top, and can scrape in and out of The Hole, then I will be
satisfied.”
"I’m not clum —” began H. Bumble, then seeing me offer the sweet
to Top, and noticing a weak expression on Top’s face, hurried to my side.
"It’s very considerate of you, String,” he remarked, "but, really,
Top never eats those things, do you, Top? His food is always green.
Peter John used to keep him all the green jelly-beans.”
"I thought,” said Top plaintively, "that if I swallowed it quick
and ’magined it was green—oh, Hum, you’ve knocked it over, and now
you’ll have to eat it.”
"Yes, such a nuisance,” said Hum. "’Specially when I was on a
diet, too.” As nobody commented favourably on this, Hum, a little
embarrassed, changed the subject. "String is writing a story,” he said.
"These are his book and pencils.”
"What is he writing about?” asked Rut. "ME,” said Hum.
"Who?” "ME. H. Bumble. Hum to friends.”
"It will be a book, then,” jeered Rut.
He s going to bring you and Top into it,” said Hum, with studied
carelessness. Rut and Top drew near to me, with widened eyes. "Is this
true?” they queried.
Of course it’s true,” boasted Hum. "He’s been making notes just
now. Read what you have, String.”
I looked abashed. "As yet I haven’t much,” I admitted. "In fact,
I’ve only got 'handsome babyhood.’ ”
"Excellent,” said Hum.
"And who does it refer to, may I ask?” queried Rut.


“Me, of course,” said Hum.
Rut looked disgusted. “I think it’s going to be a very inferior sort
of book,” he disparaged, “and, anyway, everyone knows that any real
book has an 'acknowledgment’ and 'a dedication.’ ”
Hum was impressed, and Top remarked under his breath that “he
had brains, all right, that Rut.”
“If you tell me how,” I said humbly, “perhaps I could put an
'acknowledgment’ and a 'dedication’ in this.
“Well, it’s quite easy,” said Rut. “You just write down, T hereby
acknowledge Root-Under-The-Ground as being a pre\ ailing factor in
my book,’ and then dedicate it to 'Root-Under-The-Ground, out of re-
spect and admiration,’ and —”
“But what about us?” echoed Top and Hum wrathfully.
“You’ll be provided for in the chapters,” said Rut airily. He
glanced up at the sun. “Now you must all excuse me, as I have to get
back to work. And please, Top and Hum, don’t PUSH me as you
PULLED me. I’m not elastic!”
There was more grunting and more puffiing, then Root-Under-The
Ground slowly disappeared, head first, into his workshop.
Top yawned and came over and shook my hand. I m very glad
about the book,” he said kindly, “and I really didn’t mean that about
the ears and feet. Do you honestly think I’m graceful?”
“I do, truly.”
“Well, goodbye. See you yesterday!”
Hum retrieved his syrup from the bachelor-button clump, and ate
it reflectively.
"String,” he said, “how soon will the story be finished?”
“To tell the truth, Hum, unless you give me a hint, never.”
Hum was crestfallen. “It’s all gone,” he said, “’ cept this little lickey
part. Do you want it so badly, String?”
"Oh, no,” I replied.
Hum was happy. “Do you know,” he smiled, “even if your book
hasn’t a 'dodgement’ and an 'edication,’ like old Rut said, 111 love it.
"That’s nice,” I replied, almost affectionately.
“Yes, it was,” regretted Hum. "I don’t suppose you have any more
tenpence-halfpennies-for-tins-of-syrup-from-the-store-in - the - village,
String?”
“We’ll see,” I replied.


CHAPTER FOUR
IN WHICH HUM AND I GO ADVENTURING AND MEET
SOME MORE FOLK
TRING,” said Hum, one warm afternoon, as I met him
waiting anxiously for me at The Forest end of The
Path, "String, was there anything Particular you
wanted to do?” I put down my bundle of books with
a sigh, for the sun was almost hot. "Well, no, Hum,
not unless you wanted me to do something, then —”
"Then?” asked Hum. "I’ll do it,” I assented
Hum was gratified. "I thought,” he said, "you might like to come
with me on Annaventure!”
"An Adventure!” I said, half correctively and half pleasurably.
Hum shook his head. "Not Anne —she lived next-door to Peter
John, but Annaventure. All together, you know, like Rootunderthe-
ground.”
"But it’s Root-Under-the-Ground,” I insisted.
"Well, didn’t I say Rootundertheground,” retorted Hum, rather
crossly. "Of course, if you don’t wan’t to come with me —”
"But I do,” I hastened to assure him, "and I think it will be
charming.”
Beneath The Tree we left my books and coat, but we took the
snacks, because Hum said they might come in useful if we met the
Annaventure.
"What will the Annaventure be?” I asked Hum curiously.
"How can I tell before I find it?” said Hum, with a rather con-
temptuous glance.
"But you said to take the snacks in case —”
"Oh,” replied Hum hurriedly, "it won’t be that kind of Annaven-
ture —I mean not an eating kind of one. We’ll have those ourselves
at Tree in the Middle of the Forest.”
"But what,” I queried cautiously, "if the Annaventure is an eating
kind of one?”
"Then,” said Hum sadly, "we will have to give him the snacks,
because that would be better than him taking the snacks with us outside
the snacks, wouldn’t it, String?”
I thought it indeed would. So with a bundle of goodies in my
pocket, and with Hum on my shoulders, his fat legs crossed over my
chest, we started on our way.


"Hum,” I said, after we had progressed a little distance, "what if
there are no Anna ventures around to-day?”
"Then we’ll go and see Top Tip.
Where is Top Tip?”
"At Tree at the Extreme End of the Forest. He’s giving the leaves
a deportment lesson.”
By Tree in the Middle we had still to meet the Annaventure, so,
by Hum’s suggestion, we ate up our bundle of sugar cookies. I thought
this proceeding rather unwise, because there was still the other half of
The Forest to journey through, and one never knew. But Hum suddenly
recalled an episode in his last Annaventure, when the thing (the Anna-
venture thing), had told him he never ate sugar cookies because they
gave him ’itises. Hum also reminded me that Top was likewise prone
to these same ’itises after snacking, so I took his word and helped finish
up the crumbs, which was all, after our discussion was finished, that
remained.
It was then that we saw the —Hum saw it first. He clutched my
shoulder and said, "String, do you see?”
"See what?” "The Annaventure.” "Where?” "There, in front
of you.”
"I can only see a clump of clematis, and a buttercup, and—”
"String, do you mean to say you can’t see It?”
"Well- -er —perhaps I can, after all. Isn’t It sitting on the butter-
cup?” "Yes.”
"It looks savage.” "I think so, too,” said Hum.
"Do you think it is dangerous?” I asked. "I wouldn’t like to meet
it at night.” "Me either,” I said.
Hum shuddered a little. "String,” he said, "what would you call
this Annaventure person?”
"It looks to me,” I said reflectively, "remarkably like —a Geebung.”
Just what I thought,” agreed Hum. We both stared fearfully
at the Geebung.
The Geebung was, and yet it wasn’t, if you understand what I
mean. No doubt it would have been fierce when it had on a fierce
mood, just as it would have been gentle if it felt that way. Assuredly
it would be big when it grew big and past sitting on buttercups, and
more assuredly still it would be when it stopped not being. In fact, it
was one of those things that you pass over quickly when you are feeling
a little vague and not at all sure of yourself. And it was a Geebung,
and that, I think, should be sufficient for everybody.


/fZ'%
“Top was putting some new leaves through a difficult quadrille "


"String,” said Hum, "I wonder if there are any other Geebungs in
The Forest.”
"Probably a great army of them,” I suppose. why not ask this
P 55
"I forgot my glasses,” excused Hum, "so I don’t think I’d under-
stand him. You try, String.”
I crossed over doubtfully to the buttercup and listened intently.
"Hum,” I said seriously, "this Geebung tells me that —”
"There are a great number of Geebungs?” "Yes, and that
"They are going to make war on the Forest Folk? Yes, and
that —”
"We’d all B’WARE?” 'Yes, we’d all B’WARE.”
"String!” "Hum!” "This is Very Urgent!” "Yes.”
"It is a Very Big Annaventure!” "Yes.”
"It is a thing of Great Importance!” "Yes.”
"It is a Matter of Immediate Action!” "Yes.
"We must let Top Tip know instantly.” "I think so too.”
"And then inform Rut G.” "Of course.
As we were already at Tree in the Middle, we continued to Tree
at the Extreme End, where Top was putting some new leaves through
a difficult quadrille. We found him conversing with a koala and a
kookaburra.
"Hullo,” said Hum, forgetting his mission, "surely not Kooka-
burra?”
"No, you jackass,” laughed back that bird," just a thing with
feathers and wings and etceteras.”
"What are they?” questioned Hum, wrinkling his nose over the
third word.
Kookaburra ignored the question. "Who is your boy friend? he
asked flippantly.
"This is String,” introduced Hum with dignity.
"String Bean or String Bag?” giggled Kookaburra.
"Neither —J. String,” replied Hum haughtily. "You think you re
clever, don’t you?”
"No, I think I’m Kookaburra.”
Hum frowned. "Yes,” he said, "that’s the odd part about it.”
"What is?” asked Kooka. "You still being here,” said Hum.
"Where else would I be?”
"Storyland, of course. Everyone’s always writing, 'the kookaburra
sat on the blue gum tree!’ ”
Kookaburra nodded. "That’s true,” he admitted, "but none of


the trees around here are blue gums. People think they are, but really
they are a different sort of gum altogether. And, anyway, I always
make it a point to sit, as I am now, on a stump, and not a gum stump
at that.”
"Don’t you want to go to Storyland?”
"Not by myself. I’m waiting for N. 8.” "Yes, Note
Below. That’s a joke.” "I suppose you mean Native Bear?” asked Hum.
"Koala, please,” corrected that little animal gently. "I prefer
Koala.”
"Why are you waiting for Koala?” queried Top.
Kooka laughed carelessly. "I’m sure I don’t know,” he admitted,
"unless it is we have always been such good friends.”
Top looked at Hum, and a warmth of feeling passed betwixt them.
These friendships—
Koala breathed deeply, and taking out a huge leaf fanned herself.
"Are you hot?” asked Hum.
She nodded. "I’m always hot,” she sighed.
"Why don’t you take off your thick dress?” said Top.
"I can’t find the buttons,” bemoaned Koala.
"Have you ever looked?” queried Hum.
Koala shook her head. "It tickles,” she said
Top Tip swung down from his class of leaflets. "What are you
doing at Extreme End, Hum and String?”
Hum, recalling his Matter of Great Importance, looked around
furtively. “It’s a secret,” he said enticingly.
They all pricked up their ears. "Tell us, Hum,” implored Top.
Hum looked doubtful. "A secret’s a secret,” he announced, "and
I don’t know whether I can. I must consult String. You see, it’s his
secret, too.” We "consulted” a few yards away, and decided for the
General Safety of Everyone to tell the whole story of the Annaventure.
"It happened at Tree in the Middle!” "Ooh!”
"Something,” Hum looked at me half ashamedly, "jumped out
at us.”
"What was it?” "A—Geebung!” "A Geebung?” "Yes!” "Ooh!”
"I know,” nodded Kookaburra, "big and —” "Furry and —” said
Koala. "Savage,” added Top Tip. "Wings like a bird,” said Kooka.
"Teeth like a wolf,” said Koala. "Claws like a dragon,” finished Top Tip.
"I’ve heard of ’em before,” remarked Kooka.
Hum, who was looking rather pink, swallowed once or twice. "The
Geebung,” he said, "told us that there were three million Geebungs
altogether, and —”


"Yes?” said Kooka. "Yes?” said Koala. "Yes?” said Top Tip.
"They were going to make an attack on us, and—”
"Yes?” said Kooka. "Yes?” said Koala. "Yes?” said Top Tip.
"We’d better —” "Yes?” said Kooka. "Yes?” said Koala. "Yes?”
said Top Tip. "B’WARE!” finished Hum, in a loud voice.
"Oh!” said Kooka, Koala, and Top Tip in a chorus.
A serious silence followed; then Kookaburra looked hopefully at me.
"Rope,” said he, "who do you suggest?”
"I thought maybe an ambuscade—”
"Excellent,” agreed Kooka. "I thought that too.”
"Old logs would serve the purpose,” I continued.
Hum shook his head. "I favour the first,” he said. "What first?”
I asked.
"The An-Bus-K. It’ll be just the very thing. I know these Gee-
bungs.”
"We will hold a meeting to-morrow to arrange matters.”
"We’ll call it a Council of War,” said Koala. "A. C. of W.,”
shrilled Kooka.
"And plan the best method of fighting these Geebungs,” concluded
Hum.
So then and there, it was determined to hold the meeting beneath
The Tree the very next afternoon; snacks to be provided by String,
and Top Tip to let Rut G. know of "the arranged Get-Together and
the Immediate Urgency of Punctual Attendance,” not mentioning "the
Necessity of Quick Action and Universal Unionism.” (Kooka, I might
mention, said all this.)
The party broke up, and with Hum on my shoulder, I returned
to The Tree for my books.
At Tree in the Middle, the shrubs seemed to stir mysteriously.
There was even a "geebung-iness” in the air.
"To-morrow afternoon,” reminded Hum, as I passed down The
Path, "and don’t forget the —you know. Those with the pink tops that
you had yesterday were very nice.”


CHAPTER FIVE
IN WHICH THE PROBLEM OF KOALA’S BUTTONS IS SOLVED
T THREE o’clock the next day, Kooka, Koala, Root-
Under-The-Ground, Top Tip, Hum and myself con-
gregated at the agreed place for the C. of W. (Council
of War). We all sat in a circle; Kooka accepting the
stump; Hum guarding the treasury, which consisted
of all snacks; and me (String) jotting down notes on
any Subject of Occasion.
"There’s no doubt about it, but, as String previously said, we must
have —have —” began Kooka doubtfully.
"An-Bus-K,” finished Hum glibly, and helped himself to a choco-
late wafer with such an air of intelligent superiority, that no one thought
of protesting.
"I agree,” piped Top Tip.
"All agreed,” announced Kooka, and banged the stump with his
left wing.
"Write that down, String,” urged Koala, and I obediently scribbled,
"ITEM 1 An-Bus-K,” hoping fervently it was The Forest way of
spelling it. I need not have been worried.
"Just what is An-Bus-K, may I inquire?” put in Rut G., who
had a very Undesirable Habit of demanding Awkward Explanations at
Unfortunate Moments.
Everyone was embarrassed. Kooka looked at Koala; Koala looked
at Top Tip; Top Tip looked at Hum; and Hum looked uncomfortable.
I came to the rescue. "An-Bus-K,” I said importantly, "is a thing by
which one may throw missiles through to the enemy.”
"Mistle-throo to the enemy,” triumphantly flashed Hum to Rut.
"Never heard of it,” disparaged that person.
Hum looked annoyed. Little Matters like This were Too Trifling.
"Well,” he said resignedly, "have you heard of Mistletoe?”
"Of course,” said Hum sulkily.
"Then this is Mistle-too,” giggled Hum.
"But we were referring to Mistle-throo,” corrected Rut.
"That’s what I said,” affirmed Hum pinkily.
"The An-Bus-K,” I went on peacefully, "would most probably be
built from twigs, branches and old logs, and formed into such a position
around The Tree so as to hide the Throwers from the Enemy, and pre-
vent the Enemy from throwing things on to the Throwers.”
"And what will we throw?” asked Top Tip. "For my part, I think


this Mistle-throo might be hard to obtain. I know there’s no such tree
in This Forest, either!”
"Well, we’ll decide on sticks and stones and whatnots,” I suggested
happily.
"Make another note, String,” directed Kooka, and I wrote down:
"ITEM 2. —An-Bus-K to be formed of tree stumps, logs and bushes
and placed in an agreed position round the Tree.”
"ITEM 3. —Sticks, stones and whatnots, no Mistle-throo, to be thrown
on to Enemy from behind An-Bus-K.”
"I wonder what the Enemy will throw on Us,” shivered Top Tip.
"Gee-bungers, I suppose,” reflected Kooka.
"How long will the battle last?” asked Rut G. "In my work I
have always to be near at hand, in order that the workings of the trees
and the conditions of the—”
"Yes, we’ve heard all that before,” put in Kooka hurriedly. "As
to the length of the battle, it all depends. If we defeat them early, so
much the better; but if they are a strong army, we might be forced
to hold the fort for a few years. One cannot say in these affairs.”
"If it comes to years, or even weeks, or even days—or even any
time,” commented Hum hopefully, and with that very familiar eleven-
o’clockish gleam in his eye, "we will want food.”
Of course, agreed Top Tip. "But while on the subject, just what
is suitable fighting food?”
"Snakes and grubs,” said Kooka.
"Tender gumleaves,” decided Koala.
Just a glass of sap or two and a few bixits would see me over,”
contributed Rut G.
Anything that s going,” said Top pleasantly, "only green for pre-
ference. Hum, trying to say everything at once and catching his
breath so doing, hid his confusion in a Mintie.
Top Tip, whose long legs made it a task to sit still for any length
of time, glanced up at branches above, and wondered how he could
possibly slip away for a swing without attracting attention. "If it’s as
warm as today, he remarked, "we’ll have a hot time fighting.”
"You may be sure it will be hotter still,” said Kooka. "It always
is. And besides, I’ve heard from good authorities that Geebungs have
breaths of fire, so —”
Koala gave an amazed gasp.
Breaths-of-\UAz/?” she faltered, fanning herself with a drooping
paw.
"Breaths of fire,” Kooka repeated, with a chuckle.


Meek, subdued, affable little Koala


"Breaths-of-Fire! Breaths-of-Fire! Oh, no, you don’t mean it!
I can’t stand it! I won’t stand it! It’s most unreasonable! It’s im-
possible! You’ll have to fight your Geebungs on your own. I refuse
to help. I’m prostrate from the heat as it is, but Breaths-of-Fire! Oh,
no, I couldn’t!”
Everyone looked surprised.
"She feels the heat,” commented Kooka unnecessarily. "She’ll get
over it.”
But Koala —meek, subdued, affable little Koala—bristled up indig-
nantly.
"That’s just what I won’t do,” she replied. "After all, health is
much more important than—l must ask you all to accept my resig-
nation from the army.”
There followed an uproar of voices, persuasive voices, indignant
voices, coaxing voices and despairing voices. Koala was a sturdy person,
and quite an asset to any group of soldiers, whilst in an Urgent Matter
like Geebungs, she was indispensable.
A whispered conference between Kooka, Top, Rut and Hum
brought Kooka promising to put her on duty in the cooler hours; Top
dangling the offer of the juiciest leaves he could obtain for her refresh-
ment; Rut telling of the long gum-mugs of sap he would see that she
had to keep her cool; and Hum producing an out-size in leaves with
which he proposed to fan her when she felt faint.
But Koala stood firm.
"I’m not blaming any of you,” she said, "but I am bemoaning
myself; I simply can't bear the heat —not extra heat like Breaths of Fire,
anyway—and that’s that.”
''But think,” urged Kooka, "of the disgrace of being a deserter!”
"Think,” retaliated Koala, "of thick, hot fur! Ooh! It’s all right
for you, Kooka, with your nice cool feathers.”
Think began Top, but Koala went on, "And you in your
leaves.”
"Think—” strove Rut. "And you in your loose jacket,” bombarded
Koala.
"Think—” edged in Hum, but Koala protested, "And you in your
er —er —Oh, no, it’s utterly impossible.”
The others exchanged dismayed looks. Here was defeat before
they had even started out.
"Can’t anything be done?” despaired Top.
"Nothing,” sighed Kooka, "unless—”
"Unless?” brightened Koala. "Unless?” brightened Top. "Un-
less?” brightened Rut. "Unless?” brightened Hum.


“Unless Koala takes off her coat,” Kooka finished.
“That’s no good,” said the others. “She can’t find the buttons.”
"The point is,” remarked Kooka, “has she ever looked?”
Everyone turned to Koala. Koala made a grimace. “It tickles,”
she complained.
Kooka struck an attitude of patient reasoning.
“In a Matter of Great Importance, Koala,” he said, “Little Things
like being tickled are Very Trifling Indeed. You should only be too
willing to sacrifice yourself for the sake of The Forest, and, for that
matter; your personal well-being. Think, too, Koala, of the day when
you, a grey-haired Grand-Bear, will proudly say to your Grand-Cubs,
T was the Koala who sacrificed myself to a tickle for the sake of The
Forest!’ Think of that, Koala.”
“I’ve thought,” replied Koala sulkily, “and I —couldn’t —stand —it.”
“Then,” decreed Kooka sternly, “I will have to use force. Don’t
move! Hum and Rut, take Koala’s head. Top Tip, grab her feet.”
It was all over in a few seconds. Kooka helped Koala, shaking and
spluttering, to her feet as though to apologise for his scarcely chivalrous
behaviour. Everyone looked expectant. Kooka shook his head. “Miss-
ing,” he said dramatically. “Not a trace of a button to be seen!”
Koala nodded pathetically. “I’m sure,” she said, lovingly stroking
her fur into place, "in fact, I’m almost certain, I can remember losing
them when I was a little cub of a thing.”
“But there are no signs of where buttons could have fitted,” said
Kooka.
“Well,” said Hum, “if we could only find the buttons we could
press them all over Koala till they did fit,”
Koala protested strongly at this, but her protestations were over-
ruled by the rest of the council.
“It’s for a good cause, N. 8.,” Kooka told her cheerfully, “and if
it’s a success you’ll never have cause to complain about the heat again.”
It was decided that Kooka should search Extreme End; Hum and
String, Tree In The Middle; Koala This End; Top Tip the trees; and
Rut G. under the bushes.
Everyone was to return within an hour.
Hum and I scoured The Middle thoroughly, and after sharing a
chocolate Hum discovered in one of my pockets, we decided to return.
“Koala,” said Hum, rather off-handedly, “your buttons would not
happen to be white and fluffy, would they?” And he brandished a
modest bunch of nodding queen of the bush.
Koala looked weary. “Hum,” she replied, “do you think they look


the type of buttons my style of animal would wear? No? Dear, Dear!
Fancy that! Remarkable! You will see to my right more buttons —in
fact, buttons enough for fifty Koalas,” and she pointed to a conglomera-
tion of pebbles, gumnuts, knobby roots and burrs.
Everyone sat down for some Deep Thinking. Rut G. offered some
advice. "Why not find an owl,” he suggested.
"But there are no owls —at least, no Wise Owls —left. They are
all in Storyland.” Rut G. nodded. I know one, he said, not exactly
Wise but Almost Wise, and he might be able to help Koala.”
"Good,” commented Kooka. "Let’s find this Almost Wise Owl.”
They found Almost Wise Owl sleeping in the Sunset End of The
Forest. He was rather cross at being roused.
"Never mind complaining,” said Kooka. "If you can tell us what
we want to know, we’ll all declare you a Wise Owl instead of an Almost
Wise one.”
"I really am Wise,” yawned the owl; "it’s just that I don’t get
recognised as such and —what’s the trouble, anyway?”
"We want to know —where are Koala’s buttons?”
"Koala’s buttons?”
"Yes, to do herself up by, you know. She’s lost them and she can’t
get out of her jacket. What are you laughing at?”
Owl was indeed laughing. His sides shook and shook and his eyes
disappeared in mirth.
"Koala has no buttons,” he managed to gasp after some nfinutes.
"No buttons?”
"No —and no buttonholes either —she never had any!”
"Never —had —any?” said Koala.
"Had —any?” said Kooka. "Any?” said Top Tip. "Had-any?”
said Rut.
"Never —had —any?” said Hum.
"Never —had —any,” reiterated Almost Wise Owl. "You see, it’s
this way. Koala is different from the rest of you in one respect. Under
her fur she is just inside —bones and stuff —not Koala at all like Hum is
Hum when he takes off his suit.
"Which means I can never take off my coat?” said Koala.
"Certainly not. Why should you want to? It’s just as natural for
you to have fur as Kooka and myself feathers, and Top, Rut and Hum
skin.”
"But I get hot —” grumbled Koala.
"Ridiculously Impossible!” commented Almost Wise Owl.
"Ridiculously Impossible?” reflected Koala. "Yes, that must be


it. Just so long as I know. Now I come to think of it, I don’t feel the
heat so much. And in July my fur’s a positive blessing. Thank you,
Wise Owl.”
Kooka flapped Wise Owl on the back. “You’ve got brains,” he
admired.
“Just what I was going to say,” said Rut.
“I think so, too,” said Top, and Hum echoed, “Too.”
Wise Owl bowed self-consciously. “Don’t mention it,” he smiled.
Under the Tree, when we again formed our circle, “Now,” said
Kooka, “about those Geebungs.”
The Forest’s Visitors


CHAPTER SIX
IN WHICH THE FOREST HAS VISITORS
T WAS later than usual when I climbed The Path the
next day. I had been at work on my "Hum Book”
and had forgotten the time. As I approached The
Tree, I saw three unfamiliar figures talking volubly to
Koala and Hum beneath its shade. At first I thought of
Geebungs; but changed my mind at a closer look as
just visitors, and decided to wait till they had gone. But Hum saw
me before I could escape, and beckoned urgently.
I approached them, feeling a little nervous, for the three visitors
did not look at all affable—in fact, they seemed decidedly an noyed.
"Good Afternoon,” I began, then, as they did not respond, 1 added
"Hum and Koala,” so as not to feel embarrassed.
Hum tried to help a little. "String,” said he, "I want you to meet
these—This is String, J. String. This is Koala. Jam Hum. Hum
Bumble for short. Now we all know each other.
One of the things approached a step. "Do we, mough. ihat is
the question. Do you, Mr. Hum Bumble, know me?
Hum looked uncomfortable. "Well, perhaps I he began.
"Ah! And you, Mr. Koala?” "Now I come to think it over-
said Koala. , t „ 11
"Ah! and YOU, Mr. String—” and I began, Well, to tell you
the truth —”
"I thought so,” despaired the person. "Koala and Hum 1 cannot
blame so much, but, you, Mr. String —Look again. Look again. LOOK
AGAIN. Now tell me, isn’t there something familiar about me? Some-
thing you have seen before? Something that you
I looked closely. As a matter of fact, it was not much of a thing
to look closely at. Two black eyes set in a long, flat face—so long and
so flat as to do service as a body as well, two spindley legs, and two fussy
hands. I looked again and again, then began to recognise the thing.
"Well?” it asked.
"You wouldn’t be —that is, you don’t happen to be —I mean you
are remarkably like —” "Well? it repeated.
"A Rice Pudding,” I said, with some confidence.
"Even so. Clever person. My name is Rice Pudding. Milk Rice
Pudding in full. How did you guess?”
"Your eyes mostly. Aren’t they sultanas?
"They maybe and they maybe not. Last time they were currants.


Next time they will be raisins. Even then I have dates and prunes left
for a change, if the family gets faddy. Disguise me with apricot jam.
Change it next time to plum conserve. It’s all the same. I’m Rice
Pudding; Milk Rice Pudding. That’s my downfall.”
"I rather like milk rice pudding,” I said helpfully.
"Rather? What’s that? Do you ever hear people say they rather
like strawberries and cream? Do you ever hear people say they rather
like apple pie? No, Mr. String. It’s always T love’ so and so, or 'I
adore’ such and such.”
"And yet,” I said, "Rice Pudding is a popular dish.”
"Duty,” said Milk Rice sadly, "just sense of duty on the cook’s part.
Prunes and blancmange on Monday; bread-and-butter custard Tues-
day; Milk Rice Pudding Wednesday; Stewed Apples Thursday; Pancakes
Friday; Jelly Saturday; and Fruit Salad Sunday. Routine, that’s what
it is! Colour me pink, mix me with crushed raspberries, and call me
Rainbow Delight and serve me on Sunday, and the whole family will
rush me. But mention Rice and serve me on Wednesday and the spell’s
broken.”
"It’s the name,” I agreed. "It’s got that flat sound.”
Milk Rice Pudding nodded. "And yet,” he said, "it shouldn’t have.
If you had tasted rice like cooks who really know their milk puddings
choose to serve, you’d wonder why a rice pudding isn’t a world favorite.
I’ve known them creamy, whole-grained, golden-brown and plentifully
stuffed with dates or almonds —'Scrumptious!’ ”
"Scrumptious!” echoed Hum, who was most intrigued.
"And yet nine times out of ten,” went on Milk Rice Pudding,
"you’ll find me served either dry and thick, or washy and thin. That’s
what has put people against me. It’s very hard.”
Koala was looking a little bored. "Who are your friends?” she
queried curiously.
"This,” introduced Milk Rice, "is Crust —you might have recog-
nised him. String, at least, knows him well.”
Crust approached to the centre of the group. He was a very
unpleasant creature in appearance; lean, hard and intensely uninviting.
"Yes, I’m Crust,” he admitted fiercely, "though through no fault
of mine. I would have far rather been Inside.”
"Inside of what?” said Hum.
"Bread, of course. What else?” Crust said, crustily.
Hum looked perplexed, and Crust announced that if he could not
talk on intelligent subjects with a certain degree of intelligence, it would
be far better for him to listen and perhaps learn something. "I shall


carry on this conversation with Mr. String,” he concluded, "though, I
must add, he is no friend of mine, hie is like all the rest of them
"I am fond of crusts —when they are golden and crispy,” I said
hopefully.
"That is when they are not crusts,” replied Crust sternly, "they
are then just edges. Everyone likes edges. But a crust —a black, hard
Crust —that is the test.”
"But don’t you think a black, hard Crust is expecting a little too
much?”
"Certainly not, and anyway, there’s always jam and honey,”
decreed Crust stoutly. "Besides, there are other enticements.”
"What?” the others asked, in chorus.
"Curls,” replied Crust, producing a bunch of auburn, black and
brown ringlets. "This is another means of my advertising. Have you
ever been told, Tf you eat up your crusts you’ll have beautiful ringlets’?
—I suppose so. It used to be a popular phrase once. At first it was
a success, then —”
"Then?” they echoed.
"The bob came in and crusts went out.”
"I’ve got curls and I’ve never eaten a crust yet,” announced Koala
proudly.
Crust gave Koala a long and scornful look and relapsed into a
bitter silence.
The third member of the group stepped forward. "I doubt,” he
said, "if you’ll recognise me.”
"Well,” I said, "you might be a cabbage—”
"Yes?”
"But you have a suggestion of fruit cake about you —”
Go on.
"And baked potato and macaroni cheese and fried onions and —”
"Half right,” said the last thing, "there’s just the rhubarb and
french beans and brandy snaps and boiled sago to add on. I am
Re Mains.”
"Now we do know each other,” said Hum happily. "Here we
are: Koala, String and Hum; Milk Rice Pudding, Crust and Re Mains.
Quite a happy party.”
"Scarcely that,” said Rice Pudding mournfully. "I ask you all,
how can we Left Overs be happy? Pushed to one side of the plate;
scraped into a dish; and then—sent to The Tin.”
"Ah, The Tin!” moaned Re Mains with a shudder. "I was placed
near an empty soap packet today. Such an Insult!”


Crust gave a little shiver. "There is a dog two doors up,” he said.
"who has learned how to take off the lid. I know he’s after me. It’s
outrageous.”
"But how,” queried Koala, "did you get out of the Tin today?”
"A quarrel,” explained Milk Rice. "A very low-down, smashed-
up cup started a fight and tipped off the lid, We escaped whilst the
brawl was on.”
"But what made you come here?” asked Hum, who was very fond
of The Forest and beginning to feel out-of-sorts with these strange in-
truders, who were scarcely adornments of its beauty.
"Ah!” said Milk Rice. "Ah!” said Crust. "Ah!” said Re Mains.
"We thought you might help us,” volunteered Milk Rice.
“Suggest some fate happier than a tin,” hoped Crust.
"Reinstate our self-respect,” pleaded Re Mains.
"But how,” said Koala and Hum, "did you know about Us?”
"Blame String for that,” replied the Left Overs.
Koala and Hum gave me reproachful looks, and I wrinkled up my
forehead in bewilderment.
"You see,” explained Rice Pudding, "the waste-paper basket was
tipped in The Tin, and we found out all about everyone from some old
notes that Mr. String had written —and evidently thrown away as of
no further use.”
Hum cleared his throat. "Milk Rice Pudding, Crust and Re
Mains,” he said weightily, "I am very sorry for you, but at the same
time, I regret my inability to help you in any way. We, Koala, String,
and myself feel for you in your trouble, but would point out that you
are greatly wasting our time, and Time for Immediate Action it happens
to be, to mention nothing of occupying the shadiest spot in Our Forest,
and —”
Milk Rice Pudding looked at Crust and Re Mains, and smiled
wickedly.
"What,” he said, "if we refuse to leave the Forest?”
"Yes, I’m quite comfortable here,” drawled Crust. "A charming
spot,” sighed Re Mains contentedly.
Hum and Koala looked dismayed. "We will push you —” began
Hum, then decided that Milk Rice was rather sturdy for a mere pud-
ding. Koala beckoned him to one side to hold aC. of W.
This indeed was a fix! Here they were with an An-Bus K to>
be built; an army of Geebungs to be conquered; and an indolent group
of Left Overs spoiling their Forest and monopolizing their barracks.
After five minutes they came back.


"Well?” said Rice Pudding. "Well?” said Crust. "Well?” said
Re Mains. ~ , . „ i
"I was thinking,” began Koala. "We were thinking, corrected
Hum. „ ~ TT
"That —” continued Koala. "That said Hum.
"Perhaps—” continued Koala. "Perhaps said Hum.
"Maybe—” continued Koala. "Yes, maybe
"One speak,” ordered Rice Pudding. _
Koala stepped forward. "We were thinking that what s next.
"That we were think —” began Hum. Oh, yes, that we were
at least —” continued Koala. 5j
"You are too nice—” "Too nice to —” "Be wasted—”
"Oh, yes, to be wasted in this —” "This Forest, and And
that—” "And that—”
"And that perhaps for a favour —” "We would eat you up.
"As a special favour —” , -
There was a. critical silence. Milk Rice Pudding shook his head.
"We despise favours,” he said. "You must feel spontaneous.”
"I do, truly,” said Hum. "It gets me here every dinner time.”
"So do I,” said Koala. "I think it’s a good idea.”
Milk Rice Pudding looked at Crust, and Crust looked at Re Mams.
"It’s better than The Tin,” admitted Rice.
"And they do sound as though they mean it,” said Crust.
"And after all it’s natural for us,” said Re Mains.
"Well?” said Koala and Hum.
There was no reply. Under The Tree rested a flat milk rice pud-
ding, a stale crust and a tumbled mix-up of different dishes.
"The spell’s broken,” I said. "They are just things again. I’ll
sweep them out if you like.”
"We should keep our word,” said Hum wistfully, and Koala agreed,
"It’s our duty.” I began to protest, "But —”
"Our word,” repeated Hum, closing on a shred of fried onion.
"Our duty,” echoed Koala, with rice on his nose.
As I left The Forest I saw Hum splitting up Re Mains.
That afternoon I received a letter from Peter John and Anne in
Anne’s Mother’s writing.
"We are having a lovely time,” they said, "and we both can swim.
There was no mention of "Things,” but I guessed this was because
of Anne and Anne’s Mother.
After all, Pacts are things that you can’t let everyone know about.


CHAPTER SEVEN
IN WHICH AN AMBUSCADE IS BUILT, AND A WAR IS
FOUGHT
T A GENERAL Meeting held by Kooka, Koala, Rut G,
Top, Hum, and myself, it was decided to carry out
the battle against the Geebungs with Methodical Fore-
thought. That, at least, was Kooka’s idea, though Hum
afterwards whispered in my ear that he considered my
"Mistle-throo” plan much better. It was Quite Agreed
that An-Bus-K, must be the first concern, and that the building of
it be commenced immediately. So early next morning the work was
started, Kooka directing, Koala puffing, Rut G grumbling, Top giggling,
Hum "eleven-o’clocking” rather too frequently, and String writing
Notes of Progress down in a book.
At the first it was doubtful if the An-Bus-K could ever reach
completion.
Kooka, who made an excellent speaker, was not such an excellent
worker, and though this was put down to his size and ability to only
move the smaller twigs and leaves, he seemed to spend a most un-
necessary amount of time upon the stump, ordering and scolding the
others about.
Koala proved a fairly good enthusiast, but had the unfortunate
habit of pulling off gum leaves as she passed the An-Bus-K or puffing
so heatedly upon it that the whole affair several times completely
collapsed.
Top, whose long, green legs invariably got tangled up in the
branches and who was too scatter-brained to stop long at one thing,
made of himself such a nuisance that he was given the job of decorating
the An-Bus-K, Kooka admitting that, if nothing else, it would at least
deceive the Geebungs into thinking it was a new and queer kind of
tree that grew along the ground.
Rut G was a thorough worker once he started, but as he demanded
a full ten minutes of everybody’s combined efforts to push him in and
pull him out of the Tree (and he did this quite often, because, as he
frequently repeated, he "never permitted duty to suffer”), and as three
times in doing so he knocked over the handiwork, he was signed off
and asked to make himself useful elsewhere, even if it entailed dis-
appearing all the morning.
Hum was very willing, even if he did consume a bottle of honey


over one branch, and get half way to another and discover it was time
for a little "keep you up and going.” . ,
By dinnertime, despite Kooka’s talk, Koala s pantmess, lop s
irrelevance, Rut G’s gloomy forebodings and speeches, and Hum’s long
and constant inner wants, the An-Bus-K. was taking a gratifying shape.
By Kooka’s suggestion, they had erected it against The Tree, so
that behind The Tree itself formed a kind of headquarters for the
army. Top, however, was more in favour of a circular barrier, so as
any strong Geebungs would not be able to creep in at the back of the
An-Bus-K., and make a rear attack. But, as Hum pointed out, they
would then be hopelessly shut in with no means of escape if the Geebungs
proved the stronger fighters —and one never knew with these Geebungs
—and stormed relentlessly in upon them.
Then came the realization that what would be just an ideal height
in Bus-K’s for Top, would be rather awkward for smaller Hum, Rut
and Koala, and altogether impossible for little Kooka.
Kooka amended changing the approved shape of the Bus-K. to a
sloping one, Top Tip to stand at the tall end, and Kooka at the short.
Rut, however, favoured one that did not slope so evidently, but jutted
up and down, and so supplied everyone’s needs without attracting
unnecessary attention.
It was Hum who made the brilliant suggestion of building a Very
Ample Bus-K. on the approved shape, and giving Kooka and the smaller
ones sufficient stumps, for their individual needs, to stand upon at the
back.
It was decided to carry on with Hum’s idea.
At three o’clock the An-Bus-K. just covered the top of Top’s
green head, but at Top was a jumping sort of creature they allowed
a few inches in case of emergency.
Stumps were the next question. Kooka needed a great many and
Hum almost as much. Also Hum, whose wings had forgotten how to
fly, and who could not squirm up things like Rut or clamber down
like Koala, had to have steps cut in his stump for ascent and descent.
Top Tip frilled out some leaves on the An-Bus-K. to make it less war-
like, and Rut scattered around bark here and there to further deceive
the enemy.
"It looks just like —” began Kooka proudly. ' That s what I think,
praised Koala.
"One would never guess it was a —” said Rut. "No, never even
dream it —” agreed Top. "Never,” admitted Hum.
Everyone had a snack behind the Bus-K., and decided that the


next move in accordance with the Methodical Forethought was to get
the war equipment in readiness.
Top proved very useful in pulling down sharp twigs and gum-
nuts; Rut G supplied quite a number of knobby roots and tree ends;
Koala and Ffum gathered large armfuls of stones, sticks and etceteras;
and Kooka arranged them all behind the barrier.
It was decided that Top, on account of his long, loose arms, must
have the sticks and bushes; Koala, Rut and Hum sharing the nuts,
stones, and knobs; leaving the "cetras” to Kooka, who couldn’t throw.’
The battle was timed for ten o’clock next morning, action to
begin by a volley of artillery and a stirring warcry composed by Kooka:
We, Rut, Koala, Kooka, Top and Hum,
Are out to fight you Geebungs, and we will,
By Gum!”
Kooka suggested that each one pop up at his name, and that the
By Gum be the signal of the exhibition of the standards, gumleaves
stuck like warriors’ plumes in every furze cap.
I left Kooka and Hum, whose turn it was to stay guard over
the fort till relieved by the other officers, dozing behind the An-Bus-K,
and promised to be on time next morning with a book and pencil to
perform any necessary duties as Official Reporter, Chronicler and His-
torian to the Battle of the Geebungs.
At ten o clock next day war commenced. Kooka gave the signal,
took up a twig baton, and conducted the Stirring Song in excellent
spirit. Then everyone hurled out their first supply of ammunition on
to the enemy before they discovered the enemy was not there. This
was Rather Awkward and Decidedly Embarrassing. So one by one, very
silently, they retrieved their weapons, and went through the Stirring
Song again.
By twelve o clock, no one could squeeze out another Stirring note,
and the ammunition was getting a little knocked about. Accordingly,
Kooka arranged for ten-minute relief parties, whilst the remainder of
the warriors rested and snacked.
Top came first. As Official Reporter, I asked his opinion on Gee-
bungs. "They maybe and they maybe not,” he said obligingly. "One
never knows.”
Koala came next. When I asked him what he thought about War
1 actics, he said they were a nuisance when you got them in you—
especially the head—and sometimes they proved fatal.
m Rut Jf fraine s! , t0 sa y much - "Perhaps. Maybe. Who knows?
why not? was all he ventured.


Kooka went on duty for the next ten minutes. He said a lot
of everything and even offered to stand for a P*J°“S”P ; h „
Hum was last. "What is your opinion— I began. Hush,
Y Stamp! Stamp! Something was stalking through The
J'Sld Std W An-Bus-K. H_
end of the An-Bus-K. Hum broke into the Stirring Song, and Hu
threw out a root end. In fact, he jumbled everything, and completely
forgot Kooka’s first instructions, that of warning the rest of them of
the t however, they heard the chaos, and came tumbling, rush-
ing, scrambling and squabbling to their appointed positions; and
tumbled, rushed, scrambled, and squabbled into the wrong places. Top
commandeered Kooka’s stronghold; Kooka grabbed Rut s; Rut immedi-
ately jumped on to Hum’s; and Hum captured Top s. Then everyone
bumped and tripped into their correct places. . . n .
Tramp! Tramp! Tramp! Kooka took out his twig baton. One.
Two! Three! Everyone took a deep breath and opened their mouths.
Not a note came out.
Kooka gulped and shook the baton again.
Stamp’ Tramp! Stamp! Out of the bushes opposite appeared
two things rather like String in appearance, and with funny smooth
pieces of wood attached to gleaming metal ends under their arms. In
two minutes they had disappeared. t
There was a Deep Silence. Kooka was the first to speak. bo
those,” he said, "are Geebungs!” , ,
Everyone looked at me. Top raised a green eyebrow; Koala shrank
in distaste; Rut looked pained; Kooka frowned and Hum crept re
assuringly closer.
"A Geebung in disguise,” Kooka accused.
Hum came and stood behind me. "No,” he said bravely, String
is String! String is not a Geebung. Geebungs have dingo’s teeth and
dragon’s claws and breaths-of-fire and
"A Geebung in disguise,” echoed the rest without Hum.
Hum threw back his head. "The time has come for me to speak,
he said dramatically.
"About what?” said Kooka. "Geebungs, answered Hum. You
see, the day that String and I saw one sitting on a buttercup at Tree
In The Middle—we didn’t—that is, we only thought—we might have
been mistaken —Oh, surely, you believe me?


"I do,” said Top, loyally. "I—er, well, you’re not such a bad
hum, Hum,” said Rut.
"We shared the Left Overs,” remembered Koala. "I’d hate to
think it of you, admitted Kooka. Deep Silence.
WTat worries me, said Kooka, is what those things are if they
are not Geebungs.”
"They look like String-things,” said Koala. "Yes, but those long
sticks they carry—” "And the way they walk—”
I stepped forward. "I can tell you,” I said. "Then do.” "Are
they Dangerous?” "Will they hurt?” "Is it an Urgent Matter?”
"Yes,” I said, "it is a Dangerous and Serious Matter. But you’ll
have to wait until the next chapter.”
CHAPTER EIGHT
IN WHICH WE HOLD A GRAND FAREWELL PARTY
HOSE, I said, were woodcutters, or, if you prefer it,
cutters of wood.” "Oh,” said Kooka, Koala, Top and
Hum, "And what ezackly,” asked Hum, "is a coo-
wutter, String? He told you,” said Koala, "a wooder
of cut. You mean,” giggled Top, "a wutter of
cood. No, declared Rut, "String distinctly said a
All JJ *rC t XT’ 1 re • « i
wuttercood. All wrong,” sniffed Kooka, "it’s woodcutter and cutter
of wood. Wood —wood —you know. Wood have gone—wood have
come —wood’ve cutter —only the 've’ is left out.”
. i S1^ ed P at l No, Kooka, I said, "you are not entirely
right. This wood is a different wood altogether. It means the wood
of the tree; the wood that is The Forest; The Bush itself. Now, do
you understand?”
"Oh!” said Kooka, Koala, Rut, Top and Hum.
Oh! said Kooka, Koala, Rut, Top and Hum.
"What was the woodcutter doing in our Forest?” demanded Rut.
I think, I said sadly, he was looking for wood to cut.”


"But,” gasped Koala, "surely he wouldn’t cut wood from this
lovely Forest?”
"Surely—” agreed Kooka, Rut, Top and Hum.
"It’s been done before to other lovely forests, I replied sorrowfu y.
Gloomy Silence!
"If The Forest is chopped up,” said Hum, The Tree will go too.
"'Yes, The Tree will go too.”
Gloomy Silence!
"And if The Tree goes, then we — faltered Hum.
Very Gloomy Silence. ~
"Perhaps by that time you’ll all be in Storyland, I said hopeful >.
The prospect was cheering. Top began playing with a sprig ot
c U m tips; Rut threaded a pine-needle and sewed on a button; Hum
hurtcd hopefully in my pocket for a stray sweet; Koala started to fan
herself once more; and Kooka dived after a lizard scutthng through the
g "We should,” he said between dashes, "have —a Grand Farewell
—Party!” „ ( < T . „
"That’s the idea!” approved Top, "Dancing and Lectures,
"Displays,” suggested Koala. "Songs” itemed Kooka. "Snacks,”
finished Hum anxiously.
"Let’s make arrangements,” said everyone.
It was decided to hold the G.F.P. (Grand Farewell Party) on the
very next afternoon; spending the morning decorating up the An-
Bus-K, which, flattened out, would make an excellent table tor the
snacks.
By Kooka’s suggestion, I pencilled out a Programme of Proceedings,
and submitted it in turn to the participants for approval.
Concluded, it ran:—ltem I.—United Chorus. Snack Interlude.
Item 2. —Leaf Tarantelle —by Top Tip. Snack Interlude.
Item 3.—Lecture. Subject, "The Internal Workings of a Tree
—by Root-Under-The-Ground. Snack Interlude (much needed).
Item 5. —Laughing Song by Kooka. Snack Interlude. _
Item 6. —Selection by Hum Bumble. Final Snack. Toasts. United
Chorus.
As no one knew a United Chorus other than the Stirring Song, it
was decided unanimously to sing this very loudly and rather quick y,
so that the words would not be too noticeable.
Hum, whose gifts neither included dancing, lectures, tree climbing


nor laughing songs, was rather at a loss as how to entertain, but did
not object to obliging, inasmuch that another item would mean another
snack on the list.
Kooka was elected Master of Ceremonies, and Hum, after some
hesitation, the Passer-Round of Snacks.
I promised to bring up the refreshments and drinks, with the
exception of snakes and sap, which, if required, would have to be
supplied by the ones who wanted them.
Kooka suggested inviting Wise Owl, who had not "gone off” yet,
and was consequently feeling at a loose end. It was also decided to
ask Beetle, Ant, and Ant’s Uncle (Bull Joe), as they would be useful
in eating up the scraps.
The G.F.P. was timed for three o’clock.
Next morning, I left the decorating to all the Forest Folk, and
went down to the village store. Here I obtained a tin of condensed
milk, a bottle of honey, a pound of ginger-snaps with fancy tops, a
bar of nut-chocolate, a packet of Creamy Toffee, three penn’orth of
Hundreds and Thousands (for Beetle, Ant, and Ant’s Uncle, Bull Joe)
a bottle of raspberry cordial, and some paper tumblers.
At three o’clock everyone was waiting at the end of The Path.
Kooka had spruced up his feathers till they glowed; Koala had
twined an orchid round one ear; Top wore a girdle of gumleaves;
Kut G carried a walking-stick made from a twisty twig; and Hum
was shod in brand-new bud mocassins.
t •J T WaS i ntr °duced to Beetle and Ant, and was very pleased (though
I said I was sorry) to hear of the indisposition of Uncle Bull Joe.
Wise Owl woke up sufficiently to give me a sleepy nod and ask
what time it was.
Setting the table was an enthralling task. Hum danced greedily
rom end to end of the An-Bus-K, scarcely containing his wild en-
husiasm. By Kooka s whispered suggestion, I only set out one article
at a time, planting away even part of that for the Final Snack.
When everything was ready, we opened with the United Chorus-
We, Rut, Koala, Kooka, Top, and Hum,
Are out to fight you Geebungs and we will
By Gum!”
It was not exactly suitable, but it was loud and enthusiastic, and
Beetle, Ant, and Wise Owl were gratifyingly impressed.
During the pause for Top to get ready for his dance, Hum handed


round the "bixits,” keeping the lolliest lolly tops for himself, and giving
Ant and Beetle a crumbled-up one them.
nu , ittszss tavsn
stlsWngwhS; somtdmefhe pTvw'ed breathleTsly, first northward then
s&jjstsz sraas?*
s=as= aAtsis
m ' lk ßut took his stand for the lecture on the tree-stump and empha-
sised his best points by banging the ground with his stick.
"We wilf divide,” said he, "the Tree into different sections. No
let us look at the first division. In it you will see numerous cells
These cells are a very important factor as concerns the we 1-bemg of
the Tree. Do you know why? I will tell you. It is because
As everybody was asleep, no one found out. ,
The following snack (much needed) included a bar of choco a
to brighten the audience up. , tt TCnala had
Koala’s tree-climbing display was very interesting. If Koala had
lost her figure she had not lost her speediness Up and down she
whisked, a very seething source of energy m her plump little body.
She showed how speedily she could climb in case of emergency, an
went over the movement with slow motion to show how it was don .
Everyone was so interested that when she announced that t a was
end there was a cry for more, and only the remainder of the chocolate
and some Hundreds of Thousands regained or er.
Kookaburra’s laughing song was s.de-crackmg Kooka had the
rare gift of coaxing smiles to every face and by his last gay choru .
"Come, Forest Folk, all laugh with me,
Ha! ha! ha! ha! He! he! he! he!”
even Wise Owl was awake and smirking, and Rut Gs mouth was
actually turning up at the corners. a
Hum came on for his performance with a piece of toffee f o
the previous snack tucked lovingly beneath one cheek. ~
He decided to dance, but fell over. Then he started to talk on
"the interior workings of a Hum,” but was lost for sufficient words
He thought of trying to emulate Koala, but was forced to gn
up; and after he had broken down on a high note m an impromp u


i H 3 1
0
' Sometimes he leapt above the uppermost tree boughs ”


song, he finished in bowing himself off, with the intention of stopping
Ant before he polished off the last drop of honey.
The Final Snack lasted as long as supplies lasted, and everyone
tried to get as much stowed away as they successfully could without
appearing too greedy or putting themselves in the path of possible
resultant "itises.” When the goodies were all finished, everyone s toast
was drunk in raspberry cordial from the paper tumblers, and the United
Chorus sung again, but finished with "End” this time to show that
it was.
"We, Rut, Koala, Kooka, Top and Flum,
Are out to fight you Geebungs and we will,
By Gum!
End.”
The sun was setting, and after things were made a little tidy, we
farewelled each other. . , ,
"I’ll be seeing you again, but not so often, I told Kooka and the
rest. "I want to make some headway with my book, you know.”
Hum walked to the beginning of The Path with me. Fie was just
a little quiet and subdued. I wondered whether it was simply too m uch
snacking, or perhaps the thought of forever bidding goodbye to The
Beloved Forest. Being so fond of both, it was hard to say with certainty.
As I walked into the house I heard Splash’s Mother say to Splash,
"Next week you’ll have your brother back, Phil.” (Splash’s true name
was Philip Christopher.) I made investigations. It was true!
Anne-of-Next-Door’s Mother had written to say that she was
bringing Anne-Anne and Peter John home the very next Friday!


IN WHICH MANY THINGS HAPPEN, AND WE SAY GOODBYE
N THE day before Peter John’s homecoming, I left my
work and went up The Path to The Forest to see
about arranging for some Welcome-Back Function on
Peter John’s behalf. But Top was the only one about.
Kooka, he informed me, was nesting at Extreme End,
and Koala had naturally gone too. Rut was working,
as usual, and Hum? Hum had not been around for days. There seemed
to be some sort of attraction down at the Lily Pond at the bottom of the
paddock. What, he could not say.
Top also told me that Wise Owl had "gone off” two days back,
and offered to call up Beetle and Ant and Ant’s Uncle, Bull Joe (who
had completely recovered) if I particularly wished to hold a Meeting.
All this I learnt as T.T. swung from branch to branch, hanging
summer blossoms on the trees. His attitude was quite plainly, "Such
a nuisance! Fancy popping in at this time! Most awkward! Well,
he’ll have to amuse himself. I’m far too busy to bother.”
I left Top a bag of toffee I had brought up for Hum, and said
I wouldn’t wait.
As I strolled down The Path, I glanced in the direction of the Lily
Pond. Splash was sailing leaf boats on its placid surface.
The next morning I hurried up to The Forest, and just caught
Hum hurrying away.
"Hum,” I said excitedly, "you’ll never guess!”
"Guess what?” replied Hum, rather crossly, and with one eye on
the distant Lily Pond.
"Peter John comes back this afternoon!”
"Who?” asked Hum indifferently. "Peter John,” said I.
"Peter John? Oh yes, to be sure, the little boy. Well! Well!”
"What are you going to do about it?”
"Do about what?”
"Why, Peter John coming back, of course.”
"Oh, I don’t know. Find Kooka.”
"But—”
"He’s at Extreme End. You’ll find him quite easily.”
I was taken aback.
"But Hum,” I said, "I thought you were fond of Peter John.”
"So I am,” announced Hum, "but there are other people besides
Peter John, you know! You, for instance. I’m very fond of you, String.”


"Thank you, Hum.”
"And Peter John, you won’t mind my saying, is just Peter John,
after all. In fact, just a boy, all said and done.”
"And you are just a Hum.”
"That,” coldly, "is not what we were speaking of. What I was
going to say was, Peter John is just a boy after all, and anyway, there’s
Anne-Anne.”
"But Anne-Anne isn’t a Hum,” I reminded him.
"No —but a Hum isn’t always a Hum, either.”
"What do you mean?”
"Well, it’s this way, String. A Hum in The Forest is just as it
should be, but a Hum in a Forest that has been cut up —well, you
know —”
"I don’t think I do. A Hum should be a Hum anywhere, and
then there is my book —”
"Oh, yes,” said Hum with a sidelong glance, "there’s the book.
I suppose Storyland is a delightful place once you get used to it. For
myself, I like Forests or —Lily Ponds.”
"We weren’t talking of Lily Ponds,” I answered snappily.
"And, of course,” continued Hum, "it would be just the thing
to go to Storyland. Still —String! If a Hum changed to, say a —
Twingytwang, he couldn’t go to Storyland as a Hum, could he? Hums
do change, too. I’ve often heard of it.”
"I don’t know what you’re talking about,” I said crossly, "and
I think you’re very mean. You might at least have got up a concert
for Peter John.”
"Previous engagement,” replied Hum shortly.
A cunning idea occurred to me. "That’s a shame,” I said, "because
I was bringing quite a lot of snacks up —cream puffs, seed cake, and
peanut brittle.”
Hum yawned. "Other people,” he said, "bring snacks too.
A horrible suspicion assailed me. "Hum, are you trying to say
goodbye?” I asked him.
"No, that’s easy. Goodbye!” he said, moving off.
"Hum, are you putting me off?” I persisted.
"Off where? You’re standing on the ground. Don’t be silly.”
"Hum,” I said reproachfully, "I can tell that this is the end. Our
happy days are over for ever. We will never see each other again.”
"Oh, yes, we will,” replied Hum airily. "Quite often, too. Don’t
look so sad and worried, String. Everything will turn out all right.
You see if it doesn’t. Well, I must get on. See you sometime.”


I went and sat under The Tree. I felt very sad and very bewildered.
The Forest was silent. Even Top had moved to the other end.
A woodcutter came tramping past. He nodded a friendly head
to me.
"Nice day?” I said. "Are you going to chop down all these trees?”
"Yes. They have to go. Leave the hill a bit bare when it’s finished,
won’t it? Still, as people say—Ouch!”
"What’s wrong?”
"A bull joe! The wretch! Vicious things those ants! Any way,
I killed him.”
He passed on to his work, and I fell to composing a suitable note
of condolence to poor bereaved Ant, now "uncleless.”
Peter John came up from the station, in Anne-of-Next-Door’s
Father’s car.
He was looking very brown and bonny. He threw his arms round
his Mother, gave Splash a brotherly nosepull, shook hands with his
Father, and nodded calmly to me.
"I can shoot breakers,” he boasted, "an’ Anne has got a snapshot
of me on a shark, a rubber one, of course. Anne and I caught a
lobster once, only it got away. An’ I brought you home some shells,
Mum—singy ones when you put them to your ear. One day, we had
a boat an’ went all over the lagoon an’—Oh, here’s Anne!”
Anne danced in, all legs and curls and airiness.
"Oh Pete,” she chirped, "you left your spade. Here it is.”
"Ooh,” said Peter John, "I didn’t want to lose it. That’s the one
I —” whisper! whisper! whisper! Giggle! giggle! giggle!
"What?” I said jealously.
Peter John looked at Anne-Anne, and they both shook again with
laughter.
"It’s a secret,” volunteered Anne, "a very deadly secret between
Peter and me. We couldn’t possibly tell you, could we, Pete?”
Peter John shook his head vigorously. "Not possibly,” he decreed.
There was a Stiff Silence.
"Can you swim, Uncle?” asked Peter John kindly but a little dis-
interestedly. I can swim five yards and Anne can swim three. Can’t
you, Anne?”
"You had your feet on the bottom the last half,” accused Anne.
I went on to the verandah and tried not to hear the familiar giggles
that floated out to me. I sat very tight and stared hard at the garden.
Splash was intent on some little affair of his own, but spared a moment
to wave a tentative hand to me as he passed.


After a while, Anne-of -Next-Door skipped home. I felt I must
go in and clear up about this "secret” and "Uncle” business. Besides, I
wanted to tell Peter John about the fate of The Forest and the inex-
plicable strangeness of Hum Bumble.
Peter John was unpacking.
"Come and help me, Uncle,” he called out.
"Peter John, why are you calling me 'Uncle’?”
"Don’t you like it? I’ll call you just Jim, if you’d sooner. Anne
calls all her relations by their first names.”
I looked very stern and dignified. "You will decidedly do nothing
of the kind,” I replied.
"Righto, don’t get your hair off, Nunk,” giggled Peter John.
I was silent, not knowing just what to say, nor how to say it. Then
I gulped resolutely and determined to get done with it.
"Peter John —” I began.
"Say Pete, Uncle; everyone else does.”
"Have you forgotten,” I continued, disregarding the interruption,
"the Pact —and things—and the Forest —?”
Peter John reddened. "Oh Uncle,” he said, "I’m five now. That
was only fun. I was just playing. When one grows older—one ”
"And Hum?” I said sadly.
"Hum? What are you talking about, Uncle? You are funny.”
"Perhaps it’s all just as well,” I said half aloud, "especially now The
Forest is going to be cut up.”
"Cut up, is it? What fun! I love seeing trees come down!”
I went outside and wandered aimlessly around the garden. I felt
Very Desolate and Very Lonely and Very Sad. The thing I had always
feared had happened. Peter John had outgrown me.
Splash came sauntering along. He was going on for three. Three
is interesting.
"’Lo String,” he said. "Doing anyfink?”
"Oh, no, nothing particular, Splash. Why?”
"I wanted to show you somefink. Just you. Down at The Lily
Pond.”
We walked down together.
"It’s a secret,” volunteered Splash, "and it’s going to be ’tween us.
"Splash, whatever is it?”
"It’s —you must never, never tell, Uncle String—”
"No.” "Promise.” "I promise.” "Cross your heart.” "I cross
my heart.” So we made our first compact.
"Well, it’s a —a Twingytwang.” "A Twingytwang?” "Yes.”


/ N kJ/[ ) \U .„ *> * - •" >/-1.
S\ <~*v~*r—zr$‘*r .., «/ «■ *„,„ .„ i(/ u- i;—V '/
'V ?/ •'</■'" v/ „ /A ■" ]/ ■' * „- ■</ -.y ,, , / l,7 i^ i >v .
*v ... ■// '" y ' •"« 'x' —■ ./ 7 v ”' '■'/ .,
WAm~ U ' w "' '‘‘ J^r- v/' ►-/ /> - 7 v - - l > ,v
lK/y?SH*' V ' *' ' ,y *S* r J‘ WJ v*"'" " I'/ r - k
C ffiBVw iijglJ ,,„ i/» , »*/ ( l " t/ u/ " v//„ <*■ ; » /
’V* Wv’- ffl'" * v * > "^^-!'"' ,l< - W w */ */''• ,, u ' v ' U/ V/
i.i A..*;;; - - ,;vv r ; -: -
/\l, InM w ;L </# IV ,, 7 . «'- «' “ J// VI/ . /'/ ■ •'/ ,
| H '*y W "" |f / p *'- -** * ■
On the middle lily boat sat a■


"Whatever is a Twingytwang?” "Oh, just a Twingytwang.”
"Something to do with the Lily Pond?” "Yes—” . „
"Fairies?” "No—” "Birds?” "Hardly—” Ammals? Not
quite _” "Then what?” "Oh, just a Twingytwang.”
After was a doubtful pause; I felt I must know more.
"Like a bird to look at, of course?” I asked casually.
"Not exactly.” "Something like a bear?” I suggested hopefully.
"In places.” , . .
"Fairylike?” "Sometimes.” Silence. I had a happy thought.
"Splash,” I said, "I knew a Twingytwang too—about a hundred
years ago, when I was young. , ~
Splash was jubilant. "I thought so,” he said. I wonder if your
Twingytwang was anything like my Twingytwang.
"What’s yours like?” "Oh, it’s hard to explain. You know.
"Yes, I know.” "And anyway, you’ll be seeing him soon,” said
Splash. ''Down at the Lily Pond?” "Yes,” said Splash.
So down to the hollow with its still pool wreathed m pale leaves,
and cream and shell-tinted lily flowers, that was to Splash a place of
Great Importance, with Splash’s warm, confiding little fingers tight in
mine, I went to meet the Twingytwang.
It seemed very strange that I, who had felt so unhappy an hour
ago, now was in exuberant spirits.
"Splash,” I said, "I am most honoured to know that you are allow-
ing me to meet Hum —at least, Twingytwang.
I fumbled in one pocket and, discovering a bar of chocolate, offered
half to Splash.
He ate a section and put away the rest.
"Twingy loves chocolate,” he explained.
"Well, that proves it,” I said to myself. "I wonder will Kooka and
Koala and Top and Rut change their names too. Root-Under-The -
Ground will be; Pebble-Under-The-Pond, I expect. Rut G. and Put P.
They rhyme, too,”
Up in The Forest the axes were ringing, but down at The Lily Pond
the wind was rustling the lily petals into a tremor of cream and rosebud.
And on the middle lily sat a—
"Yes,” said a thin, very high, quick voice, "yes, it is funny how I
always did fancy chocolate on a lily boat down at The Lily Pond of a
sunny afternoon.”
THE END




/
\


f V
3 1508
#23.1
PUBLISHER’S
NOTE
A/ C
'Y'HIS is one of those
whimsical half-fairy,
half-human stories that
children love, amusing:
them while awakening
their imaginations. It
is also that unusual thing
—a fairy-story of the
Australian Bush, The
illustrations might have
been drawn by that little
imp, Hum himself.


■
■
\ J*
*
■
*
Wholly Set Up and Printed in Australia
by W. A. Hamer Pty. Ltd.. 20S-2I7
Peel Street. North Melbourne. N.l.
*3*
i> <
-
. »'
'
