





T/VFp
hi o
r /
Hume Robertson
An Appreciation


“&nb gerbantg stall bo
seriate, anb tfjep stall
See JNs face.”


The Rev. Hume Robertson, B.A.
The scholarship which you are seeking
to win was founded by one of his many
friends to commemorate the name of a
very gallant Geelong Collegian who both
in Peace and War upheld the honour of
his school.
Hume Robertson was conspicuous at
school for the extraordinary enthusiasm
which he threw into everything he under-
took. This keenness of interest he never
lost. Living and dying were to him rich
adventures. He loved variety as boys
do, loved laughter and games and good
company. But he possessed also the
qualities that belong more especially to
manhood, dogged determination, breadth
of mind, fortitude in suffering, sympathy
with trouble, and fearless opposition to
all that was evil.
‘Page c Uhree


Early in life he asked himself the ques-
tion that confronts every Public School
boy—“ How can I most fully serve the
world I live in?’’ He felt that he could
give himself most freely as a minister of
the Gospel, in making plain the things by
which men live and nations endure, and
in revealing through his own brotherli-
ness the love of God to men. From this
decision he never wavered, and wherever
he went his joyous personality made
people reconsider the meaning of religion.
All his qualities had full scope when he
went as a chaplain to France., The men
in the trenches found a soldier who would
share their risks, and officers discovered
in him a leader of men who strengthened
their authority.
His coolness in danger infected others
with courage. After being wounded he
was stationed at a large base hospital.
At any hour of the night, if aeroplanes
were attacking the town, he would leave
his shelter and walk the wards, steadying
everyone with his ready humour, pre-
pared to lend a hand in any emergency.
‘Page Four


At this post his self-denying thorough-
ness revealed, itself amazingly. The par-
ents of every man in that huge house of
healing received a weekly account of
their boy’s progress. It meant to him
sometimes 100 notes a day,—what it
meant to the parents they alone know.
But his life work lay mainly in Vic-
toria, in Mia Mia, Castlemaine, and
Brighton Beach. In his church at Bright-
on Beach a memorial service was held
a few days after his death, and the Rev.
P. J. Murdoch, M.A., spoke to the con-
gregation about their minister. The
words that follow are the tribute he paid
that day to the character of his friend:—
“This man, whose death we mourn,
whose release from pain we rejoice
in, was a man very greatly beloved—so
deeply beloved that any attempt to sketch
his character must disappoint his friends.
Yet some such attempt I must make, and
I ask your pardon for its inadequacy.
Hume Robertson had a genius for
friendship. He made friends wherever
‘Page Five


he went, and he retained them. He re-
tained them by maintaining friendly in-
tercourse and doing friendly acts. He
took a great deal of trouble to do that.
And he took trouble because of his
friendly spirit. Friendliness was an in-
nate disposition. He was very keen about
his work ; very keen about his games ;
but throughout work and game the
human interest persisted—the friendly
hand was feeling for the hand of a friend.
And this friendliness was thoroughly
catholic. Men of his own profession and
men outside of it, lawyers, doctors,
soldiers, wise men and foolish men,
women as well as men—all were grist
to his mill. All were embraced by his
goodwill, and all felt his spell. And so
it comes about that there are few men
in our community whose death would be
felt by so many to be a personal loss.
We deeply mourn the loss of the com-
munity, and the loss of the Church ; but
for all of us and for a multitude of others
there is something more intimate. We
are experiencing a personal bereavement.
'Page Six


I think I am right in making this
genius for friendship the central charac-
teristic of Hume Robertson ; but there
were other characteristics—characteris-
tics that made his friendship immensely
valuable. One of these was the gallant
spirit he bore. We saw that, of course,
when, at an age that would have made it
impossible for most men, he volunteered
as a Chaplain, went through years of
service with the colours, and suffered
grievous wounding. We saw it, too, in
connection with his last illness. But
there was more than that. He bore this
spirit throughout life. He faced life and
the world and death “breast and back as
either should be.” He was, indeed, some-
thing of an adventurer. That was one
reason why he was so keen a traveller.
But it was not in travelling only that the
spirit appeared. All life was for him an
adventure, and he loved that aspect of it.
Then, he was richly gifted with humour.
That was a constant delight to his
friends and to himself. It brightened
many weary times*and relieved pain. It
‘Page Seven


did far more than that. It enabled him
to see men and things in the proportion
of their importance. It saved him from
reckoning himself or other men bigger
than they were. He could see them in
the perspective of history.
Along with these characteristics we
should mention his untiring industry. As
I have said, he knew well that he was
not one of the biggest men in the world.
He was quite safe from any foolish vanity
of that kind. But he knew equally well
that there were some things he could
do and some things he was set to do.
And these things he would do at what-
ever cost of toil. No man in our Church
was keener to do the work that had been
given him to do.
Another thing that helped him im-
mensely in his work and in his friend-
ships was the naturalness of his good-
ness. No one who knew him well could
doubt that he was animated by the spirit
of Christ. A deep religious conviction
and religious purpose were the supreme
realities of his life. Everything was
‘Page £ighl


touched by that Divine influence. It
sent him into the Ministry of the Gospel;
it shaped and inspired all his work ; and
had power over ail his intercourse. Yet
he did not speak much about religion to
his friends. He never put on religion
like a garment. It was an innermost
power, working out from the depths of
his character, where it had its throne.
The Spirit of God, so far as it was given
to him, was incarnated, that is, it was
wrought into the manhood of Hume
Robertson.
All this, then, and much more, he
brought to friendship, and all this he
gave to Christ.
The characteristics I have referred to
appear in his public work. He was, per-
haps, more conscientious than interested
in the routine of Church courts ; but he
did his share of it faithfully. In large
questions of ecclesiastical policy he was
keenly interested, and his counsel was
always worthy of close attention. He
brought to every problem an able and
thoroughly independent mind—a mind
‘Page t\[ine


very well informed and trained to see
things in their proportions. It v/as, I
think, the social aspects of the Church’s
work that engaged his mind most deeply.
If there was any way in which the
Church could guide the community clear
of social perils, he was sure to recognise
the opportunity and lead the Church
along that path. His interest in men and
women ruled his ecclesiastical efforts.
Of Mr. Robertson’s work in the con-
gregations over which he had charge,
you know much more than I. Neverthe-
less, I do know something. I was sent
up by my Presbytery to Castlemaine to
prosecute the call of Brighton Beach,
and I saw the deep love his people there
bore for him, and their great unwilling-
ness to lose his services. And then I
have been familiar with the long story
of your devotion to him. Here, then,
are two congregations that have loved
him with a quite extraordinary affection.
A great deal can be inferred from that.
I am sure you all recognised that he did
his very best for you. And you knew
that his best was far better than most
‘Page "Cen


men could do. I am sure that his wide
reading made his sermons interesting.
I am sure that he was diligent in visiting,
especially in visiting the sick and the
lonely. And you found that he gave his
mind efficiently to congregational prob-
lems. But there was something beyond
all that. I think I shall be right if I speak
again of his genius for friendship. Here
was a man who was sure of the Gospel
of God’s love, and lived by it, and who
was constantly offering it to you through
the medium of friendship. His genuine
goodwill was manifest. He was your
friend, and he gave himself in his friend-
ship. He would work with you, talk
with you, laugh with you, play with you,
and in it all he was a frank, interesting,
gallant man ; but he was always some-
thing more, and had more to give. His
friendship embraced Jesus Christ, and
the biggest thing he had to give, and
always wished to give, was the key to
the door of that higher friendship.
Hume Robertson’s earthly history is
ended ; but we are sure his life goes on.
‘Page iSleven


<*l.o
RoS
e
He rests ; and we are glad of that. But
rest cannot be all for such a spirit. With
rest in his heart, he will surely have some
high adventure to pursue. And he will
be compassed with friends, and, above
all will penetrate ever deeper into the
supreme friendship. We leave him quite
confidently in that guardianship.”
HENRY THACKER, PTY. LTD., PRINTERS, GEELONG




