

Hume and Hovell's Overland Expedition.
Hums and Hovell’s Overland Expedition, 1824=25.
From Nouvelles Annales des Voyages, Tome XXVIII,
pp. 417-121. Paris, Dec. 1825.
Voyage dans le Sud de la Nomelle- flollande.*
M, le Redacteur des Annales des Voyages.
Monsieur, je vous prie d’accorder une place daus vos
t interessantes Annales h Particle qui suit cette lettre, c’est la
relation du voyage execute par les Anglois de Sydney a Port-
Western, qai a ete annoncee deja dans un de vos nurneros.
L’extrait que je vous envoie a etc adresse par M. Howel lui-meme
a M. Lejeur.e, dessiuateur de I'expedition de la Coquille, qui
m’a perrais de vous ka comrauniquer ; ainsi vous pouvez compter
sur son authenticity.
—Jules de Blosseville, officier de marine .
Voyage execute par MM. W. Hilton Howel et H. Hume de Sydney
d Port- Western dans le territoire de la Nouvelle-Galles du
Szid; ahrdge extrait du journal de M. Howel , 1824-1825.
(Communique par M. J. Le Jeune.)
Accompagnes par 6 domestiques et munis de vivres pour 16
seraaiues, nous quitiames, le 3 Octobre 1824, le district d’Appin
pour nous reudre a [’habitation de M. Hume, situee sur le bords
du lac George , par 34° 50' S. et 149 Q 21' E. de Greenwich.
Le 17, nous primes defiuitivement uotre point de depart, nous
dirigeant vers le 5.0., et le lenderaain nous traversames un beau
pays convert de paturages, qui reput le nom de plaines d« Dongal
(le naturels le nomment TVWf). Dans la soiree du 19, nous nous
trouvames sur le bords du Murrum-Bidgi, qui fut passe le 22 et
marchaut toujours au S.O a travers un pavs convert de belles
forets, nous arrivames deux jours apres au pied d’une chaine
considerable de montagnes. Comme il paroissoit impossible de
la gravir, surtout avec nos chariots, nous primes le parti de les
laisser aupres du Murrum-Bidgi, avec plusieurs objets d’un grand
poids et des provisions salees qui n’etoient pas iudispensables.—
Ce fut le 29 que nous trouvdmes enfin un passage pour entrer
daus les montagnes qui se dirigent h peu pres du sud au nord ;
le 31, nous comrnemjames a descendre sur leur versaut occidental,
et nous atteigniraes une petite riviere coulant vers le nord, qui
fut traversee le 2 Novembre. Nous campamos, dans la soiree du
* From copy in possession of E. A. Petherick, Esq.
t Now, through some misunderstanding, known as “ Yass ” Plains,
named after the River—Y£ri, or Yharr, or Yarrh, or Yar, properly
“ Yarra ” ; meaning running watey.—E.A. P.




memo jour, h un millo d’une autre riviere dont la premiere n’eat
qu’une branche, et il nous parut quo toutes lea deux so dirigeoient
rers le Murrum-Bidji.
Le 4 et le 5, nous continuances notro route dans le raontagnea ;
et le 6, avant le nuit, nous descendimes dans un pays tout-h-fait
different dea contrees que nous veniona de parcourir; il stoit
coupe, dana toua lea sens, par dea collines et dea moulagnea, et le
aommet de celles qui se dirigoient rers le sud etoit encore convert
de neige, ce qui nous determina h gagner davantage dans I’ouest.
Cea hautes montagnea, couvertes de friraas h la fin du printerapa,
furent nomraes Alpes Australiennes meridionales (South Australian
Alps). Noiia marchamea ainsi jusqu’au 13 dana un paya ouvert,
arrose par dea criquoa nombreusea; et, reprenant enauite la
direction du S.O.,noua ffimea arretea le 16 par la rencontre d'une
riviere situ6e par 36° 15' S. ' Cette riviere, qui reput le nom de
M. Hume , a aa source dana lea montagnes de la neige , aa largeur
eat d’environ 100 yards, olle oat profonde, et, selon toute
apparence, franchit aea borda dana le temps dea grandea pluies;
quoiqu’ila aoient elevea de 10 pioda au-deaaus du niveau qui nous
avona observe; le courant dont la vitease oat da 3 & 4 milles so
dirige vers I’O. et le N.O. Le 20. nous passaraea au sud de la
riviere dana un bateau fait avec de petitea pieces de boia et un
Jarpanlin (1); et, le 21, apr&s avoir traverse un pays coup 6
par dea maraia et dea lagons dana I’epace d’environ 4 milles,
nous roncoutramenea succeasivement deux branches de la riviere
de Hume qui furent paaseea de la memo manure.
Notre route conatammeut vers le S.O. nous fit
d6couvrir des boia tr&s-beaux et dea paturagea excellens jusqu’au
24; ce jour, dans la soiree, nous nous trouvamea sur lea bords
d’une charraante petite rivi&re, qui fut appelee riviere d'Oven, et
traversee le lendemain par 36° 30' S.; ayant prolonge ensuite la
base d’une chaine de montagnes que nous gravimes le 29, nous
deacendimes le 30 dana une plaine bien boisee qui nous
parcourumea jusqu’au 3 Decembre ; nous arrivamea alors sur le
bords d’une rivifere par 36° 50' S. qui reput le nom de
Ooulburn.
Ayant traverse la riviere Goulburn , nous avanpames vers le
S.O. jusqu’au 8 Decembre ; nous fflmes obliges alors de gagner au
N. pour tourner une raentagne que des buissones d’epines, des
ronces et dea herbea epaisses rendoient impraticable. Le 12, nous
reprimes I’ancienne direction, ayant devant nous un pays tr&a-
degag6 ; et, le 13, nous aperpumes des plainea qui paroissoient
I’emporter, sous toua les rapports, sur cellos que noua avions dejh
visitees ; le lendemain, noua efimos le plaisir de nous confirmer
(1) Jarpanlin. Ce mot, qui nous est inconnu, est transcrit litterale-
ment.
[Should be tarpaulin. —E.A.P.J




Hume and HovelVs Overland Expedition.
dans cette opinion favorable; car, pendant le trajet de cette
la fertilite du terrain aurpaasa toutea nos esperances.
Dana le coura de I’apr&s midi, nous montames an sommet d’une
colline d’ou nous nous dominions depuia le S.E. jusqu'h TO., aur
le plus beau pays que nous oussions encore vu dana toute la
colonie. Nous traversames ensuite cette auperbe contree en
merchant au sud et & I’ouest, et remontant h chaque pas de petites
rivieres et des ruisaoaux qui couloient tous vers le sud.
Le 16 au aoir, nous ehnes onfiu I’extreun satisfaction
d’atteindre Port- Western, et notre petite caravane campa aur la
pointo and de la cote occidental, vis-h-vis de la grande ile qui
forme le centre de la baio; de cette station noua voyions ae jetef
au fond du port une reviere considerable qui paroissoit venir de
Teat, du milieu d’une chaine de montagnea; elle re9oit presque
toutea celles que nous avions traverses lea trois jours
et, sous le rapport de la grandeur, ne le c&de & aucune des
rivieres decouvortes jusqu’h ce jour dana la colonie. Si noa
provisions n’avoient pas presque 6puiseea, nous eussions
entrepris une exploration complete, mais cet obstacle nous en
empeclia.
Le pays que noua parcour&moa pendant plusieurs jours avant
notre ofifroit les plus riches paturages, et nous trouvaraea
qu’il 6toil egalemeut fertile jusqu’au bord de la mer. Lea
environs du port paroissent manquer de bois de construction,
mais ils en fourniroient encore assez pour les besoins d’une ferme,
et & 60 milles environ on s’en procureroit en abondance, d’une
excellente quality, et par le transport les plus facile, au moyen
de la riviere qui a aa source dans les montagnea.
Pendant tout le cours de notre voyage juaqu’il Port-
Western, nous n’aperghraes aucun naturel, mais nous observamea
aouvent des traces de Jeur passage. A notre arrive, nous y
rencontrames une tribu qui se conduisit d’une manure amicale,
quoique sea premieres dispositions eussent paru hostiles; et,
pendant notre retour vers le lac George, nous vimes une centaine
d’hommes, de femmes et d’enfana qui n’eurent avec nous que des
rapports de paix et d’amiti6.
Ayant quittij Port-Western le 18 D6cerabre, nous repassames
le 24 la riviere Goulburn 25 milles plus h I’ouest que la premiere
fois. Cette nouvelle direction fut conserve jusqu’au moment
ou nous arriv&mes a la aeconde chaine de montagnes ; alors noua
reprimes notre aucienne route ; et, le 16 Jauvier 1825, notre
petite troupe revit I’endroit ou nous avions l*iss6 nos chariots, ils
6toient encore dans le raeme etat que quand nous les avoins
et cependant nous eumes des preuvea que les
naturels les avoient visites. Le 18, nous atteignimes I’habitation
de M. Hume aur les bords du lac George, apr&s une absence de




The Victorian Historical Magazine.
15 semaines. Durant ce long epace de temps, nous n’avions eu
de pluie qu’un seul jour; aussi tout le pays, generalement parlant,
sembloit-il avoir beaucoup souffert de la s^cheresse.
C’est par Port-Western soulernent qu’on peut 6tablir des
communications regulidres avec Pinterieur; car les montagnes
Alpines, qui commenceut k s’elever par environ 34° 30' 8., et
147° 50' E. ne se terminent qu’au promontaire de Wilson
dans le dtiroit de Bass, et le separent d’etablissement qui se
trouve h I’E. En consequence, les corates de Cumberland et
d'Argyleshire sont tout-it-fait isoles. Peut-etre seroit-il plus
facile de penetrer dans ces fertiles regions en partant des plaines
de Bathurst ?
La route parcourue dans ce voyage, en comprenant le retour,
est d’environ 1,200 milles dans la direction S.O. et N.E.
[English Translation .]
A Journey in the South of New Holland.
A Journey taken by Messrs. W. Hilton Hovell and H. Hume,
from Sydney to Western Port, in the Territory of New South
Wales ; an abridged extract from the diary of Mr. Hovell,
1824-1825, communicated by Mr. J. Le Jeune.
Accompanied by six servants, and provided with provisions
for sixteen weeks, we left the district of Appin on the 3rd of
October, and repaired to Mr. Hume’s house, situated on the
banks of Lake George, 34° 50' S. and 149° 21' E. of Greenwich.
On the 17th, we started definitely on our journey, going towards
the S.W., and the next day crossed a beautiful country covered
with pasturage, which received the name of Donegal Plains (the
natives call it Yeri).* In the evening of the 19th, we arrived at
the banks of the Murrum Bidgi, which was passed on the 22nd,
and, still marching to the S.W. across a country covered with
beautiful forests, we arrived two days afterwards at the foot of
a considerable chain of mountains. As it seemed impossible
to climb them, especially with our waggons, we decided to leave
them near the Murrum Bidgi with several weighty articles and
some salt provisions which were not indispensable. It was on
the 29th that we found a passage through the mountains which
run almost from south to north ; on the 31st we began to descend
their western side, and reached a little river running towards the
north, which we crossed on the 2nd of November. In the evening
of the same day, we encamped a mile off another river, of which
the first was only a branch, and it seemed to us that both were
flowing towards the Murrum Bidgi . On the 4th and sth, we
pursued our road through the mountains, and before nightfall
* Since printed Yass. See page 81.




Hume and Novell's Overland Expedition.
on the 6th we came to a very different country from that we
had just passed through ; it was cut up in all directions by hills
and mountains, and the tops of those turned to the south were
still covered with snow, and that determined us to go towards
the west. These high mountains covered with frost at the end
of spring were named South Australian Alps. ■We continued our
march until the 13th across an open country watered by numerous
creeks, and then going towards the S.W. we were stopped on the
16th by a river situated 36° 15' S. This river, which received
Mr. Hume’s name, had its source in the Snowy Mountains ; it
was about 100 yards in breadth, deep, and, according to all
appearances, overflowed its banks during the rainy season,
although they were 10 feet above the water mark; the current,
which flowed at a speed of from 3 to 4 miles, ran towards the
W. and N.W. On the 20th, we passed to the south of the river
in a boat made of small pieces of wood and a tarpaulin ; and on
the 21st, after having crossed a country cut up by marshes and
lagoons within the space of about 4 miles, we encountered, one
after the other, two branches of River Hume , which we crossed
in the same way. Keeping continuously to the S.W., we went
through beautiful woods and excellent pasturage until the 24th ;
that day, in the evening, we found ourselves on the banks of a
charming little river, which was called River Ovens ; we crossed
it the next day in 36° 30' S., then, having followed the base of a
chain of mountains, which we climbed on the 29th, we descended
the 30th into a well wooded plain, over which we travelled until
the 3rd of December; we arrived then on the banks of a river
situated in 36° 50' S., which received the name of Goulburn.
Having crossed River Goulburn, we advanced towards the S.W.
until the Bth of December ; we were then obliged to turn towards
the N.W. in order to go round a mountain that thickets, thorns,
brambles, and grasses rendered impassable. On the 12th, we
took our old direction again, having before us a clear country,
and on the 13th we saw some plains which seemed superior in
every way to those we had already visited ; the next day we
had the pleasure of having this favorable opinion confirmed, for
during the day’s journey the fertility of the soil surpassed our
expectations. In the course of the afternoon, we climbed to the
top of a hill, from whence we commanded a full view of the
country from the S.E. to the W. over the most beautiful scenery
we had yet seen in the colony. We then crossed this lovely
country, marching towards the south and west, and coming across
many little rivers and brooks, all flowing towards the south.
On the evening of the 16th, we had the extreme satisfaction
of reaching Western Port, and our little caravan encamped on the




The Victorian Historical Magazine.
southern point of the western coast opposite the large island
which forms the centre of the bay; from there we could see a
large river which seemed to come from the east from the middle
of a chain of mountains, and empty itself into the further end
of the harbour; it received the waters of all those rivers we had
crossed on the three preceding days, and is larger than any other
river yet discovered in the colony. If we had not exhausted
almost all our provisions, we should have undertaken a complete
exploration, but this prevented us.
The country we travelled over for several days before our
arrival showed rich pasturage, and we found it equally fertile
all the way to the sea shore.
In the surroundings of the harbour there was not much building
timber to be found, only enough for the needs of a farm, but
about 60 miles off there was abundance to be had and of an
excellent quality, and with easy transport by means of the river
with its source in the mountains. During the whole time of our
journey to Western Port, we had seen no natives, but often
noticed their traces. On our arrival, we encountered a tribe,
which behaved in a friendly way, although at first inclined to
be hostile ; during our return journey to Lake George, we saw
about a hundred men, women, and children, who" had most
peaceful and friendly intercourse with us. Having left Western
Port on the 18th of December, we recrossed River Goulburn on
the 24th, about 25 miles more to the west than the first time.
We kept on in this new direction until we arrived at the second
chain of mountains ; then we returned to our old route, and on
the 16th January, 1825, our litble band again saw the place where
we had left our waggons ; they were in the same state as when
we left them, but we saw proofs that the natives had visited
them. On the 18th, we reached Mr. Hume’s house on the
banks of Lake George, after an absence of fifteen weeks. During
all that time we only had rain one day, in fact, the whole country
generally speaking seemed to have suffered from drought. It is
only by Western Port that it is possible to establish regular
communication with the interior, for the Alpine Mountains,
which begin to rise in 34° 30' S. and 147° 50' E. only end at
Wilson's Promontory in Bass Strait, and separate it from the
settlement which is in the East. In consequence, the counties
of Cumberland and Argyleshire are quite isolated. Perhaps it
would be easier to penetrate into these fertile regions by starting
from the plains of Bathurst. The length of the route travelled
over in this journey going and coming is about 1,200 miles in the
direction of B.W. and N.E.


{
* 5- f
± °
ir d~
Ul
1508
00749651
