

Soli Deo Gloria
Hundredth Anniversary
of the
Dedication
of the
Evangelical Lutheran Church
(“Hum Weinberge Christi") Incorporated
at
Lobetbal, South Australia
1845 - 1945




'Praise yc the Lord. Sing unto the Lord a new song, and his praise in the
congregation of saints.” Psalm 149: 1.
Soli Deo (Bloria
Ibunbuebtb Hnmversair’
of the
Deblcatton
of the
Evangelical Xutberan Cburcb
(“Znnt OTfinbfrgp (Hljnsti”) Snrnrpuratrh
at
Xobetbal, South Australia
1845 1945
Subtler grruirrs If fib
grptrmbrr 16, 1345
the Sacred (^Memory
of the Founders of the Evangelical Lutheran "Zum Weinberge Christi” Church
Inc. at Lobethal, South Australia, who being denied liberty of conscience and
worship in the land of their birth, said vale to friends, relatives, and home, and
bravely faced the uncertainty of the long and hazardous ocean journey and the
trials and hardships inseparable from making a home in a new and unknown land
in order to enjoy that most priceless of all blessings liberty of conscience and
of worship and in the land of their adoption erected a house of worship
which even to-day is a striking monument to their piety and zeal for God, and
TO ALL who have during the past one hundred years rendered loyal and faithful
service to the Church and are now at home with God
THIS SOUVENIR BOOKLET IS GRATEFULLY DEDICATED.
MAY the record here set down by picture and pen fill the hearts of present and
future members with never-ceasing and ever-increasing thanksgiving to God and
with a firm determination to hold fast and confess the Truth He has so graciously
preserved for them during the past hundred years.


"ZUM WEINBERGE CHRIST!” EVANGELICAL LUTHERAN CHURCH, LOBETHAL.
ueaicatco September, 1545. Size: 62 h. x 32 ft. x 17 ft. Cost of erection, £l3O.
Contractors: Kleinschmidt & Klar.


“The Lord hath done great things for us, whereof we are glad.” Psalm 126: 3.
One Hundred Years
1845 - 1945
£)ENIED the right and privilege to worship according to their faith by a King
who thought it his prerogative to unite the Lutheran and Reformed Churches
of his realm and to force upon his subjects a uniform liturgy which the Lutherans
on Scriptural grounds regarded as contrary to their faith, many Lutherans left
their homeland, Prussia, in the early decades of last century and sought a new
home in countries where they could enjoy liberty of conscience and worship.
Many of them went to the United States, whilst several hundred came to South
Australia. Among those who came to South Australia was Pastor G. D. Fritzsche,
who left Hamburg with his congregation of 274 souls on July 11, 1841, and
arrived at Port Adelaide on October 28 of the same year. Of this company of
immigrants eighteen families, under the leadership of Pastor Fritzsche, founded
the settlement of Lobethal. On May 4, 1842, at the close of an open-air thanks-
giving service for God’s protection on the long and hazardous journey from
Europe and safe arrival in South Australia, Pastor Fritzsche quoted the twenty-
sixth verse of the twentieth chapter of the Second Book of Chronicles, which
in Luther’s translation of the Bible reads: “And on the fourth day assembled
themselves in Lobethal; for there they blessed the Lord: Therefore the name •
of the same place was called Lobethal unto this day.” Thus Lobethal received the
name it has to-day. Within a short space of time these eighteen families were joined
by other Lutheran immigrants who settled in Lobethal and the nearby districts.
At first the religious services were held in the open air, and then in the
newly-built homes of the settlers. The rapid increase of the population made
the building of a church an urgent necessity. The decision to build a church
was made in 1843. An early record written by the first school teacher in the
settlement says: "During the first months the services and evening devotions were
held in the open air at the stem of a tree, until Bro. Hoffmann had put a roof on
his little home. In this house, which later was turned into an hotel and still later
used as a State school, we held our Sunday services. In the meantime Bro. Preuss
had built a more spacious residence, where I conducted the school and where
twice during the week evening devotions and the Sunday services were held. When
in 1843 the brethren Pfeiffer, Haensel, Lauterbach, Seidel, Klose, Irrgang, etc.,
had settled in 'Schoenthal’ (now Charleston), preparations were made for the
building of a church. Bro. Kleinschmidt, who at that time did masonry, took
over the contract. Because of Pastor Fritzsche’s conducting services at Bethany,
Pastor Kavel solemnly laid the foundation stone. Bro. Kleinschmidt built single-
handed and with many interruptions for two years, so that the dedication could
take place in September, 1845. F° r building, for stones, bricks, lime, and labour
Bro. Kleinschmidt received the remarkable sum of £22 sterling. The necessary


timber was supplied by the congregation.” A church 62 ft. x 32 ft. x 17 ft. was
built. The total cost of erection was £l3O. The walls are of burnt brick, which
were made some three hundred yards from the building site. It is reported that
the bricks were transported to the building site chiefly by the women, who carried
them in their pinafores and hand-baskets. The roof was of shingles, which were
not removed when the present iron roof was put on in 1860. Until 1858, when
the present pews were made, planks placed on blocks served as pews. The original
floor of flagstones was replaced by a board floor in 1888. The altar, pulpit, and
baptismal font are of local timber and were made by a member of the congregation
in 1854. The baptismal font, still in use, was cut by hand out of the stem of
a tree. The church has seating accommodation for approximately three hundred
persons and since its dedication in September, 1845, services have been held in
it uninterruptedly. —ln 1855 a vestry was added. On September 4, 1870, the
congregation resolved to buy its first organ after it had been given a trial. It
was built by Bro. Hammer and he was paid £6O for it. In 1883 Bro. F. W.
Kleinschmidt presented the fine organ which the congregation uses to-day. • On
November 12, 1871, it was resolved to build a gallery and put in a ceiling. The
stipulation was that the work had to be completed by Christmas. Gallery, ceiling,
and a few small extras cost £BO 9/4. A gas lighting plant was installed in 1912.
This was replaced by electric light in 1925. On January 13, 1939, a divine
service, held in the historic church, was broadcast by all Australian national
stations, the preacher being the Rev. T. Lutze. Since 1936, South Australia’s
centenary year, some three thousand tourists from many parts of the world
have visited the church. In 1872, Bro. H. Juers, at his own expense, built the
present porch.
A hundred years have passed. Two generations have almost gone; the church
remains, an eloquent testimony to the Lutheran pioneers’ piety and zeal for God.
Interior of Ev. Luth. Church, Lobethal


'J’HE formal organization of the "Zum Wein-
berge Christi” congregation, at Lobethal,
was effected at a meeting held in Hamburg,
Germany, on Monday, May 24; 1841. The
elders elected were: E. Klar, J. G. Felsch, G.
Bormann, Grosser, Grocke, and A. Hensel.
The Lutherans who constituted the meeting
hailed from the province of Posen and from
the districts of Schwiebus, Zuellichau, and
Gruenberg. On May 6, 1841, they had
embarked on their boats at Tschichherzig, 274
souls.
On June 14, 1841, the emigrants embark on
the "Skjold,” a sailing vessel of four hundred
tons register, with Captain Claucsen in charge.
Owing to contrary winds they were compelled
to remain at the Cuxhaven anchorage till
July 11. As, then, the sailing ship starts on
its momentous voyage to South Australia,
Pastor Fritzsche prays: "O Lord Jesus, be
Thou our Compass, Rudder, and Mast; and
Thy breath speed us on our way.” According
to a diary kept by one of the emigrants, fifty-
MR. B. KLAR.
Elected Elder May 24, 1841.
Emigrated with Pastor
Fritzache.
1845 -1945
two deaths occurred on the voyage. On an
average, three deaths a week! Sad, indeed,
must have been the hearts of pastor and flock.
On October 28, 1841, Port Adelaide is reached.
After a thanksgiving service on board they
disembark. Some go to Klemzig, some to
Hahndorf, some to Bethany. Later those at
Hahndorf decided to form a settlement of their
own. With the financial help given by Mrs.
Nehrlich, Pastor Fritzsche’s mother-in-law, 168
acres of land in the Lobethal valley were pur-
chased for £196. This land was divided among
the eighteen pioneer families, and on May 4,
1842, each was assigned its portion. On this
day and occasion, at the close of the thanks-
giving service, the locality was named Lobethal.
The first homes of the immigrants were
either dug-outs, hollow trees, or huts with roof
and walls of bark. Only two of the settlers
were in a position to erect comfortable homes,
the brethren Hoffmann and Preuss. Their pro-
duce, butter, eggs, etc., they carried to
Adelaide for sale, the journey of fifteen miles,
as the crow flies, being made on foot, often by
the women. The soil was prepared for the
crops with fork and spade.
Reading through the congregation’s records
of the past hundred years, one finds many
happenings which are worthy of mention in this
booklet. But lack of space demands that we
pass them over in silence. Justice, however,
demands that we mention that from the very
beginning the congregation actively supported
the undertakings of Synod. Love for Christ
and gratitude for His wonderful mercies con-
strained the members to support the spreading
of the saving Gospel. Concordia College,
Koonibba, and the City Missions have been
supported by gifts in money and in kind. May
the Lord make the present and future members
truly grateful for the many blessings received.
May He keep them steadfast, immovable,
always abounding in the work of the Lord.
Throughout the past hundred years the
congregation has made constant growth. True,
there have been disappointments, trials, but
they proved to be blessings in disguise. The
members have prospered. Stately homes have
replaced the humble dwellings of the early
days. Therefore we exclaim to-day: "Praise
the Lord; for the Lord is good.”


PASTOR L. F. E. KRAUSE
1871-1876
PASTOR GOTTHARD DANIEL
FRITZSCHE
1841-1863
PASTOR C. F. A. STREMPEL
Pastor-in-charge
1863-66, 1868-70
PASTOR HELLMUTH
1866-1868
PASTOR E. J. A. SCHULZ
1910-1928
PASTOR J. M. R. EY
1876-1893
"/ have set watchmen upon thy walls, 0 Jerusalem, which shall never hold their
peace day nor night.” Isaiah 62 :6.
PASTOR T. W, LUTZB
1929 (present pastor)
PASTOR E. KRIEWALDT
1895-1910


1863 - 1945
pASTOR FRITZSCHE faithfully ministered to the congregation till his death
on October 26, 1863. The fruits of his able ministry are visible even to-day.
During the ’fifties, and also at later periods, unfortunate dissensions rent the
congregation asunder and Lutheran congregations were founded in opposition.
But in spite of these sad happenings, the congregation, under the blessing and
protection of God, made steady progress and grew in numbers from year to year.
Unfortunately, no statistics are available to give us an idea of the number of
souls in the congregation during Pastor Fritzsche’s pastorate.
Pastor Strempel, of Hahndorf, served the congregation during the vacancy,
1863-1866.
In 1866 Pastor Hellmuth took charge. After a ministry of two years
he resigned.
From 1868 to 1871 Pastor Strempel again ministered to the congregation.
On November 24, 1871, Pastor Krause arrived in Lobethal from America.
He was the pastor of the congregation till 1876, when he resigned.
In 1876 the congregation secured a successor to Pastor Krause in the
person of Pastor R. Ey. Pastor Ey served the congregation until his death on
September 20, 1893. Pastor Ey writes that in the year 1870 the communicants
numbered 185.
During the two years’ vacancy which occurred after Pastor Ey’s death,
the pastors of the neighbouring parishes ministered to the spiritual needs of
the congregation.
On September 16, 1895, Pastor E. Kriewaldt arrived from the United
States in response to a call from the Lobethal parish. His ordination and
installation took place on September 29, 1895. On September 19, 1910, after
fifteen years of faithful service, Pastor Kriewaldt left for Hochkirch, Victoria,
having accepted a call from the Hochkirch parish early in the year.
Pastor E. Schulz, of Booleroo Centre, was Pastor Kriewaldt’s successor. He
was installed by Pastor T. Nickel on December 18, 1910. On June 18, 1928,
Pastor Schulz resigned the pastorate, but conducted the services • till the end
of February, 1929.
MISS M. HBNSCHKB
Assistant Teacher
1940-
On March 3, 1929, Pastor T. Lutze was in-
stalled by Pastor Janzow.
On July 14, 1908, the statistics of the con-
gregation were as follows: Souls, 466; communi-
cants, 311; voting members, 101.
On March 1, 1932, they were as follows:
Souls, 572; communicants, 421; voting members,
155.
On September 1, 1945, they were as follows:
Souls, 635; communicants, 477; voting members,
197.


S. JANTKE
C. SICKERDICK
Church Elders of
the Past
W. DROEGEMUELLER
A. PAECH
C. BECK
A. MUELLER


C. MUELLER
(also School Elder)
J. G. WANKE
O. MUELLER
CHURCH ELDERS, 1945
E. Miller, W. Jantke, A. Grote
W. Seidel, Pastor T. Lutze, A, Seidel (Hon. Elder)


F. MUELLER
1842-1883
C. BRAUER
1904-1917
School Teachers
O. GROTE
1884-1904
School, dedicated 1851


Lobethal Lutheran School
REGARDING their Lutheran faith as their most priceless possession, the
pioneers naturally sought to preserve it unto their children. With praise-
worthy zeal and sacrifice they at once in 1842 inaugurated a Christian day school.
The first pupils, nine in number, were given instruction in the home of Bro.
Preiss, the teacher being Bro. Ferdinand Mueller, who began teaching on Sept. 5,
1842. Until his resignation on November 7, 1883, this faithful teacher instructed
the youth of Lobethal in the "one thing needful.”
Present School, dedicated February 14, 1900
When Pastor Fritzsche, in 1847, had built for himself a second residence,
the first one which consisted of two rooms was converted into a school room by
the removal of the partition wall. This was the first school in the new settle-
ment and stood on the site on which the present manse stands. Very soon this
building became too small. In 1850 the congregation built a school, thirty-two
feet by eighteen feet by nine feet high. It was dedicated by Pastor Fritzsche in
1851. For fifty years this school was in use and hundreds of children here received
their secular and religious training. The building was in the main street opposite
the present parsonage.
In 1899 Pastor Kriewaldt asked the congregation seriously to consider the
erection of a new school. A building thirty-six feet by twenty-four feet was built.
The dedication took place on February 14, 1900. The school is a fine one, is in
use to-day, and will accommodate approximately eighty-five children.
In March, 1884, Teacher Grote was installed and had charge of the school
for twenty years, till 1904.
Teacher C. Brauer was Teacher Grote’s successor and continued in office
from July, 1904, till the time the Lutheran schools in South Australia were closed
by Act of Parliament, in 1917.
A special meeting to discuss the re-opening of the school was held on June 2,
1925. A committee was appointed: P. and O. Mueller, P. and A. Kerber, and
W. Jantke. The result of the energetic labours of this committee was a meeting
on May 27, 1928, at which the congregation resolved to re-open its school. At
this meeting the brethren H. and O. Sickerdick were added to the committee. At a


MR. A. H. BRUGGEMANN
Head Teacher, 1930-
the day school. On Tuesday, January 28,
Pastor Lutze formally re-opened the school in
the presence of a large gathering of parents
and children. Fifty-five pupils were present on
the opening day. During the year 1931 the
number of pupils rose to seventy. At present
(1945) the roll shows seventy-one pupils. Miss
M. Henschke is the assistant.
In past years the following were assistant
teachers: Messrs. W. Paech, W. Juers, and
V. Erdmann, Misses Sieber, Ey, L. Brauer, A.,
Theo, and Elva Lutze. Their services are here-
with gratefully acknowledged.
Pastors W. Paech, H. Koehne, W, Juers, M.
Heidrich, E. Kriewaldt, and A. Zoerner were
pupils of the Lobethal Lutheran School.
That the religious training given throughout
those many years in the Lobethal Lutheran
School has had a beneficial influence in the
life of the community no one will deny. And
parents, whom God has commanded to bring
their children to Jesus, can give to their Lord
no better jubilee offering than to send their
children to the Lutheran day school, the re-
opening of which is due to His grace and
help alone.
May the Lord bless teachers and pupils and
may He fill the hearts of all members with
love and zeal for the Christian day school.
“And, ye fathers, provoke not your children
to wrath; but bring them up in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord ” Ephesians 6: 4.
meeting of the congregation held on June 24,
1929, the following resolution was adopted
without a dissentient vote, "That this meeting
reaffirms its decision to reopen the day school
and that the calling of a teacher be proceeded
with forthwith.”
On Sunday, January 19, 1930, Mr. Albert H.
Brueggemann was duly installed as teacher of
Pupils and Teachers, 1945


W. SICKERDICK
J. C. A. KERBER
Presented £5O to Day School in
1930
School Elders of
the Past
A. JUERS
O. J. SICKERDICK
G. SCHUBERT
P. HENSCHKE


Trustees and Seal Bearers of the Past
E. PFEIFFER
S. J. JANTKE
W. MUELLER
Left substantial Legacy for Day
School
H. JUERS
J. ALTMANN
C KLOSE


H NUSKE
O. KERBER
W. JANTKE
Pastor Gotthard Daniel Fritzsche
PASTOR G. D. FRITZSCHE was born on July 20, 1797, at Liebenwerda,
Saxony, Germany, where his father was the city organist. His home was a
refined and cultured one; but the boy was not brought up in the "nurture and
admonition of the Lord.” At the age of eleven he entered the college at Dresden
(May 10, 1809). On April 23, 1819, he received his matriculation certificate.
Overtaken by a serious illness he vowed to devote his whole life to the service
of his Saviour. In 1823 he completed his theological studies at the Lutheran
University of Breslau. By his teachers he was regarded as a student of "exceptional
abilities, devoted piety, exalted Christian character, indefatigable industry and
self-sacrificing zeal for the advancement of the Christian faith.” For a few
years he followed the occupation of teacher. Pastor Fritzsche soon saw that
the union of the Lutheran and the Reformed Churches, introduced by the King
of Prussia, was contrary to Holy Scripture, and for that reason he severed his
connection with the new church. His strictly Lutheran attitude brought
relentless persecution by the authorities. Finally, his health failed. He reluc-
tantly left his field of labour and went to Hamburg. On July 11, 1841, he sailed
for Australia, and arrived at Port Adelaide on October 28. On January 12, 1842,
in a stock-keeper’s hut at Hahndorf (Ambleside), his marriage with Dorette
Nehrlich was solemnized by Pastor Kavel. On February 19, 1845, death took


Church Choir, 1945
Pastor Fritzsche, who was an accomplished musician, organized the first choir. A
member of that choir writes in her memoirs that, under the conductorship of Pastor Fritzsche,
the choir rendered selections from Bach, Haydn, and Handel, the "Hallelujah Chorus,”
and many anthems and motets. Throughout the whole of the hundred years a church choir
has been in existence, and the beauty of many a service and special celebration has been
enhanced by its fine singing. On several occasions the choir has taken part in the combined
choir singing in the Adelaide Town Hall. Conductor: Teacher A. Brueggemann; Accom-
paniste, Miss R. Pfeiffer.
Teacher's Residence, Lobethal, 1945


WOODSIDE SUNDAY SCHOOL, 1945
To supply the spiritual needs of the members living in the Woodside district, and
especially those of the children who were unable to attend the Lutheran day school, the
holding of divine services was begun and a Sunday School called into being in Woodside in
1932. Services are held four-weekly and the Sunday School assembles every second Sunday.
Messrs. A. Brueggemann, L. Kramer, and E. Schoell were the first superintendents. We
herewith gratefully recognize their faithful services. For many years now Mrs. M. E.
Pfeiffer has rendered excellent service as superintendent She now is ably assisted by Misses
R. Lorke and D. Henschke. Children on roll, twenty-three.
LOBETHAL CONCORDIA LUTHER SOCIETY, 1945
Organized on July 7, 1925, the Lobethal Luther Society has proved a valuable means
of keeping the young people in touch with the Church and through regular Bible study
deepening their knowledge of saving truth. Since its inception approximately £6OO has been
collected by the members A contribution is made annually towards the upkeep of the
Lutheran day school. Present membership, eighty-four. Officials: President, Pastor T. Lutze;
Chairman, G. Pfeiffer; Vice-Chairman, K. Henschke; Secretary, Miss L. Pfeiffer (absent);
Treasurer, Miss L. Lutze (absent).


Ladies’ School Auxiliary, 1945
In 1942 a Ladies’ School Auxiliary was organized. The members have taken a
particularly keen interest in the welfare and progress of the school and have rendered valuable
assistance, sponsoring necessary improvements from time to time. A substantial amount
of money has been raised for further improvements. Membership stands at forty. President,
Mrs. A. Brueggemann; Vice-President, Mrs. T. Lutze; Secretary, Miss M. Henschke;
Treasurer, Mrs. A. Paech.
The Manse, Main Street, Lobethal


Past Officials
An earnest attempt has been made by the jubilee committee to have the list of past
officials complete. It has not been an easy task, since, unfortunately, some of the records
have apparently been lost. Those records which exist have been carefully examined. If,
therefore, a name, or names, be omitted, the committee deeply regrets the omission, but
assures the reader that the omission is not due to malice or inadvertency. Here be put
on record our appreciation and recognition of the faithful services of many whose names
are not recorded. May the heavenly Father "who seeth in secret” be their everlasting,
rich reward!
CHURCH ELDERS
Elders who were elected in Germany on May 14, 1841, and came to Lobethal with
Pastor Fritzsche: E. Klar, J. G. Felsch, and Bormann.
G. Behrendt, C. Beck, W. Droegemueller, J. G. Wanke, A. Paech, S. Jantke, A. Mueller,
C. Sickerdick, F. W. Kleinschmidt, J. F. Mueller, J. F. Pfeiffer, F. Wotzke.
SCHOOL ELDERS
G. Schubert, A. Juers, C. Mueller, W. Sickerdick, P. Henschke, J. C. A. Kerber, A. Seidel,
O. J. Sickerdick.
TREASURERS
G. Behrendt, J. G. Wanke, W. Dube, A. Juers, J. F. Schubert, C. Klose.
\
TRUSTEES AND SEAL-BEARERS
H. W. Hermel, H. Juers, E. Klar, E. Pfeiffer, J. Altmann, W. Mueller, S. Jantke,
S. J. Jantke, F. Strempel, C. Thomas, F. W. Kleinschmidt, A. Kumnick, F. Heinicke, F.
Weyland, C. Nitschke, W. Schubert, H. Thomas.
AUDITORS
E. Pfeiffer, F. Weyland, J. Altmann, A. Juers, F. Schubert, F.. Heidrich, D. Juers,
F. Strempel, F. Rosenberg, J. P. Pfeiffer, B. Paech, F. Kleinschmidt.
LECTORS
J. Altmann, W. Droegemueller, C. Sickedrick, A. Seidel, H. Schubert, C. Mueller.
WARDENS
H. Schubert, A. A. Sickerdick, W. Jantke.
THE FOUNDERS OF LOBETHAL
A search of the records has revealed that the names of the eighteen persons who with
Pastor G. D. Fritzsche founded Lobethal in 1842 are as follows: Carl G. Meier, Gottfried
Krause, Christian Wentzel, Samuel Gottlob Hoffmann, Johann Kleinitz, Daniel Menzel,
Gottlieb Felach, Emanuel Klar, Friedrich Mueller, August Mueller, Johann Gottfried Hauffe,
Traugott Weinert, August Weincrt, Dienegott Weinert, Johann Christian Hentschke, Gottfried
Bormann, Johann Christoph Kowald, Friedrick Kowald. These eighteen names appear in
a copy of a memorial lodged in the General Registry Office, Adelaide, April 13, 1842.
(Jlfltttluatntt G* ve t 0 our G°d immortal praise! Mercy and truth are all , His ways,
* lUwluil n/ onc i ers 0 f g race to God belong: Repeat His mercies in. your song.


