

3-
; I A BOOK POUNDED ON PACTS.
COMPLETE
PRICE
03*E SHINING.
E 0 DOfyjjf
-...0S
RECOLLECTIONS OF
GRIMES & CRIMINALS
THE
AUSTRALIAN COLONIES
FROM THE EARLY DAYS TO THE PRESENT
CONTAINING :
CONVICT LIFE,
BUSHRANGING,
MURDERS, FRAUDS,
EXECUTIONS, |
And other Terrible Secrets never before Published
in the Colonies.
AND A
GRAPHIC DESCRIPTION OF CRIME, VICE AND CRUELTY.
1882.
Published by the London Publishing Co., for
E. GRAVEUR,
W J BOOKSELLER AND STATIONER, «
+ 196 GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY.
sfcO-*-
OfS*—*-




H9355/F/OGI9
THE COMPILER.
London, 1882.
That “ truth is stranger than fiction ” will readily be acknowledge, and
more particulary so on perusing the annals of crime in the Australian
colonies, where, from the days of the first appointed Governor till the
present time, the Criminal Calender contains the history of the deeds of
the atrocious bands of highwaymen who have kept the country in a continual
state of terror, not “ gentlemen of the road” but offenders of the viiest
description. But the criminal code does not end with them, for murder,
robbery and crimes of a deeper dye blacken the history of those fair colonies.
The offences are not confined to those whose ignorance and youth would
plead an excuse, for we find men of culture and high social position were
among those who robbed the widow and orphan and made homes desolate.
A brief history of the offenders will doubtless prove interesting to those
who take an interest in the well being of Her Majesty’s possessions in the
antipodes, and with that idea I have endeavoured to make this little work
as complete as possible, hoping that my trouble will be appreciated. The
attempt may be feeble, yet feeble efforts are sometimes productive of great
benefits Those who read these pages will see how impossible it is to avoid
detection, and the inevitable results of wrong doing, and therefore I hope
that the persual of this work will counteract the ideas contracted from
reading the romantic deeds of those who appear as heroes in those novels
written to suit the morbid tastes of a certain portion of the population.
Should the perusal of this volume be instrumental in deterring one or
more of its youthful readers from entering on the path of crime; or of ar-
resting in their guilty career any who may have deviated in the slightest
degree from the line of strict honesty and recitude of conduct, its chief
object will have been attained ; and will ever be regarded with feelings of
gratitude by


GRIME AND CRIMINALS IN AUSTRALIA.
IFIROZMI 1785 TO 1880.
RECOLLECTIONS OF PRISONERS.
On tie Hawkesbury and its tributaries tbe first successful agricultural
colonists were planted, and there dwelt, in 1845, a few representatives of the
first fleeters, These settlers, whoso recollections do not exactly tally with,
although they confirm, the history transmitted to us by Collins, are all in
comfortable circumstances—some positively wealthy. Among the last was
Mr. Smith, who always spoke his mind to high and low. He had been free
almost ever since he arrived in the colony, and had never been “ in trouble.”
“He was an old man, with a large-featured, handsome, military sort of
face, of a red-brown complexion, shaved clean. His dress consisted of a red
flannel shirt, with a black bandana, tied sailor-fasbion, exposing his strong
neck, and a pair of fustian trousers. Out of compliment to a lady he once
put on a blue coat with gilt buttons, but, being evidently uncomfortable,
consented to take it off again. He refused to see the lady until he learned
that it was * the Mrs. Chisholm; ’ being usually rough to those he did not
respect.”
A Dr. , who had the reputation among the prisoner population of
never having spared any man in his anger, or any woman in his lust, during
the old flogging days, met Mr. Smith, face to face, coming out of the bank
in Sydney; and holding out his hand said, “ Come, shake hands, Mr. Smith,
and let bygones be bygones : lam glad to see you looking so well.” Smith,
putting his hands behind him, answered, “ I suppose, because I have got a
velvet waistcoat, and money in the bank, you want to shake hands ; but no !
Dr. ,it would take a second resurrection fto save such as thee.” The
doctor slunk away.
MR. JOSEPH SMITH.
“Macdonald’s River, County of Hunter, 3rd Oct., 1845,
“I arrived in the colony fifty-six years since; it was Governor
Phillip’s time, and I was fourteen years old ; there were only eight houses
in the colony then. I know that myself and eighteen others laid in a hollow
tree for seventeen weeks, and cooked out of a kettle with a wooden bottom:
we used to stick it in a hole in the ground, and make a fire round it. I was
seven years in service (bond), and then started working fora living wherever
I could get it. There was plenty of hardship then : I have often taken
grass, and pounded it, and made soup from a native dog. I would eat any-
thing then. For seventeen weeks 1 had only five ounces of flour a day. We
never got a full ration except when the ship was in harbour. The motto
was “Kill them, or work them, their provision will be in store.’ Many a
time have I been yoked like a bullock with twenty or thirty others to drag
along timber. About eight hundred died in six months at a place called
Toongabbie, or Constitution-hill. I knew a man so weak, he was thrown
into th# grave, when he said, 1 Don’t cover me up; I’m not dead ; for God’s
sake doryt cover me up ! ’ The overseer answered, ‘ D your eyes, you’ll
die to-night, and we shall have the trouble to come back again! ’ The man
recovered, his name is James Glasshouse, and he is now alive at Richmond
“ ThpyGised to have a large hole for the dead ; once a day men were sent
down to collect the corpses of prisoners, and throw them in without any
ceremony or service. The native dogs used to come down at night and fight
and howl in packs, gnawing the poor dead bodies.


“The governor ■would order the lash at the rate of five hundred, six
hundred, or eight hundred; and if the men could have stood it they would
have had more, I knew a man hung there and then for stealing a few biscuits,
and another for stealing a duck frock. A man was condemned—no time—
take him to a tree, and hang him. The overseers were allowed to flog the
men in the fields. Often have men been taken from the gang, had fifty, and
sent hack to work, Any man would have committed murder for a month’s
provisions : I would have committed three (murders) for a week’s provisions!
I was chained seven weeks on my back for being out getting greens, wild
herbs. The Rev. used to come it tightly to force some confession.
Men were obliged to tell lies to prevent their bowels from being cut out by
the lash.
“Old (an overseer) killed three men in a fortnight at the saw by
overwork. We used to be taken in large parties to raise a tree; when the
body of the tree was raised, he (old ) would call some of the men away
—then more; the men were bent double—they could not bear it—they fell
—the tree on one or two, killed on the spot. ‘ Take him away; put him in
the ground !’ There was no more about it.
“ After seven years I got my liberty, and then started about working
for a living where I could get it. I stowed myself away on board the Bar-
rington, bound for Norfolk Island, with eighteen others; it was not a penal
settlement then. Governor King was there. I had food in plenty. I was
overseer of the governor’s garden. Afterwards I went to live with old
D’Arcy Wentworth, and a better master never lived in the world. Little
Billy; the great lawyer, has often been carried in my arms.
“ Old D’Arcy wanted me to take charge of Homebush property, but I
took to the river (Hawkesbury), worked up and down till I saved money to
buy old Brown’s farm at Pitt Town. No man worked harder than I have
done. I have by me about one thousand pounds ready cash. I have given
that farm of forty acres to my son Joseph, and three other farms, and about
five hundred head of cattle ; and about the same to my other son. 1 have
also got 80 acres—3o acres, 60, 76, —beside my house, and some fine cattle.
We are never without a chest of tea in the house ; we use two in the year.
I have paid £4O for a chest of tea in this colony. Tea is a great comfort.”
MRS. SMITH’S STATEMENT.
“ I have seen Dr. take a woman who was in the family way, with
a rope round her, and duck her in the water at Queen’s Wharf. The laws
were bad then. If a gentleman wanted a man’s wife, he would send the
husband to Norfolk Island. I have seen a man flogged for pulling six tur-
nips instead of five. One , was overseer, the biggest villain that ever
lived —delighted in torment. He used to walk up and down and rub his
hands when the blood ran. When he walked out, the flogger walked behind
him. He died a miserable death, maggots ate him up; not a man could be
found to bury him. I have seen six men executed for stealing 21 lbs. of
flour. I have seen a man struck when at work with a handspike, and killed
on the spot. I have seen men in tears round Governor , begging for
food. He would mock them with, ‘Yes, yes, gentlemen; I’ll make you
comfortable ; give you a nightcap and a pair of stockings!’ ”
Mrs. Smith was blind; she acted as she spoke, and wept on recalling
the horrors of her early life. The house was large, and crowded with fur-
niture. Smith presented Mrs. C. with a pistol as a souvenir, which he
pulled out of his belt, saying, ‘vYou may depend on it!”
HENRY HALE.
Well’s Creek, Hawkesbury River, 4th Oct., 1845.
“ I arrived in the third fleet on the 16th of October, 1791; it was on a
Sunday we landed. The ship’s name was Barrington, Captain Marsh. I
was sent to Toongabbie. For nine months there I was on five ounces of
flour a day—when weighed out, barely four; served daily. In those days
we were yoked to draw timber, twenty-five in gang. The sticks were six
feet long ; six men abreast. We held the stick behind us, and'dragged with
our hands. One man came ashore in the Pitt; his name was Dixon; he was


a guardsman. He was put to the drag; it soon did for him. He began on
a Thursday and died on a Saturday, as he was dragging a load down Oon-
stitution-hill. There were thirteen hundred died there in six months. Men
used to carry trees on their shoulders. How they used to die! The men
were weak—dreadfully weak—for want of food. A man named Gibraltar
was hung for stealing a loaf out of the Governor’s kitchen. He got down
the chimney, stole the loaf, had a trial, and was hung the next day at sun-
rise. At this time a full ration was allowed to the governor’s dog. This
was Governor . I have seen seventy men flogged at night, twenty five
lashes each. On Sunday evening they used to read the laws. If any man
was found out of camp he got twenty-five. The women used to be punished
with iron collars. In Governor King’s time they used to douse them over-
board. They killed one. Dr. was a great tyrant. Mine is a life
grant from Governor Bourke—fourteen acres. I grow tobacco, wheat, and
corn ; just enough to make a living.”
A little anecdote related by Wentworth, culled from hundreds floating
in the colony at that period (1816), illustrates a form of government and a
state of society strangely at variance with our notions of the rights of Eng-
lishmen. Governor Bligh, having heard from his cowkeeper that the
servant of an officer of the staff had made some impertinent remarks because
disappointed of the customary supply of milk for his master, on the following
morning sent for the dissatisfied delinquent. Wondering and trembling, he
was ushered into the presence of his excellency, was received with a condes-
cending smile, and told that, as the chief constable’s house was on his way
home, the governor had merely sent for him to save a dragoon the
trouble of going there with a letter. The poor fellow, Ms mind relieved,
respectfully received the missive, delivered it, was immediately tied to the
triangles, and rewarded with twenty-five lashes from the cat-o’-nine-tails.
In 1831, Sir Richard Bourke introduced and passed an act, by wMeh the
number of lashes to be inflicted on summary conviction by a single magistrate
were limited to fifty. The moral condition of the employing classes in the
colony at that period may be imagined, from the fact that, for this measure
of justice and mercy, the governor was assailed with a loud cry of pro-flog-
ging indignation, and from that time forward was subject to a factious
opposition and a series of annoyances from the Plutocracy of the colony,
which eventually led to his resignation. Foremost among Ms assailants was
a Scotchman, of the name of Mudie, who had had the misfortune to take up
his abode in New South Wales a few years too late, instead of proceeding to
Louisiana or Cuba, where his little peculiarities might have had full scope,
without impertinent interference from governors or newspapers. Facts
which came out in the course of the trial of six servants of this Mudie, who
were all hanged for an attempt to shoot his overseer, induced Sir Richard
Bourke to strike him out of the commission of the peace. Thereupon tMs
white slave-driver became a grievance-monger, and wrote a book, in which,
with perfect unconsciousness, he painted his own picture in such colours as
to more than justify his erasure from the roll of magistrates. The curious
and instructive part of the business was, that Mudie actually succeeded in
obtaining a long string of testimonials in favour of his virtue and humanity
from parties, some of whom were highly respectable. Yet the following
extract unconsciously conveys the severest satire on the man and the state
of society:—
“ A young fellow who had just become free, and had got himself estab-
lished on thirty acres of land, with a few pigs, &c., set off to the factory
(female convict barrack) in search of a wife. On his way he had to pass the
estate of Mudie. _ In conversation with the wife of the porter he mentioned
the object of his journey. The porter’s wife advised him to pay Ms
addresses to one of her master’s convict female servants, whom she recom-
mended as being both sober and industrious, whereby he would at once gain
a good wife, and spare himself an additional journey of 140 miles.
“ The young woman was sent for and consented at once, No wonder
that a woman would accept marriage in preference to slavery with a Mudie.


The white slave-driver author then gives the following dialogue as taking
place between himself and the young couple :
“ Marianne — 4 I hope your honour will allow me to get married.’
“ His Honour —‘ Married! To whom ?’
“ Marianne —(rather embarrassed) —‘ To a young man, your honour.’
“ His Honour —‘ To a young man ! what is he ?’
“ Marianne —(her embarrassment increasing— ‘ I really don’t know.’
“ His Honour — 4 What is his name ? Where does he live ?’
44 Marianne — 4 1 don’t know. To tell your honour the truth, I never saw
him until just now. Mrs. Parsons sent for me to speak to him; we agreed
to be married if your honour will give us leave. It is a good chance for me.’
44 His Honour — 4 Send the young man here.’
44 Enter Ccelkbs.
“ His Honour — 4 Well, young man, lam wish to marry Marianne
one of my convict servants. e you observed the condition the young
woman is in?’ (Marianne being 4 in the way that ladies wish to be,’ &c.)
44 Ccelebs —(grinning, as we may imagine Mudie if some one had offered
him the chance of an heiress, old, ugly, ill-tempered, with a hundred thou-
sand pounds)— 4 Why, your honour, as to that, in a country like this, where
women are scarce, a man shouldn’t be too greedy. I’m told the woman is
very sober, and that’s the main chance with me. If Igo to the factory, why
I might get one in the same way without knowing it, and that might be the
cause of words hereafter; and she might be a drunken vagabond besides.
As to the piccanninny, if it should happen to be a boy, it would soon be use-
ful, and do to look after the pigs.’ ”
THE REGISTRAR’S FRAUDS.
In 1841 the Registrar of the Supreme Court became a defaulter ; in the
following year he took the benefit ot the Insolvent Act, and eventually paid
a dividend of sixpence in the pound. The committee which investigated his
case, with the view of obtaining redress from the home government for the
sufferers by the malversation of the appointed, reported, that the first
registrar, Colonel Mills, was a decayed gentleman, with no knowledge of
business, and who, therefore, left what there was to be done to other officers.
On his death the governor and council recommended that the office, in the
then state of the colony not needed, should be abolished; but, before receiv-
ing or without attending to this recommendation, the defaulter in question,
Mr. M , was appointed. His antecedents were not more encouraging
than those of Colonel Mills. In 1811 he had executed a deed of assignment
of all his property for the benefit of his creditors; and in 1823, after return-
ing from an eight years’ residence on the Continent, had taken the benefit of
the Insolvent Act; in 1828 had been appointed Chief Justice of Nova Scotia,
and had been permitted to exchange the appointment for that of Registrar
of the Supreme Court of New South Wales, with the duty of collecting the
effects of intestates, and, according to his own account, the privilege of
investing the money for his own benefit pending the distribution.
On arrival at the colony Mr. M took up a high position. That part
of his duty which related to registering deeds of grants of crown land he
entirely neglected and suffered to fall into an arrear, which eventually in-
volved great numbers of the humbler class in litigation and ruin. But the
collection of the estates of intestates he entered on as zealously as any
wrecker on the spoils of storms. The presence of near relatives was no
protection for the moneys of the deceased: in defiance of son, brother,
father, the registrar grasped all the estate, invested it in his own name for
his own benefit, and from 1828 to 1838 kept neither day-book, cash-book,
nor ledger, but one account at his banker’s, rendered no statement for audit
to any one, and paid over what balance, if any, to the next of kin of intes-
tates when and how he pleased
In 1838 the judges made rules of court requiring the registrar to pass
his accounts and pay the balance into the savings’ bank. The great man
remonstrated against these rules in a most indignant tone, 44 as threatening
to take from him a source of legitimate income, on the faith of which he


immigrated to the colony,” and intimated that, “unless he was permitted
to retain and make use of the money himself, he would use no exertions to
obtain it.”
At this audit he reported himself to be in possession of £1,980 175,0|d.,
but the court, after argument, found £3,085 IBs. 2d, due, compelled him to
pay it into court, and, in spite of violent resistance, in which he was sup-
ported by one of the official legal advisers of the governor, had a set of rules
of court sanctioned by the governer in council, under which the registrar
was bound to account regularly and pay in the proceeds of every intestate
estate within a certain fixed time (three months from the period of the in-
testacy) ; the injured registrar all the time protesting that “ the judges were
reflecting on his honour by calling for accounts, and depriving him of the
legitimate profits to be derived from the employment of other men’s money,
which had induced him to settle in the colony.” The judges being firm,
and supported by the council, the registrar then resorted to fraud, and in
the course of two years became possessed of £9,000. When no longer able
to conceal his appropriations, he announced his insolvency in in a debonnair
yet dignified’ manner —a condescending, much-injured style—which could
only come from a colonial official. The sufferers by this embezzlement
petitioned for compensation fram the home government. The correspondence
with the appropriator is extremely rich and racy. Throughout he appears to
consider himself deeply injured. The home government rejected the
prayers'of the petitioners.
JEWELLERY FOUND IN THE BUSH.
A curious find (says the Queanbeyan Age) has been made out in the
Black Range, between Hoskingtown and Braidwood —probably a portion of
the spoils gathered by the bushranger Clarke many years ago. Some few
weeks back a settler in that neighbourhood named Lewis found hidden in
the bush a quantity of jewellery, which he duly advertised in these columns.
The police, ascertaining the nature of the find, moved in the matter. Senior
sergeant Cornett sent constable Torpy to take of the goods as
treasure-trove, and they are now in the hands of the police at Queanbeyan.
The list includes ten gold watches, ten silver watches, several gold brooches,
lockets, shirt studs, earrings, bracelets, keys, pencil-cases, seals, &o.; about
a dozen and a half handsome gold chains and alberts, a lot of inferior chains,
scraps of gold, a few gems, and other things. They have evidently lain
many years where they were found, and have been ruthlessly abused, the
watches battered to pieces, eaten by rust, and worth little more than the
price of old gold and silver. Some of the chains and brooches may be reno-
vated, cleaned, and rendered useful again. The local police have searched
the Crime Report for 20 years past in vain to find any account of the articles,
and from their general appearance they were probably the stock-in-trade of
a travelling jeweller, who has perhaps been murdered as well as robbed.
ATTEMPTED ESCAPES OF CONVICTS.
A large number of prisoners had, by means of misinterpretations of
stories of the blacks, conceived the idea that there was a colony of white
people about 500 miles to the south-west, and had formed a plan to escape to
that place; but it being discovered, sixteen of the prisoners were brought to
Sydney, and punished. In order to convince the whole of them of their
error, the Governor proposed to dispatch four of (he strongest malcontents,
with four soldiers and guides to accompany them on their journey. After
an absence of ten days, three returned. One man being determined to pro-
ceed, was left with the guides, who returned after 26 days, and added to the
Australian Ornithology a splendid specimen of the moenura, or bird of para-
dise, for the first time procured, January, 1788.
W B with lus wife and two children and seven other
convicts, escaped in an open boat, March 28, 1791, [They reached Timor,
and were subsequently taken prisoners by Captain Parker, B died
at Batavia; his wife was taken to England, tried, and confined in Newgate
until her sentence expired.]


Discovery by the ship “ Providence,” 28 guns, Captain Broughton, at
Port Stephens’ of four runaway convicts, who had been missing from Parra-
matta since September, 1790; August, 1795.
Twenty male and female convicts absconded, with the idea that they
could reach China overland, November 21, 1791. [Several of them died in.
the bush, and the remainder were brought back in a deplorable condition. ]
The Colonial vessel “ Cumberland ” taken by prisoners, August, 1797.
The “ Venus,” brig, owned by Robert Campbell & Co., seized by con-
victs, and taken off, 1799.
“ Venus,” Colonial vessel, seized at Port Dalrymple, by prisoners, June
17, 1806.
The “ Harrington,” brig, Captain W. Campbell, taken out of Farm
Cove by prisoners, May 15, 1808. [News was received by the “ Lady Bar-
low,” on August 22, 1809, of the re-capture of the “ Harrington,” in the
Indian Seas, by the frigate “ Phoenix.” Shortly after she came from India
she was lost on the Laconian coast, and the convicts (including the ringleader)
thereby escaped, or perished.]
The “ Unity,” a Colonial vessel, piratically seized and taken away by
prisoners from out of the River Derwent, April 23, 1813.
The “ Trial,” Colonial vessel, seized by prisoners who were erecting the
Lighthouse at Watson’s Bay, Port Jackson, and taken away, on September
12, 1816. [She was afterwards dsscovered wrecked north of Port Stephens.
AH on boord perished by famine, or were murdered by the natives,
place where the boat was found by Mr. Oxley, was called Trial Bay.
The “ William Csesar,” Government boat, taken away by prisoners, and
afterwards found north of Port Stephens, July 11, 1817.
The “ Isabella,” small craft, seized at Port Macquarie, by prisoners, and
not since heard of, October, 1823.
An assigned servant of Thomas Potter McQueen, and five other prison-
ers of the Crown, absconded, on October 4, 1828. from his station, and at-
tempted to reach Timor or New Guinea overland. After penetrating the
country for 200 or 300 miles, and enduring the most frightful sufferings, by
which all his companions died, Mr. McQueen’s servant returned and gave
himself up, November 26, 1828, to Peter Mclntyre, J.P-, of Sigenhoe Estate.
Seizure of the Government barque Lady Franklin,” Captain Willett,
by 22 convicts when on their way from Hobart Town to Norfolk Island, De-
cember 28, 1853, [The convicts overpowered the guard and retained posses-
sion of the barque for eleven days, when they loaded the ship’s boats with
provisions and left in them.]
Norfolk Island appointed a place to which offenders convicted in New
South Wales, and being under sentence of transportation, should be seen
August 15, 1826.
Harwood’s brig seized and taken away by convicts whilst on passage
from Sydney, 1827.
Serious outbreak amongst the prisoners at Norfolk Island; fifty escaped
to Phillip Island, seven miles distant, where after three had been killed, the
rest were captured, or after a time surrendered. September, 1827.
Captain J. Wakefield, 39th Regiment, resigned his position as Command-
ant of Norfolk Island, June 29,1839. [He was succeeded by Lieut.-Colonel
Morissett, late Superintendent of Police, Sydney,]
The “Governor Phillip,” a vessel employed by Government to carry
supplies to and from Norfolk Island, was piratically seized by the prisoners
of that Island. The boat’s crew, numbering 12 men, all prisoners, who were
employed between the island and the vessel, by a preconcerted plan, disarmed
the sentry on board, compelled such of the crew who were on deck to jump
overboard, and secured the captain, mate, and soldiers below deck. The
captain and mate, by breaking through a partition, got in communication
with the soldiers, and commenced an attack by firing through the crevices,
which took effect, when they rushed on deck, and after a brief struggle with
the pirates, recaptured the vessel. The soldiers lost one man, and five others
were wounded; of the convicts, five were killed and two wounded. The
others were tried, and four were convicted and executed, 1842.


INSURRECTION OF CONVICTS.
The first great insurrection, of convicts commenced at Castle Hill, and
extended to the Hawkesbury. This outbreak was shown to have been in
agitation for a month previous. Martial law was proclaimed. The insur-
gents had in their possession 136 muskets, 14 pistols, and a great number of
swords, bayonets fixed on poles, and pitchforks. Ten ringleaders were taken
in arms on March 4 and 5, 1804. [They were tried and condemned : three
were executed at Parramatta on the Bth, three at Castle Hill on the 9th, two
at Sydney on the 10th, and twofwere respited.]
REMARKABLE CIRCUMSTANCES CONNECTED WITH
CONVICTS.
A man found guilty of stealing a pair of oars, sentenced to Übe impris-
oned one calendar month, and on the last day of his imprisonment to be
publicly whipped from the Police Office to the King-street Wharf, September
23, 1829.
A conspiracy was got up among the prisoners who were being conveyed
to Norfolk Island in the “ Governor Phillip,” to murder the crew and
guard, but it was discovered and fortunately frustrated. The notorious
Knatchbull, who was on board, was, it was alleged, the principal conspirator,
1832.
OUTRAGES BY NATIVES.
Koenycrook, a Taoungurong, shot, it is supposed, by Bennett’s shepherd,
who was found murdered. The black was found in a tree badly wounded,
and died in Melbourne hospital, May, 1841.
Two men reported by the aboriginals to have been shot near Hall’s, at
the foot of the Grampians, by Hall’s hutkeeper, July, 1841.
Kowarramin, two other men, and a girl, reported by the aboriginals t°
have been shot by three white men near Kirk’s, Purrumbeep, July o r
August (so in official record) 1841.
Bood bood yarramin, reported by the aboriginals to have been shot by
Captain Bunbury’s storekeeper near Mount William, August, 1841.
The bodies of three aboriginal women, and one male child, found dead,
and an aboriginal wounded by a gun shot in a tea-tree scrub near the
station of Messrs. Osbrey and Smith, Portland district (now Western
Victoria), February 26,1842.
A tribe of about sixty slaughtered in return for Frazer massacre, Dawson
River, 1857.
About 170 blacks slaughtered in Medway Ranges, Queensland, by
police and others, in return for Willis’ massacres, Oct. and Nov- 1861.
Six convicts and two soldiers, cutting rushes, killed, in retaliation for
the ill-treatment by them of five native women at one of the bays adjacent
to the N S.W. settlement, henceforward called Rushcutter’s Bay, 1788.
The aboriginal natives during the year 1809 committed many acts of
aggression, including the murdering and spearing of many of the colonists,
the destruction of cattle, and other acts of violence.
Shepherd of W. Bowman’s, killed by the Taoungurongs, near Mount
Alexander, May or June (so in official record), 1838.
Shepherd and hut-keeper of Mr. 0. Hutton’s, killed near the Campaspe,
May 22,1839.
Shepherd of Messrs. Jenning’s and Playne,s (successors to Mr. Hutton)
killed near the Campaspe, June, 1840.
Hutkeeper of Mr. Wills, killed near Mount William, November 21,1840.
Hutkeeper of Mr. Oliphant, killed near the Pyrenees by the Balkalgoon-
deet natives, March 19, 1841.
Shepherd of Mr. Bennett’s, killed by the Taoungurongs on the Campaspe,
May, 1841.
M. A. M. Allen, killed by the Mallgoondeet natives, on the Loddon,
March 13,1842.


Two men in the service of Mr. Irvine, at the Pyrenees, attacked and
wounded, February, 1842.
Several head of cattle speared on Mr. Hall’s run, near the Grampians,
Ma-ch, 1842.
About thirty head of sheep scattered, and several of them stolen by the
Belokepor and Utowolbulloh natives at Messrs. Birch’s, 1843.
Andrew Beveridge, a young settler, muidered in Port Phillip district,
Lower Murray, by a number of blacks, August 23,1846.
Mr. Frazer, wife, children, and governess, massacred near Dawson
River, 1857.
Mr. H. S. Wills, Baker, his overseer, Baker’s two sons, and eleven other
persons massacred at Cullinlaaringo Station, Queensland, Oct. 17, 1161.
Mr, Johnson, telegraph station-master, Daly-waters, speared by blacks,
June, 1875.
Handley Regan and another white man shot by blacks on Daintree
River, Queensland, December 16, 1877.
Cowardly attack on and wounding of Mr, Hartley and Captain Sykes at
the North Shore, near Cooktown, Queensland, by a large band of armed
blacks, February 6, 1879.
B. Maylo, with three white men, who went with Beckett’s cattle to
Sulieman Creek, were found murdered by blacks, owing to the treachery
of their own black boy, who had instructed the murderers to rush between
the whites and the camp while the men were bathing, February 27,1879.
Cuncan Mackay, while searching for water, was supposed to have been
killed by blacks, at Herbert Downs, February, 1879.
Eureka Stockade, taken by storm on the morning of Sunday, December
2,1854. [lt occupied about an acre, and was situated in Ballarat East,
Victoria, between the present Eureka, Stawell, Rodier, and George
streets,
EXECUTIONS.
The first execution in Australia was that of a youth, aged 17, named
James Barrett, executed for robbery in New South Wales, March 6, 1788.
AN EXTRAORDINARY EXECUTION.
Joseph Samuels, who, on September 12, 1803, was tried and convicted
at the Criminal Sessions for the robbery of a desk containing money, the
property of Mary Breeze, at Sydney, was thrice suspended, September 20,
1803, [The cord first separated in the middle, and the criminal fel
trate ; on the second attempt the rope unrove at the fastening, and ho
again came to the ground; and the third time being launched off, the
rope again snapped short. The Provest Marshall, Mr. Smith, a man
universally respected, compassionating his protracted suffering, proceeded
to Government House, and represented all these extraordinory circum-
stances to the Governor, who was pleased to reprieve Samuels.]
TRIAL BY JURY.
Trial by Jury obtained at the Quarter Sessions Court, N.S.W., October
15, 1824.
The first trial by jury in the Supreme Court, N.S.W., took place,
February 12, 1825.
Mr. Bulmer presented a petition to the Imperial Parliament from the
colonists of New South Wales, praying for trial by jury in all cases, civil
and criminal, and also for a Legislative Assembly for New South Wales
June 29, 1832.
PRISONS.
First public meeting held in the colony of New South Wales, to raise
funds to build a gaol, June, 1799.
The sum of £lO,OOO voted by the Council for the erection of a gaol at
Darlinghurst, Sydney, 1835.
Cockatoo Island, Parramatta River, near Sydney, first established as a
place for convicts, February, 1839.


Darlinghurst gaol first occupied by prisoners, June 7, 1811.
Cockatoo Island constituted as the penal establishment of the colony of
N.8.W,, 1811.
Pentridge Stockade, near Melbourne, proclaimed a House of Correction,
April 20, 1852.
Cockatoo was proclaimed as a penal station under the Colonial Govern-
ment in 1817. [Although used by the Imperial Government as a prison
for many years previously, by an order from the Colonial Secretary, dated
April 2, 1856, it was directed that after that date it should be the destina-
tion of all prisoners sentenced to work on the roads and other public works
of the colony.J
Berrima gaol constituted a model prison, March 23, 1865.
St. Helena penal establishment of Queensland situated on an island 500
acres in extent, in Moreton Bay, 22 miles from Brisbane. First detach-
ment of prisoners landed there in charge of Mr. John McDonald, May 20,
1.867.
Cockatoo Island abandoned as a prison and its name changed to Biloela,
!872.
The alleged maltreatment of prisoners in Berrima gaol discussed in the
Legislative Assembly, May 7, 1871; Royal Commission appointed to
enquire, July 2, 1878; reported November 26, 1878.
REMARKABLE TRIALS.
First Breach of Promise Case (Cox v. Payne) tried in Sydney, N.S.W.,
May, 1825.
Lieutenant Lowe, of the 40th Regiment, tried at the Supreme Court,
Sydney, for directing four of the soldiers under his command to shoot a
native black, who was charged with the murder of a settler’s servant, which
order was at once carried into effect. The credibility of the testimony was
shaken by that of the witnesses for the defence, and he was acquitted. 1827-
A settler named Jamison, tried for the murder of a native black, when
itjwas found to be justifiable homicide. 1827.
A trial in the Supreme Court, Mudie v. Kinchela, occupied much
public attention. It was a case in which Major Mudie prosecuted Mr.
Kinchela (a son of the late Judge) for an assault. The assault complained
of, consisted of a severe horsewhipping inflicted on the Major by Kinchela,
in retaliation for insults to which his father (the Judge) had been subjected
in a work published by Mudie, under the title of “The Felonry of New
South Wales.” The jury, taking into consideration the provocation which
the matter in the book afforded, save the small damages of £5O, being one
pound for every blow the plaintiff was said to have received. 1840
The great trial between the Bank of Australasia v. The Bank of
Australia, took place March 26, 1845, [lt lasted until April following, when
the jury being equal, no verdict was returned. The amount sought to be
recovered was £169,000. The parties being dissatisfied with the result, the
Court granted a trial at Bar, which commenced June 23 following, and lasted
20 days, but a verdict was returned which caused an appeal to be made to
the Privy Council by the Bank of Australasia.]
The Queen v. Bell for embezzlement and conspiracy. The trial, in
Sydney, lasted day by day from Octobers, 1845, until December 12 (65 days),
when It was adjourned until January following, on account of the illness of
one of the jurors, who subsequently died. The trial was not proceeded with,
and no further steps were taken.
Rev. W. F. X. Bailey v. Fairfax (S. M. Herald), for libel in publishing
from “ Modem State trials, 1850,” an account of an extensive forgery in
London. Verdict for plaintiff: £lOO damages. August 11, 1864.
The Newtown Ejectment Case, known also as the celebrated Devina
will case, tried in the Supreme Court, Sydney, a verdict for defendant, given
after a trial extending over eight days. 1852 [The circumstances were
that Nicholas Devine, an officer who arrived in the “first fleet, and who
served the Government for 25 years as Superintendent of Convicts, received
in recognition of his services a grant of 210 acres of land adjoining Sydney,


and afterwards called Newtown. One Bernard Eochford, lived with Devine
as an assigned servant, or rather as his guardian, for he became enfeebled in
mind and body, and in 1827, Devine executed a conveyance of the whole of
his land property, to Eochford. After the death of Devine, Eochford sold
the whole of the property, which in a few years became very valuable, by
reason of Sydney having extended its limits and Newtown having become
one of the most populous, healthy, and highly improved suburbs of the city.
Things having assumed this altered aspect, the whole history of the affair
was not long reaching the ears of Devine’s relatives in Ireland, and the
grand nephew and heir-at-law of the original grantee came to the colony
and claimed the whole estate, on the ground that the conveyance of 1827 was
a forgery or a fraud, Devine having been at that time and for some years
previously, generally insane ; or if this ground were not tenable that Eochford
being a prisoner of the Crown could not lawfully acquire, hold, or dispose of
Sroperty of this nature. Twenty-six gentlemen defended their homesteads
i this law-suit. The case, was, however referred to the Privy Council, and
a new trial granted, which was heard in the Supreme Court, Sydney, before
Judge Dickinson, in 1857, and lasted 30 days, resulting again in favour of
defendants. September 19, 1857. Further litigation was prevented by a
compromise, the plaintiff receiving a sum of money in consideration of
foregoing his claim.]
First Queensland State Trial (Eegina v, Pugh,) tried Angust 21, 1861.
Urquhart v. Argus, libel, Melbourne Supreme Court, damages 40s.
March, 1865.
Chisholm v, Macauley. The right of free selectors in'NewJjSouth Wales
toTmpound, confirmed. September 8, 1868.
Mate v. Nugent. Crown grant v. Selection. [Before N.S.W. Courts
several years, ultimately decided in favour of Mate.] March 25, 1869,
William Lorando Jones, a sculptor, tried at the Parramatta Quarter
Sessions, before his Honor Judge Simpson, for blasphemy in reading passages
from the Old Testament scripture and commenting on them, intending
thereby to bring the Holy Scriptures and the Christian religion into
disbelief and contempt. Defendant was found guilty, and sentenced to two
years’ imprisonment in Darlinghurst Gaol, and to pay a fine of £lOO to Her
Majesty the Queen. February 18, 1871. [The event created considerable
sensation, and the case was brought before Parliament. The Governor and
the Executive decided to release Jones and remit the fine after he had served
a few weeks’ imprisonment.]
Trial of George Eobert Nicholls, a native of the colony, aged 30, and
Alfred Lyster or Froude, a native of Dorsetshire, England, aged 20, at the
Criminal Court, Sydney, before Mr. Justice Hargrave, for the Parramatta
Eiver murders, May 21-22, 1872, [The murder of John Bridger took place
March 8, 1872, und of Wm. P. Walker, on March 13, 1872. The prisoners
were convicted and afterwards executed for latter offence.]
Trial at Melbourne of Mount and Morris for the “ Carl ” [murders.
Verdict of manslaughter returned. December* 21, 1872. [The prisoners
were afterwards released on a point of law.]
Barton v. Muir, right to transferffree selection. Ended in favour of the
squatter (Barton). July 10, 1873,
Tichbome v. Lushington. The plaintiff declared himself to be Sir
Eoger Charles Tichhorne, supposed to have been lost at sea, and
claimed the baronetcy and estates, worth about £24,000 a year. Eoger
Charles Tichbome, son of Sir James, horn 1829; educated in France
till about 1843 ; entered the army 1849 ; proposed marriage to his cousin
Kate Doughty, declined, January, 1852; sailed from Havre for Valparaiso
(March), and arrived there June 13, 1853 ; sailed from Eio Janeiro in the
“ Bella,’, which foundered at sea, April 20, 1854. [A Chancery suit was
instituted, and his death legally proved.] His mother advertised for her sou,
May 10, 1865 ; the claimant (found by Gihhes and Cuhitt in Australia)
asserted that he and eight of the crew were saved from the wreck of the
“Bella”; that he went to Australia, and lived there, roughly, for 13 years
under the name of Castro ; married as Castro, January, as Tichbome, July
3, 1866; he set up his claim, and was accepted by the dowager Lady


Tichborne as her son at Paris, January, 1867. [No others of the family
accepted him; but Sir Clifford Constable and some brother officers did.]
His claim was resisted on behalf of Sir Henry (a minor), son of Sir Alfred
Tichborne, and after Chancery proceeding (begun March, 1867), a trial begun
in the Court of Common Pleas, London, before Chief Justice Bovill, May 11,
1871; the claimant was examined 22 days; the trial adjourned on 40th day,
July 7th; resumed, November 7th; case for plaintiff closed, December 21st;
trial resumed, January 15, 1872; the Attorney-General, Sir J. D. Coleridge,
spoke 26 days; on March 4th the jury expressed themselves satisfied that the
claimant was not Sir Roger; on the 103rd day he was declared non-suited,
March 6, 1872. [The law proceedings are said to have cost the estate nearly
£92,000.] He was lodged in Newgate to be tried for perjury, March 7th;
indicted as Thomas Castro, otherwise Arthur Orton, for perjury aud forgery,
April 9th; the Court of Queen’s Bench decided that he be admitted to bail,
April 23rd; released, April 26th; Lody Doughty, mother of Sir Henry
Tichborne, died December 13th; the trial of the claimant for per jury and
forgery begun before Chief Justice Cockburn and Justices Mellor and Lush
at Bar April 23, 1873; case for the prosecution closed July 10th; resumed
(for defence) July 21st. [Up to June 27th (47th day of the trial), out of 150
witnesses above 100 had sworn that the claimant was not Tichborne, and
about 40 that he was Arthur Orton.] The claimant forbidden to attend
public meetings, September 10, 1873; case for the defence closed on the
124th day, October 27th; adjourned from October 31st to November 17th,
then to November 27th; rebutting evidence heard, November 27-28; Dr.
Kennealy’s summing up, December 2-14, January 15-28, 1874. [Mr.
Whalley, M.P., for contempt of court, fined £250, January 23rd.] The
Chief Justice’s summing up, from January 29th, to February 28th.
Verdict: —That the claimant did falsely swear : That he was Roger Charles
Tichborne; that he seduced Catherine N. E. Doughty in 1851; and that he
was not Arthur Orton. Sentence: 14 years imprisonment with hard labour,
February 28, 1874, [Longest trial known in England.] New trial refused
by the judges, April 20, 1874; Jean Luie (Lindgren) and “ Oapt.” Brown
convicted of perjury in the Tichborne case (7 years’, and 5 years’ penal
servitude), April 9-10, 1874,
Charles Orton declared the claimant to be his brother, at the Globe Office,
London, March 10, 1874.
Joachim v. O’Shanassy. Joachim took up eight selections of 320 acres
each in the names of his children on O’Shanassy’s Moira run, N. 8. W., on
February 20, 1873. The litigation lasted three years; Privy
Council decided in favour of Joachim, 1877.
Peter F. Macdonald v. Queensland Government, for losses through
Irregular issue of pastoral leases of runs to others which'were rented to him;
tried at Rockhampton. Verdict for plaintiff (including interest, £7,000),
£19,700, April 12-19, 1879.
J. V. Lavers v. Municipal Council, Sydney, for £3,000 damages, being
£l,OOO per month for non-completion of Town Hall, Sydney, according to
Act, of Parliament, He lost the case on a technical point, April, 1875.
Hugh James Vincent O’Ferrall, convicted in Melbourne of embezzlement
in the Lands office, sentenced to 12 years’ imprisonment, July 31, 1875.
[His defalcations were supposed to have amounted to £30,000.]
Learmonth v. Bailey, Great Victorian mining case. Case cast for
plaintiff, £lO,OOO. 1876.
Raynes, Treeve, and Co., auctioneers, Sydney, failed. Raynes died in
September, 1876, and his partner, Josiah Richard Treeve, who had
previously announced his succession to the title of Lord Blayney, attempted
to escape from the colony in the “ Fanny Wright ” which however, in sailing
out of Port Jackson, came into collision with the steamer “ City of Hobart,
and was sunk. Treeve was arrested a few days afterwards, and tried at the
Criminal Court, Sydney, before Mr. Justice Faucett, on November 11, 1876,
and following days, frr forging the name of Mr. (now Sir) G. Wigram Allen,
and other directors of a Building Society, to eight pieces of paper, each of
the value of £3,000 to £4,000. The prisoner found guilty and sentenced to
thirteen years’ imprisonment, November 24, 1876,


Robert Hancock, a rich old colonist, died in Sydney (leaving property
■worth about £40,000), February 26, 1876. He left a will dated August 4,
1870, bestowing his property on Hannah Hincksman, Mary Hincksman, and
Mary Payne. A solicitor’s clerk, named Marshall, produced a second will
dated November 1, 1875, leaving some of the property to Mrs. Burton and
£2,000 to the Randwick Asylum. The trial to prove the validity of the
second will took place in Supreme Court, Sydney, March 2,5, 6,7, and 8,
1877, and ended in a verdict against its validity. Marshall was tried for
forging the second will; convicted and sentenced'to; seven years hard labour,
February 29, 1878.
Important insurance case. Manning v. New Zealand Co., for insurance
on “ Lord Ashley,” tried at Sydney. Verdict for plaintiff, March 19, 1878.
The charge preferred against Mr. G. Stevenson and others of conspiring
to defraud the Customs, Melbourne, terminated August 22, 1878. [Ten of
the jury were for an acquittal and twe held out for the conviction of the
defendant Stevenson ; no verdict could be taken.]
Important judgment in the Supreme Court in the case of Lloyd v.
Vickery. November 21, 1878. [This trial, involving large interests in
stations on Liverpool Plains, N.S.W., extended over five years.
REMARKABLE CRIMES and CRIMINALS.
Mnrder of John MTntyre, by an aboriginal, 1789.
Marion Du Fresne was murdered in New Zealand, June 14, 1799.
Murder in Sydney of Samuel Clode, a missionary of Tahit, by a soldier,
his wife, and a free man, July, 1799.
A great fraud was practised by clerks (prisoners) who had access to
the records of the names and periods of transportation of prisoners. The
sentences of 200 prisoners were found to be altered to make them appear
less ; from £lO to £l2 was given by each prisoner for the alteration, 1801.
Joseph Luker, a constable, was inhumanely murdered whilst on duty,
August 26, 1803.
Rev. Dr. Halloran, tutor to the Earl of Chesterfield, was transported
for forging a frank to a letter (postage 10d.), September 9, 1818.
Murder perpetrated by a man named Barry, at Birch Grove, on the
defenceless persons of Mr. and Mrs. Bradly, an aged couple, August 15,
1822.
At the Criminal Sessions 34 prisoners were sentenced to death, princi-
pally for bushranging, October, 1822.
An atrocious murder committed within three miles of Kissing Point,
on a poor woman named Martin, whilst her husband was at church, the mur-
derer never having been discovered, June, 1823.
£5,000 stolen from the Government Treasury, Hobart Town, 1824.
Captain Piper, “the Naval Officer” (as the Collector of the Customs was
then called), was found to be a defaulter to the amount of £13,575, 1827.
Singular robbery of the Bank of Australia, George-street, Sydney, by
excavating from a house across the street. £750 in British silver, 2,030
dollars, and a large number of notes (£14,500), and bills stolen, September
15, 1828.
Captain Logan, whilst surveying, murdered by the Moreton Bay blacks,
November, 1830.
Sarah M’Gregor and Mary Maloney tried and convicted of the murder
of their master, Captain Waldron, at Illawarra (to whom they were assigned)
February 22, 1834. [They were respited until the pleasure of His Majesty
was known, when their sentences were commuted to three years’ imprison-
ment. ]
Tne body of James Hamilton, murdered by strangulation and his bowels
ripped open, found by two lads named Lovett and Anderson, on their way
home from the races, near Mount Renny. Kilmartin was executed for this
crime, May 11, 1834.
Dr. Wardell was murdered in his own grounds at Petersham, by John
Jenkins and Thomas Tattersdale. A man named Emanuel Brace turned
informer, September 7, 1834.


■William Fineas Bowles, convicted of tlie murder of his wife in open day
in Bathurst-street, Sydney, with, a knife, February 13, 1835; executed
February 16, 1885.
John Dow, alias Lutterell, alias Lord Yiscount Lascelles, tried and con-
victed of forgery, and transported for life, May 5, 1835. [ln this assumed
title he travelled over the colony for several months on Her Majesty’s com-
mission, to make enquiry into the state of the prison population,]
Samuel Onions, extensive ironmonger in Sydney, convicted oUperjury:
sentenced to seven years transportation, August 10, 1837,
Eight men were tried, charged with the murder of aboriginals at a station
called Myall Creek, belonging to Henry Dangar, Esq. The number killed
was 28 men, women and children, under circumstances of most cruel heart-
lessness. The victims were shot and burnt indiscriminately, no regard being
paid to age ®r sex. The accused were assigned servants as stockmen and
labourers to various settlers. The occasion of this uncalled-for slaughter of
these aborigines was for spearing cattle, but there were grounds for supposing
that those murdered were not given to violence and plunder, being under the
protection of Mr. Dangar and his servants. At the first trial the men were
not convicted. On the second occasion, November 27, 1838, Mr. Chief
Justice Dowling presided, Mr. Piunket (Attorney-General) and Mr. Roger
Therry appeared for the prosecution, Mr. A’Beckett, Mr. Foster and Mr.
Windeyer appeared for the defence. Seven of the prisoners were convicted
and were executed December 18, 1838.
Harrington, the notorious swindler, taken from the “ Roslyn Castle ” in
Sydney Harbour as she was proceeding to sea, bound for England, January
26, 1839.
A surgeon in Sydney sentenced to pay a fine of £5O for illegal dissection,
September 16, 1839.
John Thomas Wilson purchased the brig “Venus,” and put on board
her a full cargo of merchandise which he had purchased from a number of
merchants and tradesmen, and left the colony in her, his debts being £30,000,
October 18, 1839, [He left the bulk of his property behind, which he had
previously assigned over to Mr. A. Polaok; the deed being found faulty,
Polack agreed to pay the creditors 75 per cent, of their respective claims.]
Defalcations of Murray, of the Supreme Court, discovered,
1842.
Street robberies prevalent in Sydney. Mr, Noble: murdered in his own
house by three ruffians, who were afterwards arrested for the crime, 1843.
Mrs. Jamieson, a widow, barbarously assaulted with a tomahawk, by one
John Fitz, otherwise knatchbull, January 6, 1844. (She died in a few days
afterwards. Knatchbull was subsequently tried for the murder, and defended
by Mr. Robert Lowe, when the defence set up (for the first time in the colony)
was self-delusion. He was however found guilty, and executed ISth)January
following,)
Mrs. Hoadley, murdered in her house in King-street, Sydney, May 19,
1845.
John Tawell, bom in 1784, in Aledby, county of Norfolk, in 1798,
entered the service of a widow who kept a general store, and who belonged to
the Society of Friends, of which society he afterwards became a member.
In 1804 he went to London, and entered the service of Mr. Janson, a large
linendraper. He married a housemaid in the employ of his master, and then
left. He was engaged by a Mr. Marsden, wholesale druggist and chemist,
to travel for the establishment, and evinced so much activity and business
tact, that for seven years he was trusted and highly prized by his employer.
At length it was found that he had committed extensive forgeries on the
Uxbridge Bank, for which, if he had been tried, he would have lost his life:
nevertheless, the bank officials, being members of the Society of Friends, were
disinclined to be instrumental in taking life, so proceeded against him on
the charge of having a forged note in his possession, for which he was trans-
ported to Sydney in 1814. Here he was employed as an assistant in the
Convict Hospital. For his assiduity, intelligence, and carefulness he soon
obtained a ticket-of-leave from Governor Macquarie, who very shortly after-
wards gave him his emancipation ticket. Tawell then commenced as a


chemist in Hunter-street, Sydney, and also traded in various kinds of produce.
He rapidly giew rich., embarked in the shipping trade and oil speculations,
and was successful in all his ventures. He built a chapel for the Society of
Friends in Macquarie-st., Sydney, and emptied 600 gallons of rum in Sydney
Harbour, in order to encourage temperance. His wife hearing of Ids altered
condition, came out in 1824. After an absence of 16 years he returned with
a large fortune to England, 1831; made one or two trips to Australia on
business speculations, which brought him a large sum. His wife, during her
last illness, was attended by a nurse named Sarah Hart, with whom Tawell
formed an illicit intercourse, and kept her in seclusion at various places.
He married again, in 1841, a widow named Mrs. Cutforth. Fearing that his
connexion with Sarah Hart would be found out, he planned and perpetrated
her murder, for which ho was placed on his trial, March 12, 1845. In his
confession he stated he had previously attempted to kill her with morphia put
in some porter, and that on this last and fatal occasion ho had used prussic
acid. He was executed March 21, 1845. Throughout his whole life he
always appeared to be religious and charitable: to one school he gave £3O
per annum. He took apparently great interest in all matters belonging to
the religious society of which he was so unworthy a member.
The Nelson Gold Robbery in Hobson’s Bay, Melbourne, April 2, 1852.
[The ship which had arrived the previous day from Geelong with treasure,
was boarded by a daring gang of robbers and plundered of gold to the value
of £24,000. (There were only three sailors and three passengers on board.)
The gold was bought by a Melbourne storekeeper (who met the robbers on
the beach) at thirty shillings an ounce. He then sailed for England, and
was never prosecuted. Four men—John Jones, James Morgan, James
Duncan, and John Roberts was indicted for the offence and found guilty.
One was afterwards released, his arrest being found to be a case of mistaken
identity. April 2, 1852.
Robbery of the MTvor (now Heathcote, Victoria) Gold Escort, July 20,
1853.
Dr. Alexander Cuthill, an old-established and much-esteemed medical
practitioner of Sydney, shot by an insane person named James Gray, while
returning in his gig to town from Cook’s River, April 27, 1854. [Dr.
Cuthill left a legacy of over £lO,OOO to the Destitute Children’s Asylum,
Sydney, the bulk of which has since been expended in erection of the Asylum
at Randwick. He died from the effects of the wound May 1. Gray was
tried, condemned to death, and his sentence commuted to 15 years imprison-
ment.]
Murder of James Scobie, near Eureka Hotel, Ballarat, Victoria, October
7, 1854. [The hotel-keeper, Bently, suspected, arrested, and acquitted;
indignation amongst the diggers in consequence.]
Francis Brannagan arrived in Tasmania in 1842, under a sentance of 14
years. Went over to Melbourne in 1854, and in November, 1854, was com-
mitted for highway robbery by the Maryborough bench, and whilst en route
for Castlemaine for trial, broke out of the Tarrangower lockup, together with
another prisoner, Brannagan escaping, December 7, 1854. [£loo reward was
offered for his capture, which was accomplished by the police near Ballarat;
he was sentenced to 15 years, the first three in irons.]
Captain Melville was undergoing a sentence of 32 years hard labour,
when he headed the first outbreak of the prisoners at Williamstown, which
resulted in the death of Owen Owens, a boatman, whom he killed with a
hammer. Sentenced to death at Melbourne, November 21, 1856, but was
commuted. Strangled himself in the goal, August 12, 1852.
Richard Rowley assaulted Kilmartin, an overseer at Pentridge, while
under cumulative sentences amounting to 32 years, July 26, 1859.
Eugowra Escort robbed, June 15, 1862.
George Williams tried at special sessions Darlinghurst, for robbery under
arms on October 14, 1862, of John George File; pleaded guilty, and sentenced
to 12 years’ hard labour, the first year in irons, February 9, 1563.
George Williams and Frank Britten, for robbery under arms November
5, 1862, of the Bathurst mail, in company with another man, when Arundel
Everett was robbed of £6, and Owen Malone of £990, the property of the


Bank of New South Wales, found guilty at the special commission, Darling-
hurst, and each sentenced to 16 years hard labour, the first year in irons,
February 9, 1863.
Charles, alias James Mackay, for the robbery underarms of two camera
at Mount Victoria ; sentenced at the special sessions, Darlinghurst, to hard
labour for 15 years, first year in irons, February 9, 1863.
John Healey, for robbery under arms near Goulbum, sentenced at the
special commission at Darlinghurst, to 15 years hard labour on the roads, the
first year in irons, February 9, 1863.
Charles Foley and John Brownlow, tried at the special commission at
Darlinghurst, for having, on December 18, 1862, robbed at the Laggan,
O’Brien, a publican, of £75; found guilty and sentenced, Foley to 12 years’
hard labour on the roads, the first year in irons; Brownlow to 7 years’ hard
labour, February 9, 1863.
An attempt was made about 10 o'clock on Tuesday night, February 24,
1863, to rob the Western escort, The coach was attacked between Big and
Little Hartley, by a party of some five or six armed men, who fired upon it,
some logs having been thrown by them previously across the road so as to
block it. One shot slightly wounded Sergeant M’Lure, and one of the horses
was shot dead; the gold, however, was not interfered with, and after an
interval of half-an-hour, the escort proceeded on its way.
Wilson, a noted Melbourne street-walker in female attire, sentenced to
death, December 1, 1863. [Sentence commuted to hard labour for life on the
roads of the colony.]
John Woods, alias Young, was transported for 15 years for a serious
offence from England; also sentenced afterwards to seven years on the roads
at Norfolk Island, and arrested by J. Dowling, Esq., while attempting to rob-
the English, Scottish and Australian Chartered Bank, Fitzroy, June 12, 1864.
William Carver, alias Foster, alias Thomley, convicted at home, and
sentenced to seven years transportation to Van Dieman’s Land. Eight years
for horse-stealing at Castlemaine, Victoria; and two years for beastiality at
Ballarat. Arrested for shooting at Percy de Jersey Grut, Esq., with intent
to murder him and rob the English, Scottish, and Australian Chartered Bank,
Fitzroy, Melbourne. This man was arrested June 15, 1864, by Detectives
Williams and Berliner, who also afterwards captured his companions,
Jeremiah Phillips and James Anderson.
Desperate conflict between four police and eleven prisoners at Bargo
Brush, N. S. W. ; Constable Eaymond shot dead by a prisoner named James
Crookwell, April 15, 1866.
Series of murders committed by Thomas Kelly alias Noon, Richard
Burgess alias Hill, and Philip Levy, who with John Joseph Sullivan, were
known as the New Zealand murderers. The latter turned Queen’s evidence,
he proved how they planned the murder of Mathieu, Kempthom, Dudley
(storekeeper), and De Pontius (a miner), who, on June 12, 1866, left Deep
Creek for Nelson, and were murdered the following day whilst crossing the
Maungatapu Mountain. Three of the party were shot by the murderers, and
the fourth was strangled with Sullivan’s scarf. They also murdered poor
“Old Jamie” in a manner even more horrible than that of the above four
men, and took from him £3. Besides Mr. G. Dobson, surveyor, whom they
strangled, and left at the foot of a tree in a sitting position (as if he had died
from exhaustion), but whom they afterwards buried, these fiends are supposed
to have committed more than thirty murders in New Zealand alone. They
carried with them a bottle containing strychnine, having resolved that if any
party they encountered were too strong for them, they would make friends,
and whilst drinking with them administer the poison, and then rob them.
Burgess stated that he began his criminal career at the age of eight. He
had been a lawyer’s clerk, and was the chief of the band. June 13, 1866.
Murder of four constables at Jindera Mountains, January 9, 1867.
Andrew Anderson and Thomas Campbell tried before Mr. Justice Cheeke,
and found guilty of conspiring to blow up a portion of the outer wall of
Darlinghurst, February 13, 1867.


■William Henry Scott, tried at the Central Criminal Court, before Mr.
Justice Cheeke, for the murder of his wife Annie, and sentenced to death,
February 22, 1867. [Scott after murdering his wife cut up the body and
placed it in a box, and with the assistance of a boy carried it from his house
in Sussex-street. The body was subsequently found by a lad named James
Kirkpatrick, at the back of Barker’s mills.]
Fifteen prisoners sentenced at Bathurst Assizes, 1867, on their way to
Sydney, made a desperate attempt to escape, two got away—(one Rutherford
afterwards captured). Constable Holmes being shot dead, April 23, 1867.
T. J. Griffin, Police Magistrate at Clermont, Queensland, tried at the
Police Court, Rockhampton, and committed for trial, November 21, 1867.
Henry Garrett alias Rouse, robbed the Bank of Victoria at Ballarat in
185.5, and was sentenced to ten years imprisonment; in 1861 was granted a
ticket-of-leave ; he then went to New Zealand, commenced bushranging and
stuck up 23 persons in one day on the Maungatien Ranges, was captured and
sentenced to eight years imprisonment; after serving six years was again
liberated and sent over to Melbourne, where he was brought before the
magistrates under thr Influx of Criminals Act; he complained bitterly of
not being allowed to settle anywhere, and threatened to commit a murder, in
order that his life might be ended for him. 1851—1867-
The remains of two German hawkers, named Pohlman, were found in
the ashes of a fire on the Yanko Creek, about 8 miles from Narranderra.
April 1. 1868.
A ticket-of-leave man named William Munday or Collins, committed
five brutal murders at Conroy’s Gap, sixten miles from Yass. He got up in
the night and kißed with an axe a shepherd, who was sleeping alongside of
him. Smith, a man who was sleeping in a room on the opposite side of the
hut, hearing the noise, got up, but Munday quickly killed him with a shears.
Conroy and Mrs. Conroy also hearing the struggle ran into the murderer’s
room, when he killed them both with the sheepshears. Next morning •.
shepherd named White, who slept in a detached hut, came over to Conroy’s
house; he was met by Munday, who first disabled him with the shears and
then struck him down with the axe. [Munday said he intended murdering
Conroy’s son, but fortunately he was absent on the fatal night. The reason
assigned by Munday for the murders, was that he was badly treated whilst
in Conroy’s employ, and that he could only obtain £1 for six months service
as a shepherd. He was tried at Goulburn for murder, found guilty and
sentenced to death.] April 8, 1868.
Rev. W. Hill murdered at Pentridge Gaol, Victoria, by a prisoner
named Riston, May 13, 1869.
Scott allias Captain Moonlight, tried at Ballarat for the Egerton
(Victoria) bank robbery in 1870, found guilty of the offence, sentenced to ten
years imprisonment, 1872.
Triple murder committed at Forest Reefs, in the Orange district, by a
man named Martin, His wife and his wife’s father and mother killed.
January 3, 1871.
Martha Elizabeth Rumph, wife of a shepherd near Bombala, cut the
throats of several of her children, two of whose heads were nearly severed
from their bodies by a knife, and then attempted to kill herself, She was
tried at the Central Court, Sydney, February 16 following, and acquitted on
the ground of her at the time of the murder s. January 11, 1871.
A threatening letter sent the Governor of N. S. W., stated in the
Assembly to have been the work of a boy of thirteen years. June 1, 1871.
A man named Savage found murdered in a hut on his own property,
about three miles from Parramatta, and on Kissing Point Road, near Sydney,
June 27, 1871.
William Hartley alias George Cox, sentenced to death at the Bathurst
Assizes for the Wren’s Nest murder. October 28, 1871.
Mail coach stuck up near Merriwa by two armed men. November, 1871.
Arrival of the “Jessie Kelly,” schooner, from Noumea, bringing intelli-
gence of the massacre of Bishop Patterson, of the Melanesian Mission, and
the Rev. Mr. Atkin. November 4, 1871.


Keropa tried at Napier, New Zealand, for the murder of Rev. Mr.
Volkner; found guilty and sentenced to death, December 21, 1871.
James Stewart, murdered with a knife, at Camden Park, New South
Wales, by Robt. Boyd, who committed suicide same day. January 5, 1872.
G. R. Nichoils and Alfred Lyster, tried before Mr. Justice Hargrave,
for the murder on Parramatta River, New South Wales, of William Percy
Walker, March 13, 1872 ; they were convicted and sentenced to death, May
22, 1872.
“Carl” murders and kid.: . ping investigation commenced, Water
Police Court, Sydney, July 27, 1872.
Captain Joseph Armstrong and the mate of the “Carl,” convicted on
the (Queen’s) evidence of Dr. James Patrick Murray, of kidnapping Poly-
nesians, were sentenced to death, but the sentence was afterwards commuted;
five of the crew were also tried, and received two years imprisonment, for
assault on the high seas, November 19, 1872.
Release of Mount and Morris (of the “Carl” kidnapping expedition),
who had been sentenced at the Melbourne Criminal Sessions some time before
to fifteen years imprisonment; grounds of release being that it was not shown
that they were detained for their crimes in some place appointed by the
Secretary of State. September 18, 1873.
Extensive forgeries of Bank notes discovered in Parramatta Gaol,
October 1, 1873
H. J. O’Ferrell, a clerk in the Lands Office, Melbourne, absconded;
£14,000 deficient in his accounts, November, 1873; was arrested in Singapore
in 1874, brought back to Melbourne, tried, convicted, and sentenced to
fourteen years imprisonment. 1874.
A girl named Mary Buchan foully murdered at Mount Gambier by a
married man named William Page alias Walker, who was executed for the
crime. July 11, 1875.
Case of attempt to bribe a member of the New South Wales Parliament.
A sentence of three years imprisonment with hard labour was passed, which
however was quashed on appeal to the full Court, August 17, 1875.
Richard W Sawers, teller, Bank Victoria, arrested Melbourne, embezz-
ling £1,400, October 27, 1875.
Attempt was male to upset the up-train from Ballarat and Geelong to
Melbourne by placing three iron rails and a sleeper across the line ; the train
cut through the rails. December 9, 1875. [£2oo reward was offered for the
conviction of the perpetrator.]
Commercial Bank at Cannonbar, New South Wales, broken into, and the
manager bailed up at night and robbed of £1,500. January 13, 1876. [The
robbers were subsequently captured, and a large amount of the money
recovered.]
Bank of N.S.W. Brisbane, robbed of £1,300 by a clerk. December 5,
1877,
A box, the property of the Oriental Bank, containing £5,000, extracted
from the mail room of the “ Avoca,” during the passage from Sydney to
Melbourne, Aug. 4, 1877. Twelve months afterwards the carpenter of the
vessel, Martin Wieberg was captured and confessed to the robbery, implica-
ting Ellison, the first officer. Wieberg- escaped from the Victorian police
when pretending to lead them where the hidden treasure was, Oct. 28, 1878.
Ellison was arrested in England, but acquitted. NovlB7B.
A messenger at the Sydney Observatory, arrested on suspicion of having
attempted to destroy Mr. Russell, the Government Astronomer, by an infernal
machine, September 8, 1877,
Mr. and Mrs, Askell murdered at Booral, Raymond Terrace, New South
Wales, February 1, 1878
Senior Sergeant Wallings shot whilst after bushrangers, September 20,
1878.- [His murderer, Gibson, was shot by Sub-inspector Duffy and party;
on the Queensland border, Oct. 6. 1878.]
The private escort between Mclvor and Castlemaine attacked and the
gold stolen, July 20, 1853. The robbers of the Mclvor escort captured three
-weeks after the robbery, August 11, 1853. Trial and conviction of tha
.Mclvor escort robbers, September 18, 1853.


THE BENTLEY MYSTERY,
A pianiste named Julia Bentley (formerly Miss Monk, of Exeter, Eng-
land), with her husband, Thomas Charles Bentley, afterwards Secretary of
the Union Club, Sydney, arrived in New South Wales in January, I 860;
In May, 1861, and during the seven succeeding months, a number of anony-
mous letters affecting the character of Mrs. Bentley were received by the
leading inhabitants of Sydney. She alleged that she was insulted and vior
lently assaulted in the streets of the city. A parliamentary enquiry was
held commencing on November 14, 1862 ; progress report stating that no
satisfactory conclusion as to the authorship of the letters had been arrived
at by the committee, and exonerating all those accused by the Bentleys.
Sub-Inspector Harrison, of the Detective Police, gave evidence of his
belief that Mrs. Bentley wrote the anonymous letters, and in support of his
opinion, referred to a similar occurrence having happened to Mrs. Bentley,
when a girl, some years previously, when in Exeter. December 19, 1862.
THE BERTRAND CASE.
The murder of Mr. Henry Kinder by Louis Henry Bertrand, forms one
of the most remarkable cases in the criminal jurisprudence of the Australas-
ian Colonies, and from the revolting circumstances attending it, and the
position held in society by the principal parties concerned, it is justly
entitled to be considered one of the causes celebres of court business. On
October 2, 1865, the public of Sydney were startled by the intelligence that
Mr. Henry Kinder, principal teller in the City Bank, a gentleman well-
known and much esteemed, had committed suicide by shooting himself. An
inquest was held on the body, when Helen Maria Kinder, the wife of the
unfortunate man, gave evidence to the effect that deceased had been under
the influence of drink, had been very violent, and had frequently threatened
to destroy himself; that whilst in tho garden she had heard the pistol fired,
and on returning to the room occupied by her husband, found him lifeless.
Subsequent suspicious circumstances caused the arrest of Mrs. Kinder, at
Bathurst, on a charge of murder. She was remanded to Sydney, and at the
same time, Louis Henry Bertrand, a well-known dentist of Sydney, and
the most intimate friend of the deceased, and Jane Bertrand, his wife, were
arrested on a similar charge. The hearing of the case at the Water Police
Court lasted till December 9th, when all the prisoners were fully committed
for trial. During the proceedings, a series of the most atrocious details ever
heard in a police court came to light, and, amongst other papers produced,
were the diary of the male prisoner Bertrand and a bundle of letters, written
almost daily by him to Mrs. Kinder, leaving no doubt of Bertrand’s inten-
tion to get rid of Kinder, with whose wife he had formed a liaison. Kinder
had evidently been drugged day by day, till he became thoroughly demented
and stupefied, and it was supposed either that Bertrand, finding that his
victim was more tenacious of life than he had expected, had fired the pistol,
and had placed the weapon in Kinder’s hand after death; or, having placed
the weapon in Kinder’s hand whilst he was still alive, but in an almost coma-
tose state, had bent the arm and then pulled the trigger, in either case
leading to a supposition of suicide. Bertrand and Mrs. Kinder were placed
on their trial at the Central Criminal Court, in March, 1866, Mrs. Bertrand
having been set at liberty by the Attorney-General, as it was clearly seen
that the part she had taken in the series of circumstances connected with
the case had been done from fear of her husband, who had used the most
terrible threats towards her, and that she had really no knowledge of the
intended murder. After a long and patient trial, at which the most learned
counsel were engaged on both sides, Mrs. Kinder was acquitted, and Ber-
trand found guilty and sentenced to death, March 21, 1866. The most
strenuous efforts were, however, made by the prisoner’s friends to obtain a
commutation of the sentence; every legal and technical point was made
available for a fresh hearing and renewed arguments. The case was taken
before the Privy Council, which upheld the conviction, Bertrand being
meanwhile kept in Darlinghurst gaol. At length, after the lapse of about


two years, during which period all those skilled in medical jurisprudence
were consulted and examined, the sentence was, on the ground of insanity,
commuted to imprisonment for life, a sentence Bertrand is now undergoing
in the Parramatta Criminal Lunatic Asylum, N.S.W. Mrs. Kinder found
it expedient to emigrate to New Zealand, where she was at once engaged as
barmaid at an hotel, and has since re-married.
BUSHRANGERS.
Clarke, John. Robbery under arms, at Michelago, of Levy’s store,
Michelago, June 1, 1866; robbery of the mail near Moruya, July 16; of
W. & J. Morris’s and John King’s stores, at Mudmelong, July 16; of the
Yass mail, July 27 ; of F. H. Wilson, Esq,, at Manar, July 24 ; of the Bore
mail, July 30; of Messrs. Myers and Badgery, at Jembaicumbene,
August 27 ; of JohnHoskings, at Foxlow, August 23, and again on September
10; of Guelch and Dallas, at Long Flat, September 35 ; of Joseph Taylor, at
Little Bombay, October 20; of Messrs. Smith and Dawson, on Braidwood
road, October 22; of a number of Chinamen, on the Araluen Mountains,
October 28; of Ah How, at Jembaicumbene, November 20 ; of Chong Chang,
at Major’s Creek, November 20; of the Yass mail, December 7; of a
Chinaman, at Mudmelong, December 31; of John Hyland, at Crown Flat,
December 31; suspected of assisting to murder the four special constables, at
Jindera, January 9, 1867 ; of Hornby and others, on the Araluen Mountains,
January 15 ; of Henry Lamb and Chowry, Mongarlon road, January 14 ; of
Gr. Myers, at Jembaicumbene, Jamxary 26; of the Yass mail, January 27 ; of
the Groulburn mail February 22 ; of Frazer s store, at Gundaroo, March 2;
of F. Louise, at Bungendore, March 4; of Williams, publican, at Boro,
March 7; feloniously wounded Constable Walsh and the black tracker, Sir
Watkin, when being captured at Jindera, April 27 ; tried at Central Criminal
Court, Sydney, May 29,1867 ; executed at Darlinghurst, June 25, 1867.
Clarke, Thomas. Escaped from Braidwood Gaol, whilst under com-
mittal for robbery, being armed, October 3, 1865; stole a horse from C. E,
Dransfield, at Jembaicumbene, October 27 ; stole a horse from Mulligan, at
Jembaicumbene, December 1; stole a horse from John Mallon, at Mericum-
bene, December 13; robbery of Mr. Hoskings, at Foxlow, December 29; of
of Summer’s store, at Jembaicumbene, January 13, 1866; of Frazer and
Matthison, on Major’s Creek Mountain, January 13; of the Araluen and
Braidwood mail, January 15; of the Post Office at Michelago, February 13;
of John M’Elroy, at Manar, February 10; of Ed. Eaton, at Crown Flat,
February 23; of Cullen and Harnett, near Cooma, March 22 ; of the Nerri-
gundah mail (Mr. John Emmett wounded), April 9; murder of Miles
O’Grady at Nerrigundah.for which he was outlawed April 9; robbery of Morris’
store at Mudmelong, February 23; of Armstrong’s store at Araluen, May 22;
of Levy and others, at Michelago, June 1; of Thomas Wall, at Jindera,
July 4; of the Moruya mail (mailboy’s horse taken), July 16 ; of King &
Morris’s, at Mudmelong, July 16; fired at the Ballalaba police, July 17;
robbery of the Yass mail, July 27 ; of the Queanbeyan mail, July 30; of
F. H. Wilson, at Manar Station, July 24; of Hosking’s, at Foxlow, August
22, and also September 10; of Myers and Badgery, at Jembaicumbene,
August 27; of a Chinaman, on the Araluen Mountain, October 9 ; of Joseph
Taylor, at Little Bombay, October 20 ; of R. Smith and T. Dawson, on
Braidwood road, October 22; of a number of Chinese, on the Araluen
Mountain, October 28; of a Chinaman, at Jembaicumbene, November 20;
of a number of Chinamen, at Major’s Creek, November 20; of the iass
mail, at Razorback, December 7 ; of a Chinaman, at Mudmelong, December
31; of attempt to rob James Hyland, at Crown Flat, December 31; sus-
pected of murdering the four special constables at Jindera, January 9,1867:
of robbery of John Hornby, on the Araluen Mountain, January 15; of
Chowry and Lamb, at Mongarlo, January 14; of James Myers at Jembai-
cumbene, January 26; of the Goulburn mail, February 22; of the Yass
mail, January 22, of Frazer’s Store, at Gundaroo, March 2 ; of Mr. Williams,
at Boro, March 6 ; feloniously wounding Constable Walsh and Sir W 7 atkin,
the black tracker, when being captured at Jindera, April 27. for which he
was tried at the Central Criminal Court, May 29 ; executed June 25, 1867


Donohoe, John. A native of Dublin, arrived, a prisoner, in the eolony
by the “Ann and Amelia," 1825. Soon afterwards escaped, and took to
the bush; depredations committed chiefly in the vicinity of Liverpool,
Penrith, and Windsor ; was joined by ten or twelve others, forming a band
that carried terror through all the more populous parts of the interior
during 1828 and 1829 ; shot dead, in a skirmish, by a soldier named
Maggleton, at Raby, September 1, 1830; several of his companions after-
wards caught and executed. Donohoe was 5 feet 4 inches in height, and
had flaxen hair and blue eyes.
Dunn, John One of the Gardiner gang of bushrangers, captured on
the Marthaguy Creek, below Dubbo, by Constable James A. G. M’Hale,
assisted by Senior-Constable Elliot and Constable Hawthorn; Dunn shot
M’Hale in the leg, and was himself wounded and afterwards tried and
executed at Darlinghurst, December 24, 1866,
Gardiner, Francis. Commonly known as “Frank Gardiner,” alias
Christie, alias Clarke; born at Boro Creek, near Gouiburn, New South
Wales, in 1830, height 5 feet 8£ inches, brown hair, sallow complexion,
hazel eyes; was first tried on the 21st and 22nd October, 1850, at the
Geelong Circuit Court, Victoria, on a charge of horse-stealing, for which he
received a sentence of five years imprisonment with hard labour. On the
26th March, 1851, he escaped from Fentridge prison, Victoria, and was
next convicted at the Gouiburn Circuit Court, New South Wales, on 17th
March, 1854, on two charges of horse-stealing, for which he received two
sentences of seven years each on the roads. He obtained a ticket-of-leave
for Carcoar on the 31st December, 1859, but it was cancelled on sth May,
1861, for absence from district and being suspected of cattle stealing. For
several years he kept a great part of the country in terror by his lawless
deeds, aided by a gang of ruffians that he got together, the names of the
principal ones being Gilbert, O’Malley, Hall, and Dunn. No less than six
mail robberies under arms were committed by him, and scores of persons
were bailed up and plundered. The most memorable crimes were the
robbery of the gold escort from the Lachlan at Eugowra, in 1862, when the
three police were overpowered by a large number of ruffians, several
thousands of ounces of gold stolen; and the shooting and wounding of
Troopers Middleton and Hosie in a desperate encounter with the gang.
Notwithstanding the efforts of the New South Wales Police, Gardiner
escaped out of the country into the neighbouring colony of Queensland, and
he set up business as a storekeeper, and successfully carried it cn for two
years at a place called Apis Creek, on the road from Rockhampton to the
Peak Downs, where he was captured by Constables Pye, McGlone, and
Wells, in February, 1864. He was brought to Sydney, and tried and con-
victed before Sir Alfred Stephen on the Bth July of that year for the
wounding of Trooper Hosie and the robbery of Messrs. Hewett and Horsing
ton. For these offences he received sentences amounting to 32 years’ harif
labour. In consequence of strong pressure being brought to bear upon the
Executive and the Governor, Gardiner was released from prison in July,
on 1874. condition that he leftthe colony,and accordingly he went to America,
where he now (1882) is. Mrs. Brown, Gardiner’s paramour, was the wife
of a respectable settler; having been seduced by Gardiner, she left her
husband and family, breaking up a comfortable home, and lived with the
outlaw until he was captured. Soon afterwards went to New Zealand, and
died a violent death by her own hands on the Thames gold-flelds in 1868.
Gilbert, John, native of Canada, and the son of an old soldier, came
when a boy to New South Wales with his father. He was engaged as
stockman on a station near Marengo, from which place, lured by the false
co curing given to bushranging in the neighbourhood, he, in 1862, joined
Gardiner’s gang; he was present at the sticking up of the gold escort in
June of that year, and subsequently when Gardiner had left the gang, he,
in company with Ben Hall and John Dunn, made their names a terror to
the country ; he with his own hand shot Sergeant Parry, who, deserted
by his comrades attempted to defend the Gundagai mail of November 16,
1863; on May 13, 1865, being betrayed by the farmer in whose house he
and his comrade John Dunn had taken shelter for the night, he was shot


in an encounter by a constable named Jobn Bright, who, in company with
Senior-Constable Hales and Constable King, were brought to the spot by
the informer. John Gilbert at the time of his death was about 22 or 23
years of age.
Hall, Benjamin, was for some years a small squatter in the Lachlan
district, when he made the acquaintance of Francis Gardiner, then a ticket-
of-leave man who was engaged in the occupation of a butcher. He was for
a long time suspected by the police as being an accomplice of this man
and his gang, and the close supervision under which he was kept, together
with the alleged misconduct of his wife, at length drove him to desperation,
and he openly joined Gardiner. On the retirement of the latter from his
lawless career, Hall assumed command, and in company with Gilbert and
Dunn, became the terror of the Goulburn and Lachlan districts. At length
he determined to relinquish his desperate life, and leaving Dunn and Gil-
bert, applied to a connection, in whose hands he had placed some money
for safe keeping, for the amount. This man, under pretence of going into
Forbes to obtain the money from the bank, revealed to the police Hall’s
hiding place which they, under Sub-Inspector Davidson, closely surrounded
at night, and as Hall arose the next morning, May 6th, 1865, his body was
riddled with slugs, as many as thirty-four wounds being counted. £IOOO
reward had been offered for his capture, £SOO of which his betrayer
received, the other half being divided amongst the police present at his
death.
Howe, Michael, Notorious bushranger in Van Diemen’s Land, shot
by Private W. Pugh, and captured October 21, 1818. [See Bushranging,
Van Diemen’s Land.]
Kelly Gang, The. Constable Fitzpatrick, of Benalla, Victoria, whilst
armed with a warrant to arrest Daniel Kelly, was overpowered at Kelly’s
house by the prisoner, his brother Ned, his mother, and two men, named
Williamson and Skillion. The constable was maltreated and rendered in-
sensible, but allowed to depart on solemnly promising not to report the
occurrence. The three latter were subsequently imprisoned for the crime;
the brothers Kelly took to the bush April 15,1878, and thus originated the
Kelly Gang, consisting of Edward Kelly (native of Victoria, aged 27),
Daniel Kelly (native of Victoria, aged 18), Stephen Hart (native of Fish
River, New South Wales, aged 20), and Joseph Byrnes, aged 21. Ned
Kelly had, as far back as 1870, been arrested by the police of the Ovens
District, Victoria, on suspicion of having been an accomplice of the bush-
ranger Power. A reward of £lOO was offered by the Government of Vic-
toria for the capture of Daniel Kelly for shooting constable Fitzpatrick,
April, 1878 ; their next reported act was the murder at Stringy Bark Creek,
Wombat Ranges, near, Mansfield, Victoria, of Sergeant Michael Kennedy,
and Constables Scanlan and Lpnergan, by shooting, October 26, 1878. On
October 30 the gang were outlawed, and a reward of £5OO offered by the
Victorian Government for the capture of each of them, dead or alive.
Stuck up Faithful Creek Station, near Euroa, December 9; robbed the
Bank of Victoria at Euroa, of £2OOO, December 10 ; stuck up the Police
Barracks at Jerilderie, New South Wales, and bailed up the police, Satur-
day evening, near midnight, February 8, 1879; paraded through the town-
ship, held possession of it for two days, keeping the police in charge
nrisoners in the lockup, cutting the telegraph wires, and generally terrify-
ing the inhabitants, robbing the bank of £2OOO, and burning some of its
valuable documents, February 10, 1879. [See Rewards for Capture of.]
Macgregor, alias the Wild Scotchman, was the most notorious bush-
ranger in Queensland; he came originally from New South Wales, and
carried on for some time his depredations single-handed. As there was but
little gold at that time discovered in the colony, his raids were principally
on stations and travellers : was captured once, but managed to effect h s
escape on his way to Rockhampton gaol; at last was, after a chase of
eighty miles, captured by two magistrates, who managed to obtain fresh
horses at various stations on the road, whilst Macgregor had but the one ; he
was safely conveyed to Brisbane, where he,was sentenced to twenty
years’ hard labour, 1863.


Melville, Captain. Born at sea. This notorious scoundrel, who gained
some sympathy from a few for his being the nmgt daring of Victorian
bushrangers, died by his own hand in the Meibom ; gaol, at the age of 35,
August 12, 1859. He was undergoing his sentence of thirty-two years’
hard labour when he headed the first outbreak of convicts at Williams-
town, which resulted in the death of a boatman, Owen Owens, whom he
was accused of having killed with a hammer, and for whish he was sen-
tenced to death at Melbourne, November 21, 1856; he was respited, hut
before the intelligence arrived he had strangled hims e .
Morgan, Daniel, carried the palm over all bushrangers for cool
audac ty and blood-thirstiness. His murderous exploits at the Hound Hill
Station were never equalled in Australia. Five hundred pounds rewar
was offered by the New South Wales Government for his apprehension,
January 5, 1864. In Jnne, 1864, he shot Sergeant M‘Qinnity dead, and
took his horse and firearms. Verdict of the wilful murder of John M'Lean
returned against him, June 23, 1864, and a reward of £lOOO was offered
for his arrest by the New South Wales Government, June 26. In the
following September he shot Sergeant Smith, who died a few days after-
wards. Reward offered for his appsehension by Government increased to
£l5OO, March 8, 1865, On April 6, 1865, put in force a threat often attri-
buted to him, of making a raid upon Victorian territory, and he stuck up
the station of Mr. Evans at Whitefield. Several carriers were also baiie d
u on the road near Wilton. On April 9 following, Morgan reache d
Mr. M‘Plierson’s house at the Peechelba Station, about twenty miles from
Wangaratta. He immediately bailed up all whom, he found on the station.
But a servant girl ran to the house of Mr. Rutherford, a partner of Mr.
MTherson’s, situated at a distance of 400 yards. A man was despatched
to Wangaratta, and the police force arrived, which, combined with Mr.
Rutherford’s men, made a party of about twenty-eight men. Morgan,
meanwhile, unsuspectingly was spending the night in a free and easy
manner, Mrs. M‘Pherson playing on the piano. In the morning, after
reconnoitring in the front of the house, he prepared to start The force
had been carefully posted in ambush all round the place. After having
duly breakfasted, Morgan left; Mr. M‘Pherson and three others going with
him to the paddock to get a mare. On his way he approached within a
hundred yards of the ambush of John Quinlan, a labouring man, who
jumped from behind a tree and shot the bushranger in the back. He died
a few hours afterwards, without confessing anything. Next day an
inquest was held on the body, and the jury returned a verdict of justifiable
homicide.
Power, Henry, stuck up the mail near Porejsukka, in the Ovens
District, May 7, 1869 ; stuck up the Buckland mail coach within e mile
of Beechworth, The Government of Victoria offered £SOO for his arrest,
August 28, 1869; captured by Superintendents Nicholson and Hare, and
Sergeant Montfort, whilst asleep in a hut on the Glenmore Ranges, at the
head of the King River, Victoria ; there was a revolver by his side and a
gun close to his head (he supposed he was betrayed by Edward Kelly, who
turned out bushranger in the same locality), June 5, 1870. Found guilty
at the Beechworth Assizes on three charges of robbery, and sentenced to
five years’ imprisonment on each charge, sentences to be cumulative. He
showed bravado in Court, and, on being sentenced, requested the judge to
“ draw it mild,” August 2, 1870.
Peisley, John, a notorious scoundrel, at whose house, in the Western
District, it is supposed the Gardiner gang received assistance, encourage-
ment , and support. Peisley was tried and conv of murder, and
executed at Bathurst, April 25, 1862.
Walmsley, one of Donohoe’s gang, was captured, after a slight resist-
ance, and was condemned to death; was, however, pardoned by the Gover-
nor, in consequence of disclosures he made as to the receivers of the booty
taken by this gang (it was chie on his evidence several convictions of
receivers took place), January 5, 1831.
Ward, Frederick, alias Captain Thunderbolt, was a stockman on Barney
Downs Station, in the New England district; was a splendid horseman.


and a man of cool, determined courage. Whilst serving a sentence, he
escaped from Cockatoo Island. For some years he set at defiance the
authorities in New England. He once stuck up a German hand in the
Goonoo Qoonoo Gap, and as they pleaded hard for their money, he promised
that if he should succeed in robbing the principal winner at the Tenterfield
races, for whom he was on the look-out, he would return their money,
which promise he faithfully kept, by sending to them, much to their aston-
ishment, to the post-office at Warwick, the £2O he had taken from them.
Subsequently, when at a public-house at Uralla, he was surprised by two
policemen; instead of mounting his own horse, he jumped on one belong-
ing to a hawker, which turned out a bad one; a chase ensued. One con-
stable’s horse ran away with his rider; the other constable (Alexander B.
Walker), a brave young fellow, now sub-inspector, rode Thunderbolt
down to a waterhole, when a desperate duel ensued, resulting in the death
of Thunderbolt, May 25, 1870.
Webber, one of the gang commanded by Donohoe, who was shot by
the police, was captured (subsequently condemned and executed),
January 16, 1831.
Westwood, William John, known as Jackey Jackey, was not, as is
from his cognomen generally supposed, an aboriginal. He was the son of
a farmer in the County Kent, and was transported to New South Wales in
1837, when he was assigned to Mr. Philip King, at Gidleigh, 1840 ; he
absconded from his employment, took to the bush, and joined a most deter-
mined scoundrel and murderer named Paddy Curran, who was hanged at
Berrima in 1841; this man Curran, attempting to ill-treat a married
woman, Jackey Jackey defended her and threatened to take Curran’s life
for the base act and then left him, taking his horse, arms, and ammunition,
and thenceforward he carried on his “ profession ” single-handed. Jackey
Jackey had been arrested near Goulhurn, and when being escorted from
there in June, 1841, he escaped from the Bargo lockup, taking the arms
and accoutrements of one of the police. A day or two afterwards he stuck
up Mr, Francis M‘Arthur, and took from his carriage on the Goulburn
Plains, a fine horse, and he then proceeded to Gray’s Inn, called the “ Black
Horse,” some ten miles from Berrima, when he was set upon by Mr. Gray,
Mrs. and Miss Gray (the latter showing extraordinary bravery), and a
carpenter named Waters, and captured after being struck on the head with
a shingling axe by the latter. The reward for £3O offered for his appre-
hension was paid to Gray, and the convict Waters received his pardon.
Jackey was sentenced to imprisonment for life, and after an attempt to
escape from Darlinghurst was sent to Cockatoo Island, Parramatta Elver,
N.S.W., from which place he, with twenty-five other desperadoes, attempted
to escape by swimming to the mainland, but were followed by the police
in their boat and all captured. Jackey was then sent to Tasmania on
board the brig “Governor Phillip. 4 ’ The prisoners were confined in the
hold nearly naked and chained to a cable, but on the way they managed to
get loose and attempted a mutiny, and it was with the greatest difficulty
they were landed at Hobart Town, whence they were sent to Port Arthur ;
there Jackey Jackey again escaped, but after nine days’ starvation was
captured, one of his comrades, Frank Bailey, being shot. Twelve months
afterwards he again succeeded in making his escape to the mainland, but
was captured and placed in Hobart Town gaol, and thence forwarded to
Norfolk Island, where, on July 26, 1846, nearly all the prisoners under
Jackey mutinied. They murdered the overseers, and then, to the number
of several hundreds, marched in a military form to Government House,
under the command of Jackey. On the road, however, they were charged
by the soldiers, and at last made prisoners. The principals in this rising
were tried, and eighteen of them, including Jackey Jackey, were
executed.
Williams, Thomas, was a convict sent to Tasmania ; when his sen-
tence expired he went to Victoria and became a bushranger ; was caught
and convicted on the three charges of highway robbery, for which he
received sentences amounting to 30 years 4 imprisonment.


NEW ZEALAND.
Garrett, Henry, alias Rouse, a liberated Victorian felon, arrived in
New Zealand, and at once took to the bush in the Maungatiou Ranges,
sticking up twenty-three persons in one day; was captured, and sentenced
to eight years’ imprisonment, 1861.
BUSHRANGING IN VAN DIEMEN’S LAND,
The welfare of Van Diemen’s Land was greatly retarded in its earlier
days by the number of daring and prolonged depredations committed by
bushrangers. In some districts the inhabitants succoured and helped to
conceal them, whilst in others the settlers assisted the authorities in trying
to suppress them. Colonel Davey. in 1813, declared the whole colony
under martial Jaw, and punished with flogging persons, whether free or
bound, who quitted their homes by night, and several bushrangers who
were captured were speedily executed. The constables were prisoners of
the Crown, and it was to their interest to detect or pretend to detect crime,
this giving them a claim for quicker liberation, and consequently most
atrocious perjuries were at times committed by them, implicating innocent
persons, whilst it was subsequently ascertained that in many cases they
received from the real culprits a share of their booty. The names of the
most noted scoundrels were Cash, Cavanagh, Brady, Mosquito, and Michael
Howe,
Mosquito.—This bushranger was a Sydney aboriginal, transported to Van
Diemen’s Land for the xnnrder of a woman. At first he was employed by
the authorities as a tracker for hunting up the haunts of the bushrangers,
but he afterwards effected his escape to the bush, and headed the Oyster
Bay tribe of natives, over whom He appeared to exercise unbounded sway;
they numbered some 200 blacks, and under the command of Mosquito
committed many foul and treacherous murders upon isolated settlers and
their families. He became a pest to society and a terror to the colony, and
a large reward was offered for his capture ; at last he was tracked to his
lair at Oyster Bay by a native and two constables, and after a desperate
resistance was wounded and eventually captured and conveyed to Hobart
Town, where he and another native named Black Tom, and six Europeans,
were executed together, February, 1825.
The love of a wild, and in a measure free life in the bush, and the wish
to avoid the severity of the lash, caused many of the prisoners of the
Crown to effect their escape into the bush where, collecting in gangs, they
vied with one another in deeds of the most daring and sanguinary nature,
till at last in 1814 Governor Macquarie, despairing of reducing their num-
bers by force, offered a free pardon to all who, not having been guilty of
murder, would within six months of the date of his proclamation return to
their duty, and this proclamation had, partly, the desired effect.
Michael Howe, who had been a seaman in the Royal Navy, and who was
afterwards the owner of a small coasting craft, in which he had acquired
some notion of command, arrived in Van Diemen’s Land in 1812, and was
sent as an assigned servant to Mr. Ingle; he, however, declared he would
be no man’s slave, and, escaping to the bush, joined a gang commanded by
a man named Whitehead. In this gang, which consisted of about twenty
outlaws, were a deserter from the 73rd regiment, and two native women.
Soon after Howe’s joining them they attacked the settlement of New
Norfolk, and there procured a good supply of arms and ammunition;
thence they marched on Pittwater, committing many depredations, and
sacking and burning the houses and stacks of those who had made them-
selves obnoxious to them; again they attacked New Norfolk, and had a
fight with the settlers, in which the latter were worsted; but in the
engagement Whitehead was seriously wounded. Finding that he could
not recover, he appealed to Howe to finish him and to cut his head off, to
prevent the reward that was offered for his capture being obtained by any
of the settlers; this Howe did, and then assumed the command of the
gang. It was subsequently asserted by Howe (and there is good reason to


believe his statements) that some of the police presumably most active iu
the pursuit of him and his gang at this time were actually in communica-
tion with them, and received a share in the profits of the men’s crimes-
Howe at this time was accustomed to leave his gang for short periods, and
retire to some mountain fastness with a native girl, to whom it was stated
he was much attached; subsequently she was captured and became useful
to the soldiers in discovering his favourite haunts to them. At la«t Howe
sent, through the medium of a Yankee sailor, a proposal to the Governor
to surrender. The Governor (Sorell) sent Captain Nairne to the rendez-
vous to meet with him and to give him an assurance of present safety and
a promise of his intercession for his pardon if he would come in, which
offer Howe accepted. When on the plea of ill health he was allowed to
take exercise under the charge of a constable, he managed to give his
guard the slip and again took to the bush. He found his gang nearly-
broken up, only two men remaining. Watts and Browne. Soon after his
return Watts conspired with a stock-kee per named Hrewe against Howe,
and taking him unawares, they threw him down, disarmed him, and tied
his hand behind his back. Leaving him thus lying on the ground, they
ate their breakfast, and then started with him to Hobart Town, with the
hope of obtaining the reward. Watts walked in front of their prisoner, and
Drewe behind him. On the road Howe managed to get his hand loose
unperceived by his guard, when, springing suddenly upon Watts, he
seized his knife and fatally stabbed him, and then, taking his gun, shot
Drewe dead on the spot. Watts managed to reach Hobart Town, but sub-
sequently died of his wounds. A large reward was now offered for the
capture or death of Howe, together with freedom and a passage home,
should his captor be a convict; but for a long time he escaped all snares.
But the temptation of the large reward and the free pardon, together with
the passage home, was a bait that could not be long withstood, and so a
transported sailor named Jack Worral conspired with one of Howe’s mates,
named Warburton, to effect his capture Major Bell gave them the
assistance of a soldier of the 48th regiment, named Pugh, these two
secreting themselves in Warburton’s hut, who was to inveigle Howe into
it. This Warburton did, but Howe discovered his danger and managed to
break away, the shots fired at him not taking effect. In running,.how-
ever, he received a severe fall which partially stunned him, and he hen
turned to fight; whilst engaged with one the other crept up, and knocked
him down with the butt end of his musket, and with the same weapon
dashed his brains out, October 21, 1818. a kangaroo skin pouch or
knapsack which he carried, was found a record of his crimes and the
names of many of his accomplices, with those o the eceivers of stolen
property, hitherto unsuspected.
MEDALS FOR BRAVERY IN RESISTING AND CAPTURING.
Medals, Gold and Silver, which were ordered by Sir Charles Oowper
in 1870, were in 1875 issued by the Hon. the Colonial Secretary, New-
South Wales, to the following recipients, in recognition of the bravery
displayed by them in conflicts with bushrangers during the years 1863,
1864, and 1866. The gold medals were given to private colonists, and
silver medals amongst the most meritorious of the constabulary On the
obverse side is the head of the Queen, with the words “ The Colony of
New South Wales,” on the reverse the Australian Coat of Arms, below
which is inscribed the name of the recipient of the medal, and a wreath
of flowers and foliage of the banksia, the whole being surrounded by the
words, “ Granted for gallant and faithfu services.” Th gold medals
were struck at the Sydney Mint.
Gold Medals were awarded to—Robert Lowe, Esq., Mudgee, who shot
a bushranger named Heather, near Slapdash, April 7, 1863; Henry Bayliss,
P.M,, who was dangerously wounded, August 21, 1863, whilst acting as a
volunteer in pursuit of the bushranger Morgan, and who is supposed to
have shot or caused the death of Morgan’ mate ; David Campbell, J.P.,
who shot bushranger O’Mealley, one of Gilbert’s gang, at Goimbla, near


Francis Christie, alias Frank Gardiner
.. £500
Daniel Morgan ..
.. 1,000
John Gilbert .. ..
.. 1,000
Benjamin Hall ..
.. 1,000
John Dunn .. ..
.. 1,000
— Burke
500
— O’Mealley
..
500
Frederick Ward*..
.. 500
Thomas Clarke ..
!! ” .. i
* .. 1,000
John Clarke
500
Patrick Connell ..
.. ..
250
Toogong, on the night of November 20, 1863 ; H. M. Keightley, P.M.,
Wellington, who killed the bushranger Burke, near Rockley, October 26.
1863; William Macleay, ol Elizabeth Bay, who resisted and beat off
Gilbert’s gang from Plumb’s Inn, near Qoulburn, December 19, 1864 ; J. P.
Grenfell, Crown Lands Commissioner, deceased, who was fatally wounded
after a desperate encounter with bushrangers near Narramine, December
7, 1866. The town of Grenfell was named in his honour. The medal was
sent to the Agent-General for presentation to Mrs. Grenfell, who now
resides in the Isle of Man ; to the widow of the late Captain M'Larie,
mark the services which he rendered as Inspector-General of Police from
October 28, 1856, to October 6, 1874.
Silver Medals were presented to—Constable John Middleton, who
arrested Gardiner under circumstances of great bravery at Fogg’s hut on
the Fish River; Sergeant A. B. Walker, who shot Thunderbolt near
Uralla. May 25, 1870; Mr Beauvais, innkeeper, Pine Ridge, who defended
himself when attacked by an armed bushranger and murderer named
Rutherford, whom he shot dead .
REWARDS OFFERED FOR APPREHENSION OF BUSHRANGERS.
Large reward offered for the capture of William Underwood, the com-
panion of Donohoe,the bushranger. Uuderwood was described as a native,
of Antrim, Ireland, a labourer, about 28 years of age, and 5 feet 8 inches in
height, 1829; £5OO was offered for the capture of Power.
The following is a list of the highest rewards offered for the appre-
hension of bushrangers ;
For the Capture of Amount.
The murderers of the special party of detectives .. .. 5,000
Edward Kelly, Daniel Kelly, Stephen Hart, and Joseph
Byrne (by N.S.W. and Victoria).. , .. 8,000
VICTIMS MURDERED BY BUSHRANGERS.
The following list includes only those who were killed between 1862
and 1867
Daniel Crotty (mailman), shot dead, near Marengo, August 16, 862
Peter Clarke (drover), shot dead by Wilson.
John M’Bride (miner), shot dead by Gilbert and Lowry.
M'Ginnity (sergeant), shot dead by Morgan.
South (sergeant), shot by Morgan, died of his wounds.
mßLe an (station hand), shot dead by Morgan.
fßpry, E. (sergeant), shot dead by Gilbert.
Chinaman (name unknown), shot dead by Morgan.
Nelson (constable), shot dead by Dunn.
Chinaman (name unknown), shot dead by Clarke’s gang.
O’Grady (constable), shot dead by Clarke’s gang.
Another Chinaman shot dead by Clarke’s gang.
Constable Raymond, shot dead by Crook well aud others.
Commissioner Grenfell, shot dead near Narramine.
Special constables Carroll, Phegan, M’Donald, and Kennagh, shot dead
at Jindera, by Clarke’s gang, January 9, 1867.


James Dornen, alias Bill Scott, alias the Long Tailor, murdered, it is
believed, by Clarke’s gang to prevent him giving information.
Noonang (half-caste, hush telegraph), murdered, it is believed, b
■Clarke's gang, to prevent him giving information.
Total number of bushrangers shot or hanged, 23.
Total number of persons murdered by oushrangers, 20.
Total lives sacrificed, from 1862 to 1867, 44.
Of those who died of their wounds, after lingering some time, or who
were maimed for life, there is no return. Doubtless there were cases,
also, of persons murdered by the bushrangers whose bodies were naver
discovered, as in the case of “ German Bill,” at one time mate of Morgan,
who was wounded by Senior-constable Brown the same night as was Mr.
Bayliss, and whose sufferings there is good grounds for believing
Morgan ended by shooting him through the head to prevent his giving
any information to the authorities, into whose hands he must have fallen.
BUSHRANGERS SHOT OR HANGED, BETWEEN 1862 AND 1867.
Peisley, hanged; Ross, Alexander, hanged; Heather, shot dead by
Mr. Lowe ; Robardy, Charles, hanged.
Cummings, John, shot dead by one of his mates in an attempt to rescue
him.
Lowry, J, F., shot dead by Senior-Sergeant Rawlinson.
Burke shot dead by Mr. Keightley.
Mr. Keightley was taken prisoner by Hall and other bushrangers, and
£5OO ransom demanded. Mrs. Keightley went to Bathurst and got the
money, and her husband was released.
O’Mealley shot dead by Mr. Campbell, at Goimb a.
Lowry, James, shot dead by Constable Ward.
Smith, shot dead at Wondilla, by Constable Saunders.
Morgan, Daniel, shot dead by a Victorian stockman, named Quinlan, at
Peechlebar station, near Victoria.
Hall, Benjamin, shot dead by Sub-Inspector Davidson, Constable Condell,
and party and black tracker, near Forbes.
Gilbert, John, shot dead by Constable Bright, near Binalong.
Dunn, John, hanged at Darlinghurst,
Rielly. shot dead by Constable M'Glone,
Connell, Patrick, shot dead by police.
Burke, (at one time belonging to Gardiner’s gang), hanged at Melbourne.
Clarke, John, hanged at Darlinghurst.
Clarke, Thomas, hanged at Darlinghurst.
Ward, Frederick, (alias Thunderbolt), shot dead by Constable Walker,
near Uralla.
LIST OF POLICE KILLED OR WOUNDED, 1862 TO 1879.
Detective Patrick Lyons received gunshot wound in right hand while
escorting prisoners between Forbes and Young : was attacked by Davis
and party ; Davis was arrested, A.pril 14th, 1862,
Senior Constable Henry Moran shot in the groin by Gardiner’s gang,
Eugowra Creek, when escorting gold, June 15th, 1862.
Constable Luke Cullen, while struggling with a prisoner, pistol exploited,
and was shot in leg, August 10th, 1862.
Constable Thomas Rayfield, wounded with pistol ball in side white' at-
tempting to arrest a horse-stealer named little Jemmy, November 10th,
1862.
Senior constable William Hughes fired upon from ambush, received
gunshot wonnd in arm, June Bth, 1863.
Senior constable Frederick Sutton wonnded by Gilbert when attempting
to rob Carcoar mail. August 6th, 1863,
Senior Sergeant James Stephenson received gunshot wound in the hand
in an encounter with Lowry, when latter was wounded and died following
day, August 29th, 1863,


Senior constable Thomas Haughey received gunshot wound in the knee
in an encounter with armed offenders at Toodles’ shanty, Demondrille
Creek, September 4th, 1863.
Sergeant David M'Ginnity shot dead by Morgan near Tumberumba,
June 24th, 1864
Sergeant Thomas Symth shot while camping in his tent at night by
Morgan, September 4th, 1864 ; died September 22th, 1864.
Sergeant Edward Parry shot dead by Gilbert, November 15th, 1864.
Constable Samuel Nelson shot by Dunn at Collector, January 26th. 1860.
Senior constable John Ward died from a gunshot wound inflicted by a
Chinaman between Mudgee and Coonabarabran, February 4th, 1865.
Constable William Wiles received three gunshot wounds, two in hand
and one in leg, in an encounter with Hall’s gang at Byrne's, Mutbilly,
February 24th, 1865.
Constable John Kelly received bullet in the left breast in an attack by
Hall and gang on Araluen gold-fields, March 18th, 1865.
Constable Robert Keane received gunshot wound in right shoulder in
an encounter with bushrangers at Cunningar, March 18th, 1865.
Constable Michael King received gunshot in ankle in an encounter with
armed offenders at Binalong, 1865.
Senior constable J. R. Herbert accidentally shot (since died) in mistake
for bushranger, April 13th, 1865.
Senior constable William Lang wounded by pistol ball in the arm when
attempting to arrest mail-robber Carroll, December 10th, 1865
Constable James McHale wounded when effecting the capture of the
outlaw Dunn, December 24th, 1865.
Constable Miles o‘Grady wounded when attempting to arrest armed
robbers, April 9th, 1866.
Constable William Raymond shot by prisoner on escort, April 14th, 1866.
Constable McCable was shot by offender Pearson at “ Shearer,s Inn ”
Bourke district, November Ist. 1868.
Sergeant Andrew Sutherland shot by offender Grey, near Cowra,
May Ist, 1872.
Constable Michael Costigan shot at Bourke, September Uth, 1877.
Constable G. R. Armytage shot at Bourke, September 11th, 1877.
Senior sergeant Thomas Wallins shot dead at Wonbobbie, Macquarie
River, by offender Gibson, September 20th, 1878.
Sergeant Michael Kennedy shot dead by Kelly gang at Wombat Ranges,
near Mansfield, Victoria, October 26th, 1878.
Constable Scanlan shot dead by Kelly gang at Wombat Ranges, near
Mansfield, Victoria, October 26th, 1878,
Constable Lonergan shot dead by Kelly gang at Wombat Ranges, near
Mansfield, Victoria, October 26th, 1878.
Constable Power wounded in an encounter with four bushrangers near
Balranald, 1879.
VARIOUS ACTS OF BUSHRANGING.
Bushrangers committed depredations throughout the Bathurst district
in the beginning of 1826 ; a desperate skirmish took place between the
police and seven bushrangers, and one of the gang, Morris Connell, was
killed on the spot by Corporal Brown, of the Mounted Police, March 16th,
1826 ; affray between ticket-of-leave-men and bushrangers at Chiplin,s—
one bushranger killed, and two wounded and captured, April 2nd, 1827 ;
encounter near O'Brien's station between police and nine bushrangers,
three bushranners captured, September 3rd, 1828; the murder of Dr.
Robert Wardell, the eminent lawyer,, was committed, September 7th r
1834, (He was frequently associated with Mr Wentworth in the early
political contests in which the colonists were engaged. He was shot on his
owu land by the bushrangers, one a mere boy who turned King’s evidence.
The body was found next day by his servants covered over with a large
bramble to keep the native dpgs away, which the murderers had sufficient
humanity to do. The two bushrangers, Jenkins, who fired the fatal shot.


and Tattersdale, as abettor, were convicted and executed. Jenkins, whilst
judgment was being pronounced, used most blasphemous curses towards the
Judge, jury and council, and hit his fellow prisoner who was beside him
a violent blow on the ear ; six constables were necessary to restrain him
and to remove him from the dock. The fellow colonists (of all classes) of
Dr. WardeH testified the high respect in which he was held by crowding
to his obsequies.) Consequent on the scarcity of provisions, bushranging
became very prevalent in the neighbourhood of Sydney. Crimes increased
50 per cent, on those of the previous year, 1839 ; Mr. John Kennedy
Hume, a much respected colonist, shot by bushrangers at Gun-
ning, N.B.W. The chief of the gang was executed at Goulburn for the
offence, January 29th, 1840. Mr. Henry O'Brien, a magistrate of Yaas,
headed a number of settlers in order to bring the scoundrels to justice, and
in an encounter with the bushrangers, the chief of the gang was killed;
another having been wounded, blew out his brains. Two were taken
prisoners, and of these one hanged himself in the cell, and the other (who
was instrumental in the death of Mr. Hume) was executed in Goulburn
gaol, 1840 ; capture of the “Jew Boy's gang of bushrangers ” at Doughboy
Hollow, near Murrurundi, N.S.W., by Mr. Edward Denny Day and party;
the gang captured consisted of Davis, Marshall, Chitty, Shea, and Buggy ;
two escaped, but one of these, named Glanville, was captured the next
day, December 21st, 1840; capture of the first organized band of Port
Phillip bushrangers on the “ Plenty,” through the bravery of Messrs.
Snodgrass, Gourlay, Fowler, Chamberlain and Thomson, assisted by Messrs.
Eider, Ewart and Yinge. Jack Williams, the leader of the gang, was
shot; Fogarty, Yankee Bill, and another were brought into Melbourne in
custody, April 30th, 1842.
Alexander Ross, Charles Ross, and William O’Connor, charged with
robbery, firing at, and wounding Mr. Henry Stephens, found guilty at the
Special Commission. Darlinghurst, and sentenced to death, February 9th,
1863 ; a notice sent to the magistrates of all country benchss, that all cases
of robbery under arms and other offences of the bushranging class were, for
the future to be tried by a Special Commission, which would commence its
sittings at Darlinghurst, February 2nd, 1863; the public-house of Mr.
Cirkel was stuck up by four bushrangers,—Gardiner, Gilbert, O’Meally and
Dunn. Mr. Cirkel was shot dead by O'Meally for having, it is supposed,
given information as to the movements of the gang to the police, February
15, 1863 ; Alexander Fordyce, John Bow, John McGuire and Henry Manns,
tried by the Special Commission, Darlinghurst, February 4. 1863, for the
escort robbery on June 5, 1862, but after three days’ trial and one night’s
consideration of the case by the jury, the latter were unable to agree, and
were accordingly discharged. On February 23 they were again placed on
their trial, and on Thursday, 26, Fordyce, Bow and Manns were found
guilty, and sentence of death passed upon them. M’Guire was found not
guilty, but was arrested upon another charge, February 26, 1863 ; Gardi-
ner's gang captured on tbe Widdin Mountains, an officer of police, (sub-
inspector Norton), who surrendered to them in consequence of the police
he had ordered to meet him at the rendezvous having failed to obey the
order, and the man Mr, Norton had with him having run away. He was
kept a prisoner for some hours, when he was released unharmed, March 1,
1863 ; Clarke, one of the bushrangers present at the murder of Mr. Cirkel,
on February 16, was arrested by Captain Battye noar Spring Creek; he
confessed to being present at the murder, and said O'Meally had fired the
fatal shot, March 2, 1863; O'Connor's sentence commuted to hard labour
for life. A man named Patrick Daley was committed for trial at Forbes,
charged with being one of the men who made prisoner of Sub-inspector
Norton, March 24, 1863 ; petition for mercy in the case of Bow and
Manns, the condemned escort robbers (Fordyce's sentence having already
been commuted to hard labour for life), was signed by 13,000 persons in
two days, exclusive of a large number of signatures attached to other pet-
itions for the same purpose, March 26, 1863. Bow reprieved and sentenced
to hard labour for life, Manns executed, March 26, 1863 ; bushrangers and
the confessional formed the subject matter of a letter from Father M'Carthy


n the Sydney Morning Herald, May 22, 1865 (this was in consequence of
Vane, a young bushranger, giving himself up to this clergyman); a haw-
ker named Charles Young robbed at Beucenya Lake, New South Wales, by
William Brown, alias Betram, October 15, 1869; the Secret Police Party,
consisting of John Carroll, Eneas M'Donnell, Patrick Kennagh and John
Phegan, who were sent out to capture the bushrangers (Clarke's gang) in
the Braidwood district, were murdered at Jindera, January 9, 1867 ; two
mates of Power savagely attacked two constables at Benalla, one of the
bushrangers being captured, the other escaping, August 20, 1870 ; Sergeant
Sutherland, of the New South Wales police, shot dead a few miles from
®owra by two bushrangers, May 1, 1872 ; four bushrangers, Thomas Gor-
man, Charles Jones, William Kay, and William Hobbs, robhed Mr. Grain-
ger's store at Hatfield, near Balranald, New South Wales. They were
under arms, and took £SO, and two horses with saddles and bridles. Two
shots were fired at a storeman named Day, who escaped and gave informa-
tion to the police at Balranald, February 24, 1879. The bushrangers after
leaving Hatfield, stuck up a hawker named Friedman, and robbed him of
£4O cash, and of some valuable jewellery and other goods, February 25,
879. They were captured at Kilfern station and brought to Balranald by
first-class constable Beresford, constable Power and special constable Day,
all of the Balranald Police, who rode 180 miles from 9 a.m. on Sunday to
7 p.m. on Monday, several shots being exchanged, and constable Power
wounded, February 19, 1879.
EUGOWRA GOLD-ESCORT ROBBERY.
Pohcemen James Condell, Andrew Moran, and William Haviland, and
mail-driver John Fanan. were stopped on the Gates Road at the Eugowra
Rocks by Gardiner and seven or eight of his gang, when travelling towards
Sydney with the Goverment Escort. The Bushrangers fired a volley and
then made a rush at the coach, and took the rifles of the police, the gold
amounting to 5,500 ounces, much of which belonged to the Oriental Banking
Company, and Bank notes to the value of £7,590; they also took fhe
leaders out of the coach to serve as pack horses but only used one ; and
breaking open the boxes of gold packed them on the mail horse; they
divided the gold and notes afterwards into eight shares, five of the
men taking theirs, while the other three shares (viz., Gardiner's,
Charter's and Fordyce's) remained on the pack-horse which knocked up at
the foot of the Widdin Mountains, and before the bushrangers could remove
the gold, it fell into the hands of the police, under sergeant Saunderson
who had given chase and succeeded in recovering 1239 ounces of gold ; sub-
sequently, when Manns was arrested, 200 ounces and £135 in notes were
found on him. Date of Escort robbery, June 15, 1862. The names of the
bushrangers engaged in the robbery were . —Frank Gardiner, alias Frank
Christie, John Gilbert, Daniel Charters, (afterwards turned informer), John
Bow, Alexander Fordyce, Henry Manns, Benjamin Hall, and O'Meally.
THE END OF THE KELLY GANG.
The small history we have compiled of the lives and exploits of the most
noted band of criminals in the known world, would indeed be incomplete
without the finishing stroke, the record of the death of its leader after the
manner of villains of his stamp, on the gallows.
The trial of Ned Kelly commenced on the 28th October, and lasted till
the following day. The evidence taken was simply a resume of that already
given, and nothing new was elicited. Constables Mclntyre and Day, Ser-
geant Steele, the Manager of the Jerilderie Bank, of New South Wales,
andj other witnesses were examined, after which Messrs. Bindo and
JSmythe, counsel on both sides, addressed the Bench, and His Honour Judge
Barry summed up. The prisoner was allowed a latitude unprecedented in
criminal annals, and interjected remarks during the very lengthy speech of
the Judge. Sentence of death was finally passed, when Kelly jocularly


replied, “I will go further on and meet you where I go.” The bravado
exhibited throughout by this hardened offender clearly shows how indiffer-
ent ke was to his position, and how small the regret shown for crimes he was
instrumental in committing. After return to prison he was allowed to see
some of his relatives, but some sympathizers, Wild Wright and others,
were refused a like favour.
The Executive having fixed the date of Kelly’s execution for Thursday,
November lltb, a few misguided individuals, viz.; the brothers Gaunson,
Hamilton, and Cauldfield, convened a public meeting at the Hippodrome,
Melbourne, on November sth. to petition the governor to reprieve the crimi-
nal. The place was crowded, and a petition was drawn up, largely signed,
and next day presented to His Excellency, who, in reply held out no hope
of Ned’s escape from a well-merited fate. David Gaunson, the chief agi-
tator, endeavoured to argue the point with the Governor, who declined.
Failing in this particular, another deputation, this time of ladies, tried to
achieve what the sterner sex had failed to accomplish. We need scarce add
that neither smiles nor tears availed in moving the relentless soul of the
representative of Her Majesty.
A final and last effort was made by the Kelly sympathizers for their
hero. An open air meeting took place on Tuesday night at Carlton, which
was attended by crowds, and at which Kate Kelly, Wild Wright, Kelly’s
brother, and one of the Gaunsons were conspicuous. The latter denounced
the Press, and after a deputation had been chosen to wait on Mr. Berry, the
mob, consisting chiefly of the lowest orders of society, marched to the Trea-
sury. Mr. Berry listened patiently to the arguments in favour of the
criminal, and promised to submit their representations to the Executive,
hut held out no hope of mercy.
As the time for his execution drew nigh, the condemned man, lying in
the cell in heavy irons, and watched by armed warders, entirely lost his
defiant attitude, and grew restless and agitated, clearly showing that to the
last he had cherished hope of escaping his doom. Several persons sought
an interview, but were refused, and among them, one sent by the Widow
ef Sergeant Kennedy, who was anxious to learn the whereabouts of the
watch stolen by Kelly from her husband.
Ned Kelly was duly executed on Thursday, November 11th, in the
Melbourne Gaol. Forty persons were present, but outside the prison 6,000
waited to learn that the last dread sentence of the law had been carried out.
The night before his execution the culprit passed chiefly in talking to a
fellow-prisoner of his exploits, and arose at 5 o’clock a m., and dressed and
prayed. His irons were knocked off at a quarter to 9, and he was conducted
to the drop, attended by the Eev. Dean O’Hea and father Donaghey. He
was hanged exactly at 10 o’clock, that office being performed by the execu-
tioner, TJpjohn, an old man of 60. The convict made no confession, as an-
ticipated, and death was instantaneous, as beyond a slight quivering of
the lower limbs there was no visible motion. After suspension for half-
an-hour the body was cut down, placed In a rude coffin, and taken to the
deadhouse, for interment within the precincts of the gaol. It is indeed
satisfactory to know that the wrongs committed against society by the
Kelly Gang have been expiated by its last survivor on the gallows, and
we trust from this time forth to find that bushranging in Victoria has
received its quietus.
Several likenesses of Kelly have been taken. One of these, which ap-
peared in the Sketcher, was shown him, when he remarked, “It is a mere
fancy sketch, and not in the least like me,”
Kelly denies the statements made by Constable Fitzpatrick in October
1878, and states he was not within 206 miles of Greta, but earning a liv-
ing by digging, at the time when the supposed outrage on that constable
took place.
He does not attempt to justify his conduct, though his confession is
an ingenious attempt to fix the blame on others. He says: Ido not pre-
tend that I have led a blameless life, or that one fault justifies another,
but the public judging a case like mine should remember that the darkest
life may have a bright side, and that after the worst has been said against
a man, he may, if he is heard, tell a story in his own rough way, that will


lead them to soften the harshness of their thoughts against him, and find
as many excuses for him as he would plead for himself. For my own part
I do not care one straw about my own life, nor for the result of the trial,
and I know very well from the stories I have been told of how I am spoken
of, that the public at large execrate my name. The newspapers cannot
speak of me with that patient tolerance generally extended to men await-
ing trial, and who are assumed, according to the boast of British justice,
to be innocent until they are proved to be guilty; but I don’t mind, for I
am the last that curries public favour or dreads the public frown. Let the
hand of the law strike me dow n if it will, but I ask that my story may he
heard and considered, not that I wish to avert any decree the law may
deem necessary to vindicate justice, or win a word of pity from any one.
If my lips teach the public that men are made mad by bad treatment, and
if the police are taught that they may exasperate to madness men they
persecute and illtreat, my life will not be entirely thrown away. People
who live in large towns have no idea of the tyrannical conduct of the
police in country places far removed from court. They have no idea of the
harsh, overhearing manner in which they execute their duty, how they
neglect their duty and abuse their powers.”
It is the unanimous opinion of the police authorities that the Kellys
were never, as was supposed, in the Strathbogie Ranges. Their principal
haunts were between Glenrowan, Greta, and Sebastopol, and they never
travelled on horseback except when on some exploit. Their general cus-
tom was to carry a small tent, with provisions, in fine weather, and camp
in the middle of some large scrubby paddock. They would shift for a
short distance every night, but would not make a great change unless
they had reason to suppose they had been seen. When their provisions
became exhausted they would have resort to their friends, and in wet and
stormy weather generally sought friendly shelter. It is known for a cer-
tainty that Byrne often slept on the premises of a man who lives within
two miles of Beechworth. This man, on hearing of the destruction of the
gang and the death of Byrne, absolutely shed tears. A singular story is
told by one of the constables who was present in Sheritt’s hut on the night
of the murder. He states that a conversation was being carried on be-
tween Sherritt, Mrs. Sherritt, Mrs. Barry and himself, and that the subject
of their remarks was Joe Byrne- Sherritt then proceeded to tell a yarn
about Byrne and himself having once been arrested on a serious charge.
He said they assaulted a Chinaman and nearly killed him. The Celestial,
indeed, was so near death’s door, that he had to be fed with a silver tube.
He himself was arrested some time after, but Byrne succeeded in evading
the police. Whilst he was lyiug in the Beechworth lockup one night he
heard some one knocking outside, and on asking who it was heard Joe
Byrne reply, “It is me; lam going to help you to escape.” Sherritt
said he replied, “ The Chinaman is getting better, so you had better give
yourself up, and do not be a fool.” Byrne took his advice, surrendered,
secured legal assistance, and was acquitted. Just when Sherritt had
finished this story a knock came to the door, and, as is now well known, it
proved to be the intimation of the final visits Sherritt was to receive from
Joe Byrne.
The maker of the armour which the Kelly gang wore has not been dis-
covered, but, according to some reports, it is believed it was manufactured
by the gang themselves, whilst experts deny the truth of this statement,
and assert it is the handiwork of an experienced blacksmith. This much
is known, the manufacture of the four suits occupied four or five months,
and a good deal of time was wasted in experimenting with different ma-
terial. Circular saws were first tried and found wanting in resistance to
bullets; iron tacks were also tried and found to be not bullet proof; and
the moulds of ploughs were ultimately adopted. It has likewise transpired
that the first suit made had proved defective, and was thrown aside. The
armour was used for the first time at Glenrowan, and was carried to that
place on pack-horses.
It is now ascertained that on the night of the burning of Jones’ hotel,
at Glenrowan, a large number of Kelly sympathisers, well armed, were in


the vicinity, and it was only from fear of shooting a man named Ward,
who was in the hotel, that they refrained from firing.
Most of the plunder obtained by the Kelly gang from the banks is
supposed to be “planted ” and the police search parties actively engaged
in endeavouring to discover it. An incident has leaked out about the
career of the gang. Kelly has stated that they had been amongst snow,
and that in fact they had to clear several feet of snow off a hut they lived
in, and the deduction is that they lived for some time amongst the
Bogong Ranges
LIST OF EXECUTIONS.
New South Wales.
Styles, for murder of Thomas Roberts, executed at Sydney, July 5, 1815.
Black Tommy, aboriginal native of Bathurst district, for murder, executed
at Sydney, December 3, 1827.
John Holmes, for setting fire to a barn belonging to James Bern, executed
at Sydney, August 21, 1829.
A young desperado, named Tierney, 17 years of age, executed at Sydney,
1830, [When on the scaffold, he threw the executioner with himself to the
ground; the former, being much bruised by the fall, could scarcely be per-
suaded to proceed with his duty.]
A soldier of the 39th Regiment, named Brennan, under sentence by a
Court-Martial, shot, at Dawes’ Battery, Sydney, April 6, 1832.
Hitchcock, Poole, Riley, Perry, Jones, and Ryan, six assigned servants of
Major Mudie, for being concerned in an insurrection at “ Castle Forbes”
station, executed at Sydney, December 12. 1834. [The men did not attempt
to deny their offence, but persisted in the statement that they had been
goaded on to their crime by the tyranny and ill-treatment which they had
been subject to on the station, A Commission was appointed to inquire
into the circumstances, the result being a condemnation of the mode in
which the assigned servants were dealt with at “ Castle Forbes,” and Major
Mudie was struck out of the Commission of the Peace.]
Kilmartin, for murder, executed at Sydney, May 11, 1834.
John Jenkins, for murder of Dr. Wardell, executed at Sydney, Novem-
ber 10, 1834.
Thomas Tattersdale, for murder of Dr. Wardell, executed at Sydney,
November 10, 1834.
William Morris, for murder, executed at Sydney, November 26, 1839.
Joseph Saunders, for murder and robbery, executed at Sydney Novem-
ber 26, 1839.
Peter Scullion, for murder and robbery, executed [at Sydney, November
26. 1839.
George Carey, for having stolen property in possession, executed at
Sydney, November 26, 1839.
George Gorman, for murder, executed at Sydney, November 26, 1839.
Alexander Telford, for murder and having firearms, &c., executed at
Sydney, November 29, 1839.
James Davis, for murder and having firearms, &g., executed at Sydney,
November 29, 1839.
Llewellyn Powell, for murder, executed at Sydney, November 29, 1839.
James Lynch, for murder, executed at Sydney, November 29, 1839.
Charles Clipp, for murder, executed at Sydney, November 29, 1839.
Archibald Taylor, for felony, executed at Sydney, November 29, 1839.
John Hunt, for murder, executed at Sydney, November 10, 1840.
Thomas Whitton, for murder and arson, executed at Sydney, March
19, 1840.
Enoch Bradley, for murder, executed at Sydney, December 11, 1840.
Thomas Legg, for rape, executed at Sydney, December 1), 1840.
William Newman, for murder, executed at Sydney, December 8, 1840,
James Martin, for murder, executed at Sydney, December 8, 1810.
James Mason, for being an accessory to murder, executed at Sydney,
Decembers, 1840.


Michael Hinnigan, for murder, executed at Sydney, December 11, 1840.
Michael Bradley, for murder, executed at Newcastle, N.S.W., April
5.1841.
Patrick Curran, a notorious bushranger, for the murder of an overseer,
executed at Berrima, October 21,1841.
George Stroud and Robert Hudson, for murder, executed at Berrima,
October 29, 1841.
Patrick Olearham, executed at Berrima, April 22, 1842.
John Lynch, or Dunleary, for the murder of Londregan ;he confessed
to having committed seven other murders ; executed at Berrima, April
22, 1842.
Martin Beech, for murder, executed at Berrima, Oatober 22, 1842.
Lucretia Dunkley, for murder, executed at Berrima, October 22, 1842.
Thomas Horner, for murder, executed at Newcastle, November 10, 1842.
George Wilson, shooting with intent, executed at Newcastle, 1843.
George Forrester, for murder, executed atNewcostle, 1843.
Melville (aboriginal), for murder, executed at Newcastle, 1843,
Harry (aboriginal), for murder, executed at Newcastle, 1843.
Therramitahie (aboriginal), for murder, executed at Port Mac-
quarie, 1843.
Benjamin Harris, for murder, executed at Port Macquarie, 1844.
Mary Thornton, for murder, executed at Port Macquarie, 1844.
Joseph Yale, for murder, executed at Port Macquarie, 1844.
Benjamin Stanley, for murder, executed at Port Macquarie, 1844.
John Knatchbull, for murder of Mrs. Jameson, executed at Sydney,
February 13, 1844.
Henry Atkins, for murder, executed at Berrima, October 8 % 1844.
John Viddall, for murder, executed at Sydney, February 7, 1845.
John Ahern, for murder, executed at Sydney, August 12,1845.
James Fitzpatrick, for murder, executed at Newcastle, 1845.
William Shea, for murder, executed at Newcastle, 1846.
Patrick Ryan, for murder, executed at Newcastle, 1848.
Charles Henry Mackie, for rape, executed at Bathurst, November
10, 1848.
William Fyfe, for murder, executed at Sydney, July 4,1848.
Robert Walsh, for murder, executed at Bathurst, October 26, 1849.
George Waters Ward, for murder, executed at Newcastle, 1849.
William Hayes, for murder, executed at Newcastle, 1850.
James Whelan, for murder, executed at Sydney, November 5, 1850.
Mago (an aboriginal), for murder, executed at Sydney, November 5,1850.
Michael Collihanee (alias Mickey-bad-English), for rape, executed at
Newcastle, 1851.
Thomas Wilmore, for murder, executed at Bathurst, April 14, 1852.
Thomas F, Green, for murder, executed at Sydney, September 21, 1825.
Timothy Sullivan, for murder, executed at Bathurst. September 30, 1852.
Newina (Chinese), executed at Bathurst, September 30, 1852,
Patrick Macnamara, for murder, executed at Newcastle, November
3, 1852,
Patrick M‘Carthy, for murder, executed at Bathurst, April 11, 1853.
Paddy (aboriginal), for rape, executed at Bathurst, April 11, 1853.
Daniel Thomas Gardner, for murder, executed at Maitland, February
23, 1854.
James M'Laughlin, for murder, executed at Bathurst, April 25, 1854.
Billy Palmer, for murder, executed at Bathurst, April 25, 1854.
James Tabbott, for murder, executed at Goulburn, May 30, 1854.
Christopher Walsh, for murder, executed at Maitland, August 28, 1854
Samuel Wilcox, for murder, executed at Sydney, July 5, 1855.
Mary A, Brownlow, tor murder, executed at Goulburn, October 11, 1855.
Addison Mitchell, for murder, executed at Bathurst. May 7, 1867.
Henry Curran, for rape, executed at Bathurst, May 7, 1857.
Patrick Walsh, for murder, executed at Goulburn, November 4, 1857.
James Moyes, for murder, executed at Sydney, September 7, 1858.
John Arrow, for murder, executed at Bathurst, May 11, 1859.


William Martin, alias Thomas Ryan, robbery with firearms and rape,
executed at Bathurst, May 11, 1859,
John Scabby Harry, for rape, executed at Goulburn, May 18, 1859.
John Norris, for rape, executed at Sydney, July 22, 1859.
Robert Davis, for murder, executed at Bathurst, November 3, 1859,
Frederick Clarke, for murder, executed at Goulburn, May 8, 1860.
Ellen Monks, for murder, executed at Goulburn, May 8, 1860.
William Goodson, for murder, executed at Sydney, May 16, 1860,
John Jones, for murder, executed ft Maitland, November 15, 1860.
Harry (aboriginal), for murder, executed at Maitland, September
16,1861.
William Johnstone, for rape, executed at Goulburn, December 3, 1861.
John Peisley, for murder, executed at Bathurst, April 25, 1862,
Jackey Bull (aboriginal), for murder, executed at Bathurst, April
25, 1862.
John Smith, alias Regan, for and stabbing, executed at
Goulburn, May 5,1862,
Henry Kane, for murder, executed at Goulburn, May 5. 1862.
Benjamin Allerton, for robbery with arms, executed at Goulburn, May
5, 1862.
Jackey (aboriginal), for rape, executed at Bathurst, October 23, 1862.
Alexander Ross, for robbery and wounding, executed at Sydney, March
18, 1863.
Charles Ross, for robbery and wounding, executed at Sydney, March
18, 1863.
William Marcus, for robbery and wounding, executed at Sydney,
March 26, 1863.
Charles Robaay, for murder, executed at Goulburn, May 13, 1863.
Mahommet Cassen, for murder, executed at Goulburn, May 23, 1863.
Henry Wilson, for murder, executed at Maitland, August 3, 1863.
Thomas M'Cann, for wounding with intent, executed at Sydney,
February 1, 1864.
James Stewart, for murder, executed at Bathurst, November 22, 1864.
George Gibson, alias Paddy Tom, for mail robbery and murder, executed
at Bathurst, May 20,1865,
Ah Lun, for murder, executed at Bathurst, November 21, 1865.
Sam Poo, for murder, executed at Bathurst, December 19, 1865.
John Dunn, for murder, executed at Sydney, March 19, 1866.
Michael Green, for murder, executed at Sydney, June 11, 1866.
Charles Crookwell/for murder, executed at Sydney, Juiy 2, 1866.
Spider (aboriginal), for rape, executed at Bathurst, November 26, 1866,
Michael Maher, alias Murray, for murder, executed at Bathurst, Decem-
ber 3, 1866.
Henry Sues, for murder, executed’at Goulburn, December 10, 1866.
William H. Scott, for murder, executed at Sydney, March 18, 1867.
William Peters, for assault with intent, executed at Bathurst, June
19, 1867.
John Clarke, for wounding i with* intent, executed at Sydney, June
25, 1867.
Thomas Clarke,"for wounding]'with"|intent, executed at Sydney, June
25, 1867.
CVFarrell, H. J., for shooting H R.H. Prince Alfred, at the Sailors’ Home
Picnic, Mai'ch 12, 1868, at Olontarf, Middle Harbour, Sydney, New South
Wales, was executed at Sydney, April 21, 1868. [O’Farrell shot His
Royal Highness in the back, and with a second shot, before he could be
seized, wounded Mr. Thorne in the foot. His trial took place
before Mr. Justice Cheeke on the 30th and 31st of the same month, when
sentence of death was passed upon him. He was executed at Darlinghurst
Gaol on April 21, 1868. J
Robert Barnes, for murder, executed at Bathurst, May 26, 1868.
John M‘Kervitt; for murder, executed at Bathurst, May 26, 1868.
William Munday, alias Collins, for murder (Conroy Gap), executed at
Goulburn, June 2, 1868.


Ah Sun, for murder, executed at Bathurst, November 24,1868.
Robert Campbell, alias Palmer, for murder (Pohlman Brothers), execu-
ted at Wagga Wagga, October 5, 1870.
Chong Gow, for murder, executed at Deniliquin, June 6, 1871.
Michael M'Mahon, for murder, executed at Maitland, October 21, 1871,
Thomas Kelly, for felonious assault, executed at Sydney, January
2, 1872.
William Krauss, for murder of Captain Longmuir, executed at Sydney,
July 1, 1873.
Henry V. Jarvis, for murder, executed at Sydney, December 23, 1873.
John Hawthorne, for attempt to murder, executed at Goulburn, May
19. 1874.
John Glover, for murder, executed at Goulburn, May 19, 1874,
Gottleb Eichborn, for rape, executed at Armidale, June 23, 1874.
John M'Gratb, for murder, executed at Sydney, September 14, 1875.
George Rope, for murder, executed at Mudgee, December 7, 1875.
George Pitt, for murder, executed at Mudgee, June 21, 1876.
Michael Connolly, for murder, executed at Mudgee, June 28, 1876.
Daniel Boon, for shooting with intent (Alexander M'Mahon), executed
at Wagga Wagga, April 5, 1876.
Ah Chong, for murder, executed at Sydney, April 18, 1876.
Thomas Newman, convicted of murder, executed at Dubbo, April
5, 1877.
Peter Murdick, alias Peter Higgins, convicted of murder of Henry
Flood, executed at Wagga Waggs, October 4, 1877.
New Zealand.
Mokomoko, Mickacre Kiremanga, Hermita, and Horomona Poropite,
or Solomon the Prophet, four Maories, for the murder—through heathen
fanaticism —of the Rev. Mr. Yolkner, Mr. Fulloon, and others, executed at
Auckland, New Zealand, May, 1866.
Thomas Kelly, alias Noon, Richard Burgess, alias Hill, and Philip
Levy, executed in Nelson Gaol, October 5, 1866.
Queensland.
Thomas John Griffin, Gold Commissioner, for the murder of trooper
John Francis Power and Patrick William Cahill, executed at Rockhamp-
ton, June 1, 1868. [Griffin robbed the gold escort in charge of these
troopers after murdering them on the Mackenzie River,]
Palmer and Williams, for the murder of Halligan, a storekeeper, execu-
ted at Rockhampton, November 24, 1869.
Archibald, executed at Rockhampton, for murder of Halligan, December
22, 1869.
William Brown, alias Bertram, for wounding Mr, Baker, and for rob-
bery under arms, executed at Toowoomba Gaol, April 29,1870. [He was a
native of Germany, and came to South Australia at 12 years of age ;
was a reputed horse-stealer in New South Wales.]
Cunningham, executed at Brisbane Gaol, January 14, 1878.
Victoria.
George Melville, George Wilson, and William Atkin, for the MTvor
escort robbery, executed, 1852.
James Condon, John Dixon, Alfred H. Jackson, convicted November
19,1855, of highway robbery with violence, on Mr. Rutherford, near Bal-
larat. Took £l5OO from him. Kept Geelong and Ballarat road in terror
for a time ; executed at Melbourne, November 24, 1855.
Chong Sing Han Tzan, for murder of Sophia Le wist whilst in a state
of intoxication. Robbed her of a large amount of money and jewels, 1856;
executed at Melbourne, September 2, 1857.
John Mason. Killed his mate with an axe near u ßal!an; was fonnd
burning the body (which he bad previously cut to pieces) near his hut.
Executed November 6, 1857.
William Jones. Edward Brown. Robbery with violence. Executed at
Melbourne, March 1, 1858.
George Robinson. Murdered his wife by throwing her down a hole at
Castlemaine. Executed at Melbourne, March 16, 1858.


Edward Cardanna, alias John Nelson. Murder of John Armstrong, at
Long Gully, executed at Melbourne, March 10, 1858.
Owen M'Queeny. For murder of Elizabeth Lowe, near Geelong,
executed at Melbourne, October 20, 1858. [At the execution of this
criminal a woman applied for permission to have her hands “ streaked
over ” with the hands of the dead man.]
Samuel Gibbs, Ghorge Thompson. Murder of Mr, Anderson at Ballarat,
executed at Melbourne, November 6, 1858.
Edward Hitchcock. Murdered his wife at Strathlodden, executed at
Castlemaine, November 23,1858.
Christian Von See. Murder of his mate, countryman and benefactor
Leoman, a puddler at the Terricks, Bendigo, executed at Melbourne, No-
vember 29, 1875.
Thomas Ryan. For murder of L. Hartweg, a gardener at Indigo,
executed April 11, 1859. [Ryan shot him to obtain £l4, the produce of his
day’s sale of vegetables; was originally sent out as a convict on board the
“ Calcutta,” in 1803. Afterwards returned to England from which he
sailed as an emigrant.]
George Chamberlain, for murder of Mr, Cornelius Green, and
William Armstrong, shooting with intent to murder Joseph Green,
executed July 12,1859. [The first criminal shot, and the latter tomahawked
the dying man.]
William Siddons. For rape, at Pleasant Creek, on [a child eight years
old, attended with circumstances of peculiar atrocity,'executed November
7, 1876.
Henry Brown, For murder of his mate, executed November 21, 1876.
This (coloured) man was formerly a slave in Maryland, whence he escaped
to Canada. He murdered his mate in a fit of passion while both were at
work in a drive.
George Waines. For {murder of Mr. and Mrs. Hunt, of Casterton,
executed July 16, 1860. [A well-to-do farmer, possessed of £1,400, in order
to save some £5O he owed his victims, murdered them, and then buried
their bodies, and eight months afterwards disinterred them and burned Mrs.
Hunt’s body to cinders; The male body he put in a sack and threw it into
a pond. He confessed to a detective who had been put into a cell withhim,
and who persuaded the murderer he was a fellow prisoner.]
Edward Fenton. For murder, executed August 20, 1860,
John M'Donald. For murder of his wife at Ironbark .Gully, Bendigo,
whilst in delirium tremens. Knew nothing of his crime till told by his
little girl; executed September 3, 1860.
William Smith. Drowned his wife in a waterhole, near Beechworth,
executed April 22, 1861. [The night before his execution he attempted to
cut his own throat with a small piece of razor, which he managed to conceal
in the lining of his shoe.]
Henry Cooley, For murder of his wife, executed at Melbourne, July 11,
1861. [Made a confession to another prisoner.]
Nathaniel Horatio Ruby. Killed his mate by striking him with a piece
of quartz, executed at Melbourne, August 5, 1861.
Martin Rice. Murder, executed at Melbourne, September 20, 1861.
Thomas Sanders. For rape on a servant in the family of Mr. Cropley, a
farmer in Keilor Plains; an atrocious case. His accomplice, Johnson’s
sentence commuted to hard labour for life. Sanders was an old “flogger”
at Norfolk Island; executed at Melbourne, October 31, 1861.
Samuel Pollet. For rape on a child of his own, aged 11, executed at Mel-
bourne, December 29, 1862. [He was previously worth £4,000.
Thomas M‘Gee. Murder of a miner named Brown at Sandhurst, executed
at Melbourne, February 19, 1863.
James Murphy. Murder of Constable O’Boyle at Warrnambool, executed
at Geelong, November 6, 1863. [The executioner sent from Melbourne to
Geelong was an old mate of the criminal, and was so much affected that he
had difficulty to perform his duty. ]
David Gedge, Julian Cross, Elizabeth Scott. At the instigation of the
woman the two men murdered her husband, Robert Scott, a refreshment


tent-keeper near Mansfield, whilst lying in bed with delirium tremens
executed at Beechworth, November 11, 1863. This being theyn - s< and only
execution of a female in Victoria, fears of a disturbance were entertained,
leading to the execution of the three taking place half-an hour before the
time publicly announced.]
James Barratt alias Birmingham. Hacked Mrs. Elizabeth Beckinsale to
pieces with a tomahawk in her own house at Woodstock, for the sake of £6,
a silver watch, and a pair of hoots, executed at Melbourne, December 1,
1863.
Alexander Davis. Murder of George Sims at 'Smythesdale, executed at
Melbourne, February 29, 1864.
Samuel Woods, William Cower. Robbery in company, and shooting
with intent to murder, executed at Melbourne, August 3, 1864.
Christopher Harrison. Murder of his partner Marsh, executed at Mel-
bourne, August 3, 1864. [They were contractors ; Marsh delayed certain
payments ; Harrison thought his good name lost, and shot his partner at
the back of the Public Works Office. Great exertions were made to obtain
a respite on the ground of “ emotional madness.”]
John Stacey alias Michael Stacey, Murder of a child named Macdonell,
executed at Melbourne, September 5, 1865. [The boy was son of a woman
who lived with Stacey, and the brute in revenge for having been beaten
by another man, took the boy out of a bed where he was sleeping with four
of Stacey's own children and threw him down the water closet.]
Joseph Brown. For murder of Emanuel Jacobs, at the Whittington
Tavern, Bourke-street, executed at Melbourne, May 1, 1865.
Pierre Dotsellaere. For murder in Latrohe-street, of Catherine Sarah
Jacobs, his paramour, who was about to be married to another man,
executed at Melbourne, July 6, 1865,
David Young. For murder of a young married woman, named Graham,
at Daylesford, her husband being away on his night-shift, executed at
Castlemaine, August 21, 1865. [On the scaffold Young denied his guilt,
hut subsequently abundant evidence was given that he had been the per-
petrator of many crimes, besides that for which he suffered.
Thomas Mendid alias Yankee Tom. For murder of James Sweeney,
executed at Geelong, October 28, 1865. [Before capture he fired four shots
at the police, but without effect.]
Patrick Sheehan. For murder, executed at Melbourne, November 6,
1865.
Poy Long. For murder, executed at Melbourne, March 10, 1866.
James Jones. For murder, executed at Melbourne. March 19, 1866.
Robert Burke alias M‘Clusky. Notorious N.S.W. bushranger. Passing
through Victoria back to his old haunts at Diamond Creek, he got some
refreshment at the house of Mr. Hurst; at some fancied insult of the son,
H. F. Hurst, he deliberately shot him; Executed at Melbourne, November
29. 1866.
Denis Murphy. Murder, executed at Melbourne, April 17, 1867.
John Kelly. For unnatural offence, executed at Melbourne, May 4,
1867.
Duffers. For rape on his own daughter, executed at Castlemaine,
May 22, 1867.
William Henry Terry. Murder of his mate Peter Reddick at the Coliban,
executed at Castlemaine, July 31, 1867.
Joseph Ballan and George Searle. Murder of Mr. Alick Burke, manager
of the Bank of Australasia, Smythesdale, executed at Ballarat, August 7,
1867- [They left the dead body in a sitting position in the buggy.]
Joseph Whelan and Bernard Cunningham. Murder, executed March 31,
1868.
John Hogan. Murder of Martin Rooney at Bullock Creek, executed at
Castlemaine, August 14, 1868. [He killed Rooney in his own tent with a
hammer, and stole some £200.]
Michael Flannigan. Murder of Sergeant Hull, at Hamilton ; executed
at Melbourne, March 31, 1869. [Dressed for death in his old mounted
police uniform.]


James Ritson, For murder of the Rev. Mr. Hill, at Pentridge, executed
at Melbourne, August 3, 1869. [Had been sentenced to death for shooting
at a Market Inspector named Kinsella ; the sentence was commuted to im-
prisonment for life. Mr. Hill went to see him in the usual course of his
prison duties.]
James Smith. Murder of his wife, executed at Beechworth, November
11, 1869.
Ah Pew. Violation and murder of Elizabeth Annie Hurst, a child aged
9 years, at Glenluce, executed at Melbourne, March 23, 1869.
Patrick Smith. Murder of his wife at Hotham, executed at Melbourne,
August 4, 1870.
Andrew Vair. Murder of Amos Gheale, executed at Ararat, August 15,
1870.
James Cusick. Barbarous murder of his wife'at Gooley’s Creek, executed
at Melbourne, August 30, 1870.
James Seery. Murder of his mate Auguste Topfar, at Grant, executed
at Melbourne, November 14,1870.
James Quinn. Murder of Ah Cow; died protesting innocence ; executed
at Beechworth, November 10, 1871.
Patrick Geary. Murder of Thomas Brookhouse, in February 1854, at
Colac; his wife was acquitted; circumstantial evidence and confession;
when sentenced to death said, “Amen ! this is the last of poor Patrick”;
executed at Melbourne, December 4, 1871.
Edward Freny. Murder of Charles Manks in the Treasury Gardens in
March, 1872; executed at Melbourne, May 14, 1872. [A singular case, in
which other crimes were involved.]
James Wilkie. Murder of Henry Pensom, at Daylesford, executed at
Castlemaine, May 20, 1872.
Samuel Wright. A convict, attempted murder of Hogan, executed at
Castlemaine, March 11,1873.
Thomas Brady, James Smith. Murder of Mr. Watt, of Woragee, executed
at Beechworth, May 12, 1873.
Pierie Borhuu. Murder of Mrs. Smith of Kangaroo Flat, Sandhurst, who
kept a public house, where he spent most of his gains ; executed at Castle-
maine, May 20, 1873.
Oscar Wallace (Negro). Rape at Mount Beckwith, executed at Ballarat,
August 11, 1873. [A hardened ruffian, who daneed a jig the night before
his execution - ]
Ah Cat (Chinese). Murder, executed at Castlemaine, August 9, 1875.
Ah Gaa (Chinese) Murder of his mate at Vaughan, near Maryborough;
executed at Melbourne, August 30, 1875.
Henry Howard. Murder of Elizabeth Wright, of Frankston, executed at
Melbourne, October!, 1875.
John Weechurch, real name John Taylor- Murderous assault on Warder
Moran with the iron handle of a tub, sharpened at both ends, whilst under-
going a sentence at Pentridge ; executed at Melbourne, December 6, 1875.
[On the scaffold he said he had been a professional thief for years, and had
never known a thief die worth a shilling. He had been in trouble since
1850. This man was a deep scoundrel.]
Basilio Bondietto. Murder at Sandy Creek of Carls Comisto, his mate,
on September 4, 1876 ; executed at Melbourne, December 6, 1876. [Cir-
cumstantial evidence; Sir George Stephen formally protested against his
execution, and a public meeting was held in the Town Hall two days
before and a petition presented to the Governor, but the Cabinet stood firm.]
John Duffus, Rape on his own children; executed at Castlemaine, May
22, 1876.
James Ashe. Rape and assault on Mrs. Reece, of Burrumbeet; executed
at Melbourne, August 21, 1876. [Had no knowledge of a Creator or any
religion ; had lived the life of an ignorant herd-boy. Died penitent.]
William Hastings. Murder of his wife near Frankston; executed at
Melbourne, March 1,1877.


J%f r
&t6L(O
f(O6 7 9
N c^fcu
/ v


THE
GENTLEMEN’S OWN LIBRARY.
My Price List for Liuely Books for 1882.
jjarALL BOOKS POST FREE.
Gay Life in London : or the Fortunes and Misfortunes of the
famous Moll Flanders, who was born in Newgate, 12 years a
bad woman,'five times a wife, therefore once to her own
brother, 12 years a thief, 8 years a transport felon in Virginia,
at last grew rich—Bound in Cloth, 500 pages, Price 7s. 6d.
The Works of Hogarth, beautifully illustrated from sketches of
real London life,—Cloth, Price 10s. 6d.
Aristotle’s Works, full of coloured plates, ss.
The complete Works of Rabelais, beautifully illustrated, bound in
Cloth, 10s. 6d.
Ovid’s Art of Love, with steel plates, 2s. (id.
Byron’s Don Juan, 3s.
Decameron ; or Ten Days’ Entertainment of Boccaccio, 10s. 6d.
Gay Life ill Paris : or, The Fortunate Mistress, a History of the
Life arid vast Variety of Fortunes of Mademoiselle de Beleaux
afterwards called the Countess De Wintselsheim, in Germany,
being the person known by the name of the Lady Roxana in
the time of King Charles 11., 7s. 6d.
The Original Mysteries of Paris, 3s. 6d.
Mysteries of New York, 2 volumes, bound in Cloth, Is.
The Mysteries of a Convent; also, the Awful Disclosures of
Maria Monk, 2s.
The Prosecuted Book—Fruits of Philosophy—by Bradlaugh and
Besant, Is. 6d.
Don’t miss to read Illustrated New York Truth, Is. 3d.
Something good—London Puck—a very large book, 3s. 6d.
The Pretty Girls of London, Bd.
The Racy and Mirthful.Book—.The Marriage Guide, Is. 3d.
True History of Tom Jones, a Foundling, 2s.
Lives of Highwaymen, Robbers and Murderers, 2s.
Lives of Pirates and Sea. Robbers, 2s.
Dr. Hollick’s Works.—The Male Generative Organs, 10s. 6d.
Tbe Diseases of Women with Coloured Plates, 10s. 6d.
U±L G-RAVEUR,
(Established 12 Years),
English & American Bookseller, 196 Gleorge-st., Sydney
