

REVISED EDITION
A COURSE
BY
CORRESPONDENCE
IN
Mesmerism
Hypnotism
AND
Suggestive Therapeutics
ETC., ETC.
BY
P. H. McEWEN
Copyrighted 1911-1012, by P. H. McEWEN
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED


Hypnotism Made Plain
BY
P. H. McEWEN.
THIRD EDITION.
Sydney, Aus. :
William Brooks & Co., Ltd., Printers,
1912.


COPYRIGHT, 1911-1912
by
P. H. McEWEN.
All Rights Reserved.


TO MY WIFE, FLOY,
this volume Is
AFFECTIONATELY
DEDICATED.




PREFACE.
I have but one apology to offer in presenting this
little book to the American people, and that is, that
owing to an incomplete knowledge of the English
language, I am compelled to set forth such grand
truths in so simple and, I fear, many times incor-
rect language, I cannot hope that this book will
gain any recognition for its literary merits, but I
do trust that for the sake of the truths presented,
the errors of expression will be overlooked.
I have conscientiously tried to do what the title
implies—make plain not only the possible uses of
hypnotism, but also what I consider the best
methods of producing the hypnotic state, and to do
so in such a manner that all who read may under-
stand, believing, as I do, that a general knowledge
of hypnotism will be a benefit to mankind.




CONTENTS.
SYNOPSIS.
Chapter I.
History of Mesmerism and Hypnotism.
Ancient History—lss2 B. C.—Superstition—Mesmer of
Vienna—Animal Magnetism—Abbe Faria of India First
Scientific System—Santanelli in Italy—Braid of Man-
chester —Grimes of America—Electro-Biology—Lei-
bault of Nancy—The Nancy School—American Ad-
vancement — A Scientific Basis. Pages 15 to 29.
Chapter 11.
What is Mesmerism and Hypnotism.
The Primary Causation—The Four Great Principles of
Life—The Difference between Hypnotism and Mes-
merism—Different Degrees—Principles Involved—First
Suggestion—External Suggestion—Auto-Suggestion—
Associate Suggestion—lndirect Suggestion—Hypnotic
Suggestion—Post Hypnotic Suggestion—Continuative
Suggestion—Telepathic Suggestion—Second Obedience
—The Conditions Must be Obeyed—No Person Can
Hypnotize Another—Third Imagination—lts Import-
ance—Fourth Concentration of Mind—The Effort on
the Part of the Subject—Mind Over Matter—The Con-
dition of the Intellectual Development. Pages 30 to 39.
3
SYNOPSIS.


Chapter 111.
The Duality of the Mind.
The Composition of Man—Man the Possessor of Two
Minds Objective Mind Subjective Mind Their
Functions—Man’s Normal Condition —The Spirit or
Soul of Man—The Theory of the Nancy School—The
Theory of the Paris School—The Theory of Mesmer
—The Potency of Auto-Suggestion. Pages 40 to 46.
Chapter IV.
How to Produce Hypnotism.
Necessity of Confidence—The Difference in the Character
Shown —Conditions Necessary for Success—Musical
Assistance —The Mesmeric Passes —Success the Result
of Expectancy—The Return to a Normal Condition-
Imposters—Their Cure—Some General Observations
, —Physical Tests—Mental Tests. Pages 47 to 62.
Chapter V.
How to Produce Hypnotism (Continued).
Conditions to Observe for the 'Nerves—Hypnotic Subjects
Most Easily Cured —Dr. Parkyn’s Theory—The Eye an
indicator of the Attitude of the Mind—Rules to follow
for the Conceited —Man, the Likeness of God—Reason
for the Youth being Most Readily Hypnotized—Semi-
consciousness—Effect of Counter Suggestions. Pagts
63 to 73.


Chapter VI.
The Use of Suggestion in Mental and Moral Development.
The Subjective Life of the Babe—lts Instinctive Know-
ledge—The Impressible Age—lmitative Ability of the
Child—lts Far-reaching Consequences—Efficiency of
Suggestion During Natural Sleep—lts Practical Use
Illustrated—The Eradicating of Fears —The Correct-
ing of Habits—Hypnotic Suggestion and Education
The Wisdom of Solomon Shown. Pages 74 to 84.
Chapter VII.
Suggestive Therapeutics.
Hypnotism has a Bad Name—The Responsibility of our
Secular Press—The Value of Hypnotic Suggestion to
the Medical Profession—lts Place as a Therapeutic
Agent—Hereditary Diseases—Contageous Diseases—
The Various Schools of Medicine—The Effect of Im-
agination—The Death of a Soldier —The Death of a
Condemned Criminal—The Rising of a Blister by Sug-
gestion—The Cures Performed at the Holy Shrines—
Faith Cure —Mind Cure —Christian Scence—Spiritist
Healers—The Various Diseases to which Suggestion
is Applicable— The Value of Sleep. Pages 85 to 97.
5
BYNOPBIB.


Chapter VIII.
Suggestive Therapeutics (Continued).
Some Personal Experiences—Cure of a Cripple—Cure of
Stammering—Restoring Sight to the Blind—Enabling
the Deaf to Hear—Deaf and Dumb Woman Cured—
The Use of Suggestive Anaesthesia in Dentistry—
Some Instances—Anaesthesia for Surgical Operations
—The Amputation of a Limb during Hypnotic Sleep
—The Induction of Anaesthesia by Auto-Suggestion—
Soldiers and Martyrs as Examples—A Personal Ex-
perience—Subjective Faith. Pages 98 to no.
Chapter IX,
The Physical Manifestations of Christ.
The Miracles of Jesus Christ—Faith a Requisite Condition
—His Right to be Called the Savior of Men Proven—
His Operations Within the Domain of Natural Law—
The Efficeiency of Faith Recognised—Some Illustra-
tions—The Personal Character of Christ—Raising
the Dead—Natural Law and the Power of Suggestion
Observed—Christ’s Recognition of Matter—The Same
Conditions Necessary to the Success of the Healers of
To-day—The Reality of the Personality of Jesus Christ
—His Spiritual Philosophy—The Evidences of Its
Truth, Pages n: to 125,
6
HYPNOTISM MADE PLAIN.


Chapter X.
The Relation of Hypnotism to Crime.
The First Proposition—Second Proposition—lnstinctive
Auto-Suggestion—Weak Auto-Suggestion—The Re-
cognition of the Courts—Laboratory Tests—Man a
Free Moral Agent—The Will of a Subject Not Weak-
ened—The Effect on the Nervous System—lts Intelli-
gent Use Beneficial—Defence of Hypnotic Exhibitions
—Appeal to the Legislature—The Privilege of the
Hypnotized—What the Hypnotizers Have Done
Pages 126 to 137.
7
SYNOPSIS.




INTRODUCTION.
There is no subject that is receiving greater atten-
tion from all classes at the present time, and none
perhaps so little understood as the subject of Mes-
merism and Hypnotism, or the influence of the
human mind.
‘‘There is nothing greater in this world than man,
nothing greater in man than mind, and nothing
more worthy of man’s time and careful study.”
The study of Psychology along its various
branches opens up a vast field of hiterto unthought-
of ideas, and affords pure food for the mind. An
eminent divince once said in speaking of this;—'
“ -The body, in order to live aright, requires food-
bread, the staff of life; the soul, in order to live
aright, requires food—the word of God. Now, the
mind being the superior part of man (controlling
both body and soul), must have food—Psychology,”
Every intelligent man should make a study of this,
for, as it has very truly been said, “Know thyself
and thou shalt know all men.”


Never was there a time in the history of our race
when the mind was so restless. Not for two thou-
sand years has the world waited with such breath-
less expectancy and hope for new light to be given
to enable us to discern our relation to a universe
of intelligence. Everywhere is a restless movement
of advance.
Amid the changing scenes, truth is always found
invincible, while superstition, bigotry and ignorance
standing ever in the path of progress, are rapidly
giving way; and each succeeding generation is be-
coming less and less superstitious and learning the
grand truth; that all of the supernatural is only the
natural misunderstood. Wisdom increases. Life
does not seem so weird as it did one or two thous-
and years ago; nature not so mysterious and God
not so far away.
But in order for man to understand these laws of
nature he must probe deep in the hidden mysteries
of the universe and be prepared for some startling
developments. Especially is this true in the study
of the mental science; Psychology and its various
branches, none of which at the present time, the
masses perhaps know r so little about, or one of
greater importance to mankind, than the much-
10
HYPNOTISM MADE PLAIN.


abused subject of Mesmerism and Hypnotism. It
is not to be wondered at that it is so little under-
stood, that it is scoffed at, at the present day; and
one who is capable of demonstrating it, is branded
a “fake,” fraud or imposter by so many. AVhen we
consider the fact that until within the recent years
we were taught to believe it a “power” which only
a few possessed, wherewith they could control
another man’s mind and body, perhaps to his des-
truction; in fact, one possessing this so-called power
was “of the Devil.”
Even the physicians, those who knew so well the
anatomy of the human body, and thought they knew
the mind also, would not recognise the power of
Mesmerism, and they of all men most loudly de-
nounced it as a humbug or delusion. But now that
it has commanded their attention and is at the pre-
sent time being taught in all medical colleges of
national reputation, they think of having it copy-
righted for their own exclusive use. But not until
doctors have proven themselves more intellectual
and virtuous than their fellow men, should they
be given the monopoly of one of the greatest God-
given benefits to mankind.
Let every father and mother understand the prin-
11
INTRODUCTION


ciples and power of sugestion, and how potent it is
in the training of children; and then will we see
humanity gradually becoming grander, purer and
nobler.
I am aware that this, with many other statements
made in the following pages, will startle some of my
readers, but I will ask you all to lay aside all preju-
dices and pre-determined opinions and with all can-
dor and impartiality direct your intellectual and
moral faculties toward an impartial investigation of
the truth, and for the truth alone,
“The man who dares to think for himself and act
independently, does a service to his race.” And daily
experience shows that it is energetic individualism
which produces the most powerful effects upon the
life and actions of others, and really constitutes the
best practical education. Schools and colleges give
but the merest beginning of culture in comparison
with it.
The most brilliant lives have in many instances
been those of men who, possessing only ordinary
gifts, but exerting to the utmost such power as has
been given them, have accomplished more than hun-
dreds of men who were much more sup-
plied with mental qualifications.
12
HYPNOTISM MADE PLAIN.


Realizing the possibilities of hypnotism and the
benefits to be derived from it, and noting with plea-
sure that it is being recognized by scientific men as
a most powerful factor in education, and believing
that what is good for the few is good for the masses,
I have endeavoured to set forth in plain comprehen-
sible language the manner in which Mesmerism
may be produced, and how it may be used for the
benefit of humanity—by developing the physical,
mental and spiritual parts of man, as there is no
power which, if properly understood and applied,
that is of more benefit to the human family than
Mesmerism and Hypnotism.
Earnestly yours,
P. H. McEWEN.
13
INTRODUCTION




CHAPTER I.
History of Mesmerism and Hypnotism.
Ancient History—1552 B. C. —Superstition—Member of
Vienna —Animal Magnetism—Abbe Faria of India
First Scientific System—Santanelli in Italy—Braid of
Manchester— Grimes of America—Electro-Biology—
Leibault of Nancy—The Nancy School—American
Advancement —A Scientific Basis.
There is nothing new in Hypnotism but the name.
It has been used for thousands of years in India and
has been handed down from generation to genera-
tion.
In order to understand the gradual development
of modern Hypnotism from animal magnetism, we
must distinguish two points: First, the fact that
particular psychic states can be induced in human
beings by certain physical processes; and, second,
that all human beings are more or less influenced
by others, either by direct contact or at a distance.
This second fact is noticeable in ancient history
where we see the widespread belief in sorcerers,
witchcraft and their power to influence others, which
power could be used for good or evil.
There has existed at all times in many quarters
the belief that particular individuals could bring
prosperity and happiness to all those upon whose
head they laid their hands in benediction; also the


healing by touch which was obtained by the old
Egyptians and other oriental nations. The Greeks
derived most of their customs from Egypt and India.
The first Greek physicians for the care of disease
used certain processes and passes, which can only
be compared with the manipulations of the modern
mesmerist and hypnotist.
We find also in the study of the history of medi-
cine, as practiced by the Egyptians as early as 1552
8.C., that the laying on of hands played an impor-
tant part. It is also known that Francis I. of
France, and other French kings up to Charles X.,
healed by the imposition of hands. These effects
we see produced through direct contact with the
individuals, but this was not always necessary, as
is seen by the belief which prevailed in sorcerers,
who could bewitch persons, thereby gaining an
almost unlimited power over them, and which indi-
cates that contact was not necessary to produce an
effect,
Kieswetter attributes the early soothsaying by
means of precious stones to hypnosis, which was
induced by steadily gazing at the stones. For ex-
ample, take the Egyptians in their practice of look-
ing into vessels and crystals for divinations. They,
like the Indian, Yogis and fakirs, throw themselves
into the hypnotic state by means of fixation of the
gaze. The same thing has occurred in many con-
verts of the Greek church, and I might add even in
our own churches of to-day.
16
HYPNOTISM MADE PLAIN.


Hypnotism, as we know it, formed a part of the
Buddhist religion, and no doubt was used amnog
the Hebrews and Assyrians. Innumerable passages
could be quoted from the sacred word in support of
this, but a rigid and critical analysis of the Middle
Ages would here be impossible, if not out of place.
The question here is only of solitary facts in which
no scientific system is discoverable. A system pre-
sents itself to us only after the end of the Middle
Ages. It develops itself out of the doctrine of the
influence of the stars upon men, which, as is known,
astrologists claim, and which ivas firmly believed
in by the Egyptians during the time of the Rameses.
And nowadays we find remnants still existing in the
belief of the influence which the moon is supposed
to exercise. Even modern doctors of mental diseases
have called in the influences of the moon to explain
special periodical mental disturbances.
At the end of the Middle Ages (about 1530) is
advanced the theory of the effect of the heavenly
bodies upon mankind, more especially on their dis-
eases. Out of this a belief gradually developed
itself, that not only did the stars and moon influ-
ence men, but that men also mutually influenced
each other, a belief which, as we have seen before,
had already arisen sporadically.
Van Helmont taught with more precision that
man possessed a power by means of which he could
magnetically effect others, particularly the sick.
The Scotchman, Maxwell, maintained something
17
HISTORY OF MESMERISM AND HYPNOTISM.


of the same kind later (about 1600). He attributed
to the human excreta, and also to the mummies, an
effect upon the human beings; they could be used
for the curing of diseases (sympathetic cures) ; also
men could cure themselves of disease by transform-
ing them to animals or plants. Aremnant of this
system developed by Maxwell still exists in country
places where people apply excreta to their wounds.
Maxwell assumed in particular a vital spirit of the
universe, bv means of which all bodies were related
to each other. This vital spirit seems to be the
same thing which Mesmer later called the universal
fluid; and the existence of which the Rev. Father
Kiel (a Jesuit priest), announced to the world in
1734 (the year in which Mesmer was born), and his
ability thereby to cure disease. But how was such
information received? With delight as such a valu-
able discovery should have been No. As we have
had martyrs to Christianity, so have we had martyrs
to science. Look into the history of the life of the
Rev. Father Hieal, who was laughed and scoffed at,
and driven out of the church, for (as was claimed)
possessing the power of the devil and using witch-
craft for relieving pain, and producing such effects
as are to-day produced only on a limited scale. And
so it has ever been. Look back into the dim vista
of the past, and what do we see? A raging battle
with ignorance and superstition upon one side, and
science upon the other. Franklin reaches forth his
hand, and clutches the forked lightning, and holds
18
HYPNOTISM MADE PLAIN.


it in a deathless grasp. On the noble brow of
Galileo shines the light of infinite worlds. Morse,
in the dim, misty seclusion of an old attic, deemed
insane, and ostracised by his own brother and
friends, evolves from his immortal brain that tiny
machine whose magic click startles the whole world
like the thunders from Mt. Sinai.
Harvey, the discoverer of the circulation of the
blood, and who thereby bestowed a blessing upon
countless generations of humanity, was called a char-
latan and mobbed.
We are not surprised, therefore, that those who
first maintained the existence of animal magnetism
and demcnstated the great laws of psychic force,
which pertain to the highest elements of man’s
mental and spiritual existence, should meet the re-
proach of non-progressive, unscientific stupidity.
Although the foundation of the doctrine of animal
magnetism was thus laid, universal attention was
first drawn to it by Mesmer, a doctor of Venice. He
studied the influence of the planets upon human
bodies, and was thereby led to believe in a magnetic
fluid which emanated from man. In the year 1775
he sent out a circular letter, particularly addressed
to several academies, and in which he maintained the
existence of animal magnetism and completely dis-
tinguished it from magnetism of metals. This was
indeed a bold step, as he had at first used the mag-
net in the treatment of disease, although he later on
ceased to employ it. He, however, believed that


animal magnetism could be conveyed by use ot
glass, wood, iron, etc., thereby making healing pos-
sible by the use of animal magnetism, and without
the physical contact which he had before deemed
necessary. Shortly after sending out his letter
announcing to the several academies his discovery,
and which they almost without exception treated
with silent contempt, he was nominated a member
of the academy of Bavaria, but in consequence of
the enmities aroused in Vienna by his very pro-
nounced views, he went to Paris in the year 177&>
where he constructed a baquet, which was magnet-
ized by him, and which was supposed to transmit
the magnetism.
It is represented as a very complicated apparatus;
an oak chest or tub with appendages of iron, etc.
Mesmer found many followers in Paris Dr.
Oeslon was the first to join him—but he also en-
countered many opponents. Several of the scientific
commissions which examined the question pro-
nounced in 1784 against the existence of animal
magnetism. However, a separate report was made
by one of the members, Jessieu, which was not con-
sidered decisive. But no one denied that far-reach-
ing effects were produced by imagination. It was
only denied that there was a physical force resem-
bling true magnetism. In spite of all these attacks
Mesmer made disciples, and his successors are gene-
rally called mesmerists; while the doctrine of animal
magnetism is called mesmerism, vital magnetism,
bio-magnetism, or zoo-magnetism.


In the latter part of the eighteenth century one of
the followers of Mesmer discovered a state or condi-
tion which was named artificial somnambulism, In
which the ideas and actions of the magnetized could
be directed by the magnetizer. It is uncertain
whether Mesmer knew of this condition or not, but
it is altogether probable that he did.
About this time Petetin, a doctor of Lyons, inter-
ested himself with magnetism, and describes the
phenomena of sense transference (hearing with the
stomach), also catalepsy. But the wars and French
revolution repressed further investigation of mag-
netism in France until about the year 1813.
In Germany animal magnetism was recognised at
the same time in two different places; on the upper
Rhine and in Bremen.
In the year 1786 Lavater paid a visit to Bremen
and exhibited the processes of mesmerism to several
doctors; and here was established the headquarters
of this new doctrine. But on account of the general
dislike to animeal magnetism, the town came Into
bad repute in the rest of Germany.
About this time the doctrine of animal magnet-
ism spread from Strassburg over the Rhine pro-
vinces, and a little later found adherents in Dresden.
Getting encouragement from Bremen, people began
making experiments in other parts of Germany, and
notwithstanding the early dislike of magnetism, it
finally gained ground and flourished much in Geih
many, especially during the first twenty years of
this century.


In Austria only it met with ill-fortune, so much
so that in 1815 the whole of Austria was forbidden
to exercise the power of mesmerism. Hoav different
was the action taken in Prussia. There the gov-
ernment, in the year 1812, sent one Wolfart to
Frudenfeld to be taught of Mesmer, in order that the
people through him might become acquainted with
the subject. Wolfart came back a firm adherent of
Mesmer, and introduced magnetism in the hospital
treatment, and afterwards became a professor in
the university.
In response to the request of the Prussian govern-
ment, a prize was offered by the Berlin Academy
of Sciences for an essay on Animal Magnetism, but
was, it seems, withdrawn. But in spite of all oppo-
sition the doctrine of magnetism flourished in Berlin
to such an extent that the physicians placed a monu-
ment at Mosburg on the grave of Mesmer, who died
in 1815. And as it was Mesmer’s idea to teach the
clergy, the theological candidates were instructed in
physiology and the treatment of disease by vital
magnetism.
There were many inquiries in the rest of Germany
and the knowledge of the phenomena was spread by
means of lectures in universities, some of them be-
ing delivered in Berlin by Wolfart .We are informed
by some authors that by royal orders, in February,
1817, in Prussia, physicians only were allowed to
magnetize, and the same law was enacted in other
countries.
22
HYPNOTISM MADE PLAIN.


In Italy and Switzerland it was received at first
with very little sympathy, although as early as the
beginning of the eighteenth century we find Santan-
elli in Italy asserting the existence of the vital
magnetism, and also recognising the great influence
of imagination.
For almost thirty years France suspended, so far
as we know, the study of animal magnetism, but in
1814-15 it is again agitated by experiments shown
by Abbe Faria, who came to Paris from India, and
who taught that no unknown force was necessary
for the production of the phenomena; he claiming
the cause of sleep was in the person who was to be
put to sleep; all was subjective. He at that early
day made use of the main principles of modern
hypnotism to induce sleep.
The Paris hospitals in 1820 began experimenting
and investigating; and in 1826 the Paris Academy of
Medicine appointed a commission to investigate the
phenomena of magnetism. After an investigation
which lasted six years the commission reported in
favor of magnetism, but the Academy was evidently
not convinced, and in 1840 declined to discuss the
question further.
Although in many towns, such as Bremen, Ham-
burg, and Bavaria, there were still many thoughtful
and serious inquiries, the belief in magnetism de-
clined more and more and the phenomena received
very little attention in Germany between the years
1830 and 1840. Although magnetism lost many


adherents in the scientific world, among the people
the belief in the mysterious force continued preva-
lent.
In England magnetism could gain no hold,
although in Eondon we find two firm adherents,
and when La Fontain, a magnetizer from France,
came to Manchester in 1814 and demonstrated mag-
netism, showing, like Faria, but with more method,
that the phenomenon was a subjective nature;
Braid, a doctor of that place, interested himself in
the matter, and finding that by fixation of gaze, the
eyes resting on any object whatever, sleep was in-
duced, he, therefore, named the phenomenon hyp-
notism, which name it still maintains.
At first Braid considered hypnotism to be identical
with the mesmeric state, but he soon gave up this
idea, and was of the opinion that the two conditions
were similar, and gave mesmerism an independent
place by the side of hypnotism.
Braid was also acquainted with the phenomena of
catalepsy, and the power of suggestion, and used
hypnotism therapeutically; especially as an anaes-
thetic in performing surgical operations. Mesmer-
ism had also, and at an earlier period, been used in
operations, but in spite of the fact that well-known
physiologists confirmed the statements, it found no
general acceptance.
In America, meanwhile, animal magnetism had
root, New Orleans being for a long time its
chief centre. Later, Grimes appeared, and although


working by similar methods, but quite independent
of Braid, he produced results analogous to hypnot-
ism, but which he called electro-biology. In 1850
Darling went from America to England and exhi-
bited the phenomena of electro-biology, but their
identity was soon recognised with those of hyp-
notism.
Meanwhile Liebault, who later moved to Nancy,
had made himself familiar with the phenomena of
hypnotism and animal magnetism, but endeavoured
to refute the latter and he became the real founder
of suggestive therapeutics, and for which he found
himself very much ridiculed.
In Paris in 1875, Charles Picket came forward
claiming the real existence of hypnotism, but calling
it “Somnambulism Provoque.”
In the year 1878 Charcot began his public classes,
in which he directed attention to the physical states
of hystero-epileptics during hypnosis, and in a book
on “La Gran Hysteria,” published in 1881 by Paul
Richer, many experiments along the line of Char-
cot’s study are related.
Incited by the exhibitions of Hanson, many inves-
tigators in Germany interested themselves in the
subject in 1880. The investigation of hypnotism on
animals aroused no lasting interest. The move-
ment of 1880 also soon ceased.
The researches of Charcot likewise had very little
effect upon the further pursuit of inquiry. Some of
the hospitals occasionally took up the investigation,


but only slight interest was taken, and very small
results obtained. But only when Professor Bern-
heimer, a student of Liebault, approached the subject
and opened up the second medical school in France
that of Nancy—did the subject become of more
general interest. He gave in this school examples
of hypnotism as a curative agency, claiming the phe-
nomena to be of a purely psychic nature.
Then followed the contest in France, between the
schools of Nancy and Charcot, which has hardly yet
been settled, but the Nancy school is fast graining-
ground.
Although the study of hypnotism had been com-
menced in various countries in connection with the
experiments of Charcot, it was not until the school
of Nancy was established and placed hypnotism
upon a surer basis; with a more profound conception
of psychology, could the people at large begin a
study of it.
Even in France, where Charcot and his theory was
considered infallible, the importance of the Nancy
investigators was more and more recognised, and
and numerous other experimenters, even those who
at first considered the experiments of Charcot to be
of higher value, turned their attention to the school
of Nancy.
The interest in hypnotism has spread through all
countries, and is being used therapeutically in many
places, and in no greater extent perhaps in any place
than Stockholm.


In Spain the power of suggestion in therapeutics
was recognised and practised many years before the
experiments of Bernheimer, but less is known of it,
and the results, at the present day.
In England there exists a society of private inves-
tigators—the Society for Psychic Research—which
studies hypnotism and psychic phenomena of var-
ious branches.
In no country, perhaps, has hypnotism created
greater interest than in America. An American
Society of Psychic Research, which is affiliated to
the English society, has been formed, and extensive
investigation has been carried on by Dr. Beard,
although his experiments have not received the wide
attention which they merit.
There has been in the last five years a great num-
ber of investigators, but the great importance of sug-
gestion has only recently been recognised, and con-
sequently many hypnotic experiments have been
fruitless.
We find some experimenters who decidedly deny
the use of hypnotism as a therapeutic agency, claim-
ing for it a different field; but I claim that hypnot-
ism has an almost unlimited field, and in spite of the
great importance of hypnotism in therapeutics, I
think it a great mistake when doctors fix the thera-
peutic value of hypnotism as the standard by which
it is to be measured, for another factor, that of edu-
cation and mental development, may well be con-
sidered a great field for hypnotism; also experimen


tal psychology, for the investigation of which seve-
ral scientific societies have been formed in Germany
as well as in this country; and in which hypnotism
is used in the carrying out of psychological experi-
ments.
In order to facilitate a general discussion of the
most important questions in regard to hypnotism, a
congress convened in Paris in 1889, where nearly all
civilized nations were represented, and where a sub-
stantial cleaning up of opinions on some important
points were attained; and there the views of the
Nancy school were given the supremacy, in general,
at least.
We must now recognise hypnotism as a science,
and we can better realize its importance and the place
it has won when we consider that it has made its
way into the lecture rooms of universities and col-
leges all over the country, and has influenced even
literary circles.
Many books have been published in late yeans
upon this subject. It has formed the material for
romances as well as for many a scientific article.
When we consider that the Bellevue medical insti-
tute in New York, perhaps the largest of its kind in
the United States, placed a chair of hypnotism in
April, 1897; that there is to-day in the city of Chic-
ago a daily clinic held, at the Chicago School of
Psychology, on Bowen avenue, and of which Dr.
Herbert Parkyn is the medical superintendent, a


man who for years in his practice used successfully
suggestion as an anaesthetic in surgery; when we
consider, I say, all these things then must we recog-
nise that hypnotism has indeed been placed upon
a scientific basis, proving that this work, although
apparently a deviation from the known laws of
nature, is no evidence whatever that it is beyond the
pale of law.
We are all on the eve of the most wonderful mani-
festations in this line that the world has witnessed
since the days of the pyramids and sphynxes of
Egypt; since which time the light of ancient wisdom
has been lost tc man. That light is coming again
and to the dista, t east, wfith its fifty centuries of
meditation, must we feel indebted for the knowledge,
or key, wdiich unlocks the mysteries, and reveals the
powers of the subjective mind or soul of man.
Let us, therefore, reverently and hopefully explore
this field of knowdedge. Let us turn awhile from the
strife of life, the greed of gain, our sorrows and pain,
to look for a greater happiness; for comes there not
a new light, a new voice, a new hope, to which
humanity may cling in its distress, and for which it
has for hundreds of years been longing?
c


CHAPTER II.
What is Mesmerism and Hypnotism.
1 he Primary Causation—The Four Great Principles of
Life I he Difference between Hypnotism and Mes-
merism—-Different Degrees—Principles Involved—First
Suggestion — External Suggestion — Auto-Suggestion
—Associate Suggestion—Indirect Suggestion—Hypno-
tic Suggestion Post Hypnotic Suggestion—Continua-
tive Suggestion—Telepathic Suggestion—Second Obed-
ience—The Conditions Must be O’ eyed—No Person
Can Hypnotize Another—Third T agination—Its Im-
portance-Fourth Concentration i Mind—The Effort
on the Part of the Subject—Mind Over Matter—The
Condition of the Intellectual Development.
What is Mesmerism? What is Hypnotism? What
15 the difference between the two? These questions
ate being constantly asked by persons who are led
to believe in the reality of the phenomenon as they
see it produced, or become interested in it for the
first time.
These questions have been asked and answered
with more 01 less accuracy in the pages of maga-
zines, pamphlets and special works upon the subject
many times. But they are questions more easily
asked than answered, unless we view the effects as
facts, which denote the condition, and explain the
cause of the result. For, like heat, light, electricity,
the force of gravity, and other natural powers, the
primary causation lies in the infinite mind. And


like all the unexplainable laws of the universe and
our being, are accounted for only by an overruling
power of infinite knowledge.
We are, however, privileged to understand the
fundamental laws upon which these are based, if not
always the cause of such laws.
The wide difference of opinion as to the correct
explanation of these phenomena, as have been set
forth by many eminent men, while seeming contra-
dictory, were really a corroboration of the truth.
But not until the year 1893, when Hudson in his
book, “The Law of Psychic Phenomena,” set forth
a hypothesis upon which all facts were classified,
and which hypothesis has since been generally ac-
cepted, could hypnotism and its resulting phenom-
ena be considered classified, and its cause fully
understood. It has so long been regarded as a
power, possessed only by a few, and looked at as
something supernatural for one to be able to demon-
strate it; and that only from ten to twenty per cent,
of the human family were susceptible to the influ-
ence ; that now when we tell the truth and say that
all intelligent persons are susceptible, that it con-
sists simply of four great principles of life: i.e., sug-
gestion, obedience, imagination and concentration
of mind, we are looked at by many with suspicion
and our veracity doubted. So fond is the human
mind of reveling among things supernatural, that it
objects to being awakened to the knowledge that it
is but the result of natural laws.


As this book is intended to teach those who are
just beginning the study of mesmerism and hypnot-
deavour^ er T advanced stu dent, I shall en-
deavour to make more plain the above stated facts
y taking each of the four before mentioned prin-
cipal factors in the production of either mesmerism
or hypnotism, and treat each separately, but briefly
s owing their relation to the subject matter. Per-
haps there is no time better than the present to make
plain to my readers the difference between mesmer-
ism and hypnotism. Hypnotism, as the name indi-
cates, is a sleeping condition, and was so named from
he Greek word Hypno—meaning sleep. But as in
life we have the sleeping and waking states, so have
we in this phenomenon—hypnotism— the sleeping
or unconscious condition; mesmerism, the waking
or conscious state.
Some writers choose to class it all under the name
of hypnotism, calling the different conditions, differ-
ence of degree; and such it no doubt is. But Ido
not think it literally correct to designate both con-
itions by one name, for would we be considered
as speaking the truth if we should say that while
attending to our business in the day time, that we
were sleeping, only we were in a conscious sleep?
I he statement in itself is contradictory.
I shall, therefore, when speaking of the deep and
unconscious conditions, call it hypnotism, and when
alluding to the condition of the subject, who,
although governed by the suggestions of the opera


tor, is still conscious of his acts and surroundings,
mesmerism.
Now let us consider the four principal parts of hyp-
notism. First—suggestion: I very much doubt if
the average person realizes what an important part
suggestion plays in their every-day life, and how
much we owe to suggestions of various natures.
Stop and think! There is no word spoken, no desire
expressed, no thoughts formed in the mind, and no
action of the brain which is not due to some form of
suggestion.
All realize that mind controls the action of the
body, but how many stop to ask themselves, what
controls the mind?
The five physical senses control the mind. We
see, touch, taste, hear and smell, and each of these
senses convey to the mind over the nerves a sug-
gestion of the result.
If we touch anything hot, the sensation is carried
over the nerves to the brain, which immediately re-
cognises the suggestion as one of danger, and causes
the action necessary for protection.
There are many forms of suggestions, viz.; Ex-
ternal suggestion; auto-suggestion; associate sug-
gestion; indirect suggestion; hypnotic suggestion;
post-hypnotic suggestion; continuative sugges-
tion and telepathic suggestion. Although ex-
ternal suggestion is named first, we must not con-
sider it of the greatest importance. It is the most
common form of suggestion in our every-day life,


and includes the suggestions of voice, eye and
action, and all others which are conveyed involun-
tarily through the senses.
The auto-suggestion is one of intuition, or God-
given, such as that of self preservation, which causes
one to go through with any amount of suffering
rather than readily yield up the life given them.
The firmly implanted ideas or beliefs of one’s con-
science also constitutes the strongest possible form
of auto-suggestion, and one which no external sug-
gestion can overcome. But more will be said of this
later on.
The associate and indirect suggestions belong to
almost the same field, but differing in that associate
suggestion is that which in suggesting to the mind
some act or word causes it in its turn to call up some
other suggestion with the first suggestion. While
indirect suggestion is a suggestion placed in such
a way that its meaning is obscure; a mere hint or
insinuation, leaving the subject to carry out his own
natural bent, or auto-suggestion.
Hypnotic suggestions are the suggestions which
are used for the purpose of inducing the hypnotic
state, such as “Now you are becoming drowsy,”
“Sleep, sleep,” etc., also the suggestion upon which
the subject acts while in the hypnotic or highly re-
ceptive state, and is suggestion intensified.
Post-hypnotic suggestion is a suggestion given to
the hypnotized subject, but the resulting action of
which is to be deferred until some later time, desig-
34
HYPNOTISM MADE PLAIN.


nated by the operator at the time of placing the
suggestion.
Continuative suggestion is that suggestion which
continues active even after the object for which it is
placed, has been attained. But it can be better
understood by the following simple illustration:
We tell a subject while in either the mesmeric
or hypnotic state that he is to walk three times
across the floor, but that when he has crossed it
twice, he will be fully awake, and in a normal con-
dition. He starts, and as suggested, he awakes, but
without knowing why continues walking until he
has crossed the floor the stated number of times.
Telepathic suggestion is the most subtle of all
forms of suggestion, being wholly dependent upon
the subjective mind, or unseen force inherent in
man. It is the communion between subjective
minds, and will be more fully explained in another
chapter.
By thus defining the different forms of sugges-
tion, the reader will be better able to understand
the various stages of the phenomena as produced,
and will be able to see that the so-called different
degrees are due to the different forms of suggestion,
and times at which said suggestions were placed.
We must remember that the mesmerized, and
especially the hypnotized subject, is in a highly
receptive state of mind, due to the abeyance, more
or less complete, of the objective mind, and that the
slightest word or action from the operator or one


with whom the subject is en rapport, are sugges-
tions quickly seized and acted upon, and accounts
many times for the unexpected action on the part
of a subject.
Second—Obedience: As it is necessary to obey
the laws of nature in order to live, so it is necest-
sary to have obedience in order to produce either
mesmerism or hypnotism.
Not only must the subject or investigator obey
the suggestions of the operator, but the operator in
his turn must obey certain laws of nature if he
wishes to demonstrate what he sometimes chooses
to call his power, but only in the sense as “know-
ledge is power,” can that term be applied to hyp-
notism.
In order that the results of our efforts shall be
satisfactory, the subject must begin by obeying
every suggestion placed by the operator. And if he
is skeptical as to the genuineness of the phenomena
he must throw aside his pre-conceived opinions
enough to obey the simplest suggestion; for the fact
that he is passive, and listens attentively to all that
is said, is not sufficeint; he must comply with each
wish, and obey every command, or the effort to in-
duce the hypnotic state will be of no avail. I will
also add that faith in the remark or suggestions of
the operator will greatly facilitate matters, but
obedience is positively necessary, for notwithstand-
ing the many statements made to the contrary, no
person can hypnotize another. The so-called hyp-
36
HYPNOTISM MADE PLAIN.


notizer, understanding the law of suggestion, mer-
ely assists by placing the proper suggestion at the
right time; but unless the subject sees fit to obey
those suggestions, he is not hypnotized.
Hence we see the necessity of giving to obedience
the second place in the principles or conditions
necessary to produce hypnotism.
Third: Imagination, as we know, is a belief of
the mind without any logical proof to support it,
and is a faculty with which some are much more
largely endowed than others, and which will in
many cases explain the rapidity with which certain
subjects yield to the hypnotic suggestions; for so
strong is their imaginations that any suggestion
from the operator is almost instantly accepted as
a reality, which is what the operator most desires,
for when placing the hypnotic suggestions, the
sooner the subject believes the suggestions, the
sooner will the hypnotic state be induced, during
which the subject necessarily believes everything
then stated.
Thus we see the place imagination occupies in
the production of hypnotism, and upon it depends
more or less the success of the experiments; for
other things being equal, the strongly imaginative
person makes the best subject.
Fourth: Concentration of mind. This is by no
means the least important principle, as no differ-
ence, how strong or how carefully placed, are the
suggestions, or how obediently each one is followed


out physically, or how strong may be the imagina-
tion, the experiment will result in failure unless
there is concentration of mind upon, and in favour
with the suggestion.
Hypnotism is the result of mental atcion; not on
the part of the operator, as so many suppose, and
as it is sometimes called, “The superior mind con-
trolling the inferior,” but the result of mind over
matter, or the subject’s mind over his own body.
Therefore, I claim that hypnotism is nothing more
nor less than concentration of mind upon the sug-
gestions, which carries the imagination into a
reality, according to the suggestion.
Having thus defined the Jour principal parts of
hypnotism, and their relation to the subject mat-
ter, the reader will better understand the phenom-
ena as described in the following pages, and the stu-
dent will have a knowledge of that with which he
operates, and therefore work intelligently; for no
man should practice in any trade or profession
without first understanding the tools with which he
has to work.
I want, however, to impress upon the beginner
the importance of suggestion, and its potency for
good or evil. We see every day the effect of evil
suggestions; take, for instance, the drunkard. I
venture to say there are very few men who would
independently and of their own free will, drink to
excess. Drunkenness is often the result of a sug-
gestion, or invitation from a friend to take a drink,
38
HYPNOTISM MADE PLAIN.


then another and another, and for the sake of being
social he complies. The impressions and suggest-
ions of the surroundings are an influence stronger
than many imagine.
All men are not born equal, some being naturally
more inclined to the low and the base than are
others, thereby being more easily influenced to do
wrong, and who need, more than others, an environ-
ment of a refining and uplifting nature; but, as we
know, they are more often in surroundings adverse
to moral or intellectual growth, and which leave
their imprints upon the soul.
Intellectual growth depends upon the kind of sug-
gestions received, and the ability of the recipient
to utilize them, and the force with which they are
projected.
The greater number of senses simultaneously im-
pressed, the more lasting will be the impressions
made by the suggestions.
Of suggestion is born every beautiful thought
which is shown forth through each grand burst of
melody, flight of poetic fancy and superb architec-
tural splendour, which so entrances the people of
this nineteenth century, and is lifting mankind up
to the beautiful heights of intellectual achievements.


CHAPTER III.
The Duality of the Mind.
The Composition of Man—Man the Professor of Two
Minds — Objective Mind — Subjective Mind — Their
Functions—Man’s Normal Condition—The Spirit or
Soul of Man—The Theory of the Nancy School—The
Theory of the Paris School—The Theory of Mesmer—
The Potency of Auto-Suggestion.
In all ages and civilized nations the duality of the
mind has been recognised. It has been more or less
clearly defined by philosophers of all ages, from the
pagan to the Christian; and although it is classed
differently by each age, the same general idea is
disclosed. From the ancient alchemist who refers
to man as being composed of three elements: salt,
sulphur and mercury, down to the early Christian
doctrine of the trinity constituting man, there has
ever been shown a tendency to recognise the essen-
tial truth .that man is endowed with a dual mental
organization.
Recognizing the fact that this has been so long
considered and believed, we have therefore good
reason to assume that if but properly understood,
it would prove very important to mankind, for it
has surely a basis of truth, and truth is always sig-
nificant,


hits since the most remote ages many eminent
men nave studied and laboured to ascertain the
truth, and to establish a scientific basis upon which
the fundamental laws governing the human mind
could rest and be of service in the explanation of
the many wonderful phenomena of mental activity,
which were considered by many as supernatural,
because no known law of nature governed them.
Now at the present day it has been fully demon-
strated that man is the possessor of two minds, or
one mind with two distinct parts or functions, the
knowledge of which makes plain many things here-
tofore unexplained, as the conception of this funda-
mental truth has been but dimly understood until
within recent years. At the present time it is widely
recognized as substantially correct, and forms a pre-
eminent principle in the philosophy of the most able
demonstrators of psychology.
The elements constituting, and the principles gov-
erning this dual mind of man is clearly shown when
observing the phenomena of hypnotism, during
which the mind, or part of man, which is employed
m our every-day actions, is placed in abeyance, and
the other assumes control.
The two minds are called subjective and objec-
tive, and are thus clearly defined by Hudson:
"The objective mind takes cognizance of the ob-
jective world. Its media of observation are the five
physical senses. It is the outgrowth of man’s phy-
sical necessities. It is his guide in his struggle with


his material environment. Its highest function is
that of reasoning.” .
“The subjective mind takes cognizance ot i
environment by intuition. It is the seat of the emo-
tions ami the storehouse of memory. It performs
its highest function when the objective senses are
in abeyance. In a word, it is that intelligence which
makes itself manifest in a hypnotic subject, when he
is in a state of somnambulism.”
One of the principal differences between the two
minds is shown under suggestion.
Man in a normal condition, with the full use of his
objective mind, cannot be controlled against his rea-
son, and when a suggestion is offered, asks evidenc
of his senses and wants positive knowledgi before
believing, while the subjective mind takes for
granted everything that is suggested to »" d ac ‘*
upon it unhesitatingly. No matter how absurd the
statement, it is accepted as a positive fact, and acte
UP Thus CC we d Te g e' y that the subjective mind is a dis-
tinct and separate being, having mem
tal organization and powers, and is capa
taining an existence independent of the body. It is,
to make it clear, what is commonly called the spu
or soul of man, and which lives on after the death
1 wifh'which the subjective mind ac-
cepts as a reality whatever statement is made when
acting independently of the objective mind, as
42
hypnotism mA.de PLAIN.


does while the subject is in the hypnotic state,
necessitates the acknowledgment of the importance
of suggestion in producing the different hypnotic
experiments.
It is on this point of suggestion that the two great
schools of France the “Paris,” and the “Nancy” sub-
stantially differ. The Nancy school claims that the
different states and conditions characterizing the
hypnotic state are due to mental action alone, and
that the phenomena can best be produced in a per-
son of sound physical health and perfect mental
action, and that the sounder the brain the quicker
the result can be attained, also that all of the differ-
ent subsequent psychological and physical pheno-
mena are, in all cases, caused by some form of sug-
gestion. While the Paris school, as Charcot’s school
is called, believes that the true hypnotic state can
only be induced in those whose nerves are in an
abnormal, or diseased condition; and much of the
phenomena can be produced independent of sug-
gestion.
The followers of Mesmer and his fluidic theory
claim also that the hypnotic condition can be pro-
duced independent of suggestion, they holding that
from the operator flows a subtle fluid which comes
in contact with those to whom it is directed, and
that with intense concentration of mind, accom-
panied by passes over the subject by the operator,
the mesmeric hypnotic state is induced; also that
these effects can best be produced by physical con-
43
THE DUA.LITT OF THE MIND.


tact, but that they can be produced at a distance
without the aid of suggestion and independent of
the subject’s knowledge.
Thus we see the wide difference of opinion held
by these well-known schools, and while neither are
perhaps entirely right, each maintain a part of the
truth. But to the Nancy school is credited the dis-
covery and recognition of the power of suggestion,
which theory has of late been accepted by almost
all operators; and that to suggestion, in one or more
of its various forms, can be attributed the almost
marvellous effects so frequently produced through
hypnosis, is plainly demonstrated.
The student must not lose sight of the fact that
the subjective mind is constantly subject to control
bv suggestion, and not only of the operator, but
also of the objective mind of the individual himself.
This is proven in many ways, and accounts for
the well-known fact that no man can be hypnotized
against his will ; also that he cannot be made to do
many things when apparently completely ttndei
control.
The failure of the hypnotist to hypnotize some
people is due to the auto-suggestion of the subject
being contrary to the operator. Contrary auto-sug
gestion is responsible also for many failures in at-
tempted experiments, which come often so unex-
pectedly to the operator, and many times to his
confusion. I remember once where I had a very
skeptical audience, and fearing the audience would
44
HYPNOTISM MADE PLAIN.


think my subjects were shamming, and I imposing
upon them, I suggested to the entire class while
they were in the somnambulistic state, that the
sense of feeling was gone; that they could feel no
pain; then proceeded to thrust a pin through the
hand of each to prove the reality of the work, when
to my utter astonishment and confusion, my best
subject, one with whom I had done almost every-
thing else, woke up, resuming a normal condition
the moment the pin touched him. He said he felt
no pain, and did not know why he woke; but
stated that he had previously resolved that he would
not allow me to do that one test, and had told his
friends he was willing I should do anything with
him excepting that.
The mind being impressed by two suggestions,
each in direct opposition to the other, it but follows
that the weaker must yield, the stronger always pre-
vailing; and it is a fact fast becoming recognized
that no hypnotist can place any suggestion so strong
upon a subject as to overcome an auto-suggestion,
and cause him to perform any act contrary to the
settled principles of his life; and the more deeply
rooted are those principles, habits or convictions,
the stronger and more potent are the auto-sugges-
tions, making it impossible for them to be over-
come by any external suggestion.
There is no better way to ascertain the true char-
acter of a person than by hypnotism. Take a sub-
ject, for instance, who is a staunch temperance man,
n


and while hypnotized offer him an empty glass, tell-
ing him it is a glass of fine beer. He will undoubt-
edly refuse to drink. I remember one who I ex-
perimented with. While he was making a temper-
ance speech I offered him a glass of water, telling
him it was beer. At first he refused to drink, say-
ing he was an advocate of temperance; but upon
being assured that there was no one around, and
that he could drink it, and no one know about it,
he very eagerly drank the supposed beer, much to
the astonishment of some who witnessed the ex-
periment; but it was no surprise to some who knew
him more intimately. Thus the defect in his char-
acter and deceit of his life was shown.
The subjective mind being at all times amenable
to control by suggestion, and being incapable of in-
ductive reasoning, accepting as it does every state-
ment that is made to it, however illogical, is a fun-
damental fact not to be ignored or for one moment
lost sight of by the student of psyhcology, and will
be seen as a self-evident fact as we further pursue
this study. The reader who has followed thus far
the elucidation of this subject, which I have endea-
voured to make plain, will now be prepared to
understand the resulting phenomenon, which I shall
in the next chapter endeavour to show how to pro-
duce.


CHAPTER IV.
How to Produce Hypnotism.
Necessity of Confidence—The Difference in the Character
Shown—Conditions Necessary for Success —Musical
Assistance —The Mesmeric Passes—Success the Result
of Expectancy—The Return to a Normal Condition —
Imposters—Their Cure —Some General Observations
—Physical Tests—Mental Tests.
There seems to be at the present time, since the
study of the manifestations of all psychic phenom-
ena has become so general, a desire for full and
plain instruction as to the method of producing the
hypnotic state; as hypnotism is soon recognized by
the student as the key which unlocks the mysteries,
and makes plain many of the so-called supernatural
manifestations.
And notwithstanding the fact that many books
have been written upon the subject, claiming to
give the true explanation, very few students know
any more about how to hypnotize than before they
read them, as their language is incomprehensible
to the average reader.
It is a difficult undertaking to convey in writing
instructions sufficient for all the phases that’ per-
tain to hypnotism, for as one enters upon the study
and begins experimenting, they are but opening
the doors, and entering the portal, from where they
47
HOW TO PKOHUCE HYPNOTISM.


catch their first glimpse of the realities of the life
immortal; and while contemplating the beauties re-
vealed by one experiment, another still more won-
derful appears, enticing one to further investigation.
No two persons are exactly alike, and under hyp-
notic influence each trait of character is shown forth,
and each requires a different mode of treatment in
order to bring about the best results.
It is for this reason that it is so difficult to give
in writing, instructions which will apply to all
classes, and each individual.
It is not hard to teach a child the rudiments of
music by letter, but all know that with the average
scholar personal instruction is necessary in order to
become accomplished; and unless the student is
endowed with ability above the average, they may
even then never become a master of the art. Neither
can every one become an expert mathematician.
And so it is with the science of hypnotism. Any
one can learn the rules necessary to follow, but not
every one can become a successful hypnotist. I
shall endeavour to give to my readers in plain, com-
prehensible language the manner in which hypnot-
ism can be produced, and if carefully studied and fol-
lowed, any one can, by persistent effort, become
able to hypnotize, if they do not become an expert
hypnotist; and by practicing keen observation, and
making a study of human nature, thereby under-
standing how best to approach a person in order
to inspire confidence. Ability can be developed to


a surprising extent. The gaining of the confidence
of the person whom you propose to hypnotize
should be your first care, as hypnotism is always
the result of expectancy. The subjects believing
what you tell them, and expecting the result which
is to be obtained. The operator must also possess
self-confidence in a large degree, as the subject will
not have confidence in you and your ability, unless
} r ou assume, if you do not really have confidence in
yourself.
You should begin by explaining in plain, simple
language what you propose doing, and what they
will observe if they follow out your instructions.
There are even at the present day many people
who believe it is only those who are physically and
mentally weak, who are susceptible to the influ-
ence, and that if they were hypnotized it would
indicate that they were weak-minded, and cause
them to be an object of ridicule, and for that reason
will not allow themselves to be operated upon; or,
if they consent will, as soon as they begin to feel
the influence of the suggestions, assert their will in
opposition to them.
It is essentially important, therefore, for complete
success for the operator to disabuse his audience,
and especially the ones whom he proposes to ope-
rate upon, of this erroneous idea, as in so doing he
will gain the consent of many for the proposed ex-
periments who would not otherwise allow them


selves to be hypnotized, and who would perhaps
make the best subjects.
In order to do this, and to throw aside all pre-
judice and superstition in regard to the matter, and
thereby gain the favourable mental environment
which is conducive to success, the operator must
impress his audience at the start with the fact that
the manifestations about to be produced are only
the result of natural law; that it is no special power
invested in himself; that he hypnotizes no one;
they hypnotize themselves by following out the
instructions, etc.
When commencing and wishing to gain the con-
fidence of the audience, it must be remembered that
you have at the present time but one sense through
which to impress them, and for that reason must
make explanation very plain, divesting it of
all mystery, and showing how dependent you are
for the success of the experiments upon your com-
mittee. Tell them plainly that you do not claim to
be able to hypnotize any one against his will; that
it is not mind over mind; a superior mind controll-
ing an inferior mind, as some have supposed; but
that it is mind over matter, or the subject’s mind
controlling his own body.
Explain that the practice of hypnotism is not
injurious or weakening to the mind, but on the
contrary it strengthens the mind; that one-fourth
of hypnotism is concentration of mind, and that by
practicing concentration, the mind is developed the
50
HYPNOTISM MADE PLAIN.


same as the muscles are developed by physical prac-
tice ; and that by so doing, the memory and recep-
tive abilities are strengthened and developed; and
that they are in reality getting a benefit out of it,
instead of harm being done them.
Having thus explained the subject, and gained
the confidence of all by letting them understand
that you not only know what you are talking about,
but can also with their help demonstrate what you
claim, you are now ready to begin work.
The first thing, after having gained a complete
silence and the undivided attention of your subjects,
ask them to sit straight in their chairs, their feet
flat on the floor and together, to place their hands
on their knees, and to look fixedly at a light or any
bright object located in front and above them, and
not to take their eyes off of it for one minute, and
to concentrate their minds upon the fact that they
are going to sleep.
I usually allow them to gaze steadily and silently
for a few moments in order for them to get their
minds perfectly passive; then I commence to aid
them in going to sleep by suggestion: Now you are
beginning to get drowsy, your eyelids are growing
heavy, they are growing very heavy; don’t resist;
let them close; you are growing very sleepy; now
they are closing; don’t try to keep them open; when
they feel tired just let them close; now you are going
fast asleep, sleep, sleep, fast to sleep, sleep sound,
sleep.
51
HOW TO PRODUCE HYPNOTISM.


By this time the most, if not all of your class are
in that drowsy, sleepy condition, with the eyelids
closed, but if any should still have their eyes open
you can give them a little personal attention, sug-
gesting to them in a low, soothing tone that they
are going to sleep, and at the same time gently
stroke down the centre of the forehead and over the
nose with the tips of the fingers (always stroking
downward), which will assist to close the eyes. But
if by this time you see that you have one or more
in your circle who are not obeying your suggest-
ions by keeping their eyes on the one object, or are
laughing, and do not seem sincere, you will do well
to let them out, as they but hinder the others who
are really trying.
If you undertake to give public performances,
securing your committee of subjects from those
who volunteer from the audience, you will find
many who will, as they in their boasting way tell
their friends, go up to “Show him he can’t do that
with me.” It is impossible with anyone of this kind
in the circle to establish the harmony necessary for
good work, and the sooner you dispose of them the
better success you will have with the others.
In order to keep such persons off of the stage, I
state in the beginning that I do not want anyone
to come up to show they cannot be hypnotized, as
I do not claim to hypnotize anyone against their
will; and that everyone who is not weak minded
can be, at least, mesmersized.


But to return to our class. They now have their
eyes closed, and their minds in a passive condition
where they are more susceptible to suggestions. A
slow, dreamy waltz played upon a piano, the music
gradually growing louder, is a great assistance in
producing hypnosis.
The voice and tone of the voice also have much
to do with it. Speak in an authoratative manner,
letting your tone indicate that you intend and ex-
pect to succeed. Keep repeating loudly and for-
cibly: Sleep deep-deep—fast to sleep—and while
doing so, step from one to another, making down-
ward passes with your hands from the subject s
head; not straight down, but start with your hands
together and above the subjects head, and in bring
ing them down, separate them gradually, passing
the face with the palms toward the face, and about
six inches apart, and on down over the arms; but
without touching the subject. This is not necessary
for the purpose of emitting a magnetic fluid, as is
taught by the school of Mesmer, but the passes
cause a vibration of air readily felt by the subject,
and which acts upon his imagination, at the same
time having a soothing effect, which assists m
bringing on the deepest stages of hypnosis.
Now suggest, the muscles relax the head is gro\\
ing heavy—the chin drops on the breast—the hands
fall to the sides—they are falling—now they move
—you are fast asleep—or any suggestion which will
keep it impressed upon the mind that they are


asleep; and each suggestion must be timed to suit
the condition of the sleeper, and which experience
alone can teach you how to judge.
After the muscles are relaxed, go to each and
while suggesting that they are fast asleep—their
head is heavy, etc., gently rotate the head for a few
moments with your hand on the top of the head,
and let the chin drop on the breast when you re-
move your hand. This little nod of the head is in
itself a suggestion of sleep, as is also the falling of
the arms to the side; and appeals to the sense of
feeling, as does also the vibration of the air caused
by the passes; and with the sense of hearing upon
which you have to depend principally in placing
the suggestion, combine in impressing the subject,
and making the suggestions more forcible, as the
greater number of senses simultaneously impressed,
the stronger and more lasting will be the impres-
sions made. You must also remember that any
impressions made, or suggestion sent to the brain,
is many times increased in power if the mind is
previously tranquilized, as it is even in the lighter
stages of hypnosis.
Having gone thus far with your class of subjects
(which, although it takes a long time to tell how to
do it, takes in reality only from three to eight
minutes) you will have the music stopped, then
calmly say—you are fast asleep—when 1 count three
you will all try to open your eyes, but you will find
it impossible. They are all fast—until when? Until


I clap my hands together and say all right, now
you remember you can get them open when I clap
my hands together and say all right—but not before
(impressing them with the words fast and all right),
now you say slowly and deliberately—one—two—
three—all try —try —try hard to open them ; letting
the tone of each suggestion imply to them that
although they do try they cannot open them, that
you know they are really stuck fast. After each one
has tried sufficiently long to convince himself, also
your audience, that he cannot get them open, clap
your hands together, and in a loud, commanding
voice say—all right—when they will be able to
instantly open their eyes.
There may be someone who has scarcely changed
his position or made any effort to open his eyes, and
still remains in the same state of lethargy, paying
apparently no attention to your last suggestion, but
do not feel at all concerned, his subjective mind has
received each suggestion you have made and regis-
tered it upon the pages of its never-failing memory
and will understand your suggestion of “all right'
when it is impressed upon him with enough force;
but he having received the suggestions of sleep,
which were given first, has impressed them so for-
cibly upon his mind that he was not able to receive
the last ones as readily as the others; therefore it
will necessitate a repetition of the suggestion in
order for him to accept and act upon it. All you
have to do with the average one is to stand close
55
HOW TO PRODUCE HYPNOTISM.


behind him, and again slap your hands together, and
say “all right.”
Should you have any of the exceptional cases,
where the repetition of the,suggestion did not pro-
duce the desired result, do not feel any anxiety, or
allow yourself to become the least bit nervous, but
take your hand and raise the subject’s head and de-
liberately tell him to open his eyes, assuring him
that he can do so, and at the same time give' his
head a slight jar backwards. He will then slowly
open his eyes, and you, looking steadily into them,
will say—when I count three and say “all right,”
you will wake up; then proceed to do so, keeping
your eyes on his, and giving his head another little
backward jar while you say “all right,” thus having
the two senses, that of sight and hearing, you will
be able to impress him more forcibly with sug-
gestions.
Should you have any one who could not get their
eyes open although apparently trying to do so, and
both of the above methods have failed to assist him,
and you have placed your suggestions while they
were passive as to what would take them out of the
hypnosis, you can rest assured that that person is
only pretending, and you can leave him quietly
alone, with the remark that his eyes will come open
after a little while, and they no doubt will; or you
may have to resort to my method for such persons,
and although it sounds rather harsh treatment, it is
only too mild for such impostors, I then say to


him that as he cannot get his eyes open he can qmt
trying and go fast to sleep, and to sleep sound for
a few minutes. If he pretended he could not open
his eyes when he could, he will continue the farce by
appearing to go fast to sleep. Then I lay him down
quietly at one side of the stage and leave him there
in full vieAv of the audience the remainder of the
evening. He will be ashamed to acknowledge that
he lay there shamming all evening and is not likely
to call me a “fake” around town the following day.
I hope, however, that none of my readers will have
any experience of this nature, and you will likely
not have unless you give public performances, where
you have to try all classes of people, and some of
the “smart” class is to be found everywhere. If you
practice much in public you are likely to be called
a fraud every day of your life. All these things
await any one who becomes a public hypnotist,
as there are plenty of persons who will pretend that
they are mesmerized when they are not. Such
are frauds and imposters, but are usually too ignor-
ant to realize the fact, and will afterwards try to
make it appear that you are the fraud, and that they
were “sharp” in acting as they did, and proving, as
they try to do to their friends, that you are the fake
instead of themselves. I do not know any words in
the English language which are sufficient to express
my antipathy for such persons, as they not only t
to ruin your business, but to rob you of your hoi
in the eyes of the public.


There is also another class which is almost as bad
as the first, and that is, those who were honestly'
hypnotized, but afterward, fearing that some one
would think them "weak-minded,” or that they
would be laughed at by their companions, assert
that they were only pretending, or doing it to “help
him out,” as they say.
Then there are those who, because they have gone
only into the mesmeric state and were conscious of
their actions, say, and honestly think, perhaps, that
they could have opened their eyes or taken their
hands apart if they had only wished to do so, and
claiming, therefore, that they were not influenced at
all. They fail to recognize that the very fact of their
not wishing to do so was proof that they were really
mesmerized.
I can have more patience with the latter class be-
cause they are, and were at the time, honest in their
acts and statements; but with those who deceive not
only the operator, but their friends in the audience,
and try to make it appear as though the operator
was the deceiver, are, in my eyes, contemptible per-
sons.
I speak of this phase of the work, as all experi-
menters must meet with similar experiences, espec-
ially the travelling performer, as it seems to be the
outgrowth of perverted human nature, which is so
prevalent in some parts of the country. It is almost
impossible for an operator not to be deceived, as the
class of experiments introduced are generally those
58
HYPNOTISM MADE PLAIN.


wherein the entire class are involved at the samfe
time, and when one operator has from ten to fifty
subjects, it is impossible for him to watch each one
sufficiently to detect a deception.
Now that you have determined who of your vol-
unteers are able and willing to obey your sugges-
tions and to accept your instructions, instead of fol-
lowing out their own ideas as to how it should be
done, arrange their chairs in a half circle, with your
subjects seated and arranged so that your best sub-
jects will be next to your poorest; and as thus mixed
up, the mental environment from the stronger helps
the weak.
Now you must not suppose that because the eye-
lids have been stuck that you can immediately intro-
duce successfully any test which you may have seen
performed, as in assisting one to be hypnotised you
must work on the same plan as in teaching a child
the English language. With a child it is necessary
for it to first learn the A, B, C’s and small words
before it learns to read sentences and pronounce long
words; and so it is with hypnotic subjects.
It is no easy matter to concentrate the mind upon
one thing the first time you try it, and to do so to
such a degree as to exclude all other thoughts and
sounds, can only be attained by the average person
after repeated attempts.
It is for this reason that the subject who has been
hypnotized several times is able to be more readily
operated upon another time; and not as some have
59
HOW TO PRODUCE HYPNOTISM.


supposed; because the mind, or “will has become
weakened.”
As I said before, you must now with your new
subjects begin on the light or A, B, C tests. The
first, or the easiest one for the average person, is that
of drawing them backward and forward as you sug-
gest. Have the subject stand up with his feet to-
gether, and arms hanging at his side, and to make
himself passive. Now pass your hands over his
shoulders and down his back in short rapid strokes,
suggesting at the same time: In a few moments you
will feel something pull you back—firmly believe it
—when I suggest it you will actually feel it. Now
bring vour hands over his shoulders and down his
back, but without touching him, and at the same time
saying: “Now you feel it —now it is pulling you back
—l'll catch you,” and he will actually fall into your
arms, although you did not really touch, or assist
him, except by suggestion.
Now face the subject, and looking straight into
his eyes, tell him very deliberately that in a few mo-
ments he will feel something pulling him toward
you; then bring your hands up, one over each
shoulder, at the same time moving backward your-
self and suggesting: “Now you feel it—it is pulling
you,” etc.
After you have found each one susceptible to
these light suggestions you can try, and generally
with success, to fasten the hands together. In order
to do this, have each one clasp their hands together,


suggesting to them—“bring them tighter—look
steadily at your thumbs —tighter—tighter—and
when you see they are really pressing them very
tight, go to each and while lightly slapping the
hands say; “Now they are fast—try hard to take
them apart —try harder, you can’t take them apart
until I say ‘all right.’ ”
You will occasionally find some one in }'our class
whose hands will not stick fast, although his eye-
lids were stuck fast in your first test; but you can
generally, with a little effort, with him personally,
succeed in fastening them.
Now have them all fold their arms across their
breast and look steadily at their wrists, and to press
their arms tightly, you in the meantime aiding them
with suggestions similar to those used to fasten the
hands; and they will presently be unable to take
their arms down. Then you can make the finger
stick fast to the nose, the hand to the ear, etc.
Having thus put your subjects through a few of
these physical tests, you can now, in all probability,
succeed with some mental tests, where you are able
to make them see, hear, smell or taste as you sug-
gest; also make them insensible to pain by placing
suggestions to that effect, or induce them to do
whatever you wish to have them do, providing it is
nothing contrary to their life principles, or firmly
implanted auto-suggestions, as you must remember
that your subject is not as he sometimes seems to be,
a mere automaton. Do not try to extort from him a
secret, or insist upon him doing something which he
1


refuses to do, or he will likely resume a normal con-
dition by exertion of his own will, which causes a
slight nervous shock; also a shock (but a much
worse one) to his confidence in you, and perhaps to
such an extent that he will never again allow you to
hypnotize him.
The preceding explanation of the first few physi-
cal tests, which I have explained so minutely, may
seem very superficial to some of my readers; but as
I said before, this book is for beginners and intended
to teach instead of mystify them, and it is necessary
to understand how and when to place the sugges-
tions upon the new subject, and for the first experi-
ments in order to succeed later. With the old and
trained subject it is not necessary to suggest to him
in each test what will take him out of the hypnosis,
as he will respond to whatever suggestion has pre-
viously awakened him, unless you suggest to the
contrary; as it is the belief of the mind in the power
of the suggestion to release them, and not the effic-
iency of the act itself, which awakens them. If you
suggested to them that you would have to touch
them before they could awaken, no amount of clap-
ping the hands and saying “all right” would affect
them; you would certainly have to touch them in
order for them to regain a normal condition.
Do not lose sight of the fact that suggestion is
the fundamental law which governs all manifesta-
tions, and that suggestion in some of its variems
forms is responsible for all the different phases of
this phenomenon.


CHAPTER V.
How to Produce Hypnotism (Continued).
Conditions to Observe for the Nerves—Hypnotic Subjects
Most Easily Cured—Dr. Parkyn’s Theory—The Eye
an Indicator of the Attitude of the Mind—Rules to
... Follow for the Conceited—Man, the Likeness of God
—Reason for the Youth being Most Readily Hypno-
tized—Semi-Consciousness—Effect of Counter Sug-
gestions.
The method outlined in the preceding chapter,
for the induction of hypnosis, is that which I em-
ploy so successfully in my public performances, and
is intended more especially for a class, and when you
wish to operate upon more than one at the same
time; but when wishing to induce hypnosis for thera-
peutic purposes, or with one person alone, I proceed
in a little different manner generally, and vary the
method according to the nature, or disease, of the
person. j «
Take for instance the nervous, timid woman afraid
of everything; you must with her gain her confi-
dence by telling her in a quiet, firm manner that the
hypnotic sleep is nothing to be dreaded; that it is
practically the same as natural sleep; that she has
really been hypnotizing herself every day all her
life, and having her strength renewed by nature
while she slept; but that now she is not well, and is
in need of assistance in order for her to gain the
perfectly tranquil state of mind necessary for the
63
HOW TO PRODUCE HYPNOTISM.


body to respond to or comply with nature’s law.
While talking in this way, I usually sit in front
of the subject and look earnestly into her eyes, and
speak in a serious manner. Do not begin as some
Christian science healers do by telling the patient
that he, or she, is not sick, that “they only think
they are;” for their illness is, and has been, very real
to them; and such a remark but arouses their anta-
gonism, and causes them to dismiss you from the
start; but tell them: “Yes, I see you are not well,”
you have really been sick; but there is no reason that
you cannot be cured, many a person has been cure-1
by hypnosis who was as bad, or worse, than you
are; and if you will only assist by following out my
instructions, you will get well very rapidly, etc.
Now take both hands in yours, and in a gentle,
soothing manner; ask her to look into your eyes;
and while she is doing so, suggest to her that she is
going fast asleep, and in a firm quiet manner repeat
about the same suggestions as those referred to for
a class, when inducing hypnosis. The eyelids may
or may not become stuck together, but if they do
not, tell her it is not essential that they should; that
she can be cured without that. That perfect tran-
quility of mind and body is all that is necessary;
that she shall just keep her eyes closed and think
of nothing but sleep. While she is in this passive
condition, you can place the suggestion for her re-
lief, from whatever discomfort she is suffering.
I think, although Dr. Parkyn, of Chicago, does
not agree with me, that the hypnotic subject is more


readily cured than the mesmeric subject, tor the
simple reason that with the hypnotic subject the ob-
jective mind is in complete abeyance, and the sub-
jective mind for the time being assumes control;
and as it of necessity believes everything suggested
to it, either by its own objective mind or that of
another; and this mind which controls every func-
tion of the body being positively informed that it
was to be no longer sick, that it should again resume
its healthy normal condition; and these suggestions
of restoration accompanied, and backed up by the
inherent auto-suggestion of protection for the body,
will be more readily accepted as true, than they
would be if the objective or reasoning mind, was
cogitating upon every remark and placing voluntary
auto-suggestions contrary to the suggestions of the
operator. Therefore I expect more ready results
from a hypnotized person; although I again say that
this hypnotic condition is not necessary as the auto-
suggestion of protection for the body, before re-
ferred to, is more powerful than any voluntary auto-
suggestion to the effect that it will not help them,
etc., which their lack of knowledge upon this sub-
ject and a consequent lack of faith causes them
to place. But there is no doubt that these contrary
auto-suggestions are a great hindrance to the rapid
recovery of the patient, and can only be overcome
by persistent and repeated efforts.
The mesmeric state is not even always neces-
sary, in order for the patient to be benefited by sug-
gestion, as many cases have been cured by sugges-
65
HOW TO PRODUCE HYPNOTISM.


tion when there was no apparent response to any
of the suggestions at the time.
Dr. Parkyn’s theory is that the person who does
not yield so entirely to suggestion as to throw aside
for the time being the use of the objective mind,
is more of a reasoning, self-reliant individual, and
that they are therefore more capable of assisting
you, and helping themselves after becoming ac-
quainted with the fact that the cure is to be accom-
plished by inspiring the mind to assert its author-
ity over the body; and that the assistance rendered
by their voluntary auto-suggestions to that effect, is
more powerful and the desired results are more
readily attained than is possible in the hypnotic sub-
ject. I also believe in the efficiency of voluntary
auto-suggestion, and very much desire the co-ope-
ration of the patient, but I believe that that can be
received from the hypnotic subject just as readily as
from the mesmeric subject, and they having the ad-
vantages before mentioned, all other things being
equal, necessarily more easily benefited.
With some persons the hypnotic state can be more
readily induced if the object at which they gaze is
in a position where it is necessary for the eyes to
be rolled up and backward while gazing at it as the
eyes will in this position become tired much quicker,
which thus creates the desire to close the lids. For
this purpose I frequently stand at the side of the
subject and place my thumb on the centre of their
forehead, and my fingers on the back of their head,
and then ask them to look up at my thumb, to look
66
HYPNOTISM MADE PLAIN,


steadily. As I see the pupils of their eyes dilate
from the steady gaze, I ask them to close the lids
but to keep the eyes rolled up, and to go fast to
sleep. Then after suggesting that the lids will be
fast when I count three, but that they shall try to
open them, I proceed to count, and then tell them to
try and open them, at the same time pushing up
on their forehead with the tips of my finger.
This method I have found quite successful with
many upon which all other methods had failed to
induce hypnosis.
You can tell with the majority of subjects when
the mind is concentrated upon the object or sugges-
tion by the eye, as with almost all, there is a de-
cidedly noticeable dilation of the pupil, and it is
while in this condition that the suggestions are more
readily accepted. It is for this reason, more than
any other, that the operator looks so intently into
the subject’s eyes while suggesting, as the eye is the
mirror which reflects the condition of the mind, and
denotes when it assumes that receptive attitude dur-
ing which the suggestions are readily accepted and
acted upon.
Not only do the nervous persons require a
method peculiar to themselves, but also do another
class, who are perhaps the most difficult of any to
operate upon, and they are conceited and the inves-
tigating persons. Some people do not seem able
to wilfully lay aside their pre-conceived opinions,
and self-sufficiency enough to enable them to com-
ply with the first requirement for the induction of


hypnosis, and obey even the slightest suggestion of
the operator.
There are others who, thinking they are comply-
ing with each suggestion and condition, and who
do so to all outward appearances, still are not hyp-
notized because they do not place their mind in that
passive condition so necessary to success; but will
try to analyze each little sensation both real and
imaginary, expecting that hypnosis will be preceded
by some distinct and peculiar sensation, which de-
noes the induction of the state itself, and for the pur-
pose of studying and analyzing this expected sen-
sation, keep every faculty of the intellect upon the
alert, and as a consequence, they never enter into
the realities or actual experience of the subjective
state itself, for that complete mental passivity
which is one of the primary principles, and which
must be observed in the production of hypnosis, has
not been attained.
The most to be hoped from this latter class is a
mesmeric condition, but some may, by repeated
efforts, become able, after the novelty of the situa-
tion has worn off, to yield themselves more com-
pletely, and finally allow the subjective mind to
usurp control of the objective, the physical to be
dominated by the mental.
When one has thus learned to control himself,
or, in other words, has learned how to overcome
the material body by asserting the rights of the true
ego, he has accomplished much toward the develop-
ment of the soul, giving to it the place to which it


rightly belongs, whereby it can the better assist the
body in which it is incased, and to which it owes
its present development, to a more perfect living,
by overcoming the natural tendencies of the flesh
to error, and its consequent suffering.
It is this ability of overcoming the inclinations of
the material body, which is our birthright from God,
and which distinguishes man from the lower order
of animals, and it is a grand gift. When “God
breathed into his (man’s) nostrils the breath of life,
and man became a living soul,” He endowed man
and his progeny throughout all time and eternity
with that which made him “In his own image,” and
Invested him with the ability not only to reason, but
also to understand intuitively and to bring into sub-
jection, through an understanding of the power
which is within us, the ills to which the physical
bodv is heir. It is because of this fact that all men
are made in the likeness of God; that each and every
one is endowed with a soul, or subjective mind, more
or less perfectly developed; that it is possible for
every one who has the use of his full reasoning
powers to become mesmerized if they will but fol-
low out the conditions requisite to its induction.
But the man who has for many years cultivated
the belief in his own infallibility, and followed out
his own ideas entirely without respect to the ideas
of others, cannot easily comply with the wishes, or
follow out the directions of any one; and as obed-
ience is one of the principal factors or necessary
condition in the production of hypnosis, it is there


fore hardly to be expected that such a person can
be operated upon successfully the first time.
It is for this leason that the young person is much
more readily influenced, as their accustomed atti-
tude is one of obedience rather than being obeyed,
and of receiving instructions instead of instructing'.
It may be necessary with some of the before-men-
tioned class to resort to a trick or deception on your
Pait in order to gain any influence over them. Of
course, any suggestion given in an authoritative
manner will only arouse such a subject’s antagon-
ism and destroy the least probability of obedience
to the suggestion. Do not hesitate, however, but
pioceed to place two or three more in the same com-
manding tone, to all of which, of course, there will
be no response, as he is, perhaps, almost uncon-
sciously, mentally resolying to show you that no
one can dictate to him. Now go to him, and in a
mannei indicating that you have been conquered by
his “superior strength of will,” ask him in a IoW
tone to close his eyes, which, as he thinks, you have
recognized that you can’t make him do anything he
will readily do. Continue placing your suggestions
in a low, imploring tone, and he will almost uncon-
sciously obey them, and before suspecting anything,
he will be asleep; as it is impossible for the laws
involved to be followed and the suggestions obeyed
without hypnosis being induced.
It is but natural law with which you operate, and
when properly applied, there can be but one result
—hypnosis,


You can add two and two together, and if the rule
of addition is correctly followed, your answer will
be four, and you can make it nothing else, no mat-
ter how often you may add the two sums together.
And so it is with hypnotism, the law of which is no
less positive, or the result any less sure, than a
mathematical problem.
Take, for instance, the first test introduced, that
of closing the eyes and then being unable to open
them, as it is utterty impossible to do, if the direc-
tions have been followed and the suggestions obeyed.
The first suggestion is for the subject to roll the
eyeballs up and back, then to keep the eyes rolled
up and close the lids; to keep the eyes as though
looking into the brain, and to try and open the lids;
and we frequently find people who, although they
firmly assert that they were following closely each
condition, open their eyes Without hesitation.
But were they? No! There is no one who can
open the lids while the eyes are up and back, as the
very act of rolling the eyes up to any great degree
causes the muscles of the lids to contract and draw
down the eyelids.
Let my reader try Tor himself and see. Thus you
see, this first part is not really and always mesmer-
ism, but it is invaluable in ascertaining the true
mental attitude of the subject; for if he fails to fol-
low out these first instructions, it is hardly possible
that he will comply with others.
It is only when the subject, after having his eyes
71
HOW TO PRODUCE HYPNOTISM.


in this condition for some time, is unable to let the
eyeballs down in order to open the lids, that he can
be said to be mesmerized; as after trying to open the
lids while the eyes were rolied up, and finding that
he can not, he imagines that it is impossible, through
any effort on his part, to open them. Thus his im-
agination is carried into a reality according to the
suggestions which may be from the operator, or
auto-suggestion, the consequence of seeing others in
the same test previously.
After you have succeeded in sticking the eyelids,
the next test will not be so hard, as that will be
sufficient to show the skeptic that it is a reality,
and in the next test his efforts in obedience will be
backed up by faith and expectancy, which will
greatly facilitate in securing the desired results.
The contrary person also will have his confidence
in his “strength of will” shaken by having been so
unexpectedly influenced, and will yield more readily
another time.
The timid person will see that there is really noth-
ing to fear, and after experiencing the benefit de J
rived from the few minutes of complete inactivity,
as well as that received from the therapeutic sug-
gestions, will be only too eager to enter again into
the subjective state.
Especially is this true of those subjects who allow
themselves to be operated upon for the purpose of
scientific investigation, also for the amusement of
their friends, as the exclamations of surprise and


wonder from some, and admiration from others, is
to them a rich reward; as the subjective mind is
always conscious of its power and rejoicing in it,
delights in making itself manifest, and grasps each
word of praise and commendation as an incentive
to further efforts. Not only is each word or sug-
gestion of praise recognized, but so also are those of
distrust or suspicion, and, if persisted in by one or
more of the spectators, is likely to cause a failure in
the experiment; as the repeated suggestions to the
effect that the subject is only shamming, that he is
not really hypnotized, etc., is impressing upon the
subjective mind suggestions contrary to those pre-
viously placed by the operator; and, as a result of
the conflict between the two, the subject often re-
sumes a normal consciousness.
This sleep, whether forced or self-induced, does
not mean the abolition of the intellectual faculties,
during which the subject is a wholly irresponsible
being, but each act performed is, correctly speak-
ing, a conscious action. Although it may be uncon-
scious to his objective senses, it is but a latent
knowledge, and may be brought over the threshold
of consciousness by sug-gestions to that effect dur-
ing the subjective state.
It is this sub-consciousness which dictates to, and
prevents the subject from accepting and acting upon
harmful or incriminating suggestions, regardless of
the amount of force with which they may be pro-
jected.


CHAPTER VI.
The Use of Suggestion in Mental and Moral Development.
The Subjective Life of the Babe—Its Instinctive Know-
ledge—The Impressible Age—Imitative Ability of the
Child—Its Far-reaching Consequences—Efficiency of
Suggestion During Natural Sleep—Its Practical Use
Illustrated—The Eradicating of Fears—The Correc-
tion of Habits—Hypnotic Suggestion and Education—
The Wisdom of Solomon Shown.
The question of the possibilities and limitations
governing the hypnotic state is one upon which
there is at the present time a wide difference of
opinion among many of our best psychologists.
Just at the present time, the question of the res-
ponsibility of the hypnotized subject, or the extent
to which a subject can be influenced by suggestions,
is being widely discussed. But there is no field
which hypnotism has entered, or to which it is ap-
plied, that is creating greater interest, or one more
worthy of the consideration and investigation of the
educated, thinking people of the age, than its place
as a therapeutic agent. And with credit to our
country may it be said that not only the most emi-
nent men in the medical fraternity, but also among
the laymen, is it being recognized as one of the
greatest therapeutic agents in the realm of science.
It seems impossible to say too much for hyp


notism in this field; still, I feel that the doctors, at
least, are prone to confine its use to therapeutics,
fixing that as the limit of its legitimate usefulness;
not recognizing the great force of suggestion in
mental development, a field in which its value is in-
estimable, and it is for the consideration of the use
of suggestion in mental and moral development,
especially among children to which I wish to ask
your attention now, leaving for another and sepa-
rate chapter the discussion of suggestion and its
possibilities as a therapeutic agent.
The intellectual value of suggestion in its rela-
tion to children is very great, and suggestion in
each and all of its various forms is responsible for
the character and after life of the individual; and
parents should fully realize this fact, and awaken
to the necessity of greater vigilance in regard to the
associates and consequent suggestion impressed
upon the child, and which may be adverse to its
higher future development.
We all know that in youth one is more easily
influenced ; that any impressions made upon the
mind during the first few years of the child’s life
are retained and carried with it through life.
We must not overlook the fact that because of
the almost entirely subjective life which the child
lives for the first year, after which it begins to un-
derstand objectively, that it is always and fromi
birth subject to influence by suggestion.
No mother can begin too soon the education and
75
MENTAL AND MORAL DEVELOPMENT.


mental devleopment of her child. There are too
many parents who, not understanding the quality of
the mind, and thinking that it is useless to try to
teach a child obedience or anything else until it is
old enough to understand the language and to rea-
son, leave the child to follow any suggestion or idea
which may suggest itself, doing only that which
its own will dictates, until they find to their surprise
and sorrow that the little unreasoning one has de-
veloped to a surprising degree a will and determi-
nation which is very hard to cope with.
Just how much every adult individual owes to
heredity, and how much to his environments, is
a problem for which there is no solution.
There is proof, ample for the conviction of every
one, that a child is more or less the reflection of the
mother’s life, thoughts and emotions, prior to its
birth, or is the influence broken entirely at birth.
By the instinctive knowledge which a babe pos-
sesses we are compelled to recognize the fact that
it is endowed with a subjective mind, of which intui-
tive knowledge is the product, and because of this
understand how a babe can be influenced by the
mother, especially because of it being in reality
more a part of herself.
Every mother has seen herself reflected in her
babe and noticed that when sick, nervous or restless
herself, the same symptoms were observable in her
infant. Not only is this true of the babe who re-
ceives its sustenance from its mother’s breast, as
76
HYPNOTISM MADE PLAIN.


some have supposed, but it is also noticeable in the
babe not so sustained. All mothers should cultivate
within themselves an even happy temper and a
peaceful frame of mind, it they would have their
child the same.
The child also at a very early age displays an
adaptiveness, which is one of the peculiar charac-
teristics of the human family, and for the reason of
which may it be said that our lives are moulded by
circumstances and associations which form the so-
called destiny which shapes our ends.
The old adage, “Tell me what company you
keep, and I will tell you what you are,” has lost
none of its significance, and is especially true if ad-
dressed to a child.
The first few years of one’s life i(s a very impres-
sible stage, and the ability to reason inductively is
but being developed, and until this stage of devel-
opment is reached, are the mother, nurse and com-
panions responsible for the education of the child,
both mentally and morally. During this time a
child is in that receptive and subjective condition
closely allied to the state of a hypnotized subject,
where they take for granted as true everything that
is stated.
Do not misunderstand me by thinking that I
aver a hypnotized subject to be as irresponsible as
a child; not so. The adult has within him his auto-
suggestions the result of education and developed
subjectivity, which limits the power of hypnotic
F


suggestion, while the child’s intuitive knowledge,
which is all the knowledge it has, is very limited.
One of the most noticeable traits displayed in
children, and one which should impress all parents
with the responsibility of child training is the won-
derful accuracy with which a child will imitate the
actions of its elders.
What father or mother has not seen a perfect
caricature of their own actions by watching their
children at play with hobby horse and doll or the
cat and dog. It is during babyhood that a child is
taught kindness or cruelty to animals, by the sug-
gestions placed by his elders. It is not necessary
that such suggestions be spoken in order to be effec-
tive, as with the child an action is a suggestion much
more readily accepted, remembered and imitated
than any oral suggestion; and each kick or each
caress will be faithfully reproduced in direct accord-
ance with the suggestion.
I do not wish you to imagine that when I speak
of suggestion I mean the constant prating and nag-
ging away at a child, as to what it shall do, and
what it shall not do, and which to my mind gene-
rally “goes in at one ear and out at the other,” and
does more harm than good, because the penalties
attached in punishment as the result of the non-
observance of the “shalls and shants” are usually
not enforced, which thereby causes the child to dis-
trust you and your promises. By suggestion I
mean all the various forms as analyzed in another
78
HYPNOTISM MADE PLAIN.


chapter of this book; also that of silence, which is
often a stronger suggestion of forbearance than any
lecture would be., It is not always the suggestion
but the way in which it is placed which makes it
most effective.
I think that most people will agree with me, when
I say that there is no question in life of greater im-
portance than the training of children, because of
its far-reaching consequence, realizing as we do, that
“The boys of to-day will be the men of to-morrow,”
and upon them will rest the responsibility of this
nation and the generations which follow.
The lack of interest and total ignorance which
some mothers display and their apparent lack of
responsibility, is indeed truly alarming. Some
mothers show no apparent sympathy with the child,
or interest in the little things which go to make up
his life, and thereby lose hold of the greatest lever
in wielding an influence over her child. It seems
to me that sympathy is one of the essential elements
in child training, as any suggestion given from one
who is in sympathy with them in the little things of
life will be much more readily accepted than if given
in an unsympathetic manner, which if accepted at
all is done so only through fear.
The lack of sympathy in child life creates condi-
tions which stunt the true development, and blunt
the sensibilities. Let no one subject a child to this
stunting process by bringing it under such wither-
ing conditions. Remember that a child’s sorrows


and griefs are all absorbing; as the child does not
have recourse to reflection and the comfort which it
brings.
Some mothers seem to think their whole duty lies
in compelling obedience, even without condescend-
ing to reason or explain and make plain the cause
for such obedience, and for this purpose they
“Spare not the rod,” believing that a child’s ques-
tioning is but foolishness, and that “The rod of cor-
rection shall drive it far from him,” but instead of
driving out the desire to question such authority, it
ofttimes drives out all love and sympathy and places
between the parent and the child an insurmountable
barrier. Rather let the parents and teachers look
for assistance in the controlling as well as in the
education of children to suggestion, and study their
children in order to understand how to apply it to
each one with regard to the peculiarities of the
individual.
One of the best times to place an oral suggestion
upon a child is during a natural sleep; the subjec-
tive mind never sleeps, and, as in hypnotic sleep,
there is no possible resistance from the objective
senses, and will be much more effective than those
given in the waking hours.
Speak softly to the little sleeper, suggesting such
things as will be helpful in its trials of life, or the
restraining of some bad habit which may have been
formed.
Mary S. Fielding, in an article on the use of sug


gestion in child training, gives the following in-
stance, which I quote verbatim, as it is a good illus-
tration of the power of suggestion, and the recep-
tive ability of a sleeping child:
“I know of one child who was very despondent
over her inability to understand arithmetical pro-
blems. She had concluded that there was no use
trying, as she seemed to become more confused by
greater effort. I suggested to her, while she slept,
that there no reason why she should not grasp
the full meaning of the rules and apply them inH
telligently, and that the only thing in her way was
the auto-suggestion that she had no talent for num-
bers. I repeated this several nights, and had the
satisfaction of hearing the child say arithmetic was
not nearly so difficult as she supposed. In one
month she gained fifty per cent, in this particular
study.”
The fear of a storm or thunder and lightning,
which so many children display, is in almost all
cases the result of education, there being only an
occasional case of hereditary suggestion to that
effect.
If children were taught, and had pointed out to
them, the beauty of the rain-drop as it falls, the
majority of the clouds as they roll across the sky,
the transcending grandeur of the lightning as it il-
luminates the clouds, and is followed by the
thunder, which proclaims with such wonderful vol-
ume of sound the forces of nature which are at
81
MENTAL AND MORAL DEVELOPMENT.


work, purifying the atmosphere, and thereby better-
ing the conditions for life and happiness here for
us, there would be nothing to suggest fear watch-
ing the “Battle of the elements.”
Let every child be taught the causes, or that it is
the great force in nature which causes the wind,
lightning, thunder, fire, the dark, etc., and be im-
pressed with the fact that death is only transition,
that there are no such things as a devil, ghost,
witches and goblins.
Fear will always be one of the strongest elements
in human life; but it is an awful thing to inculcate
into the mind of the child a fear of, and a belief in
things supernatural. Many groundless fears can be
eradicated by teaching a child where, and in what
real danger lies.
It is eradicating these fears and establishing con-
fidence in a child who has been subject to these ad-
verse suggestions, that hypnotic suggestions will be
found invaluable.
The moral sense is not large in a child and de-
velops strength only by careful and constant culti-
vation. But every mother realizes how hard it is,
even with the most watchful care, to overcome the
adverse suggestions of playmates, and especially is
this true if the child is in a public school where its
schoolmates and associates are often very undesir-
able companions. It is during this stage of the
child’s life that suggestion is so efficient, not only
as a means to assist the understanding of difficult
82
HYPNOTISM MADE PLAIN.


lessons, but in forming the character, and breaking
up of habits so unexpectedly and rapidly formed.
Take, for instance, the habit of lying, which child-
ren fall into so readily, also the use of bad language
and so many other things which the watchful mother
notices, and at once recognizes the necessity of im-
mediate correction.
A child will, during this early and impressible age,
accept the suggestions given during the natural sleep
and their habits will gradually yield to the sugges-
tions, but, if after several such treatments, there is
no noticeable difference, it will be better to induce
the hypnotic sleep and place your suggestions then,
as the hypnotic suggestion will attain the result
which education has failed to accomplish, for the
reason that it is more powerful, and acts more
quickly. “Hypnotic suggestion and education are
one and the same thing.” “Education is suggestion;
hypnotic suggestion is suggestions intensified.”
The hypnotic state can be induced in children
who are over seven or eight years of age, usually, or
as soon as they can understand how to follow out
the instructions for its induction; and its employ-
ment will be found more satisfactory in the forming
of character, as the intensified suggestions act more
quickly in determining the will in any certain direc-
tion.
I hope my readers will pardon this little talk on
character building, or child life, as an apparent di-
gression from the subject matter; but I consider it
83
MENTAL AND MOEAL DEVELOPMENT.


one of the greatest fields for the use of suggestion,
and all will agree with me in saying that there is
nothing more worthy of our time and careful study
than the proper cultivation of the child life, in order
for it to attain its greatest usefulness in the future.
“Train up a child in the way he should go, and when
he is old he will not depart from it,” are not idle
or meaningless words, and many people of this lat-
ter age have recognized the wisdom Solomon dis-
played in this statement, showing he recognized the
power of suggestion and a necessity of its being pro-
perly applied in the training of children.
We have not a virtuous world now; we never will
have until every father and mother understands the
power of suggestion, and how r to apply it in the
training of their children, who are to be the progeni-
tors of the future generations.
84
HYPNOTISM MADE PLAIN.


CHAPTER VII.
Suggestive Therapeutics.
Hypnotism has a Bad Name—The Responsibility of our
Secular Press—The Value of Hypnotic Suggestion to
the Medical Profession—Its Place as a Therapeutic
Agent—Hereditary Diseases —Contageous Diseases—
The Various Schools of Medicine —The Effect of
Imagination—The Death of a Soldier —The Death of a
Condemned Criminal —The Raising of a Blister by
Suggestion—The Cures Performed at the Holy Shrines
—Faith Cure—Mind Cure—Christian Science—Spiritist
Healers—The Various Diseases to which Suggestion
is Applicable—The Value of Sleep.
A good many objections have been urged against
hypnotic suggestion, and its use as a therapeutic
agent.
A careful investigation, however, will prove to
any unprejudiced person that these objections have
been advanced by persons entirely ignorant of the
science, and would not even investigate, as one who
makes any pretence of being a scientist should, but
simply dismissed the subject by saying, hypnotism
has a “bad name,” and that they know enough about
it to not want to have anything to do with it, etc.
To our secular press perhaps is due the greatest
responsibility for the prevalence of this view of the
subject, for the reason that they, in their eagerness
to give to the public the latest sensations, have
grasped each senseless remark and absurd utterance


upon the subject, and, combining it with some sen-
sational report, have without regard to facts and
scientific proofs, hashed it up and given it with all
its false ideas and superstitions to the reading pub-
lic who are not able, as a rule, or have not the op-
portunity of a personal investigation, which would
enable them to discriminate between the false and
the true, the real and the imaginary.
It is strange, but history proves it true, that every
step of advancement in the field of any science has
been confronted by the most stern and bitter oppo-
sition. But time, which is the great sieve in which
is sifted the accumulated thoug'hts of men, removing
the debris, and bringing to light the hidden truths
before which, in their sparkling and unimpeachable
purity, the din of contention is hushed, the clouds
are lifted, and in the light of knowledge the ignor-
ant and stupid crowd stand appalled, and cease their
cowardly attacks, inwardly admiring the new star
which has been so victoriously ushered in upon the
scene, and which shines forth with such splendour
from the galaxy of the scientific heavens.
The value of hypnotism or hypnotic suggestions
to the medical profession is very great, and is per-
haps the most promising of any of the curative
agents among the many grand and startling truths
which have been unearthed in the last decade; as in
its realm are many unexplored fields full of grand
possibilities for the relief of suffering humanity.
The progressive scientific physician cannot afford


to disregard any means which will alleviate suffer-
ing, and he cannot but recognize the fact, after even
a slight investigation, that hypnotism, divested of
all of the sensational rubbish which has attached
itself to it, and so hampered it in its progress, be-
fore the scientific world, is exceedingly useful, and
will accord to it the recognition which it deserves.
“We believe that the day has come when hyp-
notism should take its place with electricity, mas-
sage, drugs and the like, as a therapeutic agent.”
(Halphide.)
When we remember that the instrument used in
the production of hypnotism is the mind, we must
admit that it is no mean power, recognizing as we
must the mighty influence which the mind exercises
over the body, and to what a great degree it is res-
ponsible for the many ills of the flesh.
Some have tried to undervalue suggestion as a
therapeutic agent by claiming that, although it
might alleviate the suffering for the time, it could
not remove the cause, and thus insure a permanent
benefit. It is, however, a recognized fact that the
mind dwelling upon any ill will greatly magnify it,
and any patient who is allowed to discuss and ana-
lyze each symptom, and who is obliged to listen to
some friend calmly predicting some terrible results,
and perhaps fatal determination of either of their
conditions, will develop with startling rapidity symp-
toms indicative of the truth of the prophesy. Every
nurse recognizes the necessity of guarding against
87
SUGGESTIVE THERAPEUTICS.


any associations or suggestions adverse to recovery.
The readiness with which such suggestions are
received and acted upon compels us to recognize
how powerful must be the hypnotic suggestions
placed while the mind is in that peculiar but most
receptive condition, and which are the more readily
adopted because when placed as a physical benefit
they are instantly enforced and assisted by the auto-
or natural desire for health and physi-
cal preservation,
„ an eminent psychologist, says:
Pain makes the patient think of his trouble, and
thinking of it he exaggerates it.” “Hypnotism,
w ich distracts his attention, acts in a contrary way
upon the pain, it diminishes it by making us think
no more of it.”
We do not claim that merely the removal of the
pain will cure a disease, of which pain is but a symp-
tom, but it renders a cure much more probable by
securing a restful, hopeful condition of the patient,
and while the mind is in the unresisting, or unrea-
soning state which characterizes the hypnotic con-
dition, it may readily be controlled by powerful sug-
gestions, stimulating the enfeebled functions to
more perfect and natural action.
Many people are dominated by fears or ideas of
certain things which are expected, and, as a result,
do really often happen wholly because of the idea
being constantly before the mind, and the result so
vividly portrayed in the imagination for such a


length of time as to act upon the organs sufficiently
to produce a reality.
The idea of consumption being a hereditary dis-
ease, and that because the parents die of it, the chile
must also, has much to do with the fact that so many
actually do. The same is true also of cancers, in-
sanity, etc. The idea constantly dwelt upon pro-
duces the reality more frequently than any actual
disorder of the system which the child inherits.
Few children die of consumption, and this would
certainly not be true if they were born with the
germs of consumption already implanted in their
system. But the idea so frequently impressed upon
a man from his childhood up by the repeated sug-
gestions of friends to the effect that his parents died
of consumption, and he cannot hope to escape it,
that one can tell by his looks he is likely to have
consumption, etc., tend to work upon his imagina-
tion, and to keep him in that expectant mood where
with each slight cold, or cough, every symptom is
analyzed and dwelt upon, until, in many cases, the
idea becomes a reality.
Why is it so few persons take typhoid fever after
visiting some one who has it, while only a few
years ago almost every one who stepped inside of
the room where some one was suffering from that
disease took it in some more or less fatal form? Be-
cause it is any less malignant in late years, or that
physicians better understand how to successfully
treat it? Not entirely; but having been taught that


pro'lched° t w , it e h Ce ] Sary f a disease, it is ap
proached with less fear, and consequently the di
ase is less frequently contracted.
sionV tha/ h he re ,- moVal ° f these ideas and impres
sifyinu as it y do° tlC tt, SUggeSti ° n is effectua1 ’ inte "
} gas it does, the receptivity of the mind fo
e suggestions, which, when intelligently placed
directs the mind to opposite and higher ideijs J
owmg nature to build up defective organs ani to
*° “t 111I 11 " 31 State of Perfection,
tt is because of this powerful effect nf •
upon the body that alfphysi cLf seek the 00^
i 0 , lr P atl ents, and insist that they be kept
hopeful state of mind, recognizing as a*
tt e coTd SSibility H° f S6CUring ideal ™«lts without
we consider'th C °,; operat ‘ 0n of the Patient. When
medkhie and n o gS ° f the Vari ° US schools of
could ll T^ZnV
war, but vividly inurateTthir' 11 " * ,a “
a Z t‘ pST Mof
and expecting at any —! the oth"


hardy, jolly and careless. The roar of battle was all
around them. Just as a shell burst over them, the
thoughtless fellow pricked his comrade with his
bayonet without him seeing the action, simply as a
joke to frighten him, and during the excitement for-
got him further until after the battle was over, when
he was found to be actually dead, but without a
wound of any kind, excepting the slight prick from
his friend’s bayonet. The burst of the shell, accom-
panied by the sharp prick'from the bayonet, sug-
gesting to both the sense of hearing and the sense
of feeling simultaneously, and enforced by the auto-
suggestion to the effect that he was going to be
shot, were sufficiently strong to produce dissolu-
tion.
The condemned criminal who was told he was to
be slowly bled to death, and who, although but mer-
ely scratched, but while blind-folded, felt the warm
water which was made to trickle over the scratch
and drop in a basin, actually died with all the symp-
toms of weakness from loss of blood, although in
reality not three drops of blood had escaped. But
the use of the auto-suggestion and suggestions im-
pressed upon both the sense of hearing and feeling
produced the same results as though the expected
had actually been performed.
It is an established fact that a blister can be raised
upon a hypnotized subject by merely applying a
postage stamp and suggesting that it is a fly
blister.


It is also well known that the symptoms of almost
any disease can be produced in a hypnotized sub-
ject by suggestion. The subject can be made to
suffer the most excruciating pain in any or what-
ever part of the body suggested by the operator.
The temperature may be lowered or raised to an
abnormal degree. Rapid or slow pulsation can be
induced. Partial or complete paralysis can be pro-
duced, and in many instances hemorrhage from the
nostrils or throat have been effected.
If all this can be produced through the imagina-
tion, by concentration of the mind upon the sug-
gested result, showing that it is the mind which
controls each physical manifestation, cannot sug-
gestion, properly applied, reverse the action and con-
sequent results, making it redound to the benefit of
the body, and by keeping constantly before the mind
the ideal of health and perfection, bring it into more
perfect harmony, and thereby establish a permanent
healthy condition?
The normal condition of the organism of man ts
a condition of freedom from pain, and all the forces
of nature unite to assist in maintaining this free-
dom. And as the natural course of each of nature’s
forces is along the line of the least resistance, it but
follows that disease can be much more easily cured
than created, if we but understand the law which
governs the forces within us, and how to direct
them to the fulfilment of their natural duties.
It is for the purpose of directing the mind to an


attitued of harmony and the correcting of false
ideals, thereby establishing the normal healthy con-
dition, that suggestion has been found so beneficial;
also as a relief from suffering, causing it to be re-
cognized by the medical fraternity at the present
time, and why? Because its results are something
new? No! but because it is but recently that it has
been classified and placed upon a scientific basis.
We have had for many years, aye, ever since the
time of Christ, many who have used this great law
of suggestion and faith for the alleviation of suffer-
ing, but who, not having understood the law which
governs it, could give no explanation of their work,
or bring others to an understanding of that which
caused their cures.
In late years many have been the “healers” who
have sprung up all over our land, and various the
titles they have assumed, each choosing one which
was to his mind indicative of his peculiar mode of
treatment, and each meeting with more or less suc-
cess.
There is no fact in history or science more clearly
authenticated than the cures which have been per-
formed through Christian faith and prayer, and
which are exemplified in the wonderful cures per-
formed at the holy shrines. It is faith in the heal-
ing power of the water of the famous grotto- at
Lourdes which causes the thousands to flock there
annually, and thousands are the cures which have
been effected there.
G
93
SUGGESTIVE THERAPEUTICS.


Many cures have been effected by prayer alone in
th ls country without a pilgrimage to the holy
shrines, and are known as faith cures, or divine in-
terposition, and which gives to the person who
directs the supplications and proclaims their effic-
iency the title of Divine Healer.
I he advocates of mind cure have also made them-
selves known in this country, basing their method
of healing upon the supposition that all disorder or
abnormal condition of the body is due to an abnor-
mal condition of the mind, and that by and through
a direct action of the mind of the healer upon the
t? 6 Patl6nt a CUre could be Performed,
ihe Christian Science doctrine is founded upon
he assumption of the unreality of matter, they
teaching that as our bodies are not real, there can
be no disease, and that mind is the only thing which
does really exist. That mind, being the real min
and a part of God, is necessarily perfect. That all
pain is but the result of a lack of harmony, the on-
sequence of a neglect of the reiteration *f p er fec-
HealerS claim their cures are per-
formed by the intervention of some disembodied P or
departed spirit, and that, although they sometimes
work dmectly upon the patient, they generahy oTe
rate through a medium. 7 P
Each of these schools are divided into sects, each
employmg modified processes of applying the force
Wh.ch they command. The only thing fommonT


them ail is that they each cure disease, and to each
perhaps should be given the credit of having grasped
a part of the truth; and the most obvious conclu-
sion is that there must be some underlying principle
which is common to them all. But to such great
men as M. Leibault and Bernheimer, who first ap-
plied hypnosis in their hospital treatments, and who,
recognizing the great and important part which sug-
gestion played, and the powerful effect of the mind
upon the body at all times, have sought to estab-
lish a systematic method of treating the mind as the
surest and quickest means of eradicating the disease
itself, and to them we must feel indebted for the
great benefit which humanity derives from the ap-
plication of their theory.
Suggestive therapeutics has a wide field, and there
is perhaps no curative agent which approaches it in
the scope of its application in the treatment of dis-
ease, for “Either alone or in conjunction with other
agents there is hardly a department in the sphere
of medicine where it is not of great service.” (Halp-
hide.) I do not claim that hypnotism is a panacea
for all disease which man is heir to, or do I decry the
use of medicine, as I believe that drugs, intelligently
given, are at times as essential as the food which
sustains our body.
Many of the medicines are actually food for the
certain organs for which they are intended, and sug-
gestion with all of its attending benefits can not for
any considerable time take the place of pure water


fnd healthy food for the active laborer, neither can
it at all times and alone, bring back as rapidly the
worn-out organs, to their natural state of perfection
as when assisted by the proper drugs. Still much of
the medicines administered are like the spittle-
annomted clay, with which Christ the “Great
Healer” annointed the eyes of the blind man; onlv
the means of conducting the current of faith, which
suggests the cure.
Ihe specific diseases which have been cured by
suggestion are too numerous to mention; but among
tnem may be noted, rheumatism, neuralgia, scia-
tica, dyspepsia, constipation, nausea, insomnia,
epilepsy, spasms, paralysis, monomania, hysteria,
M \itas dance, hiccoughing, and all ailments of
which an abnormal condition of the nervous sys-
tem is responsible. J
In the wide field for the application of hypnotic
suggestion as a most sure and rapid cure, may also
be mentioned the habits of alcoholism, morphine
cocame, tobacco, stammering, lying, kleptomania,’
laziness and many habits for the treatment of
wmch drugs have proven so ineffectual.
he application of hypnotic suggestion in the pro-
uc ion o anaesthesia for the performance of sur-
gical operations and dental work, is one of the
Xte S „ t t fiel 4° f H USefUlneSS n ° W fOT *
ployment We have a considerable number of
exc 0 ep y t n t e h’is o^e"- 1 £ro ” tad


It is for this reason that all who have a know-
ledge of suggestion, so cheerfully recommend its
use, knowing there can be no possible discomfort
of dangerous after effects from its employment.
All physicians recognize the value of sleep, but
also recognize the too frequent evil results of the
drugs necessarily used for its induction with many
patients, as restlessness and insomnia are accom-
paniments common to many ailments, and which
rob the patient of the much-needed rest and recupe-
ration. Sleep has for its object the repair of tffe
wear and tear of the vital processes of life, and to
insure sleep we should not interfere with these pro-
cesses, which we do when drugs are given until
sedateness results.
Hypnosis leaves only a quieted soothing effect,
and by inducing this tranquility of body and mind
the patient readily passes into a natural sleep.
Natural sleep can also be induced at any set time
by post hypnotic suggestions, and the regular re-
turns of these periods of suggested sleep, soon be-
come a fixed habit or normal condition; and mater-
ially assist nature in keeping its life machinery in
perfect order.


CHAPTER VIII.
Suggestive Therapeutics (Continued).
Some personal Experiences—Cure of a Cripple—Cure of
Stammering—Res to rmg Sight to the Blind—Enabling
the Deaf to Hear—Deaf and Dumb Woman Cured-
ihe Use ot Suggestive Anaesthesia in Dentistry—
i5°mie Instance ® —Anaesthesia for Surgical Operations
T , be Amputation of a Limb during Hypnotic Sleep—
ihe induction of Anaesthesia by Auto-Suggestion
—Soldiers and Martyrs as Examples—A Personal
Experience—Subjective Faith.
Some perhaps will think that I claim too much for
hypnotism. I do not think I do.
There are of course instances where suggestive ther-
apeutics fail to accomplish the end for which it was
intended, as do all remedies, but it often succeeds
where other agents have failed. I have seen it accom-
plish marvels, not miracles as some say, as its work-
ings are wholly within the bound of natural law, as I
have endeavoured to show.
I shall herewith add a few experiences of my own.
which I hope will give to others a glimpse of the great
possibilities to be attained through its application,
and inspire them to a further investigation of this won-
derful power inherent in man.
First: I met while in Eldora, Iowa, a boy nineteen
years of age, who had for eighteen months been a
great sufferer from rheumatism. So long and so
great had been his suffering, and as a consequence of


which the muscles of one limb had become contracted
to such a degree that it was impossible for him to
place his foot to the floor, and in order to move around
was obliged to use crutches. For six months he had
been in this condition, given up by the physicians
who had previously tried almost every known remedy
for his relief.
At the first treatment I put him into a deep
somnambulistic state and by suggestion and slight
massage, straightened his limb and had him walk
before bringing him back to consciousness. Then
after placing some suggestions strongly upon him to
the effect that when I awoke him, he could walk as
well as ever he did ; I brought him once more to a
normal condition, after which he could walk very
readily, one treatment being sufficient to restore the
limb to its former normal condition and to relieve him
of all suffering.*
Second: A young lady sixteen years of age, living
in Ripon, Wisconsin, who had always while talking
stammered in such a manner as to make it almost
impossible to understand what she said, came to me
for treatment. I could only induce a slight mesmeric
state at the first treatment, but during which, by sug-
gestion, enabled her to read an entire sentence without
hesitation. The second treatment I was able to induce
a slightly deeper state, after which the improvement
was noticeable. Each treatment thereafter I was able
♦President Miles of the industrial school at Eldora,
lowa, will testify to the truth of this.
99
SUGGESTIVE THERAPEUTICS.


to induce the hypnotic state, during which I placed the
suggestions. At the end of one week, during which
time I had given her suggestive treatment daily, she
could talk quite plainly and a few days later was en-
tirely cured.
Third : This is also a case of stammering, with a
boy about nine years of age. With him there was
not only an inability to speak plainly, but also a lack
of control of the lower maxillary, as while making the
effort to talk the jaw would twitch and jerk in a very
distressing manner. This case was entirely cured by
suggestion, the patient going into the somnambulistic
state at each treatment.
Fourth; A young mulatto woman was brought
to me in Lowell, Mass. She had been entirely blind
since childhood. I hypnotized her several times, plac-
ing suggestions each time to the effect that she would
be able to see me. After some two or three attempts
she was able to discern light, then after the next treat-
men she could see objects, and finally at the end of
a week’s treatment her sight was fully restored.
Fifth: During a gala day in Hawick, Scotland (the
place of my nativity), there was among the vast crowd
assembled there a man selling a medicine which he
claimed would cure deafness. Some used the medi-
cine there and professed to be cured by it. I, in my
youthful egotism, desiring a little notoriety, asked
permission to come upon his platform and show him
I could cure deafness without the use of medicine. I
was confident that I could do so, as I had done many
wonderful things by the use of hypnosis.


After I went upon the platform an old man who
was very deaf came from the crowd to see if he could
be cured, and who I enabled to hear, not only the
ticking - of a watch, but any words spoken to him in
a whisper, after having placed suggestions to that
effect during hypnosis. # ,
I knew nothing of this man’s history, what caused
his deafness, or how long he had been deaf. He was
merely one of the crowd, and who came deaf and
went away hearing. . ,
Sixth; A lady of Gallashield, Scotland, was
brought to me in Hawick, having been informed of
the cure just narrated, who had for years been unab e
to either hear or speak, as a result of a severe illness
in childhood. _
This woman was made to believe that I could put
her to sleep, and that while asleep she would be able
to hear. After having established confidence in the
result, and while she was filled with expectancy, I, by
signs and suggestions, applied to each of the senses
she still retained, was able to induce the hypnotic
state, during which she was made to both hear and
talk. ’ I kept her in this state for some time, then after
receiving her promises that she would always talk and
hear the same as she was then doing, woke her up
with the suggestions that she would always be able
to talk and hear, impressed strongly upon her.
The experiment was a grand success, much to the
delight of the lady’s friends and almost to the surprise
of myself, as these two instances last recorded were
accomplished when I was very young and first began
101
SUGGESTIVE THERAPEUTICS.


,° f hyp " otism > and really understood ver
little of the laws which governed it. I knew that th
patient must have faith in my ability, and for tha
“nr Vt “ ,e T m ° f a " manner ° f thi «ic
■ But as I now look back on those dav
I am compelled to admit that it was the receiving o
1” ' SUm of , mone y which I got for my work.fha
T e ™L7o7?r metban the fact that 1 had be ™
me means of relieving some unfortunate, for I was
still under the control of a guardian who was wise
enough not to give me all the money I winded to
dentist r d 3 b °° n the
anaesthesia can be secured Th ‘ m ° re contim,in g
natl - f _ T t secured - co-operation of the
pa lent can also be procured, they obeying the sug-
gested desires of the operator assuming and retaining
tZ P : v T« eSJred ’ ‘, hereby gi ™ g * • aX” S
tage o\er other anaesthetics.
anaLhtsbm 7 I h T by suggestion produced
aesthesia to such a degree that the patient would
have no knowledge of the tooth being extracted umd
cmtdh“ n they Were agai ” br ° Ught t 0 a nOT mal
performed nno 0118 °J * painful nature have been
state h 7 patlents whil e in the deep hypnotic
state, who knew nothing of what was being done-
while with others I have given the suggestion of con’
merely robbing them ° f *0
ense of pain. They were not robbed entirely of the


sense of feeling, but while sensible to touch and while
witnessing the operation and being entirely conscious
of what was being done, there was still no discomfort
or pain felt.
I will give in its entirety a letter which a dentist
had published after having done some work for a lady
which I had hypnotized, and which will itself explain
the nature of the test.
“Yesterday afternoon Miss Edith Holbert, of Wells,
Minn., came to my office and asked whether or not I
would fill her teeth while under hypnotic influence.
With pleasure I consented and made an appointment
for this forenoon,
“At the appointed time Professor McEwen and Miss
Holbert arrived. In the presence of half a dozen
spectators the professor immediately put Miss Holbert
asleep in an ordinary chair, then requested her to take
the operating chair, which she did without hesitation.
After being seated she was put into a more profound
sleep, and I was told to operate. The muscles were
perfectly relaxed, the patient opened her mouth by
request, and I began to operate with drill and chisel,
regardless of whether or not it hurt. But not a move
was made by the patient. On arriving at the third
cavity to be prepared, I decided to not only thoroughly
excavate it, but approach the pulp chamber, where
lies the extremely sensitive nerves of the teeth.
“Fearlessly I cut and lacerated these nerves, during
which time the patient remained as though in a pro-
found sleep. Not a flinch or a murmur was noticed.


The operation lasted nearly half an hour, after which
the patient was brought to a normal condition. She
said that she experienced no pain whatever. This cer-
tainly was a crucial test of hypnotic power. If the
skeptics could have witnessed this operation they
would be convinced that hypnotism is not a fake with
McEwen.
“W. W. EBERHART,
Dated Mankato, Minn., Nov. 14, 1896.
By the request of a physician, I hypnotized a young
lady m order to render painless the operation of re-
moymg the tonsils, and during the performance of
which she slept and heard sweet music as was sug-
gested, being wholly unconscious of the performance
°ff t f e fw e u atl °u 1 als ° placed suggestions to the
effect that her throat would heal without her experi-
encing any pain or soreness, which it did.
Some persons perhaps will say that is nothing such
operations as those could be performed without anv
anaesthetic if a person had any “nerve.” That these
are only minor operations I admit, but major ones
can and have been performed many times without the
0th ® r^ neans . of producing anaesthesia than
suggestion, and the patient be entirely unconscious of
the operation.
One case I especially remember was of a man who
was brought into the hospital at Providence, R. I.,
while I was there about five years ago. His rip-fit W
was so badly mangled as t0 J require *


above the knee. I first fascinated him, then by sug-
gestion induced the hypnotic state, during which the
operation was performed in a most complete manner.
I then, before restoring him to normal condition,
placed suggestions to the effect that when I awoke
him he would still feel no pain, also that his limb would
heal readily, and it did heal much more readily than
could have been reasonably expected otherwise.
I could go on reciting innumerable instances where
my knowledge of the law of suggestion and hypnosis
had enabled me to render invaluable asistance in re-
lieving others, but these few are sufficient to show how
broad is the field in which hypnotism may be used
for the relief of the unfortunate members of the
human family.
The question now naturally arises: If all this can
be produced by the aid of hypnotism, and hypnotism
is really the result of the natural ability of the subject
himself, the operator only assisting by suggestion, and
if auto-suggestion is more powerful than any external
suggstions, why cannot the person induce this state
himself? He can.
What then is the use of a hypotist? Just this.
We have each and all within ourselves this natural
gift, or power, whereby we can control our bodies by
our minds to a much greater degree, at least, than we
are accustomed to doing. But hypnotism and its pos-
sible benefits procured through suggestions applied by
another, thereby complying with our long established
idea that it was the power of another, and not a con


dition inherent in each one of us, is as much of the
truth as the average person of this age is capable of
grasping.
In later years when our self-knowledge permits it,
man will grasp the truth itself and will not need the
assistant of a hypnotist; but when for any reason he
is in pain, he will be able to pass instantly into the
subjective state, with the voluntary auto-suggestion
that in five minutes he would awaken free from pain,
and it will disappear just as readily as though the sug-
gestions were placed by another.
The faith necessary for this is gradually acquired
through the exercise and knowledge of your own
power.
Thus the ability of enduring what would have other-
wise been a very painful operation without the con-
sciousness of pain, is an ability inherent in man, and
is but awaiting his knowledge of control. Many evi-
dences of its existence are brought forth in our every-
day life; when through any intense excitement the
whole being is completely concentrated upon one idea,
shutting out for the time being any other suggestions
of the mind, and making any impressions upon the
consciousness impossible.
Who does know of some person, who, in order
to rescue some child or friend, perhaps, from being
consumed by fire, have themselves been severely
burned but wer e< utterly unconscious of it, or any at-
tending pain until all was over, and the dominating
suggestion removed? Then consciousness looks forth


from its late bondage and discovers the wounds of its
encasement.
History records that many martyrs sang joyful
songs while being consumed by scorching flames.
They with their whole attention fixed upon heaven
and eternity; their whole being concentrated upon
their expected deliverance from their earthly bodies,
felt not the pain attending their dissolution. They are
wonderful examples of the power of suggestion to
produce anaesthesia.
Many instances are also recorded of soldiers who,
during the heat of battle, when the whole soul was
thrilled with the awful suspense and anxiety, have
been wounded, perhaps, in the most sensitive parts of
the body, and yet recognizing no pain, go on until all
is over, the crisis is passed and consciousness returns,
perhaps only to succumb to the agonies of suffering.
We have also many legends handed down from the
dim and misty past telling us of the operations of this
mysterious psychic law.
Man is composed of the same matter, his mechanism
is the same, and his attributes we have every reason
to believe, are identical with the patriarchs of old, and
we are capable of the same understanding of nature
if we but investigate for the truth, and then use it
when we find it.
These instances of physical anaesthesia recorded in
literature but show us of to-day the natural endow-
ment of man, providing that the anaesthesia produced
to-day by hypnotic suggestion is only the result of


natural law which has been more or less clearly under-
stood for ages.
It is not necessary for everyone to be under great
excitement, or even to have the assistance of sug-
gestions from another in order to produce anaesthesia,
but, as I said before, a man will touch the truth itself
and be able to apply it without the assistance of an-
other. Many do so even now. Every surgeon of any
note has witnessed cases where he has been astonished
at the ability of the patient to endure very painful
operations without evidencing any suffering.
I hope my readers will pardon the recounting of
a little personal experience illustrative of the possi-
bility of each one to control his physical senses through
a knowledge of the efficiency of auto-suggestion.
I several years ago met with a very severe accident,
when I had not only part of two fingers of my right
hand cut off, and a very severe gash in my scalp, but
also had my left arm broken just below the elbow,
and in such a manner as to cause the bones to pro-
trude through the flesh. This was certainly enough
to test my theory of the power of auto-suggestion to
conti ol the physical senses. Knowing my own power,
I would not allow the physicians to administer any
anaesthetics, but instead by auto-suggestion produced
anaethesia and had all my wounds properly dressed.
The bones were set, the finger ends trimmed up and
stitched (and which, not done to suit me once, I had
done a second time),, eight stitches put in the scalp
wound, and all was accomplished without me being


sensible to any pain but once; then, owing to some
adverse suggestions placed by the spectators, who
while expressing their sympathy, were unconsciously
doing me harm by bringing me to a consciousness of
pain, but which I instantly stopped by auto-suggestion
after having procured the harmonious silence neces-
sary for perfect concentration.
I can also put myself to sleep at any hour of the
day for any length of time, waking up on the second
decided upon, free from headache or nervousness, or
whatever discomfort for the relief of which I had
entered into the subjective state.
I have of course only acquired the ability to do this
after years of study and practice, and the full faith
with which I enter into the subjective state is due to
the knowledge of my own ability. I wish, however,
to impress upon my readers one thing, i. e., that ob-
jective faith is not essential to the relief of suffering.
It is a subjective faith which is required and which
can easily be procured in the hypnotic subject in direct
opposition to the objective attitude of the patient, be-
cause of the lack of ability to reason inductively while
in that state. Then as the suggestions take effect and
one is compelled to acknowledge objectively, the
benefits derived, the objective faith is born, and it
greatly facilitates the acceptance of the suggestions
and the performance of the object, by no longer set-
ting up any voluntary auto-suggestions against them.
I wish that every one might realize how much
greater is the mind than matter. In every man there
H


ex J! ts thls £ reat force - or spiritual power, which when
sufficiently cultured and developed will shine forth
and enable the real ego to reign, and master disease
and Sin as did Jesus and his disciples.
It is for the development of this spiritual part of
man that hypnotism is proving itself to be of so much
value.
The discovery of modern hypnotism will prove one
of the grandest monuments to our present age and
civilization, demonstrating, as it does, the power of
mind and soul over all the minor laws of this vast
creation.


CAPTER IX.
The Physical Manifestations of Christ.
The Miracles of Jesus Christ —Faith a Requisite Condition
—His Right to be called the Saviour of Men Proven—
His Operations Within the Domain of Natural Law—
The Efficiency of Faith Recognised—Some Illustra-
tions—The Personal Character of Christ—Raising the
Dead—Natural Law and the Power of Suggestion Ob-
served —Christ’s Recognition of Matter—The Same
Conditions Necessary to the Success of the Healers
of To-day—The Reality of the Personality of Jesus
Christ—His Spiritual Philosophy—The Evidences of
Its Truth.
The conditions requisite to the successful healer of
to-day are those which Christ considered necessary
and indispensable in the exercise of His power to heal
the sick when He was upon this earth.
Oh! but some will say, “Christ performed miracles,”
but did he? I say No! Now I do not want to antag-
onize any one’s creed, or am I as some might think,
endeavouring to bring Jesus Christ down to the com-
mon level of mankind and rob him of his glory by
trying to show that he considered the same con-
ditions necessary to success which our mental healers
of to-day require; but rather does it add to his glory
to prove that he really understood intuitively to such
perfection the laws which govern this vast creation
and our being, so many ages in advance of his fellow-
men.
That condition which Christ taught to His disciples


as essential to success, not only in the patient, but
also in the healer, is embraced in one word “faith.”
There is no other word which so fully embraces
the whole law of power in this world, and salvation
m the world to come. Without faith we would have
no heaven, no inspiration to a better life, or an in-
centive for the exercise of the powers within us in this
world.
Christ came to this world not to establish new laws,
or to build up superstition, but he illustrated by his
life and example his knowledge of the already existing
aws of nature, and utilized them in the performance
of the so-called miracles; but he never worked outside
of their domain.
„ It is this infinite knowledge of God’s laws which
Christ possessed, and his ability to exemplify them
more than eighteen hundred years before his fellow-
men perceived, through the process of inductive rea-
soning, the first glimpse of the grand eternal truths,
and stupendous powers concealed within the natural
laws of our universe and being, which proves his
divinity and establishes his right to be called the
Saviour” of men.
He taught his disciples how to employ these forces
to both the physical and spiritual welfare of their
fellowmen. Not only that, but he stated the condi-
tions of success, and left the promise to the world that
whosoever complied with those conditions should do
even greater works than he did. He did not then
teach or explain all of the underlying principles of the


conditions involved in his physical manifestations, for
the reason, as he told his disciples just before his
crucifixion, “Ye cannot bear them now, 5 ’ but he imme-
diately offered the consolation, “Howbeit when he, the
spirit of truth shall come, he will guide you into all
truth.”*
This spirit of truth has ever since been seeking to
manifest itself to the world, but it remained for this
age with the knowledge accumulated through the
centuries of education acquired through the process
of inductive reasoning to grasp the evidence of this
eternal truth.
The exclamation, “Except ye see signs and wonders,
ye will not believe,” which he addressed to the noble-
man of Capernaum who besought him to heal his son
who was sick, fully illustrates his realization of the
impossibility of the people of that age to grasp the
truth itself. But with his infinite knowledge he could
foresee the time approaching when man would seek
for an explanation of all of these manifestations, and
demand some logical proof of their possibility.
Because Christ did work entirely within the domain
of natural law, is no evidence that he did not have
the ability to perform miracles, but that he did so was
startling evidence of his wisdom.
Christ foresaw this present age of materialism and
skepticism, which is but the natural result of man’s
intellectual development, and knew that the ability of
man to prove by scientific investigation the possibility
*(John xvi:i3.)
113
PHYSICAL MANIFESTATIONS OF CHKIST.


of the performance and truth of the physical demon-
strations of his power, would but confirm the essential
truth of his spiritual teachings. He also knew that
by a knowledge of the truth of his teachings of the
physical laws and their application, as is testified to
in the records of his work by his disciples and now
proven by the discoveries of modern science, men
would be enabled to grasp by faith his promises of
eternal life, and accept the truth of his spiritual doc-
trine, thereby accomplishing his mission upon earth.
It is, however, the physical manifestations of his
knowledge and power which we wish to consider in
support of the statement previously made, i. e., that
although Christ was the first to proclaim the condi-
tion and demonstrate the possibilities of mental heal-
ing, that he employed the same means and observed
the same conditions as do the mental healers of to-day.
The difference being in degree, rather than a differ-
ence in the principles involved.
We all know that the successful healer of to-day,
whether he be called a Faith healer, Christian Scientist
or Magnetic or Mental healer, is the one who has
implicit faith in his own ability or power to heal.
That Christ taught his disciples that this' was neces-
cary to them for success is plainly shown by his re-
buke to them when the father of the lunatic, while
beseeching Christ to have mercy upon his son, said:
“And I brought him to thy disciples and they could
not cure him.”*
*(Matt. xvii:i6.)


After Christ had rebuked the devil and cast him
out, and “the child was cured,” the disciples ques-
tioned Jesus privately: “Why could we not cast him
out?” And Jesus said unto them “Because of your
unbelief.”*
He did not say that it was because they did not
possess so great a power as he did, or that they lacked
the knowledge; but he reproved them for the lack of
faith and consequent failure.
That Christ employed the same principles himself
cannot be denied, for knowing his own power, he had
that faith, or knowledge, which surpasses faith, that
whatever he undertook would be accomplished.
His disciples later acquired' a greater faith as the
result of the exercise of their power.
That Jesus required faith in those he healed, and
that he did not pretend to be able to heal independent
of that condition, is evidenced in the records of his
works, and plainly expressed in almost every instance.
That he also recognised the power of suggestion
and a harmonious environment as essential to the suc-
cessful operation of his psychic powers, is clearly
shown in the conditions he observed in his demonstra-
tions.
A striking illustration of his consideration of faith
as a necessary element is shown in the account of him
restoring the sight of the blind Bart’meus, who, as he
sat begging by the wayside, called upon Jesus saying,
*(Matt. xvii:2o.)
115
PHYSICAL MANIFESTATIONS OP CHRIST.


“Thou son of David, have mercy upon me/’ and who
when asked what he would have him do, said, “Lord
that I might receive my sight.” And Jesus said unto
him, “Go thy way, thy faith hath made thee whole.”*
Another illustration of the potency of faith is re-
corded in the eighth chapter of Luke, where the
woman who was afflicted with the issue of blood, and
who, although she “had spent all her living upon
physicians, neither could be healed of any,” was
immediately cured by touching the hem of his gar-
ment. When Christ found it out did he tell her it was
because there was any virtue in the touch of his gar-
ment, or that her cure was the result of any power of
his? No! But he did say, when he saw her trembling
with confusion because of being brought into the
presence of so great a person and attracting the at-
tention of the multitude, “Daughter, be of good com-
fort; thy faith hath made thee whole; go in peace.”
It is only a parallel case with that recorded by
Matthew in the ninth chapter, where Christ restored
the sight of the two blind men who followed him,
crying, “Thou Son of David, have mercy upon usd’
“And when he had come into the house, the blind
men came to him and Jesus saith unto them, ‘Believe
ye that I am able to do this?’ They said unto him,
‘Yea, Lord.’ ”
“Then touched he their eyes, saying, ‘According
to thy faith be it unto you.’ And their eyes were
*(Mark x:52.)
116
HYPNOTISM MADE PLAIN.


opened; and he charged them, saying, ‘See that no
man know it.’ ’’
The instance of the cleansing of the leper, and
Christ’s avowal to him afterwards, when the man was
giving him thanks for what he had done for him:
“Thy faith hath made thee whole,”* is but another
striking example of his recognition of the efficiency
of faith.
There is no character spoken of in history whose
whole life so plainly indicated a realization of indi-
vidual responsibility as that of Jesus Christ. Each
act, each word, may be considered as containing an
intended lesson. They were not meaningless or insig-
nificant remarks which composed his conversation.
With this knowledge of his character it does not
seem probable that when he questioned those blind men
as to their faith, or when saying to the woman who
had been cured, after only touching the hem of his
garment, as he also did to the leper, “Thy faith hath
made thee whole,’’ that he was merely uttering idle
words, or that if it had not been an factor
in the operation of their healing, that he with his
natural gravity and seriousness in all things, would
have questioned them in regard to it, or remarked
upon it as he did, indicating it as the cause of their
cure.
I admit that it is true that all of the cures recorded
are not so plainly accorded to the operation of the law
*(Luke xviiilQ.)


of faith as these just referred to, but that is no clear
proof that faith was not the means employed.
Take as another example the instance recorded by
Matthew, xx: 30-34, “And behold two blind men
sitting by the wayside, when they heard that Jesus
passed by, cried out, saying, ‘Have mercy on us, O
Lord, thou Son of Uavid.’
“And the multitude rebuked them because they
should hold their peace; but they cried the more,
saying, ‘Have mercy on us, O Lord, thou Son of
David.’ ”
And Jesus stood still and called them, and said,
‘ What will ye that I shall do unto you?’
They said unto him, ‘Lord, that our eyes might be
opened.’ So Jesus had compassion on them, and
touched their eyes, and immediately their eyes received
sight, and they followed him.”
Does not the fact that they called unto Jesus as he
passed by indirectly proclaim their faith ? So strong
v. as tneir confidence in him, and so fearful were they
that Jesus would not hear them and would pass them
by, tnat when toe multitude rebuked them and tried
to silence their cries, they cried the more, “Have
mercy on us, O Lord, thou Son of David,” plainly
testifying to their faith that if Jesus would he could
restore their sight.
Not only is it evidenced that faith was a means em-
ployed when he performed the many cures and mighty
works, but when he could not perform them, as he at


times could not do, as is shown when he visited his
own country, it was always because of a lack of the
proper conditions.
“And he did not many mighty works there, because
of their unbelief.”*
Jesus himself declared that,, “A prophet is not with-
out honor, save in his own country, and in his own
house.” But, some may say, look at the miracles of
raising the dead, there could be no laith exhibited
there. It is true there could be no objective faitn,
and these instances are strong- evidence in support of
the proposition that Christ did really perform miracles,
unless the propositions set forth in the pieceding
chapters are fully accepted, namely:
First: That the subjective mind is the spirit or soul
of man.
Second: That communion between subjective minds,
independent of the objective senses, is possible.
Third; That the subjective mind has full control
of the body. _ .
Fourth; That it is not an objective, but subjective
faith which is necessary in the performance of these
cures.
Fifth; That the subjective mind is always amen-
able to control by suggestion, either of its own objec-
tive mind or that of another; also suggestions received
telepathically from another subjective mind.
That propositions embrace merely the operation of
xiii:s7 )


the law which Christ observed, and which is proven,
by a study of the instance recorded of the raising of
the daughter of Jairus from the dead.
That Jesus recognized not only the necessity of
faith, but also the importance of observing the great
law of suggestion, is clearly shown in a study of this
remarkable illustration of his power.
In the vast multitude which thronged about Jesus,
one of the rulers of the synagogue, whose little daugh-
ter was sick, came to him, pressing through the throng,
urged on by his faith in the ability of Jesus to heal,
and throwing himself down at Jesus’ feet, told him
that his child was at the point of death, and besought
his help, saying: "I pray thou come and lay thy hands
on her, that she may be healed, and she shall live.”*
But almost while he was still speaking he received
the news from his home that his daughter was dead,
and that it would be unnecessary to trouble the Master
further.
As soon as Jesus heard the word that was spoken,
he saith unto the ruler of the synagogue, “Be not
afraid; only believe.”
And he suffered no man to follow him save Peter
and James, and John the brother of James.”
“And he cometh to the house of the ruler of the
synagogue, and seeith the tumult and them that wept
and wailed greatly.”
“And when he came in he saith unto them, ‘Why
*(Mark v:23.)


make ye this ado and weep? The damsel is not dead
but sleepeth.’ And they laughed him to scorn. But
when he had put them all out he taketh the father and
the mother of the damsel, and them that were with
him, and entered in where the damsel was lying.”
‘And he took the damsel by the hand and said unto
her, ‘Lalitha curniwhich is, being interpreted, 'Dam-
sel, I say unto thee arise.’ ”
“And straight away the damsel rose and walked,
for she was the age of twelve years. And they were
astonished with a great astonishment.”
“And he charged them straightly, that no man
should know it, and commanded that something should
be given her to eat.”*
In the first verse just quoted must be observed the
immediate attempt to inspire faith in the father, know-
ing that his mind was in telepathic rapport with the
daughter, and the suggestion of death being im-
pressed upon her telepathically, would be adverse to
her return to the body.
It was for that same reason also that he suffered
none of the multitude to follow him, and turned the
mourning friends away.
The first statement he made upon entering the room
where she lay, “The damsel is not dead but sleepeth,”
was of double importance for the reason that it in a
measure at least silenced the lamentations of the
friends, and acted as a strong counter suggestion to
*(Mark v:36-43.)


those placed previously to the effect that she was dead;
thereby inspiring a subjective faith.
The fact that Christ took with him only those of his
disciples whom he chose, also; the father and the
mother, with him in the chamber, showed his recog-
nition of the importance of a harmonious mental
environment, realizing that they would all be of one
mind in the determination that she should live again,
and that the suggestions would be more forcibly im-
pressed if projected by several simultaneously than if
only by one at a time, and was merely an observance
of the rule which he taught his disciples when he as-
sured them, ‘‘That if two of you shall agree on earth
as touching anything that they shall ask, it shall be
done for them of my father which is in heaven.”
“For where two or three are gathered together
in my name, there I am in the midst of them.”*
Christ then took the damsel by the hand and com-
jnanded her to arise. There was no doubt implied in
that suggestion. This is a noticeable fact also, in the
record of the raising, either of Lazarus or the widow’s
son. The suggestion was uttered as a command. No
apathetic suggestions were used by Christ in the per-
formance of any of his manifestations.
“And the damsel arose and walked.’’ That Christ
recognized the necessity of guarding against counter
suggestions is shown in this instance by the fact that
“He charged them straightly that no man should
*(Matt. xviii :i9-20.)
122
HYPNOTISM MADE PLAIN.


know it,” as he did also in many other instances of the
exhibition of his power. The mere fact being told
to others, who doubting the truth of the statement,
and inferring, perhaps, that it is but a temporary
benefit or illusion which will soon be dispelled, and
that it being but the result, of the operation of the
imagination, it will in time return, etc., places the
mind in a credulous attitude, and finally the oft re-
peated suggestionsbring about the predicted condi-
tion.
That fact that Christ ‘’Commanded that something
be given her to eat” showed that he despised not the
aid of material things, and also that he recognized
the reality of matter.
Thus we see that Christ, possessing by far the
greatest subjective power ever given to man, and
understanding to perfection the laws of nature used
his knowledge to the benefit of his fellow-men.
That Christ understood and despised not the use
of all the conditions requisite to the success of the
mental healer of to-day is evident.
That all of his so-called miracles were performed in
strict accordance with these laws, is clearly demon-
strated, and the importance of their observance is
proven by the discoveries of modern science.
That Jesus Christ is not, as some have supposed, a
fictitious character, is plainly proven by the records
of his works. It is not reasonable to suppose that
those who wrote the history of his life and works upon
earth, could by any process of the imagination, being


ignorant of these laws, portray with such accuracy
the works attributed to Jesus; that after eighteen hun-
dred years of inductive reasoning, and the knowledge
accumulated thereby, they could be proven scientifi-
cally correct in every detail.
We have had in late years many books written upon
advanced ideas and portraying future achievement in
the field of science, detailing the possibilities of the
performance of many things; but not once have these
flights of imagination been proven practicable or pos-
sible of execution in every detail.
It would have been impossible for any one without
any knowledge of electricity to have eighteen hundred
years ago predicted the use of, or outlined the con-
ditions necessary to be observed in the successful
operation of our electric cars of to-day.
That those who wrote the history of the life of
Jesus Christ had a reality of which to write, and actual
experiences to narrate, is an obvious fact.
That Christ’s knowledge was of divine origin, and
that he was indeed and in truth the Son of God, is
proven in the fact that he possessed this accurate
knowledge of God’s laws and the application to man-
kind, when there had never before him been any one
who possessed this knowledge, and of whom it was
said, “Never man spake as this man.’’
That he perceived these truths more than eighteen
hundred years before the world was ready to receive
them, proves it to be an intuitive knowledge. Such


also was his knowledge we have every reason to be-
lieve, of the spiritual truths he taught.
Now that man can by his much cherished scientific
methods prove that the physical manifestations of
Jesus Christ, as recorded by his disciples, are true,
is it not but reasonable to suppose that the spiritual
philosophy which he expounded was also true, and in
so doing enable us to grasp by faith his promises, and
obey the instructions which he gave for the obser-
vance of the conditions he laid down as essential to
our soul’s salvation?
Merely because we are yet incapable of the under-
standing of our spiritual being, as was man hundreds
of years ago incapable of understanding the physical
part of his being, is no proof that the teachings of
Jesus in regard to this is not also correct.
In the ages to come, when man through the process
of development is able to grasp the truth of the spirit-
ual teachings of Christ, and recognize that we are
indeed 'dike him,” then will we, too, be able to see as
though face to face, whereas we now see, ‘‘As through
a glass darkly,” having as yet caught but a glimpse
of the first rays of the grand truths defining man’s
relation to God, the light of which is but dimly visible
along the horizon of the intellectual world.


CHAPTER X.
The Relation of Hypnotism to Crime.
The First Proposition-Second Proposition—Instinctive
Auto-Suggestion—Weak Auto-Suggestion—The Re-
cognition of the Courts—Laboratory Tests—Man a
Free Moral Agent—The Will of a Subject not
Weakened—The Effect on the Nervous System—Its
Intelligent Use Beneficial—Defense of Hypnotic
Exhibitions—Appeal to the Legislature—The Privilege
of the Hypnotizer—What the Hypnotizers Have Done.
The greatest objection that has been urged against
the spread of the knowledge of hypnotism is that the
induction of the hypnotic state reduced the subject
to a mere automaton, when he was for the time being
wholly irresponsible for any act which he might per-
form. Also that the subject was so robbed of his
individuality as to be obedient to whatever suggestion
was given him by the one with whom he was en
rapport even to the extent of obeying a post-hypnotic
suggestion, to the effect that he should commit mur-
der, arson or robbery. In fact, he was merely a
machine or instrument in the hands of the hypnotist.
To the person who has made a study of the different
forms of suggestion, this idea is simply erroneous,
and I feel sure such an opinion is held onlv by those
who have rushed at a conclusion after having grasped
but the first proposition, namely: That a hypnotized


person is constantly amenable to control by sugges-
tion ; and then was unable, or at least failed, to grasp
the second proposition, that each suggestion is met
by predominating suggestions, which either enforces
or counteracts their effect. These predominating or
auto-suggestions are, as I have before stated, the re-
sult of both natural endowment and education.
I do not claim or do I know of any hypnotist who
does claim that it is impossible for a criminal hypnotist
to induce a hypnotized subject to commit crime, pro-
viding he has the right subject; but I do claim that
the same subject could by persistent suggestion and
proper inducement be persuaded to commit the same
crime while in a normal condition.
Conscience, that faculty inherent in man, whereby
he is enabled to discriminate between right and wrong,
that guardian angel of man’s soul, stands ever ready
to judge what is right, and imperatively commanding
him, her vassal, to do the right, and abstain from doing
wrong, and forms the strongest of all suggestions,
operating always against, and ever predominating
over, any suggestion of wrong-doing.
This then is the silent sentinel which is ever on the
alert to protect man’s honor and woman’s virtue, and
the extent to which it does so is due not only to his
natural endowment, but also to the extent of his normal
education and training.
It is in the moral training of the youth that the
possibilities for the abuse of hypnotic suggestion is
to my mind the greatest; as with a child the moral
127
RELATION OF HYPNOTISM TO CRIME.


sense, or the ability to discriminate between right and
wrong is not strong, and the constant suggestions of
another, either while the child is in a normal condi-
tion of the hypnotic state, helps to educate and de-
velop his conscience.
It is not the quality of man’s conscience (there can
be but one quality), but the quantity, or rather the
degree of perfection to which it is developed, which
constitutes his safeguard.
The character who has for his standard the motto,
“Honesty is the best policy/’ and practices honesty
merely because it is policy, is not the real honest man.
Such a person would not require hypnotic suggestion
to induce him to commit a dishonest deed.
The instinct of self-preservation, which is inherent
in man, and forms one of the strongest auto-sugges-
tions, is not sufficient to keep some men from risking
the worst of dangers for the purpose of performing
some fiendish act, with perhaps no greater incentive
than a mere greed of grain, or would it be strong
enough to withstand the hypnotic suggestions of
crime.
Religion has been said to be the only safeguard
against wrong influence, still we know of many persons
who have done the most immoral acts, and committed
the most heinous crimes in obedience to the teachings
of their religion. Also many followers of our Chris-
tion religion are as fiendish as they are devout, seem-
ingly being utterly devoid of that sense of right and
wrong conscience.
128
HYPNOTISM MADE PLAIN.


Thus we see that each one of these instinctive auto-
suggestions are not strong enough to singly combat
successfully the hypnotic suggestions; but each unite
to form an insurmountable barrier in the way of any
suggestion contrary to their purpose.
It is very true that the auto-suggestions of some
are not so strong as with others; but it must be re-
membered that those who are incapable of strong
auto-suggestions are also incapable of receiving and
acting upon strong hypnotic suggestions, and when
we consider that auto-suggestion is the product of the
subjective mind —the same mind as that with which
we have to deal when placing the hypnotic suggestions
—we can readily see why it is impossible to place any
suggestion strong enough to overcome an auto-sug-
gestion.
Such a person could, while in a normal condition,
be persuaded to commit crime if the risk of detection
was not too great
Any one, however, who thoroughly understood
hypnotism would not want any person to commit a
crime for them while under hypnotic influence, as the
same person could do the act in a much more perfect
manner while in a normal condition, for the reason he
then has the full use of his reason, while a hypnotized
person is incapable of inductive reasoning, and would
not be able to change or regulate the specified plan
of action in case the arrangements were frustrated at
the last moment, and would thereby reveal perhaps
the whole secret.
129
EELATION OF HYPNOTISM TO CRIME.


It is therefore this peculiar constituent of man which
we call conscience, that regulates the potency of crim-
inal suggestions upon each individual, and controls
each act of vital importance.
We have all seen people who seemed to be utterly
devoid of conscience who would, in business transac-
tions, rob the widow or poor person, merely conform-
ing to the letter and not to the spirit of the law; living
perhaps a moral life, but doing so only because he
wished to appear well in the eyes of the people, and
not because he wished to do right for the sake of
truth itself.
With such a .person hypnotism would be eagerly
accepted as a cloak with which to cover his offenses.
He would enter into the state with the expectancy of
accepting each improper suggestion, and act upon it,
knowing that the hypnotist and not himself would be
responsible in the eyes of the people.
' If once the courts began to recognise the plea of
hypnotism as a defense for crime, we would have
innumerable cases of persons who would get some one
to hypnotize them in order to do some unlawful act,
just as men to-day get drunk in order to have the
“nerve” to do something they could hardly do while
sober. The hypnotist would be safe enough also, for
the man could swear he was hypnotised without know-
ing when or by whom.
Some claim that a person can be hypnotized against
his will, also without his knowledge, and that while
130
HYPNOTISM MAUL PLAIN.


in that state he can be made to follow any suggestion
of the operator.
If such a thing were really possible there would be
no limit to the influence of suggestion,, and its use
would be limited only by the desires of humanity.
That such a proposition is absurd is plain to be seen.
Some will say, perhaps, they have seen some person
who they knew was utterly incapable of committing
murder while in a normal condition, go through the
very act in imagination and in response to hypnotic
suggestion. Quite true, but the very fact that it was
only a test was the reason. There is ever with the
hypnotized person the ability to discriminate between
the real and the imaginary.
The oft-repeated experiment of arousing the anger
of a subject, and making him believe a friend or cer-
tain person had done him a great and irreparable
wrong, and suggesting that to avenge himself he
should stab the man, his enemy, at the same time giv-
ing him a paper dagger, and because the subject, as he
invariably does, creeps upon his man and goes through
the act of actually killing him, proves nothing. But
give the same subject a real dagger and notice how
different is the action. The subjective mind, always
on the alert, notes the difference, and although you
may, by repeated suggestions, succeed in getting the
subject to start for his victim, the auto-suggestion is
too powerful and the subject, hesitating and trembling
in every nerve, wakes up without even having touched
the man.


The same is true in all experiments. I have found
many a man who I could not induce to say his name
was George, if his name was John, or say anything
was so if he knew it was not; and every effort to make
a hypnotized subject do something which he had
firmly resolved he would not do, before consenting to
be hypnotized, has ended in failure.
Not only does science prove that such is impossible,
but every one who is without scientific knowledge, but
believes in divine justice, knows it cannot be true. Our
faith enables us to know it could not be, for God
would not be just and allow one man to control the
mind of another and thereby rob him of his individu-
ality.
Man was constituted a free moral agent, his soul
being dependent for its development upon the ex-
ternal part, or objective mind of man, which is
endowed with the ability to reason, inductively, and
to discriminate between right and wrong. When
this is done each conclusion is impressed upon the sub-
jective mind; or, in other words, the soul, that never
sleeping, never forgetting part of man, which, while
the objective mind is at rest, usurps control, allowing
no act in violation of its principles.
Again let me repeat that no external suggestion
can overcome an auto-suggestion or inherent prin-
ciple of man. That the man who could be induced to
commit crime while under hypnotic influence is just
as dangerous in a normal condition.


The idea that the oft-repeated induction of the
hypnotic state has a tendency to weaken the will of
the subject, and that the constant submission to the
suggestions of another person, while in the hypnotic
state, will gradually but surely rob one of his indivi-
duality, is quite prevalent.
That this idea is incorrect is very evident to any one
who has an acquaintance with any much used sub-
ject. Take, for instance, the professional subject, of
which we have many in this country. It is with them
a business, a means of gaining a living. Every
hypnotist has seen his subject, the very one others
thought was incapable of independent action, assert'
his will in a very decided manner, and display tiie
avaricious tendencies of his nature, if some one else
only offered him a few dollars more of a salary.
I have used for many months consecutively the
same subjects in my nightly performances, and can
conscientiously say that there was not one of them
who was not benefited by the constant use of the sug-
gestions.
We occasionally hear it claimed by some that the
professional subject, constantly used for entertaining
purposes, gradually become a nervous wreck, and for
that reason many people denounce hypnotic exhibi-
tions.
That such an effect is impossible to produce I do not
deny, but that it is the result of inexcusable ignor-
ance, or indifference, on the part of the hypnotizer, I
do assert.
133
RELATION OF HYPNOTISM TO CRIME.


There can be no possible detrimental effects to the
subject, merely from the induction of the hypnotic
sleep. It is in the sudden changes from one illusion
to another, and the unheralded awakening, which
causes whatever shock a subject sustains. *But the
intelligent and conscientious hypnotizer will, with due
regard to this possibility, give the deep hypnotic sub-
ject warning of an intended change, then by sug-
gestion relieve the mind of all lingering illusions and
place a suggestion to the effect that they will “wake
up feeling good,” before bringing them back to a
normal condition.
When these precautions are observed there is no
possible chance for the subject to sustain any injury
to the nervous system, but instead, they receive a
benefit from the sleep and its accompanying beneficial
suggestions.
I want also to say a few words in defense of hypnotic
exhibitions, the practice of which is so loudly de-
nounced by some.
I have already shown that the subjects operated
upon are not injured by the exhibitions. Where then
can there be any harm in producing some comical
tests for the amusement of the audience, thereby
awakening an interest in the phenomena? Even the
grandest truths must be presented to the public in
an attractive form, or they will not be accepted.
If the spread of the knowledge of the possible bene-
fits of hypnotism was left to the scientific lecturer
alone, and its experiments confined within the walls


of a laboratory, the knowledge would be spread very
slowly indeed. The average person wants to be
amused as well as instructed, and many want to be
wholly amused; but by illustrating scientific truths in
a comical way, they are attracted and unconsciously
perhaps accept some of the truths of the lecture as well
as enjoy the demonstration.
The tardiness with which a knowledge of the bene-
fits of hypnotic suggestion would become general, if
left entirely in the hands of the medical fraternity, as
some of them think it should be, is shown by their
present general ignorance upon the subject. That
this ignorance is due in many cases to the fact that
they have never had its possibilities impressed upon
them sufficiently, is proven to me by the great number
who apply to me for instructions annually, and who,
after learning, use it so successfully in their practice.
Many physicians who do understand its use dare
not use it openly in their practice because of the
superstition of the people, which is due to their ig-
norance of its benefits, because, perhaps, the subject
has never been presented to them along the lines of
truth.
It is the preparing of the people for the general use
of hypnosis by the physicians that is the great work
of the professional hypnotizer, and the occasional op-
portunity of curing some poor sufferer, whom he
chances to meet in his travels, is his privilege, although
in some states a few of the people are trying to induce
135
RELATION OF HYPNOTISM TO CRIME.


the legislature to enact a law prohibiting its use. I
am confident, however, that the legislators of this
enlightened age are too wise to prohibit the use of
so great a God-given benefit to mankind.
If such was now the law, the poor woman who but
yesterday I cured of a disease that had for many
months confined her to her bed a hopeless invalid,
given up by physicians and friends, would still be a
burden to both herself and family, instead of a comfort
and a pleasure, as she now is.
Only those who have received the blessings, and
the expressions of almost unspeakable gratitude, which
I received upon the occasion of this and similar acts,
can understand how insignificant I consider the title
of “Charlatan,” which some of the physicians choose
to give to any one practicing outside of their beaten
paths.
To the hypnotizer is reserved the privilege of dis-
tributing the knowledge and presenting the truths of
hypnotism to the masses, and we glory in the trust.
What have the hypnotizers of this world done? I
will tell you. They found a study, but no science,
and have torn from the innumerable volumes on
mental philosophy the senseless, meaningless pages,
and have given by the observations of the phenomena
facts instead of theories. They found mind a chaotic
region; they gave it law. They annihilated the worth-
less, re-incarnated the old, and gave birth to the new.
136
HYPNOTISM MADE PLAIN.


They have expanded the horizon of thought, placed
another star in the firmament of mental philosophy.
They have by the truths revealed by
psychology erected an eternal living monument to
man’s intellect and reason.
137
RELATION OE HYPNOTISM TO CRIME.






