

IDEAL HUMANITY
Sermon by
REV. ALEX. MARSHALL. D.D.,
SCOTS CHURCH.
MELBOURNE.
Preached 17th June, 1917.
Published by Scots Church Branch of the Presbyterian
Women’s Missionary Union, in aid of Home Missions.
Obtainable at P.W.M.U. Tea Rooms, 156 Collins Street,
Melbourne.


ifffy^-‘ R O U S O N COIXECTIO^\\v
|f Rational Library" |||


IDEAL HUMANITY
Sermon by
REV. ALEX. MARSHALL, D.D.,
SCOTS CHURCH,
MELBOURNE.
Preached 1 7th June, 19 i 7.
Published by Scots Church Branch of the Presbyterian
Women s Missionary Union, in aid of Home Missions.
Obtainable at P.W.M.U. Tea Rooms, 156 Collins Street,
Melbourne.


Ideal Humanity
Hebrews 2 : 8, 9. —" But now we see not
yet all things put under Him, But we see
Jesus .... crowned with glory and honour .”
One of the most saddening results
of the present war is the conviction
impressed on thinking minds that the
progress which humanity was sup-
posed to have been making during
recent centuries towards the realisa-
tion of the high moral and spiritual
ideals inspired by the Christian re-
ligion had not only been hopelessly
arrested, but had proved to be alto-
gether vain and illusory. A people
that had led in the very front ranks of
the science, the literature, the art and
the philosophy of modern culture and
civilisation, as soon as the veneer of
peaceful conditions had been chipped
off by the harsh war conditions which
they themselves created, have shown
themselves to be as completely indif-


ferent to the moral sentiments and re-
straints which (it was fondly sup-
posed) the teachings of Jesus Christ
had imposed on the heart and con-
science of humanity as if they had re-
lapsed into a state of primitive sava-
gery. It is hardly ncessary to recite
the black items on the ghastly list of
Germany’s sins against the laws of
God and Man since this war was
planned and hatched, to make good
this terrible indictment. It may be
said, of course, that this deplorable
Upheaval ii\ our 20th century civiliza-
tion is due to circumstances altogether
exceptional—to circumstances aside
from the lines of normal development
and running across them; that it is the
product of a caste and monarchical
megalomania inspired by godless
teachers and dynastic ambitions. It
may be so. It may be that the Ger-
man people as a whole are* if not inno-
cent, at least less guilty of the atroci-
ties that have been perpetrated on sea
and land since the war commenced
than the rulers and leaders who
planned and ordered them. I should


like to be able to think so, for per-
sonally I have the happiest recollec-
tions of some months of student life
spent among- the people of South Ger-
many, who then were too kindly and
pious in disposition and character to
be parties to such a fiendish policy.
But that was a long, long time ago,
and there may have been sad changes
in their mental and moral attitude
since then. Be that as it may, the
fact remains, in all its moral hideous-
ness, that German policy and methods
as revealed in this war have been
characterised by a cold, premeditated,
callous brutality, a cruel egotism, an
animalistic “ frightfulness ” that have
blotched that country’s national an-
nals with gruesome stains which all
the waters of the Rhine will never
cleanse. I do not for a moment pre-
tend to know or say that the Allies
have always conducted their part of
the war with unspotted raiment and
white kid gloves, but whatever their
moral delinquencies may have been
they have had sufficient respect for
the better sentiments of humanity to


draw a veil over them whilst the Ger-
mans were glorying in theirs.
Anyhow, in view of the terrible fact
that a war of unprecedented magni-
tude is now being waged with wea-
pons of unprecedented deadliness and
with every circumstance of monstrous
horror, we surely cannot get away
from the momentous questions which
it suggests to us as thinking men and
women trained to a Christian outlook
on life. We had fondly hoped that
the days of a dominant barbarism had
passed, that culture and refinement
had bred a gentler and kindlier spirit
in the hearts of men, and that the
march of civilisation had been really
progressive, and not just a movement
in a “vicious circle”; but now, fronted
with the moral monstrosities of these
last three years, we cannot help asking
in more or less of a pessimistic spirit
whether man at the core of his nature
does not still remain pretty much of
an animal in his cruelty, and a savage
in his barbarism. And, if so, what pos-
sible hope can we cherish for the fu-
ture of the race ? What destiny can we


expect for humanity but an endless,
hopeless trudge round a world pud-
dled red with the gore of savage wars
and cruelties, and groaning evermore
. under the burden of tyranny and sor-
"■ row ?
Now, such questionings very inti-
mately concern our faith as religious
beings, and vitally affect those fyopes
and ideals which we cherish as Chris-
tians. For it must be self-evident that
if Man is unchangeably ruled in his
deepest nature by instincts and pas-
sions that are essentially animalistic,
if there be not intertwined with the
very roots of his nature as a man some
moral capacities and spiritual affinities
which, properly educated and devel-
oped, may elevate him in the scale of
being - far above the level of animalism
and savagery—nothing but a certain in-
tellectual precocity by which he is able,
not wholly to overcome but merely to
gloze over, his inherent brutality and
barbarism with a superficial veneer.
If this be so, then must we say, Fare-
well to that Christian faith which
means faith in Humanity as well as


faith in God, farewell to that Christian
hope in Man’s redemption from a mere
animal status to the status of divine
sonship—a hope that has been the
mainspring - of the most unselfish and
efficient efforts ever put forth for the
betterment and permanent uplifting
of humanity.
But just here let it be distinctly
understood that no enlightened Chris-
tian would, for a moment, admit that
the view of human nature on which
this conclusion is based is other than
utterly wrong or grossly exaggerated.
To those who have cherished an opti-
mistic faith in the perfectability of
human nature by purely natural means
—such as Education and Culture and
Civilisation—that view is a direct ne-
gation of every high anticipation in
which they had indulged. For here,
before their very eyes, embodied in all
the horrors of real fact such as the
East End of London experienced last
week in the ruthless murdering and
maiming of hundreds of innocent
women and children, is a spectacle of
the agents of a people claiming to be


the world-leaders in culture and
civilisation, enacting a moral horror
from which even degraded savages
would shrink. If any convincing proof
were needed that such self-righting
and self-lifting means (like Education
and Culture) inherent in human na-
ture were utterly inadequate for the
redemption of the race, that were
proof enough. It drives home to our
mind with convinced certainty the
truth that, so far as human experience
goes, by no mere self-evolved means
or efforts can human nature be essen-
tially changed and spiritually elevated,
so that if men are to be “ saved ” in
any real or effective sense (saved
from their own lower brutal selves)
it must be by the intervention and
inflow into our lives and souls of a
Power higher and diviner than any-
thing belonging to ourselves.
Now, I do not need to remind you
that Christianity claims to represent,
in the Person and Work of its Divine
Founder, the intervention of this
higher Power as the very “ Power of
God unto Salvation.” But when this


claim is put forward nowadays it is
faced with the objection, Well, if
Christianity be what it thus claims to
be —the Power of God unto Salvation
—surely it must be confessed a deplor-
able failure. Here it has been in the
world for some nineteen hundred
years, and this is the result of it all—
the biggest, bloodiest, and most de-
vastating war that ever horrified the
world! I daresay we have all felt the
force—or, at any rate, the implied
scorn—of that objection, and it has set
some of us “ furiously ” to think. And
what is the conclusion to which fair
Christian thinking must bring us ?
Surely this, that the objection has
validity only if we conceive of Chris-
tianity as an external compelling force
acting all the time, without let or hind-
rance, on the same subjects. But Chris-
tianity has not been acting all the
time, without let or hindrance, on the
same subjects. It has to begin at the
very beginning with every new genera-
tion born under its influence—nay,
with every new individual soul brought
into contact with it. The human race


is not a stagnant pool whose water
remains always the same, but it is like
a swift-flowing river whose waters
change from moment to moment. It
is not a forest of evergreens whose
leaves do not fade, but it is a forest
of deciduous trees whose leaves fall
and are renewed season after season.
Every new generation of men not only
needs to be treated anew, therefore,
but each requires its own peculiar kind
of treatment. Social, economic and
political conditions are for ever alter-
ing so that the practical teaching suit-
able for one age may be less suitable
for another. Each successive crop of
human beings must be dealt with de
novo, and according to its own pecu-
liar condition and needs; and each in-
dividual soul, in each succeeding
generation, demands for itself peculiar
personal attention. In view of such
a consideration every fair-minded
thinker will admit that the argument
for results based merely on the length
of time that Christianity has been
operative in the world is utterly fal-
lacious and misleading. Moreover,


this consideration is all the more tell-
ing when we remember that Chris-
tianity is not a mere system of external
authority acting constantly, like a
governmental imperialism, on the life
and habits of a people, but it is an
internal spiritual influence liable to be
thwarted at any time, and all the time,
by the cross currents of antagonistic
moods and systems of thought which,
from time to time, may prevail in the
community. I referred to the people
of South Germany as I knew them
more than forty years ago, as a simple,
kindly, pious folk—so much so that I
can hardly believe that men of the
same breed could have part in the
brutalities that present-day Germans
have perpetrated. But when we re-
member that in the interval sinister
influences, derived from Prussia, oper-
ating in all schools and universities,
and acting under the inspiration of a
blatant anti-Christian teaching, have
drenched Germany with an inundation
of moral and spiritual poison, it is
quite easy to understand that the lapse
of many long centuries is not the pro-


per measure of practical Christian re-
sults. I for one, therefore, decline
emphatically to accept the present
war conditions of the world as an un-
challengeable verdict on the impo-
tence and failure of Christianity as a
divinely endowed agency for the
moral and spiritual redemption of the
world.
In thus meeting the argument of
the objector with whom I am dealing
I can imagine him falling back on
the contention that it is difficult, if not
impossible, to conceive that Chris-
tianity, even if it had to contend with
these difficulties, should have been so
long in the world without leaving
some permanent deposit of moral sen-
timent and principle that would ac-
tively assert itself, if not in formal
Christian expression, at least in an
unmistakably Christian spirit. Well,
I am not disposed to deny that. On
the contrary, I am inclined to think
that the moral attitude of the world
as a whole towards the war is a tes-
timony to the fact that the religious
leavening of those Christian cen-


turies has not been in vain. The very
fact that the bulk of the so-dalled
Christian nations (not to speak of
Japan) finds Prussian methods and
morals repugnant and intolerable,
witnesses to the existence of a Chris-
tian feeling (even if it be second
hand) against a domineering mili-
tarism that recognises no ethical code
as superior to State necessities. And
even in the inarticulate sub-conscious
religious sentiments governing the
mind and manners of the commonest
Tommy in the trenches, we need no
stretch of charity to share with him a
spirit essentially and practically
Christian. Some of you, I know, have
read a book of wide and absorbing in-
terest entitled “ A Student In Arms.”
It consists of a series of articles writ-
ten by a young English soldier of ex-
ceptional intellectual promise who
gave his life for his country at the
very threshhold of a fine career in the
world of letters. In a chapter headed
“ The Religion of the Inarticulate,” he
says, “ The virtues of the barrack-
room are unselfishness in small things.


They (the men) were intensely
loyal to their comrades, very ready to
share whatever they had with a chum,
extraordinarily generous and chival-
rous if any one was in trouble, and
that quite apart from his deserts.”
Describing an incident which led to a
very frank discussion about religion in
one of the huts, which was closured
by the lights being put out, he goes
on to say, “It was not much, but
enough to convince me that the sol-
dier (and in this case the soldier
means the working man) does not in
the least connect the things he really
believes in with Christianity.
Here were men who believed abso-
lutely in the Christian virtues of un-
selfishness, generosity, charity, and
humility, without ever connecting
them in their minds with Christ, and
at the same time what they did asso-
ciate with Christianity was just on a
par with the formalism and smug self-
righteousness which Christ spent His
whole life in trying to destroy.” If
that be a true picture of things as they
are among our English Tommies,


surely we are fully justified in the be-
lief that though the results of Chris-
tianity be inarticulate and almost sub-
conscious in the mind and conscience
of the masses, it has not been opera-
tive in vain during the bygone cen-
turies, but has left a moral and
spiritual deposit which, in a distinc-
tive and practical form, reflects the
direct personal influence of Jesus
Christ.
Now all this leads us to gather up
the threads of thought that converge
in the text by bringing us to the ques-
tion, What really is the Christian view
of human nature and human destiny?
Speaking generally in answer to this
question I would say that Christianity
is remarkable for the large and hopeful
view which it presents to us in this
regard. It is true that it recognises
in the fullest and frankest manner that
a certain moral paralysis has disabled
our nature so that constitutionally it
has lost that spiritual spring and
vitality, that self-adjusting or recuper-
ative power whereby it might reach
or regain its full spiritual status and


strength. But although the Bible
recognises this it also teaches us that
this is an abnormal condition of things
—that man’s true, essential, ideal
being is not earthly but spiritual;
that by rights he is not a slave but a
king; that, at the core of his nature he
is less kin to the clod than to GOD.
In the Bible story of origins we read
that God made man in His own image
and breathed into his nostrils the
breath of His own divine life. To
man as God made him, and as God
meant him to be, the regency over
creation was assigned when God
handed him the Charter of sover-
eignty, saying “ Have Dominion.” As
the Psalmist sings, “ Thou hast made
him a little lower than Deity, thou
hast crowned him with glory and
honour. Thou hast made him to have
dominion over the works of Thy
hands, thou hast put all things under
his feet.”
So the Bible depicts man as God
made him and meant him to be. But
I need not tell you that man as he is
has fallen far below this ideal state—•


has, indeed, in some cases fallen into
the lowest abyss of a degraded bar-
barism and animalism. Yet, fallen
and degraded though in real life man
be, as compared with what he might
be and should be, the most pessimis-
tic critic of human nature will surely
admit that he still retains some fea-
tures of the divine image—some traits
of the pure ideal, even if they show
themselves in no other form than in
the restless discontent which the man
has with himself, and in the vague
sense of higher things begetting in-
articulate longings in his heart. Pro-
digal son though he be, some sense of
sonship, some memories of his father’s
house, still linger in his soul, and he
carries with him even to the swine
troughs of animalism the spiritual
possibilities of restoration to sonship
and dominion.
And all along the line of human life
and history we may trace the efforts
—blind, lame, unconscious efforts
they may be—that man has put forth
to regain his true self and to recover
his lost dominion. And something


has been recovered. Over almost the
whole of this great round world he has
laid the hand of his authority so that
but little of it remains to be “ sub-
dued.” Its mightiest cosmic forces—
fire, water, electricity—have been
tamed to his service; the vast expanse
of heaven, ever crushing man down
under a sense of his littleness, has
been plumbed by the human intellect,
and the sceptre of man’s knowledge
now reaches from star to star. Even
in this way, not to speak of what has
been won in other directions, man is
ever striving to regain his lost inherit-
ance—to become lord of the grand
Dominion which the Creator’s charter
put under his feet.
But notwithstanding all that man
has recovered or acquired as an intel-
lectual and moral being, we may truly
say in the words of the sacred text,
“ that now we see not yet all things
put under him.” He has not yet
reached the creative ideal.
Is, then, this ideal an impossible
thing, a vision, a delusion? Nay, for
though we see not yet all things put


under him—though as yet we see not
man as he was meant to be and ought
to be—yet “we see Jesus crowned
with glory and honour.”
Human sin, human imperfections,
even human animalism and barbarism,
may be terrible and humbling facts,
but it is not less a fact, and a grand
inspiring fact, that we see Jesus the
Son of Man—the truly Representative
Man—crowned with glory and honour.
It is simply one of the most su-
preme facts in human history that a
Man, the Man Jesus, has taken up our
nature, and worn it through a true
human life culminating in the suffer-
ing of Death, and that he has filled
that nature with such a moral dignity
and spiritual majesty that we now see
the real coronation of our Humanity
in Him —“we see Jesus crowned with
glory and honour.” And that fact is
not merely recorded, but it is photo-
graphed for us in the Gospel Story.
There, in that perfect picture limned
by the Evangelists’ pens, we may see
—literally see —Jesus crowned with
glory and .honour. I am thinking of


Him and speaking of Him just as the
Man he was—the Man in whom the
full, perfect, radiant beauty of a true
human character stands displayed.
“ Behold the Man!”—the free, royal,
Kingly Man to whom the heart and
soul of the world has already learned
to bow, and who though once crowned
with thorns—ay, just because he once
was crowned with thorns and lifted
up on a cross—is now and forever
crowned with glory and honour.
Brethren, it used to be a customary
theological method of proving the
truth of Christianity to point to
Christ’s miracles as the seal and token
of His Divine commission. I, for one,
do not question that the miraculous
truly and in fact forms part of Christ’s
story, but I say this, that to my mind
(as it is more and more growing to
be the conviction of the present age)
the most stupendous miracle, the most
convincing fact in the Gospel, is just
Jesus Christ Himself ! The perfect, sin-
less, holy Jesus —full of love and grace
and truth, embodying and realising
the ideal of Humanity—Jesus the Son


of Man wearing in his very lowliness
and humility and self-sacrifice and
suffering his coronet of glory and
honour. If that will not win men’s
Faith and bring their hearts into sub-
jection to Him, why then, “ neither
will they be persuaded even if one
rose from the dead 1”
And this Jesus (let us remember)
is no mere isolated fact or incident or
accident in human history, but “ even
as by the grace of God, he tasted
death for every man, so the very roots
of his life are intertwined with all our
humanity, in order that in Him and
with Him and by Him other men, and
all men, may be lifted up to God.
Do not tell me then of man’s help-
lessness, man’s barbarism, man’s ani-
malism as if our true humanity were
there; our true humanity is in Jesus
Christ, ana in Jesus it is crowned
with glory and honour. -
Is not this, then, a mighty Gospel
of Hope for the World? Is there not
in this sight of Jesus a blessed in-
spiration, a very energy of God’s
Holy Spirit, to quicken our dormant


souls, to stir them up to their noblest
actions, to strike them free from the
fetters of sin and sense and selfishness
and to put all these things under our
feet, so that we may rise to- the royalty
of a Divine Manhood and share with
Jesus that coronation of Immortal
Glory and Honour which is perfected
at God’s Right Hand.
BROWN, PRIOR&CO.,
\h 167-171 QUEEN ST, MELBOURNE-ry
