

IF GERMANY
SHOULD WIN!
With Sir George Reid's
Compliments
No acknowledgment necessary




MY visit !to the United States—-October,
1917,: to March, 1918 was quite
uribßjfeiah So were the numerous
addresses I delivered before my health broke
down at St. Louis. . ' |
I know ajgood deal about the excellent
work done uhder official auspices, especially
after Lord Nbrthcliife’s visit, but I thought it
Would not be an objectionable proceeding if a
man whose life was mainly spent in the public
affairs of one jof the Dominions should visit the
Great Republic, with which Australia has many
intimate ties. I could testify at first hand to
the generosity of British rule and its glorious
results, amongst which stand out the loyalty
and patriotic; sacrifice of the whole of the
Overseas Empire in Great Britain’s hour of
need.
As a Colonial resident in London during the
War, I also dbsired to testify to fhe marvellous
way in which British manhood and woman-
hood, side byiside with their noble Allies, have
fought and Worked, on sea and land, for more
than three years, in those battles for inters
national law! and human freedom, which
America has at last acknowledged to be battles
fought in her defence as well.
May I add that the President, Ministers,
Congress, and people of the United States are
making up for lost time with a thoroughness
and swiftnest which are perhaps unrivalled.
/, Mel bury Road, IV. 14. G - R -




The
FORUM
For April, 1918
IF GERMANY SHOULD WIN !
BY THE RIGHT HON. SIR GEORGE REID, G.C.B.
FORMERLY PREMIER OF AUSTRALIA, AND FIRST HIGH
COMMISSIONER FOR AUSTRALIA IN LONDON. NOW
MEMBER OF THE BRITISH PARLIAMENT
LET us turn aside for a moment from our confident
belief in the success of our arms and contem-
plate the consequences of a German victory.
But first let us remember the nature of the Prussian
character, for that is the governing factor in all things
German.
Prussians are a peculiar mixture of barbaric, mediaeval,
and modern forces. They have mobilised patriotism,
culture, and brute force with consummate thorough-
ness. The choice in 1914 between pre-eminence
in peaceful enterprise and pre-eminence in war, was
one which Germany enjoyed beyond any other nation.
There were intelligent observers at that time, even
ex-Ambassadors, who thought the German choice
would be in favour of pacific penetration. They knew
all about the military craze for “ the day,” but believed
that the rapid spread of Germany’s commerce, to say
nothing of the Socialists in Germany, or the Triple
Entente —would keep the Kaiser quiet. His “ mailed


list” for the coloured races, and his “shining sword”
for his European neighbours—well—he was fond of
tall talk, but had kept the peace for many years.
Unhappily Bismarck had made war, hypocrisy, and
deceit, splendid Prussian investments yielding fame,
empire, and unexampled prosperity to every German
who really counted. The wars of 1864, 1866, and
1870 were proofs that the German God was to be
depended upon. Just as the German Emperor is a
“War Lord,” the German God is a “War God.”
Treitschke writes, “ the living God will see to it that
war will always recur as a drastic medicine for the
human race.” A fitting pendant to that is the maxim
of the German General Staff which covers every source
of atrocity in war—“lt is permissible for the belligerent
State to have recourse to all means which enable it to
attain the object of the war.” A full explanation of
the rape of Belgium is furnished by the dictum of a
well-known German General —von Hartmann—“ inter-
national law must beware of paralysing military action
by placing fetters upon it.”
In 1914 Russia was showing signs of a new life in
spite of the Kaiser’s dear friend and brother, “ Nicky,”
and France was no longer the creature of a bastard
Imperialism. Could Germany afford to wait ?
As for Britain —was not her power in the hands of
the peace party, and her Empire crumbling ? Would
she not temporise until it was too late to check the
great adventure?
As for the United States—were they not too busy
making riches to interfere, and would they not keep
out of the trouble ? Besides, was not German power
immense, above and below, in that distant land of
freedom ?
Those two dastardly assassinations which «ave
* o
Austria her chance of crushing Serbia forced the
tremendous issue of peace and war to a climax.


With characteristic audacity, Germany replied to
Sir Edward Grey’s almost frenzied appeals that she
was afraid to interfere as it might provoke Austria to
some irretrievable step. At the eleventh hour Austria
tried to back down. Then Germany flashed her
ultimatum to Russia.
4
During the nineteenth century war became more
chivalrous and humane. Solemn treaties, and the
germs of an international conscience, sought to safe-
guard the lives of the sick and the wounded, of
doctors, nurses, and all non-combatants on land and
sea.
THE HATRED OF NATIONS WAS DYING OUT
The result of these alleviations of the horrors of war
had been marvellously good The hatreds of warring
nations began to die out with the last whiff of battle
smoke. Russia and Japan, the Briton and the Boer,
were glorious proofs of that.
The world had a right to expect that Germany, the
leader of Europe in philosophy and culture, would
fight upon these decent lines, would at least observe
the rules of international law as embodied in treaties of
her own making.
Alas ! Germany has degraded war to a level of law-
lessness and treachery, and brutality, which has no
parallel vile enough in modern history. Her word has
become a by-word. Her most solemn oath may be a
shameless lie. “ Germany above all " means Germany
above every law, human or divine. Her enemies she
holds bound to a course of rectitude, even if she had to
invent the breaches of good faith which she passion-
ately denounces.
The versatile genius of German patriotism, freed
from any obligation to truth or honesty, has performed
prodigies of mischief and corruption. Nowhere is this


more evident than in America, where Germany’s last
hope of detaching a great enemy from her “ associates ”
is centred. Germany cannot corrupt or bamboozle
Britain, France, Italy or Japan. She has shown in the
case of Russia into what a basis of “no annexation or
indemnities ” can be twisted. But in the United States,
whose war advent she ridiculed, has she exhausted her
bribes or her powers for mischief ? If she could only
entice President Wilson into some by-path that would
set Germany’s enemies at cross purposes, and neutral-
ise three years and a half of glorious valour in the
battle-fronts of freedom, would not the Kaiser have
indeed reason to thank his German God for a crowning
mercy ?
The wonderful thoroughness and brilliant wisdom oi
President Wilson since April, 1917, will efface many
bitter memories. He may have been slow to move,
but when he did throw down the gauntlet, his wonder-
fully vigorous lead found an equally wonderful backing
from the American nation. What is not American in
spirit in the United States is hiding in cellars now.
For God’s sake, keep it there !
The thoroughness of German methods is notorious,
whether in the arts of peace, or in the prosecution of
war. But that thoroughness, in the settlement of the
terms of a German peace, would have quite a number of
terrible consequences for vanquished enemies and for
all the rest of the world, too, that had not aided and
abetted German villany.
TERRIBLE CONSEQUENCES FOR VANQUISHED ENEMIES
The chief aim of America, Britain, France and
Italy, in fighting Germany, is to establish a peace
that will make war in the future impossible. The
German aim is also to establish a peace that will make
war in the future impossible. These aims seem identical,


but they have vastly different results in view when
expressed in English or in German.
An allied victory or peace—call it what you will- —
would aim at the re-establishment of law and the
placing of human freedom and the world’s peace on an
impregnable basis—would aim at the removal of
national discords and oppressions—the re-establishment
of national security and honesty— and the defeat of a
bloodthirsty attempt to enslave free nations. That
victory would restore to the world the blessings of
civilization and the benefits of democracy. It would
prevent the degradation and deafeat of national and
individual ideals. It would mean arbitration instead
of murder, perpetual peace instead of everlasting fear
extravagance and bloodshed.
'The German peace would make war impossible too,
but by making freedom impossible—by Stripping free
nations of any power of offence or defence against
their conquerors for all time —a real German victory
means the stripping of Britain and America of their
tieets and their powers of resistance with no reasonable
prospect of ever building them up again. It would
mean financial as well as every other kind of national
ruin. We would be allowed to live in order to work
off that stupendous German war debt, added to our
own. Terrible as such calamities would be, they would
be far more easily borne than the presence of a German
soldiery in our homes —all the pavements would be free
for our conquerors, all the gutters for the descendants of
British, American, French and Italian patriots who bled
and died in the centuries of the past in order that the
world might reach freedom at last.
One of the most plausible of German tricks in these
United States is the endeavour to revive bitter American
memories by lauding France and decrying Britain.
Though England was once a conquering and aggressive
power, in her worst day she was angelic when compared
with the modern German Hun. During the past three


quarters of a century, largely owing to the new gospel
of democracy embodied in the War of Independence
and the American Constitution, the soul of British
statesmanship has been born again. All the Colonies
fit for self government have got it. The three hundred
and sixty millions of the coloured subjects of our
Imperial Crown are now the objects of a splendid
benevolent trust, instead of the victims of a rapacious
Conqueror.
WHAT ABOUT IRELAND?
I may be asked ‘‘What about Ireland?” Well, if
Ireland has not a Parliament of her own yet, she has a
large share in the greatest Parliament the world has
ever seen, larger according to population than England,
Scotland or Wales. According to electors, she should
have about sixty members in the House of Commons,
she has one hundred and three. She enjoys the benefits
of remedial legislation far in advance of any the farmers
of England or Scotland have. If Ireland were three
thousand miles away from England, she might have
had her independence long ago. Alas ! Nature has
married the two Isles geographically, and a cautious
man is rather slow to let his restless wife set up for
herself next door.
Then Germany talks about the “ freedom of the
seas,” as if England had been interfering with it. No
ocean wave has been stained with the blood of a single
helpless victim of British naval supremacy. In the
British Empire there are about four hundred and fifty
million souls. Germany, before the war, had just as
free entrance to the trade of four hundred and thirty-
five of those millions, as Britain herself. This may
have been a bad policy, but there is a lot of Freedom
about it.
It is now abundantly clear that German Iriendliness
m the open ports of the British Empire was part and
parcel of preparation for a state of war.


GERMANY’S AFRICAN COLONISATION
The methods of German colonisation in Africa make
it reasonable to believe that if Germany should win, it
would be just as bad for the coloured races as for
those enjoying an advanced civilization. Black African
armies intended to back up German designs in the
Indian Ocean and in the Atlantic are among the
ambitions of German statesmen. Africans unfit for
soldiering would make good beasts of burden. Inherent
in this and most other German visions there is one fatal
drawback. They represent an era of selfish aggrandise-
ment, which—once the universal fashion—was out of
date in 1914.
The hatred which Germans cherish for England,
which is now extended to Americans also, is really a
compliment, because it means that to become first,
Germany must crush both Britain and the United
States.
Until lately, national rivalry for the pride of place,
and its collateral advantages, had only one vehicle of
effort—violence, actual or threatened. But recently
the spread of industry, the expansion of wealth, and the
multiplication of human wants and opportunities, have
combined to give national rivalry more chances along
peaceful lines. No country in ancient or modern
times has made a better use of these new chances
than the German nation. This made it all the more
surprising that Germany should risk everything upon
the hazard of a world-wide war. We all thought that
war had ceased to be fashionable. Every pair of royal
and Imperial lips, all Ministerial utterances, proclaimed
an ardent love of peace, and horror of war. True,
armaments had never grown more rapidly, but one and
all of those in power scouted the idea of war except in
self-defence;
The only two great nations that did not train their
manhood to the use of arms were Great Britain and
the United States, Both had powerful fleets, Britain
with her world-wide Empire, and her population


mainly dependent upon sea-power for food and raw
materials, had, naturally enough, supremacy in naval
power. But so destitute of materials for military
enterprise was Britain in July, 1914, that her small
expeditionary force of 150,000 men had only 470 guns,
and the plants for making rifles would only turn out
8,500 a month. The possible output of shells was
100,000 a year. To show what a peace sort of footing
that was, 11,000,000 British shells were fired off in the
Somme battles in two or three weeks.
The sudden development of the British armies, and
war material, has been one of the greatest wonders of
the war. Greatest and grandest of all has been the
turning out of vast armies of civilians at short notice
which have proved equal and more than equal to the
mightiest preparations of the most formidable military
power the world has ever seen.
THE LOYALTY OF BRITISH COLONIES
The infamous lie that British soldiers were kept
out of the firing line and Colonials put in their places
is one which Colonial soldiers are the first to expose
and denounce. Indeed, nothing angers the Colonial
soldiers more than the well meant generosity of British
journalists, which does full justice to Colonial valour,
but until recently did less than justice to the heroism
of their own men, who constitute far more than
80 per cent, of the men in the fighting front.
The loyalty of the countless races beneath the
British flag in this prolonged and desperate crisis is
a sublime proof of the equity of British rule in these
later days.
Nowhere would a German peace work greater evil
than in the United States. Not only would American
ideals of human liberty be destroyed, but from the
underworld German-American traitors in countless
numbers would emerge from their obscurity to sharpen
the edges of German brutality for American patriots.
Printed and Published by F. A, Snell, 18 and 19, Whitefriars Street. London, E.C, 4.
