

ONE PENNY.
Patriotic Pamphlets.
No. 15.
If the Germans Won.
A Simple Story that will Swell
the “Yes” majority by thousands
on the 28th.
Published by arrangement , with
the “Morning Post,” London.
CRITCHLEY PARKER,
Australian Statesman and Mining Standard,
Melbourne and Sydney,
100c916.


tCRITCHLEY PARKER PUBLICATIONS
PUBLISHED BY
GERMAN BARBARITIES IN RUSSIA.
By authority Imperial Russian Government. By post, Bd.
MANUAL OF EMERGENCY (War) LEGISLATION. By post, 7s. 9d.
FIRST SUPPLEMENT, MANUAL OF EMERGENCY (WAR)
LEGISLATION. By post, ss. 2d.
authority Commonwealth Government.
The Manual contains all the War legislation, proclama-
tions, etc., made by the Commonwealth from the com-
mencement of the War to the 15th November, 1915, and
the Supplement contains similar matter made to 31st
March, 1916. The subjects dealt with include Prize
Court Acts, Rules and Notifications, proclamations and
Notifications relating to trading with the enemy, censor-
ship, the importation and exportation of goods, etc., and
copies of regulations under all War Acts. The War
Precautions Act relates not only to purely military and
naval matters, but to such matters as enemy shareholders;
the formation of, and increase of capital by, companies,
firms, clubs and associations; the transfer of land to
enemy subjects; and the prohibition against the levying
of distress against certain property of female dependants
of members of the Australian Imperial Force; and the
prices of certain commodities (flour, bread and sugar).
A complete Index of the contents of both publications
appears in the First Supplement.
MILITARY WAR MAP.
Issued by authority of Defence Department.
Without doubt this is the most informative and accurate
map published; it shows the Franco-German frontier and
Belgium, and covers ,116,000 square miles of the Western
theatre of War. Rivers, roads, and railways are clearly
marked, also the frontier prior to the Franco-German war
in 187,0. Size 26iin. x 23|in. The accuracy of this map
is guaranteed by its official character. By post, 1/1.
BRITISH REPORT ON GERMAN OUTRAGES (LORD BRYCE).
Report and Appendix of the British Commission. 440
pages. By post, 7d.
IF GERMANY WON.
Published by arrangement with the “Morning Post, Lon-
don. By post, 2d. •


PREFACE.
to readers of the following vivid account of the relentless
and inhuman fashion in which the German despots enforced
peace upon their heroic foe in the Fran co-Prussian War, it
must appear incredible that anyone of British birth, and
enjoying British protection, should seek, upon any plea or
pretence, to shield the Germans in the present European
struggle from the crushing punishment which their savage
and bloodthirsty methods of warfare should bring upon
them —must bring, if a repetition of such infamies is to be
rendered impossible in the future.
Germany’s hatred towards Great Britain and its daughter
States is immeasurably greater than was the hostility that
led to its war upon France in 1871. It is that peculiarly
intense and bitter form of hatred which the habitual egotist,
the boaster and bully, feels when he is threatened with a
defeat to which his own folly and ignorance have largely
contributed.
Australia would be made to feel that hate with grinding,
smashing force if the Germans won in this war, or if, as the
result of an inconclusive peace, they were given a chance to
regain strength and attack us singly later—perhaps in some
contrived opportunity while the Empire was in difficulties
with another Power.
Australians should therefore keep in steady perspective—
as this brilliant sketch of the closing incidents of the Franco-
Prussian War will enable them to do—the inborn ruthless-
ness and brutality of the German leaders, from the sovereign
downwards.
The people who profess themselves against conscription in
Australia may be classed under three heads:—
(1) The followers of a foreign society whose disciples
came to Australia a few years ago to stir up indus-
trial strife and further German interests.


(2) Those who are prompted to oppose conscription
solely on account of their cowardice.
(3) Those others who wish to escape conscription in
order to better their own positions in Australia
while the men under arms are fighting for them.
Let us segregate these furtive hirelings, and with them
the weak and the selfish. It should not be difficult; they are
not representative types of the Australian people, and the
question now before the Commonwealth will show them at
their true worth.
Critchley Parker.
376 Flinders-lane, Melbourne.


IF THE GERMANS WON.
EXPERIENCE OF FRANCE IN 1870-71.
The belief that certain types of men will do in the future
exactly as they have done in the past is so universal that
the most accurate anticipations respecting their actions are
generally regarded as simply inverted recollections. The
Ethiopian cannot change his skin nor the leopard his spots.
Those, therefore, desirous of speculating as to the fate of
England if it were unsuccessful in the present struggle will
find the best data for reaching a correct conclusion in the
experience of France in 1870-71, when that nation was at
the mercy of Germany. Her terms of peace were nothing
short of an abuse of victory. Great Britain, if now de-
feated, might with confidence depend upon treatment akin
to that accorded by a beast of prey to its victim, the inten-
tion of the enemy being to make an end of the British Em-
pire.
•
If the Germans - won, Germany alone would be free.
She would be free, as Viscount Grey has said, “to break
international treaties, free to crush when it pleased her,
free to refuse all mediation, free to go to war when it
suited her, and free, when she did go to war, to break/
again all rules of civilisation and humanity on land and
sea.”
MILITARISM, KULTUR, AND RELIGION.
The war of 1870-71 is now a matter of history, and the
events leading up to it need not be recalled. The defeat of
Austria by Prussia in 1866 having made a struggle with
France inevitable, Bismarck directed his statecraft towards
making the occurrence of the conflict coincide with the time
when Prussia would be best prepared and France least ready


for it That moment arrived in connection with the succes-
sion to the Throne of Spain. After the withdrawal of the
Hohenzollern candidate, France made certain demands that
evoked from King William a refusal which, through Bis-
marck’s unscrupulous manipulation of a telegram, exasperated
Frenchmen as was intended and precipitated hostilities.
Prussia was then armed to the teeth and eager to let slip
the dogs of war. It had for years been creating a military
organisation greater and more efficient than any the wor.d
had known. Its whole social system had been directed to-
wards aggression. Its patriotism meant love of the Father-
land and hatred of every other country. Prussia could within
a week move great armies to the frohtier of France, Belgium,
Austria, or Kussia. The menace of that immense power to
the liberties of contemporary nations was increased by the
fact that it was in the hands of men who were acting on
the doctrine that might was right. The gospel of Kultur had
been industriously preached to the detriment of France, whose
literature was represented as corrupt, its art tawdry, its
learning superficial, and its society debased. But Prussia,
first in arms, arts, literature, and science, was held to be
pure, virile, and, above all, religious. As befitted a State,
whose Sovereign claimed to reign “by the favour of God and
no one else,” the blessing of Heaven was invoked at every
step. All the spoliations which' had been perpetrated hj
Prussia were by King William justified and nailt wi .Scrip-
ture.” This aged hypocrite was not revealed to Europe in his
real character until his successful invasion of France, and his
disclosure through Bismarck to Jules Favre of the conditions
on which that nation might obtain peace. In one of his ex-
cellent letters from Paris to the Morning Post in September,
1870, Mr. Gibson Bowles, who represented this journal during
the siege of the French capital, put a very pertinent ques-
tion. “Are you,” he asked, “not sickened in England with
King William’s blasphemies? Here is a hoary-headed sinner
who is wading up to his neck in blood in order that he may
be enabled to establish a despotism, and at every step he
takes he has the unblushing impudence to claim before all
men the Divinity itself as an accomplice in his wickedness.
... If men can be found to endorse that without disgust
they will endorse anything.”


JULES FAVRE AND COUNT BISMARCK.
After the surrender of Sedan on September 2, 1870, when
Napoleon 111. passed into the captivity of Prussia, the
Second Empire ended its existence. The Empress became
an exile in England, and the Third Republic was ushered
in amid tumultuous excitement. The provisional regime at
first established was the Government of National Defence
in which Jules Eavre was Minister of Foreign Affairs. Favre,
like Thiers, had opposed the war, but when it came, and the
enemy was ruthlessly closing in on Paris, he was determined,
while most anxious to stop the shedding of blood, that the
conflict should not end on terms involving the humiliation or
dismemberment of France. In a circular of September 6,
1870, to the representatives of that Power in foreign countries
he explained the policy of the new Government and its atti-
tude towards the war, adding that “we shall not cede either
an inch of our territory or a stone of our fortresses.” At
that time Thiers undertook a tour of the Courts of Europe
—Great Britain, Russia, Austria, and Italy—in the hope of
securing some sort of mediation by neutrals. Though all
were sympathetic none was willing to interfere, an atti-
tude which isolated France, and of which Bismarck took full
advantage. While the aged Minister of Louis Philippe was
prosecuting his mission in foreign parts, Favre was success-
ful, through England, in arranging between himself and the
Prussian Chancellor interviews whose object was to secure
an armistice that would permit of the election of a properly-
constituted National Assembly which could deliberate on
the question of peace or war. Prior to the interviews, which
took place on September 19 and 20, both statesmen had made
pronouncements of a very opposite character. The French
Minister had specifically stated, as already observed, that
np stronghold or territory was to be given up, while Bis-
marck had declared that he was resolved to have both. In a
Note to the North German Ambassadors on September 13
the Chancellor wrote from Rheims what he described as
“the views of the King,” “that we shall endeavour to possess
ourselves” of certain French fortresses and “shall convert
them into strongholds of Germany. . . . Were we to evacuate
France now without requiring any accession of territory,
pecuniary indemnity, or other advantage, except maTrtial


glory, the French nation would, nevertheless, cherish a deep
hatred against us, and seek to avenge our offence to their
vanity and the check we have put to their lust of conquest.”
The mission of Thiers, Bismarck alleged, had had for its
object simply “the intervention of foreign Powers on behalf
of a peace” which would deprive Germany of “the fruits
of her victory.”
MEETING OF THE DIPLOMATS.
On the morning of Sunday, September 18, 1870, -Favre
left Paris on what he called “a sorrowful journey” to Gros-
bois, where he understood Bismarck was with the Head-
quarters of the King. But at Yilleneuve St. Georges he
was informed that the Monarch was at Meaux. On nearing
that town the following forenoon, however, he ascertained
that the Sovereign had left for Ferrieres. Favre retraced
his steps and halted in the coutryard of a farm which was
completely devastated, as were indeed nearly all the houses
he had passed. After waiting amid the ruins for half an
hour he saw three men approaching on horseback with a
numerous escort. One of these men was tall, with a “power-
ful head,” and an aspect at once impressive and severe, the
person thus described wearing a white cap on which was a
broad band of yellow silk. This was Bismarck, who alighted
at the door of the farm where Favre was standing. The
French Minister expressed regret that he had not been able
to meet his Excellency in a more worthy place. But the
desolation by which they were surrounded was after all, he
remarked, not out of keeping with the interviews about to
begin, as it demonstrated in a most vivid manner the evils
of which he wished to make an end. The Iron Chancellor,
however, thought that a better spot for the conference might
be discovered, and after a few minutes’ walk, under the
guidance of a local peasant, the two diplomats, followed by
their secretaries, were installed at the Chateau de la Haute
Maison, near Montry. Though France was then very far
from the end of her powers of resistance, Bismarck, who
regarded Favre as unworthy of him, entered upon negotia-
tions in no mood for reciprocal concession, but in the spirit


rather of a conqueror come to dictate terms. There was to
be no disputing with this bullying spokesman of victorious
legions, whose Royal master had obviously resolved to have a
large slice of territory, as well as an immense pecuniary in-
demnity, and to leave Trance, in case of refusal, no alterna-
tive but that of the Caudine Forks. The Man of Blood
and Iron was throughout the arrogant representative of
Prussian militarists, bent upon the annihilation of the na-
tion they had for years called their “traditional enemy,”
and upon the ultimate construction, as is now apparent, of
a new Europe, dominated by sheer force in the hands exclu-
sively of the apostles of Kultur.
STARVATION OR BOMBARDMENT.
“My first words to Count Bismarck,” says Favre, “were
these: ‘I thought that before any decisive struggle under
the walls of Paris was undertaken, it might he possible to
come to an honourable arrangement which would prevent
untold disaster and I wish to know your views respecting
that. Our position, although irregular, is perfectly clear.
We did not overturn the Government of the Emperor. It
fell of its own accord, and, in taking office, we have obeyed
simply a law of supreme necessity. It is the nation itself
which must decide both as to the form of government it in-
tends to have and as to the conditions of peace. ... I have
come to ask whether you wish the nation to be consulted, or
whether it is against the nation that you are waging war,
.with a view to destroying it or to imposing a government
on it. In this last eventuality, I would observe that we are
determined to defend ourselves to the death, Paris and her
forts can resist for three months. Your country, on the
other hand, will necessarily suffer through your armies being
on our territory. A struggle in the nature of extermination
would* be fatal to both nations, and I believe that, with the
will to do it, we can prevent such a result through an honour-
able peace.’ ”
“I ask for nothing but peace,” replied Bismarck. “It
was not Germany that disturbed it. You declared war with-
out any reason, but with the sole idea of taking a portion of


our territory. In that respect you have been faithful to your
past. Since the time of Louis XIV. you have extended your
borders at our expense. We know that you will always
act on that policy, and that any renewal of strength on
your part will he directed simply to making war on us
afresh. Germany did not create the present situation, hut
will turn it to account for her own security, and that security
can be guaranteed only by a surrender of territory. Stras-
burg is to us a perpetual menace. It is the key of our house,
and we want it.
“Then it is Alsace and Lorraine,” remarked Favre.
“I did not speak of Lorraine,” responded Bismarck. “But
as to Alsace, I am very decided. We regard it for our de-
fence as absolutely indispensable.”
“I observed to the Count,” continued Favre, “that that sac-
rifice would inspire in France sentiments of vengeance and
hatred leading inevitably to another war, that Alsace would
remain French, that she might be dominated but could not
be incorporated, and that she would be a serious drag and
pprhaps a cause of weakness to Germany.”
Bismarck was inexorable at all points to the representative
of the Government of National Defence, which he described
as a “Government arbitrarily usurped by private persons.”
He hinted, indeed, at a possible opening by Prussia of nego-
tiations with its prisoner Napoleon. The French Minister
urged that the only way of reaching a good understanding
was that of abandoning the old policy of conquest and mili-
tary glory. If a different view from that was entertained,
people would, he remarked, be led to suspect that Prussia
had in contemplation not only territorial spoliation, but a
Bonapartist restoration. Thereupon Bismarck protested
volubly. “What does it matter to us,” he exclaimed, “what
form of government you have? If we thought Napoleon
would be more favourable to our interests we should restore
him. But we leave to you the choice of your own adminis-
tration. What we want is security, and we can have that
only with the key of the house.” (Strasburg.) This condi-
tion is absolute, and I regret that I cannot change it.”


LAYING DOWN THE LAW TO PARIS.
“I insisted,” said Favre, “that that momentous resolution
would entail grave responsibility for both Governments, I
spoke of the stubborn defence of Paris and the provinces. I
pointed out that the German armies might have to remain
six months away from home, and that they would suffer
enormous losses in France.”
“We have taken these sacrifices into account,” rejoined Bis-
marck. “We prefer to suffer them at once rather than leave
them to our children. Our position, however, is less difficult
than you imagine. We may be content to take a fort, and not
one of them could resist us for more than four days. From
this fort we should lay down the law to Paris.”
The French Minister protested against bombardment.
“Necessity may justify it,” replied Bismarck. “Besides, I
did not say that we should deliver an assault on Paris. _lt
might be more convenient for us to starve it out by spreading
ourselves over your provinces where no army could stop us.
Strasburg will succumb on Friday and Toul perhaps sooner.
Bazaine has eaten his mules; he has begun on the horses,
and will soon be forced to capitulate. Without investing
Paris we will stop its supplies with a cavalry force of 48,000
men, and we are prepared to remain with you as long as
may be necessary.”
“Then,” said Favre, “it is our destruction which you de-
sire. ... I will propose a simple method of getting over the
difficulty: Let us convoke an Assembly. You will treat with
it. If you are really wise you will impose acceptable con-
ditions, and you will have a lasting peace.”
“For that purpose,” Bismarck replied, “an armistice would
be necessary, and Ido not want that at any price.” But he
subsequently changed his mind on that point. “We offer,”
Favre stated, “to make good pecuniarily the damage which
the war has inflicted, but at present we can go no further.”
It was now late in the afternoon, and there being no imme-
diate prospect of any satisfactory conclusion being reached,
the French Minister proposed an adjournment until the even-
ing, and that was agreed to.


SURRENDER OF FORTRESSES.
The conference was resumed at half past nine at
Ferrieres, where Favre again urged the necessity of calling
a truce to enable the citizens to vote, “In that case, said
Bismarck, “we should have the right to ask for guarantees,
the nature of which the French Minister requested him to
“I have no authority,” Bismarck poiilted out, “to speak
decisively on this subject, not having received the King s
permission, to which I defer completely. I can tell you,
however, that for the present an armistice would mean the
occupation by our armies of the fortresses of the Vosges
and Strasburg. ... As to your Assembly let me have your
proposals so that I may consider them and submit them to
the King.” //Tk . . ...
“In my opinion,” answered Favre, “Pans should be neu-
tralised. You would give safe conducts to all candidates hav-
ing to present themselves in the Departments and to all t e
Deputies who would be nominated The armistice should
be for fifteen days, and I think that at the end of that
time we should be able, when we had laid down our own
powers, to put you in touch with a commission nominated by
the Assembly, and invested by it with regular authority.
‘The neutrality of Paris,” replied Bismarck, “would appear
to me to be impossible. ... If the King had not retired for
the night I should have consulted him immediately as to these
different points. But if you will be here to-morrow at eleven
o’clock, we shall finish the negotiations.”
BISMARCK’S RENEWED DEMANDS.
The French Minister returned next day at the hour speci-
fied, and resumed the conference.
The brief meeting was equally barren of result. _ It
should be borne in mind that at the time of these meetings
France was far from the end of her powers of resistance.
But the Chancellor of the North German Confederation,
already confident of the success of Prussian arms, pro-
pounded, at the instance of King William and his military
advisers, armistice conditions which no great and self-respect-
ing nation could then possibly accept.


The aim of the enemy was to dismember France, to de-
stroy her national cohesion, to reduce her to the rank of
a second or third class Power, and to make Germany
without an equal or rival in Europe. The stipulations
of Bismarck were accordingly all based on conditions
involving the humiliation of France, and making the
ultimate triumph of her foe more certain.
But the surrender of a commanding portion of the
fortifications of Paris, the giving up of Strasburg, with
its garrison, and other such demands could not he
entertained in September. It was then still possible
that the capital might successfully withstand a siege,
that the fortresses in the East could hold out, that
the Provinces might raise armies sufficient to improve
the situation, and that the French Government might
secure the aid of allies, who could not, it was thought, be
indifferent as to the result to Europe of a complete crush-
ing of France. It is true that in the following February,
after Paris had been shut off from the outer world for
months, when the death-rate in the capital had become ap-
palling, and when the city was on the point of collapse
through sheer starvation, the nation was forced to accept
terms not greatly different from those indicated at Ferrieres.
But, as has been said, that dread stage of exhaustion had
by no means been reached when the French and Prussian
diplomats first met. Something in the nature of magnanimity
on the' part of Prussia might have been expected, success
having its obligations as well as its privileges. But there
was to be no concession, Bismarck, the browbeating spokes-
man of an imperious and unchivalrous master, remaining
throughout as inexorable as fate.
PARIS UNDER PRUSSIAN CANNON.
The proceedings of the first day of the meetings having
closed with a statement by the Chancellor that he was going
to consult the Monarch on some of the points raised, Favre
resumed discussion on the Tuesday with the words; “You
have spoken to the King, and I have come to ascertain the
result of your interview.”


“The King,” stated Bismarck, “accepts the armistice under
the conditions and with the object agreed between us. As
I told you we demand the occupation of all the fortresses be-
sieged in the Yosges, and that of Strasburg with its garrison
as prisoners of war.”
At these words Favre could hardly restrain himself, and
interrupted the Chancellor almost impetuously: “Monsieur
le Comte,” he said, “I promised to report to my Government
all my conversation with your Excellency. I do not know,
however, that I shall have the courage to convey to them
what you have just told me. The garrison of Strasburg have
evoked the admiration of the world by their heroism. To
surrender the garrison voluntarily as prisoners of war would
ibe an act of cowardice which no man of spirit would advise.”
“I am not of your opinion,” replied Bismarck, “and my
reason is very simple. Strasburg is exhausted; we have to
make only a final assault to capture it. I should very much
like to avoid that, but if we cannot come to an understanding
the place will certainly be in our hands by Friday, and its
garrison will be ours.”
11 Certainly, Monsieur le Comte,” interjected Favre, “is a
very difficult word to use in war.”
“Add to it,” said the Chancellor, “if you will, ‘as far as it
can be humanly guaranteed.’ It is a matter of engineering,
and, with the reserve I have indicated, I am sure not to be
wrong.”
“Then,” observed Favre, “the garrison will succumb to
force. For my part, I shall never agree to surrender. But
let us set that proposition aside and discuss others. What
does your Excellency mean by a guarantee on the part of
Paris, of which you spoke yesterday?”
“Nothing more simple,” answered the Count. “A fort
dominating the town.”
“It would be better,” rejoined Favre, “to give you the
entire city. That would be more to the point and more
complete. How could you expect a French Assembly to de-
liberate under Prussian cannon? That is another proposi-
tion which I cannot undertake to report to my Government.”


The French Minister then suggested the abandonment of the
idea of the neutralisation of Paris. The Assembly, he re-
marked, could be summoned at Tours, where the Govern-
ment were already located,
“I accept this/’ stated Bismarck, “and in that case it is
agreed, according to what you told me yesterday, that we
shall facilitate with entire impartiality the electoral meet-
ings and elections even in the Departments occupied, except
in Alsace and in the part of Lorraine which we hold,”
Knowing that the feeling of the populations there was
against him, no one could have suggested a better arrange-
ment from his point of view, “You admit thereby,” Favre
pointed out, “that if you consult them they will be unanimous
in rejecting you.”
“I know that perfectly,” said the Chancellor. “We shall
not please them.” But what was proposed was, he held,
necessary for the security of Germany and the success of
the war, “We do not,” he added, “include them all”—the
people of Alsace and part of Lorraine—“among the electors
whom you will consult, since we desire to govern these dis-
tricts absolutely. But I shall submit to the King this pro-
posal, of which he has not heard. At the same time, I shall
tell him of your opposition to the surrendering of the gar-
rison of Strasburg.”
FRENCH DETERMINATION.
Bismarck then went away to consult the King. “Left
alone,” says Favre, “I wished to give free rein to the violent
feelings which ran riot within me, I almost lost patience,
and I felt that I would still have need of it. I strode up and
down the rich apartment. The beauty of the country on
which my eyes rested seemed to be the very refinement of the
suffering I was enduring. This park, shaded by trees, the
peaceful water, the grass, and the flowers were so many ag-
gravations of the misery of a country delivered up to inexor-
able and grasping invaders. Kot being able to bear the
spectacle, I seated myself at one of the tables in the apart-
ment, The idea then occurred to me of recording at once
irrefutable testimony of the incredible proposals which had
been made. There was no paper at hand. But on the back
of a letter I took from my pocket I wrote the substance of


the terms which had made my blood boil. I waited about
twenty minutes, irritated, but undisturbed, knowing very
well what the denouement would be.” The Count then re-
entered, paper in hand, and read the text of the proposals.
“Before he had finished reading,” writes Favre, “I informed
him that I had summarised in a few words on my own ac-
count the propositions he had just submitted to the King.
As far as the guarantee in respect of Paris was concerned,
I made use merely of this expression: ‘A fort overlooking
the town.’ ”
“That is not correct,” observed Bismarck. “I did not say
one fort. I may ask you for several. I wish specially that one
should dominate the enceinte, such, for example, as that of
Mont Valerien.” Favre remained silent, and let him add:
“The King accepts the arrangement as to the calling of the
Assembly at Tours, but he insists that the garrison of Stras-
burg shall be made prisoners.”
Such conditions the French Minister could not accept. His
role of negotiator was now finished. In taking leave of the
Chancellor he said: “I made a mistake in coming here, but
Ido not regret it. I have suffered sufficiently to excuse my-
self in my own eyes, but in any case I yielded only to a
sense of duty. . . . Should my Government think fit again
to send me to you, however cruel for me the task, I shall
have the honour of returning. . . . The inhabitants of Paris
are courageous and determined to make every sacrifice, and
their heroism may change the situation. If you conquer
them, you will never subjugate them. The whole nation is
inspired by the same sentiments. As long as there can be
found a single element of resistance we shall fight you.”
Having consulted his colleagues in the Government of Na-
tional Defence the Minister for Foreign Affairs, on Sep-
tember 24, informed Bismarck that the Prussian terms had
been declined. The Provisional Government would accept an
armistice to permit of the election and meeting of a National
Assembly, but not on the humiliating conditions proposed.
There was afterwards little more said about an armistice
until November, when, at the suggestion of neutral Powers,
led by England, negotiations were undertaken by Thiers at
Versailles, where -Bismarck proved, if possible, more un-
yielding and less compromising than he had yet been.


STARVING OF PARIS IN 1870-71.
What do these worthies
But roh and spoil, hum, slaughter, and enslave,
who leave behind
Nothing hut ruin wheresoe’er they rove?
the meetings between Favre and Bismarck at Fer-
rieres in September, 1870, led to no agreement, they were
followed by a great change in European opinion respecting
the war.
The conflict after the fall of Sedan was waged,
on the part of Prussia, with that diabolical fright-
fulness which has been recalled by recent devastations
and atrocities in Belgium, The inherent brutality of
the German character was in all quarters appallingly
manifest. Every village through which the enemy passed
became a scene of organised pillage. The civil population
was outraged, imprisoned, and massacred in open
defiance of every convention by which civilisation had
sought to prevent excesses in war. The traditions of
soldierly honour were disgracefully flouted.
.. In 1870 > however, the infamy of the Huns fell short,
it must be admitted, of the submarine and Zeppelin
devilry which has lately brought them within the
category of pirates and assassins. The crimes of
forty-five years ago were part of a policy deliberately
adopted by the miscreants of the General' Staff, whose
still more barbarous successors of to-day would, if
victorious, put the freedom of England at the' mercy of the
bandits of Berlin. Towards the close of 1870 this journal,
backed by such men as Sir Edward Hamley, protested
against the atrocities of Prussian soldiers whose minds were
then fixed on the annexation to Germany of reluctant popu-
lations, and on the possibility not only of starving the in-
habitants of Pans, hut of laying that city in ruins. The re-
fusal of Bismarck to make peace, except on unreasonable
terms put his country in the wrong, and popular sympathy
turned largely in favour of France. “The key to Prussia’s


pretensions/’ said the Morning Post, “was clearly shown after
the battle of Sedan. To dictate terms at the gates of Pans
is the Prussian programme,” a forecast which proved cor-
rect. Practically the same thing was stated in the Quarterly
Review. “France,” it was there declared, “lay, to all ap-
pearance, helpless beneath the heel of her enemy, and, for
a brief space, the utter prostration of the one combatant and
the supreme triumph of the other, raised in the spectators
of the contest a delusive hope that terms of peace which
might be accepted without abject humiliation would be con-
ceded by the magnanimity of the conqueror. It was soon
found, however, that the hope was not to he realised. . • .
The Prussian Monarch had resolved that the cup of humilia-
tion should he drained by his helpless enemy to the last
bitter dregs.”
THIERS AND BISMARCK.
On November 1, 1870, Thiers met Bismarck at Versailles
to try, at the instance of neutral Powers, led by England, to
arrange an armistice. The tone and temper of the German
Press, however, were such as to inspire but little hope that
the negotiations would be successful. “An armistice if at
present granted,” wrote a semi-official agency at Berlin to-
wards the end of October, “must either include a political
guarantee of peace, or else a military guarantee that it will
not diminish the chance we now have of obtaining a speedy
success at Paris and Metz, as well as in other parts of the
country where fighting is going on.” Prussia was thus to
run no risks, and no abatement was to he made on the Fer-
rieres terms which had been looked upon throughout Europe
as excessive, and had terminated the interviews of Septem-
ber. The matters to be settled at Versailles were embodied
under the following five heads, to which Bismarck did not
at first appear to have any insurmountable objection:—
1. The principle of an armistice, having for its essential
object to stop the effusion of blood and to afford France the
means of constituting a Government founded upon the ex-
pressed will of the nation.


2. The duration of the armistice, having regard to the de-
lays required for the formation of a National Assembly.
3. The freedom of the elections in the Provinces then oc-
cupied by Prussian troops.
4. The conduct of the belligerent armies during the stop-
page of hostilities.
5. Lastly, the revictualling of the besieged fortresses, and
specially of Paris, during the armistice.
At the close of the opening meeting on November I Thiers
was confident that an important step had been taken towards
peace. The rival statesmen were in absolute agreement on
the first point. As regarded the duration of the armistice,
the subject of the second proposition, Thiers recorded: “I
asked the Chancellor that it should be from twenty-five to
thirty days—twenty-five at the least. Twelve days, I told
him, were inquired to allow the electors to consult and to
agree as to their choice, one additional day was necessary
for voting, four or five days more for giving the elected can-
didate§ time, in the existing state of the roads, to assemble
at an appointed place, and, lastly, eight or ten days more
for a summary verification of the powers of the men elected,
as well as for the constitution of the future National As-
sembly. Count Bismarck did not contest these computations,
and only remarked that the shorter the time the fewer would
be the difficulties in concluding the proposed armistice. He
seemed, however, resolved, like myself, on a period of twenty-
five days. Next came the serious question of the elections
involved under the third head, the Count stating that in
the districts occupied by the Prussian Army they would be
as free as ever they had been in France.” On the fourth
point-—the suspension of hostilities—the Chancellor had to
consult his military advisers, then assembled under the pre-
sidency of the King, It was at length stated that “the oppos-
ing forces should remain in the very places which they oc-
cupied on the day of the signature of the armistice.”
GERMAN POLICY OF STARVATION.
But when the fifth point—the subject of revictualling—
came up for consideration the whole proceedings broke down,
*Bismarck having changed ground. Prussian successes had


evidently rendered it impossible for him to treat on equal
terms with an adversary who was steadily losing all save
the desperate courage of despair. “Count Bismarck, wrote
Thiers “had not raised any fundamental objection on tins
subject (revictualling), and had seemed inclined to content
only the extent of the quantities claimed, as well as the dith-
culty of collecting them and having them introduced in
Paris. As regarded quantities, I had positively declared that
they should be the subject of an amicable discussion, and
even of important concessions on our part. Once again the
Chancellor wished to confer with the military authorities, to
whom several other questions had already been submitted,
and we agreed to adjourn until the next Thursday,
November 3, for the definite solution of the question raised.
Thiers had urged, in connection with an armistice, that
in accordance with justice and universal practice, the
status quo should be preserved, that is to say, that each
belligerent should at the end of the suspension of hosti-
lities be in the position in which he was at the time
the stoppage began. Otherwise there would rest with
the besiegers a distinct advantage an advantage of
which, however, Bismarck had clearly resolved to avail
himself. His uncompromising and selfish attitude gave
rise to an embittered exchange of views between the diplo-
mats. With unconscionable hypocrisy the Count, while
professing to be desirous of peace, was making stipula-
tions that rendered peace impossible.
In resuming the discussions on November 3, the Chan-
cellor, “speaking then not in his own name, but in that of
the military authorities, declared to me,” says Thiers, “that
the armistice was absolutely opposed to Prussian interests;
that to give us one month’s respite was to afford time for
the organisation of our armies; that to introduce into Paris
quantities of food difficult to specify was to give to the city
the means of indefinitely prolonging her that
such advantages, therefore, could not be granted without
‘military equivalents’—an expression of Count Bismarck’s
own. I replied promptly that undoubtedly the armistice


might bring us some material advantages, but that the Prus-
sian Cabinet must have foreseen this while admitting the
principle of the armistice. Besides, to satisfy the national
wish, to bring peace nearer, and, above all, to show a proper
deference to the declared will of Europe, were political ad-
vantages for Prussia such as were fully equal to any mate-
rial gain which she might concede to us. I then asked Count
Bismarck what were the ‘military equivalents’ required of
us, but he was slow to specify them.
“He at last, however, stated them, always with a certain
reserve, ‘lt was,’ he said, ‘a military position about Paris’
(and, as I further pressed him), ‘a fort,’ he added, ‘more
than one, perhaps.’ I promptly stopped the Chancellor. It
is Paris, I said, that you ask from us; for to deny us revic-
tualling during the armistice is to take from us one month
of our resistance; to require from us one or several of our
forts is to ask for our ramparts. It is, in short, to demand
Paris, while we should give you the means of starving or
bombarding her. In treating with us for an armistice you
could never suppose that its condition should be that we
should give up Paris herself to you Paris, our chief
strength, our great hope, and for you the principal difficulty,
which after fifty days of siege you have not been able to
overcome.”
PRUSSIANS WITHOUT CHIVALRY.
At this point the two statesmen could proceed no further,
and nothing more was heard of an armistice until January.
The offer made at Versailles .to Thiers in November was
practically that submitted at Ferrieres to Favre in Septem-
ber, an armistice, that is to say, on condition that Paris
should be placed under the guns of forts surrendered to her
enemy. Bismarck knew that he had his adversary on the
hip; and no Shylock could have clung to that advantage with
more selfish tenacity. “An armistice, to be fair, must in-
volve,” as Mr. Gibson Bowles said at the time, in one of his
letters to the Morning Post, “the maintenance of both sides
in statu quo; but what the Prussians- propose is that they
should be left in as good a condition as they now are, and
that Paris should be deprived of twenty-five days’ provisions;
or, in other words, that its starvation point should be brought


nearer by twenty-five days. Such a proposal is so manifestly
inadmissible that it will be interesting and curious to know
bow M. de Bismarck justifies it; as for the Parisians, they
had better have surrendered at once than have accepted it.
The incident shows how sincere the Chancellor is in desir-
ing peace, and what extreme importance he attaches to
the desire of the four Great Powers for an armistice. He
does not refuse it, indeed, but he attaches a condition to it
which makes it a mere derision.”
Paris, the capture of which had been a fixed
idea of the enemy from the first, had at last
through sheer lack of food either to submit or
to die Neither food nor medicines had been
permitted to enter the city for weeks. Yet during
the present war a nation of assassins has whined a
the very idea of being brought to book by England
through starvation. Since the beginning of the cam-
paign, indeed, the Huns, despite their ruthless policy
towards France forty-five years ago, have been trying
to make neutrals believe that the British blockade and the
attempt to stop enemy supplies are inhuman, illegal, and
quite new to the practice of war.
The capitulation of the French capital in January,
1871, was followed by negotiations leading up to a
peace which entailed upon the new Kepublic the
payment of an indemnity of £200,000,000, and the
relinquishing of two provinces. But that enormous loss
did not include extortionate requisitions which had through-
out the conflict enabled Germany to wage war cheaply, and
which had been demanded everywhere, according to the
practices not of civilised soldiers but of the worst type of
brigands.
THE SUFFERINGS OF FRANCE IN 1871.
After enduring siege and bombardment, with famine
finally at hand, Paris was, in January, 1871, forced to capi-
tulate. “On Monday morning I received an extremely grave


piece of intelligence,” wrote Mr. Gibson Bowles to the Morn-
ing Post on Wednesday, the 25th of the month. “That
intelligence which is,” he said, “freely whispered about, and
has even been darkly alluded to by more than one General,
was that the provisions had suddenly been discovered to be
very far short of what had hitherto been believed, so much
so-indeed that, with the provincial armies far off, the Go-
vernment had been forced to recognise the absolute necessity
for negotiation, and that Jules Favre was in consequence
about to set forth immediately for Versailles, with the object
of gaining an armistice, allowing the revictualling of Paris,
and that at any price. In effect, this must amount, of course,
to a capitulation under the disguise of an armistice.” That
was an accurate epitome of the situation. The death rate
had become appalling in the capital, which had endured the
siege twice as long as had been expected. Nothing except
submission could now save the population from the horrors
of actual starvation. In a despatch to Earl Granville, at the
end of December, Odo Russell declared that the Prussians
would be satisfied only with unconditional surrender. On
January 23 Eavre started for Versailles, where five days
previously King William had been proclaimed German Em-
peror, That proclamation marked the first great step of
Imperial Germans in their criminal enterprise to dominate
the world on the barbarous principle that might was right.
Even then the devastation had begun,
And half the business of destruction done.
“The union of Germany,” said the Morning Post on Febru-
ary 9, 1871, “pointed to an era of physical force, in which
all who desire to hold their own must be prepared to meet
such force with something more than moral arguments or
diplomatic negotiations.” No warning or anticipation was
ever more completely justified by events.
CAPITULATION OF PARIS.
Bismarck had now become a Prince and Moltke a Count.
A message had been sent to the French Minister for Foreign
Affairs, informing him that he would be received by the
Chancellor if he came to discuss the question of capitulation
and no other.


On that understanding there ensued negotiations
which Bismarck hoped would end hostilities con-
sistently with the safety and dignity of Germany. He
asked what Paris had to offer. Favre replied that it would
capitulate if the “Army were permitted to march out with
the honours of war.” That was refused.
January 24 was spent by the French Minister in
the capital in consultation with his colleagues, and
on the three following days he was again with the
Chancellor. At one o’clock in the morning of 28th
the bombardment of Paris ceased. For several hours that
day Bismarck, Moltke and Favre were in close conference,
the deliberations resulting in an armistice, extending to Feb-
ruary 19. It permitted the Government of National Defence
to convoke an Assembly' to pronounce on the question
“whether the war should be continued or on what terms peace
should be made.” It also provided that there should be an
immediate surrender to the German Army of all the forts
forming the perimeter of the exterior defences of Paris. The
capital was to furnish a municipal contribution of war
amounting to 200,000,000 francs, that payment to be effected
before the fifteenth day of the armistice. The balance of
power in Europe being now jeopardised by the encroach-
ments of Germany, Guizot, while Bismarck and Favre were
at Versailles, tried to enlist the sympathy of Mr. Gladstone
against “ambitious despots and conquerors.” No action was
taken, however, by our Liberal Government, whose policy
was loudly approved by a few Teutonised English men of
letters, with whom the worshop of everything German-had
become a species of idolatry. After the election of the
National Assembly, which was not in favour of continuing
the war, Thiers and Favre went to Versailles to arrange pre-
liminaries of peace. Paris had fallen, the country was com-
pletely exhausted, the people had been impoverished by the
rapacious exactions of a remorseless foe, and Germany had
risen to the highest rank as a European Power. The dis-
cussions on the peace preliminaries extended from Tuesday,
February 21, to Sunday, February 26, and, though Germany
had gained all at which it had aimed, Bismarck showed
himself more overbearing and less compromising than he
had yet been, .......


THE INDEMNITY QUESTION.
The original indemnity proposed was £240,000,000. This
seemed excessive, and the French Ambassador in London
brought the matter to the notice of Earl Granville, who was
induced to express the hope guardedly and in the most
friendly manner through Lord Augustus Loftus, British Am-
bassador at Berlin, that the amount would not he greater than
the country could be expected to p&y. In the end the sum
was reduced to £200,000,000, not, however, without much
debate, during which Bismarck threatened to renew the war
between German troops and “whatever they could find to
fight.” “We found him,” says Favre, “particularly excited
on the Saturday morning. His reception was constrained
and almost supercilious. He showed himself more than im-
patient. He rebuked M. Thiers for returning to questions
which had already been debated and settled, and for recur-
ring under another form to the advantage which Germany
had wrested from us. Nothing was more unjustifiable. M.
Thiers had the right to defend the interests of his country,
and he acquitted himself of the task in a way at which the
Chancellor had no right to take offence. . . . But M, de Bis-
marck would listen to nothing. He accused us of inventing
pretexts for prolonging negotiations and preparing ourselves
to renew the war. His language was impetuous, almost pas-
sionate, and his tone harsh. It was easy to see that he was
under the influence of violent feelings hostile to our delibera-
tions. I had no difficulty in understanding this, because I
knew that the evening before he had received the news of
the despatch which Lord Granville had sent to Lord Augus-
tus Loftus. I was in no way surprised to hear him ex-
claim, with a vivacious movement, H see quite well that
you have no other idea than that of beginning the campaign
again; you will have in that the support and advice of your
good friends the English.’ ”
“I stopped him,” says Favre, “and asked him what he
meant. I combated for perhaps the twentieth time his pre-
tended apprehensions. I added . . . that if we now found
friendships in Europe it was certainly to him that we owed
them. He replied that the best way to prove that our de-
sire for a prompt and peaceful solution coincided with his


was to arrange definitely the payment of the indemnity.”
Bismarck submitted a scheme of due dates and Treasury
conditions, naming at the same time the people to whom he
would entrust it. He asked the Frenchmen to accept these
people as intermediaries. Thiers, however, showed that the
proposals had the disadvantage of adding sensibly to the
responsibilities of his country and of diminishing in a very
prejudicial way its libertyof action. “France,” added Thiers,
“is overwhelmed, hut she does not despair of herself. She
no more wishes to escape from her engagements than to re-
sume the war. She will recover herself by industry, and
will pay you within the periods agreed upon, however short
they may be. You have nothing to ask beyond that. For
the rest, what you have just described to us is com-
plicated, and technical. You have prepared it without
haste with eminent financial advisers. We claim the like
opportunities for deliberation. M. Alphonse de Rothschild
is in Paris, and you know as well as I do his great experi-
ence and his perfect integrity. I propose to send him a tele-
gram, and after I have consulted him I shall he the more
certain not to make any mistake.”
THE FURY OF BISMARCK.
Bismarck did not oppose, the claim of Thiers, but it obvi-
ously caused him displeasure. As the discussion continued,
he became more and more excited, interposing at
every, sentence uttered by the Frenchmen, and declaring
that he was unable to go any further in elaborating what,
as he alleged, others were pleased to render fruitless. Then,
strutting up and down the little room in which the negotia-
tions were being conducted, the Chancellor showed himself
to he in a violent rage. “It is very good of me,” he ejacu-
lated, “to take the trouble you have imposed on me. Our
conditions are ultimatums; you must take them or leave
them. I don’t want to he mixed up' any more with the af-
fair. Bring an interpreter with you to-morrow. Henceforth
I shall no longer speak French,” the Prince afterwards pour-
ing on Thiers and Favre a vehement tirade in German.
When the crisis had arrived at its most acute stage, and
when an impaste seemed to have been reached, the situation
was relieved by the arrival of an attendant, who announced:


“Dinner is served, gentlemen.” During this painful scene,
Thiers did not lose his self-possession for an instant, but
maintained a dignified silence, hoping that the bullying
Chancellor would soon become calm. The Frenchmen were
asked to dine, but they refused the invitation, which was
particularly courteous and pressing.
It was after half-past seven when Alphonse de Rothschild
arrived. Having been informed of the financial aspects of
the negotiations he expressed himself as quite in accord with
the opinions of Thiers. Thiers immediately communicated
with Bismarck, who afterwards conducted the party to the
salon where he had been with his guests. He showed him-
self attentive and gracious, taking obvious pains on this occa-
sion to make the Frenchmen forget what had occurred. In
his ordinary intercourse with the representatives of the
French Bismarck generally observed reasonable restraint, but
in his official capacity he lost no opportunity of insulting
them.
“TO THE LAST BITTER DREGS.”
The foregoing were some of the incidents amid which
the preliminary conditions of peace were arranged. “Re-
duced,” states Fevre, “to submit passively to the will of
the conqueror, we could not hope for any conditions except
those dictated by his interest.
From the day when he drew the sword he had
resolved if we were beaten to snatch two Pro-
vinces from us. This was part of his policy, which
inspired him with implacable passion and hatred
that had been nursed for a long time. Indifferent to
notions of justice, right, and morality alike, he dreamt
only of satisfying German pride. The conquest of a
part of our territory appeared to him to be the best
homage which could be rendered. To the wishes of
the populations which he was incorporating in his Em-
pire, or to the views of the Powers which had so
often called attention to the necessity of preserving the
European equilibrium, he showed the most supreme
Cbntempt.


What could we do against such an attitude? Bend
under 'the weight of our misfortune, ... It was
the certainty that we were fulfilling a great duty which
sustained us during these six mortal days. Nothing of
that which rends a French heart was spared us. We had
to assist, impotent and confounded, at a work of ruin and
national mutilation, to discuss coolly clauses which started
in us feelings of rage and indignation. We thought that
we had exhausted all the sufferings which it was possible for
us to endure. But we were mistaken. A last one was re-
served, the most poignant of all, the pang appending
our signature to the fatal agreement, at the side of that
of Germany triumphant. This was in effect the official
consecration of the iniquity which had just been con-
summated . . • Who is there of all our fellow-citizens
who would not have shuddered at the idea of affixing his
name?” • "
On Saturday evening, February 25, each article of the
Convention was drawn up. There was left only the matter
of certain transcriptions. The Frenchmen, therefore, ex-
pected that on Sunday, the 26th, by one o’clock, all would
be ready. But they had not counted on the slowness of the
office of the German Chancellor in dealing with a defeated
adversary. Thiers and Favre had to wait more than three
hours that were occupied with general conversation which
seemed to them “the very refinement of suffering.” When
at length all the documents had been finished and compared,
Bismarck said: “I think it will be convenient to allow
my colleagues of Bavaria, Wurttemherg, and Baden to
enter.” The Frenchmen had no objection to the presence
of these statesmen, who were to listen to the reading of the
Treaty, and that they did without remark. The face of
Bismarck was radiant. Everything from the German stand-
point seemed almost to have been rehearsed. The Chancellor
brought, with much theatrical ceremony, a gold pen which
the ladies of a German town had furnished for the occasion.
“In silence and grieved to the heart,” says Favre, “M, Thiers
approached the little table on which the documents were
arranged; he wrote his name without letting the feelings
which tortured him be apparent. I forced myself to imitate


him, and we retired.” The sacrifice was complete, the vic-
torious Germans marching down the Champs-Elysees three
days later and occupying Paris for forty-eight hours. Favre
and Thiers had tried hard to save the capital from this
crowning mortification. The Emperor, however, had deter-
mined that the cup of humiliation should he drained by
his enemy to the last bitter dregs. He could not refuse to
his troops the luxury of the triumphal procession which was
headed by that notorious exponent of German barbarism,
General von Bernhardi, then a lieutenant. Bernhardi had
been ordered to ride ahead with twenty-four of his Hussars
to clear the wa) for the main body of soldiers. After pass-
ing through the Arc de Triomphe he was confronted by an
immense crowd which had gathered in the Place de la
Concorde, and which seemed disposed to dispute the passage
of the little advance group of the enemy. Bernhardi com-
manded his men to dismount, to stand by their horses’ heads,
to sling the bridles over their arms, and to have their car-
bines ready. With a loud voice he ordered the Frenchmen to
get out of the road, showing them at the same time how far
back they were to stand. For a moment the crowd fell back,
but was again pressing forward when Bernhardi shouted;
“I shall shoot every person who sets foot on this open space.”
Fortunately, he fulfilled his purpose without any sacrifice
of life, the procession then passing through Paris as if the
capital had been a city of the dead.
“A GLORIOUS BUT BLOODY WAR.”
When all had been finished at Versailles the Emperor sent
for the Crown Prince, whom he embraced tenderly, father
and son weeping with joy. In a congratulatory despatch
to the Sovereign Princes of Germany the Emperor said:'
“With a heart filled with thankfulness we are now at the
end of a glorious but bloody war, which was forced upon
us by frivolity without parallel, and in which your troops
have taken so honourable a part. May of
Germany be consolidated by peace.” The preliminaries ar-
ranged at Versailles were, with certain modifications, rati-
fied in May by the Treaty of Frankfort, which transferred


from France to Germany the whole of Alsace, except Bel-
fort, and a large part of Lorraine, including Metz, with
an indemnity, as already stated, of £200,000,000. It may
here be mentioned that in 1867, three years before the war,
Kiepert, the well-known geographer, _ published at Berlin a
map showing Alsace and Lorraine as included in Germany.
What has just been recounted is not recalled for the pur-
pose of showing how, when victory comes, England should
treat Germany and her Potsdam despots. The Allies may
be trusted not to adopt the methods of their enemy. But
anyone who reads the history of the Franco-Prussian War
of 1870-71, especially that part of it which has reterence ,to
the meetings between Bismarck, Favre and Thiers, will find
nothing in it to induce him to adopt towards the foe the
policy recommended by such men as Professor Pigou, Dr.
Lyttelton, and Mr. Eamsay Macdonald, whose ideas, for-
tunately, have as little claim to represent public opinion in
this country as had the views of the three Tooley-street
tailors* Yet no end of mischief results from their speeches,
which, through Wolff’s Bureau, are industriously circulated
among our enemies, our Allies, and neutrals, as expressions of
“popular feeling in England respecting the War.” The
speeches are the very antithesis of popular sentiment. The
people of England are determined to avoid the Fate of
France in 1870-71, to crush German militarism at all costs,
and “to bind Satan” for generations to come.
♦Or in Australia’s case the members in the Senate and House of
Representatives who voted against Conscription.


we will say deliberately and un-
hesitatingly that any municipality, any
Government, any public concern whatever,
accepting a contract from any firm repre-
senting German interests, will lay itself
open to a very grave suspicion of having
had its honour tampered with. It is
notorious that some of the German firms
trading in Australia set aside sums of
money for use by their agents for purposes
of bribery. Let it be made quite clear then
that anybody, when this war is over,
accepting the contracts of such firms, will
be open to the suspicion of having been
induced in this ivay to consent to the
placing of a contract with a nation which
has shown itself to be the deadly enemy ~ of
the Empire to which we belong!\
“Australian Statesman and Standard,”
October 1, 1914.


VCae, date ' : .
KINSMEN FIRST.
Remember, the British firms to-day are handicapped by
making munitions for the protection of the whole
Empire. Make allowance for this when placing
your orders.
Contracts given to-day outside the Empire will be sub-
jected to criticism a few years hence.
Don’t help to build up enemy countries against our-
selves.
Keep Germans, German goods, and neutral firms hav-
ing German connections or associations out of the
Empire, and thus enable British industries to get
a sound footing.'
For the sake of the men at the front who are doing their
duty by us, let us- do our duty by them. '
Keep this firmly in your mind: Two or three years hence
Great Britain and other parts of the Empire
generally will want all the work they can get to
keep their new industries and factories going.
Don’t go rushing orders out of this country without
making the fullest enquiry as to what can be done
by our own kith and kin.
If England or this country cannot produce the goods
you want now, think before ordering whether the
job should not wait.
Mistrust the mealy-mouthed individual. He is either
* making money indirectly through Germany or is
paid directly by Germany. Look closely into such
a man’s record.
Use caution in trading with neutrals, or it may happen
that the enemy will be helped by you; investigate
carefully where neutral firms are concerned.
If Australia cannot make what you want—
BRITISH GOODS BY BRITISH WORKMEN SHOULD BE
YOUR AIM.
CrITCHLEY Parker. October 5, 1916.
Wholly Set-up and Printed in Australia by Statesman and
Mining Standard, Pty. Ltd., Melbourne
