



IF WAR COMES!
C 11093
-4 MOV 1938
An Address by Rev. J. E. OWEN,
Gardiner Presbyterian Church.
If war had come a week ago—if Mr. Chamberlain
had been compelled to hurry back from Germany because
Hitler had already sent his army across the border into
Czechoslovakia, and Britain and France had thereupon
declared themselves bound to go to the assistance of the
Czechs, there can be little doubt that the great majority
of Christian people would have rallied at once to the
national policy and have declared themselves in favour
of a war in the name of justice and freedom against a
lawless aggressor. Two events have profoundly stirred
the imagination of the people of this country within the
last fortnight. The Prime Minister’s appeal to the
churches to lead the nation in a day of prayer for peace,
followed immediately by the British Premier’s dramatic
visit to Hitler, was taken as proof by the majority of
Christian people that the Empire was seeking the Chris-
tian way out of the European Crisis. If war had come
immediately the churches would with almost undivided
voice have declared that it was now a Christian duty
forced upon a reluctant Empire.
It is because I could not accord with that judgment,
because nothing has moved me to alter the opinion I have
so freely expressed from this platform during the last
two years, that I take- the liberty of giving to you my
judgment on the present situation now, before any out-
break of hostilities, while it is still possible to discuss
these matters in an atmosphere of comparative calm.
What follows is my own judgment. Ido not attempt to
express the judgment of any section within the Church.
If war comes within the next few days we will be
back to the position we assumed in 1914. We will be a
nation driven reluctantly into war as the only means to
save the world from unrighteous despotism. In more
ways than one we will be'back in the situation of 1914.
We will undoubtedly be back in the old game of Power
Politics. Back to the attempt to force peace by the most
expedient combination of peace-desiring nations against
the war-minded nations. Back to the doctrine of the
balance of power. In 1914 we believed that it could be


done once and for all, that one great sacrifice could secure
peace for Europe and the world for generations. It was
this that nerved us for the fight. One competent observer
wrote during the height of the conflict, “There is not the
slightest feeling of vengeance here, only a feeling of sor-
row. But the English are determined not to have this
war recur. The German armed threat must disappear,
and the sooner it disappears and with the least harm to
the Germans the better. There is not the slightest hatred
of Germans. The moment Germany will or can give
up what we call militarism for ever, peace will come
instantly, with no revenge, no hatred, but of course the
reinstatement of Belgium. But no voice will be heard
except on these conditions, no talk of merely stopping
the war, to let it recur ten or twenty or forty years
hence. . . .” It was, as we have been so often reminded,
the war to end war and to make the world safe for
democracy. Well, we won the war, and brought Ger-
many to her knees. We tied her down with conditions
of settlement such as to make it morally impossible for
her to threaten the peace of Europe again. We delivered
political minorities in Europe from the hand of oppres-
sion that had been upon them for centuries. We put
down despotism and we exalted democracy. Yet for all
our success, the years that followed have seen the rise
of the armed threat with more alarming power than the
world has seen before, and we have witnessed the sacri-
fice of democracy in country after country. We did not
establish the peace of the world, and we did not make
the world safe for democracy despite the incalculable
sacrifice of those years, and it is going to be exceedingly
hard for anyone to convince us now that a war will ever
bring lasting peace and the security of democracy! Our
leaders ought to be frank with us. A war now will not
deliver us from the necessity of preparing for another
war. It will be just one more in the already long list of
wars fought in the interests of a peace which is never
secured. Hostilities are suspended as soon as national
resources are exhausted, but there is no peace. For we
are again in the era of Power Politics, which holds out
no higher hope of peace than that the peace-loving
nations will hold the balance of power, and will use their
power to enforce peace as long as they can, and will exer-
cise their power.to protect themselves and their interests
when their efforts to preserve peace fail.
For a time we did lip service to another ideal. We
pledged ourselves most solemnly to renounce war as a
means of settling international disputes. In place of war


we adopted the principle of collective Security. We
bound ourselves to use machinery which we ourselves
helped to set up to secure that an aggressor nation within
the League of Nations would be restrained by all the non-
aggressive, peace-loving nations of the League. If we
had meant this seriously it would have been a great step
forward in the history of international relationships. But
we really did not mean that we were prepared to stand
or fall by the principle of collective security. Perhaps
we thought that we meant it, but when the testing times
came we were not prepared to stand by our word. Man-
churia and Abyssinia and China all witness to the fact
that whatever we may have said about collective security
and our desire to protect democracy and freedom against
aggression, we have not been prepared to fight simply
for an ideal when our own interests were not immediately
involved. It must be granted that there were difficulties
in the way of putting the policy of the League into action,
both through the uncertainty that prevailed within the
League and through the divergence of opinion on the
subject of collective security in Britain itself. But we
were pledged. We were bound by our solemn word more
rigidly than ever we were bound to help Belgium in 1914.
Morally we were responsible, along with all the other
major nations of the League, for the safety of Abyssinia
and China and all other countries who in their weakness
had accepted gladly the principle of collective security.
And we did nothing effective to save Abyssinia or China.
It is interesting to notice the Press comments of our own
country on our obligations to the League when Abyssinia
was being attacked. Our papers betrayed no sense of a
national failure to fulfil obligations. The ‘Argus’
argued that this war could have nothing to do with Bri-
tain. The war was just another of the age-long relations
between Europe and North Africa. European countries
have never intervened in these relations in the past. The
League is new, but it is inconceivable that it should fan
a little war into a world war. “That would be a terrible
violation of common sense. If it cannot stop a war, it
must not cause a war.” “Later the ‘Argus’ swung round
sharply in favour of sanctions. But it was not the only
paper to express strongly the opinion that we must not
allow our League commitments to draw us into a war
when our own interests are not touched. ‘The Bulletin’s’
attitude at the beginning of the war is that ‘there, are
no vital British interests involved in this war, and Britain
would be the only member of the League to fulfil its obli*


gations.’ ” “We won’t fight Italy to protect Abyssinia or
to preserve the League.” The “Labor Daily” is no less
explicit. “England led France and Russia into the
Geneva labyrinth, and ‘they must get out as best they
can, but Australia won’t be there.’ ” The Melbourne
“Herald” asserts that “there is nothing in either Musso-
lini or Haile Selassie to inspire us to go to war to defend
Abyssinia.” (And less than twelve months previously
the “Herald” had declared that “it is better for the
League to keep its principles and lose its members than
to keep its members and lose its principles!”). The
Sydney “Morning Herald,” in urging the recognition of
Italy’s conquest, declares that “Peace is more important
than the League.”
And all this was written while we were pledged to
resist the aggressor. And Italy had been declared the
aggressor! It is abundantly plain that we have never
held seriously to our obligation to maintain collective
security, or to fight in the interests of democracy and
freedom when our own interests were not immediately
involved. If we had, we should have been at war years
ago. And if we go to war now it will be impossible
to maintain that it is an act which we are morally or
even legally bound to perform. We have already shown
quite conclusively that we are not willing to be bound
by our word, or by any other considerations, when we
feel that we can keep the peace profitably, and we could
stand aside now. Czechoslovakia means no more to us
than Abyssinia or China, or Spain for that matter.
Democracy is facing the threat of Fascism in China;
women and children were slaughtered in Abyssinia; if
we could stand aside then we can stand aside now, and
the only thing that will prompt us to fight now, if we do
fight, is the conviction that the blow is falling a little
too near home—that if we let this act of aggression
pass, our own interests will suffer very soon. It is im-
possible to deny that it is the old game of power politics
again. Reluctantly, because we have no desire to fight
for gain, reluctantly we will go to battle to defend the
homes of our people and the interests of our Empire,
getting in the blow now before we leave it too late and
find the enemy at our very gates. This is not meant to
be a bitter or a harsh judgment. It is simply an attempt
to bring out the realities of the situation. The war, if it
comes, will not be forced upon us by our international
commitments —we have already shown quite clearly that
we can disregard them when we please—nor will it be
forced upon us by an aggressor invading our territory. It


will be quite deliberately chosen by us as the only way
to defend our own interests. One could not justifiably
underestimate the responsibility which rests upon the
British Cabinet in this time of crisis. The Governments
of the Dominions are likely to be largely guided by the
British Cabinet, and the well-being of the Empire is in
the hands of that little group of men. One cannot
believe that they would lightly rush into a conflict that
must involve the whole world ultimately. The decision,
if it is made, will be made sorrowfully and reluctantly.
But it will be our decision. Let us not forget that. We
could keep out of the clash of interests between Germany
and Czechoslovakia if we wished. If we go in, it will
be because we believe that the way to protect the people
of the Empire is to strike at German aggression now.
If that decision is made and that course taken, I, for
one, must strongly dissent from the decision, and refuse
to do anything that will positively foster the war spirit.
“But if war comes, if reluctantly we are forced into
it, would you not take your part in the defence of women
and children and defenceless non-combatants?” That is
the question that is thrown immediately at anyone who
repeats his renunciation of war at a time like this. It is
not an easy question to answer. If a man at once
answers, “Although I am a pacifist, if the war I have
striven to avert comes, then I must as a man fight to
defend the defenceless,” he at once destroys one of the
chief values of his pacifism. For one of the best things
that a growing pacifist opinion in the community can do
is to act as a restraint upon those in responsible office
who are following policies that may lead to war. A
government whose selfish economic policy is endangering
the peace of the country would be more likely to change
its policy and eliminate the danger of war if it were
conscious of the existence of a large body of opinion in
the country irrevocably opposed to war. But a govern-
ment which knows that in the last resort all its people
will fight, if only to defend women and children, will be
much more reckless in its ordering of its international
relationships. And, in any case, a pacifism which is
confined to peace time is a rather strange growth.
Possibly the nations will not be delivered from war
madness until there is a large body of men willing to
take the stand that Christians took in the days when the
faith was young' and renounce the right to kill, even in
defence of women and children. But it is also possible
that we are allowing ourselves to be too much dominated
by ancient and out of date categories of thought in this


matter. Defending women and children once meant
going out to grapple with the invader in the field and
prevent him from ever reaching your women and
children. Nowadays the threat to the civilian population
will come from the air, not from bayonet and bullet but
from high explosive shells and poison gas, and the first
and most important act of defence for the women and
children of a combatant nation will be the act of getting
them away from the cities into scattered shelters, and
maintaining a proper supply of gas masks and of food
and all the common necessities of life when normal
means of transport and supply will be thrown out of
joint. This will be the real work of protecting the
women and children, and in this every pacifist ought to
be prepared to work himself to death if need be. But
as for that other form of “defence” which consists in
massacring the women and children of the enemy, to
which Mr. Baldwin, when Premier of Britain, said we
must inevitably be driven in the next war, no pacifist
need make apologies for refusing to have any part in
that, or in the active prosecution of the war which will
have that as one of its main forms of strategy.
Further, on this matter of the defence of women and
children, we have allowed ourselves to be too much
dominated by ancient categories of thought in the pic-
ture which we have allowed men to draw of the
conditions that would obtain in a country into which an
aggressor has marched. The scene is usually made to
include the ghastly picture of murdered millions; women
and children and all the civilian population ravaged in
wholesale massacre. That would be true only in a
country in which resistance had been offered. What the
aggressor wants in these days is not dead millions but
living millions, not cemeteries but markets. It is the act
of resistance which compels the aggressor to destroy
millions of potential buyers of the products of his nation,
which is not good business. The conquest of Austria is
a typical example of the application of the modern
technique in national conquest. It demonstrates quite
obviously the fact that the desire of the modern ag-
gressor is not to exterminate, but to dominate. Thus the
women and children of Czechoslovakia are in far less
danger of torturous death from Hitler if he should be
left unobstructed than they are from the well-meant
intervention of Britain and France and Russia. War to-
day is not waged to defend women and children from
death. In war, they will be among the first to suffer,
and the frantic measures being taken in England to-day


in Air Raid Precautions only serves to indicate that the
Government is well aware of the fact that the civilian
population will be the enemy’s definite objective. War
is waged to-day at the cost of the death of women and
children. It is a price deliberately paid for .. . . ? For
what ? For the preservation of a regime; for the right
to retain a form of government. I do not say that this
might not be with the highest motives. No one would
lightly choose to live in a totalitarian State to-day after
he had enjoyed the privileges of British freedom. If war
comes, it will certainly be to defend women and children
and all the people of the Empire from ultimate subjection
to the rule of Hitlerism. But it will be waged at the cost
of incalculable suffering and ghastly death to thousands,
if not millions, of women and children. It is a price the
nation will confess itself willing to pay for freedom. Here
the militarist, for all the scorn that he has poured on
pacifist cowardice, will find himself in no better case.
“Would you stand by and see the women and children
suffer?” he has cried. But now, in approving the war,
he is himself condemning untold thousands of women and
children to infamous torture, which he will be powerless
to prevent, and the best hope he can offer them is that
he will kill so many of the civilians of the enemy that
their nerve will be broken first.
And it is not as though he could promise us any real
peace out of all the carnage. Twenty years after this
we will be preparing for the next war, if there are any
of us left to prepare for it, or is this another war to stop
war?
I say that it is not worth the price. At the best,
we win a short termed peace, at the awful price of the
decimation of civilian populations, or else we fail, and
are no better off than if we had not resisted.
“But surely,” the persistent patriot replies, “surely
it would be the very depths of craven depravity if we
should simply allow ourselves to be ruthlessly dominated
by a Hitler. Even if the danger of defeat were before
us, would it not be more in accord with the spirit of
our people that we should die gloriously fighting for
righteousness and freedom than in cowardly fashion
yield before an aggressor? Would we not accomplish
more for freedom and truth by our sacrifice?” Again
we are under bondage to ancient ideas. It was a glorious
and a spiritually fruitful thing to die gloriously fighting
for freedom and righteousness in the days when you met
the aggressor face to face and relied upon the justice of
your cause to nerve your arm for the fight. But there is


nothing ennobling or glorious in the total impact of
modem war upon what remains of civilisation after it.
Even the great mass of personal devotion and willing
sacrifice which is contributed by individual combatants
on both sides of the conflict is more than outweighed by
the moral bankruptcy into which we enter the moment
we enter war. We may not wish it. But war nowadays
demands of us all the rotten tricks and unashamed
betrayal of trusts that as private individuals we would
scorn to employ. It demands of us a willingness to
employ all the immoral means that we fear our enemy
might employ; and, if possible, we will employ them
first. Indeed, it is possible to maintain, as Professor
Walter Murdoch maintained in the Melbourne “Herald,”
that we have in reality seen the end of war; that all that
remains now is massacre. The central aim now is
slaughter. “The idea of a fair fight has long been
obsolete. Commander Russell Grenfell, in his simple
and lucid manual of naval strategy, ‘The Art of the
Admiral,’ is perfectly candid and explicit on this point:
‘ln war the endeavour should not be to engage in fair
fight, but in unfair fight. The more unfair the fight, the
‘better the strategy.’ . . . .” A careful reading of the plain
records of the last war indicate that those words are true
in more -ways than the Commander meant. War is not
noble nowadays, neither is it in its impact upon the life
of the world ennobling. It is tending to become
increasingly organised massacre devoid of the few good
qualities it enshrined in former centuries, and with all
its evils aggravated. One further quotation from
Professor Murdoch: “All the references to war in our
literature, and especially in our poetry, are redolent of a
past age, the Age of War; they will need to be revised
or re-written if we want to bring them up to date and
make them relevant to the Age of Massacre. Even some
of the hymns sung with gusto in our churches will sound
different if they are suitably modernised. ‘Forward,
Christian soldiers, marching as to Massacre’ —it is not
only the rhyme and the rhythm that are changed by the
alteration of a word. The churches will really have to
make up their minds about these hymns of theirs, and
also about a question which has been troubling them for
centuries—the question whether war and Christianity
are compatible. They have now to decide whether
Christianity is compatible with wholesale massacre—a
hardish nut to crack, I imagine, for a militarist bishop.”
I believe that there is a positive way out of all this
madness of war. Many will call it the sheerest folly,


but what is war? The world was impressed by the
gesture of Mr. Chamberlain in flying to Hitler for a
conference. The world is always impressed by the
dramatic and the unexpected. What would the world
have said if Mr. Chamberlain had announced to the world
and to Hitler the disbanding of the British forces and
the dispersal of the Fleet? If he had invited Hitler to
a conference on international settlement in which
Britain was so little desirous of enforcing her own in-
terest that she had put aside her means of enforcing
them? If Mr. Chamberlain had said, “For the first time,
we are so anxious for you to regard our approaches as
sincere that we have resolved to rely upon the justice
and the sincerity of our cause for our defence” ? Then,
I believe, he would have made a gesture in international
relationships capable of transforming all efforts after
peace. Then he would have robbed the dictators of their
most potent weapon in their own countries, for he would
have taken the whole sting out of their constant assertion
that the great democracies are determined to keep Italy
and Germany down.
And suppose such a splendid gesture should fail, and
the dictators should succeed in convincing their people
that they had a sufficient grievance against a disarmed
Britain to set about conquering her, at least then we
would have kept our hands clean from massacre and from
deeds of hatred, and would be in a position to begin the
real work of a Christian people, the penetration of the
community with the ideals of brotherhood and true
liberty, a work which even slaves can perform when they
have taken to themselves the right to die, and not to
kill, for their faith.
One thing is certain at the present moment; if
war should come, the Church will be found divided.
Many, and I believe the vast majority, will say, “However
reluctantly it may be, I am compelled to fight for what
I believe to be the cause of justice.” Some-will say, and
no man knows how many, “I can have no part in war;
what I can do for peace I will, but I will have no share
in wholesale massacre.”
It will be a grievous division, but we who are of the
household of faith cannot forget our responsibility to
preserve unbroken the fellowship of all sincere believers
in the Lord. The worst tragedy that could befall the
Church would be that we should forget the charity that
we owe to each other and poison with bitterness a
brotherhood that should remain unbroken in spite of
divergent views concerning the application of the Gospel


to the fact of war. The Report of the Conference $t
Oxford, July, 1937, on Church, Community and State
makes this strong plea. “If war breaks out, then
pre-eminently the Church must manifestly be the Church,
still united as the one Body of Christ, though the nations
wherein it is planted fight each other, consciously offering
the same prayers that God’s Name may be hallowed, His
Kingdom come, and His will be done in both or all the
warring nations. The fellowship of prayer must at all
costs remain unbroken. The Church must also hold to-
gether in one spiritual fellowship those of its members
who take different views concerning their duty as
Christian citizens in time of war.” (The heavier type is
mine).
He who would break the fellowship and create
bitterness in the name of pacifism or of patriotism would
do the Church of Christ a tragic disservice.
One final word to Christian men and women. Be-
ware of losing your Christian perspective! When danger
looms, as it does at the moment, it tends to overshadow
everything else. It rises like a blank wall, and for a
time we can’t see above it nor around it, and we are
tempted to feel that the world has reached its final
catastrophe. It is well at such a time to look back over
the pages of history and review again some of the dark
moments of this world’s life, and see how through all the
darkest moments of the last two thousand years, and
through the long blank centuries of apparent defeat, the
Christian Gospel has kept its little flicker of faith that
has proved itself capable of blazing again into glorious
life. Whatever may be the road by which He will lead
us, Christ will at last bring us into His peace, and will
build the Church against which the gates of Hell itself
shall not prevail.
References:
“Life and Letters of Walter Page,” Second Series, pp. 207-8.
“The Australian Press and the League of Nations in the Abyssinian
War.” Downing and Foxcroft. From “Press, Radio, and
World Affairs.” Melbourne University Press.
Melbourne “Herald,” July 0, 1938.
Report of the Conference at Oxford, July, 1937, on Church, Com-
munity and State.
Fraser & Morphet Pty. Ltd., Printers, 3 and 5 Eastbourne St., Prahran.
