

ILLUSTRATED
DESCRIPTION OF THISTLES,
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, VICTORIA.
ETC.,
INCLUDED WITHIN THE PROVISIONS OF THE
THISTLE ACT OF 1890.
By Authority:
ROBT. S. BRAIN, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, MELBOURNE
1893.
2921.








A number of inquiries having been made to this Department
by public bodies and private persons, desirous of obtaining in-
formation respecting various Thistles which have taken root in
Victoria, it occurred to me that the publication of a coloured
illustrated description would be of value in many ways. Having
communicated with Baron Sir F. von Mueller, the Government
Botanist, on the subject, that gentleman very kindly undertook
to provide such a work, and I acknowledge my indebtedness to
him.
I trust that his labours in preparing so clear and comprehensive
descriptions will have the effect of making generally known the
distinguishing characteristics of those members of the Thistle
family dealt with by the Thistle Act.
Copies of the publication will be supplied gratis to Shire
Councils, Agricultural Societies, Free Libraries, and State Schools,
also to Farmers and Graziers on application.
D. MARTIN,
Secretary for Agriculture.
Department of Agriculture,
Melbourne, April, 1893.
A 2




DESCRIPTIONS AND ILLUSTRATIONS
OF
THISTLES AND ALLIED PLANTS
REQUIRED TO BE DESTROYED UNDER THE THISTLE ACT OF 1890.
This unpretensive publication arose from a desire of facilitating
an exact knowledge of those plants which, under the above-
mentioned Statute, come to public notice, and should therefore
be elucidated in a manner admitting of no uncertainty of recogni-
tion. Chromo-lithographic illustrations, as well as descriptions
of all the Thistles and thistle-like plants mentioned in the Act
are now provided, so that anywhere the various species might be
identified locally with more ease, whereby the necessity for
obtaining departmental information in this direction will be very
much lessened. Further on in this introductory text the principal
characteristics of the Thistles here under consideration have been
briefly contrasted; thus as far as possible tedious comparisons of
the lengthened descriptive records will be avoided, should glances
on the respective pictures not prove at once sufficient for any
information anywhere sought.
As for rural purposes it is desirable that the naming of the
Thistles here hitherto immigrated and copiously spread should be
as free from complication as possible, it was deemed best to adhere
to the systematically scientific names, the vernaculars being subject
to much local vacillation ; but to simplify the nomenclature, the
generic name Carduus in the Linnean sense is maintained, so that
the modern generic appellations Cnicus, Cirsium and Silybum
are given merely as synonyms for the true Thistles. Perplexing
popular names of very limited significance are omitted. The
descriptions may seem unnecessarily effuse; but to distinguish the
Thistles, now already here required to be elucidated, from allied
additional species, which are sure at some future time to invade
our colonial territory, a full account of each sort becomes needful.
In identifying any kind of true Thistles, it should also be borne in
mind that hybrids occur not rarely among them, rendering their
specific recognition not always easy. It has further been considered
desirable to offer some few remarks on the best method of sup-
pression of these troublesome weeds, not for experienced farmers,
but for such settlers, who as colonists enter on rural pursuits for
a new occupation of life. In coping with plants of this kind


two distinct means must be kept in view as necessary. When
annual weeds are to be dealt with, the difficulty is not so great as
in those cases where perennial plants have to be subdued. What-
ever method is adopted for getting rid of plants seeding only once
from the same root when left undisturbed, it reduces itself to acting
on the principle of destroying the plants before they can ripen any
seeds. In the case of Thistles and allied plants of annual growth,
when the individual plants are cut or lifted, they should im-
mediately be brought into heaps and be burned at once, otherwise
the seeds may ripen still on the plants; inasmuch as though dis-
lodged or cut, they are apt to retain vitality for some considerable
time while on the ground, all Thistles being succulent and slow in
drying up. The difficulty of dealing successfully with Thistles
and other weeds of perennial growth is much greater; and regret-
ably the worst of all European Thistles, Carduus arvensis, has in
late years made its appearance also here. The difficulty of its
eradication is augmented, because the root is ramified and fragile;
besides, the smallest portion left near the surface will continue
to grow. Here it may incidentally be mentioned, what Dominique
Yillars already asserted, in the last century, that Carduus arvensis
could best be subdued by not interfering with it till after flower-
ing. So it would seem, that the root gets much exhausted by the
far advancing growth of the plant, without the danger of seeds
ripening being readily incurred by this almost unisexual Thistle.
Villars pointedly says, that by any early cutting the plant would
increase in all directions from the root. As this Carduus is in
our colony of comparatively recent introduction, this advice could
not yet be much brought to test here; it is not applicable how-
ever to Thistles of only annual duration, and would probably be
neither of avail, when Carduus arvensis has become a plant of
several years’ age.
It would seem, that for providing an expeditious, effective, and
uncomplicated “ Weeds-Destroyer,” the ingenuity of invention
can still further be exercised, with a view of superseding to some
extent manual application by usual hoes, forks, scythes, spades,
ploughs or other tools.* Beyond the ordinary operations and
implements in rural use for the destruction of weeds of various
kinds, some contrivances exist perhaps not yet adopted here.
Thus attention is directed, where locality admits of application, to
a particular “ Paring Plough,which cuts the roots readily under
the surface, and thus prevents the plant forming several side-stems,
as it is prone to do when cut just above ground. In some cases
depasturing can be resorted to, particularly by sheep, and perhaps
goats and pigs, as the continued deprivation of stem and leaves be-
eomesat last detrimental totheroot; thus sheepwill nipoff theyoung
sprouts of Carduus arvensis with avidity ; and if this is carried
on sufficiently long, the roots will perish of exhaustion. The
* Here the “ Thistle-hoe ” (a small lifting spade) and the “Thistle-chopper” are chiefly
utilized.


destruction of the small Rumex-Sorrel (Rumex Acetosella, L.) can
be aided by sowing broadcast repeatedly turnips between, and
feeding off through sheep the united young growth, the sorrel as
the weaker plant getting suffocated and tramped out. will
devour as well Thistle-roots as Bracken-roots, and by keeping the
animals within hurdles, moved gradually over the ground, the
annihilation of these plants can be effected more readily on some
places than by other means. It should be further taken into
consideration, that in the winterless clime of our lowlands the
growth of weeds proceeds more or less through the whole year,
and this renders coping with such plants here far more onerous
than in countries where the length and severity of the winters
annihilate largely such plants and their seeds. Therefore, the
Australian ruralist has far more perseveringly to bring his
operations to bear for the suppression even of mere annuals. To
deal with obtrusive plants of perennial growth is, of course, still
far more complicated, as our experiences show with such plants,
for instance, as the Sorrel-Rumex, the Bracken-Fern, the Furze,
the Briar-Rose. Hitherto the Thistle and cognate plants which
have invaded our colony are all annuals, except Carduus arvensis,
above alluded to. This can further be distinguished from the
other Thistles, with us hitherto naturalized, by perfect male
and perfect female flowers being developed by separate individual
plants only. Carduus arvensis is a “Plume-Thistle,” that is to
say, the tuft on the summit of the seed-like fruits consists of
plumous bristlets. As yet only one more real Plume Thistle is
widely naturalized in our colony, the very common Carduus
lanceolatus, the other remaining genuine Carduus, namely C.
pycnocephalus, has simply hair-like bristlets of the tuft. These
easy distinctions as regards the “pappus” are observable already
in the young flower-headlets.
For further facilitating the use of the plates and the descriptions
of the nine plants recorded here, it may introductorily be noted
that the Heraldic Scotch or Onopordon-Thistle, which in its less
grey state bears some resemblance to Carduus lanceolatus, has
the inside bottom of the flower-headlets, so to say, honeycombed,
and not beset with capillulary bristlets; while the Spotted Thistle,
Carduus Marianus, is known well enough everywhere by the
vernacular name, signifying as if a milky fluid had been sprinkled
on the foliage. The Centaureas are spurious Thistles; and as we
have hitherto to attend only to two, their discrimination is quite
easy by the mere colour of the flowers, purple in Centaurea Calci-
trapa, yellow in Centaurea Melitensis. The only other yellow-
flowering plant coming under notice on this occasion is the very
conspicuous Saffron-Thistle, Kentrophyllum lanatum. Thus it
solely remains under the Thistle Act to recognise the so-called
Bathurst-Burr, a plant very different from the eight others treated
in this essay, and so distinct that it in no way can be called a
real Thistle.


As the first effort of an artist, who on this occasion had to be
initiated into plant-drawing, the coloured delineations now offered
must be regarded as fairly creditable. Some imperfections have
been amended in the full descriptions elucidative of the illustra-
tions. Furthermore, these plates of a publication, which the
Agriculture Department intends to distribute very widely over
our colony, will perhaps, along with the descriptive letter-press,
thus serve also educational purposes, at drawing lessons and
at botanic teachings. That delineations of plants of so large a
size had to he brought within such narrow pictural space, arose
from the necessity of rendering this little treatise conformous to
the other literary issues of the Victorian Agricultural Department.
To the Honorable the Minister and the Secretary of the
Agriculture Department I beg to tender my best thanks for pro-
viding the means and for other facilitations afforded to elaborate
this publication.
I.
CARDUUS LANCEOLATUS, LINNÉ.
(Cnicus lanceolatus, G-. F. Hoffmann; Cirsium lanceolatum, Scopoli.)
The Spear-Thistle, called also hut inaccurately the Scotch
Thistle ; one of the Plume-Thistles.
Indigenous to Europe, Western Asia, and Northern Africa ;
here the commonest and most readily spreading of all Thistles.
A formidable plant. Height to several or even many feet, but
only once flowering from the same root under ordinary circum-
stances. Stems and branches robust, furrowed, beset with mostly
crisped hairlets. Leaves decurrent, the largest when well de-
veloped to one foot long, mostly pinnatifid, but some particularly
the upper less divided, often also irregularly prickly denticulated ;
on the upper side rough from minute straight rigidulous hairlets ;
on the lower side more or less bearing a lax somewhat webby
or cottony but not close vestiture, or rarely quite whitish-lanu-
ginous ; the lobes often almost semilanceolar, undivided or some
incised, always terminated by a conspicuous pungent spinule.
Headlets of flowers erect, comparatively large, approached by
diminutive floral leaves, singly terminating branches, or two or
more rather near together by the shortness of approaching
branchlets. Involucre almost globular or somewhat ovate, soon
open, consisting of numerous conspicuous rigid spinescent and
mostly spreading bracts lanceolate or subulate-linear in form,
and usually bearing some weblike vestiture below, the innermost
hardly pungent. .Receptacle copiously beset between the flowers
with setular-capillulary bracts. Corolla of the flowers upwards
purplish (shown in our analytic plate hardly of a sufficiently
bright tinge), thinly tubular to the middle, towards the summit


dilated and produced into five narrow lobes. Filaments of the
stamens disconnected, beset with some hairlets ; the five anthers
united into a tube, purplish, sagittate-linear, their pollen pale.
Style capillular-filiform, glabrous ; the two stigmas very slender,
purplish, soon exserted, coherent except at the summit. Fruits
seed-like, obliquely cuneate-ellipsoid, compressed, but also latterly
angular, glabrous, outside pale yet shining, smooth. Pappus
somewhat shorter than the corolla, consisting of whitish hygro-
scopic capillularv and distantly plumous setules, finally much
expanding and seceding, but often carrying the fruit with its
solitary seed widely through the air, as in the case with all true
Carduus Thistles. In cold climes this, like many other Thistles,
is regarded as biennial; and here also it may pass into a second
year if the growth becomes retarded or interrupted.
Although the specific name is constantly ascribed to Linne, it
occurs already in Ray’s works, if not before in G-erarde’s, with
precisely the same wording, and it was indicated even by J. and
C. Bauhin.
Explanation of Plate I.
a. A flowering branch with its leaves, natural size.
b. 1. Longitudinal section of a headlet of flowers.
2. A complete flower, with young fruit, also bracteal
bristlets and pappus.
3. A separate corolla.
4. Stamens flattened out.
5. Style and stigmas.
6. Fruit.
7. Transverse section of a fruit, showing the two cotyledons
of the seed.
8. Embryo.
9. A bracteal bristlet.
10. A pappus-bristlet.
1-10. Magnified, 1 slightly so, the rest to various extent.
II.
CARDUUS ARVENSIS, TABERNÆMONTANUS.
(Cnicus arvensis, G. F. Hoffmann; Cirsium arvense, Scopoli; Serratula
aryensis, Linne.)
The perennial Thistle (called also, but incorrectly, the Canadian
and the Californian Thistle), one of the Plume-Thistles, easily
recognised by its perennial root and by having staminate and
pistillate flowers perfected only on distinct plants, and these not
always intermixed. Indigenous to Europe, Western Asia, and
Northern Africa. . The most mischievous of all immigrated
Thistles, on account of the very great difficulty encountered in
its eradication.


Height usually up to some few feet. Root thick, spreadingly
penetrating to a gradually great length and depth through the
soil, hence much ramified, very tenacious of vitality, the ramifi-
cations of the root brittle. Stem furrowed, variously branched,
particularly the upper portion, as well as the peduncles often
somewhat lanuginous. Leaves, unless the lower, sessile, usually
not decurrent or only slightly so, pinnatilobed or only short-
sinuated or some almost entire, often crisped, pungent-pointed
and spinular-denticulated, often nearly glabrous, or on below
scantily webby-lanuginous. Headlets of flowers generally stalked
and somewhat paniculated, upright, of two forms; those with
perfectly polliniferous anthers on individual plants distinct from
those producing fertile seeds and larger, with more exserted
flowers; male involucre more semi-globular; female involucre
more truncate-ovate; involucrating bracts comparatively small,
much appressed, from broad to narrow lanceolar and slightly
fringed, the lower the broadest and short-spinulous at their apex,
the upper gradually the longest and hardly or not at all pungent,
all imperfectly fringed with minute hairlets, often of a rather dark
hue. Receptacle bearing capillulary-setular bracts between the
flowers. Corolla pale-purplish or more lilac, seldom white, its
five lobes much longer than broad, bluntish, suddenly emerging
from the very slender tube. Stamens alternate to the corolla-
lobes, their filaments disconnected, rough; anthers arroAv-shaped
linear, in the male plant perfect and therefore pollen-bearing.
Style thinly filiform; the two stigmas narrow but conspicuously
broader than the style, and except at or towards their summit
coherent, more divergent at the upper end in the female plant;
fruits seed-like, truncate-ellipsoid, smooth, shining, less readily
maturing than in most other species (the lithographic colouration
incorrect). Pappus fragile, consisting of distantly plumous
setules, finally seceding, those at least of the female plant con-
spicuously overreaching the corolla.
The most difficult of all our Thistles to subdue, though less
copiously producing seeds fit to germinate.
Explanation of Plate 11.
a. Perfect staminate plant; flowering branch with its leaves,
natural size.
1. Longitudinal section of a headlet of flowers; aside an
enlarged floral bract.
2. A separate corolla, the stigmas emerging.
3. Corolla, laid open, showing also the stamens.
4. A perfect anther, with part of the filament.
5. Side and back view of sterile stigmas with their style.
6. A sterile fruit.
7. Pappus.
8. A separate pappus-bristlet.
2-8. Magnified, but to various extent.


b. Perfect-pistillate plant, flowering branch with its leaves, also
portion of the root and some young shoots; natural
size.
1. Longitudinal section of a headlet of flowers.
2. A separate corolla, anthers and stigmas also visible.
3. A corolla, laid open.
4. A sterile anther with portion of filament.
5 and 6. Fertile stigmas with style.
7. Pappus.
8. A separated pappus-bristlet.
9. Fertile fruit.
2,3, 4,5, 6 and 8. Much magnified, but to various extents.
III.
CARDUUS PYCNOCEPHALUS, JACQUIN.
The Shore-Thistle.
Indigenous to Middle and Southern Europe, Northern Africa,
and South-Western Asia.
The specific name is derived from the lieadlets of flowers,
generally crowded, mostly without stalks at the summit of the
branches.
Height of the plant up to some few or rarely several feet; only
once flowering from the same root under ordinary circumstances.
Leaves much decurrent, except the lowest, when most developed
to several inches long, of moderate width, frequently pinnatifid,
irregularly spinular-denticulated, above seldom quite glabrous,
beneath often from short hairlets webby-tomentellous, the lobes
partly or irregularly incised, always ending in a short spinule.
Headlets rather small and remarkably narrow, erect or diverging,
usually from two to five close to each other at the end of the
uppermost branchlets, without any near approach of conspicuous
eaves. Involucre at flowering time almost hemiellipsoid or even,
somewhat cylindric, occasionally bearing a lax webby vestiture,
but not unfrequently almost glabrous, the constituting bracts
rather small and smooth, pale-greenish outside, inside colourless
and very shining, mostly linear-semilanceolar, but the lowest
verging into an ovate form, hardly any of them strongly pungent,
the upper somewhat spreading —(drawn on the whole too small,
and not sufficiently pointed in the lithographic plate). Flowers
much less numerous within each involucre than in most other
species, linear-setular smooth bracts copiously betwixt them;
corolla purplish or verging into violet colour, its lower half thinly
tubular, the upper half divided to beyond the middle into five
very narrow lobes. Stamens alternate to the corolla-lobes, their
filaments upwards disconnected, and there beset with minute hair-
lets. Anthers pale, united into a tube, sagittate-linear. Style


filiform, the two stigmas violet-coloured, very narrow, coherent
except at the summit, encircled at the base by minute papillules.
Fruit compressed, almost ellipsoid, but more attenuated towards the
base; when ripe brownish or remaining pale outside and very
minutely foveolar-dotted, slightly constricted below the depressed
summit. Pappus somewhat or hardly shorter than the corolla,
finally deciduous, the constituting capillulary setules merely
subtle-ciliolated; thus this species not being a Plume-Thistle.
When the branches are more broadly dilated by the decurrent
leaves, then this plant as a variety bears the name Carduus tenui-
florus (Curtis). To this Thistle is similar Carduus crispis, L.,
which has not yet any particular hold on Victorian soil, but is
likely to invade hereafter our colony also, it being of still wider
range in Europe, Asia and Africa than Carduus pycnocephalus;
it can already be recognised by leaves generally less lobed, less
pungent and less rigid, by less crowded headletswith involucres
much more widely spreading out, by narrower involucral bracts,
also more subtle-furrowed fruits.
Explanation of Plate 111.
Flowering branch with its leaves, natural size.
1. Longitudinal section of a headlet of flowers.
2. A floral bract.
3. A complete flower with young fruit; also bracteal bristlets
and pappus.
4. A separate corolla, the stigmas also visible.
5. A corolla, laid open, showing the stamens.
6. Style and stigmas.
7. A fruit.
8. Transverse section of a fruit; also showing the cotyledons
of the seed; longitudinal section of fruit (the cotyledonar
division drawn too deeply).
9. Pappus-bristlet.
1-9. Magnified, 1 slightly so, the rest to various extent.
IV.
CARDUUS MARIANUS, LINNÉ.
(Silybum Marianum, Gasrtner.)
The Spotted Thistle, called also the Maria-Thistle and the
Milk-Thistle. Indigenous to Southern Europe, Northern Africa,
and South-Western Asia. The generic name Silybum is recorded
as the Roman one by Plinius, and originated from the vernacular
of the plant in the ancient Greek language. Next to Carduus
lanceolatus, hitherto the most frequent Thistle here.


Height to several feet. Flowering under ordinary circum-
stances only once from the same root. Stem robust, much streaked
and rather angular, occasionally the upper portion somewhat beset
with crisp or floccous hairlets. Leaves spacious, some to 2 feet
long, the lower somewhat pinnatilobed or only sinuated, the upper
with bilobed base amply clasping but otherwise often lobeless,
indented, all spinular-denticulated, glabrous, shining-green and
usually with whitish spots and whitish costular and venular mark-
ings. Headlets very large, soon erect, as broad as long or broader,
almost flat at the" base, singly terminal, often conspicuously
stalked. Involucral bracts mostly of foliaceous texture, the
outermost broadly stipitate, nearly cordate or semiorbicular, spi-
nular-denticulated and spinescently long-acuminated; the more
middle bracts very long ~and much spreading, towards the base
entire and almost stalklike, though also broad and flat, thence
passing into a deltoid or cordate-orbicular large dilatation, con-
cave or channelled, irregularly spinular-denticulate and gradually
terminating in a long spinule; the innermost bracts almost linear-
lanceolar, more or quite entire and somewhat scarious. Flowers
numerous, with very copious setulous-capillulary persistent bracts
between them. Corolla upwards purplish, reddish or rarely white
to beyond the middle slender-filiform, then suddenly widening
and cleft into five somewhat unequal linear-elliptic lobes. Sta-
mens alternate to the corolla-lobes, their filaments for the greater
part of their length connate into a tube; anthers purplish, linear-
sagittate. Style filiform ; stigmas somewhat broader, coherent
except at the summit, purplish, soon exserted. Fruit ovate-
ellipsoid, truncate, considerably compressed, smooth, with a pro-
truding apex, outside dark-brown, with slight paler variegation.
Bristlets of the pappus flatfish, ciliolar-serrulated or those of the
outer flowers slightly plumous, connectedly deciduous, not very
much longer than the ripe fruit.
Explanation of Plate IV.
Flowering branch with its leaves, natural size.
1. Longitudinal section of a headlet of flowers.
2. A complete flower with young fruit and pappus.
3. Stamens with summit of the corolla and only upper
portion of the filamental tube.
4. Stigma and upper portion of the style.
o. A bracteal bristlet and a pappus-bristlet.
6. A fruit.
7. Transverse section of a fruit, showing also the cotyle-
dons of the seed.
8. Embryo.
2-8. Enlarged, but to various extent.


V.
ONOPORDON ACANTHIUM, LINNÉ.
The Scotch Heraldic Thistle.
The generic name was written by Linne Onopordum, but the
writing generally adopted is in accordance with the name as
given by Plinius from ancient Greek authors.
Indigenous to Europe, Western Asia, and Northern Africa.
Here less obstructive than the other Thistles. Height up to
some few or rarely many feet, but often dwarfed. Flowering
under ordinary circumstances only once from the same root.
All over or particularly the leaves beneath more or less webby -
lanuginous. Leaves conspicuously decurrent, except those at the
root, in outline from rhomboid-ovate to narrow-lanceolar, short-
lobed or only indented, always irregularly spinescent-denticulate,
sometimes glabrescent above, the lower to one foot long and
occasionally some deeply cleft. Headlets of flowers singly
terminating branches or approximated branchlets. Involucre
truncate-globular, consisting of numerous rather small spreading
upwards linear-subulate very pungent bracts, the lowest bent
downwards. Receptacle honeycombed and denticular-foveolate,
but devoid of setular-capillary bracts. Corollas upwards purplish-
red or rarely quite white, the lower half thinly filiform, the upper
half suddenly turgid, somewhat irregularly cleft into five narrow
bluntish lobes. Stamens alternate to the corolla-lobes, their
filaments almost glabrous ; anthers connate, linear-sagittate, pur-
plish. Style capillulary; stigmas narrowly semicylindric, coher-
ent except at the summit, with a slight basal enlargement. Fruits
somewhat compressed, nearly ovate, longitudinally angular-lined,
outside brown or greyish and occasionally black-spotted, con-
spicuously wrinkled, supported within its receptacular hollow by
only a minute bract. Pappus-bristlets numerous, subtly ciliolar
denticulated, at the base connate, sometimes reddish.
Explanation of Plate V.
Flowering branch with its leaves, natural size (lithographic
colouration green instead of greyish).
1. Longitudinal section of a headlet of flowers.
2. Alveolar bracts of receptacle, one yet retaining its fruit.
3. A complete flower, with young fruit and pappus.
4. A corolla laid open, showing also stamens, style and stigmas.
5. A stamen separated.
6. Style and stigmas.
7. Side view of a fruit.
8. Fruit, presenting its summit.
9. Longitudinal section of a fruit across the cotyledons.
10. Longitudinal section of a fruit parallel to the cotyledons.
11. Transverse section of a fruit.
I—lo. Enlarged, but to various extent.


VI.
CENTAUREA CALCITRAPA, LINNÉ.
The Star-Thistle.
The specific name has been chosen in allusion to the very
spinular flower-headlets, its etymology being derived from the
Latin name of an ancient contrivance to impede the progress of
horsemen in warfare. The British vernacular has been in use
since medieval times. Indigenous from Middle Europe to
Western Asia and Northern Africa.
Flowering under ordinary circumstances only once from
the same root. Neither tall nor robust, often much spreading
and very branched, imperfectly beset with short hairlets, only
occasionally reaching a height of 3 feet. Leaves rather small,
unless those near the root, always lax, simply sessible, pinnati-
lobed or the upper gradually undivided, the basal leaves some-
times doubly dissected, the lobes and undivided portion always
narrow and distantly or imperfectly denticulated. Headlets of
flowers singly terminal and lateral, almost sessile. Involucral
bracts glabrous, at their lower portions closely appressed, dilated,
pale, uniting into an almost conic-ovate form, the upper ending in a
spreading comparatively long and strong spinule, excepting the
innermost bracts; the spinule towards its base denticulate-
spinular and somewhat channelled. Receptacle beset with
numerous capillulary-setular white bracts. Flowers of nearly
the same length, not very numerous, the outermost generally
sterile. Corolla purplish in the majority of the plants, its tube
very thin, widened towards the summit, the five lobes narrow;
corolla of the circumferential flowers longer lobed. Stamens
irritable, alternate to the corolla-lobes, their filaments beset with
very minute papillular hairlets ; anthers reddish, connate, linear-
sagittate. Style capillulary, bearing papillular hairlets at the
upper end ; stigmas narrowly semicylindric, coherent except at
the top. Ripe fruit glabrous, cuneate-ellipsoid, somewhat com-
pressed, slightly biangular, at the base unilaterally impressed or
almost excised, outside pale with darker striolate spots (the
lithographic colouration on the plate incorrect). Pappus absent.
A very closely allied plant, showing a transit to Centaurea
Iberica (Stephan), differs chiefly in having a short pappus, at all
events to the fruits of the marginal flowers. A variety, here
also already immigrated, in which the lower involucral bracts are
terminated only in very short spinules, approaches Centaurea
Pamphylica (Boissier and Heldreich).
Explanation of Plate VI.
Flowering branch with its leaves, natural size.
1. Longitudinal section of a headlet of flowers, slightly
enlarged.
2. A separate corolla, showing also style and stigmas.


3. A corolla laid open, showing thus the stamens.
4. A stamen detached.
5. Style and stigmas.
6. A fruit.
7. Transverse section of a fruit, exhibiting the cotyledons.
8. Embryo.
2-8. Enlarged, but to various extent.
VII.
CENTAUREA MELITENSIS, LINNÉ.
The Malta-Thistle.
Indigenous to Southern Europe, Northern Africa, and South-
Western Asia.
Neither this nor any other Centaurea is so formidable as any of
the true Carduus-Thistles, nor do they so easily spread from seeds
to far distances ; flowering under ordinary circumstances only
once from the same root. Vestiture short, soft, grey, partially
evanescent. Height of plant to three feet or exceptionally more.
Stem erect, usually few-branched, foliaceously dilated at its angles.
Radical leaves of good size, narrowed into a conspicuous petiole,
pinnatifid, the end-lobe largest ; cauline leaves rather small, long
decurrent beyond the point of aflfixion, from narrow-lanceolar to
broad-linear, quite entire or somewhat denticulated, the floral
leaves much shortened. Headlets of flowers absolutely terminal,
or some at the ends of short but seldom crowded branchlets
almost axillary, comparatively small. Involucre turgid, but
generally less broad than given in the illustrative plate, also less
spreading and spinulous in the downward portion, often partici-
pating in the general vestiture, its constituent bracts downward
much appressed, near the upper end most of them spreadingly
spinular-denticulated, and except the lowest and innermost ending
into a spinule of a length less than that of the whole bract.
Receptacle beset with numerous capillulary-setular bracts. Co-
rollas yellow; those of the peripheral flowers somewhat enlarged
and generally sterile; tube thinly filiform, rather suddenly widen-
ing, the dilated portion nearly as long as the five narrow and
acutish lobes. Stamens alternate to the corolla-lobes ; their
filaments glabrous ; the anthers shaped like a narrow elongated
arrow-head, but slightly contracted at the middle. Style capillu-
lary, with circles of papillular hairlets at the upper end, otherwise
almost glabrous. Stigmas semicylindric, somewhat curved, con-
nate except at the summit. Fruit ellipsoid, moderately com-
pressed, at the top truncated, above the narrow base unilaterally
much impressed, scantily covered with almost imperceptible hair-
lets, shiningly greyish outside. Pappus-bristlets flattish, but


extremely narrow, scarcely subtle-ciliolated, those of the outer
row less than half the length of those of the inner series, hut the
latter still shorter than the capillulary bracts of the receptacle
and hardly as long as the fruit.
A closely allied species, namely Centaurea solstitialis (Linne),
the St. Barnahy’s Thistle, which is of the same geographic range
in its native countries, has also already found its way into the
Colony Victoria for permanent domiciliation; it remains however
as yet less frequent, though in the countries at the Mediterranean
Sea it seems more common than Centaurea Melitensis, which does
neither claim British natality in the way of Centaurea solstitialis.
The latter may be recognised already by the terminating spinules
of the involucral bracts being considerably longer than the
lamina of bracts, also by the outside darker colour of the fruits,
with less attenuation at the base, and by the longest pappus-
bristlets about doubly exceeding the length of the fruit, irrespec-
tive of some minor characteristics.
Explanation of Plate VII.
Flowering branch with its leaves, natural size.
1. Longitudinal section of a headlet of flowers, slightly
enlarged.
2. Pappus-bristlets.
3. A separate corolla, unexpanded.
4. A separate corolla, expanded.
5. A corolla laid open, showing thus the stamens.
6. An anther with part of its filament.
7. Style and stigma.
8. A fruit, its pappus shed.
9. Transverse section of a fruit.
10. Embryo separated, showing cotyledon and radicle.
11. Whole pappus.
12. Inner pappus-bristlets.
2-7. Enlarged, but to various extent.
VIII.
KENTROPHYLLUM LANATUM.
De Candolle and Duby (from. Necker), Carthamus lanatus, LinrA
The Saffron-Thistle.
The generic name is derived from the spinular-prickly leaves,
the vernacular from the affinity to the spurious Saffron-Plant,
Carthamius tinctorius, L.
Indigenous to Southern Europe, Northern Africa, and South-
Western Asia.
2921. B


Flowering under ordinary circumstances only once from the
same root, but it may pass into a second year of growth. Stem
strongly streaked, to about three feet high, unless exceptionally
taller; its upper portion as well as the branches somewhat webby -
lanuginous. Leaves stiff, bright-green, scantily lanuginous or
glabrescent and slightly viscidulous papillular, prominently venular,
the lowest stalked and often pinnatilobed, their end lobe much
the largest; the upper leaves gradually smaller, clasping, produc-
ing short narrow spinular lobes, pungent-pointed, some of the
lobes reduced to denticles. Headlets of flowers large, solitary,
surrounded by floral leaves. Involucral bracts spacious, the outer
upwards of leafy texture and colour, to some extent webby-
lanuginous, from a broad base narrow or linear lanceolar, spinular-
lobed or denticulated, the innermost narrower, nearly or quite
entire and somewhat scarious. Receptacle copiously beset with
setular-linear smooth bracts. Flowers numerous on each recep-
tacle and within each involucre, uniform, unless some few of the
outer sterile and devoid of a pappus. Corollas intensely yellow,
more deeply so in age, towards the summit marked by dark
longitudinal stripes, their tube thinly filiform, suddenly widening
near the five linear lobes, its base orbicularly dilated. Filaments
of the stamens near the upper end barbellate; anthers connate,
sagittate-linear. Style capillulary, glabrous ; stigmas thinly
semicylindric, except at the summit connate. Fruits seed-like,
glabrous, almost semiovate, distinctly quadrangular, distinctly
wrinkled, their basal attenuation somewhat oblique, outside pale
or turning light-brownish. Pappus finally light-brownish, its
outer scalelets very much shortened and partly truncate-bluntened,
the inner gradually much longer and pointed, some exceeding
twice the length of the fruit, all broadish-linear and minutely
ciliolated.
Explanation of Plate VIII.
Flowering branch with its leaves, natural size.
1. Longitudinal section of a headlet of flowers, slightly
enlarged.
2. A separate corolla, showing also stigmas.
3. A corolla laid open, the summit removed, the stamens also
exhibited.
4. A separate anther with upper part of filament.
5. Style and stigma.
6. Side-view of a fruit with its pappus.
7. Top-view of a fruit with its pappus.
8. Scalelets of pappus.
9. Transverse section of a fruit, showing also the cotyledons.
10. Embryo, showing cotyledons and radicle.
2-10. Enlarged, but to various extent.


IX.
XANTHIUM SPINOSUM, LINNÉ.
The Bathurst-Burr.
The generic name, if really indicated already by Dioskorides,
is derived from a yellow pigment of this kind of plants, further
from the yellow colour of the spinules. The specific name occurs
first in Professor R. Morison’s writings (1699). Assumed to be
a native of South-Western Asia, though also thought to have
originated in South-Western America. Flowering under ordinary
circumstances only once from the same root. Up to some feet
high, but generally more dwarfed. Branches finally almost glab-
rescent. Leaves on short stalks, never very large, in outline
often rhomboid-lanceolar, usually three-lobed, otherwise almost
or quite entire or seldom somewhat pinnatilobed, above dark-
green and beset with appressed scattered short hairlets, more so
along the axis and venules, beneath from a thin close vesdture
greyish or whitish, the lobes acute, the terminal lobe much the
longest ; primary venules prominent. Spinules arising from near
the base of the leaves, very conspicuous, acicular, usually ternate,
but at the base connected, yellow, each representing the primary
axis and the secondary of an undeveloped leaf. Flower-headlets
quite small, almost or wholly unisexual; the staminate more
terminal, globular, single or occasionally some few together, the
pistillate usually in lower axils, all nearly sessile. Involucre of
the staminate flowers consisting of very small mostly lanceolar
puberulous bracts in several rows, almost free from each other;
receptacle extremely short (drawn too long in the illustrative
plate), individual flowers many, partly supported by solitary minute
bracts ; corolla beset with very short hairlets outside; lobes five,
very short; tube almost obverse-conic; filaments of the stamens
connate into a cylinder or separating; anthers disconnected,
soon seceding, linear, curved-apiculate, finally spreading; pollen
pale ; style, stigmas and ovulary rudimentary or absent. Pistil-
late flower-headlet often solitary, soon bent downward, its involucre
ellipsoid, consisting of two enlarging and bilocularly concrescent
bracts, all over beset with numerous small very spreading hooked
inwardly (not outwardly as drawn) yellowish or brownish spinules,
open at the summit, including only two flowers, bearing a short
close vestiture except at the spinules, at last hardening, often
terminated by two straight spinules ; corolla none or rudimentary.
Stamens absent; style thinly cylindric ; stigmas two, capillulary-
semicylindric, emerging and finally spreading. Fruits seed-like,
elongated, concealed, filling the cavities, somewhat compressed,
one-seeded, dark-coloured outside, glabrous, devoid of any pappus.


Explanation of Plate IX.
Flowering branch with its leaves and spinules, natural size.
1. Top view of a staminate headlet.
2. Base view of a staminate headlet.
3. A staminate flower detached, with its own bract.
4. A staminate flower laid open.
5. The five stamens separate.
6. Front and back view of anthers.
7. Style and stigmas, young.
8. Involucre and receptacle of staminate headlet, the flowers
removed.
9. Fruiting involucre.
10. Transverse section of fruiting involucre, showing its two
cells with seed-bearing fruits.
11. An involucral spinule, separated.
12. Embryo, showing the cotyledons and radicle.
1-12. Enlarged, but to various extent,


P.Ashley. Del. et Lith.
F.v M.Dir.
Stebbing. Addy &Co. Impr.
CARDUUS LANCEOLATUS (Linné).


P.Ashley. Del. et Lith
F.v M. Dir.
Stebbing. Addy & Co. Impr.
CARDUUS LANCEOLATUS (Linné).


P. Ashley. Ded. et Lith.
F.v M. Dir.
Stebbing. Addy & Co. Impr.
CARDUUS ARVENSIS (Tabernaem).


P. Ashley. Del. et Lith.
F.v M. Dir.
Stebbing. Addy & Co. Impr.
CARDUUS ARVENSIS (Tabernaem).


P. Ashley. Del. et Lith.
F.v M. Dir .
Stebbing. Addy & Co. Impr.
CARDUUS PYCNOCEPHALUS (Jacquin).


P. Ashley. Del. et Lith.
F.v M. Dir.
Stebbing.Addy & Co. Imp.
CARDUUS MARIANUS (Linné).


P. Ashley, Del. et Lith.
F.v M. Dir
Stebbing. Addy & Co. Impr.
CARDUUS MARIANUS (Linné).


P. Ashey, Del. et Lith.
F.v M. Dir.
Stebbing. Addy & Co. Impr.
ONOPORDON ACANTHIUM (Linné).


P. Ashley. Del et. Lith.
F.v. M. Dir.
Stebbing. Addy & Co. Impr.
CENTAUREA CALCITRAPA (Linné).


P. Ashley. Del. et Lith.
F. v M. Dir.
Stebbing. Addy & Co. Imp
CENTAUREA MELITENSIS (Linné)


P. Ashley. Del. et Lith.
F.v M.Dir
Stebbing. Addy & Co. Impr.
KENTROPHYLLUM LANATUM (Necker).


P Ashley. Del et Lith.
F.v M. Dir.
Stebbing. Addy & Co Impr.
XANTHIUM SPINOSUM (Linné).




