





BRIGHT PROGRESS COMMITTEE
ALPINE CLU|f^ T% **
s3rcsitirnt;
W. A. STAKER, Esq.
Uice^rfsiUent;
R. BEVERIDGE, Esq., J.P.
Secrctarg anti treasurer;
Dr. J. F. WILKINSON, J.P.
Committee:
Messrs. E. L. SMITH, C.E., H. S. SMITH, G. HUNTER, G. S. L. LARK AN,
H. SYMONDS, O. V. BRINER, and Rey. W. L. FENTON.
Tourists may become members of the Club on 'payment of 2s. 6d., when as far
as possible they will have arrangements made for their tours, and all information
and advice furnished.
The Club has an adequate supply of Snow-shoes, Alpenstocks, Ropes, Ac., and
arrangements for ascending Buffalo, Feathertop, Ac,, in winter will be made for
members by the Secretary.
Latest information as to probable weather will ahvays be furnished by the
Secretary by wire (prepaid).


McIEAN, BROS. & RICO, LIMITED,
GENERAL
Iso^mo^(sE?y
107-113 ELIZABETH STREET, MELBOURNE.
Galvanized Iron, Wire, Machinery Warehouse, Bourke St.W.
f)UR stock of REQUISITES for TOURISTS and SPORTSMEN for the summer
season will be found most complete, and comprises the following :
for tourssts.
BICYCLES FIELD GLASSES POCKET FILTERS SANDWICH BOXES
CAMP BEDS GENTS’ DRESSING „ ■ COMPASSES TENTS
„ STOOLS CASES PICNIC BASKETS TRAVELLING Bags
DRAM FLASKS HAMMOCKS (Fitted and Plain) ~ BATHS
DRINKING CUPS LUGGAGE LABELS RUG STRAPS TRICYCLES, &c.
„ STRAPS
FOR SPORTSMEN.
CARTRIDGES DOG WHISTLES GUNS (Muzzle and REVOLVERS—
CARTRIDGE CASES ~ WHIPS Breechloading)— Smith and Wesson
~ BELTS ~ COLLARS Scott, Cashmore Colt and Wesley
„ MAGAZINES GAME BAGS and Hollis RIFLES-
„ FILLERS GREYHOUND Slips POWDER Colt, Winchester
CAPS GUN CLEANERS RE-CAPPERS Martini-Henri
DOG COUPLES „ CASES RABBIT NETS SHOT, WADS, &c.
OUT-DOOR GAMES AND AMUSEMENTS.
BOWLS, Taylor’s FISHING HOOKS FISHING FLOATS TENNIS NETS
GYRO PIGEONS
FISHING RODS
REELS QUOITS „ MARKERS
BASKETS „ Rope and Steel „ BALLS
GUT TENNIS POLES „ RAQUETS
LINES
Our Showrooms are replete with a large assortment of Plated and
other Goods suitable for Birthday and Wedding Presents, &c.
( DAVIS’ HAND AND TREADLE SEWING MACHINES
v n , e Aaovtofnr J MILNER’S FIRE-RESISTING SAFES AND DOORS
' J I QUIBBLE’S PATENT DISINFECTING LIQUID AND POWDER
ASPINALL’S PATENT ENAMEL PAINT.
BEAIYCHES :
SYDNEY, ADELAIDE, NEW YORK, LONDON,


MURRAY’S LIVERY STABLES,
IRELAND STREET, BRIGHT.
Horses and Buggies for hire at lowest rates.
Reliable Drivers provided if required
Murray's horses are well known as good
mountain-climbers.
Leggings , Straps , &calways on hand.
J. MURRAY, Proprietor,
THOS. GRENYILLE,
BTJTCHEB,
IRELAND STREET, BRIGHT
(And at Wandiligong).
Good supply of Fresh and Salt Meat always on hand.
Parties “ camping out" can at all times obtain
supplies of the best meat, carefidly packed-quality
guaranteed ,


THE MUTUAL
Assurance Society of Victoria, Ltd.,
ESTABLISHED A.D. 1870,
FOR LIFE ASSURANCE,ENDOWMENTS, AND ANNUITIES.
HEAD OFFICE: 406 COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE.
Funds over £650,000. Annual Income over £165,000.
DIRECTORS:
Hon. Thomas Loader, Chairman.
Professor McCoy, K.C.M.G., Sc.l). Cantab., F.R.S. ; Alexander
Morrison, M.A., LL.D. ; Hon. William Bayles ; Messrs.
William Siddeley and William Riggall.
MAYHEW A. RIDGE, F.1.A.V.,
Secretary.
JOHN B. GILLISON, F.F.A. and F.1.A.,
Actuary and General Manager.
SPECIAL FEATURES:
Age taken at nearest birthday.
Premiums unusually low.
Conditions liberal and security undoubted.
Claims settled promptly.
Members divide all profits.
Bonuses allocated annually in case of claims, and declared quin-
quennially.
Policies kept in force by surrender value.
The only Australasian Society issuing Double Benefit Policies
with amount assured payable twice and with full profits.
Children's Endowments, with payment of Premium ceasing upon
death of parent, and all Premiums returnable if Child die before Ma-
turity, also Issued.
Local Agent—
H. Y. WIPPELL,
Bright.
Payments to Members exceed <450,000,
4


h, 1%5 a
- A.
PREFACE.
Until the formation of the Alpine Club two years ago,
the magnificent scenery of the Bright district was prac-
tically unknown, and many of the best sights were almost
inaccessible to the ordinary tourist. The Club has,
however, been so successful in its efforts to open up
the district and to render all its beauty-spots easy of
access, that it is now recognised as the leading inland
tourist resort in Victoria, and bids fair to become the
most popular mountain district in Australia. The want
of a comprehensive Guide Book has long been felt, and
the Committee of the Club instructed two of its members
to prepare such a work. This is now before the public,
and the authors trust it will be found to supply a
long-felt want, and will enable the tourist to ascertain
with ease the best spots to visit and how to see them.
The authors desire to tender their best thanks to the
Shire Engineer, E. Lyndon Smith, Esq., 0.E., for his
well-executed map of the district, and to acknowledge
the services of the late A. P. Chauncy, Esq., for his
diagram of the mountains as seen from the Buffalo;
also to Mr. N. J. Oaire for allowing use of his photo-
graphs for illustrations in this book. They would also


take the opportunity of urging all tourists to become
members of the Alpine Club, and thus enable the
Committee to continue the good work of opening up
new tracks and improving already existing ones. It
may be mentioned that during the past eighteen months
the Committee have spent over £IOO in making and
improving the road to Eurobin Falls and the track to
Mount Buffalo, and they are prepared to still further
improve the latter whenever funds will permit.
The Authors.
6


INDEX OF CONTENTS.
Across Australian Alps to Omeo, Gippsland, and the Gippsland
Lakes ........... 65
Alpine Regions in Winter, The 66
Boarding Houses’ Tariff 11
Bogong, Mount .......... 63
Boustead’s Hospice 60
~ in Winter 67
~ to Mount Hotham 60
~ to Mount Feather top . . . . . .61
~ Tours Around 60
Bright 27
~ to Buckland Valley ....... 32
~ to Buffalo Mountains ....... 43
~ to Clear Spot. ........ 29
~ to Eurobin Falls ........ 36
~ to Feathertop via Snowy Creek . . . . .35
~ to The Gap 27
~ to Harrietville 57
~ to Landslip ......... 29
~ to Snowy Creek Falls ....... 33
~ to Wandiligong ........ 31
Buffalo, Mount ......... 43
~ in Winter, Ascent of . . . . . .70
~ Cost of Trip ......... 45
~ Necessary Appurtenances ...... 44
~ Principal Sights 45
„ Falls, Head of 46
~ Foot of ......... 39
~ Time to Visit 44
~ Time Table to various Sights 43
Buggy Hire, Tariff 15
Clear Spot. . . . . . . . . .29
~ in Winter 67
Cost of Buggy Hire, Guides, Horses, &c 15
Diagram of Mountains as seen from Horn .... ,/ace 50
Distances and Heights, Table of ...... 17


PAGE
Distances and Times (to Boustead’s, Hotham, and Feathertop) 53
District Map face 20
Eurobin Falls, Road to ........ 36
~ ~ in Winter ........ 70
Expenses, Travelling. . . . , . . . .15
Explanatory Notes 19
Falls, Buffalo .......... 46
~ Eurobin 36
~ Howell’s .......... 32
~ Lady’s Bath ......... 37
~ Snowy Creek ......... 33
Feathertop, Mount . . - 61
~ Ascent of, via Snowy Creek 35
~ ~ ~ Harrietville 61
~ ~ ~ Boustead’s and Mount Hotham . 61
~ ~ in Winter 68
~ Sunset on ........ 71
~ to Harrietville direct ...... 62
Fees, Guides’ . . . 15
Foot of Buffalo Falls ......... 39
Gap, The, from Bright ........ 27
Gorge, The, Mount Buffalo ....... 48
Guides’ Fees .......... 15
Guides’ Names and Addresses . . . . . . .45
Harrietville .......... 57
~ to Feathertop direct . . . . , .61
~ to Boustead’s and Mount Hotham . . . .59
Head of Buffalo Falls 48
TCO
Horn, The, Mount Buffalo ....... 50
~ Ascent of, in Winter 70
~ Diagram of Mounts as seen from . . . face 50
Horse Hire .......... 15
Hotham, Mount ......... 61
~ Ascent of, in Winter 68
Hotels, Tariff of ........ # n
Hump, The, Mount Buffalo ....... 50
Illustrations 1,2, 3,4, 5
Itinerary 25
Lady’s Bath Falls . 37
Landslip . ! 29
Leviathan Rock ' _ .50
Map of District /ace 20
Method of doing Buffalo .... ... 43


PAGE
Method of doing Boustead’s, Mount Hotham, and Feathertop . 55
V,-. & .^.vr MU v XVWWIVi • tJ'J
Mount Blovvhard ......... 61
~ Bogong 63
~ Buffalo .......... 43
~ Feathertop ......... 61
~ Hotham .......... 61
„ Smythe 60
Necessary Appurtenances for Buffalo Trip . . . .44
Notes, Explanatory ......... 19
Oriental Hill .......... 31
Plan of Tours in the District ....... 20
Principal Sights on Mount Buffalo 45
Provisions when Camping Out ....... 45
Railway Fares .......... 12
~ Time Table ......... 12
Smythe, Mount .......... 60
Snowy Creek Falls 33
Snow Ascents 66
Table of Distances and Heights ....... 16
Table of Distances and Time necessary to Visit Boustead’s, ! r .,
Hotham, and Feathertop . . . . . . . /
Tariff, Hotels and Boarding Houses . . . . . ,11
Time Table, Mount Buffalo ....... 43
Time Table, Railway 12
Time of Year, best, for various Tours 22
Tours in the District, Plan of . . . , . . .20
Tours in Winter 21
Twins, The .......... 60
Travelling Expenses 15
Wandiligong .......... 31
Winter Tours .......... 67
Walking Tour via Boustead’s to the Gippsland Railway at\
Stratford or Briagolong . . . . . . . /


d~ —— -- ———-
OF
N. J. CAIEE
(Gold Medalist),
PHOTOGRAPHER,
Of 157 Toorak Road , South Yarra,
Begs to inform the public that he has taken
a SPLENDID SERIES of LARGE PHOTO-
GRAPHS of the Buffalo Mountains, Bright,
Harrietville, and Mount Eeathertop, copies of
which can be obtained from Dr. Wilkinson
(secretary Australian Alpine Club), and of
Mr. M.L. Hutchinson, Bookseller, Collins Street,
Melbourne; also at Mr. Cairo’s Photo Establish-
ment, 157 Toorak Road, South Yarra.
Prices are very moderate.
Visitors to Bright and district should call
on Dr. Wilkinson and inspect the series of
photos.


Hotels, Boarding Houses, Tariff.
, . . {£2 2s. to £2 10s.
Htd P CT W6ek; 10S -
George’s The Ch&let | I)<sr day , ; 3s ’ n 6d '
° per meal or room.
Mrs. Leslie’s Tourist’s) 0 i
Home |£2 2s. per week.
At Bright
Mrs. Snell, Kiewa'
House ....
Mrs. Gregory, Rose-
dale
Mrs. Peacock’s Prince'
of Wales Hotel .
Mrs. David Taylor,
Private Board .
Mr. Johnson, Rising
Sun Hotel .
rMr. Manfield, Buffalo'!
-J Falls Temperance [
I Hotel . . . J
■c£l 10s. per week.
At Wandiligong
I£2 2s. per week ;
2s. 6d. per meal
or bed.
At PoREPUNKAH
/Mrs.F. E. Scott’s Hit\
or Miss Hotel . .J
J Mrs, Monks’ Star)
Hotel . . . . J
jMr. Boustead’s Hos-l
\ P ice J
At Buckland
j£2 2s. per week ;
- 2s. 6d. per meal
J or bed.
At Harretville
2s. 6d. per meal
or bed.
Mt. St. Bernard
are only
charged
for such meals as
On short visits
tourists
they have or rooms that they occupy. If intending to stop by
the week, they should notify the landlord on arrival.


OVENS HARDWARE STORE.
IRELAND STREET, BRIGHT,
- Established iB6O. -
IRONMONGERY IN ALL BRANCHES.
SPORTSMEN’S AND TOURISTS’ REQUISITES.
Fishing' Tackle. Best Brand Gunpowder. Shot.
. Gun Cartridges, &c.
Fan cry Goods, <sfce:., Stcr.
GEORGE HUNTER, Proprietor.
H. SYMOYDS,
SIBPSR9IBQ CSBMIST,
GAVAN STREET, BRIGHT.
H. S. having had extensive experience in the dispensing of medicines
in England, as •well as in Victoria, can confidently inform visitors to
the Bright district that all prescriptions entrusted to him will be
carefully compounded.
All Standard Patent Medicines kept in Stock.
MARTIN AND PLEASANCE’S HOMOPATHIC MEDICINES.
Piesse and Lubin’s, Rimmel’s, Gosnell’s, and other Perfumeries, at Melbourne
Prices.
PEARS’ AND OTHER PRINCIPAL SOAPS ALWAYS ON HAND.
WYETH’S PORTABLE TABLOID MEDICINES, including the THIRST TAB-
LOIDS, which are so invaluable to Tourists when travelling over mountains.
KENT’S TOOTH BRUSHES, AND ALL TOILET REQUISITES.
Address :
GAVAIJ STREET, BBIGHT.


TIME TABLE.
MYRTLEFORD
BRIGHT
c«
9
m
<D
>
o
&
c«
£
*s
w
DOWN.
FARES,
Single.
Return.
STATIONS.
Ist.
s. d.
2nd.
s. d.
Ist. 2nd.
I
s. d. s. d.
A.M. P.M,
MELBOURNE (w.G.) to .. Dep.
6 20 4 55
M’xd M’xd
686177£
MYRTLEFORD f (w.) .. Arr.
2 Oil 3
—2
2 1011 15
1011 15 29
734 180 J
BARWIDGEE
EUROBIN
2 15 11 20 30
827 187 f
2 4011 45 31
921192 J
POREPUNKAH
3 012 5 32
1002 196
BRIGHT f (w.) .. . Arr.
3 10 12 15 32
BRIGHT TO
MYRTLEFORD,
d
m
<D
>
o
c 3
S
FARES,
Single.
Return.
STATIONS.
Mxd. Mxd
2nd.
s. d.
BRIGHT'! (w.) .. .. Dep.
4 1012 51
4 20 1 l
3J POREPUNKAH
8J EUROBIN
4 40 I 25
5 5' 1 50
15J BARWIDGEE .. „
18J MYRTLEFORD t (w.) .. Arr.
5 10 1 55
„ .. Pep,
5 18 2 25
Exp.
MELBOURNE (w. 0.) .. Arr. 11 16 943 32 9 21 9
13


Cmkl & Ci„ Uiil,
COACH PROPRIETORS,
MAIL CONTRACTORS,
LIVERY, BAIT, AND LETTING STABLES,
THROUGHOUT THE N.E. DISTRICT AND N.B. WALES.
ALL KINDS OF CONVEYANCES SUITABLE FOR TOURISTS,
ETC., ON HIRE AT MODERATE RATES.
Experienced Drivers , well acquainted with the various places
of interest in the Bright and Beechworth Districts.
Our Coaches run once a week between Bright
and Omeo during the summer months, and
to Boustead’s Hospice and Eurobin Falls as
required.
SPECIAL CONVEYANCES (PAIR AND POUR-
HORSE) READY AT SHORT NOTICE.
CRAWFORD & CO., LIMITED,
BRIGHT, BEECHWORTH, &c.


TRAVELLING EXPENSES.
RAILWAY.
First Class.
Second Class.
Single. Return. Single. Return.
Melbourne to Bright, £1 12 9 £2 9 3 £1 1 9 £1 12 9
COACHES.
Bright to Harrietville, 3.30 p.m., returning 9 a.m. ; fare, 2s. 6d.
to Wandiligong, 11 a.m. and 3.15 p.m., returning 11.45 a.m.
and 4 p.m. ; fare, 6d.
to Omeo, 9 a.m. every Tuesday, returning 8 a.m, every
Thursday ; fare, £2.
Boustead’s ; fare (same days as to Omeo), 15s.
Porepunkah to Buckland, 3 p.m. every Monday, Wednesday, and
Friday, returning 10 a.m. every Monday, Wednesday,
and Friday ; fare, ss.
Boustead’s to Mount Hotham, every Wednesday at 9 a.m., returning
3 p.m. Thursday ; fare, ss.
BUGGY HIRE.
Single buggy, without driver, 15s. per day. 5 E.g. , to Harriet-
,, ~ with ~ 20s. ~ I ville, Buckland,
Buggy and pair, with ~ 30s. ~ j or
~ ~ without ~ 255. ~ J Eurobin Falls.
Single buggy, without driver, to Boustead’s, 20s. per day.
~ ~ with driver, to Boustead’s, 255. per day.
Double-seated buggy and pair, with driver, to Boustead’s, 40s. per
day.
HORSE HIRE.
Gent’s saddle horse, Bs. per day.
~ ~ ~ (for mountain ascents), if only one day, 10s. per
day ; two or more days, Bs. per day.
Lady's side-saddle horse, 10s. 6d. per day.
Pack horse, 10s. per day.
GUIDES, INCLUDING TENTS, &c., IF REQUIRED.
To Mount Buffalo, Feathertop, and Hotham (when party does not
exceed six or seven), £1 per day. For snow ascents, £1 ss.
per day.
To Mount Bogong—(Special arrangements will have fo be made).


BRITTLEBANK & ARUNDEL,
PHOTOGRAPHERS,
_A.z_.:BXj:R,3r bright.
CHEAPEST AND BEST VIEWS OFTHE GRANDEST SCENERY OF AUSTRALIA,
INCLUDING
50 VIEWS OP' THE AUSTRALIAN ALPS—WINTER AND SUMMER,
MARVELLOUS SNOW EFFECTS ON THE EUROBIN FALLS AND BUFFALO
RANGES.
Series of Views, mounted and unmounted, sent for selection to any address, on
approval ; reference required.
NEW SERIES OF VIEWS OF BRIGHT.
IRELAND ST., BRIGHT (opposite the Post Office),
~\XT. SUSTTLT vTa, Proprietor.
This well-known accommodation house has
just been enlarged and renovated throughout.
Tourists will find all the comforts of a home
here.
Letters and Telegrams promptly attended to,


TABLE OF DISTANCES AND HEIGHTS.
Feet
above
Sea-Level
Bright (1000 ft.) to Porepunkah, 3J
Lower Buckland, 13
Upper Buckland, 19
Eurobin Falls, 10
Buffalo Falls (head of) 14
4500
Hump, 18
5600
Horn, 19^
5750
W andiligong, 4
1050
Harrietville, 16
1400
Boustead’s, 28
5050
Mount Hotham, 33
6100
Feathertop via Harrietville, 24
6300
Feathertop via Boustead’s, 38
Feathertop via Snowy Ck., 20
Omeo, 72
Bogong, 20
6500
Clear Spot, 3
3500
Landslip, 4


TOURISTS TO MT. BUFFALO, EUROBIN
FALLS, FEATHERTOP; &c.,
REQUIRING A
Thoroughly Competent $ Experienced Guide,
SHOULD ENGAGE
E. CARLILE,
WANDILIGONG,
Who has every requisite in the way of horses, tents, cooking
utensils, &c., and has had great experience in connection with the
camping out of Buffalo parties.
E. Carlile acted as guide to the first successful winter ascent
of Mount Buffalo, and is prepared to conduct snow ascents under
the auspices of the Alpine Club.
Every attention paid to comfort and provisioning of parties.
Parties driven to Eurobin Falls, Buckland, Boustead’s, &c.
LETTERS AND TELEGRAMS ATTENDED TO.
Address—E. CARLILE, Alpine Guide, Waijdiligong.


EXPLANATORY NOTES.
This book does not profess to be descriptive; it is merely an
attempt to inform the tourist how he may best visit the grand
and beautiful scenery to be found among the Australian Alps,
and to give him an idea of the work to be accomplished, the
time it will take to see the different sights, and an approximate
estimate of cost.
Wherever prices are quoted, it is not to be understood that
they are binding, as quotations may vary slightly at different
times, but they will be found to be in ever} case very near
the mark. If the tourist is apparently overcharged on any
occasion, he will do well to consult the officials connected with
the Alpine Club on the subject.
Asterisks are used in various parts of the work to denote
the relative value of the different sights ; e.g., when three asterisks
are placed opposite a particular sight, it means that the tourist
should make a special effort to visit that spot, whereas one asterisk
means that though worth visiting, the particular beauty-spot does
not require special effort to reach.
The blazed tracks referred to in various parts of the book
are tracks that have been marked by the Alpine Club. A special
blaze, consisting of two slices taken out of the side of a tree, with
a cross in the centre of the face of the tree ( )X ( ) has been
adopted, and whenever tourists find themselves on such a track,
they may rest assured that it leads to some recognised resort.


PLAN OF TOUR.
A great deal will depend on the amount of time which
the traveller proposes to spend in the district, what places he
will visit, and what time he will devote to each place. It
is our intention to indicate briefly on this page the amount
of time necessary to visit the various sights with a reason-
able degree of ease, and we shall also sketch out a tour of
the whole district to be accomplished in a minimum amount
of time. We shall also append a sketch of several con-
venient winter tours. In each instance Bright is regarded
as the centre of operations, and the tourist will regulate his
movements from the time he reaches Bright.
Bright to Wandiligong * in the morning, then up the
the afternoon .driving or riding—l day.
Bright to Eurobin Falls,*** driving or riding —\ day.
Bright to Buckland* in the morning, and out to Euro-
bin Falls*** on the return journey, driving (or riding for
those accustomed to long rides) —1 day.
| Bright to Head of Buffalo Falls * * * and return,
| riding or walking—l day.
Bright to Buffalo Falls,*** Hump,*** Horn,***
11 and return (a long and tedious journey), riding—l day.
1j Bright to Buffalo Falls, and then to foot of Horn
l/g on first day; ascend Horn and Hump and return on
gjs second day • an easy riding tour***-—2 or more days.
| Bright to Eurobin Falls by trap or horse, thence on
S foot to foot of Buffalo Falls-—1 day.
Bright to Boustead’s,*** on horseback or driving—l
Boustead’s to Mount Hotham*** and return to Bright,
riding or driving —1 day.






Boustead’s to Feathertop** and return, riding or
walking—l day.
Boustead’s to The TwiNS**(walking), and to Mount
Smythe, | —l day.
Harrietville to Feathertop** (riding or walking) and
back—l day.
Harrietville to Feathertop** and return via Razor-
back and Mount Hotham to Boustead’s, riding or walking
1 day.
Bright to Feathertop** and return via Snowy Creek,
riding—l day.
Bright to Bogong** and return via Little River, riding
and walking—3 days.
Bright to Clear Spot,* riding or walking —\ day.
Bright to Landslip and The Gap,* walking or riding—
h da y-
Bright to Snowy Creek Falls,* riding—l day.
Bright to Omeo, riding or driving—2 days ; walking, 4
or 5 days.
In winter, the following tours can be most recom-
mended :
Bright to Clear Spot,*** whence a magnificent pano-
rama of all the high snow-clad mountains can be seen, and
where snow frequently lies (walking)—day.
Bright to Feathertop via Harrietville, on snow-shoes
and horseback—l| day.
Bright to Boustead’s, by driving to the snow-line,
and thence walking on snow-shoes— l day.
| Bright to Head of Buffalo Falls, in a similar
manner—l day.
Bright to Top of Horn, in a similar manner, via
Lower Buckland— day.
The trips in the valleys may be made as before.
By the following plan a glimpse of the best scenery can
be obtained in the shortest possible time :
Bright to Boustead’s—l day.


Boustead’s to Baldy and return to Bright, change horses
and drive out to Eurobin Falls, and return to Bright—l
day.
Bright to Buffalo, Head op Falls, and Horn, and
return either via Buckland or the same way as the ascent —
1 day.
TIME OF VISIT.
The particular period of the year which the tourist will
choose for his visit to the Alpine District will, of course,
depend on the nature of the mountaineering which he
wishes to do, and the purpose of the visit.
Under ordinary circumstances, the spring and autumn
months will be found the most pleasant. The weather is
apt to be very warm in the valleys during January and
February, and during these months the views are apt to be
obstructed by the smoke of bush fires. As a rule, Bous-
tead’s can be reached at the end of September with a buggy,
and from that time till Christmas the weather on the hills
will be found very charming. Cool nights and pleasant days
are the rule, and abundance of snow will be found near the
roadside and in the gullies. The Buffalo can usually be
crossed by the end of September or beginning of October.
If the tourist intends camping out on Buffalo, the best
months are December, January, and February, though
November and March have often sufficiently warm nights
to allow of camping out with a fair amount of comfort.
The Eurobin Falls are of course finest in winter and
spring, when the snow is melting, or after heavy summer
rains.
To those who wish to see the finest snow views, June,
July, and August are the months which should be selected.
During these months the nights are often frosty and the
days fine, clear, and bracing, and the high mountains com-
pletely covered with snow. The view from the Second Clear
Spot during these months is wonderfully grand, there being
an unbroken line of snow filling nearly two-thirds of the


horizon, and capped by Kosciusko, Bogong, Fainter, Feather-
top, Hotham, The Twins, Buffalo, &c. For the ascent of
Feathertop, Hotham, or Buffalo, with snow-shoes, July,
August, or early September are the best months.
On the whole, then, invalids and those who are not given
to great exertion will find the spring and autumn months
the most pleasant, while undoubtedly the winter months
show the district in its grandest aspect; but to see it
properly then, either horseback or pedestrian exercise is
necessary.
And at whatever season of the year you choose to come,
if you have the opportunity, choose a time when you will
have moonlight nights.
Alpine OfisEi|YEri
NORTH-EASTERN HERALD.
PUBLISHED EVERY FRIDAY MORNING AT BRIGHT.
Subscription — 4s. per Quarter {sent to any address), payable
in advance.
Briner and Shoebridge, Proprietors.
“ The Alpine Observer ” is the only newspaper published in
the Shire of Bright, and has a large circulation throughout the
whole of the North-bastern District, as well as in Melbourne and
the adjoining Colonies, and therefore constitutes a first-class
advertising medium.
Correspondence or orders addressed to the proprietors will
receive prompt attention.


PRIVATE
BOARD RESIDENCE
MES, GEEGOEY’S,
ROSEDALE, BRIGHT.
VISITORS TO THIS HEALTH-INVIGORATING
DISTRICT WILL RECEIVE THE BEST ATTEN-
TION AT THE ABOVE WELL-KNOWN BOARD-
ING-HOUSE.
HORSES, BUGGIES, & GUIDES
PROCURED AT LOW RATES.
LETTERS AND TELEGRAMS RECEIVE PROMPT ATTENTION.
Address —“ Mrs. Gregory , Rosedale , Bright


z
£
0
h-
z
<
2
01
Id
o
01
hi
>
01
(O
z
Id
>
o


-•••- • %


•^ltiQepaPY.^
BRIGHT is the natural centre from which all tours
among the Australian Alps should start. It is
• reached by rail, the trains leaving Melbourne at
6.20 a.m. and 4.55 p.m., arriving in Bright at 3.10 p.m. and
12.5 a.m. The tourist travels along the North-Eastern line as
far as Wangaratta, where the branch line to Bright leaves
the main North-Eastern line. In changing trains the
passenger should be careful to get into a Bright carriage, or
he may find himself shunted off to Beechworth at Everton.
The first part of the journey is comparatively unin-
teresting, but from about Glenrowan, on a clear day, the
Buffalo and Mount Feathertop may be seen away to the
right of the line. Shortly after leaving Myrtleford, the
tourist will begin to notice the increasing height of the hills,
and will soon find himself fairly in the Alpine Regions. To
the right of the line, the Buffalo raises his solid granite body,
and shortly before reaching Porepunkah, a glimpse of the
Eurobin and Buffalo Falls will be obtained. About Pore-
punkah the hop gardens may attract more than a passing
view, particularly in January and February; and shortly
after leaving Porepunkah station, Mount Feathertop may
be seen ahead to the right. The train crosses the Ovens
River about a mile from Bright, passes through Mr. Blum-
ner’s famous vineyard, and soon lands the passenger at the
Bright station, whence, on stepping on to the platform, and
looking ahead, he is rewarded for his long journey by a
magnificent view of Mount Bogong, the highest in the
colony, and snow-clad from June to November.


THE CHALET
(Late Empire Hotel),
OPPOSITE POST OFFICE, BRIGHT.
The above centrally situated and popular
hostelry offers unequalled accommodation for
Tourists, Travellers, and Boarders,, who may
rely upon receiving every care and attention.
Tourists to the mountains can engage
buggies, drags, coaches, and ponies, with or
without guides, at moderate prices.
Crawford & Co.’s Stables on the premises,
from which Harrietville and Omeo Coaches
start.
Splendid Natural Shower Bath.
The Best Brands of Wines, Ales, and Spirits
on hand.
Letters and Telegrams promptly attended to.
Address —“ The Chalet , Ireland Street , Bright .”
E. GEORGE, Proprietor.


BRIGHT
Is a beautiful little township, surrounded on all sides by
hills, which rise to a height of 2500 feet close to the town,
and afford splendid views from their summits. The streets
have been profusely planted with English trees, which give
a cool and pleasant appearance, even in the hottest weather,
and in the autumn, with their beautiful tints, serve to
revive memories of Old England in a way that probably no
other town in the colonies can do. Bright is seen at its
best in the spring and autumn months, especially the latter.
The town is 1017 feet above sea-level, and enjoys a
very pleasant climate. Hot winds and dust are almost un-
known ; the nights are cool no matter what the heat of the
day, and altogether it is a pleasant spot in which to spend
a few days, whether in summer or winter. Very rarely in
winter snow falls in the town, but oftentimes the winter
days are beautifully fine and bracing, and the cold is seldom
of anything like an extreme kind.
The hotel accommodation is now very good, and there
are several first-class boarding-houses. During the busy
season it is wise to secure rooms beforehand.
The town boasts a post and telegraph office, athenaeum,
court house, state school, four churches, two banks, two
reserves, and a number of large business establishments.
Good bathing may be obtained in the Ovens River, within
ten minutes’ walk of the-hotels. The cemetery is beauti-
fully situated on the Wandiligong road, and is well kept.
Mr. Blumner’s vineyard, near the railway station, is
well worth a visit, and the proprietor is at all times glad to
conduct visitors over the premises.
In the immediate neighbourhood, a number of pleasant
walking trips may be made.
The Gap (two hours). —A very pleasant morning or
afternoon walk, of about two hours, may be made by strol-
ling to the Gap and back. The view of Bright and the
Wandiligong Valley obtained from different parts of the
track is very beautiful. The road leads down the lane
alongside the Lone Star Hotel, crosses the little foot-bridge
over the Ovens, and then turns sharply to the right, but
gradually bearing away froip the river. A splendid view


Alpine Hotel, Bright.
_L HE new, two-storey brick additions to this well-known,
far-famed, and favorite hostelry have now been completed,
and are ready for the reception of Visitors. Tourists and
Travellers generally to this invigorating Alpine District
will find the hotel replete with all modern conveniences.
Attention, civility, and an endeavour to provide home
comforts will be found to be special features of this
establishment.
From the hotel the following picturesque and noted
places are easily accessible : —The Buffalo Ranges, Eurobin
Falls, Mount Feathertop (6,300 feet above sea-level), Mount
Hotham, and numerous other spots well worthy of a visit.
Arrangements will be made for Guides and Mountain
Ponies on the shortest notice. Hiring in all its branches.
Omeo, Harrietville, and Wandiligong Coaches start
from this hotel.
Coach meets all trains to bring passengers and luggage.
The Commercial Travellers’ Association Hotel
Sample Rooms.
Letters and Telegrams promptly attended to.
Oa.pt. tJ. HXCcF arlane,
Proprietor.


of Mt. Bogong (6500 feet) is obtained just after crossing
the bridge, looking up the stream. The track leads round
the right side of Leslie’s orchard, and passing through a
couple of paddocks you will see the cleared paddock leading
up towards the gap in the hills. The track leads up the
left hand side of these cleared paddocks, and may be
ascended right to the edge of the ridge looking over to
Robert’s Creek on the other side. The afternoon views are
probably the best, and the walk is a very shaded one then.
The Land Slip. —On reaching the summit of the ridge
at the Gap, a blazed track will be noticed leading up the
hill to the right. By following this track to the top of the
hill, and then along the ridge to the left, it will bring you to
the Land Slip, in about two hours from Bright. The climb
is not an arduous one, and may fill in a vacant day
pleasantly.
Clear Spot (8500 feet). —The view from this peak, par-
ticularly in winter, is one of the finest in the district. It
may be ascended in two hours on foot, the usual method.
The track leads up the spur to the right of the Church of
England till the First Clear Spot (one hour) is reached.
From here a beautiful view of Bright and the Ovens is
obtained, with Bogong in the background and Feathertop
to the right. From this spot a blazed track leads along the
ridge to Second Clear Spot (one hour). Magnificent views
of Mt. Buffalo, with the Hump and the Horn, are obtained as
you go along. As you ascend, the view opens out, and from
Second Clear Spot the whole great Alpine Chain is in full
view. Part of Kosciusko is seen away to the left
between two nearer hills, then Bogong, Fainter, Feathertop,
Hotham (Baldy), Blowhard, St. Bernard, The Twins,
&c. With a good glass, the road from Boustead’s to Baldy
may be clearly seen, and Boustead’s house also. Then look-
ing back, the Buffalo is seen rearing his great ramparts
against the sky. It is well to follow along the summit of
the ridge for a short distance in order to get a still finer
view of Buffalo, with Mt. Buffer away to the left, and all
the ranges round about Mansfield. On returning, be sure
and strike the blazed track, or you may very easily go down
the wrong spur, owing to the Clear Spot being really situated


mil minis’ hohic
-o*o.
<1 R. LESLIE, PROPRIETOR. >
VISITORS TO THIS POPULAR DISTRICT MAY
RELY" UPON RECEIVING EVERY CARE AND
ATTENTION AT THE ABOVE WELL-KNOWN
HOME.
Accommodation for Families, Tourists, and
Visitors generally.
CHOICE FRUIT AND FLOWER GARDEN.
HORSES AND VEHICLES ON HIRE.
PLUNGE AND SHOW T ER BATH.
LETTERS and TELEGRAMS RECEIVE PROMPT ATTENTION,
Address —“ B. Leslie , Gavan Street , Bright


on a different spur to the one the track ascended. The return
to Bright should take from an hour to an hour and a half.
Water should be taken with the party, as there is none to
be obtained on the way, and climbing is dry work.
In winter, Clear Spot is often covered with snow, and
on any clear day (of which we get very many among these
hills) there is no finer view in Australia than this. All the
great hills are completely snow-clad during June, July,
August, and September, and the panorama of an unbroken
line of snow-clad hills, filling nearly half the horizon,
is to be seen nowhere else in Australia with so little trouble
as from Clear Spot. The view from this place alone is
worth all the travelling which it may take to reach it.
Many pleasant walks may be taken along the river
banks, or up the valleys ; and in the cool of the evening,
especially when the moon is up, the effects are most charm-
ing.
Bathing may be had in the Ovens River. A party is
usually made up every evening, and tourists will be
welcome at any time. The secretary of the Tourists’ Club
will gladly introduce tourists to the best bathing place in
the river.
Wandiligong.—A mining township situated on Morse’s
Creek, is between three and four miles from Bright. The road
leads past the Bright Post Office and up the hill a few yards
when a sharp turn to the left is taken, and the Bright State
School and Presbyterian Church will be noticed to the
right of the road. On the left are the Police Station and
Catholic Church. One of the prettiest views around Bright
is obtained from the road in front of the Presbyterian Church,
looking towards the township and along the Harrietville
Road. Following the road to Wandiligong, we pass the
Cemetery and Recreation Reserve, and then cross Morse’s
Creek (1| mile). We soon reach the highest part of the
road, whence a very pretty and extensive view of the whole
township bursts suddenly upon us. The hill to the left-hand
side of the valley is the Oriental Hill,* famous in times past
for the enormous richness of its reefs (and still being worked),
and now affording the tourist who is not afraid of a climb,
one of the most extensive and beautiful views in the district,


From the summit may be seen all the highest peaks of the
Alpine Ranges and the Buffalo, while the Morse’s Creek
and Ovens Valleys lie below, with the township of Wandili-
gong on one side and Freeburgh on the other.
Wandiligong is famous for its fruit-growing, and the
apple, pear, and raspberry flourish here in profusion. The
tourist will not regret an hour spent in walking to the top
of Dunphy’s Hill (2 miles) in the early morning, for the view’
is then probably seen at its best.
The Buckland Valley* is the oldest inhabited part of the
district, being famous for the enormous wealth of its allu-
vial deposits in the early days. At one time it supported
a very large population, both of Europeans and Chinese, and
in 1857 the famous Buckland Riot took place here, when
the European population drove the Chinese off the field in
a body. To the tourist, the Buckland Valley offers what is
universally acknowledged to be the most charming drive in
the district. The road leads down the Ovens Valley as far
as Porepunkah (4 miles), when a fine view of the Buffalo is
obtained, the gorge down which tumbles the Buffalo Falls
being in full view. Leaving the bridge over the Ovens to
the right, a drive of about 200 yards leads to the Buckland
Road, which runs at right-angles to the road we have been
traversing. The Great mass of the Buffalo forms the right-
hand wall of the valley for the greater part of the way.
The river will not be seen till six or seven miles have been
traversed, when it will be noticed winding through the fiats
to the right of the road. The land in the lower part of the
valley is valuable as farming land, and supplies a good deal
of the fodder for the district. About four miles up the
valley the Devil’s Creek is crossed, and the Brookside State
School is passed. A few miles further on Howell’s Falls
will be seen away to the right, and then we shortly cross
the Buckland River, close by the foot of the spur by which
the ascent of the Buffalo was made in former years and the
descent sometimes made now, A few yards further on we
come to the Hit or Miss Hotel, Lower Buckland, excellently
kept by Mrs. Scott. If desired, lunch may be ordered here,
while the drive is continued to the Upper Buckland (20
miles), and it will be ready by the time the traveller returns,


The valley is now very much narrowed, and the marks of
the early diggers more apparent in the great cuttings and
upheapings of stones. The road crosses the river twice more
before reaching the Upper Buckland settlement, but as there
are no bridges over these crossings, the traveller should
inquire as to the state of the river before he attempts to
cross. Mr. Dunphy, at the Post Office, Lower Buckland,
will always give reliable information on this point. Shortly
after leaving the Upper Buckland on the return journey, a
very fine view of the Buffalo is obtained, rising between two
of the more adjacent hills. The drive from Bright to the
Upper Buckland should take about three hours—to Lower
Buckland two hours. By making an early start, and with
good horses, the Eurobin Falls might be visited on the
return journey. To do this it would be necessary to have
at least four hours’ daylight in hand after reaching Pore-
punkah.
In summer time, the Buckland Valley may be seen in a
very pleasant manner by travelling in the coach, which
leaves Porepunkah at 3 p.m. on Mondays, Wednesdays, and
Fridays—stopping for the night at Mrs. Scott’s—then ride
or walk up the valley on the following day, and return in the
morning of Monday, Wednesday, or Friday, reaching Pore-
punkah about noon, in time for the train to Melbourne.
BRIGHT TO SNOWY CREEK FALLS.
(Guide necessary .)
Another pleasant day’s outing may be obtained by riding
to the Snowy Creek Falls, which are situated about 10 miles
from Bright in the direction of Mount Fainter.
The road leads towards Freeburgh for five miles, then
turns off to the left and follows up the valley of the Snowy
Creek for four or five miles. The Falls, though not very
grand or impressive, are remarkable for their beauty, and
the ride is a most pleasant one, so that a day may very
profitably be spent in visiting them. The road is rather rough
for vehicular traffic, so that only those who can ride or who
care to walk should visit these Falls,


G. W. SHARP,
BAKER AND GROCER,
CAVAN STREET, BRIGHT.
CATERING IN ALL ITS BRANCHES.
TOURIST PARTIES SUPPLIED WITH EVERY
REQUISITE IN THE WAY OF PROVISIONS.
LUNCHEON HAMPERS MADE UP AT SHORT
NOTICE.
ALL KINDS OF PASTRY, CAKES, &c., OF BEST
QUALITY, ALWAYS ON HAND.


mmm 5
9m <
» X
0
WM
MSI
n§
|||| .& LU
■ UJ
% yV'v «o
Wkmk. co
M <
W 0-
r ---liP; O
H
IiSC *
IB <
u
mmm u_
i|ppli (-■
iliS 2




By following up the Snowy Creek Yalley, the track to
the Dividing Range at Cohungra will be met. This track
was cut with a view to keeping below the snow-line in
winter, and it affords a short cut to Omeo. But we cannot
recommend it for general use, as it is often blocked by fallen
timber, and thus rendered impassable, it being sometimes
impossible either to get over or round a fallen tree. The
new track to Feathertop branches off from this track at the
top of the Snowy Creek Gap,
BRIGHT TO FEATHERTOP (VIA SNOWY
CREEK) AND RETURN-ONE DAY.
The new track to Feathertop, discovered by Constable
Hayes, of Bright, is far and away the best means of
reaching Mount Feathertop.
The ride is a beautiful one, and the ascent so gradual
that the tourist is scarcely conscious of having undergone
any exertion, when he suddenly finds himself on the summit
of Feathertop. The ride from Bright to Feathertop by this
route should take about four or five hours. The way is
marked by finger-posts and the Club’s blaze at all doubtful
points.
Leaving the Harrietville Road about 500 yards beyond
the Germantown Bridge, the track strikes off to the left,
ascending at once a short newly cut road. Thence it shortly
crosses Snowy Creek by a bridge, and follows up the creek,
keeping near the stream all the way, till Dungey’s track to
Omeo (cut by Government) is strnck. This is followed till
it reaches “ The Gap,” about 4000 feet, where a tree marked
“ To Omeo” will be seen.
The Feathertop track now strikes off to the right, and
follows the ridge of the spur all the way to the top.
The return journey may be made either by way of
Boustead’s or direct to Harrietville, or the same way as the
ascent.
By this route Feathertop is most easily reached, while
the scenery in the Snowy Creek Valley is of surpassing
beauty.


As the journey can easily be accomplished from Bright
and back in one day, this new track will certainly become
the most popular route to Feathertop,
THE BUROBIN PAELS.
(Guide not necessary.)
“ A scene of beauty which no tourist should miss ” is
the remark penned by one of the best writers on the Aus-
tralian press with regard to the Eurobin Falls. And in-
deed, when the Falls are flooded after heavy rain in summer,
or during the melting of the snows in spring, they form a
sight which can but hold the spectator spell-bound.
They are situated about ten miles from Bright, and are
reached in about an hour and three-quarters, either on
horseback or by driving. The road for vehicles leads to
within ten minutes’ walk of the Falls, while the horseman
can ride right to the water’s brink. In order to fully view
the Falls, a stay of an hour or more should be allowed for,
while if the tourist desires to climb over the summit of the
Falls, at least two hours will be necessary.
The road leads to Porepunkah, then, instead of crossing
the Ovens bridge to Myrtleford, keep straight on towards
Mr. Winter’s house. On reaching the house, turn towards
the Ovens River, but do not cross it; turn sharply to the
left, thus keeping the Ovens on your right. From this
point the Buffalo towers majestically above the nearer hills,
and the great gorge, with the Buffalo Falls, is in full view.
The road now leads past some tobacco gardens, and in about
a quarter of a mile again turns sharply to the left, with
the Buckland River now on the right-hand side. The river
is soon crossed by a wooden bridge, from which a very
pretty river view is obtained. The road now turns sharply
to the right for a short distance, and then to the left, skirt-
ing the hill all the way, and passing along the left-hand
side of some fenced paddocks, it soon reaches the Squatter’s
Hill—the stiffest pinch on the road. It is advisable that
all but the driver should leave the trap in ascending or
descending this short pinch, particularly in wet weather,


LADIES BATH • EUROBIN FALLS




or if the load is at all heavy. The road soon again turns
to the left, and then to the right, until it is blocked by a
large gate with a high swing post. This must be opened,
and the road may now be followed without difficulty, as it
is well defined, there being no offshoots. As a landmark,
we may mention a gully which has to be crossed some short
distance further on; then after a couple of miles, the
Eurobin Creek has to be forded. If the load is heavy, and
the water high, the greater number of the party may dismount
and cross the creek by the foot-bridge, formed by a large
fallen tree, which will be noticed a few yards up the stream.
A few small streams have to be crossed by means of cul-
verts before we reach the camping ground, which is right
in the midst of the huge granite rocks that surround the
base of the Buffalo. Here the horses may be taken out
and tied up, though it is possible with good horses, and
where there is assistance at hand, to drive some distance
nearer the Falls. The Falls are, however, only about ten
minutes’ easy walking from the camping ground.
Water will be found here a few yards away from the
track, between it and the Buffalo, so that lunch may be
partaken of if desired. The track to the Falls is well de-
fined, and is marked all the way by blazes on the trees.
The blaze adopted by the Tourists’ Club consists in taking
a slice of the bark out of each side of the tree and cutting
a cross in the centre between the two blazes. On arriving
at the head of the track, the Eurobin Cascades will be seen
facing the tourist, while away in the gorge to the right will
be seen the great Buffalo Fall. The Lady’s Bath is not yet
in sight. After viewing the two falls from this point of
vantage, the tourist should descend to the stream, and cross
by means of the foot-bridge. The Lady’s Bath, with its
beautiful fall, will now come into view up the stream.
Lunch may, if desired, be partaken of here, and a rest
taken previous to climbing up along the side of the Cascade
as far as the Cave.* To do this, follow up the creek to-
wards the left-hand side of the Lady’s Bath Fall (facing up
stream), then cross the saddle which separates you from
the Cascade. A track will now be seen leading up along
the right-hand side of the Cascade, and this should be
followed till the top of the first Cascade is reached.


BUFFALO FALLS
Temperance Hotel
ETas. iXlaiaficsld., Proprietor.
This hotel is situated at the junction of Staker’s
track and the road to the Eurobin Falls, at the
foot of Mount Buffalo, a splendid view of which
and the Eurobin Falls may be obtained from
the verandah of the hotel. Visitors can be
met at Porepunkah station (the next before
Bright) by the proprietor and driven off at
once to the hotel. The ascent of the mountain
can be made next day, and the picturesque
Eurobin Falls are within easy walk.
Excursions can be conducted by the pro-
prietor (who has resided over 35 years in the
district) to all the principal places of interest,
such as Mounts Feathertop, Baldy, &c.
Guides and horses provided.
Letters and Telegrams (the latter via Myrtle-
ford) addressed to the proprietor at Porepunkah,
will receive prompt attention.


Tourists may venture out on to the rocky ledge for the
purpose of obtaining the view down the valley, but great
care should be taken lest a slippery patch should cause a fall.
As a rule, the granite affords good foothold except when
wet—it is then very slippery. India-rubber shoes will be
found very useful wherever there is rock climbing to be
done. The track may now be followed up to the Cave,
which is situated at the foot of the second Cascade. A
finger-post will be seen pointing out the road into this
cavern. The view from the interior shows the tremendous
power of the falling water, which tumbles headlong down
the face of the rock ; while looking beyond, a very charm-
ing view of the valley is obtained. To those who are good
climbers, the track may be still further ascended till the
head of the second Cascade is reached. The view to be
obtained from this point will well repay the trouble of
reaching it, as a great stretch of the Ovens Valley, with the
Myrtleford Road, is distinctly seen, as also are some of the
high peaks of the main divide. On the way up some enor-
mous rocks will be passed, and several very fine views of
the great wall of the Buffalo, with the great gorge, will also
appear. The return journey may be made by coming down
the opposite side of the Falls, following the blazed track all
the time.
The trip from the Lady’s Bath, round the head of the
second Cascade and back, may be accomplished with ease in
one and a half hours, allowing plenty of time for several
short rests on the way. As far as the Cave may be tra-
versed in ten minutes.
Foot of Buffalo Falls. —This trip should not be under-
taken without a thoroughly accomplished guide, as it is a very
rough and arduous climb, and there is no defined track. To
reach the foot of the Fall will take at least three hours from
the Lady’s Bath, the greater part of which will be spent in
ascending the bed of the creek—leaping from rock to rock.
The track leads towards the head of the second Cascade,
till the top of the spur is reached—then face towards
the mouth of the gorge, but keep as close in to the left-
hand wall as possible, and keep out of the creek as long as
possible. When the creek is reached, it must be ascended,


O’DONNELL & LARKAN,
fine and |pll |terel|9&tft,
IBIRACGKHLT.
VISITORS TO THE ALPINE REGIONS CAN
OBTAIN ALL NECESSARIES AT THE ABOVE
STORE WHILST TRAVELLING.
All kinds of SPORTING MATERIAL in stock.
A large assortment of Waterproofs, Hats, Caps,
and Veils; Silk Dust Goats; also strong Boots
for mountain climbing.
A large assortment of Tinned Provisions and
Preserves ; also Tobacco, Cigars, and Cigar-
ettes, in variety.
ALL WINES AND SPIRITS OF THE BEST BRANDS.


MOUNT BUFFALO.
The scenery of the Buffalo is without doubt the grandest,
the wildest, and the most novel of any to be found in Aus-
tralia. The very appearance of the great bare rock wall,
rising above the thickly wooded spurs which lead up to it,
is suggestive of grandeur and novelty, and the suggestion is
not belied on reaching the summit. The mountain rises
abruptly from the Buckland Valley, sheer 4600 feet, and
presents a most striking appearance as seen from the Buck-
land Boad. The ascent is now comparatively easy, and the
track to the summit well defined, but the tourist is strongly
advised never to attempt the ascent unless accompanied by
a competent guide ; for a sudden change in the weather
may so envelope the surface in fog that a stranger would
inevitably be lost if thus surrounded.
Ascent. —May be accomplished on horseback or on foot.
Time. —The time occupied in the ascent of the Buffalo
and in traversing its summit may be set down as follows :—•
Bright to foot of track—Riding or driving, 1 hour ;
walking, 2 hours.
Foot of track to head of track—Riding, 2 hours;
walking, 3 hours.
Head of track to head of Falls, hour.
Head of Falls to foot of Hump—Riding, 1| hour;
walking, 2 hours.
Ascent of Hump and return—Walking, 1-i- hour.
Hump to foot of Horn—Biding, hour ; walking, 1 hour.
Ascent of Horn—Walking, 30 minutes.
Horn to Lower Buckland Flat-—Walking or riding, 2|
hours.
Horn to head of Staker’s track, 2 hours.


Bright Newspaper agency.
H. V. WIPPELL,
HOUSE, LAND, ESTATE,
Insurance anti Commission S.gcnt,
STATIONER, BOOKSELLER,
OPPOSITE ALPINE HOTEL,
BRIGHT.
AGENT for COLONIAL and ENGLISH PAPERS and JOURNALS.
MELBOURNE EVENING PAPERS ON SALE NEXT MORNING.
SPLENDID ASSORTMENT OF STATIONERY,
BOOKS, TOBACCO, CIGARS, &0., &o.
Tourists may obtain the use of popular Novels
for a few days at moderate rates.
LICENSED TO SELL POSTAGE STAMPS.
INSPECTION INVITED.


and eventually a large rock will be reached right facing the
waterfall, and within a few feet of it. The two walls of
the gorge rise sheer on each side, being only a few feet
apart at the head of the gorge ; while looking back an ex-
tensive view of hills and valleys will be obtained. The
water falls in two or three leaps.
This trip would not be possible during seasons of flood,
nor during winter or spring, owing to the rocks being frozen
and too slippery for climbing. The return journey will
occupy one and a half hours.
BUTCHERING 1
JAMES CONNOLLY,
Pamily Butcher,
GAVAN STREET, BRIGHT.
A CHOICE ASSORTMENT OF THE BEST BEEF
AND MUTTON ALWAYS ON HAND.
PICNIC PARTIES SUPPLIED WITH ANY DESCRIPTION
OF JOINTS ON THE SHORTEST NOTICE.


O’DONNELL & LARKAN,
ilag and J pipit
GENERAL STOREKEEPERS,
BRiaHT.
VISITORS TO THE ALPINE REGIONS CAN
OBTAIN ALL NECESSARIES AT THE ABOVE
STORE WHILST TRAVELLING.
All kinds of SPORTING MATERIAL in stock.
A large assortment of Waterproofs, Hats, Caps,
and Veils; Silk Dust Coats; also strong Boots
for mountain climbing.
A large assortment of Tinned Provisions and
Preserves ; also Tobacco, Cigars, and Cigar-
ettes, in variety.
ALL WINES AND SPIRITS OF THE BEST BRANDS.


MOUNT BUFFALO.
The scenery of the Buffalo is without doubt the grandest,
the wildest, and the most novel of any to be found in Aus-
tralia. The very appearance of the great bare rock wall,
rising above the thickly wooded spurs which lead up to it,
is suggestive of grandeur and novelty, and the suggestion is
not belied on reaching the summit. The mountain rises
abruptly from the Buckland Yalley, sheer 4500 feet, and
presents a most striking appearance as seen from the Buck-
land Road. The ascent is now comparatively easy, and the
track to the summit well defined, but the tourist is strongly
advised never to attempt the ascent unless accompanied by
a competent guide ; for a sudden change in the weather
may so envelope the surface in fog that a stranger would
inevitably be lost if thus surrounded.
Accent. —May be accomplished on horseback or on foot.
Time. —The time occupied in the ascent of the Buffalo
and in traversing its summit may be set down as follows :
Bright to foot of track—Riding or driving, 1 hour ;
walking, 2 hours.
Foot of track to head of track—Riding, 2 hours;
walking, 3 hours.
Head of track to head of Falls, hour.
Head of Falls to foot of Hump—Riding, 11 hour ;
walking, 2 hours.
Ascent of Hump and return—Walking, hour.
Hump to foot of Horn—Biding, i hour ; walking, 1 hour.
Ascent of Horn—Walking, 30 minutes.
Horn to Lower Buckland Flat—Walking or riding, 2|
hours.
Horn to head of Staker’s track, 2 hours.


Head of S taker’s track to foot, hour.
Return to Bright, 1 hour.
It is possible to visit the head of the Falls and also the
Horn in one day ; but it is preferable to camp out if going
beyond the Falls, which may be visited easily in one day.
Time of Visit. —Undoubtedly the spring time affords
some of the finest views, but the Buffalo may be visited at
any time from October to April (both included). If the
tourist intends camping out on the Buffalo, he should choose
the months of December, January, February, and early
March in preference, though even in these months the
nights may be excessively cold. The clearest views are
obtained in October, November, December, and early
January. During the latter end of January and February
the smoke from bush fires is apt to disturb the view, but of
course the atmosphere is often perfectly clear even during
these hot months. During the winter the whole of the
summit i§ covered with a thick layer of snow, so that, as a
rule, the Buffalo cannot be crossed till late in September,
except on snow-shoes.
Necessary Appurtenances. —The tourist should see that
the equipment of his horse is sound. A few spare straps
and some string or rope will never be found amiss. A good
pair of leggings will be found very useful as a protection to
the legs when brushing past rocks or through scrub. A
good rope will be found to give greater confidence when
ascending the Horn or the Hump, and it will be of great
assistance to ladies, used as a climbing rope. If it is
intended to camp out, see that you have a sufficiency of
rugs and blankets, whatever the weather may be down
below, for you may find the night very cold on the summit.
It is a good plan to have a large rug or blanket to each
member of the party, and one or two over—these combined
will usually afford sufficient protection against the cold.
Do not wear your best clothes when visiting the Buffalo,
and take a soft hat which affords plenty of shade. Never
neglect to have a flask of some good stimulant with you for
use in case of emergency.


THE GORGE BUFFALO FALLS 4500 FT.




Cost of Trip. —The guide will require £1 per day, for
which amount he will furnish his services and provide tents.
He will be willing to ascend the Horn or Hump both at sun-
rise and sunset should the party so desire it. The guides
also usually carry a few blankets, but tourists are strongly
advised to see that they have some extra wraps themselves.
For a large party a packhorse will be required to carry the
tents, provisions, &c. The charge for this is 10s. per day;
while for the saddle horses for tourists the charge is 10s.
per day for gents’ and 12s. per day for ladies’ horses if
ascent and descent are made the same day. If more than
one day, the charges are Bs. and 10s. 6d. respectively per
day. When party consists of more than six or seven, the
guide’s charge is increased proportionately.
Provisions. —The guides will provide provisions if so
desired, and all necessary utensils, simply charging the
party the actual cost of the provisions.
Guides. —The Alpine Club have secured the services of
two thoroughly reliable and steady guides in Mr. E. Carlile,
of Wandiligong, and Mr. W. H. Weston, of Porepunkah.
They are both thoroughly acquainted with the top of the
Buffalo, and the tourist can trust to their judgment under
any circumstances, whether it be darkness or fog which may
overtake him.
PRINCIPAL BIGHTS.
The Buffalo Falls * * *.~This is undoubtedly
“the grandest and most comprehensive picture in Australia,”
and should be seen by everyone.
The Hump and Cathedral Rock**.—A very fine view
is obtained from the summit of the Hump.
The Horn * * *.—The view from the summit is
probably the most extensive in Australia.
The Leviathan Rock* *.—Probably the largest single
rock in Australia. Should be seen by everybody.
The Trip. —As stated before, the Buffalo tour may be
made in one, two, or more days. It is possible to cross
right over in one day, visiting the Falls, or ascending the


Horn or Hump ; but those who have but one day to spare,
or who do not care for camping out, will usually be content
to go as far as the Falls, and return. This is a very easy
day’s work as mountaineering goes, and the view obtained
will well repay the traveller, it being, according to “ Tele-
machus,” “the grandest and most comprehensive picture in
Australia.”
To enjoy the Buffalo properly, however, the tourist
should spend two or more days on the summit, camping out.
The complete isolation from the world of business, the ex-
hilaration caused by the rarefied atmosphere and the wild-
ness and magnificence of the surroundings, bring the tourist
into close sympathy with nature in her grandest aspect, and
render the trip both profitable and invigorating.
The guides will provide tents, provisions, cooking
utensils, blankets, and other necessaries, so that the
tourist has nothing to do but abandon himself completely to
the spirit of his surroundings and revel in the enjoyment of
his holiday.
We will now describe the tours as usually undertaken,
thus giving an idea of the work to be performed and the
mode of doing it.
Leaving Bright, the road to the Eurobin Falls is followed
for about eight miles, when, just before reaching a cattle-
pen on the left-hand side of the track, a finger-post will be
seen bearing the words, “ The road to the top of the falls—
Mount Buffalo.” This marks the beginning of Staker’s
Track—so called in honor of Mr. W. A. Staker, who has
done so much to popularise the scenes of the district. From
this point the tourist must either ride or walk, as there is
no road for vehicles to the Buffalo. Staker’s Track is
marked all the way to the top by the tourist blaze, so that
once on it, it is impossible to miss the way with anything
like ordinary care.
The track leaves the Eurobin Falls road at a right-angle,
and immediately crosses the Eurobin Creek. It then turns
slightly to the right, passes through a small gate (which
tourists should always close after them), and very soon, by
a turn to the left, reaches the main spur by which the
ascent begins. This spur is very steep, and should be
ascended with as much zig-zag as possible, Fortunately,


the top of the steep spur is reached in half-an-hour, when
a sideling is traversed on the left side of the range. A little
further on a sideling is traversed on the right side of the
range, and then the track leads along the summit of a saddle
till it reaches the edge of the granite outcrop. Looking
back during the ascent of the first steep spur, Porepunkah is
seen below, while away to the left glimpses of the Eurobin
Falls will appear. While traversing the summit of the
saddle, beautiful and extensive views of the JBuckland and
Ovens Valleys, with hills upon hills extending as far as
Bogong, Feathertop, &c., will be seen to the left, while the
Ovens Valley down by Eurobin appears below on the right.
Tourists should not neglect to look out for the beautiful
glimpses to be obtained towards Bogong and Feathertop.
Having reached the edge of the rocks, water will be
found bubbling down, and thirsty souls may refresh here.
It is usual to give the horses ten minutes’ rest here.
Pushing on we now traverse the right-hand side of the
main granite end of the Buffalo. The track at first is over
the remains of disintegrated granite, the view opening out
more and more to the right, being the Ovens Valley at
Eurobin. Presently we come to the edge of the track
which has had to be made almost entirely out of the solid
granite. A magnificent prospect is seen from a large flat
rock a few yards to the right of the track, just before
entering on the passage of the narrow rocky sideling. The
track now leads, in and out, up and down, ever advancing
round among the huge boulders and solid granite walls of
the great Buffalo, with rock to the left of it, and a deep
gorge to the right, and beyond the gorge the huge mound
of the False Buffalo. After about three-quarters of an hour
from leaving the water previously spoken of, we come
suddenly to the end of the track, and find ourselves on
the edge of the great morass, snow-filled in winter,
and covered with tufty grass and wild flowers in summer.
This morass, or plain, is typical of the summit of the
Buffalo, which is covered with these plains for many miles.
Looking beyond will be seen some huge rocks, fantastically
piled one on another. These also are typical of Buffalo, for
wherever you go, the rocks will be found scattered about in


all shapes and sizes—some lying flat, others on end, others
balanced, others supported as if ready for the lever.
We now descend into the plain, and looking a little to
the left, will see two poles stuck in the ground. These in-
dicate the bridge over the little creek, and the tourist must
make for them and cross the bridge. This bridge spans the
creek whose water is running directly down to the head of
the Falls. By noting this fact, the tourist cannot now lose
his way. However, a well-beaten track will be observed
leading along the valley for about a mile, when it narrows,
and the way is blocked for further horseback exercise by
the encroaching rocks.
We are now within fifty yards of the lip of the gorge,
though as yet there is no indication of anything wonderful
being close at hand. Follow along the course of the stream,
and in a few moments a sight will suddenly burst on the
view which invariably calls for the most superlative ex-
clamations of wonder, awe, and admiration. We do not
propose to attempt its description, but would say, if you can
possibly manage to see it, do not miss the opportunity. There
is undoubtedly nothing like it in Australia, and to have seen
it is an experience which will be remembered while memory
lasts. Having enjoyed the first glimpse, progress may be
still further made till the stand is taken on the large flat
rock at the lip of the gorge on the left-hand side of the
water. To reach this, a little jumping over the rocks will
be necessary, but it may be remembered that the rough
granite affords excellent foot-hold, provided it is dry.
From the flat rock, most of the main peaks of the Alps
may be seen on a clear day. The long ridge to the left is
Kosciusko (highest of all Australian mountains); then
comes the great triangular-shaped mound of Bogong, next
the Fainter, then Feathertop, and Mt. Hotham to the ex-
treme right. Mt. St. Bernard is not yet in view. Below
us is the Buckland Valley, running away up to the right;
Porepunkah down towards the left, and the Ovens Valley
beyond Bright, with the Valley of German Creek running
away in the direction of Bogong. The Eurobin Falls may
be seen below to the right. The elevation here is 4500 feet.
The depth of the gorge, measured from the highest point of
the great perpendicular left-hand wall to the bed of the


creek, is about 1600 feet. The fall of the water is 500 or
600 feet. Having feasted our eye on the scene, it is usual
to travel along the summit of the left-hand wall and get a
view of the waterfall, but great care should be taken in
looking over, especially in the absence of a guide. There
are various advantageous points of view, especially the
Pulpit Rock, whence the finest view of the great wall is
obtained, but these should not be visited unless the tourist
is well acquainted with the place or has a guide with him.
Boustead’s may be seen from the summit of this great left-
hand wall, and The Twins are also in view. A good echo
may be obtained from various parts of the wall.
This view is at all times marvellously grand, but in
early spring, while the snow is still covering the distant
hills, it is very much more magnificent, especially to Aus-
tralian eyes. There is nothing, as a rule, to prevent a visit
as early as September, but then on no account should the
trip be undertaken without a competent guide who knows
the Buffalo, as some snow will have to be traversed, and it
would be easy to miss the way or get into trouble where
the snow covers the boggy creeks.
Lunch is usually partaken of at the Falls, but as water
and wood are very plentiful on the Buffalo, no unnecessary
hurry need occur on that account.
After leaving the Falls, if the intention is to go on, we
retrace our steps for some distance, and then turn oft' to the
left. But we must now state that though tourists may
without much risk visit the head of the Falls without a
guide, they should on no account attempt to go further.
The different plains become so intermixed and the country
so wild that no amount of direction can safely point out the
road. It would also be useless to endeavour to mark it out
by finger-posts, for a sudden cloud may render all objects
invisible beyond a few yards. The Alpine Club will only
recommend such guides as can be trusted to find their way
almost in the dark, and tourists should place implicit confi-
dence in their leader when in a difficulty.
The track now traverses several level plains and crosses
sundry boggy creeks, then ascends a gentle slope till it brings
us out on the main high level plains. Suddenly the Hump
with the Cathedral Rock appears in view, and a few yards


further on the Horn comes in, away to the right. The sight
here is wild and weird in the last degree—the dead whitened
snow-scrub, the huge mound of the Hump, and the distant
Horn, forming a picture that could scarcely be surpassed
for weirdness.
We now pass by the left-hand side of the Hump, and if
desired it may be visited. It will take about two hours to
visit the summit of the Hump, and to scramble in under
the Cathedral Rock and listen to the wonderful echo, which
is four times repeated. The ascent of the Hump begins
through scrub, and there is no well-defined track, but after
half-an-hour’s climb, the saddle between the Cathedral Rock
and the summit of the Hump is reached. It is usual then
to climb in under the Cathedral Rock, and to get on to
a sloping platform beneath a great overhanging ledge.
Here the echo may be tried, and a very extensive view of
the Alpine Range is seen. The Cathedral Rock is of
immense size, and has never yet been scaled. The Hump
may be ascended to the Cairn, but the view is not so good
as that from the Horn, so that it is usual to ascend the
Horn only when the visitor has but time to do one or the
other.
After coming down, and continuing along the track, we
descend through some more snow-scrub, and pass round the
left side of the Hump, reaching the foot of the Horn in
about three-quarters of an hour. It is usual to camp here
when the intention is to stop another day.
Leviathan Rode. —The Leviathan Rock should be visited
before leaving the Hump. It is an enormous mass of rock,
150 feet long, 75 feet high, by 60 feet broad, balanced on a
point in such a way that both ends are raised off the ground.
A small army could be sheltered beneath this enormous rock
mass, and it is universally admitted to be one of the finest
sights of the Buffalo. It should on no account be missed,
as to visit it only means a few minutes’ deviation from the
track.
The Horn. —To see the sunrise or sunset from the sum-
mit is considered the great thing of this part of the tour,
but at any time the view from the summit of the Horn is






one never to be forgotten. The ascent is not by any means
difficult, even for ladies, and should take from 30 to 40
minutes after leaving the horses. Shortly before reaching
the summit, if at the proper season, say January onwards,
it is worth while to stop and see a wonderful collection of
Bogong moths which collect in a crevice between two great
rocks. By poking them with a stick a perfect torrent of
moths will come tumbling down, greatly to the astonishment
of the unsuspecting visitor. Having reached the summit,
we are on a sloping ledge of rock, 5750 feet above sea-level,
with the whole of the North-Eastern world at our feet.
The scene cannot be described ; suffice it to say that all the
Alpine peaks are in full view. Beechworth may partly be
seen. The Oxley plains are at our feet, as it were, and
hills and valleys on every hand. There is a fine Echo also.
The accompanying diagram will aid the tourist in plac-
ing the different points of interest.
As before stated, the sunrise is often very wonderful as
seen from this peak. The valleys are frequently filled with
white mist, from which the summits of the hills jut out
like islands in a vast tumultuous sea. The shadow of the
Cairn may be seen projected for miles over the surface of
the ground. The various tints assumed by the clouds form
objects which one never tires of watching, while the ex-
traordinary effects produced by the mist it is impossible to
describe. Not less beautiful is the sunset when seen under
favorable conditions of cloud and sky.
Having seen the view from the summit, the guide should
be asked to conduct the party through The Parlor * and
round to the edge of the great precipice on the Buffalo
River side.
To those who intend to spend several days on the Buf-
falo, there will be found plenty to interest them.
The False Buffalo may also be ascended, but only by
those who can stand severe climbing exercise. The various
plains and upheavals of rock afford opportunities for plea-
sant excursions, with always something fresh in view.
The return home may be made by way of Buckland,
or by retracing our steps and descending by Staker’s
Track, To return via of Buckland is not a bad plan.


as some very beautiful views are obtained, and a consider-
able part of the Buckland Yalley is traversed on the way
back to Bright. It will take from two to two and a half
hours to reach the Buckland Flat from the Horn, and if it
is evening, excellent accommodation may be obtained at
Mrs. Scott’s Hit or Miss Hotel. Then in the morning a trip
towards the Upper Buckland may be taken, or the Eurobin
Falls may be visited before returning to Bright.
We have thus sketched our plan of a trip to Buffalo,
and trust that our readers will find it helpful to them in
making this, the grandest of all the tours in the district,
pleasurable and easy. One is apt to get the idea
that to do the Buffalo requires considerable nerve and
ability to ride. We assure our readers that there is scarcely
any danger, provided a competent guide is present; and
the only requisite is the power to sit still on horseback and
keep your seat firmly, with the ability to do a little easy
climbing when ascending the Horn Ladies have frequently
visited the Buffalo, and the writers have more than
once successfully taken ladies up who have not been on
horseback half a dozen times in their lives. So that it
is hoped that all who can spare the time will visit the Buf-
falo, and at least see the wonderful view from “ The Head
of the Buffalo Falls.”


Riding.
Driving.
Walking.
Distance.
hours.
hours.
hours.
MILES.
Bright to Harrietville
2
2
H
16
Harrietville to Boustead’s
3*
4
H
12
Boustead’s to Hotham
1
1
H
5
Hotham to Feathertop
2
—
2
6
Feathertop to Harrietville
(direct)
H
—
H
9
Do. do. (via Boustead’s) 6
—
7
23
Feathertop to Boustead’s
3
—
11
Boustead’s to Harrietville
2
2
3
12
Harrietville to Feathertop
(direct)
41
* 2
—
5
9
Bright to Omeo
28
48
72
70
TO BOUSTEAD'S, FEATHERTOP,
HOTHAM, Ac., &c.
TABLE OF DISTANCES AND TIMES.
Boustead’s to Noone’s
Noone’s to Grant
Grant to Dargo
Dargo to Waterford
Waterford to Bulgoback
Bulgoback to Gee’s
Gee’s to Stockyard
Stockyard to Stratford (railway)
Stockyard to Briagolong (railway)
1 flB
To form a walk- 22
ing tour from 15
Bright to the 8
- Gippslancu 7
Railway, and
so back to 16
Melbourne 15
I 7


GATIN STREET, BRIGHT.
All hinds oj Tourist Requisites in Stock—Strong
Walking Boots , Fishing Tackle , Ammunition ,
Guns , (fee.
BEST BRANDS TOBACGOES, CIGARS,
AND CIGARETTES.
'Cargo Assortment of ||ipes, Cigar
a no) Cigarette || others.
Tinned Meats and all kinds of Preserves
for Parties Camping Out.
BREEN’S STORE,
@4TAH if., BRIGHT.






BOUSTBAD’S (MOUNT ST. BERNARD), MOUNTS
HOTHAM AND PEATHERTOP.
During the summer time, this trip to Mount Hotharn,
via Boustead’s Mount St. Bernard Accommodation House,
is decidedly the favorite trip, especially when ladies who
cannot ride are of the party. There is a good road all the
way to Mount Hotharn, the road passing by Boustead’s
door, and ascending, at the Diamantina Spring, to within
150 feet of the summit of Mount Hotharn (6100 feet). No
more enjoyable outing can be taken by the tired city-
denizen than this trip to Boustead’s, where a week in quiet
contemplation and admiration of nature may be spent,
away from all the worry and bustle of the city, and in a
most invigorating and health-giving atmosphere.
The accommodation at Boustead’s is always good and
clean, and tourists will never have to complain of their
treatment there. The best of the scenery is to be found in
the five miles’ drive between Boustead’s and Mount Hotharn,
and in the view from the summit of the latter.
We now propose to describe the various methods of
doing the trip, and will then give an outline of the trip
itself.
1. A special conveyance or horses may be hired from
Bright to drive all the way.
First day—-Leaving Bright at 9 a.ra., Harrietville should
be reached by 11 a.m. Lunch here and feed the horses.
Leaving Harrietville at 1 p.m., Boustead’s should be reached
by 5 p.m., in time to see the wonderful view of the sunset
from the ridge at the back of the house.
Second day—Leave Boustead’s at 7 a.m., drive on to
Baldy (Mount Hotharn) and return to Boustead’s by 10
a.m. Early lunch, and return to Bright by 6 p.m. Or the
second day may be pleasantly and easily spent by an
excursion to Mount Hotharn and back to Boustead’s only,
returning to Bright the third day.
The two days’ trip should cost £4 for trap to carry four
and driver; the three days’ trip, £5 ss.
2. A coach leaves Bright for Omeo every Tuesday, re-
turning to Bright on Friday.


Take this coach to Boustead s (fare, 155.). Then on
Wednesday morning go out to Mount Hotham in the coach
(fare, 55.), and take lunch with you. Stroll back to Bou-
stead’s in the afternoon. The distance is five miles, but it
is down hill and amid the grandest of surroundings, so that
the walk is a very pleasant one and not tiring. Then
Thursday may be spent around Boustead’s, climbing Mount
Smythe and The Twins; or, if time is limited, Harrietville
may be reached in four hours’ easy walking, so that the
return to Bright, and, if necessary, to Melbourne, may be
made on Friday morning.
The coach returns from Omeo on Thursday evening ;
leaves Boustead’s at 9.10 a.m. on Friday, and roaches
Bright about four o’clock on Friday afternoon.
Those who are good walkers might visit Feathertop on
the Wednesday and walk down to Harrietville. The time
occupied in this would be about six hours from Mount
Hotham. The track from Feathertop to Harrietville is
blazed with the tourist’s blaze. If there is any intention of
doing this, water must be taken from the Diamantina
Springs.
3. The tourist may go on to Harrietville on the same
day as he leaves Melbourne. Coach leaves Bright at 3.30
p.m., arriving at Harrietville about 6 p.m. Next morning
he may ride to Boustead’s, and if not too tired, go on to
Mount Hotham and back. Return to Harrietville on the
third day, by making an early start in time to catch the
coach leaving Harrietville at 9 a.m. To do this would be
found tiring and arduous, but it can be done by a good
horse and rider.
4. A good plan for seeing Feathertop and Hotham in
one day is to ascend direct to Feathertop (riding or walking)
from Harrietville. Then return via Razor-back and Hotham
to Boustead’s. An ordinary climber may do this in a day,
and return to Harrietville on the second day. Water must
be carried on this trip.
[A list of the distances and times usually occupied in
traversing them will be found on page 53, These times
are based on the performances of ordinary walkers and
riders, and will be found rather over than under the mark.]


The Trip. —ln making the trip to Boustead’s and Mounts
Hotham or Feathertop, let it be distinctly understood that
there is no need for a driver to be taken if there is anyone
in the party thoroughly accustomed to the handling of
horses ; if there is not, then a reliable driver should be
taken. It is also wise to see that there is some stout rope
in the vehicle in case of accident, and also an axe, in case
a bough of a tree may have blown across the track, and
also to cut down a sapling on the return journey as a
steadier to the vehicle.
Bright to Harrietville (16 miles). —Leaving Bright, and
crossing the bridge over Morse’s Creek close to its junction
with the Ovens, a splendid view of Mt. Bogong is obtained.
After travelling about two and a half miles, a halt of a few
minutes should be made so that the view of Mount Buffalo,
which is seen beyond Bright, may be admired. Passing on,
the road turns to the right, and Feathertop appears sud-
denly in view, fairly in the background, just before passing
the Germantown Chinese Camp (three miles). A little
further on the Ovens is crossed by a bridge, and now Mount
Hotham may be seen to the extreme right on the distant
horizon. The Ovens is re-crossed, and Freeburgh passed
through (six miles), Feathertop becoming more and more
conspicuous. Two miles further on, while crossing a side-
ling round the hill, the river will be noticed rushing through
the flats below, and some very fine tree-ferns may be ad-
mired. The view of Feathertop from the end of this side-
ling is very striking. The Mount is now in full view till
within three miles of Harrietville, when it is left behind
by a turn of the road to the right. The river is again met
about three miles from Harrietville, and is crossed twice
more before that township is reached. The comfortable
residences of Messrs. Gow and Clemens, successful hop
growers and miners, are soon passed by, and Harrietville is
reached in two and a quarter hours from Bright.
Harrietville is a thriving mining township, situated
right at the base of the spurs leading up to the great Alps.
In the early days an enormous amount of gold was won
from the hills around and the alluvial wash of the valleys.


ST4S HOTKIi,
HARRIET VILLE.
MRS. MONKS, Proprietress.
Stopping Place of Bright-Harrietville and Bright to Omeo Coaches.
TOURISTS AND TRAVELLERS GENERALLY
WILL RECEIVE EVERY ATTENTION AT THE
ABOVE-NAMED HOSTELRY.
§rmxhs of Mims, Spirits, mb Cordials.
BILLIARD TABLE ON THE PREMISES.
LETTERS AND TELEGRAMS ATTENDED TO.
All communications should he addressed to —
MRS. MONKS , '
STAR HOTEL ,
HARR IE T VILLE.


Recently the Harrietville Gold Mining Company (English)
purchased several reefs in the neighbourhood, and as
the reefs are turning out well, Harrietville is once more
prosperous. Should any visitor desire to see this great
mine, with its battery, smelting, assay office, &c., Mr. T. G.
Davey, the manager, will gladly give a pass for the purpose.
Visitors to Harrietville may stay at the Star Hotel, kept
by Mrs. Monks, and all their wants will be attended to.
The Athenfeum is open till 10 p.m., and books and papers
may be seen. A visit to Mr. Wraith will always be found
interesting, and that gentleman will be glad to show
tourists his very interesting collection of curios.
Harrietville to Boustead’s, Hotham and Feathertop. —A
few yards past the Star Hotel, on the left-hand side of the
road, will be seen a finger-post marked “The Road to Omeo.”
This is the beginning of the great road over the Australian
Alps, which has been constructed by the Government at an
enormous cost. This is 15 feet wide, and is for the
greater part of the distance cut out of the mountain sides.
Immediately after leaving Harrietville the ascent begins,
and almost at once it will be noticed that the road divides;
one branch, the old road, going straight up the hill to the
left ; the other branch, the new road, continuing round the
hill to the right. We strongly advise tourists who are driv-
ing to take the new road, whereas those who are riding or
walking will find the old road shorter, though of course
steeper. The road rises 3000 or 4000 feet in the first four
or five miles, and some beautiful glimpses of Harrietville
and the Ovens Valley are obtained on the way. When the
top of the ascent is reached, the road is fairly level.
Mounts Feathertop and Hotham are in full view to the left,
and Buffalo away behind. The continuation of the road
round Baldy may often be made out in the distance. Very
soon Boustead’s comes in sight on rounding a sharp turn,
but it is still six or seven miles away. The valleys below
are often of immense depth, and there is always a feeling
of exhilaration and excitement when driving along this
track, as it were between heaven and earth. Water will
be found at the side of the road about four miles from
Harrietville. Shortly before reaching Boustead’s another


slight ascent is made, and in about four hours from Harriet-
ville the well-known accommodation house is reached, and
a hearty welcome will be given by the veteran, Boustead.
Boustead's Mount St. Bernard Accommodation House
(5050 feet) was built by the Victorian Government, and
though utterly unworthy of its surroundings, it has served
a very useful purpose, and the traveller will be glad to re-
tire to its warm and cheery sitting-room after the evening
drive from Harrietville. It is situated close to the main
divide, and by ascending the rise at the back of the house,
the tourist is soon on the very edge of the Dividing
Range, and may throw a stone down into Gippsland and
another down to the Northern Valleys, whose waters go to
feed the Murray. The sunset should be viewed from the
divide at the back of the house. One branch of the Ovens
rises just below Boustead’s. The roads to Omeo and Dargo
and Grant branch off close by, so that those who are on a
walking tour and wish to reach the Gippsland railways as
soon as possible may branch off here and make for Grant
and Dargo, thence to Stratford or Briagolong.
Short Tours around Boustead's. —Pleasant walks along
the Dargo and Grant roads may be taken at any time.
Mount Smythe (5200 feet), situated right in front of
the house, may be visited, though there is nothing of par-
ticular interest there.
The Twins. —A good stiff climb of two or three hours
will bring the tourist to the summit of The Twins, whence
a magnificent prospect of the Gippsland country, stretching
away down to the sea, may be obtained. This climb is well
worth taking for the sake of the fine view, which is entirely
different from any other to be obtained in the district.
Boustead's to MountHotham(6loo feet). —A glorious drive
of about five miles is that to Mount Hotham (Baldy). The
road is from 5000 to 6000 feet above sea-fevel all the way,
and as it winds in and out among the tops of the mountains,
the view becomes an ever-increasing and marvellously grand
one. The tremendous depth of the valleys at our feet, and


the lovely verdure of the hill sides, render the scene not
only awe-inspiring, but beautiful as well. The road crosses
Mount Blowhard, and rises quite close to the top of Mount
Baldy, at the Diamantina Springs. The vehicles are usually
left here, and the last rise of about 150 feet climbed on foot.
Water is obtainable at the Diamantina Springs (so called
after Lady Bowen, on the occasion of her visit here), the
head waters of the Kiewa River. From the summit of
Mount Hotham the view is most extensive, embracing Bo-
gong, Feathertop, Buffalo, Buller, The Twins, Mount Smythe,
Mount St. Bernard, Tabletop, Mount Howitt, the High
Plains, the Ovens Valley, and all the many smaller hills and
valleys of the neighbouring districts.
To those who are fond of camping out no better spot can
be selected than close to the Diamantina Springs. The
Alpine Club guides will provide tents and all utensils,
together with their own services, at £1 per day.
The drive to Baldy and back to Boustead’s, with ample
time to view the scenery, may be accomplished in three
hours.
Ascent of Feathertop via Mount Hotham. —This must be
done either on horseback or on foot. Vehicles cannot be
taken further than the Diamantina Springs. Water should
be taken from the Springs. The ascent is accomplished by
keeping along the crown of the ridge all the way, and for a
good part of the distance this ridge is only a few feet wide,
its sloping sides descending very steeply into the deep valleys
below. This narrow ridge is called the Razor-back. The
view from the Cairn is again very extensive, embracing all
the high peaks, and in addition the Kiewa Valley. The
descent may be accomplished either by way of the Razor-
back to Boustead’s, or by the spur leading off to the right
direct to Harrietville in about three hours.
Ascent of Feathertop direct from Harrietville. —To those
who only wish to ascend Feathertop, this is the best route.
The track has been blazed from Harrietville direct towards
the summit of the Mount. The spur which is ascended
rises from the flats at the back of the Star Hotel, and
ascends up to the left. To reach its base, pass along the


lane just below the Athenteum, and, having crossed the
river, the blazed track must be followed all the way. Water
should be taken from the river here. The trip may be done
on foot or on horseback, and should take from four to five
hours to reach the summit. After ascending the spur, the
track turns to the right, and in about two hours from
Harrietville, Feathertop comes suddenly into view, presenting
a most imposing sight. The traak trends towards the right
for a good part of the way, and keeps to the top of the
ridge. Once fairly on the way it would be impossible to
make a mistake, even if there were no blazes to mark the
track.
The return journey may be made direct to Harrietville
in three hours, or by Mount Hotham to Boustead’s in three
hours, along the Razor-back.
The trip should only be undertaken on foot by those
who are good sturdy climbers, as there is some severe work
to be gone through. On horseback, very little difficulty
should be experienced.
Mountain Home for Tourists
( Only One Minute s Walk jrom the Porepunkah
Railway StationJ.
JAMES ARMSTRONG
Has First-class Accommodation for Tourists. Every Comfort and
Attention. Piano. Magnificent View of Mounts Buffalo
and Feathertop.
SADDLE HORSES FOR LADIES.
TENTS AND GUIDES PROVIDED FOR MOUNTAINS.
Buggies to go to any part required at Moderate Charges.
Letters and Telegrams addressed to James Armstrong, Porepunkah,
via Myrtleford, will receive prompt attention.
Visitors met at the Station, either Night or Day Train.


MOUNT BOGONG.
Ascent of Mount Bogong (6500 feet). —For those who
desire to make the ascent of this, the highest of Victoria’s
mountains, special arrangements with regard to guides,
horses, &c., will have to be made with the Alpine Club.
The trip may be accomplished in three days from Bright.
On the first day the tourist may walk or ride over to Ta-
wonga, Kiewa River. The ride will take four hours, and a
high range, from which extensive views of Buffalo and the
Kiewa Valley are obtained, will have to be crossed, A
splendid view of Bogong is obtained when beginning the
descent towards Tawonga. On the second day the ascent
and descent of the mountains may be made. The ascent
will take four or five hours—the descent about three hours.
On the third day, return to Bright,
The summit of Bogong is an extensive plateau, and the
atmosphere is very bracing during the summer-time. Cattle
are fattened on the Bogong High Plains all the summer, and
a few days may very pleasantly be spent camping out up
there, provided the weather is fine.


COOK’S
JBpmmtrt far,
COMBINING THE
Victorian Alps
AN D
Gippsland Lakes.
From Melbourne by train daily for Bright,
thence by coach every Tuesday to Harriet-
ville and Mount St. Bernard Hospice (highest
habitation in Victoria), resting the night there,
and leaving by coach on Wednesday for Omeo;
from Omeo by coach daily to Bruthen and
Bairnsdale, thence by the “ J.C.D.” Mail
steamers to Cunninghame through the Gipps-
land Lakes, and return to Bairnsdale, thence
rail to Melbourne via Sale.
Fare, First-class tljrougljout
£S Ss.


ACROSS THE AUSTRALIAN ALPS TO OMEO,
GIPPSLAND, AND THE GIPPSLAND
LAKES.
A coach leaves Bright every Tuesday at 9 a.m. for Omeo,
stopping for the night at Bowstead’s ; crossing Mount
Hotham on Wednesday morning, and arriving at Omeo on
Wednesday evening. Good accommodation will be found
at Omeo at Middleton’s and Bazeley’s Hotels. Thence a
coach leaves Omeo daily for Bairnsdale, whence steamers
convey tourists through the Lakes, or train returns them
direct to Melbourne.
By taking this trip, almost every variety of scenery may
be obtained, and the Alps are crossed from north to south.
But tourists, though they may have booked for the through
trip, may break their journey, and are strongly advised
to do so, at Bright, and spend a week in visiting the
Buffalo, Eurobin Falls, and other places of interest. The
coach fare from Bright to Omeo is £2 ; luggage up to 141bs.
free. From Omeo to Bairnsdale the fare is £1 15s.
The time occupied in travelling from Bright to Bairns-
dale is three days.
Full particulars regarding this trip may be obtained
from Messrs. Thos. Cook and Sons, 281 Collins Street,
Melbourne.


THE ALPINE REGIONS IN
WINTER.
The majority of Australians are quite unaware of the
fact that during five months of the year they may leave
Melbourne on any day and be among the Alpine snows on
the following one. We propose in this chapter to point
out the best way of enjoying a holiday among the winter
snows, and of obtaining the finest snow views to be found
in Australia.
Snow usually falls on all the higher peaks in May, and
by the middle of June the crest of the long line of Alpine
ranges is completely covered. The snow gets deeper during
July and August, and begins to melt in September. By
the end of October, the greater part of the snow has melted
off the northern or sunny aspect of the mountains, but it
will be found deep in all the shaded southern gullies, even
as late as the New Year.
Boustead’s is, as a rule, cut off from vehicular or horse
traffic early in June, and the road is not open till late in
September. The road through to Omeo, round Baldy, is
usually impassable from the middle of May till the beginning
of November.
Time of Visit. —As a rule, June, July, and August are
the months during which the snow scenery is at its best.
The mountains are then completely enveloped in their white
mantle, and though the weather may be uncertain at times,
still there are always magnificent days during these months,
when it is a pleasure to live up among these hills—fine,
frosty nights, with clear bracing days, affording most ex-
tensive views, and very suitable for mountaineering. Sep-


tember is a very good month to visit the district, as there
is then still plenty of snow, and the exertion of getting
amongst it is somewhat lessened by the fact that traffic
along the various tracks can usually be carried on for a
considerably greater distance than is the case in the previous
months. But to those who would experience the true
Alpine nature of the tours we would say, come in July or
August. As to the weather, the Secretary of the Alpine
Club will always gladly give advice as to the probable
weather up to the last moment by wire (prepaid).
WINTER TOURS.
Clear Spot. —To those who would simply wish to see the
panoramic view of the snow-clad hills, a visit to Bright and
ascent to Clear Spot will be the best trip they can under-
take. From Bright, Mount Bogong is in full view, snow-
clad from summit to base, and frequently affording marvel-
lous changes of color during the sunset.
From Clear Spot (see page ) the view includes
Mounts Kosciusko, Bogong, Fainter, Hotham, Blowhard,
St. Bernard, The Twins, The Buffalo, and several other
peaks, all completely snow-clad. Such another prospect
as this is nowhere to be found in Australia with so
little cost of time and trouble. To those who can only
spend from Saturday to Monday, we would say, come
up by express on Friday night, visit Clear Spot on Satur-
day, and return on Monday morning by express.
Boustead's. —ln order to reach Boustead’s, it will be
necessary to take to the snow-shoes, and also to have a
competent guide. The snow-shoes are circular—very light,
and the art of using them is easily learnt. The amateur
who has had ten minutes’ practice will progress almost as
well as the experienced mountaineer. Guides may be
obtained by applying to the Alpine Club. On no account
should the novice attempt to cross deep snow without shoes,
as the work is not only too severe, but dangerous—a soft
patch may crop up, and the tourist suddenly disappear. It
is also advisable to carry a strong rope in making any of
these snow ascents. Alpenstocks are also available for those
who desire them.


In making the trip to Boustead’s, the best plan would be
to ride up from Harrietville as far as the snow-line, taking
a boy to return with the horses, thus reserving the strength
for the snow work. Seven or eight miles of snow will
probably have to be traversed, and the views on the way
are such as will call forth admiration and surprise, not only
from Australians who have never seen the like, but even
from veteran globe-trotters.
Boustead, though he may be completely snowed up, will
find a way in for the traveller, and will give him a hearty
welcome and comfortable quarters during his stay. If
desired, Mount Hotham may be visited, provided there is a
competent guide and the weather is clear, but such a trip
should not be undertaken except in clear settled weather.
We do not advise the ascent of Mount Feathertop by this
route, but will now describe the best method of accomplish-
ing this feat.
WINTER ASCENT OF MOUNT FEATHERTOP
(6300 FEET).
To ascend Mount Feathertop while still clad in his win-
ter garb of purest white is undoubtedly the trip par excellence
of Australia, When we say that the ascent may be accom-
plished with a minimum of difficulty and danger by any ordi-
narily robust climber, we are expressing the opinion of each
member of the party who made the first winter ascent in the
beginning of September, 1889. This party consisted of the
Hon. Jas. Campbell, ex-Postmaster-General; Mr. H. F. Rix,
8.A., of the Education Department; Mr. H. S. Smith, Rev.
W. L. Fenton, and Dr. Wilkinson, of the Bright Alpine Club ;
with Messrs. A. H. Sharpe and D. Gow as guides. To this
party belongs the honor of showing the practicability of this
trip to the ordinary tourist, and no doubt many will follow
their example during coming winters.
The Ascent. —Harrietville should be reached overnight,
so that an early start may be. made next morning. It is
useless and dangerous to attempt the ascent unless there is
a good prospect of a fine day. Lunch and water must be


taken from the valley. Horses and guides having been
arranged for, a start should he made from Harrietville not
later than 7 a.m. The track leads up the blazed spur at the
back of the Star Hotel, and on reaching its summit turns
sharply to the right along the ridge. The snow-line should
be reached in about two hours, and the horses must then be
tethered. Having strapped the snow-shoes firmly to the
feet, a start is now made for the summit, following the
crown of the ridge most of the way. Occasionally, after a
severe frost, the snow may be sufficiently hard to carry the
weight of a man without snow-shoes; if so, the shoes should
be slung over the back, as they will probably be required on
the return journey, when the mid-day sun may have melted
the frozen crust. Very soon Feathertop appears in full
view, and a stop of a few minutes will invariably be made
to admire the sight ; for the monster seems right in front
of us, cleaving the air with his wedge of white, and forming
a most striking and awe-inspiring sight. When it is stated
that such a travelled mountaineer as the Hon. Jas. Camp-
bell, who has seen the Himalayas, the Alps, and the Andes,
publicly thanked those who had brought him to see this
sight, it will be understood that there must indeed be some-
thing worth the seeing.
Moving on, we climb one or two pinches, and by half-
past eleven should be nearing the summit. The last part
of the climb is the most difficult and the most dangerous.
The snow is piled up into a ridge, with an overhanging
ledge on the south side, and great care should be taken not
to approach too near this edge.
It is well to see that all the members of the party retain
hold of the climbing rope in case of a slip. The summit
should be reached by noon. The depth of snow here varies
according to the season and the time the year, but it is
frequently from 20 to 30 or more feet in depth. Of the
views from the summit it is needless to speak—the tourist
is in the very centre of miles on miles of snow-capped hills,
and on a clear day will find himself more than repaid for
any little exertion during the climb. On the south side of
the ridge, beautiful icicles are usually seen, of most fantas-
tic shapes. Lunch should now be partaken of If there


is any wind it will probably be found very cold on the sum-
mit, but otherwise the temperature will usually be found
mild ; however, it is always wise to be warmly clad, and
not to doff and leave behind any clothing during the climb.
Some capital sliding places may be found near the summit,
so that warming exertion can easily be obtained.
The return journey to Harrietville should occupy about
three hours to three and a half hours, and it should be so
timed as to reach Harrietville before dusk.
Such is an outline of a trip to Feathertop on any fine
day in July, August, or early in September, There is
nothing grander to be done in the way of easy moun-
taineering in Victoria—the snow-shoe work is not tiring,
and the ascent is comparatively easy, and but little danger
attaches to it. Altogether it is a trip which all who are
fond of seeing the mountains at their very best should
accomplish.
THE BUFFALO IN WINTER.
The first successful winter ascent of the Buffalo was
made on August 23rd, 1890, by a party of members of the
Alpine Club, led by E. Garble, the Club’s well-known guide.
The trip was organized by the Secretary of the Club, and
the party included the Hon. Jas. Campbell, Messrs. Rix
(Beechworth), Fussell (Benalla), Barrowclough (Victorian
Railways), E. L. Smith and Davis (Bright), and Dr. Wilkin-
son (Secretary Alpine Club).
The whole of the plains were found to be covered with
snow, which varied in depth from three to six feet, while it
extended right to the summit of the Horn, even the Cairn
being completely enveloped in snow. The view of the Buf-
falo under snow is described by these gentlemen as one of
surpassing beauty ; and should any tourist desire a novel
and interesting winter ascent, he cannot do better than
have a trip arranged for him by the Alpine Club.
BUROBIN PALLS IN WINTER.
Naturally enough these Falls are often seen under magni-
ficent conditions during the winter months. If a day can


FI RST WINTER ASCENT* MT BUFFALO • AT THE HORN • 5750rr




be chosen after some heavy rains, a trip to the Falls is well
worth making. On the whole, the best plan would be to ride,
as the Eurobin Creek may be high, and not always passable
for vehicles. Even on horseback, a wetting may be ob-
tained. Should the creek be too high to ford, the horses
may be tied up and the creek crossed on foot by means of
the foot-bridge. A walk of half an hour will then bring
the tourist to the Falls, and well repaid he will be, for the
more difficult the crossing of the creek, the finer the view
of the Falls.
SUNSET ON MOUNT FEATHERTOP.
We must not omit to mention that the view of the sun-
set on Mount Feathertop which may be obtained on any
fine clear evening by walking along the Harrietville road
as far as the turn into Germantown (three miles) is well
worth seeing, and as the walk is a pleasant one, tourists
may very agreeably spend an hour and a half before dinner
by walking out to see it.
Brinei' and Shoehridge, “ Alpine Observer,” Bright ,


BiBUo
4the
BRIGHT BREWERY
ALPINE AERATED WATER WORKS,
CORDIAL COMPANY.
Extensive Additions having been made to the Company's
Establishment, and a Large Quantity of Valuable Machinery
obtained, Customers may rely upon their Orders being fid filled
with promptitude. The services of a First-class Brewer, as
well as a Cordial Manufacturer (from Melbourne ) having been
secured, satisfaction in every department is guaranteed.
Large Stock of BOTTLED ALE and PORTER
(last winter’s brew) now ready.
BITTERS, LEMON SYRUP, RASPBERRY, CLOVES,
PEPPERMINT, GINGER WINE, LIME JUICE,
GINGER ALE, PINE APPLE, LITHIA AND SODA WATERS,
SARSAPARILLA, LEMONADE, &c., &e., &c.
HIGHEST PRICE GIVEN FOR ALE AND PORTER BOTTLES




COOK’S
Tonis In (nslralasia
or full information how to reach the Holiday
Resorts of Victoria, including the ALPINE
DISTRICT, Gippsland Lakes, Fern Tree
Gully, and Healesville ; also Tasmania, New
Zealand, &c., &c., apply to
IK COOK A SON,
Official Tourist Agents
FOR THE VICTORIAN RAILWAYS
AND T 1
PRINCIPAL INTERCOLONIAL STEAMSHIP COMPANIES,
28t (ZolliQS Street,
3XTELB OURNE.
