

EXH IBITION. 1880 -81


life
LESSEE H. BYRON MOORE.
This useful and important Institution, tire rendezvous of the
Southern Hemisphere, is open to all.
Papers filed from Great Britain, France, Belgium, Germany,
Austria, America, India, Ceylon, China, Cape of Good Hope
and California, The Straits, Fiji, and all the principal
Journals of the Australian Colonies.
Shipping Registers, Gazetteers, and Nautical Directories,
of all parts of the World,
A well-assorted Library of Reference.
ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION.
£ s. d.
Public Companies (including Employes on business ) 5 5 0
Firms „ ~ 4 4 0
Firm of Two ... ... ... ... ... 3 8 0
Single Subscription ... ... ... ... 2 2 0
~ (including Employes on business ) 3 3 0
Country Subscribers Half the Above Rates.
(Persons living more than 15 miles from the Melbourne Post
Office treated under this head.)
Locked Drawer and Letter Box ... ... ... 1 1 0
T. C. RUSSELL,
Melbourne, 1880.
Manager










a ~s • r
W 3 ISS/F8C8?
O'




, it h *
/s s J , °
// hf/4//
I ** • sV / ) gS-
V -J _ ' ~
’ I - :; r
/O; ■■s r- ■ \ t
® "%*/ ■ -T •■ . .\
v> ' ':
-m*\ ■ - C” ;:• 3 “'!
a "nßßfe
U# (, 'l*
\V li ' V°A V \VV ' *
V- v VX\\\ 1 J
\V. - o ,Qi
\V« s


/fil), %
x (®i mi)
if I »
, Mo
v \<s i'r* v <S
hw U /M% pi I
% mWi
■ €#) * ’




£-CH U C A VINEYARD
jy Qp / /,
(p. Qyyyyiayy
(^^uvitntli a it - (lilUncAU^Q)
METROPOLITAN CELLARS
C ~ X'' //, - C '//> ' . ;//. >/,
NEXT ThCBJNK OF VICTORIA, y' \ //// / /
Cr> vceuwx/t'/ie'-.


1L
I West Beach, St. KILDA
BanquetingXPicnscking,Accommodation for 500 Persons. . •
QkATiwr, RIM 1/
BanquetingX Picnicking,Accommodation for 500 Persons. .
~~ V ~L S k ati n c Rink, G — ■^Cq)
On*aufr Pnnnmaftcs mts Cantu,
Wwa\? so\v& vK \Www> %. Hot X Cold Baths, Sedßdthin’g.
7 minutes walk from Railway Station,Cabs every Tram
Best Win es & Spirits.






r\
/ /' ■■ j
/ $ / / >}
Sf / /\
,
f%i
jku
%\> J«Pr% ' W
•fefi Jr/• w?>Sy
Bm»:
’ d»fi ;'■-fy^jjl
.nKm 1 .
;% • .ag
TSfflBSb'- - jjfiV \$>J
V .. - :
m


EXHIBITION ISSUE, 1880-81.
Tll K 11A V
FOE THOSE SEEKING EECREATION DURING
THE SUMMER MONTHS.
“ The winds of heaven blew, the ocean rolled
Its gathering waves—ye felt it not. The blue
Bared its eternal bosom, and the dew
Of summer night collected still to make
The morning precious : Beauty was awake !
Why were ye not awake ?”
Keats.
<BU£LIBSEQ IJf J£EZ£OUItJTJS.
H. CORDELL, PRINTER, 59, QUEEN STREET.






ramDUXRRJS. k( ~
MX MARY OR
ORUJI ff TtV
A4o'-~ - _ / £>-
'
tV-.. vVS—.
w
I sipletJ,
tk Aii'Lk'it; \ /
»1\ life 1
ofJßast/Jxrve,
y ptcoofc- 1
,1 , : ,-■'% \ SmSAn-TeakJ HKgC—/ J
!*&* % ’ 1 \ [
"V %; -notation peak ># \
\ aJfe x \ *
• Ov.;’ 1D64- ' V
H I
-Vv Caj)l?
\ a//
\ yj
kUARINE .
403 A
I CXBUS BJBLUffcT y pW 1-
7, -^MfatuuarAz&t -XEirszircfajsr l ~3;DrYSii


■ / T '-<_■ \f^^^^^^^ T Hj"j - » * \
’ j* <-
1 . >1 a >*CJ.rrßo> , J 4 ' a "*-™“
: |? !? x’’"'"
WM/lr/m 111 uTI ! ’~~^V-—' ’V Mxtßibolk^wß^P^
■' „XX \\ V \
mW/ \ | V •<’
• \t\v\Plyyjjk V— iUjoaraKyJ __r ’ -"A7
jmstauxodr- -:s>lW $[




INTRODUCTION
rowing in favour with the public of
the city and visitors from the country
as the beautiful Watering Places of
Port Phillip now are, we feel that
the time has come when summer
Visitors to the Sea - Side should
have put before them a correct Map
of the shores of the Bay, with the
various places of resort prominently
marked, and with brief accompanying
notes as to each, so that the excursionist or visitor may have
before him all the information necessary to enable him
“ where to choose.” The Map we present has been carefully
marked, and the sketches (in print) of the various Watering
Places are written impartially. No prettier trip by sea in
the colony can be obtained than an excursion “ down the
Bay,” and the information we afford will show to the reader
that each of these summer retreats has its own attractions, and
that every one of them will well repay, in the renewed health
which fine scenery, shelter from, hot winds, a fine sea breeze,
and the possibility of securing every necessary physical com-
fort, both for the invalid and the “ hale and hearty,” the visit
short or long that may be paid to them.
The attractions of the Sea-Shore to excursionists, or
residents for a season from town or country, are well known,
but it may not be inappropriate to quote the following
suggestions from a little work on “ Sea-side Rambles,” by
a popular Australian author, now no more :
“ There are certain times and seasons when the mind, so
dependent on a healthy state of the body for a vigorous
ftp
yj


dB2-' r J3*sw ■ !^<!^®(3aSis®®^S® l
development, worn out by constant toil and anxiety, becomes
thoroughly unstrung, and unless a change of scene and
companions can be at once obtained, it soon becomes
impaired, and sooner or later the consequences are seen in
one of the many tedious nervous diseases unfortunately so
prevalent in this country. A change into the interior is
scarcely likely to prove as beneficial to the man of sedentary
habits as a run by the sea, and where the f stormy winds
do blow,’ and where the long lost appetite quickly
returns, and the mental faculties resume their wonted spirit
Cities,’ remarks Professor Harvey, in his work
on Seaweeds, f are springing up in the Australian Colonies ;
and Watering places, to which the citizen takes his family to
enjoy the sea breeze during the summer time are coming into
being 5’ still a Sea-side residence becomes monotonous when
the mind has not occupation, but following out some of the
suggestions contained in the following pages, inducements
will be found for taking exercise in search of some of the
many beautiful objects of the Sea-shore, and so all the
functions, bodily and mental, may be maintained in a healthy
state.”
A sketch of Sorrento, the new and popular watering
place on the shore of the South Channel, will be found in its
own place in this Guide, but it is proper to write a few
lines here as to its origin, and the gentlemen to whom the g
public owe the creation of this attractive summer retreat. Sj
Sir Charles Gavan Duffy (not then Sir Charles) selected
about a thousand acres of the peninsula, stretching along the gj
Sound and over the neck of land to the Ocean Beach, and |j
bought up the selections of some older settlers. There he Jj
&****•& o,<- -ft ,px^«X3i!BX9
jfaaSs* icastf ti 1111—1111; '


built a residence, but the place was so difficult of access that
it was some time before his example was followed. To
encourage the formation of a popular watering place he ®
presented to Mr. P. J. Martin a piece of the land, fronting
the Channel, on condition that the latter should build
a commodious hotel for the convenience of visitors. That
was done. Sir Charles then resolved to sell a portion of
this property, and the business was entrusted to Mr. J. H.
v f i • • i ■
Knipe. He found great difficulty in inducing any person
possessed of capital to enter into the scheme, but at last
Mr. George Coppin was induced to visit the spot, who
became so much interested in the place that he at once
arranged to purchase a large portion of the land offered ; and
also floated the “ Sorrento Ocean Amphitheatre Company,”
who are entitled to the credit of developing the beauties of
this charming locality.
Cottages were erected to let furnished, —a road made from
the shore of the Bay to the sea, —the Amphitheatre and the
whole landscape improved by judicious work. The building of
the Continental Hotel has given additional accommodation to
the public, and the purchase of the steamer “ Golden Crown ”
(through which the fare from Sandridge to Sorrento and
back was reduced from i os. to js.) has given every facility
for the recreation and thorough enjoyment of the people,
Mr, Coppin being the inspiring and chief moving spirit in
the whole of the business ; and now a popular and thriving
marine village exists, which will soon develope into a muni
cipality. Mr. Coppin has conferred many benefits upon
the colony of Victoria, but none better for the inhabitants
of Melbourne and its suburbs, as well as for visitors from
the country in search of health by the Sea-side, than in the
creation of Sorrento.
3


fc?
- i
QMd
a j
Among the less remote of the many watering places that |
0 surround our superb Inland sea, Mordialloc unquestionably y
presents the premier claim. Its immediate proximity to the |
metropolis, 15 miles, the splendid road by which it is |
0 approached, and the really interesting country traversed in f
|| the journey, all serve to indicate this spot as one of the |
most desirable to be chosen by those whose business i
|| engagements may preclude them from visiting any of the |
0 more distant places of marine resort.
Though Mordialloc does not boast of many natural |
0 features to attract the attention, there is that which is of |
0 1
0 more interest both to the invalid and the sportsman, a £
|| salubrious climate and an abundance of sport both for gun, |
§rod, and line. Mullet fishing in the creek, in the season, is |
equal to any to be found in the vicinity of Melbourne, |
while the Bay, at this point, teems with many of the best
|| varieties of the finny tribe found in the waters of Hobson’s
§ Say. The gun too will find ample sport in the immediate
9 neighbourhood, and for a very considerable radius, around
0 the spot.
There are two good hotels, a post office, a general store
0 and the other concomitants of a colintry village. There is a
daily mail and coach communication with the North ||
0 Brighton Railway Station thrice daily.
The best route for visitors, not travelling in their own p
conveyance, is by train to the North Brighton station, thence ||
by coach to Mordialloc, direct to Bloxsidge’s Hotel. Any one 0
travelling in their own conveyance will find the best route to ||
0 be by the Point Nepean road, through Cheltenham.
il / 0
0 4
o cl


; T 'W
i#~
[: jx
[ About twelve miles beyond Mordialloc, upon the same #*“
■ line of road, the traveller will pass Frankston, a small
,■ but prettily situated seaside village, but comparatively ''
[ little visited by the pleasure seeker. It will, however, . > ~
hereafter come more prominently into notice, inasmuch as it 51/.
y will be, should the railway be carried out as proposed, the D
[ site of the future Metropolitan Cemetery. At present, it is
\ the coaching station of the Point Nepean line, and has been /
f for many years the head quarters of the Mornington
{ Electoral District. It was here that, during the politica
| crisis and the dead-lock, the then Chief-Secretary, Mr, (now fe-
y Sir James) McCulloch, made his principal extra-parha-
( mentary utterances.
I Its present resources are chiefly drawn from the wood 8k
/ trade, which is largely interested in the neighbourhood, (■;
| A pier and wharf have been constructed for the shipment of )
the natural produce of the place. There has consequently }V,
/ sprung up a large trade between this place and the
{ metropolis. The general remarks concerning Mordialloc yr
| will also apply to this place.
Frankston is about 27 miles from the city, and is most M
[ conveniently approached by road, via Mordialloc.
I
IK


Ip
But for a want of business energy upon the part of its
principal residents, Schnapper Point would have long ere this
have attained to a far more exalted position than it has yet
assumed. Splendidly situated, within a convenient distance
of Melbourne, possessing a larger share of natural
advantages than the majority of its rivals, and backed by a
reputation dating back some twenty years, it has done little
more than hold its prestige, while other competitors have
slowly but surely been gaining ground upon it. It is
unnecessary to enquire whether this apathy has been due to
a want of public spirit or an unusually retiring disposition
upon the part of the residents; but it may, with confidence.
be prognosticated that now the principal residents have
awakened to a sense of their own interests, a much more
splendid future is in store for this side of the Bay.
Approaching “the Point” from the sea, the bold
promontory upon which the town is built presents a
strikingly noble appearance. The red sandstone cliff
springing abruptly from the water’s edge, with the tide A
rolling in, breaking into foaming billows over the rocky 'tfS*
shoal that extends seaward from the cliff, or dashing in
unrestrained fury against its tide-worn base, is picturesque
in the extreme, while the abrupt winding roadway leading
from the town to the Pier, viewed from the Bay, at first
sight strongly reminds one of the landing at Alleppo.
The Harbour, sheltered by the cliff, affords safe
moorings in all weathers, while a fine pier provides the
necessary accommodation for the steamers which regularly
ply to “ the Point ” during the season, and to the coasting
6


to
R
8
crafts engaged in the wood traffic, a large lumber trade being
carried on at this point of the coast.
Of Schnapper Point itself, it is sufficient to say that of
all the watering places it is the most elite. The many
beautiful villas and family mansions that dot the hill-sides
being quite a feature of the place. Viewed from the Bay,
the appearance is striking and picturesque in the extreme,
the contrast of the wooded slopes and grassy undulations,
broken here and there with the white gables or bold facade
of some family residence, presenting quite a pleasing prospect
to the eye. Among the more conspicuous and striking of
these residences are the family mansions of Mr. Richard
Grice, Mr. Bright, Mr. Webb, and others.
ra
i
rt
u
N
M
M
to
to
I
|
w
to
p
%
u
8
“4
to
H
M
&
P
n
P
p
N
In the town itself there are two fine hotels (Rennison’s
Hotel, conducted by Mr. Sears, and Kilpatrick’s Hotel,
conducted by the proprietor after whom it is named), and
four eminently well-conducted private boarding houses, where
the best of accommodation may be relied upon.
The public buildings and institutions include a post and
telegraph office (daily mails being received and despatched),
the Athenaeum and Public Library, and two churches, one
the Episcopalian and the other a Presbyterian congregation.
fa
n
to
to
to
to
There are several well supplied stores, and generally
all the constituent elements of a thriving and prosperous
country town. The County and Police Courts are held in
Schnapper Point, which is the legal centre of the district.
The points of interest at Schnapper Point are the &
out-look from the cliff, where a splendid marine panorama ||
meets the view ; and the prospect from Mount Martha, on t|
the road to Dromana. Dromana and Arthur’s Seat are to
within an easy drive (12 miles), and Western Port may be |J
i
12553532338333333333335585888{5C£85882EX


reached by a 19 miles ride over very pleasant and well ;':\/
(Hfl f* wooded country. *
Sport and health are alike to be gained at “ the Point.'’ (:{Jft
( j Boats, yachts, and fishing appliances may be procured on \ j|i)
(j very moderate terms. Bay fishing may here be followed (!b|j
(j with every prospect of success. Gun and dog need not be
(j } idle, nor need time hang wearily upon the visitors’ hands (j[j^
{ for the lack of public and healthful amusement.
(j ) Bathing, it may be added, is here a most delightful and (■;!^
('i [) withal safe amusement. All the shady nooks, and they are
(| ) abundant upon this part of the coast, are well furnished |
() with bathing houses and other conveniencies for bathers,
( while the encircling sand barriers protect bathers from the (| j
] apprehensions always awakened by the proximity of sharks. |
[j j The absence of any strong current in the tide will be both
Jj observed and appreciated by the fair naiads who may
D Sport a transcient hour,
' Tn nepan Killowc Kln/»
In ocean billows blue.
It only remains to say that Schnapper Point may be
j/ reached either by water or by road. During the summer
vl j/ season, the splendid bay steamers ply regularly to this part
vi of the Bay at very moderate fares 3 return tickets, available
('} for one month, being issued. During the winter, however,
|) “ the Point ” has been cut off from town communication
(j) saving by road, a circumstance which has militated against Ah
(ji its prosperity in no small degree. The residents have,
f however, now awakened to this fact, and emulating the \
$ K Queenscliffe Company, have decided to purchase a steamer I
to place on the route permanently, summer and winter.
; } The success of their enterprise will be to the benefit of the nJ/
/ entire district 5 those moving in the matter, therefore, viM/
deserve well at the hands of all who wish success to the
tC ’,I J oldest of our Eastern bathing places.
r - rr —— - -


IP^
' vl
IT *}
Regarded in the light of its peculiar natural advantages ®
of situation, and in all its immediate surroundings, the ■ !l)
conviction is inevitable that Dromana is destined to take (j||?
a very prominent position in the ranks of our Victorian (ill)
watering-places. OB)
Situated near the south-western extremity of a sequestered (jj)
bay, nestled in at the base of Arthur’s Seat and Mount Ijll)
Martha, Dromana lies almost hidden from the casual outlook ([| j
7 of a passing stranger. To this cause, doubtless, may be ij)
) traced the fact of its existence being, comparatively, so little (j)
) known 3 but to this cause, also, it will owe its future (I)
) popularity. Sheltered from the untempered violence of the f])
I elements by the lofty ranges by which it is encircled,
Dromana presents at first sight an air of homely comfort )
} singularly foreign to the majority of watering places. Nor )
(y|) does a closer acquaintance with the place dissipate the 'll)
pleasing impression. (■ 'j
(1 I j To one who has been long in city pent, ( J 'j
|j J \ ’Tis very sweet to look into the fair
And open face of heaven—to breathe a prayer
Fall in the smile of the blue firmament. —Keats. i l <
()) The place, though small, contains all the necessary {')
(;j) comforts and conveniences of life. The hotels (of which )
i'-J there are two —the “Dromana,” conducted by Mr. Watkins, ( )
V* and the “Arthur Seat Hotel,” by Mr. Assender) are both ?
(l>) eminently well managed and comfortable. There is also 1 )
(I*) the private boarding establishment of Mrs. Haldane ■.[)
/ f A* \
ylj (beautifully situated on the beach), where every comfort ( )
that unremitting attention can suggest is obtainable at
AV'y strictly moderate charges. To ensure their own comfort, I


8
intending visitors should communicate with one or other of
the parties named to secure accommodation in advance of
j* their visit.
ti
All the necessaries of life, provisions and butchers’ meat.
are procurable at Melbourne prices, while the supply of fish
is both abundant and varied.
Pleasure yachts, and boats of smaller build for fishing
parties or excursions, are always available at moderate rates;
while for land travelling, buggies and other vehicles are at
all times procurable on terms the reverse of exorbitant.
The means of communication with the city are perfect.
A daily mail, and a local telegraph office, brings the place,
figuratively, within speaking distance of Melbourne, while a
daily coach conveys passengers, via Schnapper Point, to the
city in a few hours.
During the bathing season a steamer plies regularly to and
from Droraana; excursion tickets, available for one month,
being issued throughout the season.
It will be seen from what has gone before that Dromana
is not deficient in the matter of the comforts and conveniences
of life ; but as, at the same time, it is not these that give it
its peculiar charm to those who have once visited it; a survey
of its natural advantages may not, therefore, be out of place.
g Lying snugly sheltered at the base of Arthur Seat,
Dromana looks out over a sandy sloping beach, across the
waters of the bay, commanding a splendid view of the west
channel, the passing shipping, and the coast beyond. From
the pier and breakwater (the former of which reaches out
into the Bay a distance of over 1200 feet) there is a still
more extensive view of the bay and shipping, while the
promenade on the beach is unsurpassed by any on the
10
u


shores of Hobson’s Bay. Bathing is here eminently
enjoyable; the sheltering influence of the headlands of the
bay, and the gently sloping fine sandy beach, all conducing
to the pleasure of the occupation ; while lastly, but not least,
a barrier of sand reefs, reaching in a crescent form out into
the bay, encircles an area of about a mile in length,
protecting it from the approach of sharks or other marine
monsters.
Fishing can here be followed with success; while, at
Rosebud (about two miles distant along the beach), the
finest fishing in Hobson’s Bay, with every appliance
obtainable upon the spot, is always available to the piscatorial
sportsman.
“ Not lost the time in sea-side ramble spent,
Braced is the frame, and mental health is gained.”
The collector of marine curiosities, also, will find abundant
pleasant occupation on the beach at this point; while within
an easy drive in different directions, the natural treasures of
Cape Schanck invite his research on the one hand, and those
of Western Port on the other.
Directing our attention landward, Arthur Seat rises,
behind the town, abrupt and grand, to an altitude of 1200
feet, its wooded sides and noble outline forming a notable
object in the general scene. In an opposite direction, the
more gradual slopes of Mount Martha loom out boldly
against the sky, while the Schanck ranges, in rugged profile,
add an additional feature to the general tout ensemble.
The view from Arthur Seat in particular is magnificent.
Here, standing on the Geodetic Survey Station, at sunrise,
the scene is almost beyond description. Stretched out
beneath the observer, and “ tinted in the crimson, azure,
and golden glow of early dawn,” lies one huge panorama
JJdi.IUIcUJ.id
<mmmm


ll 0
g 8
it| of real magnificence. The eye drinks in at a single glance 0
0 the whole contour of Port Phillip Bay, with its indented
coast —here abrupt and rocky, there shelving away in silvery 0
*| whiteness into the blue waters beyond —the shipping, and 0
the towns and villages that dot its shores. The distant 0
ll ranges loom out grandly in their individuality—there the 0
You Yangs, then the Great Dividing Range, Macedon
(abrupt and bold), the Plenty Ranges (undulating and low), n
II the Dandenong, and then the Yarra Range, with the Baw 0
Baw just in sight, and the Gippsland heights beyond. In |l
the distance, the city, with its “murky mantle of fog or
ll smoke,” with all the woodlands, towns, and tillage that lie ||
between. All these, within a single sweep of the vision, go
0 to make up a scene worth the seeing and seen, w r orth the
II remembering. Seaward, the scene is not less comprehensive 0
and grand. Westernport Bay, with all its island beauties, ||
0 Nepean and QueensclifF, with the Heads like silver thread
0 winding out between to the open ocean beyond. The coast 0
line, with its many points of interest, not forgetting the
Seal Rocks, and the romantic beauties of Cape Woolamai,
0 are all in view, a scene of rare interest and surprising beauty. 0
Among the ranges there are many spots of rare sylvan 0
beauty within the distance of an easy ramble. Deep recesses
0 of virgin forest, fern tree gullies not inferior to the famed 0
gully at Dandenong, and romantic nooks down the gullies 0
and around the spurs of the range are numerous at every
0 turn of the pedestrian. The attraction of the gardens and 0
Cl residence of Dr. Hearn, situated on the hill side, must not 0
be overlooked ; nor, indeed, the orchards at Redhill (distant Cl
0 three or four miles from Dromana, in the Arthur Seat 0
ranges), where red, white and black currants, and all the 0
home fruits, are cultivated with success.
To those to whom a drive has especial attractions. Cape
Schanck (with its natural caves and many objects of interest) 0
Flinders, Westernport Bay, Sorrento, and Schnapper Point, Cl
0 offer inducements for a pleasant ride.
Such, then, is Dromana at the present time.
0 I 3 €>
0
0 0


o-Vtcnto-.
Few spots in Victoria have been so happily named as that 0
which forms the subject of the present sketch. Its position,
! ts natural advantages, and the social importance it is F
unquestionably destined to assume in regard to the hygienic
and recreative interests of the community, all stamp the k
place as fitly named after its glorious prototype on the 0
Tyrrhenic Sea. But, though the magic of a name may
conjure up historic associations of other climes, these “sink F
and fade forgotten ” before those which are peculiarly
“ native to the spot,” for over its sandy barriers and radiant k
slopes hovers all the earliest memories of the first attempt to 0
colonise these sunny shores. „
“ ’Twas here the pale-face stranger, p
From a land beyond the sea,
First heralded the promise 0
Of the nation yet to be.” —Swailes. k
It was in 1803, just some fifteen years after the 0
establishment of the settlement at Botany Bay (New South
Wales), that the British Cabinet determined upon founding F
another convict settlement, “on the Southern Coast of
Australia,” and in furtherance of that project appointed k
Colonel David Collins (of the Royal Marines) to organise 0
and carry out the expedition. The colony was, on the x6th
October, established in camp between the two hills —now F
known as the Two Sisters —and thus, nearly three-quarters >
of a century since, the first settlement of Port Phillip was k
effected at Sorrento. 0
Sorrento has still a history fraught with interest to all
those who regard the past either with curiosity or with F
veneration, and simply because it very narrowly escaped j
being made what Melbourne is to-day —the Empire City of k


the Southern Seas. Nor must it be forgotten that when an
Australian Cooper (novelist, not cricketer) arises from the
mass of youthful genius with which our University and our
public schools teem, he will have to weave Sorrento into the
web of his romance, and tell the strange story of the “ Wild
White Man*,” who for three and thirty years was housed,
fed and maintained, if not clothed, by the friendly hands of
the kin of those who we in all Christian charity and
humility shot down like wild beasts.
It is idle to inquire what might have been if a
settlement had been made at Sorrento, but certain it is that
for salubrity of climate, for the equable temperature of its
atmosphere, and for its natural advantages of position, the
site is all that could have been desired for a large and
populous city. Situated on the eastern side of Hobson’s #
Bay, Sorrento occupies a very advantageous position on
the picturesque peninsula forming the line of division
between the waters of the Southern Ocean on the one side,
and those of Hobson’s Bay on the other. The soil, at this
point of the coast, is of a fine marly formation, free from
all organic impurities, and one of the most healthful
situations possibly imaginable, is thus bettered by its
geological formation. The physical conformation of the site
is also in favour of its salubrity, inasmuch as it protects the
town from the untempered inclemency of the elements,
tempering the violence of the Southern storms, and yet
reducing the temperature of the Northern enervating blasts
to a point over 25 degrees below that experienced in the
metropolis. Thus, on the South, the natural ocean barriers,
the Sand Hummocks, afford a perfect protection, while on
the North the broad expanse of the waters of Hobson’s Bay,
* See St. Leonards.


some forty miles, secures Sorrento a perfect immunity from
the hot winds of summer. As might be anticipated from
circumstances so favourable as these, the result is a climate
at once bracing, salubrious, and equable, very largely
resembling that of Tasmania. The highly ozonised
atmosphere wafted across the Southern Ocean, and the
milder breezes from the Bay, in their agreeable alternation,
are redolent of energy and health to the valetudinarian
constitutions that may happily be subject to their
recuperative influences.
The one other condition of a sanatorium is also present
at Sorrento. Spring-water—originally in a true limestone
formation —is here present in perfection. For this reason
the occasional visit of patients of delicate constitutional
tendency, has been long recommended by many of the
leading medical practitioners of the colony for long-standing
diseases of the glands and bones. To those who, enervated
by the exhaustion of town life, seek to recruit their impaired
vitality; or to the growing young, whose osseous economy
demands its due supply of phosphate of time , the waters of
Sorrento are alike a precious boon, supplying a desideratum
not to be lightly overlooked.
Seeing then, that in position, climate, geological
formation, configuration of the country, and in its water
supply, Sorrento meets all the most exacting demands made
upon a sanatorium, it may reasonably be asked “ How
came Governor Collins to abandon so advantageous a site
for an infant colony?” In his official report Colonel Collins,
says “The arid, infertile nature of the soil, with a distressing
scarcity of water, made the abandonment inevitable.” But
that the true cause of the abandonment is not here stated is
__. _ r
Xiiij i i fi Mfiiil


sufficiently evident. The wells, dug by the expedition, and
P to which reference will be made hereafter, show to a
$ demonstration that water was found in abundance to meet (jk
all necessary requirements. Mr. Rusden, in his “ Discovery , d
ft Survey and Settlement of Port Phillip," quotes the following
extract from a letter from Mrs. Hopley, wife of one of the
r officers of the expedition, to a sister in England, which also
casts grave doubts upon the whole transaction : —“ My pen is
not able to describe half the beauties of that delightful spot. $
ft We were four months there. Much to my mortification, as
well as loss, we were obliged to abandon the settlement’
L through the whim and caprice of the Lieut. Governor.
m Additional expense to the Government, and loss to indi- tjk
viduals were incurred, by removing to Van Diemen’s Land. d
ft Port Phillip is my favourite, and has my warmest wishes.
During the time we were there (Sorrento) I never felt one
w ache or pain, and I parted with it with more regret than
A I did my native land.”
The following published for, we believe, the first time, $
ft is from a letter from one of the officers of the expedition,
j and was written from Van Diemen’s Land shortly after the
abandonment of the Port Phillip Settlement. This letter is A
xjl at present in the possession of a resident in the city: —“ The
site of the colony was one of the most salubrious that it is ft
ft possible to have chosen. Situated on a small peninsula, in
some places not a mile across, it was open to the sea
L breezes from either the North or South, while the sheltering a
ft ridges preserved the camp from the violence of the equinoctial
storms. It was one of the most healthy and enjoyable spots ft
that it has been my good fortune to find in the course of my
travels. Why it should have been abandoned is a mystery.


Climate, prospect, and every natural advantage were in its
favour, and water was to have been had in abundance if there
had been any desire to have found it.”
However, we have to do with Sorrento as it is, and what
is found. That there is now superadded to the rare natural
advantages of the place, all the comforts and many of the
luxuries of civilised life. Where, in 1803, nature reigned
supreme, art and industry have stepped in, and comfort,
convenience, health and pleasure now go hand-in-hand.
Now, natural beauty and healthful enjoyment associated
with all the conveniences of social refinement, and the
benefits of the sanatorium, are linked together with the
treasured comforts of a home.
A few words more of the town and how to get to it best
and most easily.
Sorrento is most conveniently approached by the sea,
though to those, desiring to avoid the voyage, the overland
route, via Schnapper Point and Dromana, is open.
Assuming, however, that the visitor has decided to adopt the
most used route, he, or she, will find no want of
accommodation in the means of transit. During the
bathing season, two of the fastest and most commodious of
our splendid fleet of steam-boats, the “ Golden Crown ”
and the “ Williams,” regularly ply to and from Sorrento,
calling on the way either at Queenscliffe and Portsea, or at
Schnapper Point and Dromana. The tariff of fares is most
moderate. Return tickets, available for several days, are
issued at a low rate 3 and upon Sundays the excursion fare
is still further reduced. For speed, comfort and convenience,
these boats are all that can be desired by the most exacting!
the patronage extended to them by an appreciative public
*7
■aL
IT


i oxWQ, tyc?, -jy^s^
1 3<s*S
during the past season being in itself a substantial testimony
in that respect. The fine little boat, “ Queenscliffe,”
recently built by the Queensclifte Steam-boat Company, is
also running to the Bay ports at a very moderate scale of
fares, and, doubtless, will enjoy the patronage this spirited
enterprise merits.
Upon arrival at the Sorrento Pier, visitors desiring to
Visit the Back Beach
should keep to the left along the Bay until reaching the
Amphitheatre-road, when a short and pleasant walk in a
straight line will bring them to the shores of the vast
Southern Ocean. Here there is abundant employment for
all the faculties that minister to the rational enjoyment.
Eye, ear and sense are alike gratified with the objects or
influences that operate upon them. The vast expanse of
open ocean dancing and flashing in the golden light of
summer, the sweet wild music of the plashing waves, and
the sense of exhilaration which the invigorating breezes
Induce, all tend to harmonise and complete a perfect sense
of enjoyment.
Here, on the one hand, the Ocean Amphitheatre lying in
the sheltering embrace of Point Nepean and Cape Schanck,
tempts research. Its pellucid waters teeming with all the
varied forms of sea vegetation, and plentifully supplied with
many varieties of fish, is veritably one of nature’s vast
aquariums.
“ AauAßiuM Point,”
too, to the naturalist and to the sportsman, will commend
its claims. Fish, varied as to kind, good in quality and large
in size, can here be taken by the angler, while among the
rocks and sheltered in the deep recesses the naturalist


•cannot fail to discover an ample recompense for his toil
and research.
Among the natural features of the place, mention must
be made of
“ St. David’s Chair.”
It is a very remarkable rock standing some 50 feet above the
level of the waters of the Southern Ocean, is approachable
from the shore by natural steps. In form it rudely
resembles a large throne or chair surrounded by several
chairs of smaller dimensions.
“London Bridge” and “St. Pauls.”
St. Pauls is a conspicuous dome-crested mount, rising about
a mile eastward from the Amphitheatre. From its summit,
an extensive view of the features of the surrounding
country can be obtained.
“Darby’s Monument,
too, with its tale of adventure and privation, may be pointed
out from the shores of the Amphitheatre looking across
the waters towards Bass’ Straits, and, generally, looking
seaward in calm or storm there is much to attract the
attention and gratify the senses.
Shoreward attention will naturally direct itself towards
the Sorrento Park, a Government reserve, recently planted
with English forest trees and other ornamental plants.
A Bowling Green, and a Croquet Lawn has been formed.
This is a most delightful promenade in the cool of the
summer evening, and at all times one of the pleasant spots
for pic-nicing on the shores of Hobson’s Bay.
1


“The Rotunda,”
an extensive bower, in which the Government pic-nic was-
d... . . .
0 held in 1875, w be an object of interest to the visitor-
while the “ Zig-Zag," by which it is approached, will come
in for its share of attention
The remains of the first settlement of the place, so
pregnant with historical associations are not wisely to be
overlooked. They will be found in the immediate vicinity
of the two eminences known as “The Sisters.” Here one of
the original wells, sunk by Governor Collins’ party, has been,
restored. Tables and seats have been provided for the
gratuitous use of visitors, while a sheltering scrub affords a
cool retreat to pic-nic parties who may select the spot as-
their rendezvous. A drink from “ the first well,” the waters*
of which are perfectly fresh, though they ebb and flow with
the tide, and a repast in the open air upon the camping
ground of the first settlement of the colony, have a spice of
the romantic about them that few ordinary mortals could
resist. Those who desire to visit the well will find it
situated on the beach to the left of the Pier, about half a
mile distant from the place of landing.
Excellent fishing is at all times obtainable in the Bay r
boats being procurable at very moderate hire, hand lines and
bait being provided. Rod fishing can be followed with
success from the rocks upon the Ocean Beach; many rare
and fine species of fish being taken in favorable states of the
tide. On shore, guns will find excellent sport. Rabbits
abound in thousands, and occasionally hares, wallabys and
kangaroos may also be bagged by the sportsman. Cabs,
waggonettes and saddle horses are to be hired at the hotels.
In the evenings— concerts, balls, and social enjoyment.
**&■ ■-«■


i| : m
l( Hotels. |^“
Regarding accommodation, Sorrento is sans reproche, for its
§ hotels are unsurpassed by any on the shores of the Bay. iL
Excellent in every way in their appointments, and moderate
in their tariff, they deservedly secure large patronage. fej>-
5 The “ Continental ” Hotel, on the direct road to the
{ Ocean Amphitheatre, so very admirably situated on Ipr"
K» Constitution Hill, has secured a high reputation for its liberal
management j while the “Sorrento” Hotel is also a com- B
<E-: modious and well managed house, in which comfort and jr*
j moderation in charges are judiciously combined. The rate I^.
§ of tariff charged for past seasons has been, at either of the
hotels —Board and lodging, £1 to*, per week. Breakfast fp*’"
tea, or lunch, 2s. 6d. j Dinner, 35. and Beds, 3s. Wines,
fbeer, and spirits, being supplied at Melbourne prices.
The latest acquisition, the “ Mornington” Hotel, aims at
providing additional accommodation for the great influx of
gn season visitors. M
To those who may prefer the more retired seclusion of
|| a private boarding house, in preference to the excitement
a \ -of hotel life, there is an excellent establishment, providing g
§: all the comforts of a home, with well ventilated rooms,
«|i excellent beds, and a well appointed table, upon very
??; moderate terms. g
Private cottages can also be obtained from the agents fp*~
%' of the Ocean Amphitheatre Company. They are charm- Bk
a ingly situated on Constitution Hill, and are well ventilated, &
(I roomy, convenient, and furnished throughout.
Provisions and the necessaries of life are supplied by
{the local tradesmen at Melbourne prices; game and fish H


I
A are plentiful in their supply, and all seasonable fruits and’
vegetables are procurable at city prices.
a It will be seen that there is a very ample provision
and a broad margin of choice in the matter of accommoda-
jk tion at Sorrento, which seems particularly fortunate in
<tf this respect, thanks to the enterprise of those who have
A so largely exercised themselves for its advancement.
The public buildings of Sorrento are in keeping with
tits otherwise advanced position.
The Mechanics’ Institution and Free Public Library will
be found an agreeable resort for visitors. It has been
erected by subscription, and is dependent for its support and
progress upon voluntary contributions, either in money,
books, periodicals or newspapers. The architect is Mr.,
Hennessy, who most kindly prepared the plans free of charge
and the building was erected by Mr. Thos. Anderson, who
jl also built the Company’s Continental Hotel. The present
edifice is only a portion of a general plan for a more exten-
sive building, including a large hall for balls, concerts, Bcc*
The ground upon which it stands is about a quarter of an
r ! * i j- . *
acre of the reserve for municipal buildings, court-house,
police station, &x,, granted by the Ocean Amphitheatre
Company, and is situated in the very centre of what will no
doubt become an influential borough.
There is a mail despatched every Tuesday, Thursday,,
and Saturday, the incoming mail being received on
IVTAnrlotrC Ottrl TtVirloxrC? otxrl in fUa K n .. _
Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays, and in the bathing
season there is in addition to these a mail by every trip
of the steamer “ Golden Crown.” A telegraph station has
been recently added to the conveniences of the town, and.
hence the communication with the city is complete.
23 '


ggggggggagggggggrggggggggggggggggggggggggggggggff
W
s
It remains to be said that the Public Bath is equal to J*
any artificial enclosure in the colony. The picket fence §
extends into the Bay Bjo feet. The rise and fall of the tide 8
secures the perfect purity of the water. The sloping bottom 8
and the sandy beach add comfort and safety to the luxury of W
a bath, while every possible element that leads to strength J*
and enjoyment are present to make up the sum total of j|
the whole. 8
Thus far, then, have we endeavoured to present Sorrento 8
as it was, and as it is, —with what success it is not for us
to say. 8
“ In your wisdom judge ye.” fi
w
u
u
w
u
g
B
©^o-it^ea.
Prettily situated on a small bay close to Point Nepean,
Portsea looks out across the blue waters of Hobson’s Bay,
a charming retreat from the burning blasts of summer and
the enervating heat of the tropical sun. The village is
situated on the narrow track of land forming the peninsula
that terminates in Point Nepean, on the eastern side of the
entrance of the Bay. The situation of the town is about
u
*1
I
§
N
M
♦4
I
two miles from Sorrento, consequently much that we have
said regarding that place will also apply to Portsea.
I


On arriving at the jetty, a twenty minutes’ leisurely stroll!
will bring the visitor to the Back Beach and Ocean Coast.
S The road commences immediately opposite the end of the
pier, and cannot possibly be mistaken. Near the end of this
road there is an eminence from which a splendid marine
view may be obtained, one which ought not to be lost by
any visitor having an eye for the beautiful.
There is a very fine and commodious hotel, “ Ford’s
! p Nepean Hotel,” at Portsea, ably and successfully conducted
vjtl/' by Host Farnsworth, whose endeavours to cater for the
Vi|J? comfort and pleasure of his guests is too well known to
t =| need more particular mention.
! Horses and vehicles can be hired at the hotel, and
m; pleasure boats for excursions are also at the disposal of
* visitors or sportsmen. [See Advertisement.]
A recent candidate for honors is the “ Portsea” Hotel, by
Alexander Watson,
J Portsea boasts a Public Library and a Mechanics’
Institute, and has the advantage of daily postal communi-
J; cation with the city, and a local Telegraph Station to meet
) all special emergencies.
SFrom the Pier there is daily steam communication with
the metropolis, uiaKiueensclitle, and during the bathing
(i|p season the Bay steamers regularly touch ai 1 1 1 part.
VgtZ






's&* ~ "" ■""'
Queensclifpe is the oldest, and, at present, the most |j|(\
populous of our watering places. It is the first sign of ? h ;
settlement that meets the eye as the stranger enters the M
waters of the Bay. It is very picturesquely situated, stand-
ing as it does on a peninsula, and the judicious arrange-
ment of the streets, and the elegance of the villas which
abound on every prominence, render the first glimpse of Port 7
Phillip after the tedium of a long sea voyage, even when
the weather is not as fine as it generally is, one that gives
reassurance to the minds of those who, from ignorance, y )
too often regard our beautiful continent as the abode of SI)
people only a little removed from savagry. Nor is the w
view when approached from Melbourne itself less enticing. m
It is not to be wondered at then, that those who frequent $
Queenscliffe in the summer often linger by the seductive Ci!y
whispering of its cerulean waves, and enjoy zealously the '
best of all holidays to the wearied man—absolute rest on
the sea-shore. Kr
Let us glance now at the opportunities afforded for the (j||)
enjoyment of those who will visit Queenscliffe during this (
summer, and we trust many succeeding ones. And firstly
•comes, as a matter of course, those necessities to watering (jljfi
places, k j i
The Hotels.
Here the visitor can have the choice of four, and as they
are all crowded during the summer months the excursionist
will do well to order the accommodation he needs ti)
considerably prior to his own advent. The main street gives<‘ W
us Admans’, the Victoria, and the Commercial, while tha/Si'u


»♦
I
W
U
M
I
r«
8
I
M
W visitors who approach Queenscliffe from the Corio Bay side
of the peninsula are met with the Royal.
8 Those who prefer the privacy afforded by either Boarding
8 Establishments or Furnished Residences should make early
n , , }
application to the various proprietors or agents.
The establishment of regular communication with Mel-
bourne, by the building of the commodious and now popular
steamer the “Queenscliffe,” has been found of great
convenience to the residents of the town, who before were
dependent, during the winter months, on chance for their
communication with Melbourne by water. Now that is
remedied through the enterprise of a company, who will,
no doubt, have every cause to rejoice at the wisdom and
** foresight which prompted their investment.
To those who fear prostration throu
M affliction mat de mer, the iron horse to Gf
8 and Co., or private conveyances thence, :
To those who fear prostration through that terrible
r| affliction mat de mer, the iron horse to Geelong and Cobb
8 and Co., or private conveyances thence, afford an easy as
| well as a pleasant trip,
U The general inclination of the seaside visitor is a
Plunge in the Sea,
8 and this can be effected by a visit to the public baths,
W ..... . . _ «
g The general inclination of the seaside visitor is a
Plunge in the Sea,
li and this can be effected by a visit to the public baths,
W . H
« which have been erected at the expense of the Town
W l|
g Council, and are commodious, well provided, and perfectly
\\ safe from the attack of those sea monsters —sharks.
Having taken his constitutional dip, your disciple of
Izaak Walton will find plenty of work for his line and
W rod. The Bay in the vicinity of the town is alive with fish
of nearly every edible description, the obtaining of which
& is sufficiently exciting to be delightful. g
The Swan Ponds swarm with mullet, whiting, salmon
W trout, and other smaller specimens of the finny tribe;
M 36
is a
kssssssssssassssa3ss3s3ssssssssssssasss3sssssasssss*


while at Yarram Creek, a pleasant walk of a couple of
miles or so from the town, work can be found for the
rod, as bream abound.
Shooting and Coursing, too, can be followed in
season, hares having rapidly acclimatised themselves within
easy distance of Queenscliffe \ and as to rabbits, they fairly
swarm. Teal, snipe and black duck, may be found on the
lakes. In the bush, wattle-birds, the most difficult of all
game to secure, can be obtained, in company with parrots
and bronze-winged pigeons. Touching rabbit hunting, a
couple of good ferrets would be serviceable to any party,
and would afford an enjoyable hour or two.
And speaking of the gun reminds us that those who are
fond of Target Shooting, can, on the payment of a small
fee, use the butts erected by the local rifle club, where
capital sights can be obtained up to about 800 yards. They
are situated on the margin of Swan Bay, and are within a
few minutes’ walk of the township.
A proposal is on foot to establish an Archery for the
use of the ladies.
Nor need your ardent Cricketer fear that a week or
two’s holiday at Queenscliffe will deprive him of his
favourite pastime. The Cricket Reserve is in capital con-
dition, and commands a splendid view of the Heads, so
that while engaging in their pastime the players can see
the inward and outward bound ships as they pass up or.
anchor.
Like its young sister across the water, Queenscliffe is-
blessed with Rare Climatic Advantages.
Despite its proximity to the sea ice is unknown to it,
and frost is a very occasional visitor. Above all, in the-
&
h)


I hottest day of summer the sea-breeze comes down as
regularly as it does higher in the tropics, and a close
night, even when the hotels are most crowded, is one
of the rarest of rarities. It must be remembered that
§ Queenscliffe has the advantage of a very sheltered position —
Wilson’s Promontory, Cape Schanck, and Point Nepean,
guard it on the Southward and Eastward, and Cape Otway,
Barwon Heads, and Point Lonsdale, on the S.W. Here the
invalid may find the advantages of a Southern Madeira.
The Mineral Springs at Clifton, situated within a
H short and very pleasant drive of Queenscliffe, recently dis-
-0 covered, are considered to be of great hygienic importance.
The popularity already obtained by them is a guarantee for
the efficacy of the waters (seltzer, chalybeate, sulphur and
magnesia) and the fact that they are “Hall” marked by no
|| less and well-known a name than that of Mr. Kruse.
In a word, the Mean Average Temperature of
0 Queenscliffe, computed annually, is 62.54 j and the mean
|| winter 56.70. Madeira gives a mean annual of 64.09, and
0 mean winter 60.06.
p To return again, after this short digression, we may
0 be allowed to mention a little story connected with
II Queenscliffe. On the occasion of the Prince’s visit, the
Mayor of the town desiring to be first to congratulate His
Royal Highness, presented himself on the deck of the
“ Galatea,” as she slackened speed off the town to allow
|| the procession to form line, with the usual address of
welcome, congratulations, &c. The Prince was on the
I break of the poop conversing earnestly with his sailing
jmaster, and may have mistaken the Mayor for a pilot or
something of the sort, for he either did not perceive that


functionary, who blushingly advanced, and holding forth
his emblazoned scroll of parchment, commenced in the &
usual mayoral style, “ I have the honor to present an d
address He got no further j for the Duke, with true
sailor-like frankness, turned on him, and remarked tartly,. P
“Bless your address, sir, I’ve got my ship to navigate!”
The night preceding the entry of the “ Galatea ” into the £
Heads was a glorious one for Admans’, and if the house d
could speak what a tale it could unfold !
Every person who goes to Queenscliffe wants to see
those
Beacons of Hope
For the weary mariner—the Lighthouses. Of these there
are two. The upper is 130 feet above the water, and though
the ascent is toilsome, it is repaid by the magnificent
expanse of ocean one sees when the ascent is reached.
The lower lighthouse is only 80 feet above water-level, but
the view from it, both seaward and shoreward, is really
splendid.
In case of hostile Invasion, —on the spot recently oc-
cupied by a lighthouse of the past, a battery of three guns
—not very formidable certainly—but still something in “case
of accidents, you know ! ”
The Public Gardens
will well repay a visit, they having been most tastefully
laid out at the expense of the Council.
Those who are fond of Pedestrian Exercise can find
many places to visit. There is, for instance, half-way
between Queenscliffe and Point Lonsdale, a real Lover’s
Walk.


If there are those who believe in Pic-nic Parties,
with their accompanying quadrilles, and turkey and ham
•sandwiches, they can pay a visit to Point Lonsdale, only
three miles off, and take a glance at one of Buckley’s
■Caves, Those, too, who delight in the mystic legends of
the past, and who have read the story of Fair Rosamond,
the wicked King Henry, and cruel Queen Eleanor, can
visit what one of these days will be a real labyrinthian maze;
the clue to which, if not a thread of silk, will be perhaps
as difficult to find. This pleasure they owe to Mr, Justice
Fellows.
Barwon Heads are easily accessible and pleasure boats
are always available.
As we have intimated, the Borough Council have done
much to make Queenscliffe what it is j and when the railway
is made from Geelong, there can be no doubt that its
present stationary population (about 1,000) will be greatly
increased. This will give an impetus to its
Public Buildings,
which consist of a Public Library and Reading Room,
well supplied with books and open from 9 a.m. to 9 p.m. 5
the Foresters’ Hall is in Learmonth-street, and at present
serves for several purposes, such as Council Chambers, State
School, Ball Room, Concert Hall, Skating Rink, &c.
Those who regard Sabbath Observance as a strict
duty, need not fear to visit Queenscliffe, where the Epis-
copalians, Wesleyans, Roman Catholics, and Presbyterians,
all have places of worship.


Is charmingly situated on the western shore of Port Phillip
Bay, and has a delightful eastern aspect. It is a place of
very considerable historical interest.
On the 27th April, 1802, Captain Mathew Flinders, when
visiting Port Phillip, gave this place the name of “Indented
Head,” from its appearance 5 and if was at this Indented
Head that John Batman, the founder of Melbourne, first
landed in the year 1835, a fr er his memorable voyage from
Tasmania, to explore the then unknown riches of Port
Phillip. When Batman landed he explored the country for
some distance, and gradually worked his way via Geelong
round to the Yarra Yarra. An interesting account of his
travels will be found recorded in his journal written by him
at the time. In June 1835, however, he decided to return
to Van Dieman’s Land in his vessel the “ Rebecca,” a craft of
about 30 tons, to report to his associates the wonderful
discoveries he had made. He decided further, to leave three
of his white men and seven of his Sydney natives behind
until his return. These camped at Indented Head, and by
Batman’s directions erected a hut and commenced a garden.
He left three months’ supply of stores, besides a large
•quantity of potatoes for planting, and all kinds of garden
seeds, pips and stone fruit.
While this party remained here they were joined by
William Buckley, the noted convict who had lived with
the blacks in that neighbourhood from the time when on
the 27th December, 1803, he escaped from the party of
Governor Collins.
On the 7th August of that year (1835) Mn John Helder


Wedge, one of Batman’s associates in Van Dieman’s Land,.
2 landed at Indented Head, having been deputed to enquire
fe as to the truth of Batman’s glowing descriptions. He was
W accompanied by Henry Batman and his wife, and joined the
M party previously left there by John Batman.
In addition to its historical interest St. Leonards has other
J attractions. From it beautiful views of the Bellarine Hills,
Sorrento, Portsea, Mounts Eliza and Martha, D roman a,
If Arthur’s Seat, &c., may be obtained, while the constant
n passing of vessels up or down the west channel affords an
r endless source of interest to visitors. It is twenty-two miles
% from Melbourne, from which a steamer comes every day,
K If, however, the visitor chooses to go via Queenscliffe the fine
P steamers “Williams ” and “ Golden x Crown ” will land him
in time to reach St. Leonards after a pleasant drive of some
T ten or twelve miles through a prettily wooded country.
2 Around it are many beautiful rides and drives, A few miles
K will take you to Drysdale, where the celebrated mineral
0r springs are situated, so that while enjoying the sea bathing
n at St. Leonards you can also drink the mineral waters of
Drysdale. Another extremely pretty drive is that to Port-
J arlington, the road to which skirts the Bay. There is a
IK comfortable hotel here, kept by Mr. Robert Smiley, who
$ does all in his power to make visitors comfortable. The
use of a piano, buggy, horses, boats, books, and last but not
£ least a bath, may be obtained here. The State School, lately
built on ground given for the purpose by Captain Cole, is
K in close proximity. About a mile from the hotel is Mrs.
(7 Cassell’s beautifully situated property, “ Red Bank,” where
may be found
“ Some shape of beauty to move away the pall
From our dark spirits.”






The estate of St, Leonards was purchased in 1857 by
Captain Cole who erected a jetty, part of which was formed
by the vessel “ Xylon,” which was sunk at the extremity of it.
In 1868 it was sold to Government on condition that it should
be kept in order; but, although the pier has been most
substantially rebuilt, its length has been curtailed. It is
hoped, however, that it will shortly be continued to its
original length. This pier affords a delightful promenade,
and in the evening the arrival of the fishing-boats and the
unloading of them afford a good excuse for a stroll.
“ There are curious things of which men know U
As yet but little.
Shells
Which ocean flingeth forth from off her billows
On the low sand.”
The name “ St. Leonards ” was given by Captain Cole to &
his property, and many of the residents of Melbourne will
remember with pleasure the large pic-nic given here by him y
in the year 1857. The guests were conveyed by two of
Captain Cole’s steamers from Melbourne, and were returned &
the same day to their homes after an enjoyable outing. %
Any one desiring to visit this watering-place should
communicate with Mr. Robert Smiley, of the St. Leonards’
Hotel, whose terms will be found very moderate, and who g
will furnish full information as to steamers, trains, vehicles,
&c.


FORD'S
NEPEAN HOTEL, PORTSEA,
J. FARNSWORTH, Proprietor.
Portsea has long been recognised as one of the loveliest
spot in Victoria. It adjoins the Sanatory Station, Point Nepean,
opposite Queenscliffe, and nestles in a picturesque hollow fronting
a deep mater bay. It is undisfigured by long reading shallows,
and the blue sea ripples up to a shelving sandy shore, walled
in by high rocky cliffs intersected with easy paths for climbers.
Good fishing abounds. Twenty minutes walk through charmingly
mild undergrowth (the haunt of kangaroos and rabbits) leads to
the romantically fantastic scenery of the Back Beach. Here
the chief point of attraction is London Bridge ” — a, rock cave
with arched apertures through which the ocean is visible in an
indescribably enchanting aspect. The shore scenery between here
and Point Nepean is also of great beauty.
THE NEPEAN HOTEL
Is now enlarged into a magnificent establishment, which for
external design and internal arrangement, is unsurpassed in
Victoria. Its Pining Boom mill seat 200 persons, who can also
be conveniently housed. It has corresponding accommodation
for Families and Private Patties.
EXCELLENT ACCOMMODATION FOR FAMILIES, PLEASURE AND
OTHER PARTIES.
TERMS-MOST MODERATE.
fMdk autf Wm\ms fymw,
Are obtainable at Low Charges, and plentiful means for Boating, Fishing,
Hunting and shooting are at hand. Superb Sea Bathing.
Visitors can arrive by Steamer direct, or by the Sorrento
Steamer. Vehicles attend to convey Passengers to and from the
latter free of charge.
Letters Promptly Answered.
Cl J. FARNSWORTH, Proprietor.
Ss888838SSS830888S88Q888C8&08088e:


r: : h^
This magnificient Bay, so fine a view of which is obtainable ||
from the Dandenong Ranges —especially from the top of the jr*
eminence where the Fern Tree Gully rivulet rises,—has S|>-
been comparatively unknown to the people of Victoria. (5
In the old days, when the diggings first broke out, it received ) r
a good deal of attention, for then its oyster beds were a
source of profit to many fishermen, and kept the market of ||
Melbourne well supplied with the edible which everyone fr"
appreciates. But the beds were easily exhausted there was
but little settlement along the Shores; the trade of the Bay ii
was reduced to firewood, which petty craft carried up to Ir"
Hobson’s Bay 5 and to the produce of the fisheries which
were never earnestly followed. The Islands in the Bay were
then in private hands. There was no mode of com muni- \y~
cation excepting by boats that were only occasionally Un-
available. There was no means of reaching the Bay i
excepting by the fish-carts, or the manure-laden vehicle of IP*"
some settler about Hastings, who had come to market with
produce. Westernport, therefore, was but little visited, and m
but little was known by the people of Melbourne of its lr'
beauties. Now things are wonderfully changed 5 and when
the projected railway from Brighton to Frankston (to be yx
extended, no doubt, in the next railway scheme of the Yjr
Government to Hastings) is carried out, it will become one
of the most popular resorts within easy reach of Melbourne. m
Even now the journey to the Bay is one of the most Jr
enjoyable the tourist can desire. The j ourney is commenced
by coach, which starts from the Albion Hotel, Bourke-street
3S


ff||a
ip*


(where a popular landlord, Mr. John Cleeland, has so long
reigned), at seven o’clock a.m, on the mornings of Tuesday,
Thursday, and Saturday, returning on the following days.
Breakfast is’had at the hotel of Mr. Etheridge, at Chelten-
ham, where horses are changed, and then at fast coaching
speed the visitor rides on through Mordialloc to Frankston,
driving by the sea-shore, with most beautiful scenery all
around—sea, mcor, and mountain. Another change of
horses, and then the road lies over the summit of Mount
Eliza, the great beacon through the South Channel, and a
run over a few miles of very good road brings the visitor to
the thriving village of Hastings. There, in the old days,
whaling boats were the only means obtainable by which
the islands of the beach or the opposite shore could be
reached. These islands are now occupied by gentlemen
who have purchased them—as Mr. Amess, formerly Mayor
of Melbourne, has done Churchill Island —or been selected
by settlers, as Mr. John Cleeland has done on Phillip Island,
the opening up of which for selection was such a bone of
contention in Parliament a few years ago. Now a very fast
and elegant little steamship, the “ Eclipse,” built by Messrs.
Foreman and Co., on the Yarra, has been placed on the
waters of the Bay, and carries the mails from Hastings to
Cowes (the town of Phillip Island), to the other islands, and
to the coal-field district, the port of which is Griffiths’ Point.
Cowes —the capital of the Isle of Beauty —is distant from
Hastings about twelve miles, and under favorable circum-
stances of sea and wind the distance is accomplished in little
over an hour. Not far from the jetty at Cowes the traveller
will find a handsome and well-managed hotel, named the
“Isle of Wight,” where Host Bauer is ever in attendance.
srz-\ yrr\ ycr> ✓ttn yjT' y?r\ y?C. ✓2T' yg^yg^/fiy^/S^^


ci u *
0
and ready to give his visitor every information about the
II specialities of the locality, “the Nobbies,” the “Pyramid
Rock,” and lofty Cape Wollomai, on the course at the foot
ft of which Mr. Cleeland bred his tine cup winner Wollomai*
SCS
H Here] Mr. Cleeland has built a tine residence, and will
I) gradually “ birse yon’t,” till he will be the possessor of a
l| good estate on one of the finest islands of the colony. The
bay is a fine one, and now that it has been properly
II surveyed, is a source of satisfaction to shipmasters bound
g inwards to Melbourne, who/ if driven by hard weather past
Port Phillip Heads, have no hesitation in taking shelter in
l| Westernport Bay, where they can find good anchorage,
under shelter of Phillip Island, and then—as the wind may
list—can beat out by either the Eastern or the Western
ft Passage.
From the new township of Newhaven, the channel —the
Eastern Passage—to Griffiths’ Point, the port of the main-
land of Mornington, is only about half a-mile wide. The
finest fishing can be had here by visitors touched with sea-
Waltonian proclivities. Griffiths’ Point is the coal depot of
the Westernport Coal Mining Company, who now find they
have a good mine in hand, with coal all around them, and
have appliances for doing a considerable trade in black
diamonds. Their jetty is a fine structure, at which vessels
of a considerable size can be located with facility. The
Government have also built another convenient jetty there j
and settlement has lately gone on to such an extent that the
business done with Melbourne for goods is surprising to the
“oldest inhabitant.” There are three licensed houses in
this township, and all seem to do well.
i Eas
lane
|| fine
Wa
ft
51 the
ha vi
ft
ft havi
g diar
ft of £
8 Gm
and
I) busi
“ of
ft 1 •
ft this
ft A
ft A
ft 3
USSSS:
A short distance from the Eastern Passage is situated the


—•'*
beautiful and fertile island of Churchill, the property of $
Mr. Samuel Amess, of Melbourne, who dispenses his
hospitality there in the manner of “ a fine old English
|v gentleman, all of the olden time”—though, by the way, he
(j? is Scotch. When he is at home, and, like Robinson Crusoe,
is “monarch of all he surveys,” he flies the John Bull flag, 4
which means to all and sundry who may visit the Bay—
“ Come here and be welcomed.”
On Phillip Island, as on French Island, there is splendid A
f sport to be got with the birds. On Churchill Island, if
Mr. Amess does not show sport with the native or imported
game, the guest may ask “the reason why” 5 but he will
have no occasion to do it, for sport to the heart’s satisfaction
of the sportsman there will be. On Phillip Island, if the A
f stranger can only induce Mr, Woods (and he is very
obliging, and “a man of the woods”), who keeps the well- w
furnished and managed hotel situated about a quarter of a
mile from the jetty at Cowes, to spare time to show him the
h way, a splendid day’s sport will be the result. His dogs are A
P second to none in the district, and his heart and soul are in
the sport, while his disposition lays him at the service of r
congenial visitors.
J The tourist at this season cannot possibly have a finer
treat than a visit to Westernport Bay and its shores. Easy A
r travelling, pretty scenery, fine sport on land and water, and
n good hotel accommodation, should form attractions to the f
man whose liver is out of order, and who has the health of a
a wife and family to consider. The cost of such a trip, k
moreover, is trifling. A ticket taken at Cobb and Co.’s, d
P Albion Hotel, will, for 12s. 6d., frank a passenger by coach
and steamer as far as Cowes.


'£•?- . iSie ilfSiai ®u ;


FARES:
Hastings and Cowes
35. 6 d.
Hastings and Griffiths’ Point
... 75. 0 d.
Children under 12, Half-price. Families at a
Reduction.
Coach Fare to Hastings
... 8s. 6 d.
THE ISLE OF WIGHT OF VICTORIA.
( QUIETUDE.
Q, IL S. \ RECUPERATION.
( SALUBRITY.
STEAM YACHT
leaves ) Every Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday, on
nr# nmnTnfl r arrival of Cobb’s Coach, which leaves
HASTINGS ) Melbourne at 7 a.m.
leaves ) Every Monday, Wednesday and Friday, at
NEWHAVEN \ 6.30 a.m., calling at
COWES and GRIFFITH’S POINT each way.
Melbourne.
Principal Points of Interest are.—Penguin Rocks and Bay, Cat’s Bay,
Nobbies, Seal Rocks, Pyramid Rock, Helen’s Bay, Red Bluff, Cape
Wollomai, Eastern Passage, Long Point, and Rhyll, together with Inland
Scenery at every hill.
Two First Class Hotels,
Passengers landed at Cowes under hours from Melbourne.
WESTERN PORT BAY teems with Outings and Jaunts for Yachting,
Fishing, Shooting and Boating. The climate is equal to that of Tas-
and at the Back Beach is at least 30 degrees less than in
WESTERN PORT S.S. COMPANY, LIMITED.
37, BOURKE STREET EAST.
HENRY F. NORTON, Manager,
COWES.


COBB & CO.’S COACHES.
EIBHBBAWI,
DAILY, at 7 a.m.,
AWS MIEISfILIE,
on Mondays, Wednesdays, & Fridays.
On Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Saturdays, at 7 a.m.
Returning the Following Day.
DAILY, at 1.30 p.m.
DAILY, at 8 p.m.
ylnd all parts oj the Colony in connexion with the Railways.
Coach Office ALBION HOTEL, BOURSE STREET.


LORNE.
By JAMES KINGSTON.
“J. H.”
The claims of Lome and Loutit Bay to a visit for
a few days are many indeed. Beyond other holiday
resorts—the Fernshaws, Portscas and Queenscliffs —Lome
has the greater attraction of that distance which we know
lends so much of its proverbial enchantment to many
things. To the charm of distance is in this case to be added
also that of difficulty—Lome is not to be easily reached.
Something like a hundred miles, including two railway
journeys and a coach one, have to be got through, and a day’s
time also in achieving the distance. Lome has also all the
allurement of mystery about it. How it came to be popular
was never clearly defined, and then its popularity began with
the exclusive sort of people. No holiday-makers for the day
only have ever vulgarised it. Lome altogether has thus the
call with those who have a few days to spare, and seek fresh
scenes and satisfaction to an inquiring mind.
Starting by first train from Melbourne at six a.m., the
Geelong Junction is reached at eight. Half-an-hour’s
delay for breakfast brings about the next start, and
Winchelsea is reached before half-past nine. The two
customary stage conveyances are here met. The Stage
Coach of Cobb & Co. is a public affair, and the waggonette
of Mr. Mountjoy more especially for passengers to his
own hotel, though he gladly accommodates the public generally
when there is room for them.
On this drive we were in for a journey of twenty-six miles.
A box seat on a four-horse coach on a breezy morning over a
well-made road is a fine help to good spirits, and all that much
was ours. The way lay through the broad acres and unburst-up


estates of lordly squatters, whose fat-feeding cattle and over-
eating sheep scarcely heeded the noise of our wheels. The
rabbits were more respectful, and whisked away for shelter
into the log fences ail around.
By half-past one, half of the coach journey, and the easiest
half, had been got over, and we drew up at Dean’s Marsh, and
the wayside house kept by one Bell, who here provides a mid-
day meal. “ Hunger is a fine kitchen,” and thirteen miles
through the fresh morning air proved best of sauces. It is to
be supposed that such sufficiently accounts for Mrs. Bell’s
cooking seeming to us as worthy of all praise. Her scones
are that beyond denial, and to say that they disappeared by
the half-dozen to each cater is simple truth. The butter and
cheese were worthy of the bread, and so were the mutton, the
pudding, and the tea—the two latter, helped by cream, being
something to swear by. Paying only eighteenpence for such
a dinner helped to the laugh that aided its digestion.
The good dinner was all wanted by the way, and had a heavier
payment to be exacted for it than we had made to our hostess.
The level road here ceased. We had a difficult up-and-down-
hill journey before us, unmade roadways, and much getting
afoot and trudging over heavy and up-hill bush ground before
getting a ride again. Three hours of such work, and only
thirteen miles done in that time, tells its tale of the character
of the last part of the road to Lome, and well helped to digest
the dinner had at Dean’s Marsh. And yet it was a journey
picturesque enough on all sides to please any one. At its
highest point we had climbed two thousand feet and looked
away over the tops of trees, awe-inspiring in their awful
multitude, to the Otway ranges and distant Mount Gellibrand.
It is now mostly all a down-hill drive to Lome. The road
is often shut in on both sides and overhead by tall trees, and
winds about them to find its way. Fern-tree gullies can be
seen away down to right or left, and presently a glimpse of the
sea becomes visible ahead of us. It is the light green waters of
Loutit Bay and of the wide Pacific beyond that are thus
coming to view, and soon the full sweep of the semi-circle
comes into sight, fringed with golden sands, and backed and
hemmed in—north, south, and west—by tree-covered hills and
fern-tree gullies. We enter upon the scene at one end of the


bay, and find the sight to he a pleasurable one. The traveller,
regarding the primitive state of things all around, looks upon
it as a discovery in which he has a share. There is a sense of
freshness about everything, and a pleasant feeling of being
early on the scene, and finding one’s-self satisfied with the
newly-found and Robinson-Crusoe-like possession.
The coach delivers its first batch of passengers at a collec-
tion of ground-floor buildings of straggling appearance that
appear to have grown with the requirements of Lome. Room
appears to have been added to room as need be, and no expen-
sive architect, contractor, or artificer to have been engaged
over the work. These wooden buildings constitute the large
boardinghouse of Lome known as Mountjoys’,” and our
call there has another object in the leaving of mail bags. The
large well-grassed enclosure of many acres held, till lately, all
the requirements of the place. This is to be seen in the
coaches here standing, and in a notice on one building that is
the post and telegraph office of the township. Another of its
buildings serves week-day for balls and Sunday for sacred
services. This much is seen of Mountjoys’ on the coach, but
another visit will have to be made and more be seen of this
primitive-looking bush hostelry, with which the name of Lome
is identified.
Winding round to the farther end of the bay, the Pacific
Hotel now looks grandly down upon us, and upon the wide
expanse of its namesake. The event of its day has happened
in the arrival of the coach, and the balconies remind one in
their peopled-appearance of the yards of a ship “ manned” to
honour the coming of some distinguished guests. We find
ourselves “ preening” our dusty plumage and endeavouring to
look to advantage in the hundred or more of eyes of all colours
that are glancing at us. The Pacific Hotel looked its title of
“ grand” indeed in the sunshine of that Good Friday afternoon
and in the assemblage of the tourist-dressed visitors that so
graced its balconies. The position of the house upon a hill-
side helps to its imposing appearance, and a closer look at it
shows it to be as well built and as comfortable internally as it
is attractive in its exterior. Its stated cost of twelve thousand
pounds can be readily seen by those who go over its hundred
and odd apartments, and consider as they go the cost bringing


builders and building materials to this out-of-the-Avorld nook
of Victoria.
The half-past 6 p.m. dinner-bell will not ring for an hour,
so that there is time to look about one. The best place for so
doing seems to be from the windows of the “ look-out” tower
on the roof. Either of the balconies running around all sides
of the building will serve, however, almost as well to show
this quiet corner of County Polwarth in all its aspects. The
bay is seen as a bight in the hilly and much-timbered coast of
Bass’s Straits. Its full measurement at the mouth and from
point to point would be over six miles. Far away in the dis-
tance towards the Heads is seen a promontory, the Eagle
Rock, which in the distance may be mistaken for the ruins
of an old sea king’s castle or coast fortification. North,
south, and west is all a primeval forest, as wide-stretching to
the eye as is the Pacific Ocean opening out to the east and
south-east of the picture. The half-dozen or so of dwellings
scattered about contain all the resident population —under a
hundred, and their nearest neighbouring township is euphon-
ious Birregurra, twenty-two miles distant by any road, and
made much more so by such roads as lead from Lome,
The yellow sands of the bay are strewed with kelp and
that “ wrack” or sea produce which so much resembles coils
of leather in a wet state. In its folds children seek for sea-
weeds and shells of choice kinds, specimens of which are seen
it the hands of most of those returning dinnerwards from the
sands.
A finely-grained sandstone constitutes the rocks of this
bay. Where it lies horizontally to the sands the action of that
chemical composition called sea-Avater has done much work
upon it. Blocks of stone the size of a billiard-table are in
places Avashcd as smooth, others are strangely marked off by
watery action into squares, and look as huge draft-boards,
divided throughout by sunken lines in place of colours. In
other places the water has honeycombed the surface of these
rocks in a very fantastic manner, but one that affords a good
foothold to those aa4io walk about upon them.
The special objects on the beach contributed by man’s aid
are t\A r o wrecks. That of the sketch Henry, of Melbourne, is
in the very centre of the bay, and has both its masts yet


standing, through the hold and all below deck are tilled with
sand. The other wreck shows only fragments of a shattered
vessel, and is said to be the remains of the Osprey—the
vessel of that name that obtained notoriety in the Tichborne
case as having brought Sir Roger to Australian shores. As
the oldest inhabitant is answerable for this statement there is
some credence to be given to it.
The said oldest inhabitant, known here as “ the Bishop,”
tells me the story of Lome—a short one indeed ; how one
Herd was first settler here in 1853, with all the country around
for a cattle run. How Asplin succeeded him, and Short suc-
ceeded Asplin, and Mountjoy to Short. One visitor after
another came and stayed a while. Going away they told of
the snug thing in bush life to be enjoyed, and so the fame of
of Lome spread and grew.
The dinner bell at the Grand Pacific introduces us to a
large dining-hall lighted by three gas-lit chandeliers, and
having scats for a hundred and fifty guests. Gas is, lam
told, made on the premises from gasoline. That small surprise
was supplemented by the greater ones of finding that water,
electric bells, and telephones are, similarly to the gas, to be
found all over the house. Among the number of faces that
one sees there is to be seen in one or two a rtnile of recognition,
by which other evidence is added to that before found that it
is difficult to find any place where a body will be quite unknown
by all. The character of the company reminded me only of
those genial and pleasure-seeking people that I had met at
the social gathering houses called “ hydropathic establish-
ments,” now so fashionable as water-cure and watering-place
resorts throughout Great Britain.
One sample of a day’s life at Lome will serve for many, as the
excursions are much of a hilly, a fern-tree gully, and a water-
fall character. Otherwise they lie along the sea beach to the
Eagle Rock to the north, the Cumberland Cave to the south,
or Stony Creek in another direction. The falls usually visited
are known as the Phantom, the Splitter’s Fall, Straw’s Fall,
and the Erskine —the grand excursion of all Lome visitors
being to the last-named one, the incidents of which will now
be told.
A party of half a dozen, having arranged the matter


in tlie evening, breakfast at seven the next morning,
and are started by eight o’clock. The alpenstock given
to each of the excursionists by our guide at starting
is a hint of what is to come. Ere the day was over,
the unwonted use of that useful stick—the size of a
young clothes-prop—had blistered my thumb, telling in that
way how much service it had done. The day was fortunately
a mild one, with a southern breeze blowing. Reaching the
ford on the Erskine by which the coach had crossed that
rivulet, a turn up is there made along its bank' and over its
bed, and our party fall into Indian file and scramble over the
stones for ten minutes or more, by which time “ the Rapids”
are reached. We are away now from the sight and sound
of the sea, and all among the hills and the primeval forest, and
well pleased with the change.
At the R apids we scramble over the huge boulders that
form its bed mighty masses of stone worn to slippery
smoothness with the water-flow of thousands of years. Partly
left uncovered by the stream in this dry weather, we skip
across them to a hill-side which may be called the first “ pinch.”
It proves very steep, and seems fully three hundred feet in
height. In toiling up this ascent it is “ bellows to mend”
with some oi the party. One of them especially obtains
breathing time by calling attention to the surrounding views,
enlarging as we ascend—a landscape Dounded on all sides by
gum-trees in various stages of growth or decay. If a parrot
can be seen on one of them, or a monkey—bear on another, they
aie objects of especial notice in the awful solitude that reigns
around.
The down-hill parts of the journey, though not troubling
the lungs as do the u pinches,” prove as much so to the knees
and the toes. The saplings alongside the track are clutched
at wherever possible, to arrest the momentum which would
hurry one too quickly on to the heels or over the heads of
those below. After three or four or half a dozen of these
ascents and descents, the intervening times of level road
walking become properly appreciated. We wonder then how
we could ever tire of ten or twenty miles of that easy work.
It is over these bits of level ground that the party find their
voices again, and begin to talk, chirrup, whistle, and other-


wise vocalise, until the next “ pinch” brings all of them' to
silence.
The soft ones amongst us—those fresh from the city paddock
—are glad of the rest afforded at the first Fall, which we don’t
reach until nearly two hours from the start. Our guide’s mild
joke that the first fall, though reached, has not yet been made, is
too grim to smile at—its happening had seemed at many
times so likely. The pannikins are here in great request by
the thirsty ones. This first of the three Falls to be seen to-day
is a double one, and we scramble down to the platform of rock
on which descends a stream of twenty feet, which thence
takes a preliminary run ere making a further leap of two
hundred feet downwards. It requires a cool head and good
nerve to follow its course to the edge of the precipice, and
see its headlong fall into the fern-tree gully that awaits it
below.
We shall meet it again away over the hills to which we
now follow' it. Our course will bring us to the foot of the
second Fall, and it is on this part of the excursion that the
worst piece of road is found. Some three hours have elapsed
since starting, and matters have become quite serious in the
way of getting along without further discomfort. Coats
and waistcoats have been first carried and then left behind—
“ planted” in hollow trees —to be called for on the road back.
Hats and caps have been found too burdensome, and are slung
around the neck or tied to the waistband. The handkerchief
has long since become a mere soppy thing—in that way fol-
lowing the shirt collar and wristbands that went by the board,
as sailors say, earlier in the day.
The pinch of pinches on the road to Erskine Fall is found
in the descent to this second one of the three. Half-way down
the side of a huge hill a large boulder projects on the track,
just where it takes a turn to the left. This smooth piece of
rock bevels away at an angle of 45, to where some few feet down-
wards it finishes in a ledge of a foot and a half wide, over-
hanging a precipice of an unseen depth. The foot-and-half-
wide ledge cannot be easily reached, and nothing but a lizard
could run over the smooth surface of this rock. Three foot-
holes have therefore been cut in it, and very inefficiently
formed. One of our party slipped from the middle one down


to the ledge below—and no further. He said that he thought
he might have caught in some of the trees below had he gone
over. If not, we should probably have found him, or what
remained of him, when we got down the rest of this terrible
hill.
Good things are often preceded by trouble in their attain-
ment. It was no surprise, therefore, to find that the second
Fall was one worth looking at—a fine effect produced by
tall rocks, fern trees, and water. Coolly plashing over a
hundred and twenty feet of rock the water here descends into
a channel quite embowered in fern trees. The stones lying
all about are covered with moss, and so are the trunks of the fal-
len trees among which we have to find our way onwards to the
final Fall of the three. The way to this lies all along the
boulder-strewn bed of the Erskine, and is the most interesting
part of the excursion. The overhanging ferns make it delight-
fully cool and winsome in our now heated state.
It is, if anything, too short, this part of the journey, from
the second to the third Fall. We reach that, the Erskine Fall,
to find that it shuts in and makes a cul de sac of our course.
A wall of rock of a hundred and thirty feet towers in front of
us, spreading wing-like to either side. Over the surface of
this descends with a pleasant sound the waters of the Erskine.
The course of the river is seen at the top by an opening in the
trees. Ere we left the scene a young member of our party,
aided by the guide, scrambled to this opening, and there
standing seemed, high up, solitary, and reflected on the skiey
background, as a being of another world looking down upon
a lower order of things.
The midday meal was especially welcome, and that not a
fragment was left behind testified to the goodness of our appe-
tites. There was time in plenty thus given to admire the
Erskine Fall. It is said to be the finest in Australia, and
has a strong likeness in every particular to that famous one
in Powerscourt-park, visited by all tourists in the Dublin and
the Dargle neighbourhood of Ireland.
The return journey took three hours and a-half, over the
same track as that of the morning. Lome was reached in
time to take a much-wanted bath and make a change of
dress. Ere the dinner bell rang, a good appetite had been


earned for that meal, and also the prospect of stiffened joints
for some of us for the next day. The excursion to the
Erskine Falls is one that should be delayed by Lome visitors
until shorter and less difficult “ outings ” in the neighbour-
hood have given them a preliminary training. It is otherwise
too much of an athletic feat for a soft city man’s first effort.
The evening amusement at Lome for those who come
companionless is found in the social gatherings in the large
balls at the two hotels. At the Grand Pacific only an occa-
sional one is got up, but at Mountjoy’s the evening dance is
a regular thing. One of the juniors of that family of nine
acts well as master of the ceremonies and finds out the
pianists and vocalists among the hundred or so of his visitors.
Vocalistic efforts are interspersed between the dances, and
the festive water-jugs and tumblers are ever on the sideboard
for thirsty souls —if such there be in a temperance hotel.
Thrown together here in the bush, folks become very social,
and drop much if not all of the stiffness and exclusiveness
worn elsewhere. In the Mountjoy visitors’ books are in-
scribed the names of many notable people. Poets have here
left the happy efforts inspired by the scenes, the day’s exer-
cise, and the exhilarating draughts of the Erskine water.
Such effects have these had upon some people that a Mel-
bourne bank manager has here overflowed in poetry, and de-
tails at length his" - opinions of Lome and its life, his muse
singing in seven verses. A thorough change it is very evi-
dent by that much can be worked in anybody by a visit to
Lome. Artists have decorated the margins of some pages
of these volumes in a manner worthy of the monks of old,
whom in this work they have imitated.
It may be looked upon, this Lome, as the future sani-
tarium of Victoria, a pleasant retreat for those seekinghealth,
a week’s relaxation from business, and the exercise of their
muscles in place of their brains and nerves. In time it will
become the Torquay of the colony, to which its hill-surround-
ings already shape it. Those hills give it all the mildness of
climate that fit it for a winter resort for invalids, and one
all the year round for those seeking a week or so’s “change.”
Steamers will soon call regularly at its jetty, a contract for
the extension of which has recently been let, and the return
journey can be thus pleasantly varied.


In addition to the pleasant recollections and the inflated
lungs brought back from this trip to Lome there are yet
other addenda. Acquaintanceships have been made that give
one additional pleasant faces to nod to on return to town.
Nearly every young lady has been made one of a party to
some of the Falls, and it is t o be seen that her alpenstock is
usually brought away by her. A look at it shows why the
rough stick is so treasured. Someone handy with a penknife
has bestowed an evening’s carving on it, perhaps two or three
evenings of such work. The result is her name (as at pre-
sent), a date, and the carver’s initials, all enclosed in scroll
work. He may call when in town, or wherever she may be
staying, to know if that stick has been planted and begun
yet to sprout. It is, of course, to be put in the garden, and
the choicest climbing plant is to wind itself around it.
Other souvenirs of Lome are the potted ferns on sale by a
genius who shapes his pots prettily out of fern-tree trunks.
Being porous, they are just the things to hold the young
ferns set in them. Of these the coral fern seem to be first,
favourite. The coach stops on the way back at the only
spot where this pretty fern grows hereabout, that the pas-
sengers may gather it in bunches. Next to the coral fern
come the maiden-hair and the hartstongue varieties 5 and
with a pot of these under each arm the excursionist to
Lome wends his way home, and has for many a day on his
window a growing reminder of his pleasant trip. If his
opportunities have been improved while there, such may not
be the only reminder he will thereafter have of his visit.
“Here solitude has charms ! The iciest breast
Must glow and warm beneath thy beauties rare,
Must recognise the Father’s hand, and own
‘ Creator God ’ is written everywhere.
Thy loveliness will ever haunt or hearts,
An odour of sweet incense, memory born ;
And Paradise must be most wondrous fare,
When earth can boast such spots as lovely Lome.”
Extract.


LOBNE, LOTJTIT SAY.
This modern Hotel opens for the Season with everything
necessary for the comfort cf Visitors, including .pure water laid
on from a high position on the Erskine River, gas, electric
bells, &c.
Terms i TWO GUINEAS FEE WEEK.
PRIVATE APARTMENTS ON REASONABLE TERMS,
Cobb & Co.’s Coaches run in connection with the
Hotel, and meet the first train every morning at Winchelsea,
that arrives from Melbourne, Ballarat and Geelong.
Goacli Fare, 7s. 6d,
The Hotel is also close to the Pier, where Passengers
land (see Newspaper Advertisements regarding Steamers),
TELEGRAMS AND LETTERS PROMPTLY ATTENDED TO,
T. F. ANDEHSOST,
Proprietor.


ki;ski\i-: Soii^s},
LORNE, LOUTIT BAY.
mmwsim bsotsses
In returning thanks to their numerous friends beg to
announce to them and the public generally, that their
Establishment is now replete with
EVERY CONVENIENCE AND ACCOMMODATION,
Including Private Suites of
APAffiTMtEMTO KM FAMILIES,
HOT, COLD AND SHOWER BATHS.
The House is situated close to a fine sandy beach, where
LADIES’ AND GENTLEMEN’S BATHING HOUSES
are erected ; the former supplied with Fresh Water laid on
from the Erskine River.
Comfortable Arrangements for Pic-Nic and Fishing
Excursionists,
for which LORNE is famous.
B3T CROQUET AND TENNIS. JS3
MOU.HtjO7 Brothers’ Coaches leave Winchelsea Daily on
the arrival of first train from Melbourne.


C 0338 & CO.’S
LIVERY, LETIIIG AM BAIT STABLES,
UNION HOTEL, GEELONG,
Hesse Street, Qiieenscliflc
Experienced
Grooms
Charges
employed
strictly
Moderate.
Omnibuses to and from Geelong & Queenscliffe Twice a Day.
Special Conveyances can be obtained at all hours, Night or Day.
HOLIDAYS :
Special facilities afforded to Pleasure and Pic-nic Parties to
Queenscliffe, Connewarre, Clifton Springs, Barwon Heads,
Bream Creek, Spring Creek, Swampy Creek, Loutit Bay,
Point Londsdale, Portarlington,
AND OTHER FAVORITE RESORTS.
Express Conveyances furnished to all parts of the Colony upon the
Shortest Notice.
Relays of Horses can be obtained throughout the Western District.
New Stock of Horses and Modern Vehicles of every description added
this Season, consisting of
Buggies, Carryalls, Waggonettes, Carriages, Private
Coaches, Omnibuses, &c. Sic.
CAREFUL DRIVERS EMPLOYED.
COBB & CO.’S Telegraphic Line of Royal Mail Coaches to
Colac, Camperdown, Terang, Mortlake,
Warrnambool, Belfast, Portland, Casterton,
Penola, Apsley, Harrow, Hamilton,
AND ALL PARTS OF THE WESTERN DISTRICT,
All information as to Fares, times of Arrival and Departure of
Coaches, obtainable at Cobb and Co.’s Booking Office, Great Bourke
Street, Melbourne. WESTERN STAGE COMPANY.


MUSS
ftuse, Ijbkte till stttwissttx J)gcnt,
FINANCIAL BROKER & ABSENTEE AGENT.
ESTABLISHED 1853.
Secretary to the Geelong Permanent Investment & Benefit
Building Society.
Offices :
7, MALOP STSBBT, GHBLSK6.
Jill age ||elle §otbl,
CUBITT STREET,
RICHMOND.
gg 0 NEARLY OPPOSITE THE SWAN STREET
RAILWAY STATION.
(Pood Accomodation foil Retime.


ATHLETIC
IN THE HEART OF
THE CITY OF MELBOURNE.
This immense area is now available for a
CIRCUS COMPANY
ZDJYAT -A-TsTUD TsTIGKEiCT
CURES FOR ALL COMPLAINTS.
No matter what Disease you are attacked with
OO AT ONCE TO THE
2/6 CUEE ESTABLISHMENT,
1 HAYTER & CO.,
96, RUSSELL STREET, MELBOURNE.
G-TJJ±JE&J±.2srTttJ±IJD CXJIE^ES
§2 /6 f


FEAR OF RIDICULE, FALSE MODESTY.
Many a man is now quietly ruminating in solitude, and uselessly
regretting he has not summoned up courage hitherto to consult me.
Diffidence, false modesty, and often fear of ridicule, are, with regret,
the statements made, as chiefly preventing patients from consulting me.
Many a now wretched life would have been made happy, many a
pleasing home with troops of smiling children, would have taken the
place of the hearth which is now desolate, had I been consulted in time.
Many a young life has been wrecked on the rocks of despair. I ask
often an unfortunate being why he did not consult me before, and I find
the invariable heart-bursting response, “Oh, Doctor, why was I held back
by a false feeling of shame ? Had I but consulted you in time, I should
now be a happy, healthful man. What am I now, but an object of
pity!”
Again, with regard to Skin Affections, the same illustration applies.
Many of these terrible chronic eruptions would never have occurred had
early skilful treatment been applied.
Those who have locked up within their breasts a secret, cankering
their very lives, and wish to avail themselves of my skill in the treatment
of their maladies, must remember that “ old time is a a-flying,” and that
I shall not be much longer in practice, for I have done the State some
service in my profession, and I shall not therefore be long before I take
my rest; therefore there is little time to lose, for those who wish to profit
by my skill and experience.
Let nothing in the shape of bashfulness, therefore, deter the one seek-
ing medical skill, from consulting me at once, ere it be too late. Those
who do not care for a personal consultation, can communicate by letter.
DR. L. L. SMITH,
182, Collins Street East,
MELBOURNE
Fee-By Letter, rCI.
Medicines Forwarded throughout all the Colonies.


104, COLLINS STREET EAST, MELBOURNE.
Surgeon and Mechanical
By DBUTISTS, MB
Beg to draw Special Attention to the manner in which they
are now Setting
ARTIFICIAL TEETH ON CELLULOID,
Which is acknowledged to be and to appear more natural
than any other Base before used in Dentistry.
Also, that they insert
TEETH ON GOLD AND VULCANITE,
On the Latest Scientific Principles.
Teeth. Painlessly Extracted.
Consultation Free.
BAUNSCHEIDTISM.
Lebens-utecheq (Life Bevlveij).
THE NEW HEALING METHOD,
WITHOUT THE USE OF MEDICINE,
Is so called after tlie Discoverer, GAEL BATJITSOIIEIDT.
- ir3e-t— —
It has been introduced into Victoria but a few years, with most extraordinary results, when
is considered that most cases treated were of old standing, either chronic or acute. The good
feet in very painful afflictions is instantaneous.
So far as actual experience goes, the application of this new system cures speedily
natism, Inflammation, G-out, Lumbago, Neuralgia, Sciatica,
DIPHTHERIA, TOOTH-ACHE, SORE THROAT, DISEASES OF THE EYE,
Paralysis (in its early stage,) Diseases of the Liver and Chest, Scarlatina,
And nearly every Scrofulous Complaint.
So simple and yet so efficacious is this treatment, that it would be difficult to name a com-
aint which it would not cure. Cases given up as hopeless are frequently cured by it, and a« a
ile those who try the new method reap the immediate benefit of it, as thousands can testify.
For Instruments, references and particulars, apply to
W. GUTMANN.
80, ELIZABETH STREET, MELBOURNE.


*
D A. •
to MARINE EXCURSIONS
QUEENBCLIFFE, SORRENTO, SCHNAPPER POINT
AND DROMANA.
BgT THE SPLENDID STEAMER Jgg
The most Comfortable and Fastest Steamer
in the Colony,
Having completed her usual over-haul, will run during
the Season to the above places.
For Time Table see Daily Papers and “ Evening- Herald.”
are invited to patronise the “ Golden Crown.
sl mmfm,
177, FLINDERS LANE EAST, MELBOURNE.
Passengers desiring Speed, Safety, Comfort and Punctu-
ality, with first-class Refreshments at Moderate Charges,


This Establishment, the most complete Family Hotel in the Colonies,
which has for the last seven years been so favourably known and exten-
sively patronised by the elite of Victoria, is now open for the Season.
The Hotel has been thoroughly renovated, splendidly furnished and
fitted with every requirement necessary for the comfort of Families and
Visitors. The spacious grounds are tastefully laid out, the whole now
forming one of the most delightful Summer residences in Australia.
The Lady Visitors will receive every attention from Mrs. Fenner,
whose constant care will be to study their comfort.
Its proximity to the Baths (second to none in the Southern Hemisphere)
to the Jetty, to the beautiful Sorrento Park, and to the Back Beach, makes
it peculiarly adapted for children, where they can amuse themselves with
cricket, croquet, swings, gymnasiums, &c.
To those who are suffering from Rheumatism, Gout, &c., the Hot and
Cold Salt Water Baths erected on the premises are invaluable.
The Proprietor, at considerable expense, has erected [machinery to
raise the salt water from the Bay, which enables him to have a constant
flow of pure salt water into the Baths.
The Hotel is well supplied with underground cemented tanks, affording
a constant supply of rain water off slate roofs, in addition to which he has
succeeded in obtaining a Well ; the properties of the water are highly
recommended for drinking purposes by the medical faculty.
The Kitchen is fitted with all recent improvements. The Dining Hall
has been enlarged to accommodate 100 persons, and is also fitted up with
steamer plates, thus enabling meals to be served up hot.
Wines, Ales, Spirits, cfc., of the best brands, at Melbourne Prices.
Saddle cj 'r Harness Horses, Express Waggonettes, Buggies, Boats, cfc., always available.
Picnic Parties accommodated with hot or cold Luncheons , < fc., at the shortest notice.
The Billiard Room is fitted with one of Alcock’s best Tables.
The. Cuisine, under first-class superintendence, it is hoped will be all that can be desired.
Telegrams for Rooms and accommodation will receive immediate attention.
The present Manager desires to state, that no effort of Ms or Mrs.
Fenner's will he wanting in the future, as in the past, to make this Hotel
second to none in the Colonies for Comfort, Attention and Convenience, and
hopes hy so doing to receive a continuance of the Patronage that has hitherto
keen so liberally afforded to this Hotel.
G. W. FENNER,
Manager.


