

THE AUTHORITY OF THE AGENT GENERAL FOR OTIFPNST.AMn


•' V ■


Illustrated {©
THE COLONY OF QUEENSLAND.
T is an easy and pleasant task for one who is acquainted with the prospects that He before the
fW Jwf settler in the fair land of Queensland to write of the many and varied advantages which
residence in that colony possesses. It is a significant fact that, after people have lived in
Queensland a few years, they get so attached to their new home that none but the weightiest
of reasons will induce them to leave it. Everything that goes to make life worth living is
found in Queensland: A pleasant climate, in which one can live a natural out-of-doors life all the year
round, congenial society, and work for all —work performed in wholesome conditions, and which leads to
fortune if it is honest and intelHgent. In this old land a man may work his life out, and yet not achieve
more than the beggar’s pittance; but in Queensland, free from the artificial and complex conditions of
society which enslave so large a part of the population, he is bound to win success as the result of well-
directed toil. There is no kind of work which will not be rewarded in the colony bearing our Queen’s


name, and if one tried to single out any occupation in the colony which offers specially favourable
prospects at the present moment, there would be no difficulty in selecting Agriculture. The farmers of
England and Scotland, with a little capital, and with their sons and daughters, would find in the
agricultural conditions of Queensland the means of beginning life anew, with excellent prospects.
Foreign competition, high rents, bad seasons, etc., etc., render the cultivator’s life here an unending
effort to keep his head above water. Why not close the conflict, and go to a land where labour and
money properly invested are sure to return good interest ?
Sir Henry Norman, the late Governor of the colony, said the other day:—“ Humanly speaking,
“ very little seems to be wanting for the progress of Queensland but good government, and enterprise
“ and industry on the part of the people.” In the prosecution of that noblest of all arts, Agriculture,
there is a surer method of making money than in digging for gold. It is a business which, up to a few
years ago, was very much neglected in Queensland, and, when practised at all, was in the hands of inexpert
people. The population of Brisbane and the other centres of population is increasing rapidly, and cereals
and all kinds of agricultural produce find a profitable sale. The Government are ready to assist settlers
in every possible way. The conditions of acquiring land are easy, and a good market exists for the fruits
of the farmer’s labours. Fruit-growing, jam-making for export, nursery-gardens in the neighbourhood
of big towns—all these occupations have heen neglected in the past for the excitement of the miner’s life
or breeding stock in the pastoral regions, and they make a useful addition to the agricultural opportunities
of the colony. Queensland is particularly favoured in the resources which Nature has showered upon
her: all that the other colonies of the group possess she has. More than half the head of cattle in
Australia pasture on her plains. A rise of a penny per lb. in the price of wool means £375,000 to
her squatters. She is the only colony which can grow sugar to pay. Her exports include gold
from everywhere, opals from the west, and pearl shells from the coral seas of the north, frozen
meat and hides from the stations and meat works, butter and cheese from the Downs and interior,
and horses to India (for remounts). The high estimation in which Queensland is held by the best of all
judges, the Stock Exchange, is evidenced by the price of her securities on the London market. Throughout
July, 1896, Queensland 3J per cent, stock was quoted at 109-110. Queensland can challenge comparison
with any of Her Majesty’s Dependencies as to the advantages which she offers to people with a small


BRISBANE.


capital in the old country who wish to make a fresh start beyond the seas, and find their families the
opportunity of becoming members of a happy and enlightened community.
The territory now called Queensland was known in the early days as Moreton Bay. Settlement
began in 1824, arid in 1859 the colony of Queensland was proclaimed by Imperial command, the
first Governor being Sir George Bowen. ' Since that year Queensland has made very rapid progress, and
stands now one of the most promising and thriving of the seven colonies into which Australasia is
divided. The area of Queensland is 668,497 square miles (427,838,080 acres)—more than twice the size
of the whole of the German Empire—and possesses a sea-board of 2,500 miles, along which are many
navigable rivers and important ports. Compared with this immense territory, the population of the
colony—4Bo,o79—appears a mere handful of people ; yet we find them scattered north, east, south, and
west, getting gold from the mines, growing the golden fleece, cultivating wheat on the downs, clearing
scrub for sugar-growing, breeding cattle, conducting the necessary trading and mercantile affairs in the
cities and towns, and in other ways showing the extraordinary energy and vitality for which our
cousins in their healthy and pleasant conditions of life in Australia are justly celebrated. The pioneers
in Queensland had hard times, but the conveniences now offered by an extensive railway system and
well-equipped fleet of steamers, plying between the ports of the colony, take away from settlement in
Queensland its old hardship. All the conveniences and comforts of the old world are found in this new
world, combined with a better climate and far better opportunities of reaping the fruits of honest toil.
Climate.
The question of climate is one of the first importance. What though the lands were broad and
fair, the pasturage luxuriant, the soil productive, the rocks loaded with minerals and metals, —what
would all this avail if the climate were unhealthy, and injurious to the human constitution P_ Previous to
the independence of the colony little attention was given to the meteorological observations, but an
extensive and efficient staff of observers has, for years, been appointed over a large area. The stations


LUCERNE STACKS. —CANNING DOWNS STATION, DARLING DOWNS.


at date are over two hundred. The results of 25 years’ observations have established the character of the
climate, and prove it to he favourable to the European constitution. During a large portion of the year
the weather is fine, the sky cloudless, the atmosphere dry, elastic, and exhilarating. The summer
months are hot, hut not sultry or oppressive. The winter season when dry, which it almost always is,
is exceedingly beautiful and agreeable. The mornings and evenings are cold, hut during the day the air
is warm and balmy, the sky brilliantly blue, and the atmosphere singularly transparent. Such a climate
is necessarily healthy, and the death rate of 12T0 per 1,000 proves this.
Latitude alone does not provide a sure index to climate. Rainfall and its distribution over the
year, the character of the soil and vegetation, the undulating surface of the land, the prevailing winds,
and on the coast the sea-breeze, all contribute their share to the production of climate. It so happens
that over a large portion of Queensland these conditions are favourable ; hence the climate approaches,
as near as can he, that of Madeira, and there is an absence of the hot winds from which the other
Australian colonics frequently suffer. The winter months are May, June, July, when the average
temperature at Brisbane is about 60° ; the average for the year is 67°. It is hotter as you go farther
north, hut owing to the trade winds, which blow regularly, there is no part of Queensland where
white people cannot live and work in comfort all the year round. Archibald Forbes, the celebrated
war correspondent, when on a visit to Queensland some years ago, was at Townsville (870 miles up the
coast, one of the chief ports of the colony) at the hottest time of the year, and he was so much struck
by the robust, healthy look of the people, especially the children, that he wrote in high terms of
praise of the Queensland climate in the English magazines. The average rainfall in the colony is high :
Brisbane, 60 inches ; northern coasts, 60 to 70 inches; and in the plains of the interior 20 to 30 inches
is the usual fall.
Queensland, in fact, has an exceedingly healthy and pleasant climate, one in which it is possible
to live and work in the open air all the year round. Colonists are labouring at various branches of
agriculture right away from Brisbane to the far tropical north, and their experience goes to prove
the excellence of the climate. Diseases of the throat and chest are hut little known in Queensland,
and there are hundreds of people strong and well now in the colony who were sent from this country by
their doctors as a last resource.


BULLOCK TEAMS, WITH BINE LOGS.


Agriculture.
With every diversity of climate and soil, the agricultural capabilities of the colony are unlimited.
On the high table-lands of the Darling Downs, stretching far away west and south-west from Toowoomba,
wheat, maize, turnips, mangel-wurzel, potatoes, apples, pears, strawberries, and all other well-known
English fruits and vegetables are grown to perfection, in addition to the orange and grape. The same
applies with little variation to the central districts, and even as far north as Charters Towers and Her-
herton. On the coast lands the whole length of the colony, maize, sugar, cotton, arrowroot, coffee, rice,
with the orange, banana, peach, grape, and pineapple are freely grown.
The best soil is on the volcanic elevated Downs; hut the limestone of West Moreton, with the
basalts and old rocks of other parts, yield good farming ground. Alluvial flats and coast scrub are
preferred for the sugar cane. Rich black and chocolate earths of the interior will be used when popu-
lation advances. The finest pastoral acres become farming ones in time.
The soil on the Darling Downs district is of volcanic origin, and varies in colour from black to
chocolate and red. It is generally of a clayey nature on the plains, yet such a clay that it crumbles
down with the action of the sun after rain in a similar manner that the soils of Europe crumble after
frost. All soils that thus crumble by the sun are fertile.
In order to foster Agriculture in the colony the Government includes a Department devoted
specially to the interests of the art. Instructors in Agriculture, Dairying, Tobacco Growing and
Manufacture, are employed by this Department to travel through the Colony and give advice and
expert instruction where required. Travelling Dairies also are taken into the dairying districts for
the same purpose.
The Government of Queensland offers land for agricultural and grazing purposes on liberal terms,
and the conditions which attach to the contracts have been arranged so as to meet the convenience of
intending settlers in every possible way. Persons of small means will find that the Land Laws of the
colony will allow of their taking up land on easy terms by selection ; a brief description (at page 30)
is given of the various facilities offered by the Government to persons desirous of settling upon
agricultural land in the Colony of Queensland.


SIX-PURROW PLOUGHING PUR WHEAT. GREEN HILLS PARR, DARLING DOWNS.


Europe .
12-9
United States .
12-1
Canada .
13-0
India
9-6
South America
10-0
Wheat=Growing.
The art of Agriculture in Queensland has had in the past to give way to a very considerable
extent to the requirements of the squatter grazing his tens of thousands of cattle upon the prairie lands
of the west, and the sheep-farmer on the Downs with his hundred thousand merinoos. When wool was
Is. 6d. per lb., and fat bullocks could he sold for £6 per head, these pastoral kings had it all their own
way, and the craft of the husbandman, with its multifarious cares and comparatively small returns, was
not in request. Wheat and other cereals and dairy produce were imported from other lands. But as the
profits of the squatting industry declined, and increase of population took place in Queensland, the
necessity of opening up other payable branches of land culture was apparent. Maize (Indian corn) has
been a staple crop, being used for green fodder and grain. The yield is twenty-two to thirty-two
bushels to the acre for two crops taken in the year. In 1895-96, there were 115,715 acres under maize
in Queensland, tho produce of which was 3,065,333 bushels.
The return per acre for wheat-growing in Queensland is so significant that it is reasonable enough
for great expectations to be formed of the colony’s future in this branch of agriculture ; in 1895-96, there
were 38,942 acres devoted to wheat-growing, which produced 598,052 bushels, an average of 17 21
bushels to the acre. Taking an average of six years 1889-94, we have a yield of seventeen bushels
per acre. To arrive at a full comprehension of these figures, it is necessary to consult the following table,
which gives the returns of the principal wheat-growing Continents of the world: —
YIELD PER ACRE, AVERAGE OF TEN YEARS.
BUSHELS.


WHEAT FIELD. —CANNING DOWNS, DARLING DOWNS.


What other augury can ho drawn from these figures than that the colony of Queensland has a
magnificent future before it, and that there is every likelihood of it becoming one of the world’s
granaries ?
The Agricultural Department of Queensland, for the purposes of experiment, has established wheat
stations in various districts, widely differing as to climate, soil, and other physical circumstances ; until
lately, Avheat was only a recognised farm crop, so far as the production of grain is concerned, in three or
four districts. About Toowoomba, Allora, and Warwick, on the Darling Downs, a high table-land west
of Brisbane, the crop has for years been a considerable one, and at Roma, 318 miles west of the
capital, wheat has also been grown with great success. The experiments referred to resulted in the
successful cultivation of wheat at Hughenden, the centre of a great pastoral district, 235 miles inland
from Townsville, in the tropics. At Clermont, on the Peak Downs, 575 miles north-west of Brisbane,
splendid results came of the experiment; all of the thirty different sorts of wheat planted came to
perfection.
Queensland has running; up through it a ridge of mountains, called the Dividing Range, having a
distance of from 50 to 200 miles from the sea. Professor Shelton, Instructor in Agriculture to the
Queensland Government, comes to the conclusion that the finest wheat area of the colony will be
developed in the region west of the coast range. The drawback to wheat-growing in the past, in
Queensland, was the prevalence of fungus diseases, rust, and smut, but careful experiments have now led to
the use of rust-resistant wheats, and it is thought that by a process of artificial selection, the rust plague
will still be greatly reduced. In Central Queensland there is a belt of land about 100 miles long, reaching
from Springsure on the south to Clermont on the north, well served by the main and branch railway lines,
which is described by good judges to be beautiful wheat country. Experimental wheat-growing has given
the best results from this neighbourhood. These experiments proved beyond doubt that wheat can be
grown to pay in Central Queensland, where there is an area of suitable land equal to the Darling
Downs in the south.
The conclusions to be drawn from the following table (taken from the Year Book of Australia)
are wholly favourable to Queensland, as compared with the other colonies of Australia. In the first place,
her yield of wheat per acre is far superior to that of the other colonies, and the small acreage devoted


CUTTING AND BINDING WHEAT. GREEN HILLS FARM, DARLING DOWNS.


1894-95.
BUSHELS.
New South Wales
647,483
10-9
Queensland
28,997
18-8
South Australia
. 1,732,711
7-8
Tasmania .
52,028
1,373,668
16-7
Victoria
8-3
Western Australia
21,443
7-9
to this plant in comparison with her 400-million-odd square acres of land still in the hands of the
Crown, is a direct incentive to the agricultural classes of the old world to drive the plough in the
virgin soil of Queensland: — wheat acreage, yield per acre,
It is well to point out that wheat-growing in Queensland is protected against imports from
outside sources by the flour duty of 20s. per ton, and the duty of 4d. per bushel on wheat. In 1896.
Queensland imported £370,419 worth of flour, and £179,956 worth of wheat. These figures show what
an excellent market there is in Queensland for breadstuffs, and what a splendid opening there is in the
colony for farmers to grow the staff of life. The Instructor in Agriculture estimates that at the present
price of wheat in Queensland, viz., 4s. 6d. per bushel, there is a large profit per acre for the grower.
Dairying in Queensland.
The dairy industry is one of the most hopeful and promising directions in which small capitalists
from the old country, with some knowledge of the business, can turn. One of the most wonderful develop-
ments of Australian industrial progress is the butter export trade to Great Britain. Under the
favourable conditions of cow-keeping and butter and cheese manufacture which exist in the colonies of
the Australian group, the increase of this industry has been by leaps and bounds ; in the season of 1894-5
the exports of New South Wales, Queensland, South Australia, and Victoria amounted to over thirty
millions lbs. Queensland has only recently began to export, but the spread of the co-operative system of


SHOUT-HORN COWS. —GLENGALLAN STATION, DARLING DOWNS.


supplying milk to central creameries and butter factories in the Darling Downs has had a wonderful
effect in improving the trade of the dairy produce of the colony, and in expanding the industry at large.
There is a great and increasing production of cheese in Queensland, which colony in 1896 produced
1,921,404 lbs. of that article and 6,164,240 lbs. of butter. During 1896, Queensland imported of butter
1,003,680 lbs., valued at £43,075, and of cheese 77,275 lbs., worth £1,820, a total of foreign butter and
cheese having a value of £44,895, consumed and paid for in Queensland in the year 1896. It strikes
one in looking over these figures that this sum, accessible to the dairymen of Queensland, is a prize
worth planning and striving for. Butter, and presumably milk, during the past year, and in most
previous years, has ruled higher in price in Brisbane than in Chicago, New York, or London. Often
the Brisbane market has had the lead in price by fully 50 per cent.
Fruit=Growing
Fruit-growing in Queensland is one of the pleasantest and most certain ways of ensuring a fair
return for the capital and labour expended. Oranges, bananas, pineapples, and grapes are the fruits culti-
vated on a commercial scale, and in the northern districts of the colony mangoes and other tropical fruits
are grown in large quantities. Few countries can rival Queensland in fruits. More land is steadily being
brought under orange and banana cultivation, for which many districts are admirably suited, and for
which there will be an ever-increasing demand. A banana plantation will give returns in 12 or 18 months,
and from £SO to £6O per acre a year. In 1897, two bunches of bananas from Cairns were landed in London
in perfect condition, from the s.s. “ Jumna.” Four or five years from planting the trees must be given
for an orange crop ; and they will prove a source of increasing income for many years afterwards. At Roma,
90 trees averaged 100 dozen per tree. At Maryborough, 3,440 oranges have been taken from a single
tree. At Charters Towers a grower has 60 fruit trees—orange, lemon, citron and mulberry. He sold
5,000 dozen oranges in one season at an average of 2s. per dozen. Forty trees can be planted to the acre.
Strawberries grow well, and thrive in the neighbourhood of Brisbane, on the Darling Downs,
at Roma, Gympie, and elsewhere. One grower has two acres under strawberries and grapes, in


PINEAPPLE FARM, NEAR BRISBANE.


alternate rows. The capability of Queensland to grow almost every description of fruit produced in
temperate and tropical regions has long been proved. The yearly import of the United Kingdom of fresh
and preserved fruits amounts to £7,000,000, and the discoveries of science are daily placing at the disposal
of Colonists the means of packing and preserving from decay for the length of the voyage fruits for
the English markets. Preservation and sterilisation of the surrounding atmosphere are two of the
processes now being perfected, and, in a short time, probably, grapes and other perishable fruits from
Queensland will be landed hero so as to compete on favourable terms with the fruits produced in any
part of the globe. If intending settlers are fond of the retired life in the lonely islands that fringe the
northern coasts of Queensland, no doubt the Government would make arrangements as to settlement.
These islands have been planted with cocoanut palms, and the plantations will form a very useful
addition to the natural resources of the colony.
Sugar=Growing.
One of the most thriving and promising of Queensland’s agricultural industries is the cultivation
of the sugar-cane. A ready market is found in the other Australasian colonies for all the sugar that
Queensland has been hitherto able to produce. It is estimated that when the Queensland crop exceeds
100,000 tons, an export trade with the United Kingdom will be set up. ■ Cane sugar is able to hold its
own against the bounty-fed beet article from the European Continent. Many people (rightly) prefer it
on account of the superior sweetening power. The insurrection in Cuba has interfered largely with
the production of cane sugar in that island, and the industry in the immediate future, in Queensland,
will be benefited in consequence. In the days when sugar was first cultivated in the colony, the
industry was mainly in the hands of planters, who both grew the cane and manufactured the sugar.
Experience has shown that the most profitable method of carrying on the business is by a division of the
work. The small planter now grows the cane upon his 160-acre farm, and sells it to the millowner,


SUGAR FIELD NEAK MARYBOROUGH, WIDE BAY DISTRICT.


who, relieved of the anxiety of attending to the culture of the crop, is able to devote his time and skill
to the process of manufacture. This is the most economical system of production, and under it the
farmer from Europe will find a splendid opportunity of prosecuting his calling. A married couple with
three or four children could cultivate, without hired labour, a 20-acre plantation, and make a living on
it. The sugar lands in Queensland run from Brisbane right up the coast-line, and consist of scrub,
forest, and volcanic plains. The farmer who takes up, say, a selection for sugar-growing, has to prepare
his land by cutting down and burning off scrub, at an estimated cost of £3 per acre ; breaking-up and
planting will cost £6 or £7 per acre more. It is a good plan at first, in order to ensure a quick return,
only to plant a few acres to sugar, and place the rest of the cleared land to maize.
The London Times recently had a special correspondent in Queensland, whose report of sugar-
growing in the colony was wonderfully hopeful. “On the Herbert river,” says the correspondent,
“ selectors, living upon 160-acre Government lots, are growing cane with great success for the neigh-
“ bouring mills. Amongst several into whose accounts I went with some care, I found that the man who
“ was least well off had cleared 100 acres of land, of which 70 acres were under cane, and that he teas making
“an income of about £BOO a year, with working expenses of £SOO. He had started originally as a ploughman,
“ without any capital, and, in addition to his land, now possesses a very good two-storeyed house and all
“ the horses and implements necessary to the cultivation of the farm. The others were in a very similar
“ position, with incomes varying up to £1,500 and working expenses to £I,OOO. The proportion between
“ working expenses and gross receipts was generally as five to eight. All of these men started as
“ labourers, and have worked to their existing position in periods of from 10 to 12 years, dating from
“ the time of taking up their land.”
The Government of Queensland afford every possible assistance to encourage agriculture, and
one of the examples of this is the system of “Central Mills” as now used in connection with sugar-
growing. The Government erected two mills at Mackay, and passed them over to associations of
sugar-planters, who worked them on the co-operative principle with great success, and, as the outcome
of this policy, tw T o Acts were passed in 1893 and 1895, authorising groups of planters to form companies
and borrow from the Government, on the security of the plantations, sufficient funds to defray the cost
of erection of mills and machinery. These Acts have led to a marvellous expansion of sugar-growing


and manufacture, and have placed the industry upon a thoroughly sound footing in the colony. To hard-
working young men, determined to succeed, the cultivation of sugar-cane in the northern coasts of
Queensland offers special opportunities of quickly realising a fortune in jdeasant surroundings, and the
industry can therefore bo recommended with confidence. The sugar production of recent years has
been as follows: —1892-3 season, 61,386 tons; 1893-4, 76,146 tons; and 1894-5, 91,712 tons;
1895-6, 86,255 tons ; 1896-7, 100,774 tons.
Commerce and Revenue.
The colony of Queensland offers every facility to settlers for the easy transaction of business.
There are Banking Companies with branches spread all over the colony, and the Government have
a Savings Bank, the funds in which, according to the 1896 returns, amounted to £2,329,380. The Post
and Telegraph Offices (Government Department) are admirably organised, the mail and cargo arrange-
ments between the ports and the other colonies are rapid and economical, and direct trade with the
United Kingdom is carried on by means of the lines referred to at pages 31 and 32. In 1896 Queensland
exported £9,163,726 worth of produce, and the fact that for the same year her inward trade only
amounted to £5,433,271, shows how industrious the community are, and how great the resources of the
colony must be to enable such a handful of people to produce such a large amount of valuable goods.
Queensland has about 2,400 miles of railways open, and is now shipping out materials for the
extension of her system. The plan adopted in opening up the country parts has been to build three
trunk lines due west, starting from Brisbane, Rockhampton, and Townsville ; the interior is thus placed
in communication with the ports.
The year’s revenue to 30th June, 1897, was £3,613,200 and the expenditure £3,604,300, showing
a surplus of £8,900. The Public Debt of the colony, unlike European debts, is a productive one,
having been spent on railways and other useful works. Law and order are respected as in Great Britain,


Mining.
One of the richest industries of Queensland is gold-mining ; a source of perennial wealth to the
colony and the enriching of the men who follow it with steady purpose. Of course the old days of
alluvial gold-working—by means of which gold was taken from loose earth in the beds of streams—are
over, and now the precious metal is won by means of crushing the quartz rock in which it is contained,
and extracting the gold from the crushed mass by means of scientific process. The gold fields of
Queensland are scattered all over the colony ; Gympie in the south and Charters Towers in the north are
two of the chief centres of the industry. The most wonderful of all gold discoveries was that of Mount
Morgan. This, not only so far as Queensland or Australia is concerned, but the whole world. It is 1,225
feet above sea level, situate in the centre of a ring or chain of surrounding hills, and is distant from the
town and port of Rockhampton about 22 miles. The gold is very pure and very fine, and is worth
£4 4s. an ounce. This, according to the report of the Government geologist, Mr. Jack, is due to the
fact that Mount Morgan was in former geological ages a hot spring—a sort of geyser, the water of which
held gold in solution, and which was afterwards chemically precipitated and consolidated with the other
mineral matter thrown up by the spring into a ferruginous stone. The spring has long ceased to flow.
The yield of gold in Queensland for 1896 was valued at £2,241,347, and the total production from
1851 to 1897 amounted to about 39 millions sterling. It is possible to carry on gold-mining at a profit
at very low depths with the improved appliances now used in the industry—one valuable mine is
now being worked at 3,350 feet from the surface. There are innumerable gold-bearing reefs throughout
Queensland, and the working of these is certain to provide lucrative employment for tens of thousands
of men for many years to come. Silver, lead, copper, and tin, are found in large quantities in Queensland,
and wherever the conditions of working and carriage allow these materials to he produced economically
the industries have been carried on. The coal beds of the colony have been estimated to he twice the
area of England. Any country possessing such a wealth of ‘ ‘ black diamonds ”as this must have a
grand future before it. The mines at present being worked are those near Ipswich and Maryborough.


SALTERN CREEK, CENTRAL DISTRICT, NO. 2 BORE.


The Tourist in Queensland.
Brisbane, the capital city of the Colony, is ‘2O miles from Moreton Bay; the river is navigable for
large vessels, which berth at the wharves of the City. The population of Brisbane is over 100,000 ;
the Public Offices (the Parliament House appears on the cover of this pamphlet), Banks and Merchants’
Offices are on a magnificent scale, the streets are wide, and there are all the conveniences and facilities
which one expects to find in a Metropolitan City. The late Sir Henry Parkes, on visiting Brisbane a few
years ago for the first time in his life, was struck with admiration, and said that he thought in a few
years’ time Brisbane would be the handsomest city in Australia.
Queensland has been by no means backward in railway enterprise, as explained at page 21. The
Southern and Western lane will take the traveller along the course of the beautiful river Brisbane to
Ipswich, the centre of the chief coal district of the colony, and an important agricultural town.
Toowoomba, the capital of the Darling Downs, is reached by the train climbing the ranges, through
grand mountain scenery ; primeval forests, untouched by the woodman’s axe, skirt the railway, which, at
the summit of the range, is 2,000 feet above the sea-level. The Southern and Western Railway is
continued to Charloville, on the Warrego River, a fine grazing country, where one of the artesian wells,
which have helped the squatter so much in dry districts, can be inspected. This bore yields 3,000,000 gallons
of water per day, and 201 of these bores overflow with a total output of 395,775,450 gallons per day.
The Saltern Creek, No. 2 bore {see preceding page) is 1884 feet deep, and yields 250,000 gallons a day.
The Central Railway runs from Rockhampton, an important port, through a pastoral country to Longreach,
424 miles, with branches to Clermont and Springsure. Rockhampton has some 13,000 people, is a pros-
perous mercantile town, to which the pastoral products tapped by the railway flow, with an export trade
between two and three millions sterling per annum. The Northern Railway runs from Townsville to
Hughenden, 235 miles, taking the premier gold field of the colony, Charters Towers, in its course. Towns-
ville is the chief town in Northern Queensland, possessing a considerable volume of trade: some of the finest
pastoral country in Australia lies west of it, as w T ell as vast mineral districts. Charters Towers, 80 miles
inland,is a progressive and wealthy gold mining centre, second to none in the Colonies. Besides these main
lines there are many railways in Queensland serving local requirements. From the picturesque point of


VIEW ON THE HERBERT KIVEK, NORTH QUEENSLAND.


view, Queensland’s show railway is the line from Cairns, on the northern coast to Mareeba; the train
winds in and out amongst magnificent mountain scenery and tropical jungles ; it climbs the Main Coast
Range till it reaches the tableland of the Barron River Falls, 1,200 feet above the sea. The Barron Falls
require a graphic pen to describe ; in flood time a volume of water 300 yards wide and forty feet deep
tumbles over a solid wall into space, making a clean leap of 700 feet into the gorge below —beating
Niagara by 536 feet. To see such a sight is worth a journey from the Old Country ! The river scenery
of the north, characterised by wild jungles and fertile clearings, where the hardy settler is growing
sugar, maize, &c., is most attractive to visitors to the colony; a view of the Herbert River is given on the
previous page.
Natural History.
As in other parts of Australia the marsupials (animals which carry their young in a pouch) abound
throughout Queensland ; kangaroos and wallabies are the most common form of the larger marsupials.
Ihe platypus is one of the most interesting of all animals, owing to its possessing physical resemblance
to many other creatures; it has fur like a seal and the bill of a duck ; it lays eggs and yet it suckles
its young. Another curious form of animal life found in the colony is the dugong, or sea cow, which
grows to ten feet in length, living under the water in the bays upon sea grasses. The flesh when cured
is very palatable. There are no noxious animals in Queensland, and the snakes of the colony are of a
retiring disposition. The salt-water and river fish are very numerous, and three hundred known species
are suitable for food. The giant groper, weighing a quarter of a ton, the schnapper, barramundi,
gar-fish are amongst the best known and liked. One Queensland fish, the Ceratodus, is something of
an amphibian, for it is enabled—by having a lung capable of breathing atmospheric air—to take its
walks abroad when it wants a change. Queensland is rich in insect life; one soon gets accustomed to
the mosquito, and the ants perform excellent service as scavengers.
In bird life Queensland is well off; the cassowary and emu are still roaming through the ranges
of the north; the parrot and cockatoo scream in the trees, and the laughing jackass, the friend of man,
selects a convenient roof wherefrom to make his curious song. Queensland has birds which construct
bowers to play in, and birds which build mounds in which to bury their eggs for the heat to hatch.
The lagoons furnish good sport.


CATTLE CAMP. —MERIVALE STATION, MAKANOA DISTRICT.


The trees and plants of Queensland are so numerous and so valuable for commercial and social
purposes that the services of a gentleman have to he retained as a “Colonial Botanist” to classify the
different kinds. First and foremost come the rich natural pastures of the colony, which have groat
fattening properties and astonishing vitality in resisting dry weather —a few showers of rain will
convert a hurnt-up plain to a prairie smiling with verdure.
The gum-tree is found all over Queensland, and its wood is used for many purposes.
Plenty of timber for building and fencing purposes is available throughout the colony, and some of the
most valuable sorts are exported to other countries. The wild flowers of Queensland —very different to
the prim blossom of an English hedgerow or meadow—are beautiful indeed. The lagoons are covered
with immense lilies, the downs are in good seasons ablaze with many-hucd flowers, and in the north
flower-forms of curious shape and sparkling hue are met with. One of the commonest plants in the
bush, the wattle (an acacia), has a delicate blossom, the perfume from which pervades whole districts.
People who have lived in the bush and breathed the wattle-scented air can never forget the perfume.
Grape vines grow well in the colony, and in many districts are cultivated systematically to produce wine.
Social Life.
Queensland was the first colony to establish a school system open to all, without fees or religious
restraint. In 772 State schools, at the close of 1896, were an average daily attendance of 64,316 scholars,
and 1,717 teachers. In the same year there were 10 Grammar Schools with 797 students. These are
aided by the Government, and grants are made for university scholarships.
The system of education in Queensland is under the control of the Department of Public Instruc-
tion, which is presided over by a member of the Cabinet. The gross expenditure of this department
during 1896 amounted to about £200,000. In 1896 there were 176 private schools, attended by about
10,000 scholars.
Every religious denomination is represented in the colony—English Episcopal Church, Roman
Catholics, Presbyterians, Congregationalists, Lutherans, Methodists, Baptists, Independents and Jews.
There are no State or endowed Churches ; all are equally free, with equal rights.


I’ARM.—CANNING DOWNS STATION, DARLING DOWNS.


How to take up Land in Queensland.
Homestead Selections of 20 to 160 Acres.— This form of taking up land, perhaps the most
suitable for farmers intending to cultivate cereals, sugar, or fruit, is much in favour, owing to the liberal
terms offered. The freehold of such a selection, which is of first-class farming land, may he secured
by five annual payments of 6d. per acre, and the expenditure of 10/- per acre in permanent improvements ;
five years’ personal residence by the selector is necessary.
Agricultural Farms. —The most conveniently situated lands near railways and towns are
available in blocks up to 1,280 acres for agricultural purposes. The annual rent per acre varies from
3d. to about 1/-, according to quality and situation of the land, and the selector or his agent must occupy
the land continuously; after five years’ residence, the freehold may he secured by purchase, at from
15/- per acre, and all rent paid during the period of personal residence is reckoned as part of the
purchase money.
Grazing Homesteads. —This is a form of land selection which has been specially recommended for
dairy farming. Under it farms can he got up to 2,560 acres in extent, for a 30-years’ lease, at from
|d. to |d. per acre. The selector has to occupy the farm personally for ten years ; afterwards a registered
agent may reside on the property.
Grazing Farms. —ln this category settlers can acquire areas up to 20,000 acres, on a 30-years’
lease, at rents varying according to the quality of the land, id. per acre being the minimum. The
Land Board re-assesses the rent after the first ten years, and subsequently at intervals of five years. The
land must be continuously occupied by the tenant or his registered agent. The cost of survey (ranging
from about £3O for a farm of 2,560 acres to about £65 for 20,000 acres) has to he paid with a year’s rent
when the farm is applied for.
Unconditional Selections. —Areas of land up to 1,280 acres, at prices ranging from £1 per
acre, payable in 20 annual instalments, can he secured with no conditions attached, save the punctual
payment of the purchase money.


Open Berths
£13
13
0
Closed Cabin, four berths, each adult .
16
16
0
One berth in a two-berth cabin, for married couples .
17
17
0
Second Class
37
0
0
First Class
52
10
0
How to get to Queensland.
In the old days a voyage by sailing ship to Queensland of six months’ duration was no uncommon
thing. The enterprise of the great shipowning firms and companies nowadays makes smooth the path
of the would-be settlers ; some dozen or so of regular lines of steamships ply to and fro’ between Europe
and Australasia, rendering, by the competition thus set up, travelling speedy and cheap. The Colony
of Queensland has a special service of her own, that of the Queensland Royal Mail Line, which
carries the mail for the Government along the picturesque route of Torres Straits. Steamers sail
about every three weeks from the Albert Docks for Brisbane, their terminus; the stopping places are
Naples (occasionally), Port Said, Suez, Aden, Colombo (occasionally) and Batavia (Java). From Batavia a
run is made to the first port of call in Queensland, Thursday Island (the centre of the pearl fisheries),
whence the steamers sail down the coast, calling at the chief ports, Cooktown, Townsville, Mackay,
Rockhampton, and on thence to Brisbane. During the run from Batavia to Rockhampton one is hardly
out of sight of land, and the voyage is, under usual circumstances, sailed in smooth water. This route
to Queensland is one of the most picturesque steamer trips in the world, and, given pleasant society on
board, and the fine weather which usually favours the voyage, a passage to Queensland by one of the
British India vessels is more like a yachting cruise than the ordinary prosaic steamer trip.
The rates of passage by the Queensland Royal Mail Line (Agents, Messrs. Gray, Dawes & Co.,
23, Great Winchester Street, London, E.C.) are as follows :


For those persons who prefer to proceed to Queensland via the Southern Colonies route, there is
the weekly mail service made up by the departures of the P. and 0. and Orient Lines. The steamers sail
from Suez to Albany in south-west Australia, and have their terminus at Sydney, where Queensland
passengers tran-ship into the vessels of the coasting lines.
CHEAPEST AUSTRALIAN COLONY TO REACH.
A THIRD = CLASS PASSAGE may he obtained for £l3. 13s. by Queensland Royal
Mail Steamers, running direct, about every four weeks, to the principal Ports in
the Colony, and the ship-kits for these passages will be provided by the
Government of Queensland. The amount of Luggage allowed to each Passenger
will be 12J cubic feet.
Agents: Messrs. GRAY, DAWES & CO., 23, Great Winchester Street, London, E.C
For Pamphlets and all further information as to the Colony, apply to
The AGENT GENERAL FOR QUEENSLAND,
WESTMINSTER CHAMBERS,
i, VICTORIA STREET, LONDON, S.W.
January, 1898,
Waterlow & Sons Limited, Printers, London Wall, Londo:


‘
.


