



jL (f r jut. ii p
a f ’• ’ 1 lfsA L rsZYfSi
t»
\\ \ \ \ /t&Tr
m\ & l *
L<• | %
M*' ljte6l E J.:M33®
.4V £** W-W fSfjjST ; JjfflSl- 5 i
jfv,L.«L/t«yM !s&* La#/ iflOwieS
sssr n$ im> i F j2j
e hgali^iLbg
E3l®Ai0 R 6B
—A I |.. --==- | ,—. >\ r ( . ■' \ TO THANK THE PUBLIC I-
Xo/alI 3House s ■.u l( Xi-L.mss’ j support to
oven ig, B Vi! iYIELCP- | INTIMATE THAT FOR rrt
c.vek', I BW orsrw | i ~;‘ i r J ruropc she canbceonsuu
| Prqp r . I jil I at ftzf\ ORIENTAL SHIU-lNi
~ ~i ~4 c ’’f y%'7 —-~u I Depot Microrxa, Aroaoi
t] ifi g j*; v »l\ Colun^^Entb
iW.awraELi. a '~ r\~ 'f ®|( 9
m fy I llrte


A TTfTKT 1 R 1"




SORRENTO & QUEENSCLiFFE
Steam JTaoigation ffompani), Cimifct).
CAPITAL £15,C00, IN 15,000 SHARES OF £1 EACH.
A FEW SHARES FOR SALE.
“GOLDEN CROWN,”
The Pioneer Excursion Steamer,
Was purchased expressly for the Recreation of the People,
Sunday Excursions from the Sandridge Railway Pier, at 9.35 a.m
QTJEEISCLIEFE & SOMEITO
Regular trips during the week. The superior speed of the “ Golden
Crown ” over all other Excursion Steamers enables Passengers to remain
hours at each place of call. See advertisements in,the Argus.
W. F. PENINGTON, Secretary,
33, Flinders Street West.
UJTIYEQ IiJLILWjIY GOJKBjIJIY.
A Special Excursion Train on Sunday Morning
Leaves the Melbourne Station at 9.18 a.m. to convey Passengers to the
“GOLDEN GROWN” STEAMER,.
Return Train at 7-3° a.m.


Ocean Amphitheatre Company,
SaSMrTffl®.
CAPITAL <£lo,ooo, IN 1,000 SHARES AT £lO EACH.
ESTABLISHED TO DEVELOP SORRENTO.
LAND is open for selection upon Moderate Terms, either for
Business Sites or Private Villas. Very liberal accommodation
given to Purchasers intending to build immediately.
Marine Villas. Time Payments.
To encourage residence, and to save purchasers the annoyance of
building, the Company will sell their Cottages at cost price, £6OO each,
upon Time Payments, bearing interest at the rate of 6 per cent, per
annum. A Cottage consists of four spacious rooms, kitchen, wash-
house, servant’s bedroom, with verandah; an allotment of land, which
can be extended if necessary, and every convenience. They are
substantially built, well ventilated, and remarkably cool. 6 per cent,
upon £6OO, is £36, equal to 13s. 10 d. per week for the freehold of a
Charming Marine Villa upon Constitution Hill, undoubtedly the most
convenient and beautiful site in town for a private residence. A person
purchasing two cottages could let one, the income from which, during
the season, would pay the entire interest, and give the other cottage rent
free for his own accommodation.
Furnished Cottages to Let.
Fifty additional houses will establish a Municipality and Local
Self-Government.
33, Flinders Street West. W. F. PENJNGTON, Secretary.
12M>to & s,
CONTRACTORS FOR ROUGH CARPENTERING,
FENCING. CLEARING, WELL SINKING,
AND ALL DESCRIPTIONS OF LABORING WORK, ETC.
Orders left at "W. Kett's, Stationer, &c., Sorrento,
punctually attended to.


K-e-rr
SORRENTO FAICT RIPOSIT §IY,
*
Opposite Continental Hotel,
ON THE HOAD TO THE BACK BEACH.
WILLIAM KETT,
loolisettei;,
Joys, JGlames, JTic JTacs.
CIGARS, TOBACCO, SNUFF.
HAIB DEBSSEB, <ScC.
Ladies’ & Gentlemen’s Hair dressed at Hotels if required.
The Newest and Choicest Descriptions of Pomades, Soaps,
Hair Restorers, &c.
Agent for the
“ILLUSTRATED HANDBOOK OF THE BAY,”
PUBLISHED BY MR. H. CORDELL,
I*) iiSS/z- scgg
18, LITTLE COLLINS STREET WEST, MELBOURNE.
' •—-
k '


M®M®¥ 3, WS&S®H,
FAMILY BUTCHER,
SORRENTO & PORTSEA.
Small Goods.
PORK SAUSAGES OF THE VERY BEST QUALITY.
CHAS. C. SIMPSON,
Established iB6O.
HESSE STREET, QUEENSCLIFFE.
's - I
Families called upon Daily, and Orders executed at
the Shortest Notice.
CHEMIST AM® DRUGGIST.
HOUSE, LAND & COMMISSION AGENT.
Agent for the Daily, Weekly & Monthly Papers.


—
Under the Management of ME. ALFRED DALE,
(For Thirteen Years Assistant Manager of the “ Brisbane Hotel,” Launceston ;
and for the last Twelve Months engaged at the “ Athenajum Club,” Melbourne).
Families will receive the Personal Attention of the
Housekeeper MRS. W. M. COX,
SORRENTO,
UPON THE DIRECT ROAD TO THE OCEAN.
(From Mack’s Hotel, Geelong).
This extensive Establishment has been designed and erected upon the most modern
j)lans. Large Entrance Hall, icide Passages, noble Staircases, Grand Dining Saloon,
Ladies' Drawing-room (with Piano), comfortable Sitting- rooms for Families, spacious
Bedrooms, excellent Billiard-room, convenient Writing-room, and
Separate Dining-room for Children.
THE VENTILATION THROUGHOUT THE HOUSE IS PERFECT IN EVERT ROOM.
Extensive Verandahs and Promenade, with Awning Protection.
MAGNIFICENT VIEW PROM THE TOWER.
Excellent Stables, Saddle and Harness Horses, Cabs, Waggonettes and Buggies.
Dinner Ready immediately upon Arrival of Steamer.
THE HOTEL WAGGONETTE
Is in waiting at the Pier to convey Passengers to the Hotel FREE !
Cabs run to tlie Ocean Amphitheatre for Ocl.
As this is Not a Brewer's House, the Landlord is at liberty to purchase the very Best
Articles in the open Market from the Importer, and can therefore Guarantee the
Quality of every Article he supplies.
MODERATE CHARGES
BOARD AND RESIDENCE
Private Sitting Room and Bed Room, Two... £8 Bs. per week.
Do. do. d 0.... £i i os. per day.
Bed Room and Meals at Public Table ... £2 10s. per week.
Do. do. do. ... to*-, per day.
Breakfast, as. 6 d.; Dinner, 35.; Tea, 2s. 6d. ; Apartments, 3s.
WINES & SPIRITS OF THE BEST QUALITY AT MELBOURNE PRICES.
SORRENTO BATHS.
White Flag hoisted, denotes Ladies only. Red Flag, Gentlemen only.
SORRENTO MECHANICS’ INSTITUTE fit FREE PUBLIC LIBRARY
Two minutes walk from Hotel, open daily. Books may be had by applying to
W. KRTT, Secretary.




Jil. (goiideH, Fiiinteq.




“ .Just below the Eastern Market, on the same side of
Bourke Street, is
COLE’S BOOK ARCADE.
This establishment, although not so pretentious in size
as the other arcades, yet has many points of excellence
which cannot be overlooked, and every sightseer in Mebourne
should take the opportunity of visiting it. Visitors from
America (the land of notions), England, and the continent
of Europe, affirm that it is unique of its kind, nothing like
it existing in either of those places, although each containing
cities five times the size of Melbourne. It contains an
immense variety of books, new and second-hand, books on
almost every conceivable subject, 'which are conveniently
arranged and classified in the shelves, and underneath them
in upwards of a thousand drawers distinctly labelled for the
ready convenience of the selector, who therefore can find
almost any book he wants at a moment’s notice. “ A place
for everything and everything in its place ” appears over
head in large letters, and this time-honored maxim the
proprietor has certainly fully carried out. One feature of
this arcade of the intellect is, that to a considerable extent,
especially of an evening, it is made a convenient place of
meeting or waiting for friends, who, while they find it
respectable, find it also exceedingly easy to while away an
hour or two looking over the books or music and listening
to the lively strains of a piano which is always played from
7 to to, while they can keep appointed time with certainty
by the large and somewhat astonishing clock of the establish-
ment. Bourke Street, with its market stalls, its arcades, its
vestibules, its hotels, its restaurants, its shops, and its shows,
is always collectively a lively place at night, but the Book
Arcade, as a single establishment, with its red-coated attend-
ants, rainbow signs, its rows of lights, rows of drawers, and
rows of intelligent, well-behaved, interested readers, is
certainly the finest, must curious, and most encouraging
sight to be seen in that street after dark.”
The Book Arcade contains 20,000 sorts of Books.


Runs Twice a Week
BETWEEN
MELBOURNE, PORTARLINGTON, DRYBDALE,
AND
CLIFTON SPRINGS,
Offering a convenient and cheap opportunity for EXCUR-
SIONISTS Visiting these favourite Watering Places, which
are without exception the Prettiest Inside the Heads.
GOOD HOTELS & MODERATE CHARGES.
Single ss.
FARES :
For further particulars apply to
Return 8s-
1 32, KING STREET, '
Melbourne.


G-ltaitirujC&n. J
•• ' . • (
The sketch of this little-known and now rising township is
given from notes of correspondents. £
Portarlington, ' picturesquely backed by the beautiful
undulating hills of Bellarine, is a projection in the Bay, and a
stands out as a peculiar feature of interest, presenting attrac-
tions that will one day make it famous. The air is balmy d
and serene. Its extended pier is a safe and convenient
landing-place for visitors. r
Leaving the pier and ascending the Point, a prominence r
from the beach, three or four minutes walk will take you to
the township midway up the height —“ within which view
one may well say that the beauties of nature have been d
concentrated.”
(f
Looking to the front, right and left, there is indeed a
magnificent Bay view, scarcely to be described.
On the right may be seen Points Ormond, Ballygit, (off f
Brighton), Red Blurt', Banning and Schnapper Point, and in
the bight formed by the two latter and the main land, may
be seen the locales of Cheltenham, Mordiallac, Frankston and
Mornington 5 and by ascending the highest point —Osborne, k
Dromana, Rye, Sorrento, and Point Nepean. On a clear a
day Brighton and St. Kilda. with a faint view of Melbourne
may be obtained, although the distance from the latter is d
more than 30 miles.






/-X p 01
_ ||c^.'^•‘ w * orK .J
■"V S S
*X &r r 'yv;' iaM '%
'J-TfX %I|| ;
:---..v.--w < 7 fte -■’ ifTWllllili
; fi’RB.V HKLMOWT \) Olardin# I^WIS^nMlJ&f
t - f "- • - JT)«t.vl!j7'.a'
J urfHUUJm Nv mPjMmfiflff ,r Ji , ‘ '«►
JL~~ \jVAUJKGTOE \
. v
£t>&. Bw»rS<?f I ■'■('•■ 'fT- \
■*?&>'- *’■<»?: m lirDltN EEd"" »,W* , % \L.(OVtUMOtTf-' ' /TW?Jf■£&&'*’' jlf
i „ r ‘ * Sail U‘at«r, TV i f SJ ».
f r


"PiriLLPp I s L




INTRODUCTION
rowing in favour with the public of
the city and visitors from the country
as the beautiful Watering Places of
Port Phillip now are, we feel that
the time has come when summer
Visitors to the Sea - Side should
have put before them a correct Map
of the shores of the Bay, with the
various places of resort prominently
marked, and with brief accompanying
notes as to each, so that the excursionist or visitor may have
before him all the information necessary to enable him
“ where to choose.” The Map we present has been carefully
marked, and the sketches (in print) of the various Watering
Places are written impartially. No prettier trip by sea in
the colony can be obtained than an excursion “ down the
Bay,” and the information we afford will show to the reader
that each of these summer retreats has its own attractions, and
that every one of them will well repay, in the renewed health
which fine scenery, shelter from hot winds, a fine sea breeze,
and the possibility of securing every necessary physical com-
fort, both for the invalid and the “ hale and hearty,” the visit
short or long that may be paid to them.
The attractions of the Sea-Shore to excursionists, or
residents for a season from town or country, are well known,
but it may not be inappropriate to quote the following
suggestions from a little work on “ Sea-side Rambles,” by
a popular Australian author, now no more :
“ There are certain times and seasons when the mind, so
dependent on a healthy state of the body for a vigorous
+
iuj


& -V-. wS^Sgw
development, worn out by constant toil and anxiety, becomes
thoroughly unstrung, and unless a change of scene and
companions can be at once obtained, it soon becomes
impaired, and sooner or later the consequences are seen in
one of the many tedious nervous diseases unfortunately so
prevalent in this country. A change into the interior is
scarcely likely to prove as beneficial to the man of sedentary
habits as a run by the sea, and where the ‘ stormy winds
do blow,’ and where the long lost appetite quickly
returns, and the mental faculties resume their wonted spirit
and energy.
“ ‘ Great Cities,’ remarks Professor Harvey, in his work
on Seaweeds, ‘are springing up in the Australian Colonies;
and Watering places, to which the citizen takes his family to
enjoy the sea breeze during the summer time are coming into
being still a Sea-side residence becomes monotonous when
the mind has not occupation, but following out some of the
suggestions contained in the following pages, inducements
will be found for taking exercise in search of some of the
many beautiful objects of the Sea-shore, and so all the
functions, bodily and mental, may be maintained in a healthy
state.”
A sketch of Sorrento, the new and popular watering
place on the shore of the South Channel, will be found in its
own place in this Guide, but it is proper to write a few
lines here as to its origin, and the gentlemen to whom the
public owe the creation of this attractive summer retreat.
Sir Charles Cavan Duffy (not then Sir Charles) selected
about a thousand acres of the peninsula, stretching along the
Sound and over the neck of land to the Ocean Beach, and
bought up the selections of some older settlers. There he


built a residence, but the place was so difficult of access that
it was some time before his example was followed. To
encourage the formation of a popular watering place he
presented to Mr. P. J, Martin a piece of the land, fronting
the Channel, on condition that the latter should build
a commodious hotel for the convenience of visitors. That
was done. Sir Charles then resolved to sell a portion of
this property, and the business was entrusted to Mr. J. H.
Knipe. He found great difficulty in inducing any person
possessed of capital to enter into the scheme, but at last
Mr. George Coppin was induced to visit the spot, who
became so much interested in the place that he at once
arranged to purchase a large portion of the land offered ; and
also floated the “Sorrento Ocean Amphitheatre Company, - fe
who are entitled to the credit of developing the beauties of
this charming locality.
Cottages were erected to let furnished, —a road made from
the shore of the Bay to the sea, —the Amphitheatre and the
whole landscape improved by judicious work. The building of
the Continental Hotel has given additional accommodation to
the public, and the purchase of the steamer “ Golden Crown ”
(through which the fare from Sandridge to Sorrento and
back was reduced from 20s. to jji'.) has given every facility
for the recreation and thorough enjoyment of the people,
Mr. Coppin being the inspiring and chief moving spirit in
the whole of the business; and now a popular and thriving
marine village exists, which will soon develope into a muni
cipality. Mr. Coppin has conferred many benefits upon
the colony of Victoria, but none better for the inhabitants
of Melbourne and its suburbs, as well as for visitors from
the country in search of health by the Sea-side, than in the
& creation of Sorrento. 00


a ' ,
ii
|| QMd attoc.
a
Among the less remote of the many watering places that
u I
U surround our superb inland sea, Mordialloc unquestionably {
presents the premier claim. Its immediate proximity to the
metropolis, 15 miles, the splendid road by which it is
approached, and the really interesting country traversed in
the journey, all serve to indicate this spot as one of the
most desirable to be chosen by those whose business
engagements may preclude them from visiting any of the
more distant places of marine resort.
Though Mordialloc does not boast of many natural
features to attract the attention, there is that which is of
more interest both to the invalid and the sportsman, a
salubrious climate and an abundance of sport both for gun,
rod, and line. Mullet fishing in the creek, in the season, is
equal to any to be found in the vicinity of Melbourne,
while the Bay, at this point, teems with many of the best
varieties of the finny tribe found in the waters of Hobson’s
Bay. The gun too will find ample sport in the immediate
neighbourhood, and for a very considerable radius, around
the spot.
There are two good hotels, a post office, a general store
and the other concomitants of a country village. There is a
daily mail and coach communication with the North
Brighton Railway Station thrice daily.
The best route for visitors, not travelling in their own
conveyance, is by train to the North Brighton station, thence
by coach to Mordialloc, direct to Bloxsidge’s Hotel. Any one
travelling in their own conveyance will find the best route to
be by the Point Nepean road, through Cheltenham.


[1 : - : ' [^
o^i anfU-to-ru i*
(About twelve miles beyond Mordialloc, upon the same
line of road, the traveller will pass Frankston, a small IgW,
( but prettily situated seaside village, but comparatively I!
( little visited by the pleasure seeker. It will, however,
| hereafter come more prominently into notice, inasmuch as it )'vv.
( will be, should the railway be carried out as proposed, the U
[ site of the future Metropolitan Cemetery. At present, it is Yy~
p the coaching station of the Point Nepean line, and has been ■%>..
f for many years the head quarters of the Mornington
i Electoral District. It was here that, during the politica
i crisis and the dead-lock, the then Chief-Secretary, Mr, (now )cW
Sir James) McCulloch, made his principal extra-parlia-
[ mentary utterances. ipr*
Its present resources are chiefly drawn from the wood
( trade, which is largely interested in the neighbourhood, if
I A pier and wharf have been constructed for the shipment of )y~
I the natural produce of the place. There has consequently
r sprung up a large trade between this place and the
[ metropolis. The general remarks concerning Mordialloc Jr
;• will also apply to this place. J|^-
Frankston is about 27 miles from the city, and is most |j|
[ conveniently approached by road, via Mordialloc. Jr
t
I i >


a
fA-- G?ci makkek
A/ 1 1
* But for a want of business energy upon the part of its
principal residents, Schnapper Point would have long ere this
have attained to a far more exalted position than it has yet
assumed. Splendidly situated, within a convenient distance
of Melbourne, possessing a larger share of natural
advantages than the majority of its rivals, and backed by a
reputation dating back some twenty years, it has done little
more than hold its prestige, while other competitors have
slowly but surely been gaining ground upon it. It is
unnecessary to enquire whether this apathy has been due to
a want of public spirit or an unusually retiring disposition
upon the part of the residents ; but it may, with confidence.
be prognosticated that now the principal residents have
awakened to a sense of their own interests, a much more
splendid future is in store for this side of the Bay.
Approaching “the Point” from the sea, the bold
promontory upon which the town is built presents a
strikingly noble appearance. The red sandstone cliff
springing abruptly from the water’s edge, with the tide
rolling in, breaking into foaming billows over the rocky
shoal that extends seaward from the cliff, or dashing in
unrestrained fury against its tide-worn base, is picturesque
in the extreme, while the abrupt winding roadway leading
from the town to the Pier, viewed from the Bay, at first
sight strongly reminds one of the landing at Alleppo.
The Harbour, sheltered by the cliff, affords safe
moorings in all weathers, while a fine pier provides the
necessary accommodation for the steamers which regularly
ply to “ the Point ” during the season, and to the coasting
4*- 4f- 4i> 41" 4#- 4#- 4i> 4fr» 4i>


:■- i.a s* «* *>, ■ Ha ig At •»**
•-smmri&inszmrfi
• -Ifi
crafts engaged in the wood traffic, a large lumber trade being »|
carried on at this point of the coast.
Of Schnapper Point itself, it is sufficient to say that of ll
all the watering places it is the most elite. The many M
beautiful villas and family mansions that dot the hill-sides ||
being quite a feature of the place. Viewed from the Bay, H
the appearance is striking and picturesque in the extreme,
the contrast of the wooded slopes and grassy undulations, *•
broken here and there with the white gables or bold facade ||
of some family residence, presenting quite a pleasing prospect ||
to the eye. Among the more conspicuous and striking of
these residences are the family mansions of Mr, Richard
Grice, Mr. Bright, Mr. Webb, and others.
In the town itself there are two tine hotels (Rennison’s ||
Hotel, conducted by Mr. Sears, and Kilpatrick’s Hotel,
conducted by the proprietor after whom it is named), and
four eminently well-conducted private boarding houses, where
the best of accommodation may be relied upon.
The public buildings and institutions include a post and t$
telegraph office (daily mails being received and despatched), fl
, w
the AiheticTeum and Public Library, and two churches, one W
the Episcopalian and the other a Presbyterian congregation.
There are several well supplied stores, and generally
all the constituent elements of a thriving and prosperous
country town. The County and Police Courts are held in
Schnapper Point, which is the legal centre of the district.
The points of interest at Schnapper Point are the H
out-look from the cliff, where a splendid marine panorama
meets the view and the prospect from Mount Martha, on M
the road to Dromana. Dromana and Arthur’s Seat are
.... tf
within an easy drive (12 miles), and Western Port may be
I
888M»38S«88SSEBM


f reached by a 19 miles ride over very pleasant and well
wooded country.
Sport and health are alike to be gained at “the Point. ’ r
|'j Boats, yachts, and fishing appliances may be procured on
very moderate terms. Bay fishing may here be followed ri
with every prospect of success. Gun and dog need not be
8' * idle, nor need time hang wearily upon the visitors’ hands , |
\\ for the lack of public and healthful amusement. ( |]
/Mb Bathing, it may be added, is here a most delightful and ™
§ withal safe amusement. All the shady nooks, and they are dr*
abundant upon this part of the coast, are well furnished /; ■
with bathing houses and other conveniencies for bathers,
while the encircling sand barriers protect bathers from the
JHK apprehensions always awakened by the proximity of sharks. j;
v The absence of any strong current in the tide will be both ][■
Hj\ observed and appreciated by the fair naiads who may
Sport a transcient hour,
In ocean billows blue.
It only remains to say that Schnapper Point may be dr ’
p||) reached either by water or by road. During the summer
(]| i season, the splendid bay steamers ply regularly to this part (|
N 1 of the Bay at very moderate fares 3 return tickets, available >
(j||h for one month, being issued. During the winter, however, , p
“the Point” has been cut off from town communication
j saving by road, a circumstance which has militated against s
V,h ", its prosperity in no small degree. The residents have, |
however, now awakened to this fact, and emulating the JJ
|| Queenscliffe Company, have decided to purchase a steamer t'
•I!: to place on the route permanently, summer and winter. • I
(jj) The success of their enterprise will be to the benefit of the || 1
I|j entire district 3 those moving in the matter, therefore,
S deserve well at the hands of all who wish success to the
oldest of our Eastern bathing places.
Illf V* 1
sssxs zssxs agnggs: ggrsr. ssrszsos.


Regarded in the light of its peculiar natural advantages
of situation, and in all its immediate surroundings, the
conviction is inevitable that Dromana is destined to take
a very prominent position in the ranks of our Victorian
watering-places.
Situated near the south-western extremity of a sequestered
bay, nestled in at the base of Arthur’s Seat and Mount
Martha, Dromana lies almost hidden from the casual outlook
of a passing stranger. To this cause, doubtless, may be
traced the fact of its existence being, comparatively, so little
known; but to this cause, also, it will owe its future
popularity. Sheltered from the untempered violence of the
elements by the lofty ranges by which it is encircled,
Dromana presents at first sight an air of homely comfort
singularly foreign to the majority of watering places. Nor
does a closer acquaintance with the place dissipate the
pleasing impression.
To one who has been long in city pent,
’Tis very sweet to look into the fair
And open face of heaven—to breathe a prayer
Full in the smile of the blue firmament.— Keats.
The place, though small, contains all the necessary
comforts and conveniences of life. The hotels (of which
there are two—the “Dromana,” conducted by Mr. Watkins,
and the “ Arthur Seat Hotel,” by Mr. Assender) are both
eminently well managed and comfortable. There is also
the private boarding establishment of Mrs. Haldane
(beautifully situated on the beach), where every comfort
that unremitting attention can suggest is obtainable at
strictly moderate charges. To ensure their own comfort,
«
fia!)
/IM£,
I
#
i
/Hh
; 1 h (
> Ik
m


I
intending visitors should communicate with one or other of
the parties named to secure accommodation in advance of
their visit.
All the necessaries of life, provisions and butchers’ meat,
are procurable at Melbourne prices, while the supply of fish
is both abundant and varied.
Pleasure yachts, and boats of smaller build for fishing
parties or excursions, are always available at moderate rates;
while for land travelling, buggies and other vehicles are at
all times procurable on terms the reverse of exorbitant.
The means of communication with the city are perfect.
A daily mail, and a local telegraph office, brings the place,
figuratively, within speaking distance of Melbourne, while a
daily coach conveys passengers, via Schnapper Point, to the
city in a few hours.
During the bathing season a steamer plies regularly to and
from Dromana; excursion tickets, available for one month,
being issued throughout the season.
It will be seen from what has gone before that Dromana
is not deficient in the matter of the comforts and conveniences
of life; but as, at the same time, it is not these that give it
its peculiar charm to those who have once visited it; a survey
of its natural advantages may not, therefore, be out of place.
S Lying snugly sheltered at the base of Arthur Seat,
Dromana looks out over a sandy sloping beach, across the
waters of the bay, commanding a splendid view of the west
channel, the passing shipping, and the coast beyond. From
the pier and breakwater (the former of which reaches out
into the Bay a distance of over 1200 feet) there is a still
more extensive view of the bay and shipping, while the
promenade on the beach is unsurpassed by any on the
ii| 10
*&SS23BB3SBBSB3BSBBBBBS3SSS&


shores of Hobson’s Bay. Bathing is here eminently
enjoyable; the sheltering influence of the headlands of the
bay, and the gently sloping fine sandy beach, all conducing
to the pleasure of the occupation; while lastly, but not least,
a barrier of sand reefs, reaching in a crescent form out into
the bay, encircles an area of about a mile in length,
protecting it from the approach of sharks or other marine
monsters.
Fishing can here be followed with success; while, at
Rosebud (about two miles distant along the beach), the
finest fishing in Hobson’s Bay, with every appliance
obtainable upon the spot, is always available to the piscatorial
sportsman.
“ Not lost the time in sea-side ramble spent,
Braced is the frame, and mental health is gained.”
The collector of marine curiosities, also, will find abundant
pleasant occupation on the beach at this point j while within
an easy drive in different directions, the natural treasures of
Cape Schanck invite his research on the one hand, and those
of Western Port on the other.
Directing our attention landward, Arthur Seat rises,
behind the town, abrupt and grand, to an altitude of 1200
feet, its wooded sides and noble outline forming a notable
object in the general scene. In an opposite direction, the
more gradual slopes of Mount Martha loom out boldly
against the sky, while the Schanck ranges, in rugged profile,
add an additional feature to the general tout ensemble.
The view from Arthur Seat in particular is magnificent.
Here, standing on the Geodetic Survey Station, at sunrise,
the scene is almost beyond description. Stretched out
beneath the observer, and “ tinted in the crimson, azure.
and golden glow of early dawn,” lies one huge panorama


<SSSOSOOOSSOOCOOOOOOOOCOOSSCCOSS
ft
ft
of real magnificence. The eye drinks in at a single glance
the whole contour of Port Phillip Bay, with its indented
ft coast —here abrupt and rocky, there shelving away in silvery
whiteness into the blue waters beyond —the shipping, and
ft the towns and villages that dot its shores. The distant
ranges loom out grandly in their individuality—there the
*| You Yangs, then the Great Dividing Range, Macedon
ft (abrupt and bold), the Plenty Ranges (undulating and low),
the Dandenong, and then the Yarra Range, with the Baw
Baw just in sight, and the Gippsland heights beyond. In
the distance, the city, with its “ murky mantle of fog or
ft smoke,” with all the woodlands, towns, and tillage that lie
between. All these, within a single sw'eep of the vision, go
ft to make up a scene worth the seeing; and seen, worth the
ft remembering. Seaward, the scene is not less comprehensive
and grand. Westernport Bay, with all its island beauties,
ft Nepean and Queenscliff, with the Heads like silver thread
ft winding out between to the open ocean beyond. The coast
line, with its many points of interest, not forgetting the
Seal Rocks, and the romantic beauties of Cape Woolamai,
ft are all in view, a scene of rare interest and surprising beauty,
ft Among the ranges there are many spots of rare sylvan
beauty within the distance of an easy ramble. Deep recesses
ft of virgin forest, fern tree gullies not inferior to the famed
ft gully at Dandenong, and romantic nooks down the gullies
and around the spurs of the range are numerous at every
ft turn of the pedestrian. The attraction of the gardens and
residence of Dr. Hearn, situated on the hill side, must not
be overlooked ; nor, indeed, the orchards at Redhill (distant
ft three or four miles from Dromana, in the Arthur Seat
ranges), where red, white and black currants, and all the
home fruits, are cultivated with success.
„.i j_• i • i
ffa To those to whom a drive has especial attractions. Cape
ft Schanck (with its natural caves and many objects of interest)
ft Flinders, Westernport Bay, Sorrento, and Schnapper Point,
|| offer inducements for a pleasant ride,
ft Such, then, is Dromana at the present time.
8 ■■
ft
CO3SQBBBBBBQSBQBOBBBBSBB


Few spots in Victoria have been so happily named as that p
which forms the subject of the present sketch. Its position,
'ts natural advantages, and the social importance it is
unquestionably destined to assume in regard to the hygienic
and recreative interests of the community, all stamp the k
place as fitly named after its glorious prototype on the p
Tyrrhenic Sea. But, though the magic of a name may
conjure up historic associations of other climes, these “sink r
and fade forgotten ” before those which are peculiarly
“ native to the spot,” for over its sandy barriers and radiant £
slopes hovers all the earliest memories of the first attempt to p
colonise these sunny shores.
“ ’Twas here the pale-face stranger,
From a land beyond the sea,
First heralded the promise p
Of the nation yet t» be.”—Swailes.
1803, just some fifteen years after the p
)f the settlement at Botany Bay (New South
le British Cabinet determined upon founding
t settlement, “on the Southern Coast of
1 in furtherance of that project appointed
Collins (of the Royal Marines) to organise p
be expedition. The colony was, on the 16th
lished in camp between the two hills —now
fwo Sisters —and thus, nearly three-quarters
ince, the first settlement of Port Phillip was (jv
ento. p
as still a history fraught with interest to all
It was in 1803, just some fifteen years after the
establishment of the settlement at Botany Bay (New South
Wales), that the British Cabinet determined upon founding
another convict settlement, “on the Southern Coast of
Australia,” and in furtherance of that project appointed
Colonel David Collins (of the Royal Marines) to organise
and carry out the expedition. The colony was, on the x6th
October, established in camp between the two hills —now
known as the Two Sisters —and thus, nearly three-quarters
of a century since, the first settlement of Port Phillip was
effected at Sorrento.
Sorrento has still a history fraught with interest to all
those who regard the past either with curiosity or with
veneration, and simply because it very narrowly escaped
being made what Melbourne is to-day—the Empire City of


the Southern Seas. Nor must it be forgotten that when an
Australian Cooper (novelist, not cricketer) arises from the
mass of youthful genius with which our University and our
public schools teem, he will have to weave Sorrento into the
web of his romance, and tell the strange story of the “ Wild
White Man*,” who for three and thirty years was housed,
fed and maintained, if not clothed, by the friendly hands of
the kin of those who we in all Christian charity and
humility shot down like wild beasts.
It is idle to inquire what might have been if a
settlement had been made at Sorrento, but certain it is that
for salubrity of climate, for the equable temperature of its
atmosphere, and for its natural advantages of position, the
site is all that could have been desired for a large and
populous city. Situated on the eastern side of Hobson’s
Bay, Sorrento occupies a very advantageous position on
the picturesque peninsula forming the line of division
between the waters of the Southern Ocean on the one side,
and those of Hobson’s Bay on the other. The soil, at this
point of the coast, is of a fine marly formation, free from
all organic impurities, and one of the most healthful
situations possibly imaginable, is thus bettered by its
geological formation. The physical conformation of the site
is also in favour of its salubrity, inasmuch as it protects the
town from the untempered inclemency of the elements,
tempering the violence of the Southern storms, and yet
reducing the temperature of the Northern enervating blasts
to a point over 25 degrees below that experienced in the
metropolis. Thus, on the South, the natural ocean barriers,
the Sand Hummocks, afford a perfect protection, while on
the North the broad expanse of the waters of Hobson’s Bay,
* See St. Leonards.
, ryepryjp


some forty miles, secures Sorrento a perfect immunity from
the hot winds of summer. As might be anticipated from
circumstances so favourable as these, the result is a climate
at once bracing, salubrious, and equable, very largely
resembling that of Tasmania. The highly ozonised
atmosphere wafted across the Southern Ocean, and the
milder breezes from the Bay, in their agreeable alternation,
are redolent of energy and health to the valetudinarian
constitutions that may happily be subject to their
recuperative influences.
The one other condition of a sanatorium is also present
at Sorrento. Spring-water —originally in a true limestone
formation —is here present in perfection. For this reason
the occasional visit of patients of delicate constitutional
tendency, has been long recommended by many of the
leading medical practitioners of the colony for long-standing
diseases of the glands and bones. To those who, enervated
by the exhaustion of town life, seek to recruit their impaired
vitalityj or to the growing young, whose osseous economy
demands its due supply of phosphate of Lime , the waters of
Sorrento are alike a precious boon, supplying a desideratum
not to be lightly overlooked.
Seeing then, that in position, climate, geological
formation, configuration of the country, and in its water
supply, Sorrento meets all the most exacting demands made
upon a sanatorium, it may reasonably be asked “ How
came Governor Collins to abandon so advantageous a site
lor an infant colony?” In his official report Colonel Collins,
says “The arid, infertile nature of the soil, with a distressing
scarcity of water, made the abandonment inevitable.” But
that the true cause of the abandonment is not here stated is


sufficiently evident. The wells, dug by the expedition, and
to which reference will be made hereafter, show to a
demonstration that water was found in abundance to meet
all necessary requirements. Mr. Rusden, in his “Discovery,
r Survey and Settlement of Port Phillip," quotes the following
extract from a letter from Mrs. Hopley, wife of one of the
L officers of the expedition, to a sister in England, which also
casts grave doubts upon the whole transaction : —“ My pen is
not able to describe half the beauties of that delightful spot.
r We were four months there. Much to my mortification, as
well as loss, we were obliged to abandon the settlement’
k. through the whim and caprice of the Lieut. Governor.
ft Additional expense to the Government, and loss to indi-
viduals were incurred, by removing to Van Diemen’s Land,
r Port Phillip is my favourite, and has my warmest wishes.
During the time we were there (Sorrento) I never felt one
k, ache or pain, and I parted with it with more regret than
J I did my native land.”
The following published for, we believe, the first time,
r is from a letter from one of the officers of the expedition,
J and was written from Van Diemen’s Land shortly after the
abandonment of the Port Phillip Settlement. This letter is
ft at present in the possession of a resident in the city: —“ The
site of the colony was one of the most salubrious that it is
£ possible to have chosen. Situated on a small peninsula, in
some places not a mile across, it was open to the sea
K breezes from either the North or South, while the sheltering
ft ridges preserved the camp from the violence of the equinoctial
storms. It was one of the most healthy and enjoyable spots
£ that it has been my good fortune to find in the course of my
J travels. Why it should have been abandoned is a mystery.
16 Q


Climate, prospect, and eyery natural advantage were in its
favour, and water was to have been had in abundance if there
had been any desire to have found it."
However, we have to do with Sorrento as it is, and what
is found. That there is now superadded to the rare natural
advantages of the place, all the comforts and many of the
luxuries of civilised life. Where, in 1803, nature reigned
supreme, art and industry have stepped in, and comfort,
convenience, health and pleasure now go hand-in-hand.
Now, natural beauty and healthful enjoyment associated
with all the conveniences of social refinement, and the
benefits of the sanatorium, are linked together with the
treasured comforts of a home.
A few words more of the town and how to get to it best
and most easily.
Sorrento is most conveniently approached by the sea,
though to those, desiring to avoid the voyage, the overland
route, via Schnapper Point and Dromana, is open.
Assuming, however, that the visitor has decided to adopt the
most used route, he, or she, will find no want of
accommodation in the means of transit. During the
bathing season, two of the fastest and most commodious of
our splendid fleet of steam-boats, the " Golden Crown ”
and the “ Williams,” regularly ply to and from Sorrento,
calling on the way either at QueensclifFe and Portsea, or at
Schnapper Point and Dromana. The tariff of fares is most
moderate. Return tickets, available for several days, are
issued at a low rate 3 and upon Sundays the excursion fare
is still further reduced. For speed, comfort and convenience,
these boats are all that can be desired by the most exacting,
the patronage extended to them by an appreciative public


I during the past season, being in itself a substantial testimony
in that respect. The fine little boat, “ Queenscliffe,”
recently built by the Queenscliffe Steam-boat Company, is
also running to the Bay ports at a very moderate scale of
fares, and, doubtless, will enjoy the patronage this spirited
| enterprise merits.
Upon arrival at the Sorrento Pier, visitors desiring to
Visit the Back Beach
should keep to the left along the Bay until reaching the
Amphitheatre-road, when a short and pleasant walk in a
straight line will bring them to the shores of the vast
Southern Ocean. Here there is abundant employment for
all the faculties that minister to the rational enjoyment.
Eye, ear and sense are alike gratified with the objects or
influences that operate upon them. The vast expanse of
open ocean dancing and flashing in the golden light of
summer, the sweet wild music of the plashing waves, and
the sense of exhilaration which the invigorating breezes
induce, all tend to harmonise and complete a perfect sense
i of enjoyment.
Here, on the one hand, the Ocean Amphitheatre lying in
the sheltering embrace of Point Nepean and Cape Schanck,
tempts research. Its pellucid waters teeming with all the
varied forms of sea vegetation, and plentifully supplied with
many varieties of fish, is veritably one of nature’s vast
I aquariums,
“ Auuarium Point,”
too, to the naturalist and to the sportsman, will commend
its claims. Fish, varied as to kind, good in quality and large
in size, can here be taken by the angler, while among the
rocks and sheltered in the deep recesses the naturalist


Among the natural features of the place, mention must
be made of
“ St. David’s Chair.”
It is a very remarkable rock standing some 50 feet above the
level of the waters of the Southern Ocean, is approachable
from the shore by natural steps. In form it rudely
resembles a large throne or chair surrounded by several
chairs of smaller dimensions.
“London Bridge” and “St. Pauls,
St. Pauls is a conspicuous dome-crested mount, rising about
a mile eastward from the Amphitheatre. From its summit,
an extensive view of the features of the surrounding
country can be obtained.
I
)
)
\
“Darby’s Monument,
too, with its tale of adventure and privation, may be pointed
out from the shores of the Amphitheatre looking across
the waters towards Bass’ Straits, and, generally, looking
seaward in calm or storm there is much to attract the
attention and gratify the senses.
Shoreward attention will naturally direct itself towards
the Sorrento Park, a Government reserve, recently planted )
with English forest trees and other ornamental plants. r
A Bowling Green, and a Croquet Lawn has been formed.
This is a most delightful promenade in the cool of the £
cannot fail to discover an ample recompense for his toil
and research. (®v
1
summer evening, and at all times one of the pleasant spots
for pic-nicing on the shores of Hobson’s Bay.
||


CJS333SBBBBCBOBB3BBBBOOBBBO©BCOBOBeOC'
Q‘ ' *
e< The Rotunda,”
|5 an extensive bower, in which the Government pic-nic was j
g held in 1875, will t> e an object of interest to the visitor,.
d while the “ Zig-Zag,” by which it is approached, will come
CJ ... i
H in for its share of attention. d
iThe remains of the first settlement of the place, so
pregnant with historical associations are not wisely to be
overlooked. They will be found in the immediate vicinity
of the two eminences known as “The Sisters,” Here one of
H the original wells, sunk by Governor Collins’ party, has been
Cl restored. Tables and seats have been provided for the
H gratuitous use of visitors, while a sheltering scrub affords a
g cool retreat to pic-nic parties who may select the spot as
P their rendezvous. A drink from “ the first well,” the waters
g of which are perfectly fresh, though they ebb and flow with
II the tide, and a repast in the open air upon the camping
g ground of the first settlement of the colony, have a spice of
g the romantic about them that few ordinary mortals could
|| resist. Those who desire to visit the well will find it
g situated on the beach to the left of the Pier, about half a
H mile distant from the place of landing.
|| Excellent fishing is at all times obtainable in the Bay,
Cl boats being procurable at very moderate hire, hand lines and
p bait being provided. Rod fishing can be followed with
g success from the rocks upon the Ocean Beach; many rare
II and fine species of fish being taken in favorable states of the
I* tide. On shore,. guns will find excellent sport. Rabbits
41 abound in thousands, and occasionally hares, wallabys and
p kangaroos may also be bagged by the sportsman. Cabs,
§ waggonettes and saddle horses are to be hired at the hotels.
In the evenings—concerts, balls, and social enjoyment.
8


; ‘I-
Hotels. ¥-
£ Regarding accommodation, Sorrento is sans reproche, for its ►
[ hotels are unsurpassed by any on the shores of the Bay.
| Excellent in every way in their appointments, and moderate |r^
in their tariff, they deservedly secure large patronage. ;p£>-
The “ Continental ” Hotel, on the direct road to the
\ Ocean Amphitheatre, so very admirably situated on £r~
£ Constitution Hill, has secured a high reputation for its liberal
[ management 3 while the Sorrento Hotel is also a com-
* modious and well managed house, in which comfort and Jr*"
/ moderation in charges are judiciously combined. The rate IS^*-
[ of tariff charged for past seasons has been, at either of the js.
I hotels—Board and lodging, £2 105. per week. Breakfast Ir*
r tea, or lunch, 2 s. 6d. 3 Dinner, 3s. and Beds, 3s. Wines, ||w
( beer, and spirits, being supplied at Melbourne prices.
| The latest acquisition, the “ Mornington” Hotel, aims at ur
I providing additional accommodation for the great influx of
I season visitors.
To those who may prefer the more retired seclusion of |r
a private boarding house, in preference to the excitement
[ of hotel life, there is an excellent establishment, providing t|
) all the comforts of a home, with well ventilated rooms,
| excellent beds, and a well appointed table, upon very
’ moderate terms. m
Private cottages can also be obtained from the agents fr”
' of the Ocean Amphitheatre Company. They are charm- Sh-
ingly situated on Constitution Hill, and are well ventilated, ||
> roomy, convenient, and furnished throughout.
Provisions and the necessaries of life are supplied by Ip’-
’ ihe local tradesmen at Melbourne prices; game and fish %


A
T
♦
41- 41* 4#“ # 4S*
are plentiful in their supply, and all seasonable fruits and 1
vegetables are procurable at city prices.
It will be seen that there is a very ample provision
and a broad margin of choice in the matter of accommoda-
tion at Sorrento, which seems particularly fortunate in
this respect, thanks to the enterprise of those who have
so largely exercised themselves for its advancement.
The public buildings of Sorrento are in keeping with
its otherwise advanced position.
The Mechanics’ Institution and Free Public Library will
be found an agreeable resort for visitors. It has been
erected by subscription, and is dependent for its support and:
progress upon voluntary contributions, either in money,
books, periodicals or newspapers. The architect is Mr.
Hennessy, who most kindly prepared the plans free of charge
and the building was erected by Mr. Thus. Anderson, who
also built the Company’s Continental Hotel. The present
edifice is only a portion of a general plan for a more exten-
sive building, including a large hall for balls, concerts, &c.
The ground upon which it stands is about a quarter of an
acre of the reserve for municipal buildings, court-house,
police station, &c,, granted by the Ocean Amphitheatre
Company, and is situated in the very centre of what will no
doubt become an influential borough.
There is a mail despatched every Tuesday, Thursday,,
and Saturday, the incoming mail being received on
Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays, and in the bathing
season there is in addition to these a mail by every trip
of the steamer “ Golden Crown.” A telegraph station has
been recently added to the conveniences of the town, and
hence the communication with the city is complete.


It remains to be said that the Public Bath is equal to
any artificial enclosure in the colony. The picket fence
extends into the Bay 850 feet. The rise and fall of the tide
secures the perfect purity of the water. The sloping bottom
and the sandy beach add comfort and safety to the luxury of
a bath, while every possible element that leads to strength
and enjoyment are present to make up the sum total of
the whole.
Thus far, then, have we endeavoured to present Sorrento
as it was, and as it is, —with what success it is not for us
to say.
“ In your wisdom judge ye.”
Prettily situated on a small bay close to Point Nepean,
Portsea looks out across the blue waters of Hobson’s Bay,
a charming retreat from the burning blasts of summer and
the enervating heat of the tropical sun. The village is
situated on the narrow track of land forming the peninsula
that terminates in Point Nepean, on the eastern side of the
entrance of the Bay. The situation of the town is about
two miles from Sorrento, consequently much that we have
said regarding that place will also apply to Portsea.
n
ft
ti
ft
ft
ft
fa
a
a
I
ft
fa
t place will also apply to Portsea.
I
M
fl
raWBBBSBBB^sa333333BSBBBSSSBSBBSS§


/assess






v|?
Queensclifpe is the oldest, and, at present, the most |k
populous of our watering places. It is the first sign of
settlement that meets the eye as the stranger enters the W
waters of the Bay. It is very picturesquely situated, stand- ;j '
ing as it does on a peninsula, and the judicious arrange- W
ment of the streets, and the elegance of the villas which wli
abound on every prominence, render the first glimpse of Port V
Phillip after the tedium of a long sea voyage, even when | C
the weather is not as fine as it generally is, one that gives
reassurance to the minds of those who, from ignorance, i)
too oft6n regard our beautiful continent as the abode of (0
people only a little removed from savagry. Nor is the
view when approached from Melbourne itself less enticing. Oils
It is not to be wondered at then, that those who frequent (l)
Queenscliffe in the summer often linger by the seductive w)
i•• • . '
whispering of its cerulean waves, and enjoy zealously the ‘ 143
best of all holidays to the wearied man —absolute rest on (iL
the sea-shore. ||)
Let us glance now at the opportunities afforded for the ({})
enjoyment of those who will visit Queenscliffe during this
summer, and we trust many succeeding ones. And firstly ®
comes, as a matter of course, those necessities to watering (I||)
places, yjj)
The Hotels. jj
Here the visitor can have the choice of four, and as they fj|j
are all crowded during the summer months the excursionist (111)
will do well to order the accommodation he needs fj{j)
considerably prior to his own advent. The main street gives
us Admans’, the Victoria, and the Commercial, while the
j xs?'JSw7\SSy« y


<K3BBBBBBBBSBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBSBBBBSBBBBB 8 SBBBBBB SS
_
|| visitors who approach Queenscliffe from the Corio Bay side
• . • 1 1 T» 1
of the peninsula are met with the Royal.
Those who prefer the privacy afforded by either Boarding
Establishments or Furnished Residences should make early
application to the various proprietors or agents.
The establishment of regular communication with Mel-
bourne, by the building of the commodious and now popular
steamer the “ Queenscliffe,” has been found of great
convenience to the residents of the town, who before were
dependent, during the winter months, on chance for their
communication with Melbourne by water. Now that is
remedied through the enterprise of a company, who will,
no doubt, have every cause to rejoice at the wisdom and
foresight which prompted their investment.
To those who fear prostration through that terrible
affliction mat de mer, the iron horse to Geelong and Cobb
and Co., or private conveyances thence, afford an easy as
well as a pleasant trip.
The general inclination of the seaside visitor is a
Plunge in the Sea,
and this can be effected by a visit to the public baths,
which have been erected at the expense of the Town
m Council, and are commodious, well provided, and perfectly
safe from the attack of those sea monsters —sharks.
Having taken his constitutional dip, your disciple of
Izaak Walton will find plenty of work for his line and
rod. The Bay in the vicinity of the town is alive with fish
of nearly every edible description, the obtaining of which
is sufficiently exciting to be delightful.
The Swan Ponds swarm with mullet, whiting, salmon
trout, and other smaller specimens of the finny tribe;


while at Yarram Creek, a pleasant walk of a couple of
miles or so from the town, work can be found for the
rod, as bream abound.
Shooting and Coursing, too, can be followed in
season, hares having rapidly acclimatised themselves within
easy distance of Queenscliffe $ and as to rabbits, they fairly
swarmr Teal, snipe and black duck, may be found on the
lakes. In the bush, wattle-birds, the most difficult of all
game to secure, can be obtained, in company with parrots
and bronze-winged pigeons. Touching rabbit hunting, a
couple of good ferrets would be serviceable to any party,
and would afford an enjoyable hour or two.
And speaking of the gun reminds us that those who are
fond of Target Shooting, can, on the payment of a small
fee, use the butts erected by the local rifle club, where
capital sights can be obtained up to about 800 yards. They
are situated on the margin of Swan Bay, and are within a
few minutes’ walk of the township.
A proposal is on foot to establish an Archery for the
use of the ladies.
Nor need your ardent Cricketer fear that a week or
two’s holiday at Queenscliffe will deprive him of his
favourite pastime. The Cricket Reserve is in capital con-
dition, and commands a splendid view of the Heads, so
that while engaging in their pastime the players can see
the inward and outward bound ships as they pass up or |gs
anchor. ®)
Like its young sister across the water, Queenscliffe is
blessed with Rare Climatic Advantages.
Despite its proximity to the sea ice is unknown to it,,
and frost is a very occasional visitor. Above all, in the


1
hottest day of summer the sea-breeze comes down as
regularly as it does higher in the tropics, and a close
night, even when the hotels are most crowded, is one
of the rarest of rarities. It must be remembered that
y] .r<l n I- »-V n rvf tTOI*T T CHPIf OfPn r\DC 1 1 —— •
Queenscliffe has the advantage of a very sheltered position —
Wilson’s Promontory, Cape Schanck, and Point Nepean,
guard it on the Southward and Eastward, and Cape Otway,
Barwon Heads, and Point Lonsdale, on the S.W. Here the
yi invalid may find the advantages of a Southern Madeira.
The Mineral Springs at Clifton, situated within a
short and very pleasant drive of Queenscliffe, recently dis-
-0 covered, are considered to be of great hygienic importance.
The popularity already obtained by them is a guarantee for
the efficacy of the waters (seltzer, chalybeate, sulphur and
magnesia) and the fact that they are “Hall” marked by no
P less and well-known a name than that of Mr. Kruse,
In a word, the Mean Average Temperature of
Cl Queenscliffe, computed annually, is 62.54; and the mean
|| winter 56.70. Madeira gives a mean annual of 64.09, and
mean winter 60.06.
To return again, after this short digression, we may
be allowed to mention a little story connected with
0 Queenscliffe, On the occasion of the Prince’s visit, the
Mayor of the town desiring to be first to congratulate His
Cl Royal Highness, presented himself on the deck of the
H “ Galatea,” as she slackened speed off the town to allow
the procession to form line, with the usual address of
0 welcome, congratulations, &c. The Prince was on the
break of the poop conversing earnestly with his sailing
master, and may have mistaken the Mayor for a pilot or
something of the sort, for he cither did not perceive that
8 *


functionary, who blushingly advanced, and holding forth
his emblazoned scroll of parchment, commenced in the a
usual mayoral style, “ I have the honor to present an $
.” He got no further ; for the Duke, with true
sailor-like frankness, turned on him, and remarked tartly,.
“Bless your address, sir. I’ve got my ship to navigate!”
The night preceding the entry of the “ Galatea ” into the
Heads was a glorious one for Admans’, and if the house 4
could speak what a tale it could unfold !
Every person who goes to Queenscliffe wants to see r
those
Beacons of Hope
For the weary mariner—the Lighthouses. Of these there 0
are two. The upper is 130 feet above the water, and though
the ascent is toilsome, it is repaid by the magnificent r
expanse of ocean one sees when the ascent is reached.
The lower lighthouse is only 80 feet above water-level, but
the view from it, both seaward and shoreward, is really f
splendid.
In case of hostile Invasion, —on the spot recently oc- £
cupied by a lighthouse of the past, a battery of three guns
—not very formidable certainly—but still something in “case
of accidents, you know ! ”
The Public Gardens
will well repay a visit, they having been most tastefully a
laid out at the expense of the Council. h
Those who are fond of Pedestrian Exercise can find $
many places to visit. There is, for instance, half-way
between Queensclilfe and Point Lonsdale, a real Lover’s
Walk.


If there are those who believe in Pic-nic Parties,
with their accompanying quadrilles, and turkey and ham
sandwiches, they can pay a visit to Point Lonsdale, only
three miles off, and take a glance at one of Buckley’s
Caves. Those, too, who delight in the mystic legends of
the past, and who have read the story of Fair Rosamond,
the wicked King Henry, and cruel Queen Eleanor, can
visit what one of these days will be a real labyrinthian maze 3
the clue to which, if not a thread of silk, will be perhaps
as difficult to find. This pleasure they owe to Mr. Justice
Fellows.
Barwon Heads are easily accessible and pleasure boats
are always available.
As we have intimated, the Borough Council have done
much to make Queenscliffe what it is 5 and when the railway
is made from Geelong, there can be no doubt that its
present stationary population (about 1,000) will be greatly
increased. This will give an impetus to its
Public Buildings,
which consist of a Public Library and Reading Room,
well supplied with books and open from 9 a.m. to 9 p.m. 3
the Foresters’ Hall is in Learmonth-street, and at present
serves for several purposes, such as Council Chambers, State
School, Ball Room, Concert Hall, Skating Rink, &c.
Those who regard Sabbath Observance as a strict
duty, need not fear to visit Queenscliffe, where the Epis-
copalians, Wesleyans, Roman Catholics, and Presbyterians,
all have places of worship.


iEeo-naA^A
Is charmingly situated on the western shore of Port Phillip
Bay, and has a delightful eastern aspect. It is a place of
very considerable historical interest.
On the 27th April, 1802, Captain Mathew Flinders, when
visiting Port Phillip, gave this place the name of “Indented
Head,” from its appearance; and it was at this Indented
Head that John Batman, the founder of Melbourne, first
landed in the year 1835, a f ter his memorable voyage from
Tasmania, to explore the then unknown riches of Port
Phillip. When Batman landed he explored the country for
some distance, and gradually worked his way via Geelong
round to the Yarra Yarra. An interesting account of his
travels will be found recorded in his journal written by him
at the time. In June 1833, however, he decided to return
to Van Dieman’s Land in his vessel the “ Rebecca,” a craft of
about 30 tons, to report to his associates the wonderful
discoveries he had made. He decided further, to leave three
of his white men and seven of his Sydney natives behind
until his return. These camped at Indented Head, and by
Batman’s directions erected a hut and commenced a garden.
He left three months’ supply of stores, besides a large
■quantity of potatoes for planting, and all kinds of garden
seeds, pips and stone fruit.
While this party remained here they were joined by
William Buckley, the noted convict who had lived with
the blacks in that neighbourhood from the time when on
the 27th December, 1803, he escaped from the party of
Governor Collins.
wernor mourns.
On the 7th August of that year (1835) Mr * J°* in Helder M
31


Wedge, one of Batman’s associates in Van Dieman’s Land,
$ landed at Indented Head, having been deputed to enquire
% as to the truth of Batman’s glowing descriptions. He was
£ accompanied by Henry Batman and his wife, and joined the
J party previously left there by John Batman.
In addition to its historical interest St. Leonards has other
$ attractions. From it beautiful views of the Bellarine Hills,
xb Sorrento, Portsea, Mounts Eliza and Martha, Dromana,
Arthur’s Seat, &c,, may be obtained, while the constant
j passing of vessels up or down the west channel affords an
endless source of interest to visitors. It is twenty-two miles
(Jr from Melbourne, from which a steamer comes every day.
lf, however, the visitor chooses to go via Queenscliffe the fine
£ steamers “Williams ” and “ Golden Crown ” will land him
J in time to reach St. Leonards after a pleasant drive of some
k ten or twelve miles through a prettily wooded country,
jjf Around it are many beautiful rides and drives. A few miles
will take you to Drysdale, where the celebrated mineral
£ springs are situated, so that while enjoying the sea bathing
at St. Leonards you can also drink the mineral waters of
)k Drysdale. Another extremely pretty drive is that to Port-
arlington, the road to which skirts the Bay. There is a
comfortable hotel here, kept by Mr. Robert Smiley, wha
r does all in his power to make visitors comfortable. The
use of a piano, buggy, horses, boats, books, and last but not
w. least a bath, may be obtained here. The State School, lately
(tf built on ground given for the purpose by Captain Cole, is
in close proximity. About a mile from the hotel is Mrs.
r Cassell’s beautifully situated property, “ Red Bank,” where
may be found
i “ Some shape of beauty to move away the pall
'S From our dark spirits.”
$ 3*




'
r


The .estate of St. Leonards was purchased in 1857 by
Captain Cole who erected a jetty, part of which was formed
by the vessel “ Xylon,” which was sunk at the extremity of it.
In 1868 it was sold to Government on condition that it should
be kept in order; but, although the pier has been most
substantially rebuilt, its length has been curtailed. It is
hoped, however, that it will shortly be continued to its
original length. This pier affords a delightful promenade,
and in the evening the arrival of the fishing-boats and the
unloading of them afford a good excuse for a stroll.
“ There are curious things of which men know
As )et but little.
Which ocean tlingeth forth from off her billows
On the low sand.”
The name “ St. Leonards ” was given by Captain Cole to
his property, and many of the residents of Melbourne will
remember with pleasure the large pic-nic given here by him
in the year 1857. The guests were conveyed by two of
Captain Cole’s steamers from Melbourne, and were returned
the same day to their homes after an enjoyable outing.
Any one desiring to visit this watering-place should
communicate with Mr. Robert Smiley, of the St. Leonards’
Hotel, whose terras will be found very moderate, and who
will furnish full information as to steamers, trains, vehicles,
&cc.


:ifSrß ' (l-In eK'5555
r cTi»y*^C?
FOR D ; S
NEPEAN HOTEL, PORTSEA,
J. FAENSWOETH, Proprietor.
Portsca has long been recognised as one of the loveliest
spot in Victoria. It adjoins the Sanatory Station, Point Nepean,
opposite Quecnscliffe, and nestles in a picturesque hollow f ronting
a deep mater hay. It is undisfgured by long reaching shallows,
and the blue sea ripples up to a. shelving sandy shore, walled
in by high rocky cliffs intersected, with easy paths for climbers.
Good fishing abounds. Twenty minutes walk through charmingly
mild under growth (the haunt of kangaroos and rabbits) leads to
the romantically fantastic scenery of the Back Beach. Here
the chief point of attraction is “ London Bridge” —a rock cave
with arched apertures through which the ocean is visible in an
indescribably enchanting aspect. The shore scenery between here
and Point Nepean is also of great beauty.
THE NEPEAN HOTEL
Is now enlarged into a magnificent establishment, which for
external design and internal arrangement, is unsurpassed in
Victoria. Its Dining Boom mill seat 200 persons, mho can also
be conveniently housed. It has corresponding accommodation
for Families and Private Parties.
EXCELLENT ACCOMMODATION FOR FAMILIES, PLEASURE AND
OTHER PARTIES.
TERMS—MOST MODERATE.
* addle and sarnc.&jsi
Are obtainable at Low Charges, and plentiful means for Boating, Fishing,
Hunting and shooting are at hand. Superb Sea Bathing.
Visitors can arrive by Steamer direct, or by the Sorrento
Steamer. Vehicles attend to convey Passengers to and from the
latter free of charge.
Letters Promptly Answered.
J. FARNSWORTH, Proprietor.


o>?fulLjv ; curii oSßPujiicfult cWanAa..
8
Ihis magnificient Bay, so fine a view of which is obtainable 8
from the Dandenong Ranges —especially from the top of the 8
eminence where the Fern Tree Gully rivulet rises,—has j*
been comparatively unknown to the people of Victoria. W
In the old days, when the diggings first broke out, it received |*
a good deal of attention, for then its oyster beds were a 8
source of profit to many fishermen, and kept the market of 8
Melbourne well supplied with the edible which everyone tl
appreciates. But the beds were easily exhausted j there was
but little settlement along the Shores 5 the trade of the Bay
was reduced to firewood, which petty craft carried up to 8
Hobson’s Bay; and to the produce of the fisheries which 8
were never earnestly followed. The Islands in the Bay were 8
then in private hands. There was no mode of communi-
cation excepting by boats that were only occasionally 8
available. There was no means of reaching the Bay 8
excepting by the fish-carts, or the manure-laden vehicle of M
W
some settler about Hastings, who had come to market with S|
produce. Westernport, therefore, was but little visited, and 8
but little was known by the people of Melbourne of its 8
beauties. Now things are wonderfully changed ; and when
the projected railway from Brighton to Frankston (to be
extended, no doubt, in the next railway scheme of the
Government to Hastings) is carried out, it will become one
of the most popular resorts within easy reach of Melbourne. *4
Even now the journey to the Bay is one of the most 8
enjoyable the tourist can desire. The journey is commenced 8
by coach, which starts from the Albion Hotel, Bourke-street 8
35 It*
s




(where a popular landlord, Mr. John Cleeland, has so long'
reigned), at seven o’clock a.m. on the mornings of Tuesday,
Thursday, and Saturday, returning on the following days.
Breakfast is had at the hotel of Mr. Etheridge, at Chelten-
ham, where horses are changed, and then at fast coaching
speed the visitor rides on through Mordialloc to Frankston,
driving by the sea-shore, with most beautiful scenery all
around—sea, mcor, and mountain. Another change of
horses, and then the road lies over the summit of Mount
Eliza, the great beacon through the South Channel, and a
run over a few miles of very good road brings the visitor to
the thriving village of Hastings. There, in the old days,
whaling boats were the only means obtainable by which
the islands of the beach or the opposite shore could be
reached. These islands are now occupied by gentlemen
who have purchased them—as Mr. Amess, formerly Mayor
of Melbourne, has done Churchill Island—or been selected
by settlers, as Mr. John Cleeland has done on Phillip Island,
the opening up of which for selection was such a bone of
contention in Parliament a few years ago. Now a very fast
and elegant little steamship, the “ Eclipse,” built by Messrs.
Foreman and Co., on the Yarra, has been placed on the
waters of the Bay, and carries the mails from Hastings to
Cowes (the town of Phillip Island), to the other islands, and
to the coal-field district, the port of which is Griffiths’ Point.
Cowes —the capital of the Isle of Beauty —is distant from
Hastings about twelve miles, and under favorable circum-
stances of sea and wind the distance is accomplished in little
over an hour. Not far from the jetty at Cowes the traveller
will find a handsome and well-managed hotel, named the
“Isle of. Wight,” where Host Bauer is ever in attendance.


*SSSOt&3SBSSSBS&S&4?S!ZSS9tISaU9SS&SSSK9SaSBSSBS9.BaSS:
« _ ;
and ready to give his visitor every information about the
specialities of the locality, “the Nobbies,” the “Pyramid
Rock,” and lofty Cape Wollomai, on the course at the foot
of which Mr. Cleeland bred his tine cup winner Wollomai'
Here] Mr. Cleeland has built a tine residence, and will
W
gradually “ birse yon’t,” till he will be the possessor of a
good estate on one of the finest islands of the colony. The
bay is a fine one, and now that it has been properly
fi surveyed, is a source of satisfaction to shipmasters bound
inwards to Melbourne, who, if driven by hard weather past
Port Phillip Heads, have no hesitation in taking shelter in
Westernport Bay, where they can find good anchorage,
under shelter of Phillip Island, and then—as the wind may
list —can beat out by either the Eastern or the Western
N J
Passage.
From the new township of Newhaven, the channel—the
Eastern Passage—to Griffiths’ Point, the port of the main-
land of Mornington, is only about half a-mile wide. ' The
finest fishing can be had here by visitors touched with sea-
Waltonian proclivities. Griffiths’ Point is the coal depot of
♦j the Westernport Coal Mining Company, who now find they
have a good mine in hand, with coal all around them, and
have appliances for doing a considerable trade in black
fllQm Anrlc T'lioir IDffir IC o Una cfrnafnra li 1 f'K ,0 c
diamonds. Their jetty is a fine structure, at which vessels
U of a considerable size can be located with facility. The
Government have also built another convenient jetty there ;
and settlement has lately gone on to such an extent that the
business done with Melbourne for goods is surprising to the
“oldest inhabitant.” There are three licensed houses in
this township, and all seem to do well.
A short distance from the Eastern Passage is situated the
t* 38
I
*BBBBSBBBBBSBB«afBBBB«HM»W»aSSBSSSfiBWMM»2SS#S»


- " • 2n> - u£f^nJS^SSPt S**p
beautiful and fertile island of Churchill, the property of
Mr. Samuel Amess, of Melbourne, who dispenses his $
hospitality there in the manner of “ a tine old English
gentleman, all of the olden time” —though, by the way, he «
is Scotch. When he is at home, and, like Robinson Crusoe,
is “monarch of all he surveys,” he flies the John Bull flag,
which means to all and sundry who may visit the Bay— ft
“ Come here and be welcomed.”
On Phillip Island, as on French Island, there is splendid
sport to be got with the birds. On Churchill Island, if
Mr. Amess does not show sport with the native or imported
game, the guest may ask “the reason why”; but he will
have no occasion to do it, for sport to the heart’s satisfaction
of the sportsman there will be. On Phillip Island, if the
stranger can only induce Air. Woods (and he is very
obliging, and “ a man of the woods”), who keeps the well-
furnished and managed hotel situated about a quarter of a
mile from the jetty at Cowes, to spare time to show him the
way, a splendid day’s sport will be the result. His dogs are
second to none in the district, and his heart and soul are in
the sport, while his disposition lays him at the service of
congenial visitors.
The tourist at this season cannot possibly have a finer
treat than a visit to Westernport Bay and its shores. Easy
travelling, pretty scenery, fine sport on land and water, and
good hotel accommodation, should form attractions to the
man whose liver is out of order, and who has the health of a a
wife and family to consider. The cost of such a trip,
moreover, is trifling. A ticket taken at Cobb and Co.’s, M
Albion Hotel, will, for 12s. 6d., frank a passenger by coach
and steamer as far as Cowes. H
30




GOOD AND CHEAP
EARTHEITWABE!
BUY OF THE IMPORTERS!
Breakfast,
Dinner,
Tea and
Dessert
Services!
LARGE ASSORTMENT !
BBOS.,
4 BOURKE STREET 4
And Hanley, Staffordshire.
A Call Esteemed a Favor.
A WANT SUPPLIED
TO ALL.
FOB ALL THE COLONIES.
MESSRS. BiTTB R % C 0, f
85, BOURKE STREET EAST,
Four doors Fast of llicatre Royal, ) MELBOURNE.
Opposite the Academy of Music. *


In Bottles at 10s., 205., and 275. 6d.
For all Worn-out Constitutions, Debilitated by
Disease, Dissipation or Assiduous Studies.
By taking this Medicine the most Worn-out Constitution
of the greatest roue, or dissipated man, can be restored. His
Brain strengthened, his Body and Blood renovated, and a
new man formed.
This is no Quack Remedy, the contents can be analysed
by any Scientific and Analytical Chemist, and the Consti-
tuents made known. The most scientific men of the day
have proclaimed that its contents constitutes the only means
which possibly can make an impotent individual
(See pamphlet.)
This Remedy is pleasant to take, and the doses are con-
sequently very small.
wsmm . mwn & <b<b>. 9
85, BOURKE STREET EAST,
Four doors East of the Theatre Royal, and
Opposite the Academy of Music,
MELBOURNE,


W. ». DIXOW & CO.,
(Late Furlong, Dixon & Co.),
pianoforte & Oftusic ttfareljouse,
87, ELIZABETH STREET,
Opposite Colonial Bank.
||IANOrOHT£S, lIaRMONIUMS,
ALL KINDS OF MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS,
By the Best Makers, can be purchased for
LOWEST CASH PRICES
OR ON
TIME PAYMENTS.
MUSIC AT HALF-PRICE.
PIANOFORTES FOR HIRE.
lilt §f witit itw.
COWES,
PHILLIP ISLAND.
First-Class Accommodation for Families and
G-entlemen.
Horses and Buggies for Visiting the beautiful sights around
the Island.
It has now become the most Fashionable Watering Place
in Victoria.
TERMS MODERATE.
F. BAUER, Proprietor,


STEAM TO PHILLIP ISLAND,
The Isle of Wight of Victoria.
Leaves Hastings on arrival of Cobb’s Coach, leaving
Melbourne every
Tuesday, Thursday & Saturday
at 7 a.m., for
COWES, GRIFFITH’S POINT,
AID lEWHAVEI;
Returning from ITewhaVSll 5A5 a.m. every Monday,
Wednesday, and Friday.
NO INCREASE IN FARES.
A trip to Cowes hitherto has been an irksome journey;
now it is a pleasure trip, passengers landing under seven
hours and a half from Melbourne,
WESTERN PORT S.B. COMPANY, LIMITED,
Albion Hotel.


COBB AWD GO’S
lIVERY, LETTING AND BAIT STABLES,
UNION HOTEL, GEELONG,
Hesse Street, Queenscliffe
Experienced
Grooms
employed.
Omnibuses to and from Geelong & Queenscliffe Twice a Day
Special Conveyances can be obtained at all hours, Night or Day.
HOLIDAYS:
Special facilities afforded to Pleasure and Pic-nic Parties to
Queenscliffe, Connewarre, Clifton Springs, Barwon Heads,
Bream Creek, Spring Creek, Swampy Creek, Loutit Bay,
Point Lonsdale t Portarlington,
AND OTHER FAVORITE RESORTS.
Express Conveyances furnished to all parts of the Colony upon the
Shortest Notice.
Relays of Horses can be obtained throughout the Western District.
New Stock of Horses and Modern Vehicles of every description added
thjs Season, consisting of
Buggies, Carryalls, 'Waggonettes, Carriages, Private
Coaches, Omnibuses, &c. &c.
CAREFUL DRIVERS EMPLOYED.
COBB & CO.’S Telegraphic Line of Boyal Mail Coaches to
Colac, Camperdown Terang, Mortlake,
Warrnamhdol, Belfast,
Penola, Apsley,
Apsley,
Portland, Casterton,
Harrow, Hamilton,
AND ALL PARTS OF THE WESTERN DISTRICT.
All information as to Fares, times of Arrival and Departure of
Coaches, obtainable at Cobb and Co.’s Booking Office, Great Bourke
Street, Melbourne. WESTERN STAGE COMPANY.


EZXZaTJIR/S IO IsTS
QUEENBCLIFFE, PORTBEA,
SORRENTO, BCHNAPPER POINT AND DROMANA.
63T THE SPLENDID STEAMER
Having completed her usual over-haul, will run during
the Season to the above places.
Tor Tims Table see “Argus.”
Passengers desiring Speed, Safety, Comfort and Punctu-
ality, with first-class Refreshments at Moderate Charges,
are invited to patronise the “Williams.”
81, iriiaders Street West,
Opposite Queen’s Wharf.


WICTOIIAI MINERAL WATERS.
Coimadai and Ballon Seltaer,
Are Clear, Sparkling, Inodorous and Pungent, highly
commended and largely consumed by the Faculty, and
recommended by them as the Safest and Most Wholesome
iErated Waters in the Colony.
Prize Medals Obtained
SEE ANALYSIS.
C. SWAN WICK, Agent,
Bond Street, City.
HODGSON & GO’S
(Stock’s Patent.)
!> <U cn
> >- «
o -g^.o
CO <u
h
' nP Pm
<u « 3
7 jp O _
C_ *-> «
- O O
I- ! I I
? I*i|
< ) a W w
H! ilggs
DC -si”
o ! s § »i
n s K "5 co
“■ s-
O .pp bp
5 £ u,S
cn c/2
•8 ffOH
g (Tg W “
•giUj £
•S'l s’* -D
o
I 8!. 3
-•v! cn r» / —1
B O O O “•
4 c g s >
o 2 “ s' | Z
|* B * « H
i.?B|
O' I 7
?-B>o 0
2 Oo>«i i
o g'lto -
Ss’|= m
Oq -i
AWARD E D
ptui
AT THE
EXHIBITION
OF 1875.
MANUFACTORY:
154, SmitlilStreet.
M o *
oi
CD a,
* t 9 (A U


COACHSS TO Ml
OF THE COLONY.
PASSENGERS & PARCELS
BOOKED AT
THE COACH OFFICE, ALBION HOTEL,
Bourse Street, Melbourne,
TO EVERY TOWN OR CITY IN THE COLONY.
COBB X CO.
DAILY STEAM COMMUNICATION
BETWEEN
MSDTOTOME AMD
The Fast and Commodious Steamer
cc DESPATCH ”
Leaves the Queen’s Wharf, Melbourne, for Geelong, at 4.16 p-m.
daily, with Passengers and Cargo (except on Saturday, when she leaves
at 3 p.m.), returning from Geelong at 8.45 a.m.
fares— Saloon, 45.; Return, 6s. Pore Cabin, 2s. 6d.;
Return, 4s.
FREIGHTS AT GREATLY REDUCED RATES.
THOS. J. PARKER,
5, Market Street, Melbourne.


Many a man is now quietly ruminating in solitude, and uselessly
regretting he has not summoned up courage hitherto to consult me.
Diffidence, false modesty, and often fear of ridicule, are, with regret, the
statements made, as chiefly preventing patients from consulting me.
Many a now wretched life would have been made happy, many
a pleasing home with troops of smiling children, would have taken the
place of the hearth which is now desolate, had I been consulted in time.
Many a young life has been wrecked on the rocks of despair. I ask
often an unfortunate being why he did not consult me before, and I find
the invariable heart-bursting response, “ Oh, Doctor, why was I held back
by a false feeling of shame ? Had I but consulted you in time, I should
now be a happy, healthful man. What am I now, but an object of pity! ”
Again, with regard to Skin Affections, the same illustration applies.
Many of these terrible chronic eruptions would never have occurred had
early skilful treatment been applied.
Those who have locked up within their breasts a secret, cankering
their very lives, and wish to avail themselves of ray skill in the treatment
of their maladies, must remember that “ old time is a-flying, ” and that
I shall not be much longer in practice, for I have done the state some
service in my profession, and I shall not therefore be long before I take
my rest; therefore there is little time to lose, for those who wish to profit
by my skill and experience.
Let nothing in the shape of bashfulness, therefore, deter the one seeking
medical skill, from consulting me at once, ere it be too late. Those who
do not care for a personal consultation, can communicate by letter.
XHR,. Xj. Xj. SMITH,
182, Collins Street East,
MELBOURNE.
Fee—By Letter, £5l.
Medicines Forwarded throughout all the Colonies.


"37- vp
t O
ESTABLISHED 1862.
M&Bf BDWTCBTO
BOOKBINDER
TO THE PUBLIC LIBRARY, MECHANICS' INSTITUTE, (fc.,
13, Suranston Street, Melbourne.
BOOKS BOUND IN EVERY STYLE
That may be desired, comprising Law Calf, Morocco, Calf, Antique,-
Cloth of various colors, &c.
PORTFOLIOS, MUSIC. SCRAP BOOKS AND ALBUMS-
PLAIN AND ORNAMENTAL GOLD LETTERING PIECES,
And all other requirements connected with the Business,
CHANGES STRICTLY MODERATE.
BAUNSCHEIDTISM.
&ebens-wecheq (Life &evivet|).
THE NEW HEALING METHOD,
WITHOUT THE USE OF MEDICINE,
Is so called after tlie Discoverer, CARL BAUNSOHEIDT.
o&o
It has been introduced into Victoria but a few years, with most extraordinary results, when
it is considered that most cases treated were of old standing, either chronic or acute. The good
effect in very painful afflictions is instantaneous.
So far as actual experience goes, the application of this new system cures speedily
Rheumatism, Inflammation, Gout, Lumbago, Neuralgia, Sciatica,
DIPHTHERIA, TOOTH-ACHE, SORE THROAT, DISEASES OF THE EYE,
Paralysis (in its early stage,). Diseases of the Liver and Chest, Scarlatina.
And nearly every Scrofulous Complaint.
So simple and yet so efficacious is this treatment, that it would be difficult to name a com
plaint which it would not cure. Cases given up as hopeless are frequently cured by it, and as a
ule those who try the new method reap the immediate benefit of it, as thousands can testify.
For Instruments, references and particulars, apply to
W. GUTMANN.
Office—Bo, ELIZABETH STREET, MELBOURNE.


1. & J. ATNSLEY,
MANUFACTURERS & IMPORTERS OF
China, Class & Earthenware,
Have the Choicest Stock of
PORCELAIN, BREAKFAST & TEA SETS, &c.,
in the Colonies, and acknowledged the Cheapest House
in the Trade.
21, Little Collins Street West, Melbourne.
Potteries: — Longton, Staffordshire, England.
L 0. HART’S ASTHMA CURE
Coughs, Asthma or Bronchitis.
TRADE
MARK.
A WOK9SKFUL DISCOVERT It
PERFECT RELIEF IN FIVE MINUTES.
Full Particulars sent Free by Post on application to
DAYLESFORD,
SOLE PROPRIETOR.


AUSTRALIAN
Mutual Provident Society,
(Established 1849),
For Life Assurance on the Mutual Principle.
PRINCIPLE OFFICE SYDNEY.
rnmv/irLt urnv/t ... ... munli.
%
Directors of the Victoria Branch.
Professor Irving, M.A., Chairman.
K. Murray Smith. Esq. | J. B. Motherwell, Esq., M.D.
Arthur S. King, Esq. j The Hon. T. T. A’Beckett, M.L.C. '
f t
THE OLDEST MUTUAL LIFE OFFICE IN AUSTRALIA.
During the five years ended on the 31st December, 1873,
THE PROFIT EXCEEDED A QUARTER OF A
MILLION STERLING, of which was set apart
for Distribution amongst the Members.
The Accumulated Funds exceed
TWO MILLIONS STERLING
Safely Invested in Government and other First-class Securities.
The Profits are divided every 1 "rue Years, and the Bonuses
that have been allotted are larger than those declared by any
Office of similar age in any part of the world.
The NEXT DIVISION OF PROFITS will tafye
place as from the 31st December, 1878.
N, MAINE, Eesideiat Secretary. 1
Mutual Provident Buildings,
100 Collins Street IVest, Melbourne.
j -
IV'
X
£ ,& ;■
