

Caroline.
Piedmont aise.
Barracouta.
J. GILMOUR, 7
T. CAREW, 7
J. WHITE,') T .
S. ALLEN, J Lieuts.
R. WALKER, r Lieuts.
E. LYONS, / Lleuts>
G.PRATT, J
R. BARKER, J
S. G. DANCE, Surg
A. SMART, Master.
T. DODS, Surgeon.
J. SEWARD, Purser.
F. LYNCH.
G. GUMMING, Master.
A. STEPHENS, R.M.
J. LINCOLN, Surgeon.
J. JACOBS, Purser.
A. BUCHANAN.
J. SCOTT, Purser.
ILLUSTRATIVE ACCOUNT OF CAPTAIN COLE’S SPLENDID ACHIEVEMENT IN THE CAPTURE OF THE ISLAND OF BANDA.
r J'HE Island of Amboyna having been captured by a naval force, under the
orders of Captain Tucker, Rear-Admiral Drury commanding in those
Seas, anxious to place in perfect security so valuable a Possession, directed
Captain Cole to receive on board His Majesty’s Ship Caroline, a detachment
of 130 men, and to proceed with them to reinforce the garrison of that place.
The confidence which had been invariably reposed by that officer in Capt.
Cole, induced him to solicit of the Admiral a discretionary power for an
attempt on Banda Neira, notwithstanding the smallness of the force under
his orders; to which Admiral Drury readily acceded, at the same time cau-
tioning Captain Cole of the very considerable strength of Banda, an Island
known to be of difficult access, to have numerous well appointed Batteries,
and a disciplined force far beyond any which could be spared for its attack.
Undeterred by these circumstances. Captain Cole in the Caroline, accom-
panied by his Majesty’s Ship Piedmontaise—Captain Foote, and Barracoota
Brig—Captain Kenah, and having onboard 130 men of the Madras European
Regiment, commanded by Captain Nixon, left Madras in the month of May
1810. Having furnished themselves with scaling ladders and field pieces at
Penang, the two following months were occupied in a most intricate navi-
gation through the Eastern Seas, and in exercising the seamen and marines
destined for the attack (who did not exceed 250 men) with the musquet,
pike, pistol, and cutlass, a species of discipline which was afterwards to
prove of essential service, Thcv were taught also the use of scaling
ladders, the circumscribed means Captain Cole possessed leaving no chance
of success but by escalade. Thus prepared—Captain Cole proceeded to the
attack, which the following official documents, aided by a correct View of
the Island, and a Plan of the Fortifications, will, it is presumed, sufficiently
illustrate. When the great strength of the place, and the difficulties of the
undertaking, with the vast disparity of the attacking force to that of the
enemy are duly considered, the capture of Banda Niera will unquestionably
appear to the public as it does to the writer of this article, —an achievement
which, for boldness of conception in the design, and daring courage in the
execution, has rarely been equalled, perhaps never excelled, in the annals
of British enterprise.
Captain Cole’s Letter to His Excellency Wm. O'Bryen
Drury, Esq. Bear-Admiral of the Bed, Commander
in Chief Bfc. Sfc. SfC.
SIR, H. M. S. Caroline, Banda Harbour, Aug. 10, 1810,
I HAVE the honour and happiness of acquainting you with the
capture of Banda Neira, the chief of the Spice Islands, on the 9th of August,
by a portion of the force under my orders, in consequence of a night attack,
which completely surprised the enemy, although the approach of the Ships
had been unavoidably discovered the day before.
The weather proved so unfavourable for the Boat service on the night
of the Bth Instant, that although nearly 400 officers and men had
been selected for the occasion, yet, on assembling under Great Banda at two
in the following morning, I found that the state of the weather would deprive
us of the services of some valuable men, under Lieutenant Stevens of the
Royal Marines, and the greater part of the Detachment of the Madras
European Regiment, from whom I had expected the most steady support and
assistance.
The attempt was now to be made with less than 200 men, consisting of the
Seamen and Marines, and about 40 of the Madras European Regiment, or
our labours in the Boats, through a dark and squally night in the open sea,
must end in the severest mortification.
After getting under the shelter of the land, the same circumstances of the
weather, which before operated against us, were now favourable to us, and
the confidence 1 had in the handful of Officers and Men about me, left me
no hesitation ; and with a degree of silence and firmness that will ever com-
mand my heartfelt acknowledgments, the Boats proceeded to the point of
debarkation;—a dark cloud with rain covered our landing, within an hun-
dred yards of a Battery of 10 guns, where, by the promptitude and activity
of Captain Kenah and Lieutenant Carew, who were ordered with the
Pikemen to the attack, the Battery was taken in the rear, and an officer and
his guard made prisoners without a rausquet being fired, although the enemy
were at their guns, with matches lighted. From the near approach of day-
light, our situation became critical; but we had procured a native Guide to
carry us to the walls of the Castle of Belgica; and, after leaving a guard
over the prisoners, and in charge of the Battery, the party made a rapid
movement round the skirts of the Town, where the sound of the Bugle was
spreading alarm amongst the enemy. In twenty minutes the scaling ladders
were placed against the walls of the outer Pentagon of Belgica ; and the
first musquets fired were by the enemy’s sentries. The gallantry and activity
with which the scaling ladders were hauled up after the out-work was
carried, and placed for the attack of the inner-work, under a sharp fire from
the Garrison, exceed all praise. The enemy, after firing their guns, and
keeping up an ineffectual discharge of musquetry for ten or fifteen minutes,
fled in all directions, and through the gateway, leaving the Colonel-Com-
mandant and 10 others dead, and 2 officers and 30 prisoners in our hands.
Captain Kenah, Lieutenants Carew, Allen, Pratt, Walker, and Lyons, of the
Navy, Lieutenant Yates and Ensign Allen (a volunteer) of the Madras
Service, were amongst the foremost in the escalade; and my thanks are due
to Captain-Lieutenant Nixon, of the Madras European Regiment, for the
steady and officer-like conduct with which he directed the covering party
entrusted to his charge ; and to Lieutenants Brown and Deaker, of that
Regiment, attached to the Marines.
With such examples, our brave fellows swept the Ramparts like a whirl-
wind ; and, in addition to the providential circumstance of the service being
performed with scarcely a hurt or wound, I have the satisfaction of reporting,
that there was no instance of irregularity arising from success.
The day now beaming on the British Flag, discovered to us the Fort of
Nassau, and the Sea Defences at our feet, and the enemy at their guns at
the different posts. I dispatched Captain Kenah with a Flag of Truce to the
Governor, requiring the immediate surrender of Nassau, and with a promise
of protection for private property. At sunrise the Dutch Flag was hoisted
in Nassau, and the Sea Batteries opened a fire on the Caroline, (followed by
the Piedmontaise and Barracoota) then approaching the harbour. Having
selected a detachment to secure Belgica, the remainder with their scaling
ladders were ordered for the immediate storm of Nassau ; but Captain
Kenah had returned with the verbal submission of the Governor, and 1 was
induced to send a second flag, stating my determination to storm Nassau that
instant, and lay the town in ashes, if the Colours were not immediately
struck. This threat, and a well-placed shot from Belgica (which completely
commands all the principal defences) into one of the Sea Batteries, produced
an immediate and unqualified submission, and we found ourselves in
possession of the two Forts and several Batteries, mounting 120 pieces of
cannon, and defended by nearly 700 disciplined troops, besides the Militia.
The ships had been left with so few men to manage them, that I had
merely directed Captain Foote to lead into any anchorage that he might be
able to obtain, to make a diversion in our favour ; but they worked against
all the unfavourable circumstances of a dark and squally night, in a narrow
channel, with the most determined perseverance, and with that degree of
zeal that I expected from an of my own rank, whose heart and hand
had always been with me on every point of public service.
Captain Kenah, who led the storming party, crowned a series of valuable
services, during two months difficult and intricate navigation through the
Eastern Seas, by his bravery and activity on shore.
The Colours of Forts Nassau and Belgica will be presented to your Excel-
lency by Lieutenant John Gilmour, who has served nine years in this
country as a Lieutenant, and a large portion of that time as first Lieutenant
under my command. Although labouring under severe illness, he took
charge of the ship on ray quitting her, and his seaman-like and zealous
conduct in the discharge of his trust were most conspicuous. I beg leave
most earnestly to recommend him to your notice.
I also transmit a Plan of the Defences of Banda Neira, with the position of
the Dutch troops, and our route from the landing-place to Belgica. The
enemy had advanced a strong corps towards the . place where Admiral
Rainier’s forces had formerly landed ; and a suspicion that this would be the
case, and that the roads would be destroyed, determined me as to the point
and method of our attack.
The service performed was of such a peculiar nature, that I could not do
justice to the merits of my companions without entering much into detail ;
and I feel confident, that in your Excellency’s disposition to appreciate duly
the merits of those under your command, I shall find an excuse for having
taken up so much of your time.
I have the honour to be, &c.
(Signed) CHRISTOPHER COLE.
To His Excellency Admiral Drurv, &c.
Vice Admiral William O’Bryen Drury, Esq. Comman-
der in Chief of His Majesty’s Ships and Vessels in the
East Indies, to Christopher Cole, Esq. Captain of His
Majesty’s Ship Caroline.
SIR,
I HAVE had great satisfaction in the highly flattering communica-
tion you have made to me of the sentiments of yourself and brave companions,
who so nobly and successfully stormed the supposed impregnable Fortress of
Banda Neira. The colours of which, with 2 guns, taken under your aus-
pices, by you. Sir, and a handful of men composed of the Seamen and Marines
of His Majesty’s Ships, and the intrepid Officers and Solders of the Honour-
able East India Company’s European Troops, confer on me an honour and
happiness far beyond my deserts; but most gratefully and thankfully received,
as coming from a body of men so highly and peculiarly distinguished.
The Colours 1 shall take the earliest opportunity of laying at His Majesty’s
feet.
I beg of you Sir, to accept the poor acknowledgments I can make, for the
handsome manner of making the sentiments of the Banda Heroes known to
me, whose heartfelt encomiums on their gallant leader, do equal honour and
justice to themselves, by placing on your brow a never-fading Laurel.
I have the honour to be, &c.
(Signed) Wm. O’B. DRURY.
Extracts from a Pith lie Letter from the Governor-General
in Council to Captain Christopher Cole.
Paragraph I.—l am directed by the Right Honourable the Governor in
Council to acknowledge the receipt of your Letter of the 29th ultimo, relative
to the late successful operations of the force employed under your command
in the reduction of the Island of Banda.
Paragraph 11.—The details of this brilliant achievement and of your ar-
rangements, for the administration and security of the Island, as reported by
you and Captain Nixon to the Government of Fort St. George, have been com-
municated to his Lordship in Council; who observes with just admiration, the
judgment, ability, and foresight manifested by you in the plan of attack; and
the zeal, intrepidity, and precision with which it was carried into effect by the
gallant officers and men of the Naval and Military Service under your direc-
tion. His Lordship in Council considers the rapid conquest of a place so
strongly fortified by nature and by art, in the face of a superior force, without
the loss of a man as forming a singular event in the annals of British Enter-
prize, reflecting a peculiar degree of credit on your professional skill, and
affording an extraordinary instance of discipline, courage, and activity on the
part of the officers and men under your command.
Paragraph Hl.—The Governor General in Council, considering the eulogium
which you have bestowed generally on the detachment of the Flonourable
Company’s Troops employed on this occasion, and especially on the conduct of
their commanding officer Captain Nixon, and of Lieutenant Yates and Ensign
Allen, to be highly honourable to them; has directed the expression of his
distinguished approbation to be conveyed to them generally and individually,
through the channel of the Resident at Amboyna ; combined with a desire
that the Resident will take advantage of any future opportunity' of rewarding
the services of these officers, whose exertions have claimed your specific com-
mendations, by placing them in situations of trust and importance, which
local arrangements may render necessary, and the regulations of the Military
Service and their respective rank and qualifications may enable them to fill.
IN addition to the foregoing detailed account of the capture of this valuable
Spice Island, and the eulogies bestowed on the gallant Commander and
the Forces under his orders by Rear-Admiral Drury and the Governor
General in Council, it will no doubt be gratifying to peruse the following
Testimonials of the estimation in which Captain Cole's conduct and
services were held by his brave companions.
Captains Foote and Kenah to Captain Cole.
H.M.S. Piedmontaise, Banda Harbour, Aug. 15, 1810.
MY DEAR COLE,
KENAH and myself request your acceptance of a Silver Cup (to be
made in England) in commemoration of the gallant manner you led on to,
and directed the attack and capture of the Forts at Banda : it may possibly
have been equalled, but never can be surpassed—We therefore hope you
will receive it as a testimony of our high esteem and friendship, and admira-
tion of your spirited and noble conduct on the 9th of August; most sincerely
do we both wish that you may live long to enjoy the fruits of your labour,
and to follow up your present success—and believe us, my dear Cole,
Your sincere and affectionate Friends,
CHARLES FOOTE.
RICHARD KENAH.
(Signed)
To Christopher Cole, Esq. Captain of His Majesty's Ship
Caroline, and Senior Officer, &jc. Bfc. Sfc.
SIR,
WE, the undersigned Officers of His Majesty’s Ships Caroline, Pied-
montaise, and Barracoota, beg leave to present you with a Sword (value
One Hundred Guineas) in testimony of our admiration of the gallant and
judicious manner in which you conducted the attack on Banda Neira, on the
night of the 9th of August, and consequently the final reduction of the
Spice Islands.
Banda Harbour, Aug. 18, 1810.
(Signed,)
Ca])tain Cole to Captain Foote.
MY DEAR FOOTE,
I HAVE just received the joint Letter from you and Kenah—you
will both understand my feelings, when I tell you that I am quite unequal to
the expression of them on the present occasion. Your Cup shall always be
with ine, and will ever produce the proudest recollection of my past services.
Your’s ever, my good Friends,
CHRISTOPHER COLE.
(Signed)
Banda, August 16, 1810.
Captain Cole’s Letter to Lieut. Carew of the Piedmon-
taise, Lieut. Gilmour of the Caroline, and Lieut,
White of the Barracouta.
H.M.S. Caroline, Banda Harbour, Aug. 18, 1810.
SIR,
I HAVE just received a joint letter from the Officers of the three
Ships under my orders, requesting my acceptance of a Sword, on the result
of our efforts for the capture of Banda.
I accept it in remembrance of the greatest zeal and harmony which has
made me one of the happiest of men, and which, next to the approbation
of ray superiors, will constitute the most grateful recollection of thirty years
servitude.
I am your’s, very obediently.
CHRISTOPHER COLE.
(Signed)
To Lieut. Carew, &c.
To Christopher Cole, Esq. Captain of His Majesty's
Ship Caroline, and Senior Officer commanding the
Forces at Banda.
Banda Neira, August 22, 1810.
SIR,
IN addressing you upon the capture of Banda Neira and its Depen-
dencies, which secures to the British Flag a conquest of great value, the
Officers of the Honourable Company’s Troops engaged in that enterprise.
have to congratulate you and themselves upon the successful issue, under
every disadvantage of wind and weather, upon a hostile shore lined with
numerous Batteries; the enemy aware of, and prepared for an attack, so
wisely planned, and ably carried into execution under your personal
direction.
The confidence you inspired all with on the approach to assault Belgica,
we are convinced contributed in a great measure to the success of the
escalade. Your bravery and gallant conduct were so conspicuous on that
occasion, that it must secure you the esteem and admiration of all who are
acquainted, as we are, with the circumstances attending the reduction of
that strong and important Citadel.
As a memorial of the high sense we entertain of the services performed by
you on this occasion, and as a mark of our personal esteem and respect, we
request you will do us the honour to accept of a Sword of the value of One
Hundred Guineas.
We further beg leave to assure you, that our warmest wishes for your
future success and happiness will always attend you, in whatever situation it
may please Providence to fix your lot,
(Signed)
G. L. NIXON, Capt. M. E. Reg. P. BROWN, Lt. M. E. Reg.
G. ALEXANDER, Surgeon. W. JONES DECKER, Lt.M.E.R.
C. W. YATES, Lt.-Artillery. B. HOOPER, Lt. M. E. Reg.
Win. DAVENANT, Lt. Mt. E. Reg. CHA. ALLEN, Eng. 21st M. N. I.
JAMES STEWART, Lt. M. E. Reg.
Captain Cole to Captain Nixon.
H.M.S. Caroline, Banda Harbour, August 23, 1810.
SIR,
I ACCEPT with heartfelt satisfaction the memorial offered to me by
the Officers of the Honourable Company’s Troops, of the fortunate issue of
our united efforts for the capture of Banda. Nothing but the firmest reliance
on the personal exertions of every individual on shore and afloat could have
given me confidence for the attempt; and next to my gratitude to Provi-
dence for the many unlooked-for circumstances which operated in our
favour, I shall remember the general zeal which actuated the whole, and, in
particular, the cordial co-operation and good-will of you and the Officers
under your command.
1 am, SIR, &c.
CHRISTOPHER COLE.
(Signed)
A short Account of BANDA NEIRA, and its dependent
Spice Islands.
ACCORDING to a Letter from Mr. Edmund Lyons, one of the Lieute-
nants of the Barracouta, which was printed in the Morning Post, Feb.
16, 1311, it appears, that Banda Neira, and its Dependencies, annually
export £900,000 worth of Spices to Batavia. About £ 400,000 worth was
found at the time of the capture. Besides the 700 disciplined troops of the
Enemy who surrendered to Captain Cole, Mr. Lyons stated the Militia as
amounting to 300. According to Moreri, Banda was a name then common to
six of the Molucca Islands, celled Lowtor, Nera, Puloway, Pulorin, Bassingin,
and Gunapi, or Gumanapa, in the latter of which was a Volcano. The
Portuguese under Antonio de Britto, discovered these Islands in 1511, and
were afterwards driven from them by the Dutch, who took possesson in
1609. These Islands are mentioned by Osorio, Bishop of Sylves, in his
Portuguese History, during the Reign of Emanuel, as being called the five
Islands of Banda, situated a little to the southward of Amboyna, and then
producing vast quantities of NutmcgTrees. Mickle, in a note to his excel-
lent Portuguese Asia, prefixed to his Translation of Camcens Lusiadas, gives
the following extracts from Fasia y Jous® : “Before these our discoveries,
the Spicety and Riches of the Eastern World were brought to Europe with
great charge and immense trouble. The merchandize of the Clove of
Molucca, the Mace and Nutmegs of Banda, the Sandal Wood of Timor, the
Camphire of Borneo, the Gold and Silver of Luconia, the Spices, Drugs, Dyes,
and Perfumes, and all the various riches of China, Java, Siam, and the
adjacent Kingdoms, centered in the City of Molucca, in the Golden Cher-
sonesus.” The Banda Islands are supposed to contain 5,000 Inhabitants,
who are said to have amounted formerly to 15,000. Moreri speaks of the
air of the Island of Banda as being very salubrious, but the contrary has
been asserted by other writers. The largest of these Islands is scarcely 20
miles in length.


jEjcglish Shits .
Caroline. Captain Cole. 36 guns. 254 men.
Fiedmontaise. Captain- Foote. 30 puns. 204 men.
Farraeouttcr. Captain ICenah. 20 puns. 220 men.
Force landed under the command of
Captains Cole Sc ICenah 240 Seamen Sc Marines.
Force landed under the command of Captain Miron
of the Madras Furopean Fepiment 40 Soldiers of' ditto.
VIEW OF THE ISLAND OF BANDA*«N£IRA. E.Long. 128. 5. S.Lat.4. 50.
tr flom a.
Enervat'd front a Sketch taken by t eiptain Cole, from the If land of Great Ena da,.
Bubksbed G n Damdl. N?<r, Cleveland ’ Street. Fitznrv Square: Sc by Sfe/.i rs lonyman. Hurst. Bees Orme Sc Brown. Eatemoster Jiow. October is. i&n
Dutch Fomce „
Bank Sc file Jff4
Militia 300
Gun? mounted on the
120
different batteries


