

IMAGINATION
and
OTHER ESSAYS
The Right ReTerend John OliTer Feetham. D
Bishop of North Queensland


x ■ ~
'
1 ■ 1 ' . , ■ - I
4
.
-
1 \


“Imagination”
and Other Essays
THE RIGHT REVEREND JOHN OLIVER FEETHAM, D.D.,
BISHOP OF NORTH QUEENSLAND.




FOREWORD.
BY THE BISHOP OF RIVERINA.
For nearly a quarter of a century the Bishop of North
Queensland has been delivering annual speeches on the occasions of
the prize-givings at the Church Schools in his diocese. These have
been of such outstanding interest and importance that for many years
his friends have been hoping to have them edited and published in
such a form that a wider circle of friends may have the benefit of
his wisdom, knowledge, and humour in the realm of “Religion and
Sound Learning.” His faith in Christian Ideals has always been the
inspiration of those who have been his fellow-workers and pupils in
moulding the tradition of the Schools, and any measure of success
which has been achieved in this direction has been largely due to his
constant emphasis on the spiritual basis of true education, as
expressed in Worship and Christian discipleship.
To him “the life has been more than meat, and the body than
raiment,” and the purposes of the God of Beauty, Truth and Goodness
for each individual soul have always outweighed any test of passing-
triumphs, or the claims of any lesser loyalty.
The thanks of the Church at large are due to his friends in
Melbourne for making possible the publication of these addresses.
They are splendid samples of the spiritual pabulum with which he
has fed his Hock, and it is to be hoped that they will be only the first
fruits of a harvest of literary research and prophetic insight, which
still awaits publication.
As one who, in days gone by, sat at his feet and tried to hand
on something of his Ideals to the boys of All Souls’ School, Charters
Towers, I feel it a great privilege to commend this book to all who
have the interests of the young at heart, and especially to those who
are convinced that there can be no true education which is not rooted
and grounded in the Wisdom of God, the Love of Christ, and the
Power of His Holy Spirit.
+ REGINALD,
Bishop of Riverina.
Bishop’s Lodge, Hay, N.S.W.,
S. Peter’s Day, 1940.


CONTENTS.
Page
THE IMAGINATION ■ .V 5
FRIENDSHIP 22
DISTRIBUTION 31
VALUE AND VARIETY 40


THE IMAGINATION.
The psychologists, and even more and even worse the psycho-
analysts, start off with a terrifying and tremendous terminology,
which they seldom attempt to explain, but with which I cannot help
thinking many of them juggle, though of course unconsciously. And
chey are so very confident. They remind me of Cleon the Poet, who,
in recounting the triumphs of his intellectual career, declares:—
“And I have written three books upon the soul,
Proving absurd all written hitherto.”
Each new authority in this new science claims a measure of
omniscience that would do credit to an encyclopaedia or a pope.
We are told at the outset, for example, that the inner chambers of
our personality contain—constellations, complexes, censors, super-
egos, sentiments, concepts, images, libidos and I know not how many
more; and that each of these terms as now used means something-
different to what it has ever meant before, but that the meaning
will emerge as the science develops. And yet does it? Is it a new
form of the confidence trick? In the second-rate books that are
written to sell, I fear it is. Where the great thinkers are at work
it is an indication of the immense difficulty and complexity of the
subject.
Psychologists All.
But are we not all born psychologists? And where there is,
as at present, so little agreement among the professors of the science,
have we not a right to our opinions? A student recently entering
for an examination in Psychology, as part of her Arts course, told
me that she found the subject somewhat bewildering, and feared
she had not at all a firm hold upon its principles. I said: “In that
case you are in very much the same position as the people who
conduct the examinations, and probably also as those who write
the books about it. When you take the exam., set down your
opinions with firmness and decision, and with the utmost emphasis;
don’t let it appear that you are in any doubt about any aspect of
the matter. Be as dogmatic as ever you can. That will cause the
examiners to recognise you as an authority, even if a completely
new and startling one. They will treat you with great respect, and
give you a good pass.” She was somewhat apprehensive, but I
believe she followed my prescription, and anyhow she got through.
Three Storeys.
I accept, as most people, till lately, did, some kind of a
tripartite division of the organisation upon which memory and
imagination depend: e.g., that of the conscious, the subconscious
and the unconscious realms, and I am willing for convenience to


turn these three adjectives into substantives as most writers on the
subject have done. Further, I am willing to picture them as top,
middle and bottom storeys of a building. (I am aware that some
recent authorities prefer to picture two storeys only, merging all
that is below the level of consciousness into one region). The area
of consciousness at any time is small; the sub-conscious is, I assume,
thousands of times greater, and the unconscious, I should say, is;
immeasurably vast, containing race memories of half a million years,
and pre-human material of much greater extent as well. I don’t
want all that in my private unconsciousness. I should not really be a
bit surprised to learn that we have all got the same ground floor—
basement, crypt, subterranean cave if you will—as wide as
humanity, out of which some things desirable, and other things most
undesirable, can at times erupt through the subconscious and arrive
in the conscious region.
Dr. N. P. Williams (in his Bampton Lectures), writing of the
top storey, the conscious self, says:—
“It is furnished with certain wide and spacious windows, which
are the senses, and which are never completely closed even during
sleep. Through these windows there beats in a perpetual blizzard of
sense-impressions, derived mainly from the outside world, but in-
cluding also a not inconsiderable number which originate in the body
and which, taken together, constitute what is known as the
‘coenesthesia,’ or sum of the organic sensations .... a continuous
flowing cinematographic representation of the objective world. ,r
(“Ideas of the Fall and Original Sin,” page 470).
He goes on in language that becomes necessarily more obscurely
figurative to speak of the conglomerates, constellations, and complexes
of the subconscious, till he gets down to the region of the unconscious
“almost entirely unexplored and only revealing its contents by vague,
uncertain glimpses in dreams.”
Selective Action.
My own view of it is that with my conscious mind I can to
some extent, even to a great extent, exercise a power of selection,
what I will look at and what I won’t, what windows I will keep
wide open; and which I can, at least at times, shut up. As, for
example, when going into Burlington House I can choose in which
of the 10 galleries I will spend my time, and whether with paintings
or with sculptures; or going into a library whether I will resort to
fiction, science, history or “belles lettres.” By the sort of selection
I am accustomed to make I believe that my subconscious region
largely gets furnished, and that from it I am able, to some extent,
to call up what I want. For example, I put up a notice overnight
of what is wanted, and it has duly appeared in the morning. Into
the dim caverns of the unconscious I cannot reach. There may or
may not be (as Dr. Williams thinks) a Censor, like Cerberus, on
the landing between that region and the subconscious. Some of the
harvest of my sense impressions may or may not be going down below
the subconscious into the vague basement, or may have gone there
in my infancy.


This amount of introduction: because in speaking of the
imagination one cannot avoid the use of many of the terms which
are current coin with the psychologists, although the values they
assign to them vary with each writer. I am not going to attempt
an exact definition, and my experience is that the people who do
hardly ever adhere to it. I think my best course will be to say
how I believe the Imagination may be decorated and furnished,
spring-cleaned, reconditioned, refurnished, and provided with new
decorations on top of the old ones, without trying to decide too
exactly how it is related to the conscious and subconscious depart-
ments, or to something deeper down still.
There had been a performance in London in the ’seventies of
Lord Tennyson’s play, “Queen Mary.” Thomas Carlisle met the
poet the next morning and said it had not been played so well as
it deserved; “In fact,” said the sage, “I have seen a far better
performance in another place.” “Where was that?” said the Poet
Laureate. “In the theatre under my hat,” replied Carlisle. The
theatre under your hat—what is going on in that region, so small
in compass, yet so boundless in possibility? I knew a Judge who
was fond of the best music. He seldom secured the opportunity of
enjoying grand opera, but he would sometimes take the full score
of one of his favourites, with its 25 lines or so of staff notation,
for all the instruments of the orchestra, and, sitting in his arm chair,
his sweeping glance would take in every line of the composition, and
his imagination would hear the harmonies, indicated by the rows of
notes and chords, which to another would have meant nothing. We
had, in Cambridge, a Professor of Mathematics who claimed to be
able to think in ten dimensions. Three usually provide sufficient
exercise for most of us, though I would not venture to limit the
powers of the human imagination. In the cases of the Sage, the
Judge and the Mathematician there had been a lifelong training in
literature, in music and in geometry, which enabled the imaginations
of the three to work with extraordinary power. Those three
accomplished persons might have preferred in their boyhood to sit
in the gutter and make mud pies, or to have games of marbles and
hop-scotch on the pavement—-playing the wag from school. If so, their
imaginations would never have been capable of the amazing things
which they achieved. They chose the way in which they would
employ their mental apparatus, in literature, in music and mathe-
matics, rather than mud pies and marbles, and they reaped their
reward. My first contention is this, that to a great extent we can
choose the subjects we will think about, and to a less extent reject
the subjects we wish not to think about, and so can do a good deal
for the perfecting of a mysterious mechanism, which, once set going
on the right lines, will continue to work a great deal by itself for
the collection and arrangement of the best material from all the
realms of thought, by which we can be rejoiced and entertained
throughout our lives.
Your Own World.
It was a saying of the Philosopher-Emperor Marcus Aurelius—


one not far from the Kingdom of Heaven —“A man’s soul is dyed
the colour of his leisure thoughts.” And again, “Show me what you
think and I will show you what you are.”
I knew an old man in Hoxton—not one of the most attractive
quarters of North-east London—who mended shoes. There has arisen
somehow a tradition about the atheism or infidelity of cobblers, but
the character of this old man would have gone far to redeem the
reputation of the whole of his order. In his youth he had been
what he called a “High Church Bruiser”—one of the bodyguard of
Fathers Lowder and Mackonochie, at St. George’s-in-the-East. From
1858 to ’6l those priests were often assailed by the supporters of
the local procurers and saloon proprietors, urged to frenzy by the
protestant agitators. The “Bruisers” used to draw a cordon round
the church on Sunday mornings, and my old friend had been
accustomed to find himself cheek by jowl with a young guardsman,
an officer in the Blues, 6 feet 2 inches in stature. That was one
of his recollections, and, although only a cobbler, he had used his
leisure to many other good purposes. He had read the principal
philosophers—Descartes, Spinoza, Kant—and while he cobbled the
shoes in a cellar his imagination roamed the Universe. He had a
long grey beard, and his aspect was noble in the extreme. His
neighbourhood was such as might have depressed any man, but he
appeared to live in a state of spiritual and mental exaltation.
Thieves’ kitchens and grisly abodes of vice hemmed him round, but
he, as a devout son of the Church, and as one exercising boundless
patience over damaged shoes—which didn’t deserve to be mended—
working at his last, created his own paradise. I used to think of
that Latin proverb, “Ne sutor ultra crepidam” (“Let not the cobbler
go beyond his last”)—a most mistaken sentiment, which this lofty-
minded man had triumphantly discredited. There was that in him
which made him independent of his surroundings. He lived in a
world of his own.
The imagination, then, with which you are endowed may be
creating for itself a palace of splendours, or may be degenerating
to become a cave of nightmares; it may be like a gallery of wonders
of the world’s greatest masterpieces, literary and artistic; it may be
filled with the noblest figures of history and romance, with the
presentations of your living friends—most to be honoured and loved
—or it may be a chamber o * horrors, a witches’ cauldron, an abode
of spectres. Such, I think, are the psychological possibilities. Let
us consider, then, the process of furnishing the chambers of the
imagination. Nowhere does William Wordsworth propose to you a
greater happiness than when he says:—
“Thy mind
Shall be a mansion of all lovely forms
Thy memory be as a dwelling place,
For all sweet sounds and harmonies.”
That was a promise, I think, literally fulfilled to my friend
the cobbler. He had chosen the subjects he would think about


and his mind was dyed the colour of his leisure thoughts. He might
have been merely mooning over his work, leaving his mind open to
any chance visitants, or he might have been indulging in recrimina-
tions against the injustices of a social system which placed him, a
philosopher, cobbling shoes in a cellar. But he had risen superior
to all these things.
The imagination if left to work by itself uncontrolled is
likely to luxuriate in phantasms and unrealities, as in primitive races,
ff it is starved it may go into fevers of delirium and extravagance,
or merely fade out, as in solitary confinement. If it is fed with base
material it will riot in grotesques and monstrosities, as at Los
Angeles. If it is duly supplied with light, and art, and love and
beauty, and controlled by the will, as in a good school, it can pro-
duce, when called upon, pictures of the true, the pure and the lovely.
Shakespeare.
Let us look at some of the furnishings of imagination carried
•out in early youth, for that is the most impressionable and fruitful
time.
I quote a passage from the experience of the great Sir Edmund
Gosse, whose thoughts in his childhood were trained along somewhat
eccentric lines, but who began in due time to make discoveries for
himself, which have since enriched the world. Sir Edmund has re-
corded for us something of his early life in the pages of “Father and
Son.” The Father was a naturalist, also a strict Plymouth Brother,
a fundamentalist, and though learned after the fashion of the time,
lived in a curiously narrow circle of ideas. He jealously watched
his son’s education, being desperately nervous about his contact with
the real world cf literature and of life. Edmund was allowed the
poems of Sir Walter Scott, but the novels were thought too dangerous
for him. He was almost wholly confined to literature of a strictly
serious type. His discoveries, when they came, were the more
.-startling. “It was in my fifteenth year,” he says, “that I became
intelligently acquainted with Shakespeare. I got hold of a single
play, ‘The Tempest,” this I read through and through. I studied
“The Tempest” as I had hitherto studied no classical work, and it
filled my whole being with music and romance. This book was
my own hoarded possession. The rest of Shakespeare’s works were
beyond my hopes. But, gradually I contrived to borrow a volume
here and a volume there. I completed ‘The Merchant of Venice,’
read ‘Cymbeline,’ ‘Julius Caesar,’ and ‘Much Ado’; most of the
others, I think, remained closed to me for a long time. But there
were enough to steep my horizon with all the colours of the sunrise.
It was due, no doubt, to my bringing up that the plays never appealed
to me as bounded by the exigencies of a stage, or played by actors.
The images they raised in my mind were of real people moving in
the open air, and uttering, in the natural play of life, sentiments
that were clothed in the most lovely, and yet, as it seemed to me,
the most obvious and the most inevitable language.” He felt he
■owed to Shakespeare what Caliban owed to Prospero.


“I pitied thee,
Took pains to make thee speak, taught thee each hour
One thing or other . . .
I endowed thy purposes
With words that made them known.”
Ihe growing imagination of the young Edmund was illuminated
in a way that reminds you of what Thomas Gray so vividly wrote of
the powers of the great Shakespeare himself:—
“To him the mighty Mother did unveil
Her awful face; the dauntless Child
Stretch’d forth his little arms and smiled.
This pencil take (she said), whose colours clear
Richly paint the vernal year:
Thine, too, these golden keys, immortal Boy!
This can unlock the gates of joy;
Of horror that, and thrilling fears,
Or ope the sacred source of sympathetic tears.”
And again—
“Hark his hands the lyre explore!
Bright-eyed Fancy, hovering o’er,
Scatters from her pictured um
Thoughts that breathe, and words that burn.”
Edmund Gosse in his first experience of Shakespeare felt much-
like John Keats when he first looked into Chapman’s Homer;—
“Then felt I like some watcher of the skies,
When a new planet swims into his ken:
Or like stout Cortez when with eagle eyes
He stared at the Pacific—and all his men
Looked at each other with a wild surmise
Silent upon a peak in Darien.”
The Gospels.
Poets you say, yes, but compare with those who are poets, and'
perhaps exceptional, a Japanese nobleman and Customs officer of the
middle nineteenth century, Murata, of Nagasaki.
The latest volume of the Hale Lectures by Bishop Tucker of
Virginia describes the beginnings of the Church in Japan, under its-
founder, Francis Xavier, in 1549, and the persecutions which fol-
lowed in the 17th century, and the revival of the Church in 1853.
in which year Commodore Perry, of the American Navy, insisted
upon his right to enter the port of Yokohama. There follows an
account of the work of the missionaries as Japan re-opened her gates
to the outside world, among them, that of Verbeck. On page 81
there is the episode of the picking up from the sea of a New
Testament. I go for fuller particulars to A. B. Shearer’s book,
“Japan To-day”—published about 1903. Bishop Tucker speaks in
this connection of Wakasa as the Customs officer, and his brothers
Ayabe—who became Christians at great personal risk. The-
officer’s name given in Shearer’s book is Murata. He was the head


of the Harbour Police in Nagasaki, and it was his responsibility to
patrol the water, and keep watch against the entrance of contraband.
While he was crossing the harbour one day in the fulfilment of his
duty, he saw an object floating. He told the boatman to secure
it, and it was presently picked out with the boat hook. It was a
book, saturated with salt water, but decipherable. Actually it was
a copy of the New Testament in Dutch. Murata was able to read
enough of the Dutch version of the Gospels to become intensely
interested, but wished for a copy in his own language. A friend
told him it was still a forbidden book in Japan, but he thought he
could procure a copy in Chinese. A Chinese copy of the Gospels
was procured, and Murata, being a scholar, was able to read them
in that language. Some 12 years later, about 1866, he met Verbeck.
the Dutch missionary, and described to him his impressions on a first
reading of the Gospels. He said, “When I first read that book my
imagination was entranced, my heart was taken captive, my mind
was overwhelmed. I had never conceived the possibility of the
existence of such a person as Jesus Christ.” It was not long before
Verbeck was able to prepare this Japanese nobleman for baptism,
though indeed Christianity was still a forbidden religion in Japan.
You note the manner in which a reading of the Gospels had
affected Murata. They had “entranced his imagination,” and he
could never be satisfied until he came into contact with the Person
whom they described. The Gospels, being the greatest literature,
dealing with the greatest Subject, can and do produce the same
effect upon the imagination to-day, so long as it has not been already
choked with the cares, and riches and pleasure of this life. The
weakness and poverty of imagination in our time, contrasted with
the vigour and fertility of that of the Elizabethans, is due, I think,
very largely to the fact that many people to-day are not acquainted
with the Scriptures, while the Elizabethans knew them through and
through, being as they were, a gift newly received from the hand of
William Tyndall.
“From a child . . . .”
Miss Florence Converse, in her book. “The House of Prayer,”
has most skilfully shown how they may be used for the furnishing
of the mind of the young. She describes the preparation of a boy
for his first Communion. She leads him to discover a beautiful
grey stone chapel in a wood. When he first enters it the window
spaces are empty, but the Verger of the chapel (who is actually his
guardian angel), undertakes his education, which will mean the
furnishing of the chapel.
When he is repentant for refusing to say his prayers, and
has said them, there appears in one of the window spaces the figure
of the publican of the parable, who “dare not lift up so much as his
eyes unto Heaven.”
When he has been offering to God prayers that are not more
than clamourings for the fulfilment of his own particular wishes,
and has then learnt to see that that was wrong, there appears in


another window space a picture of the garden of Gethsemane, Where
our Lord Jesus Christ is praying, “Not My will but Thine be done.”
Later he learns that he is the son of a King, and in one of
the windows there is seen the figure of Solomon in his early pro-
mise, Upon the ground at his feet there lies an hour glass through
which no sands are passing, a discarded sword, and a neglected
casket of treasure, out of which gold pieces roll unused. Solomon
had not chosen long life, nor the life of his enemies, nor wealth,
but he had chosen wisdom.
Then the boy begins to learn of the pains and sorrows of the
world, and introduces these subjects into his prayers, and is rewarded
by seeing in one of the window spaces the figure of Christ crucified.
And by this time there .is incense in the censer which fills the Chape i
with its fragrance. In later experiences the great saints appear at
prayer in one of the windows, then again there are seen shining forth,
as the boy gains faith in the victory of the Cross, pictures of the
Transfiguration and of Christ in glory. lam sure the gifted autnoress
is right, and it is through such experiences that the imagination may
provide permanent memorials for the soul, but it cannot be accom-
plished without at least a knowledge of the Gospels.
No Appreciation.
Young Edmund Gosse, and Timothy of the “House of the
Prayer,” were no doubt foi-tunate in their different ways. Those
who had the care of them saw to it that they knew the Scriptures
from childhood. Many of the parents of to-day are unable or
unwilling to attempt that task. And there are, I fear, many ima-
ginations impoverished through the fact that a good deal of our
education, so called, is conducted on the principle of small profits
and quick returns —the parents demanding that their children should
be taught those subjects which will ensure to them a speedy en-
trance to the commercial world. We have in Queensland, I am sorry
to say, an examination known as the Commercial Junior. It in-
cludes Arithmetic, Shorthand, Typewriting, Book-keeping, a little
Geography, and a very little English. Boys and girls who pass that
examination can get positions in offices, but it is a shame that they
should have been cheated of any real education, their minds are
empty, and they are almost incapable of rational recreation. Being
so unfurnished, there is great danger that their imaginations will
become the victims of the worst productions of the film theatres.
Their starved little souls seize only too eagerly upon the dangerous
stuff of fifth rate melodrama. The galleries of the sub-conscious
should have been filled with the works of great artists, composers,
dramatists, masters of romance—from the book or the screen —
so becoming the dwelling places of all lovely forms. Instead
they may have collected an array of those lurid and porno-
graphical designs that sometimes misdecorate and defile the
hoardings when a particularly sensational “talkie” is showing.
The windows that should present the most beautiful scenes
from nature and from human life and from sacred story may


show nothing but vile caricatures, base grotesques and futurist
extravagances. The imagination that has not been taught to
lay hold of the beautiful will grasp at the ugly, because it must
have something to feed upon. You and I may not have the imagi-
nation of the great artists, poets or musicians, but we have the
faculty, which is capable of use and extension, and it may be the
means to continual joy, or as I have indicated, it may create delusions
and nightmares, and be nigh unto a curse.
There is not space in this article to dwell upon the riches of
the realms of romance, but they are accessible to all of us—though
our lot in life may be drab and humdrum—as indeed were the realms
of philosophy to the cobbler in the Hoxton cellar.
“Dreams of delight shall on thee wait
And rainbow visions rise.”
One of the best signs of to-day—now that the rage for the
sex problem novels has subsided—is the output of first class fiction,,
though the School of Art libraries in North Queensland don’t seem
to have heard of it. The Penguin publications—reprints and others
—are admirable; and read Nys Petersen’s “Street of the Sandal
Makers.” And take the advice of people who have more time to readi
good fiction than I have.
The Old Testament.
But let us go back to the Bible. The Old Testament writers
were great psychologists, though I suppose they were not aware of
it. They show us the right and the wrong use of the imagination..
In Genesis VI. we are told that “The imagination of the thoughts
of man’s heart was only evil continually . . . and the earth was filled
with violence.” But an experience was at hand which would enable-
the wise Noah to give a different turn to the imagination of his con-
temporaries. It was surely a nobly inspired thought in Genesis ix..
by which he put that new interpretation on the rainbow, which
shone out over the landscape, in the clearing shower after the deluge..
There it was, suggesting to him the over-arching Providence of God,
and a pledge of His protection of the earth, where “day and night,,
summer and winter, seed time and harvest should not cease.” And
the shivering mortals who had survived the flood, still trembling
at the recollection of their recent dangers, no doubt welcomed the
token; but Noah made it clear to them that if they would enjoy
the protection of God, they must not destroy the lives of one
another, “Whoso sheddeth man's blood by man shall his blood be
shed.” Respect for human life definitely appears here in contrast
with the savage chant of Lamech (Genesis iv., 24), who boasted of
his murders,
I am reminded of two words of sinister meaning which I have-
picked up in New Guinea. The first one is this, Siragi-kapu-kapuna.
That, so Samuel Tomlinson told me in the year 1916, was the name
of a spit of sand running out into the ocean a quarter of a mile
above the Church of St. John the Baptist at Mukawa. He said.
“Would you like to know what that word means?” I said, “I


should like to know.” He said, “It means the place for the roasting
■of visitors, and that is exactly what would have happened if you
had come here some 20 years ago.” Twenty years of Tomlinson, by
the grace of God, had transformed Mukawa and its neighbourhood
into a paradise. I attended the Mass in the Church of St. John the
Baptist on the following Sunday morning. It was a very large build-
ing of poles, thatch and palm leaf. The congregation, looking-
forward to their Communion, went to the church in silence, pouring-
in streams down the twisting cliff pathways from the plateau where
the Mission buildings are, to the foreshore where the Church stands.
The Mass, celebrated with great dignity, within the dim shade
of that palm leaf church, took an hour and a half—the Mukawan
language is tremendous. When we emerged from the church into
the sunshine, the silence was broken, and the boys of Mukawa linked
arms with the boys of Boianai who had navigated the mission launch
from the south, and led them about beneath the palm trees laughing
and chattering and gesticulating, and in every way demonstrating
their pleasure in extending their hospitality to the boys of the
.distant tribe. Their languages had nothing in common, so that com-
munications were more by gesture and expression than by anything
else, but the comradeship established between the members of the
two tribes was charming. And only a quarter of a mile away was
Bii'agi-kapu-kapuna!
There is another word which I have gained in correspondence
with Archdeacon Gill quite lately: it is “Diwari-o-dari.” That is a
.spot near the mouth of the Mamba River, and it means “The place
for the cutting up of the Ambasi people.” They are of the Diwari
tribe. There is, you see, an alarming pregnancy about the ancient
nomenclature of these regions. And now again this new Christian
venture by Romney Gill, near the mouth of the Mamba, at Duvira,
has brought about a similar result to that of his former work at
Boianai, and the population is very largely Christian. I think it
would be a very hard-hearted and stupid person who would not be
converted to the Faith by the sight of those Christian villages in New
Guinea. But the writer in Genesis vi, was describing a condition
of things where the significance of names like Siragi-kapu-kapuna
and Diwari-o-dari was as yet hardly relieved. In past history it
took very many generations to do that, in New Guinea to-day it is
sometimes accomplished in ten years. And the Australian Church
as a whole neglects New Guinea—alas for the hardness of our
hearts and the poverty of our imaginations!
But let us look at certain other passages of the Old Testament.
Here is the fifth chapter of the first book of Samuel, and it
gives an example of what I described at the beginning of my article
as to cleaning and refurnishing.
“Now the Philistines had taken the Ark of God, and they brought
it from Ebenezer unto Ashdod. And the Philistines took the Ark
of God and took it into the house of Dagon and set it by Dagon.
And when they of Ashdod rose early on the morrow, behold, Dagon
was fallen upon his face to the earth before the Ark of the Lord.


And they took Dagon and set him in his place again. And when
they rose early on the morrow morning, behold, Dagon was fallen
upon his face to the ground before the Ark of the Lord, and the
head of Dagon and both the palms of his hands lay cut off upon
the threshold; only the stump of Dagon was left to him.” The
monstrous Fish-god of the Philistines was shattered before
the mysterious presence of the Ark of God.
The human heart may have become an idolatrous temple,
debased, degraded, and defiled; but if a Holy Presence enters into
it the idols are cast down, and though indeed they may be set up
again, yet if the Presence of God is invoked again and again the
idol will be dashed to pieces and annihilated.
Now go to the eighth chapter of the Prophet Ezekiel.
“The Spirit brought me in the visions of God to Jerusalem, to
the door of the gate of the inner court, where was the seat of the
image of jealousy. He brought me to the door of the court, and
when I looked, behold a hole in the wall, then said He unto me,
Son of man, dig in the wall; and when I had digged in the wall behold
a door’. And he said unto me, go in and behold the wicked abomina-
tions that they do here. So I went in and saw r , and behold every
form of creeping thing, and abominable beast, and all the idols of
the house of Israel. . . . Then said He unto me, Son of man, hast
thou seen what the elders of the House of Israel do in the dark,
every man in the chambers of his imagery? Thou shalt see yet
greater abominations.” Ezekiel is a prophet of the captivity—
•and certainly a great psychologist—and is, I suppose, trying to
prevent the corruption of the elders of Israel through the idolatries
with which they were surrounded, but he is despondently aware of
the degradation that is taking place in their souls. And in contrast
with that, look at another book relating to the captivity in Babylon.
In the third chapter of Daniel we are told of three young princes,
Shadrach, Meshach and Abed-nego. They had been given those
idolatrous names with the intention of causing them to forget their
homes and their religion. But among themselves they used the
deeply religious names, Hananiah (God is gracious), Azariah (God
is my help), Mishael (Who is like God). They preferred not to
“defile themselves with the portion of the King’s meat,” but lived
on a simple fare of herbs and beans. They opened their windows
morning by morning towards Jerusalem. And their leisure they
spent in mastering the learning of the Chaldeans. And then came
their ordeal by fire (though we need not try to say exactly what
the “fiery furnace” means), and they were equal to the occasion.
As they walked unsinged in the flames they were singing the Bene-
dicite. The words came naturally to their lips. As worshippers of
the true God they could see His glory in His creation. They first
found God in their prayers, and they were then able to see Him in
nature, their imaginations were filled with the fruits of His work.
That is the way with the greatest poets. They are not pantheists—
not “blue-domers”—nature worshippers (as Swinburne was, and as
Shelley was sometimes inclined to be). They are first of all wor-


shippers of God, like Wordsworth, and then narrators of His
works, drawing upon all nature to assist in an understanding of
His glory.
“Choose ye this day
Two sets of ideas were competing for the possession of the
imagination of those three children—the corruption of Babylonian
idolatry and the purity of the Hebrew religion—and by the exercise
of their will they chose to furnish the “chambers of their imagery”
with the latter and with “all lovely forms.” So they have left us
the beauty of their example and of their song. A similar alternative
is offered to the youth of to-day, and youth has to choose.
Some thirty-two years ago I went into a shipping office in
Charing Cross to book a passage for Australia. The day’s work had
only just begun, and the office boys were spreading out their ledgers
and their files of papers. At the back of the office, some distance
from me, but within hearing, two boys were discussing a paragraph
in the morning’s paper. It described a meeting held in one of the
big halls of London at which a great Christian leader, who is still
living, had appealed to men for purity of life. The first boy said:
“That’s all infernal cant, A man is an animal, and he has his
passions, and he has a right to indulge them, and meetings of that
kind are frequented by hypocrites.” The second boy replied, “A
man is more than an, animal, and he ought to control himself and
lead a decent life.” And the first rejoined, “Control himself and
lead a decent life! And who has; have you?” And the second boy
replied, rt Well, at any rate, Jesus Christ did.” And the first one
retaliated, “Don’t talk to me about Jesus Christ. He has nothing to
do with us; He wasn’t a man at all.”
In those few sentences there were shown most vividly the
divergent tendencies in two human souls. The one boy was refusing
to believe in the dignity of his nature, and it is much to be feared
that he would defile the image of God in him. The other one did
not claim to have mastered the desires of his flesh, but I think he
knew how to try and to Whom to go. I can picture him coming to
the Altar that his sinful body might be made clean by Christ’s
Body and his soul washed through His most precious Blood. I do
not care to picture what the other one would be doing.
I do not think that we can use our imaginations as we ought
unless we go to the source of inspiration and light which is to be
found in the worship of God. That illuminates the consciousness
at the time and stores the subconscious and goes right down, we
may suppose, into the unconscious. No two souls worship God in
the same way, but for all there is “the light that lighteth every man
that cometh into the world.” Our education may have been neglected
or it may have been fragmentary, but we can go on with it. The
materials are available, but I fear we shall make but poor use of
them unless we invite the Holy Ghost to direct our choices and lead
us into all the truth. He is able to do that working upon the realms
of consciousness, subconsciousness and also the unconscious surely.


Turn the Knob.
Some of us have not as yet got very far. There is, for example,
the slow-witted labourer in Ecclesiasticus whose thoughts and con-
versation hardly go beyond the beasts with which he works.
“How shall he become wise that holdeth the plough,
That glorieth in the shaft of the goad,
That driveth oxen, and is occupied in their labours,
And whose discourse is of the stock of bulls?
He will set his heart upon turning his furrows;
And his wakefulness is to give his heifers their fodder.”
(Eccles. xxxviii. 25, 26).
The Australian stockman has indeed, as a rule, a much wider
range of ideas, though life on a cattle station is sometimes an
unrelieved monotony of mud, mosquitoes and mob-moving, or again
of heat, thirst, flies, and the meanings of dying beasts.
But there is the resource of the wireless. That man, whose
concern is with the bulls and heifers, may sit and listen to-day to
the best music and lectures when his work is over. Perhaps he
does, and yet perhaps not; I have sometimes been surprised at the
poor quality of the stuff coming over at night in the ordinary way,
and providing a thin and colourless entertainment for the stockmen
as they sit in their huts after their tea. I have suggested that they
should turn the knob until they gain a more inspiring programme
which may be secured from some better station. But all this “radio”
work wants regulating. As in other things we can choose the kind
of wireless we will listen to, but it should all be under a Federal
control with someone like Sir John Reith to direct it. It is said
that the 8.8. C. is an example to the world. There the best minds
exercise the function of choosing for the people the sort of items
which they will enjoy, and which will do them good and not harm.
I cannot imagine any privilege or responsibility greater than that of
choosing for, and working upon, the public imagination, as a wise
censor on the top floor, or a bit above it! not in some dim basement.
In Australia itself we have not taken the matter in hand. We should
do. The proper selection of topics for the wireless under capable
handling will have more to do with the mind of the future than
anything else whatever.
New Guinea and Corinth.
I referred above to some of the more sinister place names in
New Guinea. I had the privilege of visiting that Mission in the
year 1916. In villages where Christian work had hardly begun, I
saw many fierce, grotesque and terrible specimens of humanity. And
then a few miles away I would be introduced to a people graceful,
dignified, statuesque, charming. I would remark, “This, of course,
must be quite a different tribe from those people we saw a while
ago.” And the reply would be, “No, these are people of the same
tribe, but those whom you saw first are not yet Christians, and the
people of the village we have now entered are almost entirely so.”
Over and over again it was evident that the Holy Spirit had sanctified


the souls of these primitive people, their imaginations had been
transformed, and the inward change was written in their faces and
their whole appearance. Whereas their thoughts had run upon cruel,
crafty and superstitious lines, dominated by fear of savage men and
evil spirits, they were now serene and secure in the love of one
another and of God, and many of them had a beauty of expression
even thrilling to behold.
I suppose that St. Paul found the idolatrous cities of the
Roman Empire much worse than any palaeolithic village
could be, regulated as it is by some kind of tribal law, whereas in
places like Corinth and Ephesus systems of religion, so called, were
actually organised cults of sensuality, their temples being the centres
of self-indulgence and degradation. Through that strange mixture
of an advanced civilisation with a riot of vice, the citizens would
have been more dreadful to deal with than savages. Yet St. Paul
witnessed the victory of grace among them. “Know ye not,” he
says, “that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God?
Be not deceived: neither fornicators nor idolaters nor adulterers,
nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with men, nor thieves,
nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall
inherit the Kingdom of God, and such were some of you; but ye
were washed, but ye were sanctified, but ye were justified in the
name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in the Spirit of our God.” (1
Cor. vi. 9-11).
To such people with such a history behind them, but now
converted and re-fashioned from the depths of their being, and
“bringing every thought into captivity to the obedience of Christ”
(2 Cor. x. 5), we look for reassurance when the corruptions of our
modern civilisation appal.
The Heart of Man.
It will be seen that in this article I have not written with the
firmness, decision and dogmatism which I commended to that exami-
nation candidate. She got through, and perhaps I have not, but I
doubt if the subject really admits of such treatment as I recommended
to her. I will close with two examples of the working of the
imagination, one from a fourteenth century Saint, and the other
from a recent Christian tract, which have both, I am sure, profound
psychological meanings, and illuminate the subject, though I leave it
mainly to my readers to determine how they do that. The first is
taken from Josephine Butler’s life of “Catharine of Siena”—that
passage which describes her three years’ spiritual conflict between
the ages of about fifteen and eighteen. Her parents hoped that she
would marry, and put forward “a young man of highly honourable
character and family,” but she was convinced that was not her
vocation. She was to become a member of the third order of St.
Dominic, but for those three years she went through a conflict of
great severity. “She was assailed by the most humiliating temptations
and by exciting phantoms of the imagination which haunted her,
sleeping and waking. She saw in her dreams impure orgies, wherein
men and women seemed to invite her by words and gestures to join


with them; she was tormented inwardly; her eyes, her ears, her
soul seemed to her to be defiled.” She augmented her vigils—the
enemy refused to retire. She seemed to see persons who came to
pity and advise her. “Why, poor little one,” they said, “do you
thus torture yourself so uselessly? Why all these efforts and self-
mortification? You will not be able to continue them; you will
destroy yourself, and become guilty of suicide. It is better to
renounce these austerities and enjoy the world while you are young;
you are naturally strong, and will soon recover health if you live as
other people do.” To all these suggestions Catharine only opposed
prayer. But “a still darker period arrived, in which her sufferings
were such as almost to deprive her of reason. Diabolical beings
seemed to pursue her with screams, inviting her to partake in their
abominations; the most cynical suggestions were poured into her
mind, and, to crown her affliction, her divine helper, who had usually
in the worst moments made His sustaining presence felt by her, now
seemed to have forsaken her, and she was left with no relief, visible
or invisible: her soul was plunged into a profound melancholy, and
the strength to continue in prayer seemed about to forsake her
The evil spirit seemed still to taunt her, saying, ‘Poor, miserable
creature, thou canst never pass thy whole life in this state; we will
torment thee to death, unless thou dost obey us.’ Catharine replied
with patience, yet with determination, ‘Be it so; I have chosen
suffering for Christ’s sake, and I am willing, if need be, to endure
these till death.’ Immediately on pronouncing this determination, a
great light seemed to descend from above, filling the place where she
kneeled with heavenly brightness. The devils left her, and One better
than the angels came and ministered to her. The Lord Jesus Himself
drew nigh to her, and conversed with her of her trial and her victory.
But she, like St. Anthony, said to Him, ‘Lord, where wast Thou when
my heart was so tormented?’ ‘I was in the midst of thy heart,’ He
replied, ‘Ah, Lord,’ she answered, ‘Thou art everlasting Truth, and
I humbly bow before Thy Word; but how can I believe that Thou
wert in my heart when it was filled with such detestable thoughts?’
The Lord asked her, ‘Did these thoughts and temptations give thee
pleasure or pain?’ ‘An exceeding pain and sadness,’ she replied; to
whom the Lord said; ‘Thou wast in woe and sadness, because I was
hidden in the midst of thy heart; My presence it was which rendered
those thoughts insupportable to thee; thou didst strive to repel them,
because they filled thee with horror, and because thou didst not
succeed, thy spirit was bowed down with sorrow. When the period
which I had determined for the duration of the combat had elapsed,
I sent forth the beams of My light, and the shades of hell were
dispelled, because they cannot resist that light. Because thou hast
accepted these trials with thy whole heart, thou art delivered from
them forever; it is not thy trouble that pleases Me, but the will that
has supported that trouble courageously.’ ”
Now it may be that Raymond of Capua and other friends of
Catharine, her contemporaries, describe her spiritual conflict in lan-
guage that we should not use to-day, but we get here a glimpse of
something unmistakeably real. It resembles that experience of


Christian in the Valley of Humiliation, when hideous suggestions were
shot into his mind, as it turned out, by a hobgoblin sitting on his
shoulder. What does it mean in psychological terms?—“the conduct
of this generous young athlete alone in the arena,” as Raymond calls
it, who returns victorious and becomes for the future a fit teacher
and guide of men to whom among all her counsels she gave most
frequently this, “Quit yourselves like men; be strong in the Lord,
and in the power of His might?” From what region of the sub-
conscious or the unconscious did these fearful storms surge up into
the conscious soul of Catharine? I do not know, but suffice it to
say that that woman in the fourteenth century, being no more than
a dyer’s daughter, dealt with, and, indeed, dictated to, popes and
kings, and changed the face of Europe. The victories which she
achieved in the realm of the imagination affect the world till to-day.
I have asserted more than once in this article that we can, to a
great extent, choose what we will think about and what we will not.
Those who have tried to assert their right of choice know the cost.
Catharine knew it to the uttermost, but she prevailed.
And now for the tract with which I conclude this article. It
was in Chinese, and was shown to me by a Christian Reader of that
race. It was illustrated, so I could understand its drift although
I could not read the letterpress.
The first picture was that of a Chinese face, cold, hard, empty,
cheerless, without a spark of hope or vitality, set on lines sullen,
dull and bitter. Below the man’s face his heart was shown, as in
a diagram, to be inhabited by evil-looking beasts—the monkey, the
pig, the jackal, the viper, the scorpion, the toad, the fox—symbolis-
ing, I suppose, the seven deadly sins.
Some pages further on, after columns of Chinese symbols,
the face appeared again, the same and not yet the same, it was
now convulsed with pain, marked by every token of extreme conflict
—an agony of inward struggle—shown in the drawn features.
And the heart shown below again, as in a diagram, had the ap-
pearance of flames kindling here and there, and disturbing the evil
beasts in their occupation. They seemed to be meditating flight.
And again after some pages the face appeared once more. It
had still the marks of stern conflict, but it was further changed
with a light of hope appearing in the eyes, and the set of the features
seemed to indicate courage. And below, once again, the heart
appeared, but this time consumed with flame, and all the evil beasts
had disappeared. While above the heart was a dove with wings
outspread-
Once more the same face with the same lineaments and con-
tours, but still further changed, with an expression of victory shining
from it, with courage and hope in every line. And the heart was
there, below, again, with the dove still brooding over it, and set up
in the midst of the heart the figure of Christ crucified.
Doubtless the convert had learned to say, “Absit mihi gloriare
nisi in cruce.” Catharine, and the Mystic who wrote the tract, had
close affiinity.


“Keep thine heart with all diligence for out of it are the issues
of life.” (Proverbs iv., 23). But it takes more than the exercise
of the will to do that. I have said that to a great extent we can
choose what we will think about and what we will not, and yet, as
we all know, there are times when we find ourselves unable to expel
the thoughts and images which we hate. It demands an object so
supremely attractive as to overcome the claims of all rival objects.
Some of the Eastern mystics, and some Christian Scientists claim
to have perfect control of the imagination. I hope they have, but
question whether anything like it can be gained by any means less
than Faith in the Incarnation, the Cross, and the Resurrection.


FRIENDSHIP.
There are certain great natural forces upon which we rely, and
which we constantly use without actually knowing what they are.
We make use of gravitation though we don’t know what it is. And
when, for instance, Professor Einstein tells us that it is dependent
upon the curvature of the fourth-dimensional-space-time-continuum,
we don’t know very much better. None the less, in all our move-
ments we depend upon it, and in our remotest astronomical cal-
culations we assume it, and we are not disappointed. Again, what
is light? We don’t know. Newton had a corpuscular theory
about it, Clerk Maxwell gave us an undulatory theory,
and now I understand that we hold something of a mixture
of both. We make an increasing use also of electricity, and con-
tinue in more and more astonishing ways to prove its powers, but
we don’t know what it is. Life, too, is expressed in innumerable
forms, all profoundly interesting, and all affording further informa-
tion about life; but what life is we do not know. If we leave the
physical realm and move into the spiritual, we find there forces with
whose effects we are to some extent familiar though we cannot say
what they are. The greatest force without doubt is love. We are
acquainted with many of its manifestations, and we continue to
make further discoveries about it, but in the last resort we do not
know what it is, any more than we know what light is. Love is mani-
fest in manifold guises, from all of which we can learn something of
its potency, but the more we learn the more certain it becomes that
we shall never exhaust the enquiry. My object now is to look at
one of love’s manifold aspects. The principal reason for our being-
in this world is that we may learn of it by experience, and I am going
to pursue the most obvious and elementary line of enquiry.
“And so our life, with all it brings of joy and woe,
Of hope and fear—believe the aged friend—
Is just our chance of the prize of learning love,
How love might be, hath been indeed, and is,
And that we hold henceforth to the uttermost such prize,
Despite the envy of the world.”
Between the years 1830 and ’4O Pere Lacordaire was deliver-
ing, in Notre Dame, in the presence of the Archbishop of Paris,
those Conferences in which he considered some of the great doctrines
of religion. In one of them he says that love appears principally
in three aspects: first the love of dependence, second the love of
equals, and third the love of protection. If we could fully say what
love is we could also say what God is, and indeed St. John equates
the one to the other. He tells us that “God is love,” and therefore
so far as we know love, we know God. “He that loveth is begotten


of God and knoweth God.” Further discoveries of love are further
discoveries of God, and it becomes certain to those who love that
the possibilities of love are infinite, as God Himself is infinite.
Those who have entered upon discovery of that kind cannot cease
to pursue it, and they are well aware that the realm in which they
travel is unbounded. And love has the mysterious quality that the
more of it you give away the more you have; and when people give it
to each other, their wealth in this treasure continues to increase with-
out limit, and they have always the more to give to everybody else.
Each of those three aspects of love to which Lacordaire refers can
be seen in God Himself. Reversing the order: first, in God there is
the love of protection—“ His mercy is over all his works”; second,
there is the love of equals, which subsists between the Three Per-
sons of the Trinity; and third, there is the love of dependence, since
God by His Incarnation is able to enjoy the love of a Mother upon
whom He depends.
Wherever love is at work God is at work, and by watching it
we can learn of Him, but in this axticle let us consider love in one
of its aspects so far as it can be distinguished from the ether two,
not so much the love of dependence or protection as that of equals.
I am going to discuss, so far as I know how, that mysterious thing
we call friendship—love manifested between equals.
The Formation of Friendship.
I spend a good deal of my time in schools, and though I do not
look very deeply into the work of the curriculum, I do watch the
growth of friendships between boys and girls. This is the kind of
process which I have often observed. A and B arrive from distant
homes, say one from the coast and another from the far west, at
some Church School where they are to receive their education. In
those homes, from which they come, perhaps they have been the
centres of interest, and possibly they have been made rather too
much of. On first arriving at school they feel lonely. To be only
one in so great a multitude is a very new and strange experience,
and at first bewildering. The boy or girl sits upon a bench beneath
a tree, gazing vaguely at the landscape, and wondering what is
going to happen next—perhaps indulging regretful thoughts of the
home that now seems so far away. A is moping in one corner of
the grounds and B in another. But before long something very
interesting happens. A and B discover each other, and they enter
upon a conversation about things in general. Perhaps they are
in the same class, and they observe to one another that the lessons
are most frightfully difficult. They have never seen anything like
them before. From that topic they go to others, football or cricket, or
tennis, or whatever is in season. They touch upon the advantages
or disadvantages of the school Tuck Shop, or upon the qualities,
attractive or alarming, of members of the school staff. They in-
dulge in forecasts of what they will do when the holidays come.
They offer to assist each other in grappling with those lessons which
are the most formidable that they have ever seen. Conversations
of this kind may become a daily event, and they look forward to


the time when they will be able to indulge them. Sometimes they
become so absorbed that they are almost late for next school, and
have to run hard across the quad, to reach their class-rooms. A
and B are in fact becoming friends, and it is a most mysterious
process. Before it began they were just A and B, separate indi-
viduals. Now something has happened, and their partnership means
a great deal more than merely A plus B. The thing that has taken
place is rather like what Abt Vogler describes after he has been
extemporising on the organ. He is dealing with notes in “threes,”
while I am at present considering friends in “twos.” But I am
going on to “threes” and “fours,” and larger combinations; so Abt.
Vogler’s thoughts will help. He is speaking of sounds that melt and
combine in chords, and from being simple separate notes blend into
narmonies, which are of a higher order than elementary sounds.
“And I know not if, save in this,
Such gift be allowed to man,
That out of three sounds he frame,
Not a fourth sound, but a star . . .
And there! ye have heard and seen:
Consider and bow the head.”
The mystery of the union of human souls in friendship is, even
more, one that causes you to bow your head. We can follow the
process to some extent.
The Effect of Friendship.
As the days go by, A and B become more and more interested
in each other, and their talk ranges over all the circumstances of
life as it is at home and as it is at school. As their intelligence
improves, they wander on into literature and music, books of ad-
venture and science and all the other new realms which school pre-
sents to them. This kind of thing becomes a daily enjoyment, and,
meanwhile, being young persons of sound quality, they arrive at an
increased appreciation of each other. A forms a high opinion of
B, and B returns the compliment. These opinions are very likely
far too flattering, but that doesn’t matter. The effect of their
friendship is that A tries to rise to the level of B’s good opinion,
and B attempts the same in respect to A, They vie with one another
in their endeavour to reach a higher level of performance both in
their studies and in their games. They make plans together. They
have adventures together. They get into scrapes together, and get
out of them together, and altogether life becomes increasingly at-
tractive and romantic.
What is really happening? I should say that we are observing
an elementary but most vivid example of what St. Paul calls, a
“Fellowship of the Holy Ghost.” A and B, if they had remained iso-
lated individuals, would have been uninteresting and unprogressive
persons. Now they have contracted a friendship they become in-
creasingly interesting and increasingly progressive every day. The
process has been described in Scripture. The classical example in
the Old Testament is that of the friendship of David and Jonathan.


<- The soul of Jonathan clave unto the soul of David, and he loved
him as his own soul.” Those two youths were instinctively at-
tracted to one another, and you can see as you read the story how
rapidly they both profited by that friendship. Sometimes they went
hunting together, often they discussed politics together, occasionally
they engaged together in warlike adventure. And the remarkable
thing about their friendship is its immense generosity. David is
loyal to the House of Saul, and will risk his life for that monarch,
and to preserve his kingdom, and there is nothing he is not prepared
to do for Jonathan’s sake. Jonathan, on the other hand, looks to
David as a superior character, and says to him: “You shall be king,
and I shall be next to you.” But David won’t have it so, he will
stand for Saul and his house. There is a passage in the 23rd chap-
ter of the first book of Samuel where it is said that “Jonathan went
unto David in the wood and strengthened his hand in God.” That
is a very remarkable expression, and when I am reading it to Aus-
tialian boys I say that Jonathan went unto David in the bush. It
means that when David was discouraged by Saul’s unjust persecu-
tion, Jonathan was able to put heart into him, and assure him of
the great service he was to render to the kingdom, and to increase
his faith that the good hand of God was over them both. That is
all typical of the generous sympathy of friends. We know that Saul
and Jonathan were to fall in battle, and David was to succeed to
the throne, but we also know that one of David’s first concerns was to
ask if there were still left anyone of the house of Saul to whom
he could render a service—to whom he could “show the kindness
of God.”
This theme, with variations, is really the basis of all the most
interesting literature. All the best school stories revolve round it.
1 suppose it has never been better done than in the description of
the famous friendship between Tom Brown and Harry East at
Rugby. They were both young pickles. But the wise Dr. Arnold
was glad to observe that in spite of their naughtiness they con-
tinued to act and re-act upon one another, in such a way that their
characters were refined and strengthened. All the story books deve-
lop this theme. In Rudyard Kipling’s treatment of it the friends
are a trio, Stalky, Beetle, and McTurk. Father John as Chaplain
has few greater pleasures than in going to the study of these
young persons and noting the remarkable vitality and vigour of
their friendship, and further observing the powerful effect for good
it has on the house.
In these most exhilarating friendships A and B engage in a
process of mutually elevating each other. A decides that B is a
most remarkable boy. B forms the same estimate of A, and they
have both got to rise to the required level. Woe betide them if they
don’t. Friendship is a most stimulating experience which the world
knows, and friends are most exacting in what they demand of one
another. They have idealised each other in a most generous way,
and they will not endure to have their hopes disappointed. That
is why the quarrels of friends, when they do fall out, are so fierce


and fiery, and also why their reconciliations are so rapid and gene-
rous, when each resolves anew to live up to the expectations of the
other. In this, as I have said, I believe that we see the creative-
work of the Holy Ghost, and that is why the subject of friendship
is so absoi'bing.
True Friendship and False.
But it is necessary to pronounce a warning, and it is this, God
never creates a good thing but that the world, the flesh and the
devil begin to devise counterfeits and spurious imitations of that,
good thing. I need do no more than rapidly indicate some of the
debased coins that don’t ring true. My readers can think of other
cases for themselves.
When Polonius gives advice to Laertes he says to him (“Hamlet,”'
act 1, scene 3, 1. 62).
“Those friends thou hast, and their adoption tried,
Grapple them to thy soul with hoops of steel.”
But I am afraid Polonius is really guided by self-interest. He
wants Laertes to make useful friends, with the hope that they will
advance his prospects in life. That is quite the wrong motive. There
is no adventure and no romance. Polonius was a talkative old
fool, and Shakespeare consigns him to an ignominious fate, being
spitted by the sword of Hamlet, who suspects him of being a “rat
behind the arras.”
If A says to himself, “I am going to cultivate the friendship of
B, because I think that he will be of advantage to me in various
ways,” it means that A is not yet worthy of a friendship of any
kind. The deep principle of friendship is that it is more ready to
give than to receive. Sometimes in the commercial world contracts
of a shallow and spurious sort are effected between those who
enter into a partnership, and each is thinking how much he can get
out of the other. These people are not friends at all, it would be
better to describe them as reciprocal cut-throats. And before long
that base and insincere partnership is shattered.
Again a friendship is not a mutual admiration society. The
most terrific things I have ever heard have been said to me by my
friends. Their criticisms are much more penetrating than those
of any number of enemies. “Faithful are the wounds of a friend.”
Hear what Sir Walter Raleigh says about it: “Thou mayest be
sure that he that will in private tell thee of thy faults, is thy
friend, for he adventures thy dislike, and doth hazard thy hatred.”
Real friends are never mutual “smoogers,” they do not want
adulation, as the Latin grammar used to say:—
“Cavendum est ne assentatori patefacias aures” (“Beware lest
you open your ears to the voice of the flatterer”).
Cicero refers to this in his essay “About Friendship.” I quote
a few lines of that well-known book. “It was a saying of Cato’s,”
he reminds us, “that some men were more obliged to their inveterate
enemies than to their complacent friends, as they frequently heard
the truth from the one, but never from the other,” but there I think


he is wrong; and he goes on, “As nothing is more suitable to the
genius and spirit of true friendship than to give and to receive advice
—to give it, I mean, with freedom, but without rudeness, and to
receive it not only without reluctance, but with patience—so nothing
is more injurious to the connection, than flattery, compliment and
adulation.” Cicero is no doubt quite right there, but I’m sorry to
say that he could swallow a great deal of flattery himself, and was
accustomed to invite it. He is a tedious and pedantic person. I
don’t think he knew what a genuine friendship was. He got rid of
bis wife in order to marry his ward, who was rich.
And of course there are all the enervating types of mutual
idolization, which are mutually degrading, and not far removed from
the various forms of moral degeneracy. Real friends do not gloat
upon each other’s supposed perfections, physical or otherwise; they
can always afford to tease each other in a manner that affords enter-
tainment to the world. And real friendships toughen character by
their frank interchange of home truths.
There are other caricatures, counterfeits and spurious imita-
tions of the real thing, which either wear out quickly, or pass into
mutual repugnance. We need not further particularise them. We
need only to insist that the abiding characteristic of a true friend-
ship is that it furnishes a mutual stimulus, compelling those who
share in it continually to seek a higher standard of life and conduct.
It expels meanness, weakness, conceit, self-complacency and illusion,
and provides a constant motive for better attainment on both sides.
There is at work, all the time, a kind of double leverage. A lifts B
and B lifts A towards the ideals that they have already conceived of
each other, and this process is so powerful that in a really great
friendship they lift one another to heights quite unforeseen and un-
dreamt of.
“And so our life with all it brings
Is just our chance of the prize. . . .”
And those school friendships become lifelong, and they are of increas-
ing value on both sides.
Hear what Oliver Wendell Holmes has said about it:—
“There is no friend like an old friend
Who has shared our morning days,
No greeting like his welcome,
No homage like his praise.
Fame is the scentless sunflower,
With gaudy crown of gold;
But friendship is the breathing rose,
With sweets in every fold.”
The Boy and the Girl.
Again, I watch sometimes with an interest and delight to which
age is privileged, the first introduction of a boy and a girl—both of
them of a quality to gladden the earth—both Christians in fact. She
murmurs “Pleased to meet you”; he replies, “How good of you,” and


they glance at each other for a moment or two somewhat shyly and
without an immediate flow of conversation. They are really too much
interested in each other for the ordinary commonplaces to seem
worth while. They experience a mutual attraction, and yet at the
same time a certain mutual awe. The reason for that they could
not tell us, because they are too young—at 18, say—to have thought
it out, but the actual reason is this: each one is conscious of the pre-
sence of the Holy Ghost in the other, and that, while it delights and
fascinates them, also touches and thrills them with a deep sense of
mystery. There is something of a pause before they launch into
conversation, but ere long their tongues are loosed and they chatter
gaily enough, and become quite at home with one another. As time
passes it may be that they arrive at a mutual understanding as of
brother and sister. It may be no more than that, and their world is
a better place because of it. But it may become much more than
that. It may be that the boy has met the girl who is to him the most
wonderful girl in the world, and the girl at the same time decides
that the boy is the most wonderful boy in the world. There we have
material for the most lofty and exhilarating romance; that is why a
true Christian courtship is an event of really world-wide importance.
It brings a new element into life, it is capable of thrilling humanity
from one end to the other. So far from being a sentimental experi-
ence, it is one of the most exacting of all human adventures, and
makes the greatest demands upon those who engage in it. Not all
are worthy, and counterfeits abound. So far as I know, the ideal
courtship can only take place between a boy and a girl who con-
tinually seek the sanctification of the Holy Ghost. The best of them
are wise enough to see that they have found a most holy and mar-
vellous thing, and that its progress to perfection depends upon
sacramental grace, and that their joy is derived from the fact that
they are loving one another in Christ.
Group Friendship.
I began with “twos,” and I said I should go on to “threes” and
“fours,” and larger combinations than that. Creative powers are
at work when friendships are forming, and they are even more won-
derfully manifested when groups of boys or girls or groups of men
or women are drawn into close association by strong enthusiasms,
which move them in the pursuit of common purpose. In the life of
Bishop Mandell Creighton, by his wife, there is a passage which
deals with his time at Oxford. He forms a group with three other
young men. They describe themselves as the “Quadrilateral.” By
their enthusiasm, literary, learned, political, and also religious, they
act and react upon one another with tremendous effect. The proper-
ties of triangles are remarkable enough, as you may know, and those
of quadrilaterals are far more complex and amazing. And so indeed
that which Lacordaire calls the love of equals goes on working itself
out in new groupings and combinations with ever more wonderful
effect in all the various forms of Christian society, until you arrive
at that which includes them all, namely, the Communion of Saints,


which I take to be the supreme manifestation of the fellowship of
the Holy Ghost.
We might look at many groups of the larger kind. There are in
history examples of companionships of chivalry, of adventure, of
patriotism, of discovery, of art, of science, of religion—associations
of all kinds based upon convictions held in common. And they have,
in many cases, had an effect upon the world so powerful that they
will never be forgotten. Tennyson found his theme in the knights
of Arthur’s table, and the heights of heroism to which those men
helped to raise one another through their devotion to their faith and
to their King. The stories are legendary, but they represent facts
by which the world is permanently enriched. But come down to the
fourteenth century, and look at the Swiss patriots defending them-
selves against the tyranny of the Austrians. The “William Tell”'
stories are no doubt also to some extent legendary, but there is fact
behind them. The ardent and generous comradeship of those Swiss
patriots is described in Schiller’s great play. In the second act we
see the 33 men meeting at midnight in the Rutli, a meadow on the
side of the Alps. They are encircled by dark pine trees, and the
snow-peaks rise far into the sky above them. The moon shines down
upon the scene. They are William Tell, Arnold von Melchtall, Walter
Furst, Werner von Stauffacher, and some thirty more. They stand
in a circle in the moonlight, and lifting their hands to heaven, they
repeat the words of their oath. It has come down to us in various
forms, but this is one of them:—“We promise never to betray nor to
forsake one another, to think not of ourselves, but to think only of
our country. The Austrian, his friends and his servants, we will’
drive utterly from the land, and this we will do, if it may be, with-
out the shedding of blood; but if not, we are prepared to give our
lives in order that we may hand on to our sons the freedom that our
fathers left to us. God and His Holy Ones helping us, in this bond
we will live and die.”
That scene took place about six weeks before the end of the
year 1315, and they had not intended to act until New Year’s Day,
but you know how Gesler’s cap on the pole, and then the apple on
his son’s head which Tell clove in twain with an arrow from one-
hundred paces, precipitated the crisis, and the next arrow was
reserved for Herman Gesler himself.
Legendary stories—yes, but they represent the working of a
patriotic fellowship of the highest quality, which produced results,
which remain in history. Switzerland, surrounded by powerful and
aggressive Empires, has maintained her freedom through the cen-
turies, and in Geneva was found the home and headquarters of the
League of Nations, which strove for the peace of the world.
Or look at British art in the last two centuries. In the 18th
it was partly an imitation of the classical style and partly a descent
to materialism. There were of course great portrait painters like
Sir Joshua Reynolds, Thomas Gainsborough, and landscape painters
like David Cox and Peter de Wint, but the period lacked inspiration.
Few painters of that time even attempted to suggest spiritual things..


The inspiration of faith was recovered for British art by a group of
painters of 1850 and onwards, whose names are familiar—the pre-
Raphaelite Brotherhood, beginning with William Holman Hunt,
Dante Gabriel Rosetti, and Sir John Everett Millais. The Brother-
hood expanded, and gathered in Michael Rossetti, James Collinson,
Thomas Woolner the sculptor; and closely associated with them were
Sir Edward Burne Jones, Ford Madox Brown, and William Morris.
You have only to recall these names for visions of great pictures to
rise before you. The mystical and the spiritual came back into
British art through the work of those men. If you go now to any
of our great galleries or exhibitions you will hardly fail to see pic-
tures of Christ and the Madonna and the Saints, and many other
subjects inspired by faith. We owe a very great debt to the pre-
Raphaelites. Those men working singly would have attained some-
thing, but perhaps not very much. When they came into association
and helped to inspire each other, they were carried to heights which
they would otherwise never have reached.
Or consider fellowships of sacred learning. In 1933 we kept
the Centenary of the Oxford Movement, which sprang from a friend-
ship between a small group of Oriel tutors, and has since been felt
in every part of the Anglican world, and indeed far beyond it. In
my youth—l remember the ’seventies, when the Tractarian Revival
had been in operation only 40 years—it was not unusual to find
churches with ill-furnished Altars, just tables with a piece of red
baize thrown over them, where the Holy Communion was not cele-
brated more than once a quarter. It would be hard to find a parish
now where there is not at least a regular Sunday Eucharist, or where
the Altar is not reverently adorned. I need not now speak of all
that goes with that. Last year was the fiftieth anniversary of
the publication of Lux Mundi. What does not the Church owe to
that other group of Oxford men—Charles Gore, Henry Scott Holland,
Edward Talbot, John Illingworth, William Campion, Walter Locke,
and the others, for the restoration of her brightness? And since
then the writers of “Foundations” and of “Essays Catholic and
Critical,” groups of ardent theologians moved by a common purpose,
have helped the Church in a similar way.
But something of the same kind is happening wherever there is
a congregation of Christian people. Encouraged by Christian sur-
roundings, the highest forms of Christian friendship appear, and the
good works carried out in common produce, in those who share them,
mutual reactions which enhance the value of their characters without
limit. Wherever the Christian fellowship is a reality we are per-
mitted to see something of the work of the Creator Spirit, and by
further proving the impulses and effects of love to make further
discoveries about God.


DISTRIBUTION.
There is a Dominical saying, not recorded in the Gospels, but
known to St. Paul, “It is more blessed to give than to receive.”
Now of course the world doesn’t believe that. The world
thinks it’s more blessed, and more fortunate and more desirable
to receive than to give—hence economic nationalism, with all its
frightful absurdities—wholesale destruction of primary products
sufficient to feed all the hungry a dozen times over. I needn’t give
the figures of sheep, and cattle and pigs destroyed, millions of bags
of coffee thrown into the Pacific, hundreds of thousands of gallons
of milk poured down the Hudson, wheat burnt for fuel in furnaces,
shiploads of oranges thrown into the sea—we know all about that.
The world theory of giving and receiving, so far as it is being-
demonstrated at this mvoment, is to destroy the primary products,
and then to restrict them lest they should grow too fast again and
lower prices. So much for the world’s theory of giving and receiving.
The Church knows what Jesus Christ said, but does she really re-
member His words? Does she take the risk of acting upon them?
Is she daring enough to do it?
Now in such an article as this, I shall not be expected to deal
with economic problems, neither indeed can I. What I think I
had best do is to attempt to illustrate the blessedness of giving above
(hat of receiving from practical examples that come to me in my
life as I go about the bush and occasionally visit the towns.
I have not ready a solution of the world’s economic problems,
but I am going to try and show the lines on which one might be
approached. We can look at treasure of three kinds:—
1. Gold and what it will buy—a very poor thing relatively.
2. The Treasure of Knowledge and what it effects in life. The
best treasure to which the natural man can attain.
3. The still higher treasure bestowed on Christian souls by the
Spirit of God. That is the treasure of Heaven, but it is also avail-
able to any extent for us on earth.
We have enormous wealth in commodities, but they have
become so largely non-negotiable that they get us into endless
trouble, and often, we can think of no way out except to destroy
them. So that while the world is much too rich, vast numbers are
in the deepest poverty and destitution.
The Treasure of Knowledge.
Knowledge is a very different thing, and cannot be imprisoned
by tariff walls. Eight years ago Professor Einstein was crossing
the Atlantic on his way to visit Pasadena to make some very refined


investigations into the velocity of light. The cinematograph people
at Los Angeles offered him, by radio, $5OOO a week to perform for
their “Talkies.” He declined, regretting that his time would be
fully occupied. They raised it to $lO,OOO. He declined again.
They were mystified. At Sandy Hook the journalists came on
board, and hoped to draw the Professor from his absorption in the
rows of triple integrals and the hyper-eliptic functions that covered
the pages of his notebooks. He was not very communicative. At
length one bold young man said, “Do, Professor, give us your views
of the American girl.” “Oh,” said Einstein, “the American girl—
she is an oval mass of bent space time, being thrown off like elec-
trons from swiftly rotating nithol-watts, with all the speed of an
idzol.” I don’t know what the journalist made of that. He had
had a glimpse of scientific absorption, and the “talkie” people had
perhaps learned that truth is more precious than fine gold. Or were
they regretting that they had not raised the figure again? And
none-the-less, Einstein has won from the mysterious Universe truths
which will sway thought for centuries, and bear fruit for all the
world. And, remember, that so fast as a great investigator wrests
from nature her closely-guarded secrets, he gives them away to
the whole of mankind. The great laboratories are continually ex-
changing their results and scattering them broadcast. Scholars
everywhere are supremely generous, and their liberality extends
to all who take pains to think.
Generous Scientists.
I can offer my readers one very simple instance of the generosity
of learned men. I lately tried to compose a speech on the Alphabet,
for the benefit of a school, and found myself in great ignorance on
the subject. No less than five Professors, three in Sydney and
two in Melbourne, came to my aid, gave me interviews and books,
and poured their treasures at my feet. And one aged Egyptologist,
to clear up one point, came 60 miles into Sydney and expounded
to me the history of the letter “s” from the pyramids onward.
Learned men are so generous that it would be the wisdom of society
to treat generously those who desire to become learned.
It must be remembered that the path of learning is usually
steep and rugged. It will always be steep, but it need not be barri-
caded and walled off, as to many it is even now. There is no reason,
in these days, why they should suffer the intellectual privation which
was the unhappy lot of those who called forth the sympathy of Gray
in his Elegy.
“But knowledge to their eyes her ample page
Rich with the spoils of time did ne’er unfold,
Chill penury repressed their noble rage,
And froze the genial current of their soul.”
Where ability exists it should always receive encouragement
The educational ladder should be much wider at the top—not to
induce the boys and girls to rush up and scramble for prizes, but
that they may join the company of the great distributors who handle
real treasure.


But, reflect for a moment on our debt to a few of the great
scientists whose names are best known. Where would some of us
be to-day if it had not been for people like Joseph Lord Lister,
Professor Louis Pasteur, and Madame Curie. And I must pay a
personal tribute to the doctors. I have often been on the table,
but I have got off again, confident of renewed health, and knowing
that the charges would be only nominal—and that aids recovery.
Dr. Anton Breinl cured me of New Guinea malaria in 1916. He
had been at work for some years on the problem, as a member of
the Liverpool Tropical School of Medicine, and then in the Towns-
ville Institute. In 1914 he joined a scientific expedition up the Fly
River, from the Gulf of Papua, and on coming home developed
malaria. He tested his own method upon himself, using an injec-
tion of a very subtle compound of arsenic in addition to the normal
big doses of quinine, and he was entirely successful. When I went
to him in 1916 with the same disease, he examined my blood and
said, “You have only about 7,000,000 microbes. The cure will take
from three to four months.” I followed the treatment faithfully,
and was cured in three. And that method of cure was no sooner
perfected than it became the property of the Tropical Schools
throughout the world.
Madame Curie,
The pursuit of knowledge, like most other pursuits in these
days, is speeded by the specialists; the reviews tell us that progress
in atomic physics, every six months, exceeds that of the previous
20 years. And that applies to every six months in relation to every
previous 20 years. Have not the Curie-Joliots synthetically pro-
duced in the laboratory the 93rd element, and have they not caused
many substances to become radio-active by bombarding them with
electrons of hydrogen? Now I admit I don’t quite understand, at
this point, what I am talking about, but they do, and their brilliant
researches will presently avail to lift more of the burdens of
anxiety and suffering from the world; and remember that the great
scientists give away their discoveries as fast as they make them.
When Madame Curie was being feted in the United States, and was
invited to demand anything she wished from the generous American
people, she made the request that there might be purchased for her
as much as a gramme of radium, in order that use might be made
of her discovery for the relief of suffering. That is typical of the
scientist.
I take a passage from the life of that great woman by her daugh-
ter, Eve Curie, in which an American lady, Mrs. Meloney, is quoted
describing an interview she had with Madame Curie in May, 1920,
for which she had been making request for years. The great scien-
tist was not fond of publicity. The interview at last took place.
Mrs. Meloney explained that American women were interested in
Madame Curie’s great work, and apologised for intruding upon her
precious time. And she goes on, “To put me at my ease Madame
Curie began to talk about America. ‘America,’ she said, ‘has about


50 grammes of radium. Four of them are in Baltimore, six in
Denver, seven in New York.’ She went on naming the location
of every grain. ‘And in France?’ I asked. ‘My laboratory has
hardly more than a gramme.’ ‘You have only a gramme?’
“ ‘I? Oh, I have none. It belongs to my laboratory.’
“I suggested royalties on her patents. The revenues from such
patents should make her a very rich woman. Quietly she said:—
“ ‘Radium was not to enrich anyone. Radium is an element.
It belongs to all people.’
‘lf you had the whole world to chcose from.’ 1 asked, impul-
sively, ‘what would you take?’
"And Madame Curie replied gently: T need a gramme of radium
to continue my researches, but I cannot buy it; radium is too dear
for me.’ ”
Mrs. Meloney rapidly got to work, and being the editress of
a great New York magazine, she didn’t take long. The gramme
of radium was presented personally to Madame Curie by President
Harding on May 20th, 1921. It had cost 100,000 dollars. The
biographer remarks, “Humanity needs dreamers, for whom the
dis-interested development of an enterprise is so captivating that
it becomes impossible for them to devote their care to their own
material profit.”
That is a good example of the free and unhindered distribution of
the treasure of knowledge, which no frontiers can confine.
The Treasure of the Saints.
Yes, but we are going to a level even higher than that. There
is the third kind of wealth that the Saints possess—“as poor yet
making many rich.” They have a higher treasure than the most
advanced scientific knowledge. It exists in their souls—moved and in-
spired by the Spirit of God. Theirs is indeed the very treasure of
Heaven. But it is always available for their expenditure in the
world all around them. When our Lord Jesus Christ said that we
were to “lay up treasure in Heaven,” He did not mean that we
were to hoard it with a view to some special advantage in a future
life; He meant, I think, that it was to be stored only in order
that it could be given away. The people who have treasure in
Heaven are “the world’s best bankers,” because they can make
unlimited drafts which will always be honoured. In the Chapel of
the Arena at Padua there are two pictures by the great artist
Giotto di Bondone, of the fourteenth century (1276-1336). One of
them “Invidia” (Jealousy) is a terrible figure, and she must have
startled the ladies of that day. She walks among flames. Her
hands are claws, and in one she clutches a bag of money, from which
no gift will be dispensed. She has a greatly enlarged ear, which
listens for every breath of scandal. Her tongue shoots a long way
out of her mouth and becomes a serpent, which turns round and bites
her; and from the front of her head there grows a horn which curls
over and pierces her neck. It is a terrible picture. It will be
a relief to look at the other one, “Caritas” (Love). She is sublime.


Her face suggests all that St. Paul said about love in the thirteenth
chapter of the first of Corinthians. She is very simply dressed, but
the ground at her feet is strewn with bags of money which people
have put there ready for her to give away. With her right hand
she is bestowing on someone a dish containing many fruits; her left
hand is lifted high, and Christ Himself is leaning down to her and
placing in that hand still richer gifts. The benefits she spreads
round her are always increasing. The more she gives the more
she has, and the more she gives again. What the great Giotto has there
shown us comes true in all the people who distribute the gifts of
God. If we try to keep them to ourselves they wither, but when
we give them away they become more and more abundant. About
the year ’9B, Montague John Stone-Wigg went to become first
Bishop of New Guinea, and I remember the Acting-Governor of
Queensland at the time said, how deplorable it was that so gifted
a man should be sent away to waste his life among the cannibals.
But you are aware what great response came from the tribes of New
Guinea to his Apostolic ministry, and I expect you are also aware
that even greater harvests of the Spirit have been gathered since
his time, and they go on increasing. And if the Church had selfishly
insisted on keeping Stone-Wigg in Queensland, she would have lost
immeasurably.
In October, 1939, there took place the consecration of their
■cathedral at Dogura, built of concrete in the Gothic style. On our
scale of value, it would have cost at least £25,000, but all the work
was given by the Natives.
Treasure from New Guinea.
I was permitted in 1916 to read the Diaries which Samuel
Tomlinson had written in 1891-2. Much of the material had never
been published. I produce one episode. Tomlinson and his wife
and a carpenter, three white people, were at Wedau, the village
next Dogura. Attacks of fever were almost incessant, varied by
cheering messages from the war-like Boianaians and Radavans, to
the effect that they were coming to kill the “dimdims” (foreigners).
Sixteen canoe loads of men from these villages landed on one occa-
sion close to Wedau, and would certainly have carried out their
threat had not the Wedauans mounted guard I'ound their “dim-dim”
friends all night. That an enemy so formidable did ultimately with-
draw, having done no harm, was due, humanly speaking, to the pro-
tection of the far less war-like Wedauans; but the missionaries have
always felt that they were guarded by friends more than mortal.
What follows I got from Canon Tomlinson by word of mouth.
It was not in the Diary. Before retiring from the mission station,
the dangerous visitors said to the Wedauans, “If you want to keep
those people you must pay for them, we could have had them, and
we can’t leave them to you for nothing.” The Wedauans agreed
that they would pay for their friends, and produced nine pigs as
ransom. Three pigs for a human being was the recognised standard
of exchange. The Boianaians said, “No, that won’t do. Nine pigs


is not enough, you must make it ten. White man is nicer than
black man.” So they made it ten. And to-day Boianai and Radava
are among the most Christian villages in the world. All Saints”
Church, Boianai, is one which few of our Australian towns can
equal. It would cost us £IO,OOO to build. And so the Tomlinsons,
valued at 3 1-3 pigs each, proceeded to impart to those savage
people a treasure which they were not, at that time, able to
appreciate. They do now.
So long ago as 1906 I was appointed to organise a meeting for
Missions in the largest hall in Bethnal Green. It would hold 1500,
and we had some anxiety lest it should not be completely filled. But
I am glad to say when the time arrived it was packed to the doors.
The chief speaker of the evening was the present Archbishop of
Canterbury, Cosmo Gordon Lang - , at that time Bishop of Stepney.
Much of his speech I cannot now remember, but one sentence of it is
clear in my mind. He said we should be baffled and overwhelmed
by the terrible social and moral problems of our great cities in
Europe, unless we could look away sometimes to another part of the
world and see in such a country as New Guinea the triumphs of the
Gospel, and the progress in grace made by those primitive people who
have now heard it for the first time. We go to them and impart what
we can of our treasure in the knowledge of the Faith, and they
accept it and give it back to us augmented tenfold. That is the way
in wdiich you must regard the Missions of the Church.
If you have received some measure of the gifts of the Spirit, you
have them both to use and to give away, and the more you give the
more you have and the more you give again, but if you selfishly try to
hoard it, your treasure will disappear. There has lately been some
improvement, but I am sorry to say that the Missions of the Aus-
tralian Church, as indeed you know, are still half starved. Remem-
ber the 24th verse of the 11th chapter of the Book of the Proverbs:
“There is that scattereth and it increaseth, and there is that witholdeth
more than is meet and it tendeth only to poverty.” That has come
true again and again to the Church in relation to her missionary
duties. When she has thrown herself into the venture regardless of
cost whether in money or men, she has always been rewarded, and
has had amply sufficient for her own needs.
The Best Bankers.
“In money or in men,” I said. There was a time when parents
grudged the giving of their talented boys to the Priesthood. I should
not care to relate to you the episode that follows unless things had
changed in that respect. I am thankful to say lam now getting a
very fair proportion of the most talented boys for the Priesthood with
the eager agreement and approval of their parents. Well, 24 years
ago a talented boy—a bush boy—who had done very well at school,
told me he desired the Priesthood. (He is to-day fulfilling an able
ministry therein). I told him that I believed he was fitted for it,,
with due preparation. When he left school, he said he thought it
was important that the Clergy should understand finance. I agreed


that that was so, and said that I would look for a place for him in a
bank. I went to the best bank that I knew, which very gladly
accepted the boy. And he was indeed to become one of "the world's
best bankers.” After nine months I was arranging the next stage
of his progress towards the Priesthood, and suggested that it might
be time to give notice to the bank that he would withdraw at the
end of the year. He did so. I happened to be in the bank on a day
soon after, and found the manager much perturbed. He said to me,
■"That boy of yours, with his ability, his grasp of method, his insight
into the high finance, with a prospect of a great career before him—
a thousand a year at five and thirty—and resigning from the bank to
■"go into the Church’—flying in the face of Providence, I call it.”
These sentences punctuated by short gasps of despair. "Oh,” I said,
■“don’t be distressed about that; the boy is called to the Priesthood,
.as he believes, and I think he is right, and nothing else in the world
would ever be any good to him.” The poor bank manager sighed,
and said, "Oh, well, every one to his taste.” And the boy, though
he will always be poor in this world’s goods, is, as I say, "one of the
world’s best bankers.” I am afraid that was fairly typical of the
attitude of the ordinary business man towards the Church in N.Q.
25 years ago. Things are better now, but they need to be much
better still. Many of my people have promised me to pray not only
that we may get a number of our most talented boys for the Priest-
hood, but also that our girls who have the character and disposition
that is needed may give themselves to the work of the Religious
Orders. Such self-giving on the part of the girls as well as the boys
has always characterised the best days of the Catholic Church. It
was, as you know, a most important feature in the Catholic revival
under the Tractarian leaders. Men and women gave themselves to
serve Christ in poverty for life. The Nuns (Sisters) of our Church
are wonderful women, but we need ten times as many. We Angli-
cans have only 34 in Queensland —in the Society of the Sacred
Advent. That is not because God has not been calling our girls to
the Religious Life. It is because the Church as a whole has not been
expecting it or praying for it. Consequently the girls have not
become sure of their Vocation, or if they have, they have been
thwarted and discouraged by those who should have helped them.
And so it comes about that good works of many kinds that only Nuns
■or Sisters can accomplish are so largely neglected in our communion.
I expect the same defect is evident elsewhere. It is be-
cause the sacrificial spirit has been lacking in the Church; we have
thought too much of our own advantage and convenience and far too
little of what we are called upon to give. But that can be cured.
Once the spirit of prayer and the spirit of sacrifice begin to work
powerfully in the Church all kinds of needs are quickly met. It
should be our constant prayer that they may be so.
An Opportune Storm.
“It is more blessed to give than to receive.” Perhaps I can
most forcibly illustrate that principle—so clear to Christian Faith—


by an example from the bush. Thirty years ago i was travelling*
through the Warrumbungal Mountains, in a very dry season. I was
near to the home of a lonely selector. He came down to the track,
and we paused to talk to each other. He expressed interest in the
work that T was doing as a member of the Brotherhood of the Good
Shephei’d; then he continued, “There is some that don’t believe in
God, but I do.” I replied that I felt sure that he did. He said, “You
see, it’s like a-this; three years ago w r e was havin’ a very dry time just
about now, like as what we are a-getting again, and my tank was
a-going down inch by inch till there’ll very soon be no water in it
at all.”
(I suppose I needn’t explain that by his tank he means a very
wide excavation in a paddock, embanked on three sides, in which he
catches rain water which lasts him for a year at a time).
“Well, there was that tank of mine a-gettin’ emptier and emptier
before my eyes. I don’t suppose there was more than about a foot
of water left in it. And there I’m wonderin’ what I’m going to do
with my poor beasts if the rain don’t come soon. And what should
happen one evenin’ when I was a-gettin’ more and more scared about
the water, if a teamster don’t come up the lane with about 24
horses, all very ‘holler,’ and hard up for a drink. And he leaves his
horses a-standin’ in the lane, and he comes and looks over my fence,
and he sees a drop of water in my tank, and he turns to go away.
And I calls out to him, ‘Well, mate, where are you a-goin’? T be
a-goin’ to look for water for my team,’ says he. ‘Why don’t you come
and get some water for them ’ere?’ says I. ‘Because your tank’s well
nigh empty, and you be wantin’ it yourself,’ says he. ‘No more of
that,’ says I; ‘you come along and give them poor beasts a drink.’
So we opens the gate, and he comes in with his team, and those horses
they stood around the tank and they drank, and they drank, until
the water went down by inches. He says to me, ‘Well, mate, you’ve-
done me a jolly good turn.’ And I says to ’im, ‘You must camp ’ere
to-night.’ And so, sure enough, he did. And we sat up late that
night yamin’ and talkin’ about everything in the world, and religion
and all them things, and then we went to bed. And about midnight
there was a roll of thunder, and the sky come up black all over the
stars, and towards one o’clock in the morning there was a storm
that come down with a roar and nearly come through my roof; and,
well, in the mornin’ there was ten feet of water in my tank. Yes,.
I believes in a God, I do.”
Begin at the Top.
You feel that that old man was right in his interpretation of
the bounties of nature and the designs of Providence. His faith
demonstrates what Giotto showed in another manner in the figure of
“Caritas,” “the more you give the more you have and the more you
give again.” Apply that all round—to the needs of the Sacred
Ministry both for the boys and the girls, and to the Missions of the
Church, carried on by heroic people whose salaries run to about £2O
a year, and to all the other activities to which the Holy Spirit of God


is prompting us,. Be generous and fear nothing - . If we were fol-
lowing out that principle with the highest kind of treasure, would it
not be found that it would apply itself automatically in all the lower
realms? Of course it would. Should we not open wide the gates of
Australia and invite to come in those who are homeless, landless,
and breadless, instead of trying to shut ourselves up in an enclosed
paradise of high wages and high standards of living, which will prove
a paradise of fools. We are taking 15,000 migrants over three years.
I want to add two o’s to that. I said I could not offer a solution to
economic problems, but perhaps I have offered one after all. If you
give away freely that which is greatest—spiritual treasure—you are
not likely to be found grudging in that which is least. “He that
gathered much had nothing over, and he that gathered little had no
lack.” But you’ve got to begin at the top with the Treasure o:l
Heaven.
It would come about “That now at this time your abundance
may be a supply for their (the refugees’) want, that their abundance
also may be a supply for your want: that there may be equality as it
is written . . (11. Cor. viii., 14, 15). Which means, of course, in
this case, that their industry and their brains will show us how to
develop our resources. Both will gain.


VALUE AND VARIETY.
I am not using the word “value” in any technical, recondite
or philosophical sense, but as the man in the street uses it. I shall
not attempt “transvaluation of values,” whatever that may be, only
enquire into the actual worth of some of those things which “the
world’s coarse thumb and finger fails to plumb,” which have yet
their “worth to God,” which is what matters. We start as
Archimedes did, when the king asked him to find the real worth of
his crown, for which the jeweller had received so much gold. But
was it all there, or had the man added base metal to make up the
weight? We know “things are not what they seem,” and that even
a court jeweller may cheat. But we hope that ere we have done,
we may, like the Syracusan sage, leaping from his bath, cry,
“Heureeka.”
Weights and Measures.
It is my privilege on several occasions in the year to visit a
Boys’ School: and there are few things more interesting than to
observe the progress of boys between ten and eighteen, along the
various lines by which they can advance, in athletics, in scholarship,
in the things of the spirit. When it becomes my pleasant duty to
congratulate them upon their success in these various realms, I
sometimes begin on the lowest level. I observe that I was looking
at them critically and hopefully in the month of February, when
most of them seemed small and insignificant, but now that I see
them, at the end of November, assembled for their prize giving,
they seem to have become, for the most part, large and important
persons. Many boys grow three or four inches in a year. Once I
attempted to work out a comparison for them on the basis of the
bulk of the brontosaurus. This not very handsome but quite
formidable beast was 65 feet long and weighed 40 tons, and it
had only 16 ounces of brain. One of its near relations—the
stegosaurus—had an even smaller brain, but a subsidiary cerebral
system situated somewhere in its haunches—a kind of “extension
from the main exchange,” through which it is supposed to have
operated its very cumbrous stem works. The brontosaurus, from
his portrait, looks as if he needed a similar contrivance, but, be that as
it may, we assume that a boy’s brains are in his head, though indeed
the Egyptian schoolmaster of 7000 8.C., as he flourished the rod,
maintained that “a boy’s ears are in his back.”
After some reflections of that kind I proceed to a calculation.
Since there are 240 boys at the school, and no boy gains less than
half a stone a year, and many boys gain more than a full stone, it
is plain that there must at least be a ton more boy at the end of
November than there was at the beginning of February. That, of


course, is due to the admirable efficiency of the commissariat and
housekeeping departments and to the unrivalled appetites which boys
possess. But if I were to stop there at merely welcoming a ton
more boy, they would be disappointed, and I proceed to attempt
to estimate their progress along certain other lines. I compliment
them upon the fact that they are a good bit superior to the bronto-
saurus, since a boy of 15, weighing 8 stone, has 35 ounces of brain,
whereas the brontosaurus .... It works out to show that the
average boy is at least two thousand times as intelligent as the
pre-historic beast, which could outweigh the school three times
over. That pleases the kind of youth who has been accustomed
to hear from his long-suffering preceptors less favourable com-
parisons as, for example: “Bill Bungler, you benighted boy, you
haven’t the brains of a bandicoot.”
It might not be necessary to dwell further on comparisons of
that sort but for the fact that in so many instances inappropriate
standards of value are applied to human life. It is still debated in
some quarters how old a child ought to be before he or she is
confirmed. A discussion of that kind gave rise on one occasion
to a devastating observation by the present Archbishop of York,
“What’s it got to do with their age,” said he; “why not weigh
them?”
Neither weight nor age is a guide to spiritual qualities, nor is
wealth a guarantee of worth, any more than the bulk of the
brontosaurus is a certificate of intelligence. We are suffering in this
twentieth century from prolonged and persistent illusion as to the
real nature of value, and from the application of false standards
to discover or test it in men and nations, from the worship of wealth
and complacent reliance upon increasing prosperity—in itself no
more significant than the bulk of the brontosaurus—from failure to
take account of the imponderables and immeasurables—the things
that cannot be tried by scales or callipers. Great possessions
endanger character, and the race for wealth changed, as it was bound
to do, into a race for armaments, and then .... We used to hear
much about the “economic man,” but after a hundred years of
general gold-rush, which has brought us first to cut-throat competition
and then to armed conflict, few would care to set up his image
again now.
£.s.d.
The Dutch of South Africa still refer to the struggle they had
with the British Empire at the beginning of this century as the
“Gold War,” and they have some justification in so doing. I
remember a phrase used by one of the Johannesburg plutocrats just
before the Boer War began: “We want the Kaffir kept a raw man
eating our cheese.” He didn’t wish those fine people of the Bantu
race to be educated, in case they should prove less tractable in
piling up his already overgrown fortune. He believed in the
“economic man,” but let us glance at other examples of reckonings
of that kind and observe that they are misleading.


About 1895 some Melbourne economists and an actuary—for
statistical purposes—attempted to estimate in terms of f.s.d. the
value to the country of a new-born child—what he was worth as a
potential producer. Allowance had to be made for the cost of food
and clothes, care, education and general nurture, for the possibility
of sickness or early death or other adverse contingencies. The
chances that the child might prove brilliant and inventive, or, on the
other hand, slow and plodding, or perhaps obstinately indolent, may
have been taken in, I am not sure, but at length the result of the
calculation was to show that a child at birth was worth £ll2. For
any purpose but that of abstract arithmetic, such an estimate would
be profane. And the nineteenth century was full of such profanities.
If at any point the actuary allowed for the nascent qualities of
character and for those influences in the vicinity which might enter
and affect them, and so the resultant value of the potential producer,
or if again for any personal contacts which would stimulate the
qualities which led to greater effectiveness, then of course the
calculation was vitiated by a confusion of elements belonging to
different categories. But even if the actuary worked in such a way
as to avoid such error, which I don’t think he could, the figure of
£ll2 is not acceptable in relation to the new-born child. Human
life was valued in that way in England in the 1830’s in accordance
with the ethics of the slave market. And such a base philosophy
of life would have continued to seal the fate of many if it hadn’t
been for Lord Shaftsbury and his companions. The history of the
early days of the Industrial Revolution is but too well known.
Children of four years old were sent to work in the factories. Such
children were beaten to wake them up in the morning, beaten again
to keep them at work, and beaten once more when work was over
to wake them up sufficiently to eat their scanty food. Those were
the days of the “Economic Infant,” and it is necessary to remember
that we are not very far removed in time from that kind of thing,
though indeed in sentiment we are worlds away. The fact that
quite recently the methods of valuing human life were often so
hideous and profane accounts for most of the evil that is now in
the world. Shameless economic experiments and the ravenous desire
for wealth at any cost, both by individuals and by nations, were the
disgrace of nineteenth century Europe. We have begun to be
ashamed of them, but they have left a “damnosa hereditas,” hard to
work off. And even had we fully repented, yet the accumulated
wrongs of that age of proud prosperity and ruthless exploitation
would still lie heavy on the world. There has been some reform of
our barbarous economic systems, but there has got to be much more.
We must hope and pray that out of the world’s present affliction
it will come; and it should be remembered to the credit of Versailles
by those who are accustomed to disparage the League of Nations
that the Covenant contained most careful provision for the improve-
ment of conditions of labour internationally.
A Chance in Life.
But let us go to those who have shown a clearer perception of"


values. In the year 1916 I had the memorable privilege of visiting
some of the Mission stations in New Guinea, in company with that
apostolic man, Gerald Sharp, then the Bishop of the Diocese. During
the first week we arrived at Taupota, where Percy Shaw was the
priest. I noticed a chubby and mercurial young person, aged two,
whose name was Nathaniel. His costume was of the fig leaf order,
and, though he buzzed around in all directions, he was seldom very
far from Mrs. Percy Shaw, whom he evidently regarded with the
warmest affection. I was interested to learn his history. It was as
follows:—Two years before my visit the Christian boys who navi-
gated the “Whitkirk”—the Mission vessel—had arrived at Taupota
after some days at sea, and, having a few hours to spare, walked
up into the mountains behind the Mission station to stretch their legs.
After about seven miles they arrived at a native village, and there
found the people of the place gathered round a grave in which they
were about to bury the corpse of a woman. Approaching the
assembly, they were shocked to see that with the dead woman the
people were going to bury a living baby which they had placed in
the arms of the dead. The boys pressed forward into the funeral
party and said, “You mustn’t do that; the baby is alive.” The
people said, “Yes, it is, but it’s mother is dead and nobody wants it,
so we are going to bury it.” The boys replied, “But we want it.”
The father said, “Then you can have it.” The boys very carefully
carried the baby in a handkerchief down the hills into Taupota, and
gave him to Mrs. Shaw. He weighed only 31bs. Mrs. Shaw, being'
an experienced nurse, wrapped the baby in cotton wool with olive
oil, and fed him with milk from a fountain pen squirt. He flourished,
and was christened Nathaniel. After six weeks, when Nathaniel had
got up to be 121b5., the old heathen father came down from the
hills to J aupota and interviewed Mr. Shaw. He said, “You g - ot my
boy?” “Yes,” said the priest, “we have got him.” “Well,” said the
father, “you have had him six weeks, so here are six pumpkins to
pay for him.” “We’d rather have the boy than the pumpkins,” said
the priest. “Well, then, you may keep him and the pumpkins as
well,” said the father. So the transaction was concluded, and
Nathaniel remained at Taupota. I always ask after him when priests
from New Guinea come my way. He is now a fine young man
of 26, and a teacher in one of the villages. Thei pumpkins may
have been intended as a payment for board and lodging, and not
as an equivalent for the boy, but the parties were working on
different scales of value. The old father was applying something
like the abstract estimate of the actuary, or the Johannesburg
plutocrat, or the 1830 captain of industry, while the Christian boys
were thinking in quite different terms. Those boys, who had come
out of heathenism into Christianity, had become aware of their own
value as sons of God, and they could not allow a child made in His
image to be despised. He must have the best chance that he could
get, and he got it.
Now it seems that the scale of values accepted in a totalitarian
state would cheerfully equate life to £ s. d. or to cannon fodder, and
that is an idea against which all that is left of Christian feeling in the


world to-day—and there is a good deal of it—reacts to the extent
of engaging in a war which hazards millions of human lives, let
alone its cost in thousands of millions sterling, in a determination
to annihilate and extinguish, if possible, so vile a blasphemy. Bis-
mark and Frederick the Great, and others of that kidney, with their
calculations about cannon fodder, had less respect for human life
than the old fellow of Taupota, who attempted to work it out in
pumpkins. The great Sir William McGregor, when in New Guinea,
used t© say, “It’s no use my sending magistrates and troopers to
look after these people, they can only catch a few offenders and put
them in prison for a time, which does no good; the first truth that
a native must learn is that of the value of human life, since that
is the foundation of Society. And to teach that truth it demands
Christian Missions. Let the Christian teachers show what human
life is worth, and all else will follow.” And if you go to New
Guinea to-day you will see that it has. There are ideal Christian
communities living at a level of virtue and happiness which we in
Australia have not reached, and with a system of economics which
I don’t think we can approach. Problems of distribution don’t seem
to exist. Tribal ownership is collective, and Christian influence
working on that tradition has brought into being a most generous
and ungrudging type of society. We here have a lot of trouble to
raise a little money for our rather paltry churches, while in New
Guinea they rival the middle ages, when all the treasures of art and
the gains of commerce were cast at the feet of the Church, that
great Temples of God might be built in the land.
No, weighing people against gold or even against pumpkins,
will not prove a satisfactory method of estimating their worth. Their
age may or may not be a criterion, but in many cases it cei’tainly
is not. To that point again in a moment.
Categories.
First let us go to Sir Arthur Eddington to check and correct
our categories. In his article on “The Domain of Physical Science”
(“Science, Religion and Reality”), he deals with avoirdupois aa
connected with individuality in his own decisive manner. He pic-
tures an examination in dynamics. I quote him. “An elephant
slides down a grassy hillside. .. . The experienced examinee knows
that he need not pay heed to this; it is only a picturesque adorn-
ment to give an air of verisimilitude to the bald essentials of the
problem.” He reads on: “The weight of the elephant is two ton.”
The Professor outlines the problem, and finds that the slope of the
hillside being 60 degrees, the elephant will slide down in 16.5
seconds. But I quote the passage in which he reflects upon possi-
bilities which may have upset the whole calculation. He says, “Know-
ledge of the elephant must consist in knowledge of the response of
the various objects of the world to its presence; but this response
cannot always be reduced to a pointer reading or such like indica-
tor, and the corresponding knowledge is then automatically excluded
from exact science. For example, the affection inspired by the


elephant in its mahout is one response of the outside world to its-
presence. A spiritual phenomenon, no doubt, and yet it has the
aspect of a physical force, since it causes material objects—sweet-
meats —to move in a direction that they otherwise would not have
taken.” (Towards the end of the elephant’s trunk, increasing his
avoirdupois). “This phenomenon is excluded from exact science not
because of any antithesis of nature between the spiritual and the
material, but because there is no pointer reading that can stand
for the ‘likeableness’ of the elephant in the way that the reading of’
the weighing machine can stand for its ‘ponderosity.’ ”
We may have dealt unfairly with the brontosaurus because he
may have had a “likeability” which compensated for his defective
cerebral powers, but I doubt it. I think it was the lack of ‘likeability’’
on all sides which caused those quarrelsome “dragons of the prime”’
to rend each other in desolate marshes till their species became ex-
tinct. “Nordics,” by their outbursts, remind us of these pugnacious
monsters, and by their politics court the same fate. Or, to put it
in heraldic language, the Escutcheon of the Third Reich should bear
in the first quarter a bronto, and a stego truculent, belching propa-
ganda toxic, on a field sable, and in the fourth the two beasts cadent,
upon a field gules—in the other quarters paint pots proper.
Ponderosity is no guide to value, and I don’t think that reckon-
ing by ages is any better as a means of arriving at an estimate of
spiritual or intellectual qualifications. Under the present system
of awards, boys and girls in offices often lose their jobs at 18 or
20, because the Industrial Court has said that they must be paid
according to their age. Their intellectual and business ability may
advance “pari passu” with their years, but it may not. If it doesn’t,
they prove too expensive, and their services are dispensed with from
the office. The Unions might as well have weighed them.
Jewels.
Now, once more, let us go to some of those people who have
shown a more discerning sense of value. Scipio Africanus thought
so highly of his political opponent, Sempronius Gracchus, that he
offered him the hand of Cornelia, his younger daughter, in marriage.
She bore eleven sons and one daughter. The “Cloaca Maxima” and
its tributaries, alas, were less efficient than they should have been,
and infant mortality was very high in Rome. Only two of the boys
lived. After the death of her husband the King of Egypt invited
Cornelia to share his throne, which she declined. Her dearest task
was to devote herself to developing the capacities of her boys. Such
was her hope of their greatness, the historian remarks, that “though
she was daughter of the great Scipio, she preferred to be known
as the mother of the Gracchi.” She was the lady who, in response
to a request by a fashionable and expensively decorated patrician
dame, paying her an afternoon call, and asking to see her jewels,
sent for the two boys, and said, “These are my jewels.” We have
indeed succeeded in reducing the rate of infant mortality, but there
are not among us enough women like the mother of the GracchL


The wealth of a country consists in the number of its healthy and
happy individuals—that is not disputed, but Australia does not put
the truth into practice.
On August 10th we are accustomed to commemorate St. Law-
rence of Rome, who startled the Magistrates by offering to them a
■crowd of obscure and unimportant persons—Christians gathered from
the back streets of the city—as representing the treasures of the
Church. The Roman authorities thought that Lawrence was laugh-
ing at them; and inflicted upon him a cruel martyrdom. But the
Church has not forgotten the lesson which he taught by producing
her treasures. The recollection of St. Lawrence has inspired her
missionaries and her philanthropists ever since. It was in the 12th
century that the great Hugh of Lincoln extended his compassion to
the poor outcast lepers of England. They had sunk into a terrible
degradation, being shunned and despised and having no place in
society. Hugh offered them physical and spiritual consolation, and
restored their sense of their value by assuring them that they were
“the crown jewels of Christ the King.” To come from the 12th
century to the 20th, I hope Australia will remember that we have now
to provide for lepers on Fantome Island—one of the Palms group.
And indeed it should be better known than it is how deplorable was
the condition of all the aborigines in the Palm Islands Settlement
down to about ten years ago. I will not describe it. But in 1930
old Father Gribble went to live among those people, and fulfilled for
them his work as a Priest. There is nothing now that gives me
greater satisfaction than to see a row of black men from the Palms
and from Yarrabah occupying a long seat in my Synod. In the year
1934 we had a rather striking speech from one of the Palm Islanders.
These black man have a rugged eloquence, and they are not hindered,
as some white orators would be, by any kind of self-consciousness.
The black synodsman spoke something as follows; “We black people
on Palm Island were very sad and very bad. We not like the place,
we not like the Government for putting us there. We fight, we
drink, we swear, we gamble, we do bad thing, we do very bad thing,
we go down, we go down.” And there followed a retrospect of the
distressing and melancholy time that they had had. “But,” he con-
tinued in a different key, “Now we got Dadda Gribble, we all right.”
And indeed St. George’s, Palm Island, with its Church, its gardens,
tennis court, and its social hall, is the centre of attraction of that
once gloomy settlement. And I do think that at last Australia is
taking to heart her duty to care for those most interesting and attrac-
tive paleolithic people to whom the country belongs, and who are
more and more becoming, and being recognised as, the treasures of
the Church.
Personality.
For 19 centuries now it has been the glory of the Church to
insist on the value of the individual, expounding and demon-
strating the truth of the words of Christ, “See that ye despise
not one of these little ones.” In their various ways, Lawrence of


Rome and Hugh of Lincoln and the Christian boys at Taupota have
illustrated and emphasised the truth of our Lord’s doctrine. But, as
philosophers have long’ been warning us, there are several modern
tendencies which would contradict and deny it. We have been
witnessing in more quarters than one the depersonalisation of man—
the refusal to recognise the distinctness and importance of the indi-
vidual—whether brought about, as it were, by accident, through the
mechanisation of industry, or with the conscious motives of selfish
gain by irresponsible capitalists, or by the attempt to standardise
mind and soul in the wholesale manner shamelessly professed in some
of the world’s most populous countries, to secure subservience to the
projects of national pride, or to advance the ambitions of dictators.
In pursuit of such aims, liberty has been destroyed, opinion stifled,
originality extinguished, and men with living souls reduced to the
condition of robots. All our natural instincts recoil from such ideas,
and the present war is being waged to overthrow them. The final
reason for our hatred of those practices which seek to destroy per-
sonal freedom is the fact that every human soul is of unique value
to God, both for what it is and for what it may become, a value
which cannot be measured in any terms which we possess. Conse-
quently a stunting of that soul, a thwarting of its development, is an
interference with God’s plan, and an offence against Him Who is the
Author and Perfecter of human life. It is certain that those systems
which involve a denial of personality and of the worth of the soul,
being fundamentally profane, will be brought to nought. But it be-
hoves us to see that we do not at any point give in to them, that we
work to dis-possess them wherever they are in vogue, and that we
have a firm and practising hold on those truths by which personality
is upheld and advanced.
Variety.
As we have just declared, every human soul is of unique value
to God. To illustrate this truth let us begin with the lower orders
of Creation. It is recorded of Lord Tennyson, the poet, that ones
when on a walk in the country with some friends he had dropped
behind, and when they went back to look for him, they found him
bending, absorbed over a small, wayside pool, watching the move-
ments of the swimming insects, the floating plants, and the other-
inhabitants of the water —a world of wonder indeed, as anyone
knows who has done the same. And when his friends inquired the
cause of his delay, he replied, “I was only thinking what an imagina-
tion Almighty God must have.” Even in the small compass of the
wayside pool there was that which awed the mind of the poet. I
will place in relation to that a remark made to me by an old swagman,
when we had been enlarging upon the endless variety of living things
in the forest—the bees, the ants, the beetles, the wasps, and all
the bewildering multitude of things that creep and swarm and climb
and fly. At length my friend sagely observed, “There’s lots more
of them things what they bug-hunters has never seen, and what the
men as writes the books hasn’t got in their lists, no nor never will


—far too many on ’em and far too queer they be for the Almighty
Hisself to know anything at all about ’em.” The swagman’s God,
you see, though doubtless great to him, was yet a limited
whose Creation had, apparently, in some respects, become too much
for Him. The poet’s God was an infinite Being of whose inexhaus-
tible resources a glimpse might be seen in the little wayside pool.
If you have examined a coral reef at low tide, and have seen the
varieties of growth and form in creatures whether moving or at rest,
rooted, floating, or swimming, you have concluded that to any but
the most scientific mind they are beyond all possibility of under-
standing and codification. Year by year biologists come to explore
our Great Barrier Reef, as a happy hunting ground where they
can accumulate vaster stores of knowledge, “of whatsoever walketh
through the paths of the sea.” They will tell you that they are i only
at the beginning of their task.
When the Tropical Institute of Medicine was working in Towns-
ville—and I hope it may work again—we were shown in the entomo-
logical department, year by year, fresh specimens, in great num-
bers, of what we should have called the common house fly, speci-
mens, however, which had never been catalogued before, and were
wholly new to science. Many years ago I enjoyed a walk through
a New Guinea jungle with Copeland King, the great missionary, and
he told me about the profusion of plants that flourished there,
chiefly about the ferns, in which he had specialised for a quarter of
a century. Many of them had been named after himself as their
discoverer, and he could see no reason why the discoveries should
ever come to an end. To whatever part of nature you direct your
gaze, whether to a rock pool or forest glade, or to the interior of
an atom, or to the spiral nebulae, the story is the same—a variety
that appears to have no limit. So it is that in the whole range of
the orders of Creation we are invited to admire the ever-changing
expression of the boundless ideas of the Creator. “0 Lord; how
manifold are Thy works, in wisdom hast Thou made them all, the
earth is full of Thy riches, so is the great and wide sea also, wherein
are things creeping innumerable, both small and great beasts.”' We
echo the words of the poet, “What an imagination Almighty God
must have.” Mr. Carter, of Ascham, the great coieopterist, once
showed me his vast collection of beetles, and, from time to time,
pointing to a singularly grotesque and absurdly decorated creature,
he would say, “Don’t tell me the Almighty has no sense of hurhour.”
Some of them were quite obvious jokes; and they had, outlined upon
their thoraces, positively, the caricatures of human faces! i There
is no doubt they are meant to be laughed at, but their feelings are
not sensitive about that kind of thing. In one of Anstey Guthrie’s
stories, the Dowager Lady Dampier objects to an item in a village
concert programme entitled “The Cock-eyed Kipper.” She; says,
“Isn’t it making light of a personal deformity?” But that lady
had no sense of humour.
One by One.
If the ideas of God as exhibited to us in the lower ranks of


being have a variety of form and character over which we endlessly
marvel, much more shall we be obliged to acknowledge our amaze-
ment at the range of diversity ever more astonishing which appears
in human life. Each human soul is utterly unique, separate and
distinct, an idea of God never repeated, with an original value of its
own, greater than it is possible to express. Of all the human beings
that have come into the world, in all the ages, there have never been
two alike and there never will be. The ideas of God are inexhaustible;
He never repeats Himself. Even where life appears in its simplest
forms, His thoughts are always new, and where it rises to its higher
manifestations it reveals in an increasing scale of wonder the
inexhaustible fertility of the Creator’s mind. You have heard the
expression—“As like as two peas”— but when you get past their
general resemblance it is the utter unlikeness of two peas that is
remarkable. Human twins have sometimes a resemblance so close
as to be a cause of great enjoyment to themselves, and of much
bewilderment to their acquaintances, but to those who know them
well it is their fundamental difference and not their similarity that
is most impressive. For purposes of identification, so we are told,
so trifling a detail of our anatomy as our finger prints proves
sufficient to distinguish any one man from all the other millions
who are now alive, or who have ever been alive. There are no two
things alike in nature, and certainly no two men who are not
fundamentally distinct. The Church knows this and she is strictly
careful to defend the unique value of every man; she deals with
individual human souls; she is never content to regard humanity
in the mass. In this she is true to her Master, Jesus Christ, Whose
respect for individuals is so vividly expressed in many of His
parables, and so clearly shown by St. John, who gives details of our
Lord’s conversations with a number of men and women, of whom
in several cases we know not so much even as their names. They
stand out nevertheless with undying distinctness in their relation to
Christ. And so it is with all human souls. The truth is emphasised
in the Sacraments of the Church. We are baptised one by one.
We come, one by one, to seek the gifts of the Holy Ghost, that
the mysterious purpose of our separate being may be fulfilled; and
we are reminded each of our unique value to God when we go to
the Altar and the Priest says to each one of us, “The Body of our
Lord Jesus Christ which was given for thee,” as if, for the moment,
there were none other to be considered, each soul being an object
of God’s particular and individualising care and generosity.
The Value of the Soul.
This truth of the unique value of each personality as the
expression of a particular thought of God, advancing to its fulfilment,
is contradicted as we have seen by certain types of organisation,
political and social, which widely prevail in the world to-day. It is
our duty to protest against those false systems, to expose their
errors, and to avert the danger of their being accepted among us:
but it is also our duty to follow those positive paths and to pursue


those needful enterprises by which personality is vindicated and
developed. Each man has got to be himself and not an imitation of
somebody else. Each man must think for himself and not adopt
his ideas ready made. Each man should have the opportunity of
making his own choices in life and should not be used as an element
in the formation of mass-opinion or coerced to shout with the crowd,
echoing the whims of dictators. Those methods of mass-suggestion
and enforced uniformity which attempt the co-ordination of indivi-
duals for ends devised by others are assaults upon personality—iacts
of violence to the soul and therefore utter frustrations of God’s
intention for men. We have watched with dismay in one country
after another the disappearance of liberty, the subjection of the
individual to the tyranny of mass-fanaticism, the exaltation of the
State as the final arbiter of conduct, the mistress of unquestioning
obedience, and as the object of worship. This is a re-appearance of
the blasphemy condemned by St. Paul when he refers (2 Thess. ii.; 4)
to the pretended apotheosis of the Roman Emperor: “He that
opposeth and exalteth himself against all that is called God or that
is worshipped; so that he sitteth in the Temple of God setting himself
forth as God.” The totalitarian State has revived this form of
idolatry, which must inevitably destroy the State which practises it.
Bishop Stephen in his recent Moorhouse Lectures (page 131) sums
up the situation: “The State was made for man, not man for the
State. It is intended to preserve personality, not crush it. In its
own interests a policy of standardisation is suicidal. Its chief glory,
the best hope of survival, lies in the rich variety of opinion, of
culture, of knowledge, of character, that its citizens may pour ias
their gifts into the common treasury. The evidence of its greatness
lies in the freedom with which each citizen can develop all his
powers to the uttermost, and use them for the benefit of his fellows.”
Justify Your Professions.
It is not enough to condemn what misguided States are doing;
we must have our own positive programme for the fostering of
personality, and must pursue it. For example: Church and State
share together in the work of education. The State, which began
quite late in the day, now does more and more of it, and can do it
because it draws upon the public purse. There is no reason to
complain of that, but the quality of education will suffer all round
unless the Church continues to make her contribution through har
own schools and colleges. They counteract the tendency of Sta e
Departments to standardisation of methods and of minds. They
provide the salt of the whole educational system. The Church agan
bears her special witness to the value of every human soul through
her Missions. She fosters the peculiar genius of each race. Sbe
cares for such people as Nathaniel of Taupota, and for the lepe'S
at Fantome Island and many another whose value, but for her
ministry, would not be recognised at all. But we are not now goiig
to enter upon the vast and alluring fields of Missions and cf
Education; this essay is going to wind up with a practical proposd
of a very obvious kind. Statesmen, historians and publicists ar*


agreed that the most vigorous element in the life of a country is to
be found in the people on the land. It has been the cause of the
most harassing anxiety to States like Germany, Italy and Japan that
there was no land for the people to go to. Their land hunger has
made these powers, as we well know, a danger to the world. Hitler,
demanding “lebensraum” for Germans, keeps telling us that the
German plough will cultivate what the German sword wins. The
British people, on the other hand, have land more than abundant on
which to settle their population, and to their own great loss, and
to the exasperation of less fortunate States, they make but little
use of it. We got in first, of course, in the days of our imperial
expansion and took what we wanted, and consequently our reproaches
to Mussolini for his Abyssinian adventure sounded somewhat in-
sincere. It is our offence before the whole world to-day that we
have occupied great areas of the undeveloped spaces of the globe
and that we are keeping them empty, while other people are stifling
for want of room to breathe and expand. There will be no secure
peace until this wrong is righted. On various shallow and selfish
grounds we fail to encourage Immigration and Bush Settlement, while
the population of our cities is already more than sufficient. There
ought to be millions more people on the land, but there will not be
unless we encourage those who are already settled there and devise
practical means of sending more.
Let me give one case in point. I visited lately an area of
heavy scrub (jungle) where a few men had settled and were engaged
in the arduous labour of carving out dairy farms and homes for
themselves and their families. To clear such country costs, in labour,
about £3O an acre. Men who have the heart for such a herculean
task should be given every encouragement that is possible. I
observed, however, that in most cases they were overloaded from the
start with rent, rates, taxes, unemployment relief, and I know not
what other charges. They and their children were toiling before
daylight and until after dark, and they were only just able to live.
Children who came to their Confirmation at one village had to prop
their eyelids open with their fingers to keep themselves awake.
Actually many of these families would have been better off if they
had abandoned work and gone to live in a town and drawn the dole.
These pioneering farmers are, to say the least of it, as good as
any people in the country; personally I should call them the best
element of our population. The working of our present administration
in Queensland goes far to extinguish them. They should be given
their few acres of jungle rent free, for the first five years at any
rate, and they should be relieved of many unfair charges. In such
a country as this every inducement should be offered to men to
make good on the land, but instead of that they are confronted
with endless discouragements. And when it is proposed to settle
refugees on our fertile empty spaces, someone is sure to remark
that our economic system won’t allow of it. In that case, change
the economic system.
Australia will make no contribution of importance to the solu-
tion of world problems until she is honestly attempting to do the


fair thing by the overflowing population of her own home land—
and remember, after the war it will want to overflow a great deal
again—and until she gives a chance to other promising migrants
as well. Germans and Russians released from the oppression of
their own misguided countries, and given a chance in life, make very
good Australians, and so, sometimes, do Italialns. And the Jew who
has been compelled to live for centuries in the ghettos of great
cities, has shown us that if he is given a chance he will return to
his ancient interest—agriculture—and will sit content under his
vine and under his fig tree.
I was in England on Empire Day in 1914, and there appeared
in the “Times” a poem by Sir John Gorell Barnes, part of which
I remember. It represents the reflections of: a young Englishman
who has filled an administrative post in some primitive part of tro-
pical Africa, and is dying of fever, but he does not regret his choice
of a career.
“I was driven to leap
Clear of the fetters of a settled land, i
I should have felt them even in the fields,
Those trim, well-hedged old servants of: the plough,
Turning about in endless ordered rounds,
Year after year, and flanked with lanes and path*.
I had to seek the vastness, nothing less
Than all those miles of nature still untamed,
Those mighty solemn spaces of the world,
Would give me to myself, to find the man
God planted in my soul.”
And he reflects again—
“At least I know that I have drunk of life
Right at the source from freedom’s furthest spring.”
Those lines fittingly describe the kind of opportunity that should
then have been afforded to the sons of a great Empire, and it is the
kind of opportunity that Australia should be offering very widely
to-day to her own people and to those of other countries. Many are
left to stand all the day idle at the street corners of the great
cities of Europe. War, for the moment, changes conditions, but
presently the war will be over, and unemployment will recur. Surely
it is obvious that a bold and enlightened land policy is our one hope.
In the case of the migrant it means the difference between a man-
hood fulfilled and a manhood frustrated. We I should thus prove
our faith in the value of the individual—enabling him to “find the
man God planted in his soul.” And in our own case it would mean
the difference between a country developed and held, and a country
neglected and lost.


Published by the Australian > Church Union (care of St. Peter’s Church,
Melbourne, C. 2), and printed by Messrs. Fraser & Morphet Pty. Ltd.,
Registered Office, 3 and 5 Eastbourne Street, Prahran.


