

IMMEDIATE SALTATION
THE CHIEF OF SINNEES;
OR, A
Practical dutbc for Jlnxious Enquirers
BY THE
REV. JAMBS GALL,
EDINBURGH.
1
Htclbaurne:
ROBERT MACKAY, 15 COLLINS STREET WEST.
Edinburgh: GALL & INGLIS, 6 GEORGE STREET.
f- jy/e *■




IMMEDIATE SALTATION
FOE THE CHIEF OF SINNEES. -
I. — THE OFFER OF PARDON,
Ip you are indeed anxious about your soul’s salvation—or
rather, I might say, if you are even willing to be saved
from your sins—then in God’s name, and by His authority, I
offer you an immediate reconciliation, the pardon of all your
sins, and a new nature that will enable you to lead a new
life; in short, I offer you instant salvation through His Son
Jesus Christ, the moment you accept of His offer.*
It matters not who or what you are; though you were
the greatest sinner on the face of the earth, God is both
able and willing to save you. You cannot be worse than
a lost sinner; and as Jesus came to seek and to save that
which was lost, He has now come to seek and to save you.f
He sends you a message of mercy and love, asking and
entreating you to be reconciled, and offering to be your
Saviour if you are only willing to give yourself up to Him
to be saved.
He does not require you to DO anything for your own
salvation, for He knows that you can do nothing. You can-
not atone for your own sins, nor change your own heart;
and as long as your heart is not changed, you cannot even
reform your own life. God knows all that, and yet He
•offers to save you ; all that He requires is that you consent
to give yourself up into His hands, just as you are, and
allow Him to do it all for you.J Listen, then, while I tell
you of this great salvation.
*Rev. iii. 20 ; Ezek, xxxiii. 11; 2 Cor. y. 20; vi. 2.
flsa. i. 18 ; Luke xix. 10 ; Matt. xi. 28.
X Matt, xi, 28 ; Tit. iii. 5 ; Rom. v. 6 ; Eph, ii. 4, 5 ; Matt, vii 18 ; Hos,
xiii, 9.


The Story of God’s Love.
When man sinned against God, Gods justice required that
man should die. The Bible says —“ Cursed is every on&
that continueth not in all things written in the book of the-
law to do them ” (Gal. iii. 10) ; and, “ Whosoever offendetlv
in one point is guilty of all ” (Jas. ii. 10). One sin, therefore,
would make even an angel a sinner, and the wrath of an
offended God would rest upon him on account of it. One
theft would make a thief, one murder would make a mur-
derer ; and so one sin would make a sinner, even though,
he were never to commit another.
How, then, could man escape the curse of God, and yet
God’s justice be satisfied ? There was but one way—God’s-
Son must die, or else all men must perish. Without the
shedding of blood there could be no remission of sin,
and there was no other blood but His able to atone-
for it.
But supposing that an angel or any other creature could
have atoned for sin, even that could not save us unless h&
could also change our hearts, and give us a new and holy
nature. This none but the Spirit of the living God could
do; and therefore none but the Son of God could be our
Saviour.* Yet God so loved us, that He did not spare His
only begotten Son, but freely gave Him up to the death for
us all (John iii. 16; Rom. viii. 32).
Jesus, therefore, came into the world to die for sinners.
The Lord of Glory became a Man, taking the form of a ser-
vant, to obey God’s law for us, and to suffer the punishment
of our sins. He bore the torments of God’s wrath in the
Garden of Gethsemane, and shed His blood on the cross;
to make an atonement for sin. The justice of God being
thus satisfied, He rose from the dead and sent forth His
disciples into all the world to preach the gospel; promising
that whosoever would believe in His name should not perish,
but have everlasting life.*f* He then ascended up into heaven,
and sent down His Holy Spirit to convince and convert
♦ Heb. ix. 22; x. 4 ; ix. 14 ; John iii. 6 ; 1 Tim. i. 15.
fl Tim. i. 15 ; Phil. ii. 6, 7 ; Isa. liii. 5 ; Matt. xxvi. 38 ; Pet. ii. 24 ; Col,
i. 20 ; Rom. iv. 25 ; Mark xvi. 15, 16.


sinners, and to dwell in the hearts of believers and raise
them up at the last day.*
As when the woman touched the garment of Jesus and
virtue came out of Him and cured her (Mark v. 30), so the
sinner, the moment he accepts of Christ as his Saviour,
receives the Holy Spirit from the person of Christ, who,
though now in heaven, proves Himself to be a present and
a living life-giving Saviour. At that moment the sinner is
born again, receiving a new life and a new nature; and as
the Spirit of Jesus ever afterwards dwells in him, he becomes
one with Christ, bone of His bone and flesh of His flesh.
Christ being the head, and he being one of the members,
they are so united that God’s justice cannot separate or
distinguish them; there is therefore now no condemnation
to them that are in Christ Jesus ; for when He looks on the
sinner He sees Jesus there, and is well satisfied.^
Here, then, is the gospel: Jesus Christ, the crucified,
with blood sufficient to atone for the sins of the whole
world —Jesus Christ, the righteous, with merit sufficient to
take the whole world to heaven —Jesus Christ, the mighty
God, whose living Spirit could raise the whole world to life
—offers Himself to you.
There is no doubt, then, that you may he saved, and that
you may be saved now, just as you are, on the spot where
you now sit or stand, without waiting till you become
better or worthier than you now are ; and nothing but your
own deliberate choice is able to prevent it. It is not that
your sins are too great, because the blood of Jesus Christ
cleanseth from all sin; neither is it that sin has dominion
over you so that you cannot give it up, because that is the
case with every one before he comes to J esus; but as you
wish to be saved from the slavery of sin, instead of this
being a hindrance, it is the strongest reason why you should
instantly accept of His offer. The only possible hindrance
is this—that the sinner deliberately chooses to continue in
sin, and would rather risk his soul’s salvation than give
himself up to Christ to be delivered from its power.
* Acts ii. 33 ; John xvi. 8 ; Rom. viii. 9, 11, 10 ; 1 Cor. xv. 45.
f Rom. viii. 10; 1 Cor. xv. 45 ; John iii. 3, v, 24 ; 1 Cor. iii. 16 ; Eph. v.
30 ; 1 Cor. xi 3 ; Rom. viii. 35 ; Heb. ii. 11 ; Rom. viii. 1.


II.—MISTAKEN NOTIONS ABOUT CONVERSION.
According to the common notions of Christianity, this-
instant salvation is impossible. It is supposed that con-
version is a gradual process which requires much time and
earnest perseverance before God can accept the sinner and
pardon his sin. It is supposed that the blood of Jesus,
although it cleanseth from all sin, can only be applied to
those who sincerely repent and turn from their iniquities;
and that this repentance must not be the fear of hell, but a
godly sorrow for having offended so kind and so holy a
God. It is supposed that it is necessary to cry earnestly
and perseveringly for mercy in order to obtain it; and the
parable of the importunate widow, and such passages as
these —“ Strive to enter in at the strait gate,” and “ The
kingdom of heaven suffereth violence, and the violent take
it by force,”* are supposed to prove that great earnestness
and long-continued efforts are requisite in order to be saved.
Now, however plausible all this may appear, it is alto-
gether an erroneous representation of the gospel of Christ—
powerless, comfortless, and fruitless —which never did, and
never can, lead one sinner to glory. The whole system rests
upon a wrong foundation, because it places the sinner where
the Saviour should be, and the Saviour where the sinner
should be: no wonder, then, if it leads to nothing. The
Bible represents the Saviour as standing at the door of the
sinner’s heart, waiting and wearying, and even entreating to
get in: all that is needed is, that the sinner should open the
door. But men cannot bear the idea of salvation being had so
easily, and therefore they represent the sinner as standing at
the door of the Saviour’s heart, knocking, and waiting until it
be opened. Oh, how dishonouring to God ! How contrary to
the representations of Scripture ! That door is already open;
why should the sinner knock ? The Saviour is, indeed,
standing at the door also, but He is entreating the sinner to
enter; why, then, should he stand without, or delay for
another moment to accept the invitation to enter in, and to
be saved ? The Bible represents the Saviour as a shepherd
* See Appendix, No. I.


going after the lost sheep, over the mountains of unbelief,
and calling him to return. This powerless gospel represents
the lost sheep as standing at the closed door of the fold,
calling on the shepherd to open, and let him in. The
Bible bids the sinner believe, and accept of salvation freely
offered to him; but this gospel retracts the offer, and tells
the sinner that he must not only pray for salvation, but that
he must continue to pray, without any certainty that he has
received it. No, my friend, you do not even need to pray
for it; you may have it simply by believing and accepting it.
If, while we were yet sinners, God gave His Son that we
might be reconciled, the enmity is now all on our side, not
on His, “Now then we are ambassadors for Christ; as
though God did beseech you by us, we pray you, in Christ’s
stead, be ye reconciled unto God.
I wish, indeed, that every sinner would agonise in prayer
for salvation; but that would not be conversion, because it
would not be faith. It is only when the sinner believes in
God’s willingness to save him, and accepts eternal life freely
given to him in Christ, that he receives the pardon of his
sins. It is only then that he believes the record that God gave
of His Son; for this is the record—“ God hath given to us
eternal life, and this life is in His Son. He that hath the Son
hath life, and he that hath not the Son of God hath not life”
(1 John v. 11,12). If you are really willing to have Christ,
all that you have to do is to tell Him so, and the thing is
done. Cease, then, that unbelieving cry, as if yon had dis-
covered your danger, and not God; and as if you only were
in earnest, and not He, about the salvation of your soul.
This idea of substituting prayer for believing is not only
dishonouring to God, it is also cruel to the sinner. He
prays, and waits, and even agonises in prayer, waiting till
he gets some sign that God has answered him; and because
he feels no change he thinks that God does not mean to save
him. He looks inward for something to rest his hopes upon,
but the more he looks in, the more he sees to terrify him.
The change he looks for cannot take place till he accepts sal-
vation ;no wonder, then, that he cannot see it. The love,
joy, and peace are got hy'resting on the promises: they can-
not exist before.


Repentance.
But you ask, Must I not repent before I can get Christ ?
I answer, If you mean by repentance that which the Scrip-
ture means,* a change of mind, then I say, “Yes.” You
must repent, for that is what God calls upon you to do now.
But if you mean by repentance, a godly sorrow for sin, then
I say, “No.” You can have no godly sorrow for sin until
you yourself are godly. It is one of the new instincts of the
new nature, when the heart is changed; and that can be got
only in believing. If, then, you must have this new nature
before you come to Christ, there can be no need of your
coming to Christ to get it. And if you wait till you have a
godly sorrow for sin, you will never come to Christ at all.
The only thing that you feel before you come to Christ is
the fear of hell, and a desire for rest: you can have no
higher motive, and therefore you have no merit in coming
to Him. It is not love to God, nor even a real hatred of
sin, that the unconverted man feels. He may be disgusted
with some sins to which he is not inclined, and he may hate
the sins that he indulges in ; but it is not because they are
sins against God, and dishonouring to Him; and without
this there can be no godly sorrow. Your coming to Christ,
therefore, must be an act of the purest selfishness, as God’s
willingness to save you is the purest benevolence. He knows
that you have no love to Him, and that your only anxiety is
to escape the punishment of your sin; but He invites you
notwithstanding, and appeals to your very selfishness as an
inducement to come. “ Turn ye, turn ye; why will ye
die ?” He knows that you dislike Him, and therefore He
cannot appeal to your love; He knows that your heart is
polluted, and therefore He cannot appeal to your hatred of
sin. What He wants is, that you would have compassion
upon yourself; and what He mourns over is your madness
in neglecting your own most important interests.
The repentance spoken of in tlie Bible is a change of mind,
and not a change of heart. It is not a godly sorrow for sin,
for that none but a child of God can feel —a sorrow which is
* See Appendix, No. 11.


necessary after conversion, but which cannot exist before it,
for it is one of the evidences by which we are to know that
we have been forgiven. Repentance is the turning-point of
a man’s history, when he discovers his misery, and turns to
Christ as his only hope of salvation. He thus changes his
mind; he repents and believes the gospel, not from ajiy love
to God or hatred of sin, but simply because he can do no
better. The prodigal son repented when he rose from the
swine-trough to return to his father, saying, “ How many
hired servants of my father have bread enough, and to spare,
and I perish with hunger ?” This was pure selfishness, but
it was true repentance notwithstanding: as for any sorrow
for his sin, or shame at the treatment he had given his
father, these he never felt until he had received the kiss of
forgiveness, and was restored to the place of a son.
But is it not said, “ Strive to enter in at the strait gate ” ?
(Luke xiii. 24.)
Yes ; but though the gate be a strait one, it is open, and
not shut; and the striving is not with the keeper of the
gate, but with your own evil heart of unbelief, that struggles
hard to prevent you from going in. The door is strait, but
it is wide enough to let the sinner through if he will not
attempt to carry his idols in with him. He would fain make
a compromise by giving up first one sin and then another;
but, until he is willing to part with all his sins, he cannot
enter. Perhaps the very last thing that he is willing to part
with before entering is his own righteousness : he would fain
enter with some rag of his own to cover him, but it is
impossible; no wonder, then, that it is called a strait gate,
for it is too strait even for that. And yet as soon as he
eonsents to go in empty and naked, helpless and rained,
trusting all to Christ, that moment he passes through with-
out any difficulty. In one sense this may be called a
gradual process, but it is nothing the better for that; an
instant and unconditional surrender would have been more
pleasing and more honouring to God. But, moreover, it is
not a gradual conversion, because the entering in, when it
does take place, is an instantaneous act, which renders it
impossible for any one to be both in and out at the same
time.


But is it not said that “ many shall seek to enter in, and
shall not be able ”? Yes; but that is when once the Master
of the house has risen up and shut to the door ; and then we
are told that striving will be in vain. In the matter of
salvation, it is God's call to the sinner that makes the door
open, though it be strait; but when the sinner has to cry to
God to open the door, it is then all too late. Because I have
called, and ye refused ; I have stretched out My hand , and no
man regarded; I also will laugh at your calamity; I will
mock when your fear cometh; when your fear cometh as
desolation, and your destruction cometh as a whirlwind;
when distress and anguish cometh upon you, then shall they
call upon Me, but 1 will not answer; they shall seek Me
early, but they shall not find Me (Prov. i. 25).
But is it not said that we are to knock and it shall be
opened unto us ? And have we not the parables of the
importunate widow, and the friend who wanted three
loaves, besides other passages, showing that although prayer
be not answered at first, it shall assuredly be answered at
last ?
Yes; but these promises are all to Gods children in
Christ Jesus; and the only reason why He does not at once
give them what they ask is, that He is their heavenly
Father, and knows best what and when to give them.
God’s children have many trials and difficulties in this
world, and He invites them to bring all their wants and
sorrows to Him ; but it would be neither for their good, nor
for His glory, if these trials were to be removed the moment
when they ask Him to remove them. Yet, notwithstanding.
He wishes them to continue praying, assuring them of His
fatherly love, even when He does not answer; and promis-
ing that, when the right time shall come. He will avenge
His own elect speedily. When a man believes in Christ, he
virtually gets “ all things,” for “ all things are his;” but it
would not be good for him to get all things at once in
possession. He is an heir; but at present he is under age ;
and Christ, who is his tutor and governor, and to whom he
is commanded to apply for everything, will give him that
which is good, and deliver him from every grievance at the


proper time. It is not sovereignty so much as love that
prevents God from avenging His own elect the moment that
they cry.
But it is a fatal mistake to suppose that that which is the
believer’s privilege is also the sinner’s misfortune. It never
can be good for him to continue under God’s wrath and
curse, an enemy to God and a slave to sin, even for one
moment. If God had really promised salvation to those who
prayed instead of to those who believed, the very first cry
of the unbeliever should have been answered, for there can
be no love in withholding mercy.
But again, did not the publican cry for mercy, and is he
not held up to us for an example? Yes; but his cry was
the cry of faith, accepting the atonement as a propitiation
for his sin * Therefore he did not need to wait for pardon ;
he went down to his house justified in the very act of
believing.
111. —THE LIFE-BOAT AND FAITH.
What then must Ido to be saved ? I answer—“ Believe
on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved” (Acts
xvi. 31).
But you answer—“ I have always believed, and yet lam
not saved. I know the doctrines of Christianity, and I
have no doubt of their truth; but, like the devils, I only
believe to tremble.”
You call that believing but it is not believing; for so
long as your heart does not consent, it is not faith, it is only
opinion. The faith that saves us is the faith of the hehrt
as well as of the head; for St. Paul says (Rom. x. 20), “ With
the heart man believeth unto righteousness.” You believe
that Christ is offered to you in the gospel, but if your heart
does not accept Him, and have confidence in Him,*f* you do
not believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and therefore you
cannot be saved. You must not only believe the doctrine,
for that is only opinion; you must believe in Christ Himself,
and then you trust in Him as a person. Let me illustrate
this by a parable.
* Appendix, No. 111.
f See Appendix, No. IV.


If you were in a ship that had struck upon a rock, and
was fast filling with water, and if I came with a life-boat and
told you that the ship was sinking and must soon go down,
but that if you left the ship and came into the life-boat, I
should certainly save you, this would be like the gospel
message, good news to the perishing; and it might be said
that if you believed in me you should be saved.
But if you said, No! I do not believe that matters are
so bad as you represent them; for although there may be a
hole in the ship, it is not so very large but that by working
at the pumps we shall be able to bring her to the land: and
if you succeeded in saving yourself by working at the pumps,
it might be said that this was salvation by your own works ;
whereas, were you to give up your efforts to save the ship,
and at once leap into the life-boat, this might be called sal-
vation by faith.
But if you said —“ I believe all that you say; I know
that the ship must go down, and that it is impossible to
keep her afloat by pumping; I know that if I remain on
board I shall be lost, whereas if I go into the life-boat I
shall be saved. But I have all my luggage on board, and I
cannot make up my mind to part with it. I know that
that is foolish, but somehow I cannot help it. I will, there-
fore, stay as long as possible in the ship; but I am firmly
resolved to leap into the life-boat sometime before the ship
goes down.” What kind of faith would you call that ? The
Apostle James (chap. ii. 17) calls it a dead faith, because it
is a faith without works, leading to no practical result. If
your faith be real, and not merely an opinion, you will act
upon your faith, else there will be reason to doubt even the
sincerity of your opinion.
You see, then, how simple is this matter of believing.
You are in a sinking ship, which, sooner or later, must go
-down, taking you with it to eternal perdition; but Jesus
Christ is the life-boat sent by the Father into the world to
save you. He comes and presents Himself to your notice,
telling you of your danger, and entreating you to come to
Him, that you may be saved. All that you have to do is to
.I consent to His invitation, and to accept:! t, and the moment


that you do so you are safe. It matters not how great your
sins may have been, He is both able and willing to receive
you just as you are. He never said to any one—“ Your
sins are too heavy for Me: I am not able to bear so great a
burden ; My boat is not strong enough, nor large enough,
to cany you. If you had been less a sinner I might have
taken you, but your sins are too great for Me to bear; I
must, therefore, leave you to perish.” No ; though your
sins were tenfold greater than they are, He is able to save
to the ' uttermost all that come unto God by Him (Heb.
vii. 25). /
Observe also, that your salvation depends now upon your
consent, and not upon God’s. He has already consented;
or, rather, He has provided all that is needed for your salva-
tion, and that is more than consenting: He is even entreat-
ing you to commit yourself into His hands, and allow Him
to save you. It rests entirely with yourself whether you
will be saved or not. If you are willing, God is much more
than willing, and therefore you may be saved now. Your
part is not to stand and cry to Him, entreating Him to save
you. He has brought the life-boat so near that one step is
all that is necessary to ensure your safety. “ Say not in
thine heart, Who shall ascend into heaven ? that is, to bring
Christ down from above: or, Who shall descend into the
deep ? that is, to bring up Christ again from the dead. But
what saith it ? The word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth,
and in thy heart; that is, the word of faith which we
preach ; and if thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord
Jesus, and shalt believe in thine heart that God hath raised
Him from the dead, thou shalt be saved. For with the
heart man helieveth unto righteousness, and with the
moutb confession is made unto salvation. For the Scripture
saith, Whosoever helieveth on Him shall not be ashamed’ 7
(Rom. x. 0-11).
You must also notice that this salvation, when it does
take place, is instantaneous and complete: you are either in
the life-boat or you are not. If you are in the life-boat, you
are saved; but if you are not in the life-boat you are still
lost. You may liave long resisted the invitation, and it may


have been long before you were persuaded that there was
really no other way of escape; but the time when your
salvation really takes place is the moment when you with
your heart accept the invitation. You then, as it were, set
your foot on board the life-boat—it is at that moment that
you pass from death unto life.
This parable may also illustrate the necessity of faith, and
the manner in which it secures your salvation. It has no
merit in itself, but it saves you because it unites you to
Christ. So long as you are not in the life-boat you have no
interest in it, .because it does not bear your weight. It
matters not to you what it cost, or how safe or how strong
it may be; but the moment you have stepped on board,
that moment you are identified with it; every plank, every
nail, every cord in it is for you ; its safety is your safety, and
its strength is also yours. If it shall perish, you perish with
it; but while it floats you are safe. Wherever it goes, it
bears you in it and with it, and when it comes to land, it
carries you also in safety there. And so it is with the
sinner and Christ; so long as we do not believe, we have no
interest in His blood, but are “by nature the children of
wrath even as others,” but the moment when we cast our-
selves into His arms, which are opened wide to receive us,
that moment we are identified with Him. When He died,
we died with Him; and when He rose, we also rose with
Him to newness of life.* When God’s justice was satisfied
with Him, it was also satisfied with us; and when God was
well pleased in Him, He was also well pleased with us. His
baptism was our baptism. His obedience was our obedience,
His death was our death, because all He did and suffered
were ours. So long as Christ lives, therefore, we must live in
Him, for not one of His members can perish ; and when He
reigns, we also shall reign with Him in glory.
IV. —THE ARK AND THE FLOOD.
Let me next tell you the story of the Ark and the Flood.
God had condemned the whole world to death, and after a
hundred and twenty years a flood was to come and sweep
* Rom. vi. 4 ; Eph. ii. 3 ; Col. ii, 10-12.


them all away. Noah was a just man, and in order to save
him God bade him build an ark that would float on the
waters, carrying all that were in it to the new world after the
flood was passed, and after the old world had been drowned.
When the ark was built and everything ready, it was then
a type of Christ as He is now offered in the gospel; and
when Noah’s sons and daughters were invited to come in,
all that they had to do was to enter in by the open door, and
immediately they were safe. When the rain began to fall,
and the sea began to rise, those who had their houses up in
the mountains would be pitying those who lived in the
valleys; but it mattered not how high or how low they lived
—unless they left their houses and got into the ark they
were sure to perish. This is an exact picture of salvation
by Christ. The question is not, how good are you ? or, how
bad are you ? but simply are you in Christ ? You may be
a very respectable moral man, fulfilling all the duties of life,
and an example to all around you. Men may think that
you, at least, are safe, and that if you are not saved there
should be little hope for any one. All that is a mistake, for
unless you flee to Christ, away from your own righteousness,
to trust only on His, you will be no better than Noah’s
countrymen, who lived far up among the hills, and whose only
advantage was that others were drowned before them. The
flood rose above the highest hills, and all who were not in
the ark perished; and so God’s justice rises above the
highest righteousness of man, and woe to him that trusts
in it!
And when was it that those who entered into the ark
were saved ? Was it a gradual or an instant salvation ? It
was instantaneous. As long as they were out, they were no
better than the others; and if the flood had come while they
were there, they should certainly have perished. One step
made all the difference, and by that one step they were
saved; the moment they passed the threshold of the ark,
they passed from death to life; it was an instant, not a
gradual conversion.
This Old Testament type is peculiarly valuable as an
illustration of the nature of the atonement. The ark was


the means of saving Noah, but it was not by changing the
nature or the extent of the flood. The flood was the same
whether, there had been an ark or not, because God’s
justice must take its coui'se. If Noah was to be saved, he
must be saved by water, not by dry land; for there could
be no dry land till the flood was past. Men think that the
death of Christ makes God more lenient towards sin, and
that, if men will only try to do their best, He will pass over
a great many smaller sins for the sake of Christ. But this
cannot be; God’s love to Noah did not make Him mitigate
the flood, so as to make it cover only the lower plains, and
allow men to escape to some higher level. The flood came
down in all its fury, rising above the highest mountains, so
that none could find refuge there. And so it is with the
fiery flood of God’s wrath which is yet to cover, a guilty
world; the depth of that flood may vary according to the
wickedness of men ; but even the highest in the scale, if he
be out of Christ, will find at last that he is not high enough
to escape the judgment of God.
Even the ark itself had to stand the storm; the rain from
above and the floods from beneath spared nothing of their
fury when they beat against its sides, and sought to bury it
in their waters : the only reason why it survived the shock
was because it could not sink; and the only reason why
they who were in it escaped was because it was able to bear
the weight of those who were within. And so it was with
Christ —He had to bear the full storm of God’s wrath, in
order to give shelter to those who ventured their souls into
His keeping. He saves us, not by making God’s justice less
severe, but by Himself bearing its fullest vengeance. It is-
because He was God as well as man, that He was able to
survive the storm. Like the ark, it was impossible that He
could sink; and, therefore, rising above the flood of Divine
wrath. He carries His people in safety to the heavenly
shore.
v.—SACRIFICES.
The Old Testament pictures of the work oi Christ are
very precious because they illustrate points oi doctrine so
clearly, and yet so simply, that even a child may understand-


them. The most conspicuous of all is the institution of
bloody sacrifices of different kinds ; and the chief doctrines-
which they then taught, and still teach, are— first, that
without the shedding of blood there could be no pardon;,
and, second, that the sinner may be saved by the death of a
substitute. But there is another point brought out in these
figures which is often overlooked, but which is quite as
important as the others; it is this, that there can he no
benefit derived from the sacrifice unless the sinner by some
means has become identified with the victim.
There were various ways in which that identification was
represented. The promise to Adam and Eve of a coming
Saviour was ratified by the shedding of blood, and the Lord
clothed them in the skins of the animals that were slain,.
The innocent animal was put to death, and guilty man was
saved ; but for that purpose it was necessary that God should
put on him the fleece of the victim, so that it might appear-
as if he himself had been slain.
In aftertimes the most usual form of identification was-
the laying on of the hands upon the head of the animal,
and confessing over it the sins for which he ought to die,
Without this the sacrifice was of no value, because the sins
would still have remained on the head of the sinner without
being atoned for by the death of the victim.
In the sacrifice of the Passover the identification was
represented by the eating of the flesh of the lamb, but more
especially by the sprinkling of its blood on the lintel and
side-posts of the door. Had this not been done, the
destroying angel would have entered in and slain the first-
born even of the Israelites.
In every case it was not only necessary that the blood
should be shed, but that by some ceremony, either of passing
between the parts of the slain animal, or being clothed in its
skin, or sprinkled with its blood, there should be a union
represented in order to give to the sinner the benefit of
the sacrifice.
The application of these figures to your case is evident and
practical. You are a sinner deserving everlasting death, and
Jesus has made an atonement, by the shedding of His b100d,,.


■ sufficient to save the whole world; but you can have no
Benefit from that atonement, until you have accepted Him as
your Saviour, and thus identified yourself with Him in His
.death. You are then, as it were, clothed with the skin of the
•slain lamb ; your hand is then laid upon his head, and the
blood is then sprinkled upon the lintel and door-posts of your
heart.
VI. —THE BRAZEN SERPENT.
When Israel rebelled in the wilderness, God sent fiery
serpents among the people, and thousands of them died by
their bite, which was mortal. But when the people repented
nf their sins, and prayed for deliverance, the Lord said unto
Moses—“ Make thee a fiery serpent, and set it upon
n pole; and it shall come to pass, that every one that
is bitten, when he looketh upon it shall live. And Moses
made a serpent of brass, and put it upon a pole; and
it came to pass that if a serpent had bitten any man,
when he beheld the serpent of brass, he lived.” This brazen
serpent was a type of Christ, who Himself said —“ As Moses
lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son
of Man be lifted up” (John iii. 14); and again, “And I, if I
be lifted up, will draw all men unto Me” (John xii. 32). v
The story of the brazen serpent illustrates especially the
simplicity of believing and the suddenness of the cure. Sin
is represented by the fiery serpents which bit the people,
and whose bite was death. The brazen serpent represents
the Saviour, who was made sin for us, though He knew no
sin, and was lifted up upon the Cross. The bite of the serpent
was deadly, and there was but one cure: those who were
bitten must look to the serpent of brass, and the moment
they looked to it they were cured. It was necessary that
the serpent should be lifted up, but something more was
needed to effect a cure. If the Israelites had not believed
Moses, and if they never turned their eyes towards it when
they were bitten, not one of them should have been healed.
The looking to the serpent seems especially intended to
illustrate the simplicity of faith. In the other types the act
of faith was represented by something more difficult than
looking. There was the entering the ark, the putting on of


the garments of skin, the laying of the hand on the head of
the victim, and there was the sprinkling of the blood on the
lintel and side-posts of the door; but here there is nothing
but a look.
It is the simplicity of the cure that prejudices men’s
minds against it. They cannot understand how so much
can depend on so little. They are like Naaman the
Syrian who would have been quite willing to do some great
thing in order to be cured of his leprosy; but when the
prophet bade him go and wash himself in Jordan, he went
away in a rage. Men like a religion that will give them some-
thing to do, so that when they have done it they may
know that all is right. The harder the task they like
it the better, because they think they should then be more
deserving, and the balance in their favour would be all the
greater. Some severe penance or some long pilgrimage
would be very acceptable, but when the gospel tells them
that they can do nothing, and that the only way of salva-
tion is simply to believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and trust
to His having already done everything, they feel as if they
could not venture their soul’s salvation upon anything so
simple. But here, in this story of the serpent in the wilder-
ness, faith is represented in its utmost simplicity—it is
nothing but a look. “ Look unto Me, and be ye saved,” is
the whole gospel in all its power, as well as in all its
simplicity; and yet it contains all the elements of tine faith.
That simple looking proved that the Israelite knew his
danger, and had no other hope ; and it also showed that he
believed what Moses had said, because he did what Moses
bade him. If the Israelite had not believed, he would not
have looked ; and yet the mere belief would not have cured
him, unless he had acted on his belief and turned his eyes
expectingly towards the brazen serpent.
We find here also an illustration of the certainty and
instantaneousness of the cure. It mattered not how many or
how few were the bites which the Israelite had received;
nor did it matter how far the poison had done its deadly
work upon his system. If there was life enough to look,
that look was sufficient, and that look saved him. His body


might be swollen, and his limbs paralysed; the burning
thirst of fever might be upon him, or the pallid hue of
death might have already overspread his countenance : if he
could but turn his glazed eye upon the brazen serpent, that
moment the poison lost its power, and the dying man was
instantly cured.
It may have been that, when he was first bitten, he
thought lightly of it; or when he found that his case was
becoming serious, he may have betaken himself to the
physicians, and scorned the idea of a brazen serpent curing
him. He may have had earnest entreaties addressed to him,
or even have had serious misgivings in his own mind when he
found that he was getting no better, but becoming the
longer the worse. All this may have gone before his conver-
sion, but it was not a part of it, and the brazen serpent had
nothing to do with the delay. His repentance took place
only when he changed his mind, and his conversion was at
the moment when he looked and lived.
VII. —THE BRIDE AND THE BRIDEGROOM.
The church is called the bride of Christ, and this is another
interesting representation of our union with Him, illus-
trating better than any other, not only the tender love and
devotion which subsists between them, but also the legal
change that takes place at conversion. It is true that it is-
the church collectively that is spoken of as the bride of
Christ; but what is true of the whole is true also of the
individual parts, so that we may regard the sinner as united
to Christ in marriage at the time of his conversion.
Before the marriage the bride is even worse than a beggar *
she is in debt beyond anything which she can ever be able
to pay; but the moment that she accepts of Christ as her
spouse she at once takes the rank of her husband, and
becomes a sharer both of His title and His property. Were a
king to marry a slave, the moment of the marriage makes
her a queen; and as the husband marries also his wife’s
debts, and becomes responsible for them, she becomes a
partner in all his honours and wealth, and she is no longer
chargeable with her former debts, because they are trans-


ferred to her husband, who becomes responsible for their pay-
ment in full. Before her marriage she might at any time
have been arrested and cast into prison; after her marriage
that is no longer possible, because her husband is the proper
party to whom to apply.
This is literally true as representing the legal conse-
quences of the sinner’s union to Christ at the moment of his
conversion. Before he is thus united, he is amenable to the
justice of God, which he has no means of satisfying. But at
the moment of his conversion his debt is transferred to
Christ, and all Christ’s riches becomes his. Like the slave
who by marriage becomes a queen, the sinner by his union
with the Saviour becomes a prince of heaven, and possesses
all things as joint-heir with Christ, even to the sitting down
with Him upon His throne.
VIII. —THE TWO DEBTORS.
There is but one other parable needed to complete the
picture of salvation by grace, by illustrating what must go
before, and what must follow after, the forgiveness of sins.
“ There was a certain creditor which had two debtors; the
one owed five hundred pence and the other fifty. And when
they had nothing to pay, he frankly forgave them both.
Tell me, therefore, which of them will love him most. Simon
answered and said, I suppose that he to whom he forgave
most. And He said unto him, Thou hast rightly nudged”
(Luke vii. 41-43).
Notice here, that it was only when they had nothing to
pay that they were both frankly forgiven. So long as there
was any expectation of payment, or even part payment —so
long as there was any hope or proposal of compromise, there
was no forgiveness; but the moment they declared them-
selves bankrupt, having nothing to pay, he frankly forgave
them both.
This is an exact picture of the sinner’s case before he
receives his pardon. At first he thinks that, as he owes
only some fifty pence, he will easily succeed in paying it
up; and therefore his language is—“ Have patience with me
and I will pay thee all.” By-and-bye, however, he discovers


that his debt is very much greater, and his ability to pay is-
very much ■ less than he imagined; and then he thinks to-
make a compromise, so that, though lie may not be quite
able to pay the whole, he shall be able to pay some of it, to-
the extent it may be of ten shillings, or five shillings, or at
least one shilling in the pound. All this, however, brings
no peace and no settlement. The righteous Lord can make
no compromise; and, moreover, He knows that the sinner
has actually nothing whatever to pay in liquidation of his
debt.
It is partly the natural pride of the human heart, and
partly an ignorance of the gospel, that keeps many anxious-
souls unsaved, who might at once be pardoned were they to
give up all attempts at payment, and present themselves as
utter bankrupts, having nothing to pay. A decent, moral
life, attention to religious duties, the reading of the Bible,
frequent attendance at the communion table, fasting, alms-
giving, liberal contributions to religious enterprises : all these,
and many such like, are looked upon as part payment of a
debt standing in the books of God’s remembrance against
them. But even supposing that all these duties were per-
fectly performed, that they all proceeded from a right
motive, and were unmixed with sin, still they could never
count in payment of past transgressions. When all had
been done, it was no more than it was their duty to do.
But, inasmuch as they were imperfectly performed, and
much mixed with sin, instead of reducing the debt they
only added to its amount. All hope of a settlement, or
even a compromise, must therefore be given up, and the
sinner must come as a ruined and helpless bankrupt to the
Saviour, and then only is he frankly forgiven.
But the parable is intended to illustrate chiefly the change
that takes place after forgiveness. Before he is forgiven
there is no love, but only aversion. He can have no pleasure
in the company of his creditor, and will avoid every oppor-
tunity of meeting him ; his very name will be disagreeable,
as associated with the idea of debt and imprisonment.
When the debt is forgiven, however, all this is at once done
away, and gratitude and love take the place of aversion.


It is evident, therefore, that there can be no love to God'
so long as a man is not pardoned, and that he must always
■be disinclined to come into His presence. His very name
will be disagreeable, and everything connected with Him as
a holy and righteous God will be a forbidden topic—it can-
not be otherwise. But when his sins have bepi forgiven,
and God has been reconciled to him, there will be no-more
enmity and estrangement; love and gratitude will take their
place.
The depth of this gratitude and love will necessarily
correspond with the greatness of the debt that has been
forgiven ; and this explains what would otherwise be alto-
gether unaccountable—viz., that the vilest of sinngrs, when
converted, often become the most distinguished among the-
saints. The woman of the city who washed the Saviour V
feet with her teai-s, was a far more devoted Christian than
those who had fewer sins to be forgiven.
But even this would not account for the change that
takes place at conversion; for if this were all it would bn
a very short-lived change. The power of sin would soom
revive unless the Spirit of God really entered into his-
heart and produced a change of nature and character as
well as of opinion and feelings. Many a one has deceived
himself by supposing that his sins were forgiven, although
he never gave himself up entirely to Christ to be saved from
his sins. He felt a joy and a love, because he thought he-
was reconciled, but the Holy Ghost never came into his :
heart. There was, therefore, no change in his character
and in a little while he fell into sin, and all his fine feelings'*
disappeared, his joy and his love vanished away, and he-
became even worse than he was before.
It is easy to excite the feelings by a vivid representation'
of the love of God or the sufferings of Christ, or even by a
false assurance that sin had been forgiven, and the soul
saved. But this is not conversion, and can endure only for
a while; in the time of temptation he will fall away. Real
conversion never takes place except when there is an entire
surrender to Christ, and a willingness to part with every sin..
But when this does take place, the change is permanent,


because the Holy Spirit enters the heart, and abides there for
•ever. It is a new birth and anew life which then com-
mences, killing the power of sin, and awakening loves and
hatreds that were never felt before.
And yet, when the Spirit does produce this change, it
does so in a rational and reasonable way, by real motives,
and not by a mere excitement of the feelings. Without the
Spirit of God the soul is dead; and all that is fitted to excite
our love and gratitude is unable to produce any actual
impression on the heart; but when the Spirit enters, He
gives a new life ; and then the new heart feels the force of
the arguments addressed to it, and becomes not only con-
scious of its depravity in the sight of God, but is affected by
,a sense of the Saviour’s undeserved love, and drawn towards
Him as his only hope, instead of being repelled from Him as
his angry judge.
IX. —THE ACCEPTANCE OF CHRIST.
Having thus endeavoured to explain and to prove to you
from Scripture the free offer of pardon and salvation through
Jesus Christ, let me now call upon you to come to a decision
on this most important of all subjects. It may be that your
-eternal destiny is hanging in suspense upon your decision
now, and that you may have to look back during the endless
.ages of eternity, either in heaven or in hell, upon this day, or
this very hour, when you make your solemn choice.
I have shown you that you may obtain the pardon of all
your sins, and secure your everlasting salvation now. I
have shown that your past life or your present depravity
need be no hindrance, and that your inability to cease from
sin, instead of being a reason why you should not instantly
accept of Christ, is the very reason why it is absolutely
necessary that you should. I have shown that nothing is
required of you that is not entirely within your power at
the present moment, if you have only the will; and there-
fore the question whether you shall be saved or whether
you shall be lost depends on your deliberate choice at this
very moment.
I therefore solemnly put the question to you, and, as you


shall answer to God at the great day of judgment, I call
upon you to give an answer; —“ Are you, willing to take
Christ as your Saviour, and to give yourself up to Him to be
entirely His ?” Ido not say to you: —“ Will you promise to
give up all your sins ?” for as yet you have no power to
do so; but I ask —“ Are you willing to give up all- sin if
Christ shall give you the power ?”
If you say, “ No—l am not prepared to give up all sin, or
to make an entire surrender of myself to Christ: there is at
least one sin that I am not willing to give up, so that I have
really no wish to be delivered from its power”—then, my
friend, we part here. I have no gospel for you; for God
Himself could not save you, so long as that is your decision,
unless He were to cease to be a holy God. It is an awful
choice which you hjave made, but it is a deliberate one ; and
being made, as it were, in the sight of the very blood of the
Lord Jesus, it may be said of } r ou—“He hath joined him-
self to his idols, let him alone.”
But if you say —“Yes —I am willing to take Christ as
my Saviour, and to give myself up entirely to Him, that
He may save me from my sins. I know that I have no
power to reform, and that all my good resolutions are of no
avail; but if Jesus will take my case in hand, and will put
His Spirit within me as He has promised, and give me a
new heart to love and serve Him, I accept His offer. I do
take Him to be my Saviour, and I do give myself up to
Him just as I am, that He may make me all that He wishes
me to be.” If this be your answer, then I say that you are
Christ’s and that Christ is yours. He gives you now eternal
life, your sins are all pardoned through His blood, and His
holy Spirit has entered into your heart, so that you are now
a temple of the living God. You are now a new creature,
born of the Spirit—you are no longer your own—you are
bought with a price, therefore glorify God in your body and
in your spirit which are His.
This being the case, as I trust it is, your first duty is to
go to God and tell Him the decision you have come to. He
has long been entreating you to return, and long have you
delayed giving Him an answer. You now have an answer


to give Him, and He waits and longs to hear you tell Him..
What have you to say ? Go to your knees and tell Him
that you accept His gracious invitation; but remember, do
not so cry for mercy as if God had not been all this time
pressing it upon you. Your salvation has been waiting,
not upon God but upon you. It was your answer to God’s
calling, and not His answer to yours, that was to determine
it. Do not make it appear, then, as if the delay had been
on His part, when it has been altogether your own. If you
have accepted His mercy, you do not need to cry for it;;
because the more urgent your petition, the more do you do
injustice to God’s love and readiness to save. It would be
far more pleasing to God and far more honouring to Him
were you to say, “ Lord, I accept,” than to say, “ Lord, I
entreat Thee to give it me.” This urgent cry for mercy is
not only inappropriate to the position you occupy, it also
leads to a wrong issue. If you accept of Christ as He is
offered to you in the gospel, you have Him the moment you
accept Him; but if you begin to pray for Him you cannot
expect to have Him till God answers your prayers; and
how are you to know when the answer is to come ?
When Ebedmelech came to Jeremiah in the dungeon, and
let down the rope telling him to put it under his arms that
they might draw him up; if, instead of doing so, he had
begun to cry and entreat of him to have mercy upon him r
all his crying would not have been of the slightest use, and
the more earnest and pitiful his cries the more would
Ebedmelech be annoyed, because it made him appear as
if he had not come on purpose to save him. It is not faith
that makes you cry for- mercy, it is your want of faith
because if you believed that God is sincere in entreating
you to accept of Christ, you would accept of Him at once.
Go rather to God bewailing your past neglect of His
tender entreaties. Tell Him that you resist no more—that
you now gladly and gratefully accept salvation through.
Christ, and that you make a complete surrender of yourself,,
that He may make you all that He wishes you to be.
Without waiting another moment, I would have you to
DO IT NOW.


It is some times difficult to lean the soul upon the gene-
ralities of Scripture doctrine; and therefore it is well, in
accepting the offered salvation, to take some verse of Scrip-
ture containing the gospel invitation, and to exercise faith
upon it particularly. Not that this speciality is necessary,
but it helps the anxious soul to lay hold of the offered sal-
vation by using the very words of Scripture as our warrant
for resting our faith upon it. In doing this, the heart feels
a happy assurance, when coming face to face with God’s own
invitations, and building our confidence on their unchange-
able truthfulness.
I would therefore recommend, not only for the first act of
faith, but for its frequent repetition, the use of particular
passages of Scripture chosen for the purpose, presenting
them upon your knees before God in His own words, and
then and there formally accepting them, so that you may
feel assured that the great transaction has been completed,
and that your sins are really pardoned.
There are many appropriate passages for such an exercise ;
but I may offer two as specimens of the heart’s acceptance of
the promises.
1. The Invitation. —Come unto Me all ye that labour and
are heavy laden, and I will give you rest (Matt. xi. 28).
THE ACCEPTANCE.
Lord, this is Thy promise and invitation to me —I have
been labouring; I am heavy laden; I need rest. Thou
invitest me to come to Thee —Thou biddest me come. IDO
COME ; I have no other to go to, and there is none other that
can give me rest. I now rest my weary soul on Thee, and I
believe what Thou hast promised ; Thou wilt give me rest.
2. The Invitation. —Cast thy burden on the Lord, and
He shall sustain thee (Ps. Iv. 22).
THE ACCEPTANCE.
Lord, I accept this gracious promise. Thou knowest that
my burden is sin, and that it would press me down to death
if Thou dost not bear it for me. Thou biddest me cast it on
Thee —I NOW CAST it on Thee ; bear it for me, as Thou hast


promised ; Thou art the great burden-bearer. I cast myself
on Thee, a poor helpless sinner, that Thou mayest not only
bear my burden, but that Thou mayest also sustain myself
according to Thy promise.
And now that I have cast my burden upon Thee at Thy
command, I feel assured that it is no longer resting upon me;
it is now resting upon Thee. Never let me take that burden
back again.


APPENDIX.
No. I.—p. 6. —The Kingdom Suffering Violence.
There are two passages frequently quoted to prove God’s unreadiness to
give salvation at once to those who are anxious to obtain it; and it might
be confessed that, if our translation were correct, there would be some ground
for maintaining so sad a doctrine. But, in reality, not only is our authorised
translation at variance with the context, but it is the very opposite of the
original. They are as follow:
Matt. xi. 12. —“ From the days of John the Baptist until now the kingdom
of heaven suffereth violence, and the violent take it by force.”
Luke xvi. 16. —“ The law and the prophets were until John —since that
time the kingdom of God is preached, and every man presseth into it.”
One would suppose that in these passages our Lord meant to say that,
since the time of John the Baptist the preaching of the gospel had been
welcomed by all men ; and that men’s anxiety to be saved was so mu«h
greater than God’s apparent anxiety to save them, that they entered heaven
by a struggle, in which man was victorious; whereas the true meaning is,
that the gospel, whether preached by John or Christ, had been virulently
assailed and persecuted. This is evident, not only from the context, but
also from an examination of the words in the original. In the verses im-
mediately following, our Lord compares that generation to children sitting
in the markets, who complained that their companions would neither dance
nor mourn ; and He applies the parable by saying—“ John came neither
eating nor drinking, and they say he hath a devil. The Son of Man came
eating and drinking, and they say, Behold a man gluttonous, and a wine-
bibber, a friend of publicans and sinners.”
But it is evident, also, from an examination of the words of the original,,
for, on turning up the “ Interpreting Concordance,”* under the head “Into,”
we find that in Luke xvi. 16, “ every man presseth into it,” the Greek word
is eis ; and on turning to the Glossary, we find that this word primarily means
“towards” and is translated not only “into,” but “against,” as in Matt,
xviii. 15 ; Mark iii. 29 ; Luke vii. 30 ; and many others.
We next turn up the heading “ Press,” and we find that in Luke xvi. 16,
the original word is biazomai, which in the Glossary is translated Press, in
the middle voice, and in the passive voice, “to suffer violence so that the
meaning must be—“ Since that time the kingdom of God is preached, and’
every man sets himself violently against it.”
We now examine Matt. xi. 12. Under the heading “ Violence,” the
word in this passage appears as the passive of biazomai, which means “ to
force”
Under the heading “ Violent,” the original word is shown to be hiastes ;
the kind of violence being shown in such passages as Acts xxi. 35 ; xxir. 7,
• An Interpreting Concordance of the New Testament, with a Glossary by the Rev,
James Gall. Edinburgh : Gall & Inglis.


&c., where the original word is bia. We next ascertain the meaning of the
words, “ Take it by force and, under the heading “ Force,” we find that
in this passage the word is harpazo, “to take by force.” In the Glossary,
we find that this word is also translated to catch away, to pull, to pluck.
The associated words are “ harpage, extortion, ravening, spoiling ; harpag-
mos, robbery ,” and “ harpax, ravening, an extortioner —all of them indi-
cating hostility, robbery, and violence. The meaning therefore is—
“ From the days of John the Baptist until now, the kingdom of heaven
is violently attacked, and the violent ravage it.”
These passages therefore represent God as pressing His Son on an unwil-
ling world.
No. II. —p. 8. —Repentance,
The meaning of this word can be ascertained only by examining it in the
original Greek, and observing the use that is made of it in the passages in
which it occurs. On turning up the word in the “ Interpreting Concordance,”
we find that, excepting Rom. xi. 29, the Greek is always metanoia ; and on
turning to this word in the Glossary, we find that its primary meaning is “a
change of mind.” It is derived from meta, “ a change from one state to
another,” and noeo, “to perceive, understand, think” Repentance, there-
fore, is that change which takes place when a man turns “ from dead works”
(Heb, vi. 1) “ towards God” (Acts. xx. 21).
No. lll.—p. 11. — The Publican’s Prayer.
There is no mercy with God out of Christ, and therefore to cry for mercy,
instead of accepting Christ, is inappropriate. In opposition to this view,
the prayer of the publican has been quoted as a cry for mercy, without
reference to the atonement ; whereas, in reality, it implied an acceptance of
salvation by an atonement, as well as an acknowledgment that he had no
merit of his own. Our version gives us a very imperfect idea of its true
meaning.
On turning to the “ Interpreting Concordance,” under the heading “ Mer-
•CIFUL,” we find that there are four different Greek words so translated ;
and that the one which is used in this passage is hilaskomai, the meaning of
which is very peculiar, and very different from that of eleemon or eleeo,
which are the words usually rendered “merciful,” or “ having mercy.” On
turning to the Glossary, we find that hilaskomai, hilasmos, and hilasterion,
Are all derived from the root hileos, and that the idea conveyed in all of them
is “ propitiation.” Thus, in 1 John ii. 2, He is the propitiation (hilasmos)
for our sins ; and in Rom. iii. 25— Whom God hath set forth to be a propitia-
tion (hilasterion) through faith in His blood. This word hilasterion, we find
in the Glossary, not only means “ propitiation ,” but “ the mercy-seat,” where
propitiation was made. Heb. ix. s— And over it the cherubims of glory,
shadowing the mercy-seat (hilasterion).
How, then, does this affect the publican’s prayer ? We are told in the
Glossary that hilaskomai, in the middle voice, is translated (in Heb. ii. 17)
*‘ to make reconciliation ,” and, in the passive voice, is translated in this
passage only “to be merciful.” If it be the passive voice, that is so trans-
lated, it is evident that the true meaning must be “ to be propitiated,” “ to
be reconciled at the mercy-seat.” / i*
But this is not all. On turning in the Concordance to the heading A or
An, we discover that in this passage the Greek article is used before the
word “ sinner,” and that the translation ought to have been, “ God be pro-


pitiated [reconciled in virtue of a propitiatory sacrifice] towards me the
sinner”—not a sinner, but the sinner above all other sinners, and the sinner
for whom I claim reconciliation by the blood.”
This passage, therefore, gives no sanction to the idea that God reqiiires to
be entreated to give us an interest in Christ, or that anything is a-wanting
for our instant salvation but our acceptance of His Son.
No. IV. —p. 11.—Faith.
The only definition of Faith which Scripture supplies is that given in Heb,
xi. 1—“ Norn faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things
not seen."
The original word for “ substance” is hupo-stasis [hupo under , histemi
to set]. The other passages in which it occurs are—
-2 Cor. ix, 4, in this same confident boasting.
2 Cor. xi. 17, in this confidence of boasting.
Heb. i. 3, and the express image of his person.
Heb. iii. 14, if we hold the beginning of our confidence.
We may therefore translate the passage, “ Now, Faith is the confidence of
things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen.”


WORKS BY THE SAME AUTHOR.
Instant Salvation, by the Instant Acceptance
of a Mediator and Surety. Price Sixpence.
Immediate Salvation for the Chief of Simpers;
ora Practical Guide for Anxious Inquirers.
ment of “ Instant Salvation.”) Price One Penny.
Carrubber’s Close Mission Handbill Tracts.
Packet No. I.—Arresting and Alarming.
Packet No. 2. —Affectionate Appeals.
Packet No. 3.—Simple Statements of the Gospel.
100 in each packet; Sixpence per pocket.
An Easy Guide to the Constellations, with Dia-
grams and Maps of the Stax's (white stars on a blue
ground). Price One Shilling.
The People’s Atlas of the Stars after Argelander
(white stars on a blue ground), with Key Maps.
Price One Shilling.
Sunday-School Teachers’ English and Creek
Concordance; being an Interpreting Concordance of
the New Testament. With a Glossaxy of the Greek
Words.
Primeval Man Unveiled; or The Anthropology
of the Bible. Coloured Illustrations, Crown Bvo, Cloth
Lettered. Price Seven Shillings and Sixpence.
Hymns and Spiritual Songs for Prayer Meetings
and Evangelistic Services, with music. Edited
by the Rev. James Gall. New edition containing
200 Hymns, including Sankey’s.
Cloth Twopence ; ditto, harmonised edition, cloth, Is.
Sold by
ROBERT MACK AY, 15 COLLINS STREET WEST,
TATp
616LC0
MELBOURNE.
