

IMMIGRATION;
THE GRAND DESIDERATUM FOR NEW SOUTH WALES:
AND HOW TO PROMOTE IT EFFECTUALLY.
BY
JOHN DUNMORE LANG, D.D., A.M.,
SENIOR MINISTER OF THE SCOTS CHURCH, SYDNEY,
AND RECENTLY ONE OP THB REPRESENTATIVES OF THE CITY OP SYDNEY IN THE
PARLIAMENT OP NEW SOUTH WALES,
HONORARY MEMBER OF THE AFRICAN INSTITUTE OP FRANCE, OF THE AMERICAN ORIENTAL SOCIETY,
AND OF THE LITERARY INSTITUTE OF OLINDA, IN THE "BRAZILS.




IMMIGRATION;
THE GRAND DESIDERATUM FOR NEW SOUTH WALES:
AND HOW TO PROMOTE IT EFFECTUALLY.
BY
JOHN DUNMORE LANG, D.D., A.M.,
SENIOR MINISTER OF THE SCOTS CHURCH, SYDNEY,
AND RECENTLY ONE OF THE REPRESENTATIVES OF THE CITY OP SYDNEY IN THE
PARLIAMENT OP NEW SOUTH WALES,
HONORARY MEMBER OP THE AFRICAN INSTITUTE OP FRANCE, OP THE AMERICAN ORIENTAL SOCIETY,
AND OF THE LITERARY INSTITUTE OF OLINDA, IN THE BRAZILS.




TO THE
HONORABLE MEMBERS OF BOTH HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT,
THE FOLLOWING PAGES ARE RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED
tfyc 'author.




CONTENTS.
PAGE.
PART I.
Sketch of the Policy and Practice of New South Wales in the matter
of Immigration, previous to the last Decennial Period 7
PART 11.
Queensland and New Zealand contrasted with New South Wales in
the matter of Immigration, during the last Decennial Period 29
PART 111.
Quack-salve for our colonial sores in the matter of Immigration—
Lower the minimum price of land to 10s. an acre. No! No!
Down with it to ss. at once !!! 40
PART IV.
How to originate and carry out an extensive system of Immigration
for New South Wales 42




PART I.
Sketch of the Policy and Practice of New South Wales
in the matter of Immigration, previous to the last
Decennial Period.
“ The heroic work of colonization,” as it is happily designated by Lord
Bacon, consists in transferring the surplus population and capital of
the Mother Country to some suitable colonial field. It is the planting
of a germ which may grow up in due time into a great Christian nation.
Now, that New South Wales is a suitable field for the planting of
such a germ—that it is eminently so in comparison with most of
the other Colonies of the British Empire—no person who knows any-
thing either of its physical character or of its material resources, can
deny ; and it is equally undeniable that there has never been a period
in the history either of the Mother Country or of this Colony, in which
that “ heroic work” is more needful, on the largest possible scale,
than it is now. Before pointing out our present interest and duty,
however, in this most important respect, it may not be out of place to
give a slight sketch of the policy and practice of New South Wales in
the matter of immigration, previous to the last decennial period.
Previous to the year 1831, it had been the policy and practice of the
Imperial Government to promote the “heroic work of colonization” in
this territory by giving free grants of land, with other indulgences, to
emigrants of suitable character and qualifications ; but in that year
this practice was discontinued, at the instance of a school of colonial
reformers, headed by the late Edward Gibbon Wakefield, Esq., who
recommended and succeeded in introducing the practice of selling the
Waste Lands of the Colonies by public auction, at not less than a certain
minimum price, and devoting the proceeds to the work of colonization,
by sending out suitable labourers to the colonial field. I had myself
brought out, at my own sole risk and charges, in the year 1831, a
whole ship-load of Scotch mechanics, for the erection of certain build-
ings for educational purposes in the city of Sydney, on the principle
of their paying up by weekly instalments from their wages, at the
current rates of the Colony, the stipulated amount of their passage


money; and the measure of success that attended this effort,
under very trying circumstances for myself, and the example
which it set to persons of the same class in society in the Mother
Country, undoubtedly gave a great stimulus to the work of coloniza-
tion in this territory, when a different principle of action in the
matter in question, together with much greater facilities for the
emigrant, was subsequently introduced.
I had been induced to make the effort to which I have just alluded
—my first effort in the work of colonization —under the following
circumstances : —The year 1831 was a period of great depression, priva-
tion, and suffering, in the United Kingdom ; rick-burning and machine-
breaking being extensively prevalent in the agricultural districts, while
a low rate of wages and want of employment prevailed in the towns.
Contrasting this unfortunate state of things among the working classes
of the Mother Country with that of persons of the same classes at that
period in Hew South Wales, and having the means of giving employ-
ment for a time to a considerable number of artisans of the different
classes required in housebuilding, I brought out the Scotch mechanics
above mentioned, with a view to originate an extensive emigration of the
working classes of the United Kingdom to this Colony.
The first appropriations of the Land Fund under the new system of
1831, were made for the conveyance out to this Colony, which then
included both Victoria and Queensland, as also to that of Van Diemen’s
Land, now Tasmania, whole ship-loads of unmarried females ; both to
equalize the numbers of the sexes in the Colonies, and to supply the
families of respectable colonists with suitable female domestic servants.
The idea was doubtless a good one ; but as the Imperial Government
had no machinery at the time for this particular service, it waa unfor-
tunately entrusted to an artful and unprincipled speculator, of the name
of Marshall, who, when he found it either difficult or impracticable to
obtain a sufficient number of reputable females to fill his ships, actually
swept the streets of London and Liverpool, of Dublin and Cork, and
landed downright prostitutes by the hundred in the cities of Sydney and
Hobart Town, thereby giving rise to scenes and circumstances in these
cities which it is unnecessary to describe.
In the year 1835, after another visit to England, I endeavoured, in
a series of essays published in the late Colonist newspaper, to direct
the attention of the landholders and other free inhabitants of the
Colony to the paramount importance of the Colonial Land Revenue,


as affording the means of gradually introducing into this territory a
virtuous and industrious population from the United Kingdom, and of
thereby raising the tone of moral feeling throughout the Colony. I
took occasion also at the same time to expose the flagrant enormities
of the female emigration system, as it was then managed, or rather
mismanaged, for the benefit of a few individuals in the Colonies and in
England. In both of these objects my efforts were happily successful;
the attention of the colonists having been effectually aroused to the
paramount importance of the land revenue as a source of moral im-
provement, no less than of general advancement, and the female
emigration system having been at length put a stop to by the Home
Government, in consequence of the repeated remonstrances of the
colonial public through the Press.
As the land revenue of the Australian Colonies was then gradually
increasing in amount and importance, a distinct department was at
length created by the Imperial Government, under functionaries
designated “ Emigration and Land Commissioners,” for the superin-
tendence and management of emigration generally to these Colonies.
Under these functionaries the land fund was appropriated for the pro-
motion of the emigration of reputable families and individuals of the
various mechanical employments required from time to time in this
Colony, as also of unmarried females having relations to protect them
in the emigrant ships, farm labourers and shepherds. Under this
system also, orders upon the land revenue to the amount of £ls for
each statute adult immigrant landed in the Colony were given by the
local Government, to any respectable colonists who desired to import
from the Mother Country any number of hired servants, labourers, or
shepherds, for themselves.
Having deemed it necessary, in the year 1836, to undertake another
voyage to England, to engage and bring out certain ministers of re-
ligion, schoolmasters, and missionaries to the aborigines, my brother,
Mr. Andrew Lang (late M.L.C.), of Dunmore, Hunter’s Elver, and the
late George Eankin, Esq., J.P., of Bathurst, obtained orders of this
kind from the local Government for the importation of a hundred
families each of the classes of persons required at the time in the
Colony. These orders were assigned to me by the gentlemen I have
mentioned, for the double purpose of enabling me to select a large num-
ber of reputable and industrious families for the Colony, and of facili-
tating my arrangements for the passage out of the persons I wished


to bring out with me on my return. Two large vessels were
accordingly engaged for this purpose, and were filled with suitable
emigrants of my selection for the Colony ; the orders on the land
revenue in both cases being simply transferred to the shipowners as
their security for payment on the safe arrival of their vessels at their
port of destination. In one of these vessels there was a body of clerical
and lay German missionaries, numbering thirty adult persons in all,
whom I had been permitted by the Home Government to engage at
the cost of the land revenue, for the formation of a German mission to
the aborigines at Moreton Bay ; the history and the beneficial influence
of which in the neighbourhood, for a long series of years thereafter,
are well-known in that part of the territory.
My brother’s order had included fifty families of vine-dressers from
France or Germany, whom I had agreed to select and bring out on
condition of their being accompanied by a minister and schoolmaster
of their own nation and communion, as Mr. Lang intended at the time
to form an extensive vineyard on his property on the Hunter. As
such emigrants, however, were not then procurable in France—French
vignerons having no desire to leave their native country —and as
there were great difficulties in the way of German emigrants of the
humbler classes passing down the Plane through Holland, I succeeded
at length, through a French Protestant clergyman of the place, in
engaging about fifty families of German vine-dressers at Havre de
Grace in France, who had emigrated from their native country, with
the intention of proceeding to America by way of Havre, but having
expended all their means were there stopped short. About 250 of
these emigrants, both male and female, embarked at Havre on board
the French ship, “ La Justine,” the captain of which was a Protestant,
whom I had met with in a mercantile house connected with the Colony,
in London, and a brother-in-law of the late Captain Pike of the
Upper Hunter. The captain touched, as he had intended from the
first, at Pio de Janeiro, in the Brazils, for fresh provisions. There is
a large German population in that city, as I ascertained when I was
there myself in the year 1823 ; and the arrival in their harbour of a
whole ship-load of vignerons from the fatherland was quite an event
among the Germans, and every inducement was held forth to the
captain simply to land his passengers on the wharf; the Brazilian
Government, which had taken a great interest in the matter, having
offered him a large amount if he should do so—more than sufficient


to remunerate him for all the expenses of his voyage. But the captain
was an honorable man, and being under engagement to my brother
and myself,* he refused to do so, and proceeded again to sea. But the
Germans in Bio having made their countrymen on board believe that
they were going to a penal settlement, and would all be made slaves of
on their arrival; and having secretly supplied them with arms, they
rose upon the captain at sea, and compelled him to take them back to
Bio. My brother and myself, however, were honorably relieved of all
the obligations we had undertaken in the case ; and, I have since
ascertained that the vignerons of the “La Justine formed a settlement
for the growth of the vine in the mountainous country a few miles from
Bio, near the Emperor Don Pedro’s summer palace; that they had
built a town called Petropolis in honor of the Emperor, who took a
great interest in the settlement, and often visited it, and that all the
places about have regular German names. It was no doubt a great
and irreparable loss to the Colony at the time.
But as not one in fifty of the colonists of this period had the means
of selecting and engaging emigrants in the United Kingdom them-
selves, the business of directing the emigration that was then taking
place to New South Wales fell, in great measure, into the hands of the
Emigration and Land Commissioners, who employed for the most
part experienced surgeons in the Boyal Navy, to select the different
classes of emigrants required in the Colony, and to proceed with them
themselves to their destination, as Surgeons-superintendent of the
ships chartered for the purpose by the Commissioners. The object of
the Home Government in carrying out these arrangements, was to
send out such emigrants only as were really required in the Colony
and would prove acceptable to the colonists, and also to apportion the
relief which this Government emigration was calculated to afford to
the Mother Country as equably as possible to the different districts of
the United Kingdom, in so far as this could be accomplished, in accord-
ance with that object. With this view, as the Emigration and Land
Commissioners found that emigrants of the class required, from the
remote pastoral and agricultural districts of the United Kingdom,
could not be induced to embark for New South Wales, unless they
*1 had drawn upon my brother for £l,OOO, which was duly endorsed, to enable the French
captain to fit out and provision his vessel; and I had engaged, on my brother’s behalf, that
he should be paid £3 for each adult emigrant landed in the Colony, in addition to the amount
guaranteed in the Government order.


were to do so from the immediate neighbourhood of their respective
places of abode ; they chartered vessels from time to time to proceed
to these localities, where they received on hoard their respective
cargoes of emigrants, and took their departure at once for the Colony.
It was in this way that Government emigration ships were despatched
from time to time with farm labourers from the agricultural districts
of England, particularly from the county of Kent, —with pastoral
emigrants from the highlands of Scotland,—with mechanics from
Dundee and the Clyde in Scotland, and from Londonderry in Ireland,—
and with farm servants from Belfast, and the south and west of
Ireland. There was thus of necessity a considerably greater expense
incurred (in the first instance, at least, and till the system could be
properly matured), in procuring suitable emigrants for the Colony, and
in doing strict justice at the same time to the different sections of the
United Kingdom from which it was desirable to encourage emigration;
hut as the Government emigrants were uniformly selected by men of
respectable standing in society—men in whom both the Government
and the emigrants could place confidence, and who had always their own
character as servants of the public at stake in the matter —I am satisfied,
notwithstanding the interested and persevering efforts that were made
at the time to produce a different impression, both in the Colony and
in England, that the Government emigration system of that period was
conducted throughout with a sincere desire to promote the general
welfare, and especially the moral advancement of this Colony, by sending
out to it in every instance the particular description of emigrants
which, it was supposed, would be likely to be most useful to the
Colony and most desirable; and in consistency with the accom-
plishment of this object, the relief which the abstraction of so large a
portion of its redundant population was calculated to afford the Mother
Country was apportioned, as equally as possible, to different sections of
the United Kingdom. In one word, from what actually fell under my
own observation, as well as from what I learned from personal inter-
course with the gentlemen entrusted by the Home Government with
the general management and details of the Australian Emigration
System, I have no hesitation in expressing my own belief and convic-
tion that the sole object in view, on the part of the Imperial
Government, was the promotion of the best interests, both of this
Colony and of the United Kingdom, at the smallest possible
expense.


I happened at this period, quite unexpectedly, to give a great impulse
to emigration of a particular kind to this Colony. From the failure of
the crops, and from various other causes combined, there was a famine
in the Highlands and Islands of Scotland in the year 1837, somewhat
similar, although on a much smaller scale, to the Irish famine about ten
years thereafter. The country, in that particular part of it at least,
was also suffering at the time from a redundancy of population; and a
deputation from Scotland had been sent to London, consisting of the
late Bev. Dr. McLeod, of Glasgow, John Bowie, Esq.,* Writer to the
Signet, Edinburgh, and A. Baird, Esq., an eminent solicitor, also from
Glasgow, to solicit assistance both from the Government and the
public, on behalf of the starving Highlanders, and especially to entreat
the Imperial Government to send out as many as 30,000 of them to
Canada. I happened to be present in the Egyptian Hall, London,
when the deputation gave an account of their mission, and of the
calamitous state of the Highlanders, to a large assemblage of respectable
citizens ; whom they informed that Lord John Bussell had just given
them a cheque for £IO,OOO as a contribution from the Government,
telling them, however, that there were no funds at the disposal of
Government to enable them to send any of the Highlanders to Canada.
Immediately after the meeting I waited upon the deputation, and told
them, to their great delight, that although the Government had no
funds available for sending out any of the Highlanders to Canada,
there was a fund which they could immediately make use of for
enabling them to send so many of them to Hew South Wales, viz.,
the Land Fund of this Colony, which I showed them was then assuming
very large proportions. I had procured, before leaving the Colony, all
its statistics down to the then latest date, and I accordingly supplied
the deputation with printed documents in corroboration of my state-
ments, to enable them at their successive interviews with Lord Glenelg
and Sir George Grey, who then presided over the Colonial Office, to
answer all objections ; for as is usual in all cases of new schemes or
proposals being submitted to Government, there were not a few such
objections stated. At length Sir George and His Lordship being both
satisfied of the practicability of my proposal, the matter was finally
referred to the Cabinet, who at once authorized the appropriation of so
much of the Land Fund of the Colony as might be available for the
purpose, for the emigration of a largo body of the Highlanders to
* Uncle of the late Minister for Lands, John Bowie Wilson, Esq.


New South Wales. The result of this negotiation was that about
4,000 Highlanders were brought out to the Colony, in eighteen
different vessels, during the years 1837-40; and not a few of these
Highlanders, being engaged first as servants and afterwards as prin-
cipals on the large pastoral stations of the interior, became eventually
prominent and wealthy colonists in New South Wales, Victoria, and
Queensland.
In short, the Government Emigration System, under the manage-
ment of the Emigration and Land Commissioners, had been intro-
ducing into the Colony, for a series of years up to the year 1839 inclu-
sive, a very large and constantly increasing number of a superior
class of emigrants from all parts of the United Kingdom; and the
progressive advancement of the Colony in its moral and religious
character, as well as in its material interests, was evident and gratify-
ing in a very high degree. In the meantime, the cost of the system,
which was necessarily very considerable in the first instance, from the
necessity for sending the Surgeons-superintendent of the emigrant
ships to remote parts of the Mother Country to select the emigrants,
as in the case of the Highlanders, was gradually diminishing, from the
experience gained in the management of the system and the increasing
numbers of the emigrants themselves.
A change, however, of an unexpected and most disastrous character
very soon came over the spirit of our colonial dream of onward and
steady progress as a thoroughly British community. In the year 1839,
the Land Fund, which had been constantly increasing, especially from
extensive purchases of land and town allotments in the district of
Port Phillip, very naturally excited the cupidity of the merchants of
Sydney, who conceived that if they could only get the management of
the fund into their own hands they could make handsome fortunes
from it, as some of them actually did. With this view, a hue and cry
was got up against the Government system of emigration ; the gullible
portion of the colonial public being led to believe, from certain calcu-
lations that were artfully placed before them on the part of the
merchants, that the Department of Emigration would be managed
much more economically and much better for the community, if it
were taken entirely out of the hands of the Government Emigration
and Land Commissioners, and placed directly in those of the people
themselves.


Unfortunately, the local Government of the day—that of the late
Sir George Gipps and his nominee Council —were blind enough not to
oppose or resist this suicidal agitation ; and the consequence was that
the expenditure of the large and constantly increasing Land Fund
available for the promotion of immigration, was in great measure if
not entirely taken out of the hands of the Government Commissioners,
and handed over to a few mercantile speculators in the city of Sydney.
Orders on the Land Fund were doubtless issued by the local Govern-
ment to colonial proprietors, intending or rather professing to import
immigrants as hired servants or labourers on their own account, at so
much per head for each statute adult; but as not one in twenty of
these colonists had any means of selecting and engaging such persons
in the United Kingdom, these orders were simply transferred to some
mercantile house in Sydney engaged extensively in the immigration
business, and having partners, agents, or correspondents in London.
These London agents were generally shipbrokers, who in some cases
merely paid the Sydney merchant so much per head for all the orders
for emigrants he could obtain in the Colony. In other cases there was
a regular partnership between the London ship-broker and the Sydney
merchant; at all events there was no check or supervision exercised
in either case over the ship-broker, as to how or where he was to
obtain his emigrants : he had merely to send out so many statute
adults to enable him to obtain the regular bounty, and like all
mercantile men he endeavoured to find them in the cheapest
market.
That market was the south and west of Ireland; where the London
ship-brokers had their whippers-in engaging emigrants for New South
Wales at so much per head, and forwarding them, with but little or no
inquiry either about their character or qualifications, to the Australian
emigrant ships—to the general rendezvous of the period in Plymouth
Sound —by the Dublin or Cork steamboats trading to London. For as
vessels could generally be chartered to sail from London at a cheaper
rate than from any of the outports of the kingdom, while cargo to fill
up with and cabin passengers were more likely to be found there than
at any outport, the Australian emigrant ships chartered by the London
ship-brokers sailed from London, to touch at Plymouth after getting
safely over the worst part of the voyage, the passage down channel
.—to receive their complement of Irish bounty emigrants in that
port.


I happened, towards the close of the year 1840, in returning to the
Colony from England, to see this whole process, which had then been
but recently inaugurated, and of which I had had no previous con-
ception, carried out in all its details. Having missed my passage out by
a vessel from Liverpool, instead of returning to London, I engaged
my passage by a bounty emigrant ship in which I had made a previous
voyage in very different circumstances, and which was then about to
sail from London, to touch at Plymouth Sound—proceeding as I did
first to Dublin and then to Plymouth. On reaching Dublin, I was
surprised beyond measure to find the steamer from thence to Plymouth
crammed quite full with steerage and deck passengers, who had just
been collected by the charterer’s agent in the south and west of
Ireland, and were proceeding to the bounty emigrant ship by which I
had engaged my own passage in Plymouth Sound. That vessel I
afterwards found had embarked all her cabin passengers but myself,
with all her provisions and water, and all the cargo for which she could
find stowage, in the London Docks, and had merely to touch at the
Sound for her bounty emigrants from Ireland; who were simply trans-
ferred from the deck of the Dublin steamer to that of the Australian
emigrant ship, without ever touching the English soil, although in the
correct statistics of the day they were all rated as emigrants from
England.
An intelligent young gentleman, a brother of the Surgeon of the
vessel (the ship “ Portland”), who was coming out as a cabin passenger
from the city of Kilkenny to which he belonged, told me in the course
of our voyage of his having been present when some of the emigrants
from that neighbourhood, who he knew were persons of very indifferent
character, were engaged by the charterer’s agent. Remonstrating as he
had done with the parochial authority who was certifying to their
fitness, and who was doubtless glad to get them out of the way, as to
how he could give such persons a certificate of character, the worthy
official replied —“No doubt they are no better than they should be ;
they take (meaning steal) a goose now and then ; but they are angels
compared with the people they are going out among,” meaning us,
the people of New South Wales.
The “ Portland” was the sixth vessel which the charterers had sent
out in this way to Sydney and Melbourne during the year 1840. In
the meantime the notorious John Marshall of female emigration
celebrity, had reappeared upon the scene under the auspices of a mer-


cantile house in Sydney, as a charterer of bounty emigrant ships to
New South Wales. The “ Glenswilly,” one of his vessels, arrived in
Sydney from London and Plymouth on the 11th March, 1841, having
on hoard 310 emigrants ; the whole number having been collected by
his agents in the south and west of Ireland, and carried over by the
Cork and Dublin steamboats to meet the “ Glenswilly ” in Plymouth
Sound. The proportion of Protestants to Eoman Catholics by that
vessel, as well as by another of Mr. Marshall’s fleet, in reference to
which I ascertained the fact from indisputable authority at the time,
was only one in eighteen ! A large proportion moreover of this acces-
sion to the intellectual, moral, and religious character of the Colony,
were from the county of Tipperary, the most famous in all Ireland for
deeds of violence and blood ; not fewer than three of these hopefuls,
as was credibly reported by certain of their shipmates at the time,
having been concerned in a murder in their native land.
In short, while it was notorious that nine-tenths of all the funds
arising from the sale of waste land in New South Wales had been con-
tributed by Protestant purchasers chiefly from England and Scotland,
it was nevertheless the fact that, under the system introduced, at the
instance of certain unprincipled mercantile speculators in Sydney, of
conducting emigration to this territory in private bounty emigrant
ships from London, to touch for the most part at Plymouth, at least
two-thirds of the whole amount of that revenue was expended in
bringing out to the Colony Eoman Catholics from Ireland !
Such a state of things undoubtedly implied either the grossest
neglect or the grossest mismanagement in some quarter or other; and
it is impossible to acquit the local Government of the period of the
great blame, the great culpability, that attached to it, either for per-
mitting its existence in the first instance, or for its continuance for a
single hour after its real character became known. The fact was that,
in the year 1838, His Excellency Sir George Gipps and his two Coun-
cils had found New South Wales a thoroughly Protestant Colony ; but
in the short space of three years thereafter, they had done more,
through their gross neglect of the proper duties of their office—to say
the very least that can be said on the subject—to transform it into a
mere province of the Popedom, than had been done by all the injudi-
cious acts of all their predecessors for fifty years before ! It was no
excuse for men occupying so exceedingly responsible a situation as that
which thesegentlemen held at the time to plead that they did not foresee


the consequences of the measures they had sanctioned in regard to
immigration. They ought to have foreseen them ; and the confession
of their inability to have foreseen them was simply a confession of
incapacity. They ought never to have entrusted to unprincipled
speculators (for common sense might have taught them that the
Bounty Immigration business was sure to fall into such hands under
the system they had created) such enormous powers for good or for
evil as were thus so flagrantly abused.
I was the first to sound the alarm on the occasion ; which I did in
a letter addressed to the Protestant landholders of New South Wales,
entitled “ The Question of Questions ! or, is this Colony to be trans-
formed into a province of the Popedom ? ” which was published as a
pamphlet in Sydney, in the year 1841. During the following year
the subject was taken up also in the nominee Legislative Council of
the period, by the late Bishop Broughton, who showed, from a refer-
ence to the immigration statistics of the day, that during the eighteen
months that had elapsed from the Ist January, 1841, to the 30th June,
1842, there had been imported into the Colony, at the public expense,
25,330 (twenty-five thousand three hundred and thirty) immigrants,
of whom not fewer than 16,892 (sixteen thousand eight hundred and
ninety-two), or two-thirds of the whole number, were from Ireland,
chiefly Homan Catholics from the south and west, and only 8,438 (eight
thousand four hundred and thirty-eight) from England and Scotland
together; Ireland having thus had four times her proper share of the
benefit afforded to the United Kingdom, through immigration to
Australia, in proportion to her population as compared with that of
Great Britain.
Besides, a very large number of these immigrants from the south
and west of Ireland were altogether unsuited to the circumstances and
wants of the Colony; as witness the following extract of the evidence
of the late Dr. Thomson of Geelong, given before a Select Committee
of the Legislative Council (of which he was himself a Member) on
Immigration, in the year 1843 :
25. By the Colonial Secretary — Generally speaking, do you find men who
come from towns willing to engage as labourers or shepherds in the country ?
There is a disinclination on the part of such persons to go into the interior.
We have had a great many immigrants brought to Port Phillip who are
utterly useless ; in point of intellect they are interior to our own aborigines.
26. What do they represent themselves as being ? Labourers.
27. By Dr. Lang —Where do they come from P The south of Ireland.


The subject of the prodigious disproportion, as well as of the unsuit-
ableness of a large amount of the Irish Bounty Immigration, had
been brought under the notice of the old nominee Council so early
as the year 1840. In a discussion on the subject in that Council, on the
22nd of October of that year, Mr. Jones observed that “ the learned
Attorney-General (Mr. Plunkett) hadsaid there was ananti-Irishfeeling
in the Colony. He (Mr. Jones) was not aware of such a feeling, but
at present none but Irish emigrants were sent out, and he did think
it a great disadvantage to the Colony to get nothing but Irish ; and if
our true position were known in England, he felt confident that we
should get them as fast from England as we now did from Ireland.
He liked nationality, and if the Attorney-General liked to see Irish
people arriving, he (Mr. Jones) would like to see the balance restored
by the introduction of a number of English people.”
Lest I should myself be suspected of cherishing an anti-Irish, and
especially an anti-Catholic, feeling, so as to lead me either to coun-
tenance or to practise injustice towards that class of our fellow-subjects,
I can challenge all and sundry to point to a single instance of anything
of the kind in my public procedure in this Colony for the last forty years;
during the whole of which period I have ever acted on the principle
of a fair field for all, and no favour for any. At the same time, I have
all along been strongly of opinion that it was alike the interest and
the bounden duty of all who had the best interests of this country at
heart, to do all that in them lay to make it a British and not an Irish
Colony,—to maintain a somewhat similar proportion between the differ-
ent nationalities to that which obtains in the United Kingdom,—and
especially to prevent this fair country from becoming like Ireland, a
mere province of the Popedom. And therefore I regard those un-
principled men, who for their own personal aggrandisement established
the Bounty System of Immigration for this Colony, as well as the
Government that enabled them to carry out their nefarious schemes,
as having been guilty of a species of high treason to Australia.
Providentially, perhaps, for the Colony, a period of deep and general
depression ensued in the years 1843-1845, during which the Land
Fund having fallen to nothing, bounty immigration ceased for a time ;
but in 1846, when the Colony was again reviving from this state of
general depression, and the resumption of immigration in some form
or other was generally expected, I resolved to proceed to England,
as I did accordingly, at my own cost and charges, to give an impulse


throughout the United Kingdom to Protestant emigration to New
South Wales. I did so, I confess, as, being in my estimation, a matter of
life and death to the Colony; having ascertained beyond all doubt that a
great effort was making at the time to give the future immigration a
thoroughly Komish character. Before doing so, however, I made a
pretty extensive tour in the districts of Port Phillip and Moreton Bay,
now the great Colonies of Victoria and Queensland, to make myself
acquainted with the general capabilities of the country and the wants
and wishes of its inhabitants.
I was absent from the Colony on this occasion nearly four years—
from July Ist, 1846, till March 11th, 1850 —during which I traversed
the United Kingdom in various directions, from the Bristol Channel
to the Orkney and Shetland Islands ; publishing and circulating books
and pamphlets on the subject of my mission, which I had got up for
the purpose, partly in the Colony and partly on my voyage home;
lecturing and delivering addresses on Australia as an eligible field for
emigration, and especially for the cultivation of cotton and the sugar-
cane by European free labour, and publishing a series of letters with
the same view in various influential and widely circulated journals.
lu particular, I delivered such lectures or addresses in various parts
of England, generally to very large and enthusiastic audiences, —as, for
instance, in Exeter Hall, London, and in two other localities at the
West End; in Manchester, on two different occasions ; in Liverpool;
in Leeds; in Newcastle ; in Birmingham ;in the cities of Bristol, Glou-
cester, and Bedford ; at Hitch in, in Hertfordshire ; and in Newport,
Monmouthshire, on the borders of Wales. The meeting in Exeter
Hall was presided over by the Honorable D. Kinnaird, who took a
great interest in emigration to these Colonies, and particularly in
Protestant emigration. In Manchester the meetings were presided
over by Thomas Bazley, Esq., M.P., President of the Chamber of
Commerce in that city, who had taken a deep interest in the cultivation
of cotton at Moreton Bay. The meeting at Leeds was presided over by
the ex-Mayor (also ex-M.P.) for the borough, and those at Newcastle
and Bristol by the Mayors of these cities. The meeting at Bedford
was held in pursuance of a requisition requesting me to visit that city,
and signed by the Mayor, by ministers of all denominations, including
those of the Established Church, and by a large number of the most
respectable inhabitants. The room engaged for the meeting was the


Shire Hall, the largest in tlie city. It was filled to suffocation on my
arrival; but as there were far more outside than within, the meeting
was adjourned to a large square adjoining, where a waggon was fixed
in the place usually occupied in a similar way at elections, from which
I addressed a most attentive audience of more than two thousand
persons, for nearly two hours, in the stillness of a summer eve. Some-
thing of a similar kind had taken place in Bristol, where I twice
addressed large assemblages of people, there being not fewer than
fifteen hundred present on the second occasion. Of these meetings
detailed reports were published in the local journals; in which the
subject of emigration to Australia, and the advantages it held forth
to the swarming myriads of England, were successively brought under
the notice of thousands who had never heard a syllable on the subject
before.
In Scotland I delivered a series of four lectures in the City of
Glasgow, towards the close of the year 1847, and other two to large
audiences in the Trades’ Hall of that city, early in 1849. These lectures
or addresses were repeated in Edinburgh, and in the towns of Ayr,
Kirkintilloch, Kirkaldy, and Cupar; in Aberdeen; in the towns of
Elgin, Inverness, and Oban ; at Wick in Caithness ; at Kirkwall and
Stromness in the Orkney Islands, and atLerwick in the Shetlandlslands.
Lady Franklin, with whom I had had the honor of becoming acquainted
when her unfortunate husband was Governor of Yan Diemen’s Land,
happening to be a fellow-passenger with me in the steamer to the
Orkney and Shetland Islands (whither she had gone to make ineffectual
inquiries about Sir John and the Polar Expedition) took a deep interest
in my object, both from her intimate acquaintance with the Australian
Colonies and their resources, and also from the remarkable redundancy
of female population in these islands, arising from the maritime cha-
racter of their male population, and the frequent and fatal accidents
on their dangerous coasts ; and I learned afterwards that Her Ladyship
had quite a daily levee at the inn, after I left the islands, from the
number of respectable young Shetland and Orkney Island females
who waited upon her to express their desire to come out to Australia,
and to ascertain by what means they could get out passage free. But
the benevolent efforts of Lady Franklin, as well as my own humble
endeavours, in favour of these reputable Scotch Protestant females,
were unfortunately neutralized by Earl Grey and his subordinates in
the Colonial Office, who, at the instance of Mrs. Chisholm, so well-


known in Australia, had allowed the disposable funds of the Colony at
the period in question to be absorbed in sending us out not fewer
than 2,219 Irish females under the denomination of orphans, and
almost exclusively Roman Catholics, during the eighteen months
ending on the 30th June 1849. This, no doubt, was done in direct con-
travention of a principle embodied, at my suggestion, in the Report
of the Select Committee of the Legislative Council on Immigration,
for the year 1845 (Sir Charles Nicholson, Chairman), to the following
effect:—“ Whatever number of emigrants may henceforth be intro-
duced” (that is, by Government, at the public expense) “ ought to
be derived in equal proportions from the three kingdoms.” But
Downing-street in those days was unhappily amenable neither to law
nor to reason.
In Ireland (which I visited twice during my stay in the Mother
Country) my efforts in favour of Australian emigration were confined
to the province of Ulster, where I delivered addresses on the subject
to large and deeply interested audiences, in Belfast, Coleraine,
Londonderry, Armagh, and Banbridge. In Coleraine, the meeting,
which was large and enthusiastic, was presided over by the late John
Boyd, Esq., M.P. for the Borough; in Londonderry, Sir Robert
Bateson, Bart., presided ; and in the City of Armagh, W. Raton, Esq.,
Agent for the Primate of Ireland. By these means not only was the
subject of Australian emigration and its advantages brought under
the notice of multitudes of persons of all classes of society and in all
parts of the three kingdoms, but the minds of men generally were
thereby undergoing the requisite preparation for taking advantage,
with intelligence and success, of the great impending crisis, when the
discovery of gold in Australia astonished the whole civilized world,
and attracted tens of thousands to its shores.
On my arrival in England in December, 1846, I found that the
famous Squatting Act of that year had just been passed, but
that the Orders in Council which were to be appended to it with the
force of law were still in preparation ; and that Earl Grey, who then
presided over the Colonial Office, was preparing a Bill for the better
government of the Australian Colonies. Mr. Benjamin Hawes, who
was then Under Secretary of State for the Colonies, and to whom I
was known as a Member of the Legislative Council of New South
Wales, invited me, on the part of Earl Grey, to offer any suggestions


I might deem of importance on either of these measures ; and I did
so accordingly, first for the Orders in Council, and afterwards in
various letters to the Colonial Office, during my stay in England, on
the forthcoming Imperial Act. On the subject of the Orders in
Council, one of my suggestions was, that as Australia, although re-
markably destitute of navigable waters, was not so absolutely, as it
had certain rivers of great value for coasting navigation, there should
be reserved from the operation of the Squatting Act four miles on
either side of all navigable waters for the settlement of an agricultural
population; and I gave as one of the instances in point the Richmond
River, on which and on its principal tributaries there are not less than
300 miles of navigable water. But the Emigration and Land Com-
missioners, to whom the preparation of the Orders in Council was
entrusted, refining upon my idea, as they thought, but in entire
ignorance of the subject, made it an Order in Council that two miles
on either side of the Richmond River, for twenty miles from its mouth,
should be reserved from the operation of the Squatting Act for the settle-
ment of an agricultural population. Had my suggestion been simply
embodied as it stood in the Orders in Council, numerous families of
cedar-cutters then on the Richmond River, that were left unfortunately
to a life of vagabondage, dissipation, and ruin, would have purchased
small farms on its navigable waters, transforming the country into a
perfect garden and themselves into an orderly and virtuous population.
But the Richmond River, for twenty miles from its mouth, is still within
five miles of the sea, and the whole of the intervening land on either
side of it is a dismal mangrove swamp, affording no means of sustenance
either for man or for beast. The absurdity of this proviso was noticed at
the time and ridiculed in our Legislative Council, by Mr. (now the
Right Honorable) Robert Lowe, who could not conceive how the thing
had occurred. It was also brought before a Select Committee of the
House of Lords on Emigration, at the instance of the Chairman, Lord
Monteagle, who had previously asked me to breakfast with him, to get
a few hints for his intended examination. After getting me to repeat
the case to their Lordships, he spoke as follows : —“ You mean to say
that the Orders in Council reserved only the bad land for the settle-
ment of small farmers, and gave all the good land away to the squatters ?”
“Yes, my Lord,” I replied, “that is precisely what I have said. 1 '
Lord Wharncliffe, one of the Committee, laughed at the absurdity of
the thing; but it was no laughing matter to the cedar-cutters on the


Richmond River; one of whom, the father of a family, residing in a
hut on sufferance, on a squatter’s run, who had saved up £BOO from his
earnings, which he was anxious to invest in the purchase of a homestead
and the erection of a house for his family, being unable to purchase a
single inch of ground on the river, and being ordered off the run, went
in desperation to the nearest public-house and remained there for weeks
together, till he had spent the whole of his money in dissipation !
In reference to the then forthcoming Act of Parliament, I strongly
recommended, for reasons which I stated at length, and which I re-
peated again and again, in all my correspondence with the Colonial
Office during the three years of my stay in England, that a clause
should be inserted in that Act, authorizing Her Majesty to separate
from New South Wales, and to erect into a distinct Colony or Colonies,
the territory extending northwards from the 30th parallel of south
latitude. This clause, which was inserted accordingly in the Imperial
Act of 1850, exclusively at my suggestion, has since proved the Magna
Charta of Queensland, and has served, under the judicious system of
immigration which was adopted by its rulers immediately after its
separation, to call into existence that noble Colony, which would other-
wise have been to this day an insignificant and miserable appendage of
New South Wales.
I ascertained, during my stay in England, that there had grown up
among the reputable industrial classes of the Mother Country, and
among persons and families of small means generally throughout the
United Kingdom, a strong repugnance to the Government system of
emigration then in progress, as being, in the estimation of such
persons, a pauper or semi-pauper system, to which Englishmen of
character and spirit would never submit. And as the funds for the
support and maintenance of that system were derived exclusively from
the sale of the waste land in the Colony, it appeared to me that it
would be a great improvement upon the colonial immigration
system generally, and would bring out to the Colonies a far superior
and more valuable class of immigrants, if a bonus in land sufficient at least
to cover the cost of their passage out were to be given to the emigrants
direct on their arrival at their destination. The Emigration and Land
Commissioners, I knew well, would be strongly opposed to anything
of the kind, as it would be interfering with their proper and peculiar
business ; which, as they conceived, consisted merely in supplying the
Colonies with a semi-pauper class of emigrants, as hired servants, farm-


labourers, sbepberds and mechanics. But these, I maintain, are not the
classes of people we want, especially at present. We want families and
individuals of a better class in society—families and individuals with
moderate means and substance—to occupy our waste lands, to develop
our material resources, whether pastoral, agricultural, or mining, and
to give employment to the humbler classes who are at present, and
have been for years past, languishing for want of such employment.
Knowing then, that I should have no countenance or encourage-
ment in the undertaking I was then contemplating, from the
Emigration Commissioners, I waited upon Mr. Hawes, first, at
Downing Street, and afterwards at his own summer-house at Brighton,
in the year 1848, telling him that I had visited the Moreton Bay
country (of which I had a MS. map with me) before leaving the
Colony; that I had ascertained from my own personal observation,
that both cotton and sugar could be grown to any extent in that
country by means of European free labour; and that as I contemplated
selecting and sending out a ship-load of suitable persons to make the
important experiment, asking him whether,if I did so, the local Govern-
ment would grant me a sufficient extent of waste land to meet the cost of
their passage out. Mr. Hawes appeared to take a deep interest in the
subject, assuring me that as the local Government had the matter
entirely in their own hands, he was confident they would willingly
to my proposal. Ho doubt I had no letter from the Secretary
of State guaranteeing such an arrangement; but this was out of the
question in the case, for if I had written to the Colonial Office for
such a guarantee, the Emigration Commissioners, to whom my letter
would have been referred as a matter of course, would most certainly
have refused it, as they actually did eventually.
My object in this crisis was threefold : First, to originate a stream
of thorough Protestant emigration to Moreton Bay, which was then
an integral part of this Colony, and thereby to save that important
district, if possible, from the consummation with which the whole Colony
was then threatened from the resumption of Irish Eoman Catholic
immigration ; secondly, to do so on the principle that every emigrant
who had paid either the whole or any portion of his passage money
should receive a certain extent of land proportioned to the amount he
had so paid ; and thirdly, to demonstrate the practicability of growing
both cotton and sugar at Moreton Bay by European free labour.


In combination with the other efforts I have mentioned for the
promotion of emigration from the Mother Country, in the years 1848
and 1849, I succeeded in sending out three ship-loads of thorough
Protestant emigrants, numbering about 600 in all, to Moreton Bay;
the emigrants paying for their passage at a certain stipulated rate, in
the expectation of receiving an equivalent at a certain fixed rate in
laud. But so difficult was it at that time to induce reputable people
to emigrate to so unheard-of a place, and in so low a latitude as
Moreton Bay, that in order to fill up the ship, I had to give free
passages to so many reputable families and individuals, and
passages at half-price to so many more that, on the arrival of the
first of these vessels at her destination, there was an amount of
passage money due to my agent of not less than £1,400; and from the
misrepresentation and calumnies on the part of interested persons
which are incident to all such undertakings, I have had to sustain the
loss of that whole amount to the present day.
Had the local Government done as Mr. Hawes believed and assured
me they would do, by granting an equivalent in land for the passage
money of the emigrants by the first of these three vessels, at the rate
merely of 80 acres for every £lOO either paid or due, there would
have been a sufficient extent of land available on account of that
vessel to have ensured an equivalent in land to this extent for all the
passage money paid by all the emigrants both by the first and the
second of the three ships. A continuous stream of emigration of the
most valuable kind would thus have been originated to these shores ;
for I could easily have induced twenty thousand of as good people as
ever landed on our shores to emigrate to Australia at that period on
such terms as these: but the Emigration Commissioners wrote out
to the local Government, through the Colonial Office, to withhold the
land ; and the local Government, that of the late Sir Charles Fitz Eoy
—a Government without either head or heart, and the worst we have
ever had in the Colony—did so accordingly. The Commissioners were
doubtless aware of my exposure of their enormous blunder, in the
case of the Eichmond Eiver and the Orders in Council, in my exami-
nation before a Select Committee of the House of Lords; and perhaps
they took this opportunity of paying me off for my pains. At all
events it was a heartless and a suicidal proceeding; but it was the
local Government that was chiefly to blame.


I did succeed, however, although somewhat indirectly, and with the
greatest difficulty, in getting the principle which I was so anxious to have
recognized and established, carried out in the case of certain at least of
the emigrants by these three vessels, —I mean the principle that the
emigrant coming out at his own charges should receive a bonus in land,
sufficient at least to cover the cost of his passage out. Whether that
principle was worth the pains I had taken and the sacrifices I had
made to get it recognized and established, will appear sufficiently in
the sequel; at all events, it was universally approved of at Moreton
Bay.
During the years 1848 and 1849 I had followed up the publication
and circulation of various pamphlets and letters on Australia, by
sending out three ships, containing about six hundred thorough
Protestants, to Port Phillip, which was then also a portion of this
Colony ; and hundreds, nay I believe even thousands of others were
induced to emigrate to that portion of our territory, during the next
year or two, through the influence that was thus exerted among the
various Protestant bodies of the United Kingdom. I had endea-
voured to ensure the recognition and establishment, in Port Phillip,
of the same principle as I had endeavoured to carry out, as a great
principle of Australian colonization, in Moreton Bay, viz ; that the
emigrant paying his own passage out, should be entitled to a bonus in
land of sufficient extent to cover the cost of his passage ; but I was
unsuccessful in that effort, which consequently subjected me to a
serious pecuniary loss.
Such were the efforts which I deemed it expedient to make, at my
own charges exclusively, during my stay in England, in the years
1847, 1848, and 1849, in giving an impulse to Protestant emigration to
Australia throughout the United Kingdom, and in thereby preventing
these noble Colonies from being swamped, as they were threatened to
be for a series of years previous, with a flood-tide of Irish Homan
Catholic immigration, effected almost exclusively, through the grossest
mis-government, by means of Protestant funds. That these efforts were
successful to a large extent, especially in Port Phillip and Moreton
Bay, is a matter of notoriety, and cannot be denied. Whether it was
my duty to volunteer, and especially to involve myself in great
pecuniary loss, for the accomplishment of such an object, is a matter
of opinion on which people will of course think differently. But it will


doubtless be borne in mind that there has seldom, if ever, been
anything of importance achieved for the advancement of society
without much enthusiasm on the one hand and great self-sacrifice on
the other.
During the decennial period commencing in the year 1851 —a year
memorable for the separation of Victoria and the discovery of gold in
Australia —and ending in the year 1860, the first year after the
separation of Queensland, the whole amount of the immigration into
New South Wales was 137,681 of both sexes and of all ages ; of whom
71,649, or upwards of one-half of the whole number, were imported at
the public expense, the remainder having come out at their own—the
average annual number of immigrants being 18,768.
Of the 66,032 who came out at their own expense during this
decennial period of extraordinary excitement, a large proportion must
have consisted of Protestants; for the whole number of Protestant
immigrants during that decennial period was 48,286 ; the number of
Roman Catholics, of whom a large proportion must have come out at
the public expense, having been 23,269.


PART II.
Queensland and New Zealand contrasted with New South
Wales in the matter of Immigration, during the last
Decennial Period.
The Colony of Queensland was separated from New South Wales
on the 10th December, 1859 ; and almost immediately thereafter,
the Government of that Colony set itself to the “heroic work of
colonization,” with an energy and vigour above all praise, and with an
amount of success altogether unprecedented and extraordinary. In
the first Parliament of Queensland an Act was passed to provide for
the “alienation of Crown Lands,” which was assented to on the 17th
September, 1860; and in that Act there was embodied a clause
recognizing and establishing the very princip]e of which I had been
labouring so long and so earnestly, although with so little success, to
ensure the recognition and establishment in the older Colony more
than ten years before. The Honorable P. G. W. Herbert, the first
Colonial Secretary of Queensland, acknowledged, when bringing in the
Act I refer to, that the principle which it proposed to establish, of
giving a bonus in land to every immigrant arriving in the Colony at
his own expense, had not originated with the Government of the day,
but with Dr. Lang. For the subject had been often agitated in the
Colony during the ten years that had elapsed since I first brought it
prominently under the notice of the public in the Moreton Bay
country; and the result was a general recognition, not only of the
justice of the principle, but of the absolute necessity of its establish-
ment, in view of the promotion of emigration from the Mother Country
for the occupation and settlement of the waste lands of the Colony.
I have been unable to find a copy of Mr. Herbert’s speech when
introducing the measure in 1860; but as the Act was again submitted
to the Assembly for revision and amendment, in the year 1864, Mr.
Herbert then observed, as is recorded in the Queensland Hansard,
vol. 1, page 298, that “ Dr. Lang might fairly claim to have been the
promoter of the Land Order System.”f
t In a speech delivered in the Legislative Assembly of Queensland, of which he is now a
Member, during the past year, Mr. Jordan, the late Immigration Agent in England for that
Colony, bore testimony to the fact that the system of giving a bonus in land for the promo-
tion of immigration was originated and partially carried out by Dr Lang.


Year,
Population.
Exports.
1859
25,146
1860
28,887
£523,477
1861
34,884
709,599
1862
46,300
793,236
1868
61,640
888,381
1864
74,036
1,247,054
1865
87,775
1,153,464
1866
96,172
1,366,491
The clause to which I have referred is as follows :
20. Land Orders may be given to immigrants. —lt sliall be lawful for the
Governor with the advice of the Executive Council, to issue to any adult
immigrant who shall have come direct from Europe to the Colony of Queens-
land, but not at the expense of the said Colony, or to the person who shall
have paid for the passage of such immigrant, a Land Order for the amount
of £lB ; and after such immigrant shall have resided not less than two years
continuously within the said Colony, and if not previously a British subject,
shall have been naturalized, then to issue to such immigrant a further Land
Order for the amount of £l2. Provided that two children, over the age of
four and under the age of fourteen respectively, shall be reckoned as one
statute adult under this Act. Provided also that every such immigrant shall
have complied with and shall be of the class comprised within the Immigra-
tion Regulations for the time being in force in the said Colony.
Such, then, was the system established on my recommendation, in
the Colony of Queensland, immediately after its separation from New
South Wales, on the 10th December, 1859. What then has been the
result of this system in the matter of immigration in that Colony,
during the last ten years ? Why, the following table, imperfect and
incomplete as it is, will sufficiently show :
The population of Queensland was ascertained from the Census,
2nd March, 1868, to be 102,398 ; and its estimated amount, for the
31st December, 1869, was 107,000. It is evident, therefore, that
during the ten years that have elapsed since its separation from this
Colony, Queensland has more than quadrupled its population, while
its progress in other respects has been equally gratifying—the number
of acres in cultivation in 1866 being 24,433, and its imports, almost
exclusively from England, £2,467,907, while its revenue for 1869 has
amounted to £762,356.
The progress of the Colony of New Zealand, as shown in one
of the recent despatches of Earl Granville to the Governor of that
Colony, has been equally remarkable—the population in 1857 having
been 49,800, while in 1867 it had amounted to 227,810; that is, con-
siderably more than four times its amount at the commencement of
the decennial period. Besides, in both of these cases, the increase is
due almost exclusively to immigration ; the increase from the excess of


From England and Wales
3,225
„ Scotland
... 1,061
„ Ireland
12,219
,, Other countries
118
16,623
Their religion—
Protestants of all denominations
6,301
Roman Catholics
10,296
Other persuasions
26
16,623
births over deaths, in communities of such recent origin as Queensland
and New Zealand, being necessarily small. It must be borne in mind,
however, that a similar system, in the matter of immigration, to that
which has obtained in Queensland since the passing of the Act of 1860,
has also been in operation in New Zealand during the decennial period
referred to by Earl Granville ; the bonus in land to every immigrant
arriving in that Colony having been still larger than in Queensland,
viz., forty acres of land.
Let us now see what we, the colonists of New South Wales, have
been doing in this “heroicwork of colonization,” these ten years past.
We commenced, therefore, on the 10th December, 1859, after throwing
off the Queensland swarm of 25,146 —an amount of population which
that Solon, Mr. Darvall, told us at the time was scarcely sufficient to
maintain a corporal’s guard—we commenced at that time with a popu-
lation of 336,572, and we are now, it seems, 466,765, or thereby. The
difference between these two amounts, viz., 130,193, represents the
total increase of our population these ten years past; but of that
increase the very large proportion of 95,376 represents merely the excess
of births over deaths during the decennial period ; this item being, as
I have already stated, much larger in an old community like ours than
in such recently formed Colonies as Queensland and New Zealand.
The total increase from immigration, therefore, in this Colony,
during the past decennial period, is 34,817; and of that increase, 16,623
having been introduced into the Colony under the very questionable
system of Assisted Immigration, the whole of the voluntary or un-
assisted immigration of the period has not exceeded the very paltry
amount of 18,194! The results of the Assisted System will appear
from the following quotations from the last Deport of the Immigration
Agent, presented to the Legislative Assembly during last Session of
Parliament :
“The total number of immigrants arrived under the regulations
has been 16,623. They may be thus classified :


Besides, while the immigration into Queensland and New Zealand
has comprised a very large number of persons and families of respect-
able standing in society, who, for years in succession (as I was told
by the Colonial Secretary of the period in Queensland) introduced
into that Colony an amount of British capital of not less than twenty
thousand pounds sterling a month, or nearly a quarter of a million
sterling per annum—a circumstance that sufficiently accounts for the
rapid development of our sister Colony, and the successful formation
of a whole series of vigorous and promising settlements to the north-
ward—the great bulk of the immigrants into New South Wales
during the past ten years have been of a semi-pauper class, who,
instead of coming out amongst us to develop the resources of the
Colony with their imported capital and labour, like the immigrants
into Queensland and New Zealand, have come chiefly as candidates for
employment in the Police force, or as turnkeys and warders in gaols,
or as mere messengers and menial servants in every Government
Department in the Colony. And being chiefly Homan Catholics of
the humbler classes from Ireland, they come out also to subject us
and our institutions to the domination of certain ultramontane zealots,
whose main object is to transform our noble Colony into a mere pro-
vince of the Popedom !
Simultaneously with this stationary and stagnant condition of our
population during the past ten years, there has been a want of everything
like onward progress in this Colony, as compared with the prodigious
advance that has been made in both of the other Colonies I have men-
tioned, as evinced in the wonderful increase of their revenue and in
the march of general improvement. Por while extraordinary strides
have been made both in Queensland and in New Zealand during the
period referred to, little or nothing, comparatively, has been done in
New South Wales : our realized capital has been lying unoccupied in
the banks, and a large proportion of our industrial population has been
going about without employment of any kind, and writing home, all
the while, the most dismal accounts of our condition and prospects.
Nay, the present comparatively small amount of our population, as
compared with that of these other two Colonies during the past ten
years, is doubtless owing in some measure to the very discreditable
fact that there has, during that period, been a large emigration from
New South Wales to Queensland, to California, and to New Zealand I


Reverting to the mere amount of our immigration, and without
reference to its character, for the last ten years, had we only made the
same progress in the “ heroic work of colonization,” and afforded a
corresponding amount of relief to the Mother Country, as Queensland
and New Zealand have done during the past ten years, our population
would now have been not less than 1,346,288, while the immigration
into our territory would have amounted to not less than 70,000 a
year. Besides, the government of that large additional population
would not necessarilyhave cost us a sixpence more than our present Civil
Establishment —for surely our actual machinery would be sufficient for
upwards of a million of people—while the large additional revenue
derivable from so large an addition to our population would have
sufficed to enable us to meet our legitimate expenditure without
contracting debt, and to lessen in large proportion the public burdens
that now press upon us individually.
It will surely not be alleged that either Queensland or New Zealand
was a more eligible or more promising field for emigration from the
Mother Country, ten years since, than New South Wales. Our
climate is unquestionably much more congenial to the constitution of
Englishmen than that of Queensland, especially in the settlements to
the northward of Brisbane ; and we have had neither Maori wars nor
earthquakes to frighten us, as in New Zealand. Surely, then, the
right men could not have been in the right places in the Government
of New South Wales, these ten years past, when we have fallen so
prodigiously behind these younger Colonies in the march of improve-
ment —in the “ heroic work of colonization.”
Before pointing out, as I shall do in the sequel, the origin and cause
of the prodigious difference that has subsisted for the last ten years
between this Colony and its two younger colonial sisters, Queensland
and New Zealand, I shall take the liberty—with a view to show how
men of the highest intelligence and of undoubted patriotism regard us
and our procedure from a distance —of inserting the following very
interesting and most appropriate extract of a letter which I had the
honor of receiving only a few weeks since from one of our most dis-
tinguished colonists now in England —I mean Sir Charles Nicholson,
Bart. It is dated, 26 Devonshire-place, Portland-place, London,
Oct. 2, 1869.


In looking at the condition and prospects of New South Wales from a
distance (hut with an interest that has suffered no diminution in consequence
of absence), I see much that I most deeply regret. Without caring much
about the conflict of parties, or the ascendency of any particular class of men
or politicians in the G-overnment, I cannot close my eyes to the fact that the
increase of the population of the Colony, from immigration from Europe,
during the last few years, is one that is scarcely appreciable. Up to within
the last ten years, the population of New South Wales went oh increasing
steadily and progressively, with infinite advantage, as we all know, to the
individual emigrant, and to the community with which he became ingrafted.
Why a system so calculated to promote the happiness and well-being of all
should have fallen into abeyance I know not. The population of the British
Islands is increasing in an enormous ratio, one million being added to their
numbers every three years, notwithstanding all the deductions arising from
emigration to America and other places. Why should we not get some share
of this vast and ever increasing tide of population, or allow it to find its way
almost exclusively to America ? Of one thing I am certain, that, having
regard to the climate and material resources of New South Wales, there can
be no more eligible field for the superabundant labouring classes of Europe ;
indeed, I firmly believe none so eligible as it is. There is a very strong and
a growing sentiment among the labouring classes of these islands, that the
only legitimate hope of permanently improving their position is to be found,
not in strikes or Trade Unions, but in transferring their labour to a new
country, where there is room and verge enough for every man : a country
where industry and steadiness, whatever may be said to the contrary, cannot
fail to meet their due reward. After much reflection^ it seems to me that the
old system under which we worked years ago was infinitely the best —the
system of making the Land Fund the source and means of plan ting the Colony
with civilized men. If all the waste lands were sold at a reasonable upset
price, there would be no lack of funds for purposes of emigration. The
introduction of the Wakefield system* and the high upset price, has I believe
had the most disastrous influence upon the fortunes of the Colony. It has
led to the enormous appropriations of the squatters, has prevented the forma-
tion of a bett rmost class of yeomanry, such as we had in former times in the
Colony, and such as now forms the bulk of the people in the Western States
of America; and above all, the system has virtually destroyed the Land Fund ;
for, as far as I can make out, the whole revenues from the waste lands are
exhausted in keeping up a large staff of official employes, to whom its
administration is entrusted. The resuscitation of the Land Fund, and the
employment of a few active agents in England, would again direct the tide of
population to your shores. lam sure I could influence thousands of people
to emigrate, could the means be found wherewith to enable them to get to the
Colony. To find these is at the present moment, alas, impossible ; for how
can an agricultural labourer, whose average earnings do not exceed ten
shillings a week, ever find the means of defraying his passage to the other side
of the globe? The gold fields may attract a certain number of wild adven-
turous spirits, but you will never get out of such materials the proper
elements for forming a nation.
* Coinciding, as I do entirely, with Sir Charles Nicholson in all the other parts of las
letter, I think he has scarcely done justice to Nr. Wakefield in the way he has characterized
his peculiar principle. That principle, I conceive, consisted in making the revenue arising
from the disposal of the waste lands of a Colony available in supplying that Colony with
suitable emigrants from the Mother Country. Now, whether the land is to be sold by tire
Government and the proceeds expended in giving free passages to suitable emigrants, or
given in certain fixed quantities to such emigrants, on their paying their passage them-
selves—this is a question not of principle but of detail. The former of these modes of
procedure sends out to the Colony a semi-pauper class of emigrants, as under the bounty
system so long prevalent in New South Wales ; the latter supplies the Colony with a more
respectable class of emigrants, as in the cases of Queensland and .New Zealand.


I have indulged ui the foregoing remarks because I see by the papers that
you have taken up the subject in the Assembly, and because there is no one
whose practical acquaintance with the subject is so large as yours. I often
marvel at the inconsistency of men, when I see the angry passions and violent
altercations that occur in the Colonial Legislature, about the most trivial and
personal matters ; whilst the great business of the country, the peopling and
subduing it, seems to be utterly lost sight of! However, meliora speremus;
and may a land that God has blessed with so many gifts soon become the
happy home of millions of civilized and Christian people!
It is not to be supposed, however, either that the backward state of
things arising in great measure from the cessation of immigration in
IN ew South W,ales was not felt in this Colony, or that no vigorous
effort was made to provide a remedy. On the contrary, immediately
after the passing of Mr. Eobertson’s Land Acts, in the Session of 18G1,
Mr. Parkes moved in the Legislative Assembly, on the 2nd of May
of that year, “ that this House will, on Friday next, resolve itself into
a Committee of the Whole, to consider of an Address to the Adminis-
trator of the Government (The Eight Honorable Sir John Young),
praying that His Excellency will be pleased to place upon a Supple-
mentary Estimate for the present year a sum of money not exceeding
£o,ooo to establish Emigration Agencies and Lectureships in Great
Britain and Ireland; such money to be expended as near as may be in
the following manner£2,ooo for salaries for twelve months of two
Lecturers and General Agents, £I,OOO for travelling expenses for such
Lecturers, £SOO for Shipping Agencies in principal ports, £1,500 for
printing in cheap and popular form copies of Land Acts and other
trustworthy information relating to this Colony.” This motion having
been passed by a large majority of thirty to four—the dissentients
being Mr. Cummings', Mr. Morrice, Mr. Hannell, and Mr. Dalgleish
Mr. Parkes and Mr. Dailey, two of our very ablest men, were
deputed by the Government of the day to proceed to England as
Lecturers on the Colony as an eligible field for emigration, and did so
accordingly.
There was much everything indeed—expected from this movement,
not only by the Lecturers themselves, but by the Government and the
public; all classes of persons throughout the Colony confidently
anticipating as its certain result a speedy and extensive immigration
from all parts of the United Kingdom into Hew South Wales. I was
fortunately not in the Colony at the time to throw a damper, as I
probably would have done, upon these expectations; having gone to
England on urgent ecclesiastical business immediately after the
General Election in December, 1860. But I felt assured from the first,


when I saw an account of it in the colonial papers in England, tliat
the efiort would prove, as it did eventually, an utter failure. Indeed
I have never heard of a single emigrant having come out to the Colony
through that mission, notwithstanding all this fanfaronade and costly
preparation. There was no hlame attachable in the case to the
Lecturers. They were the ablest and best men that could have been
selected for their mission, and they doubtless discharged their duty
ably and well; but like the Children of Israel in Egypt, they were
sent to make bricks without straw ; for all they had, in addition to
their own eloquent and graphic descriptions of the country, to induce
thousands and tens of thousands of the people of the United King-
dom to come out to New South Wales, was a gratuitous distribution of
certain printed copies of Mr. Eobertson’s Free Selection and Land Acts!
It was long, however, before either the Parliament or the public
could be brought to admit the possibility of failure in the great effort
they had thus made. On the 29th of July, 1862, after a speech in
which I showed that there was something else needed to induce an
extensive emigration from the Mother Country to this Colony than the
passing of the Lands Acts of 1861 and the mission of Messrs. Parkes
and Dailey to England, I moved, in the Legislative Assembly
“ 1. That, in the opinion of this House, it is expedient and neces-
sary that additional facilities, besides those implied in the
Lands Acts, should be afforded for the promotion of the
immigration into this Colony of reputable and industrious
families and individuals from the Mother Country and the
Continent of Europe.
« 2. That it should therefore be enacted that every immigrant,
whether male or female, of from fourteen to fifty years of
age, ariving in the Colony direct from Europe, or the person
or persons paying his or her passage, should receive, on his
or her arrival, or be held entitled to, twenty acres of any such
land as may be open at the time for free selection under the
Lands Act, as a free gift, and to other ten acres at the end of
two years thereafter, if he or she should then be resident in
the Colony ; and that half that extent, or ten and five acres
respectively, should be allowed for each child of from one to
fourteen years of age ; provided that immigrants arriving in
the Colony with five or more children shall not be excluded
from participating in this arrangement although upwards of
fifty years of age.”


But tliis motion was negatived by fifteen to ten ; the House being
of opinion that they bad done all that was requisite in the matter by
appointing the mission of the previous year. But both the Parliament
and the public were at length constrained to acknowledge that the
mission of Messrs, Parkes and Dailey had entirely failed.
What then has been the grand secret of our failure, as well as of the
remaikablo success of the other two Colonies I have mentioned P
Why, it has been entirely our land and immigration system, as com-
pared with that of Queensland and Hew Zealand. For while we have
been relying on our superior climate, our vast extent of eligible waste
land, and our excellent Free Selection Legislation, these two Colonies
have, in accordance with the practice of other highly intelligent com-
munities, and particularly that of the United States, been holding out
to the intending emigrant a tangible bonus in the shape of a free grant
of land. This, I maintain, has been the powerful magnet, in connec-
tion with not a little salutary trumpeting and puffing at home, that has
proved so attractive in the case of these two Colonies, while we have
oeen left alone in our glory, and nobody at home has ever been
making the slightest inquiry about us.
I confess I cannot but regard such a state of things as is thus
exhibited as being highly discreditable to all concerned. With a
climate, and with facilities for colonization, far superior to those of
Queensland, and with an extent of territory equal to that of all Great
Britain and France put together,- and at least thrice the whole extent
of Hew Zealand, we have been allowing ourselves to be outstripped in
the race of colonization by these two younger and less favourably
circumstanced Colonies; and while they have been rendering noble
service to our suffering Mother Country in her time of need, by drawing
off and absorbing so large a portion of her redundant population, and
doing themselves the greatest honor all the while, we have been doing
nothing of the kind, but been neglecting our proper duty both, to our-
selves and our Mother Country, and exposing ourselves the meanwhile
to the ridicule and contempt of all intelligent and patriotic men both
at home and abroad. In one word, we have been for the past ten
years like the dog in the manger,—neither doing anything ourselves in
the work of colonization nor allowing any others to do it.
For a considerable portion of the last decennial period, Mr. Eobert-
son was Minister for Lands, either under or along with Mr. Cowpcr.
How, I do not blame Mr. Eobcrtson for supposing, as he evidently did,


that his famous Free Selection Legislation would attract a large body
of immigrants to this territory ; for that idea was participated in very
largely both by the Parliament and the public, as I have shown in the
ease of Mr. Parkes’ famous Immigration Resolutions of 1861. But
Mr. Robertson was all along strongly opposed to any encouragement
being given for the promotion of immigration in the shape of a bonus
in land; for he was one of those who voted in the majority against my
motion on the subject, on the 29th July, 1862—maintaining, as he did,
that immigration should he left entirely to the spontaneous action of
our fellow-countrymen beyond seas, without any assistance being given
on our part whatsoever.
Hay, Mr. Robertson has all along avowed the opinion, that if such
a bonus is to be given to the immigrant from beyond seas, it ought a
fortiori to be given to the youth of the Colony generally. Now, as
Mr. Robertson is not alone in maintaining such an opinion, I shall take
the liberty to say a word or two on the subject. I have all along held
the opinion that the waste lands of the Colonies are the property and
inheritance of the British people. Now, if Great Britain, as a great
colonizing power, had had common sense enough to have reserved to her-
self, when granting free institutions to the Colonies, one-half of the
proceeds of the sales of all waste land, to be expended in the promotion
of emigration from the Mother Country to the particular Colony from
which the fund in any instance should be derived,* I am quite sure
that the Australian Colonies generally would have cordially acceded to
such an arrangement, as the benefit would have been mutual—relief to
the Mother Country, and an accession of valuable population to the
Colony; while Great Britain would have retained in her own hands, for
all time coming, a large fund for the benefit of her own redundant
population.
It has recently been recommended in the London Standar
and one of those fools and simpletons who have been getting up for us
a volunteer Parliament in London, has indorsed the recommendation at
one of the public meetings of the members, that as the waste lands of
the Colonies are the property and inheritance of the whole British
people, the Imperial Government should step in and seize the lands
which we arc making no proper use of, and dispose of them for the
relief of their own redundant and suffering people. But these worthies
* I recommended a measure of this kind very strongly in a pamphlet published in Sydney,
in 1850, as also in one of my books published in London, in the year 1852, before the Con-
stitution Act was passed.


are not aware that they are a post too late for any such action.
Through its own folly and madness, the Imperial Government, when
granting us free institutions, divested itself of all right or power over
the waste lands of these Colonies ; and what that Government has thus
given can never be resumed.
But while I maintain that the waste lands of our Colonies are tho
property and inheritance of the British people, and rightly available, to
a limited extent in each particular case, for the benefit of all who
emigrate from the Mother Country to our shores, I cannot admit that
we can ever have any right to divide these lands among the actual
population of the Colony, whether young or old. We can rightly
make use of them to supply us with the valuable quid pro quo
in the shape of an additional population from the Mother Country,
which we urgently require ; but the actual colonists have, I maintain
without fear of contradiction, had their part and portion in these lands
already, either in their own persons or in those of their parents and other
relatives. For instance :
Ist. We have still not a few amongst us of the sons or grandsons
of those who came out from the Mother Country for their
country’s good, if not altogether for their own.
2nd. We have also in a great many instances the sons or other
representatives of those who came out under the free grant
system of the olden time. But—
3rd. We have a much more numerous class of the sons or other
representatives of those who came out under the Government
immigration or bounty system during the last forty years.
These three classes constitute a very large majority of the inhabitants
of this Colony ; and, consequently, having had their share in the benefits
derivable from the waste lands already, can have no shadow of right to
a further division of these lands among themselves. So much then
for Mr. Eobertson’s objection to a bonus in land for future immigrants
an objection which I consider altogether unwarrantable.
During the remaining portion of the last decennial period, J. B.
Wilson, Esq., was the Minister for Lands, under tbe Martin and
Parkes Government, and was quite as much opposed to the policy of
granting a bonus in land for the promotion of immigration as his pre-
decessor, Mr. Eobertson. That Government indeed introduced a Bill,
during their tenure of office, to authorize and carry out, although in
what I thought at the time much too complicated a style, the principle
m question ; but as that Bill was negatived by the Assembly, nothing
was done in the matter; and our whole decennial period has conse-
quently presented only the miserable and humiliating contrast in the
matter of immigration which I have exhibited above with those of
Queensland and New Zealand.


PART III.
Quack-salve for our colonial sores in the matter of Immi-
gration-Lower the minimum price of land to 10s. an
acre. No! No! Down with it to 5s. at once!!!
There has been a great deal said, in various influential quarters,
especially during the late General Election, about the high price of land
in this Colony being the great obstacle in the way of immigration ; and
it will have been observed by the reader that Sir Charles Nicholson, in
his letter to me of the 2nd October last, of which I have given an
extract above, coincides in that opinion, and recommends a great re-
duction of the alleged high price of land as the best means of pro-
moting an extensive and valuable form of immigration. Mr. Wilson,
the late Minister for Lands, probably foreshadowed the policy of the
late Government in the event of their return to power, by giving it as
his opinion that the minimum price of land should be reduced to 10s.
an acre, and that, in the event of the free selectors paying up other ss.
an acre, in addition to the ss. they have already paid, they should
receive their deeds from the Crown, and the rest of their present debt
be cancelled.
No doubt such a measure would be very acceptable- to the great
body of free selectors, although I have not heard that they have either
asked for it or that they urgently require it; and the prospect of re-
turning prosperity, which we are now permitted to cherish with the
return of more favourable seasons, would seem to indicate that there
is no necessity for it, and that the free selectors generally will be both
able and willing to pay their debts in due time. At all events, it is
highly desirable, for the moral welfare and advancement of the Colony,
that they should.
But a different class of soi-disant land reformers assume a still bolder
style, and insist upon the reduction of the minimum price to ss. an
acre, which they tell us would greatly increase the Land Fund, and
effect a large amount of valuable immigration. Now, I confess lam
of a totally different opinion, as to the probable effect of either of these
proposed measures. On the one hand, Ido not believe that the mere
reduction of the minimum price of waste land either to 10s. an acre, or
even to 55., would have the slightest effect in the promotion of immi-
gration, or would bring out a single additional immigrant from the


Mother Country. It would, no doubt, bring out a few wealthy
capitalists from the United Kingdom, in addition to not a few persons
of the same class here already, to purchase a large extent of land in
every eligible district of the Colony, in order to hold it as mere
squatting runs in the meantime till the increase and progress of popu-
lation should make it worth their while to sell it in smaller portions at
an enormous profit. In one word, the measure in question—whether
the 10s. or the ss. one—would only tend to increase and perpetuate the
enormous evil from which we have suffered so much and so long
already,—l mean the accumulation of vast tracts of eligible land in the
hands of a few individuals, who do nothing with it themselves, but
keep it as mere sheep and cattle runs, while the very persons who
would cultivate and improve it are kept out of it altogether.
But the measure in question would have a much more disastrous
influence still in the matter of immigration. The Queensland Govern-
ment have recently raised their bonus on immigration to forty acres of
land for each adult immigrant, as it has been from the first in Hew
Zealand. How, so long as the minimum price of land is continued at
a pound an acre, a bonus of forty acres of land would represent £4O,
which would unquestionably be both regarded and felt among the
intelligent classes of limited means, throughout the United Kingdom,
as a great premium upon emigration. But reduce the minimum price
of laud to 10s. an acre, and the premium on emigration is immediately
reduced to £2O, whereas if the minimum price is reduced to ss. an
acre, that premium will be still further reduced to £lo,—an amount of
encouragement which, in the case of an intending emigrant both able
and willing to pay his own passage out, it will be scarcely worth while
for him either to think of or to accept.
I maintain, therefore, without fear of contradiction, that the mere
reduction of the minimum price of land either to 10s. or to ss. an acre
will have no effect in promoting immigration; and that such re-
duction will therefore be a mere quack-salve for our colonial sores.
As to the system now in operation for the promotion of immigration
in Victoria—that of giving every bond fide emigrant at home a
warrant for four pounds in reduction of his passage-money—such a
system would be merely Assisted Emigration in a somewhat different
form, and would be liable to all the objections above enumerated as
incident to that system here. It would be essentially a semi-pauper
system, and would never send us out the people we chiefly want.


PART IV.
How to originate and carry out an extensive system of
Immigration for New South Wales.
It must now be evident, beyond tlic possibility of doubt, that if
immigration is to be resumed, on anything like a suitable scale, to
New South Wales, the system of giving a bonus in land for the
promotion of immigration must be recognized and established.* And
the extent of that bonus must be regulated, not so much by our own
views of propriety, as by the practice of neighbouring Colonics.
Unable to decide on the comparative merits of different colonies of the
same group, the emigrant will decide as to the particular Colony to
which he will transfer himself and his small capital by the extent of
land which will be guaranteed to him by the Government of that
Colony. If Queensland and New Zealand promise forty acres to the
immigrant, we must do the same, or consent to be distanced in the
race and left behind, as we are now.
And what are forty acres of land, even estimating the land as worth
a pound an acre, compared with the quid fro quo which the Colony
will receive in exchange, in the person of an industrious and virtuous
immigrant settling in its territory ? That immigrant will in all likeli-
hood consume an additional amount of dutiable goods, sufficient at all
events to pay in the shape of revenue much more than the interest of
the whole amount represented by that bonus.
A respectable tradesman from my native town of Greenock in Scot-
land, who is now settled as a master rope-spinner in Auckland, New
Zealand, showed me, quite incidentally, when he called on me on his
visit of business to Sydney, a few' days since, how beautifully this
system works in introducing various classes of emigrants into that
Colony. My friend wished to get out two particular workmen, whom
he had known at home, for his rope-walk in Auckland, and w'rote to a
friend in Scotland to send them out to him, and he would pay their
passage. His correspondent did so, and when the men arrived in
*The United States, in their famous Homestead Act, hold out a bonus of a hundred and
sixty acres of land to every immigrant from Europe in their Western States and territories ;
and the State of Nicaragua in Central America offers still more—upwards of two hundred
acres. Why then should we be an exception to this general rule, and expect immigration
notwithstanding?


New Zealand, my friend was entitled, under the Colonial Act, to forty
acres of land for each of them, from haying paid their passage out.
But he told them on their arrival that if they preferred having the
land and repaying him by instalments the amount he had expended on
their behalf, he would willingly make over the land to them. They
preferred having the land ; and having repaid him their debt, they are
now proprietors of forty acres of land each in New Zealand. How
willingly in like manner would not hundreds, nay, even thousands of
heads of families of moderate means in the Mother Country, bring out
workmen and labourers of every description on such a security for
repayment of their outlay as this ? Only let the Colony be placed in
a proper light before the public at home, and there will be no need for
appropriations of public money for the promotion of immigration,
with the exception perhaps of a moderate amount in the first instance
for the importation of female servants. Emigrants of the right kind
will come out to us in great numbers under such a system, and will
bring valuable workmen and labourers of all descriptions in still
greater numbers along with them.
No doubt the Land Order System is liable to abuse in various
ways ; and such abuses of the system did occur, as is alleged, to a very
considerable extent in Queensland. The Eomish Bishop Quinn, for
example, was alleged to have made such a regular job of it for the
introduction of a large number of his own countrymen from Tipperary
—the faithful of course —into the Northern Colony, that it used to bo
called by way of joke Quinnsland instead of Queensland. And there
were abuses also of a different kind alleged, through the imperfect
working or faulty management of the system. But all public under-
takings of the kind, however well conceived or planned, are subject to
such abuses ; and it is simply the province of a competent and vigilant
Government to prevent them, or to provide a remedy for them when
they occur. The principle, however, is incontestable that, in the
present state of the Mother Country and the Colonies, and especially
with the present great competition for suitable immigrants on the
part of other countries and colonics, a bonus in land must be given,
otherwise there will be no immigration ; and the duty of Government,
I repeat it, under such a system is simply to secure its working against
such abuses as may or will occur as much as possible. And it should
be borne in mind for our comfort, that we are much more favourably
situated in this Colony than our fellow-colonists cither in Queensland


or in New Zealand, for keeping a sharp eye over the working of the
requisite machinery, and for holding a tight rein over the subordinate
agents. Besides, we have the benefit of all the experience gained in
the “ dear school” of others.
Taking it for granted, therefore, that the principle of a bonus in land,
as an encouragement for immigration, will be adopted and embodied
in some future Act of the Legislature, what measures, I ask, woidd be
requisite to carry out the object and to originate a large and healthful
stream of immigration from the Mother Country ? In answering this
question, I would observe that there are extensive tracts of land in
this Colony, unsuited or ill-adapted for becoming what maybe termed
Emigration Fields, or portions of country to which emigrants from the
United Kingdom should be invited, —
Ist. From the physical character of the country, as in the far
south and west —the salt-bush country for instance.
2nd. From their remoteness from any port of entry, as in New
England, although ways and means might be found of
getting over this difficulty, and—
3rd. From their being already settled in great measure, as in the
county of Cumberland.
Leaving these portions of our territory, therefore, out of view, I
would recommend that those portions of the Colony that are eminently
suited for agricultural settlements should be divided into a series of
Emigration Fields, to be mapped out and lithographed respectively in
separate sheets—each showing the extent and boundaries of the
particular field, its general character for agricultural or other settle-
ment, and the extent of land within its bounds granted, purchased, or
free-selected, with the portions under lease to the squatters and
open for selection. As a specimen of what might be done in this way,
with the happiest effect, I would suggest the three following portions
of territory—one in the south, one in the west, and one in the north —
as eligible fields of emigration for various classes of emigrants: —
Ist, South. —The Murray and Murrumbidgce, or Vine-growing,
Emigration Field of New South Wales, accessible on the north
from Sydney (distant 300 miles) by a railway of 134 miles to
Goulburn, a large county town in the interior, the rest of the
distance traversable by a regular mail route ; but still more


easily accessible on the south by a railway from Melbourne to
Echuca, on the Elver Murray ; from thence by steamer on
that river to Albury, the chief town in that part of the
territory. Extent of this field, 80,000 square miles, or about
the size of all Scotland. Numerous families of German
vine-growers from the Ehine settled and settling along the
Murray ; the eligible tenure of the land, under the system of
free selection, attracting many even from the neighbouring
Colony of South Australia. All European agricultural pro-
ducts flourish in this district.
2nd. West.—The Orange and Canoblas Emigration Field, or the
wheat-growing country of New South Wales. Yast extent
of eligible land of the first quality for agricultural settlement
around the Canoblas mountain range, at an elevation of
3,500 feet above the level of the sea ; the elevation ensuring
a much cooler climate than that of the low lands along the
coast. Wheat a never-failing crop in this district; average
produce, 25 bushels an acre. Splendid soil and climate for
all the agricultural and horticultural products of Europe.
Distance from Sydney to Orange, a rising town, 150 miles ;
traversed by a railway in progress to Bathurst (120 miles) of
■which about 100 miles completed, and to be extended to
Orange.
3rd, North.—The Clarence and Eichmond Eivers Emigration
Field, or the sugar and cotton-growing country of New
South Wales. Splendid country for the growth of cotton
and the sugar-cane by means of British or European labour.
Extent—as large as all England. Accessible from Sydney
by steam-vessels to the Clarence and Eichmond Eivers.
Numerous families from Scotland settled on free selection
farms on both rivers, and now eagerly pursuing the cultivation
of the sugar-cane and the manufacture of sugar —the future
source of wealth for the district.
If all such information as this respecting the various emigration
fields throughout the Colony were circulated extensively all over the
United Kingdom, by public lectures and otherwise, and a bonus of forty
acres of land held forth to industrious and well-disposed families and
individuals in the Mother Country, any conceivable amount of immi-


gration might be effected at the smallest possible cost to this Colony,
while an amount of capital would be introduced and expended in the
furtherance of all its industrial objects that would give such an
impulse to its onward progress as could scarcely be conceived.
Besides the machinery, both permanent and temporary, which would
be necessary at home, there would also be required some sort of
machinery to be constituted in the Colony, to guide the immigrants
to their respective destinations, and to give them such information and
advice as would be indispensably necessary on their arrival in a strange
land. For, as was feelingly observed by His Excellency Governor
Blackall, of Queensland, at a late public meeting in that Colony, the
condition of an immigrant arriving in Brisbane or elsewhere with a
mere land order from Home, and nobody to give him any advice or
assistance as to how he should proceed, is a very unfortunate one
indeed. But such assistance and direction could easily be provided
by the Government, under an extensive and well-regulated system of
Immigration.
Let us therefore cherish the hope that Government and Parliament
will at length arouse themselves from the discreditable lethargy of
the past ten years, and discharge the duty which they owe both to
the Colony and the Mother Country, by organizing forthwith an
extensive and efficient system of immigration.
Sydney : Thomas Richards, Government Printer.—lS7o.




