

IMMIGRATION;
AND THE
SCOTCH MECHANICS OF 1831:
Being Chapter V. of a Work in preparation, to be Entitled,
“Reminiscences of my Life and Times ,
both in Church and State in Australia,
for upwards of Fifty Years Past."
HY THE
REV. DE. LANG,




IMMIGRATION;
AND THE
Scotch Mechanics of 1831.
In the year 1830 I was induced, in the circumstances
I have stated above, to undertake a voyage to Englaud,
chiefly for certain educational objects in New South
Wales. Embarking, accordingly, at Sydney, in the
good ship Australia , on the 18tlf of August of that
year, we landed, after a prosperous voyage, at Dover,
in England, on the 12th December following.
The condition of the Mother Country was at that
time one of extreme depression. There had been a
failure of the harvest in many districts of the country ;
rick-hurning and machine-breaking were extensively
prevalent in the English counties; there was a
general stagnation of commerce ; and mechanics and
other operatives were suffering greatly from want of
employment.
Arriving, as I did in England, in such unfavour-
able circumstances, I could not help contrasting the
state of things I then saw around me, in all parts of
the Mother Country I happened to visit, with the
state of great prosperity I had witnessed so shortly
before among all classes of society, and especially the
working classes, in New South Wales, where the
wages for labour were then much higher than in
England, with beef and bread at a penny a pound.
In regard to the educational objects I had gone
to England to promote, Lord Goderich, now the Earl
of Eipon, who was then Principal Secretary of State


for the Colonies, had been pleased, at my instance and
request, to authorise the Local Government of New
South Wales to advance for these objects, on certain
conditions, the sum of £3,500 from the Colonial Trea-
sury, provided their promoters should contribute a
similar amount. It struck me, therefore, on taking
all these circumstances into consideration, that a por-
tion of the proposed Government advance might he
rendered available for the double purpose of promot-
ing the educational objects in question, and of making
a great experiment in emigration to New South
Wales, for the general benefit of the colony.
I, therefore, made a second proposal to Lord
Goderich, to the effect that, as I had ascertained that
a suitable vessel could he chartered in the Port of
Greenock to carry out a whole shipload of Scotch
mechanics, of the first class, to New South Wales, to
erect the buildings we should require for our educa-
tional purposes, provided His Lordship would autho-
rise the sum of £1,500 to be paid for the charter of
such vessel from the proposed educational advance,
on my arrival witli the emigrants in the port of
Sydney, His Lordship was pleased to accede to my
proposal, and thereby to sanction the introduction and
settlement of a numerous body of Scotch mechanics
in New South Wales.
The vessel that was chartered for this purpose,
with His Lordship the Earl of Eipon’s concurrence, was
the Stirling Castle , a vessel of 350 tons, belonging to
Messrs. Alan Ker, and Co., of Greenock. The corps
of Scotch mechanics —all of my own selection—
whom she carried out to the colony consisted of fifty-
four adults, with their wives and families, being
stonemasons and bricklayers, carpenters and joiners,


blacksmiths, plasterers, .&c., and all members of
Christian churches and congregations. The engage-
ment I had made with them was to supply them with
employment, at the regular wages of the colony,
which were then £2 a week, for twelve months from
their arrival in the colony, on condition of their
repaying their passage out, at the rate of £25 for each
adult member of their respective families, by weekly
instalments from their wages.*
Besides the mechanics who formed the great bulk
of our passengers, we had, occupying the cabin
accommodation, the three gentlemen as masters or
professors for our Educational Institution, with their
wives or sisters, and two ministers for the Presby-
terian Church in the colony.
Our arrival in Sydney in these circumstances was
hailed hy all well-disposed and unprejudiced persons
with feelings of astonishment and great gratification,
as establishing a new era of the highest promise for
the colony; and the scheme it developed, in the
importation of the Scotch mechanics, proved eminently
successful in the sequel, as far as the carrying out of
the mutual engagements was concerned, and was
attended, moreover, with the following gratifying and
most important results to the colony :
1. Provisions being remarkably cheap at the time
—beef and bread at a penny a pound each—the
Scotch mechanics were easily able to fulfil their
respective engagements, as most of them did very
speedily; and, writing home of their success to their
friends in Scotland, as well as in praise of the country
* The regular cost of a steerage passage to the colony had previously been
£4O. That was the rate my father’s family paid for their female servant in
the year 1824,


and climate generally, many other Scotch mechanics
soon came out, with their wives and children, of their
own accord, and at their own charges. And as the
Imperial Government gave assistance shortly there-
after for the emigration of reputable mechanics from
the land fund of the colony, on the discontinuance of
the previous system of issuing free grants of land,
a large number of such emigrants, following their
example, arrived in due time in the colony.
2. The architectural results of the scheme were
equally remarkable and gratifying. Till then Sydney
had been a mere collection of paltry wooden and
brick buildings; hut under the superior Scotch
mechanics of my importation in 1831, as well as of
those who followed them almost immediately there-
after, a great change in this respect took effect forth-
with, and that salutary architectural revolution, which
had thus been initiated through my sacrifices and
exertions, then commenced, which has since rendered,
and is still rendering, Sydney one of the first cities of
the empire for its noble buildings of polished stone.
3. But the contemporaneous moral revolution
that resulted from this change in the mechanical
department of the colony was still more satisfactory;
for the drunken ticket-of-leave men, or emancipated
convicts, who, till then, were the only mechanics
obtainable in Sydney —men working in a very inferior
style so many days in the week, and drinking the
rest —were then gradually self-exiled from the capital
from want of employment in Sydney ; being succeeded
by superior tradesmen, who husbanded their earnings
to purchase allotments, and build houses for them-
selves, insomuch that the change for the better in the
moral aspect of the city was very soon evident to all,


while the consumption of- ardent spirits, in propor-
tion to the population, was greatly diminished. In
one word, the importation of the Scotch mechanics
of 1881, and their settlement in the colony, proved a
remarkable and salutary revolution to the colony of
New South Wales.
There was at this time, however, a numerous
body of people in the colony by whom all this was
regarded with feelings of intense dissatisfaction.
Governor Macquarie, the predecessor of Sir Thomas
Brisbane, had been used to say of some people in the
colony, who had given him trouble and annoyance in
their time, “ This country was established for the
reformation of convicts ; free people had no right to
come to it.” This feeling was then very general
among the emancipists of all classes; and, accord-
ingly, the Scotcli mechanics could not pass along the
streets, to or from their places of employment, for
months after their arrival, without hearing such
observations as the following from almost every cot-
tage they passed : “ There are these bloody emigrants
come to take the country from us,” At a public
meeting of emancipists held in Sydney, for educa-
tional purposes, shortly after my return to the colony,
one of the number, who had just been liberated from
the Sydney gaol, where he had been confined on a
charge of fraudulent bankruptcy, after expressing
himself in rather favourable terms relative to the
plans and prospects of the Institution I had
been instrumental in forming, informed the meeting
that I had completely forfeited the esteem of the
virtuous and respectable portion of society, in having
obtained assistance from the Home Government, as
he presumed I had done, by calumniating himself and


his friends to Lord Goderich. On this nnd a variety
of other charges, equally frivolous and equally
unfounded, changes were rung at my particular
expense, by various orators of still higher respecta-
bility, from meeting to meeting and from month to
month; and every foul and slanderous invective that
was uttered on these occasions was carefully repeated
in the colonial newspapers. It was the incessant
assault and battery of this kind, to which I was sub-
jected for years together, by these unprincipled jour-
nals, and the serious pecuniary loss in which it
involved me from the withdrawal of public support
from our Institution, that induced me at length to
avail myself of the aid of the press, and to establish
a weekly journal on other and better principles, and
with higher and nobler views. And I am happy to
add, I uniformly found that so long as J had that
powerful engine at my command, it was always
comparatively easy to keep the whole pack of colonial
curs at bay.
While engaged under such discouragements, in
raising the requisite funds for the employment of the
Scotch mechanics in the erection of our Educational
buildings, I had to experience from a different quarter
an assault of a still more formidable character, which
almost prostrated myself and nearly ruined our Insti-
tution, as it was doubtless intended to do. As the
circumstance I refer to relates to a matter of consi-
derable importance at the period, the detail will per-
haps not be uninteresting to the reader.
The cry of distress from the agricultural districts
of the mother country was so loud and piercing, as I
have already had occasion to observe, on my arrival
in England in the month of December, 1830 —and the


impression on my own mind relative to the prosperity
and abundance enjoyed by all classes in New South
Wales was so fresh and vivid —that, in consequence
of some remarks on the subject of emigration to the
Australian colonies, which were made by my Lord
Howick, now Earl Grey, in the course of a conversa-
tion which I had the honour to hold with his lordship
in Downing Street, I took the liberty to address a
letter to Lord Viscount Goderich, pointing out the
means of conveying thousands of the distressed agri-
cultural population of Great Britain, without expense
to the mother-country, to the colony of New South
Wales; where, I was confident, their arrival would
be hailed by all classes, and where there was employ-
ment in abundance, and bread for all. The sources,
from which it was proposed to raise a revenue suffi-
cient for the accomplishment of this national object,
were—lst, the progressive sale of numerous allot-
ments of building-ground belonging to Government
in the town of Sydney, of which I estimated the pro-
bable value at the time at not less than £200,000 ;
and 2nd, the resumption and sale of the lands granted
on certain unfulfilled conditions to the Church and
School Corporation of New South Wales. In describ-
ing the second of these sources of revenue, I had
used the following language :
“ Your lordship is doubtless aware that in the
year 1825 a Corporation was established by Royal
Charter in the colony of New South Wales, to which
a seventh of the whole territory was granted for the
support of the Episcopal Church and Schools of the
colony, on the avowed understanding that the said
grant would immediately and for ever relieve the
Colonial Government of the burden of supporting


these establishments. Your lordship is doubtless
aware, also, that this Institution has utterly failed of
its intended object; the Corporation having actually
borrowed from the Colonial Government at the rate
of from £19,000 to £22,000 per annum for the sup-
port of the Episcopal Church and Schools of the
territory, while the mere cost of its management,
exclusive of the salaries of clergymen and school-
masters, has hitherto been from £1,500 to £2,000 per
annum —a sum considerably greater than is annually
expended for the management of all the church and
school affairs of His Majesty’s ancient kingdom of
Scotland.
“ But the Church and School Corporation of New
South Wales has been productive, my Lord, of still
greater evils to the community at large than any
arising from the mere expense of its management.
It has tended to identify the Episcopal clergy, in the
estimation of the whole colony, with secular pursuits ;
it has given extreme dissatisfaction to many respec-
table emigrants, who have had to go far into the
colonial wilderness with their families in search of
land to settle on, while numerous tracts of land,
of the first quality, were lying utterly waste in the
most accessible and eligible situations, in the hands
of the Corporation; it has excited a spirit of disaffec-
tion towards His Majesty’s Government among the
native youth of the colony, and I will even add, my
Lord, has sown the seeds of future rebellion. In
short, the Church and School Corporation of New
South Wales, instead of proving a benefit either to
the Government or to the Episcopal Church, as its
projectors unfortunately persuaded His Majesty’s
Government it certainly would, has lain as a dead


weight on the colony for the last five years —repres-
sing emigration, discouraging improvement, secular-
izing the Episcopal clergy, and thereby lowering the
standard of morals and religion throughout the terri-
tory.”
My letter to Lord Goderich, of which I have no
reason to feel ashamed, was published on my return
to the colony in a pamphlet, containing an “ Account
of the steps taken in England with a view to the
establishment of an Academical Institution or College
in New South Wales, and to demonstrate the practi-
cability of effecting an extensive-emigration of the
industrious classes from the mother-country to that
colonyfor it never occurred to me that any
remarks I had made in that letter, relative to the
character and tendency of the Church and School
Corporation scheme, were likely to be construed into
a personal attack on the individuals who were acci-
dentally and, as I conceived, unfortunately connected
with that system of legalized folly, extravagance, and
injustice.
My letter, however, gave prodigious offence to
the Venerable the Archdeacon,* who accordingly
addressed a long letter on the subject of its alleged
misstatements —containing a feeble defence of the
Corporation, and a series of intemperate charges
against myself —to Colonel (afterwards Sir Patrick)
Lindesay, who was then Acting-Governor of New
South Wales, with a view to its immediate transmis-
sion to Lord Goderich. This letter was signed by the
Archdeacon himself, and by the Colonial Secretary,
and the Auditor-General, as Commissioners of the
Corporation; the management of that institution
* Afterwards Bishop Broughton.


having in the meantime been transferred to the
Archdeacon and certain lay commissioners. It is the
customary and established etiquette of the colonies to
send a copy of any charges of this kind to the person
against whom they are exhibited, in sufficient time to
enable him to forward his explanation or reply to the
Secretary of State for the Colonies by the same
opportunity by which the letter of crimination is
transmitted against him; and the violation of that
etiquette by a certain military officer in the colony,
during the Government of General Darling, occa-
sioned his being cashiered by the Commander-in-
chief, pursuant to the sentence of a court-martial. I
was not favoured, however, with a copy of the Arch-
deacon’s letter till four days after the vessel in which
it was transmitted to the Secretary of State for the
Colonies had sailed for England; and it so happened
that no other opportunity of writing home presented
itself for about two months thereafter 1
In consequence of this proceeding, and agreeably
to my own anticipations, the first vessel from England
brought me a letter of censure from my Lord Gode-
rich for the publication of my letter to his Lordship ;*
but whether I ought to consider the censure of the
Right Honourable Secretary, passed in such circum-
stances, and procured by such means, at all discredit-
able to myself as a minister of religion, or whether
there was anything in the passage above cited from my
letter to his Lordship, to call forth such censure at
all, the reader will doubtless determine for himself.
* I was not aware at this time that I could not even publish my own
letter to Lord Goderich without his Lordship’s express permission. It was
evidently, however, the unauthorised publication of my letter, rather than its
contents, that formed the ground of his Lordship’s censure.


I wrote a reply to the Archdeacon’s letter, which
was forwarded to the Secretary of State by Major-
General Sir Richard Bourke, to whom it was
addressed, and who had arrived in the colony before
the next vessel sailed for England. I shall take the
liberty to subjoin the concluding paragraphs of that
reply, relative to the concluding paragraph of the
Archdeacon’s communication, from which the reader
will perhaps he able to estimate the spirit in which
they were severally written :
“In the conclusion of their letter the .Commis-
sioners Express themselves in the folio wing manner rela-
tive to myself: —‘Embarked in an undertaking in which
he felt it impossible to succeed, without degrading the
Established Church in his lordship’s estimation, he
has preferred charges against the Corporation, in that
loose style which bespeaks a man resolved at any rate
to injure the object of his envy and dislike; with the
blind animosity of a political partisan, rather than
with the scrupulous attention to truth and candour,
becoming one who claims to bear a reverend and
sacred character.’ In reference to this statement, I
beg to inform your Excellency that the undertaking
in which I had embarked in leaving the colony in
August, 1830, and in which I had hazarded a voyage
to England, and risked all the little property I
possessed, was embarked in to supply the want of an
Academical Institution in Sydney, to afford the youth
of this colony a liberal, efficient, and economical
education —a want which had long been universally
acknowledged throughout the colony, hut which the
Church and School Corporation, notwithstanding its
vast resources and superior facilities for the accom-
plishment of the object, had neglected to supply.


Arriving in England with, this object, I had scarce
touched British ground when my ears were stunned
with the loud and heart-rending cry of distress from
an unemployed and starving population, maddened
hy their necessities to acts of violence and crime; and
on arriving in London, and ascertaining that His
Majesty’s Ministers were employed in devising ways
and means for conveying a portion of that population
to the waste lands of the colonies, it immediately
occurred to me that in the colony of New South
Wales there were sources of revenue directly available
for that purpose to a very large amount in the Crown
allotments of Sydney, and the lands granted to the
Church and School Corporation; and that the raising
of a revenue from these sources for such a purpose
would prove a blessing of incalculably greater value
to the colony than was ever likely to result from the
continuance of the Church and School Corporation.
With these views was my letter to Lord Goderich
written, and, in attestation of the fact, as well as of my
own sincerity in the matter in question, I have only
to refer your Excellency to the circumstance of my
having since conducted, at very great personal incon-
venience and expense, an expedition of one hundred
and forty free emigrants to this colony, solely with a
view to demonstrate the practicability of effecting an
extensive emigration of the industrious classes from
the mother country to New South Wales, without
expense to either. And from the successful issue of
that expedition, and the calculations into which it
necessarily led me, lam confident that, if the plan I
had the honour to submit to my Lord Goderich were
carried into effect, not fewer than twenty thousand
and upwards of the poor and unemployed, hut vir-


tuous, agricultural labourers of England might, in
the course of a very few years, be conveyed, with
their wives and families, to New South I/Vales, with-
out expense either to the mother country or to this
colony. And when your Excellency considers of
what materials the population of this colony has in
great measure heen formed for the last forty years, I
can submit it to your Excellency, with entire confi-
dence, whether the introduction of such a population,
to amalgamate with the present inhabitants of the
colony, and to people and improve the extensive
tracts of highly eligible land which the Church and
School Corporation has hitherto suffered to lie waste
in all parts of the territory, is not a consummation
incomparably more desirable than the existence and
continuance of that institution.
“ In the passage above quoted, as well as in the
whole* course of their letter to the Acting-Governor,
the Commissioners have evidently fallen into the pal-
pable error of identifying the character and efficiency
of the Episcopal Church in this colony with the
character and efficiency of the Corporation, and have
therefore gratuitously accused me of cherishing a
spirit of hostility towards the former, merely because
I had recommended to the Eight Honourable the
Secretary of State for the Colonies the entire and
immediate abolition of the latter. But while I
broadly disclaim every feeling of hostility towards
the Episcopal Church in this territory, and towards
any of its ministers, and maintain that there is no
evidence of such a feeling in my letter to my Lord
Goderich, I have no hesitation in repeating, what I
asserted in that letter, that the Corporation has
evinced itself inefficient in its character, expensive


in its management, and prejudicial in its tendency
both to the Episcopal Church and to the colony at
large.
“In regard to the insinuation that I ‘ felt it
impossible to succeed in the accomplishment of my
object without degrading the Established Church of
the colony in his Lordship’s estimation,’ I beg most
explicitly to disavow every such feeling —every such
intention. As I do not feel it requisite, however, to
express my own sentiments in regard to the spirit
which that insinuation itself evidently breathes, I
beg leave to subscribe myself,” &c., &c.
Whether the Archdeacon deemed his written
vindication of the Church and School Corporation
unsuccessful in point of argument, I do not know;
at all events, he deemed it requisite to have me pub-
licly subjected to a different species of infliction,
under which I should be utterly unable to avail
myself of the noble art of defence. Accordingly, as
a member of the Nominee Legislative Council of the
colony, to whose deliberations no strangers were then
admitted, he proposed, in the absence of the Governor ,
and of certain other members , who , I have reason to
believe , ivould not have sanctioned so anomalous a 'pro-
ceeding , that a vote of censure should be passed upon
me for the statements in my letter to Lord Goderich
relative to the Church and School Corporation and
the Episcopal clergy of the colony; and the vote was
accordingly passed on the 15th of March, 1832, and
published to the following effect in all the newspapers
of the colony :
“ Resolved —That His Excellency the Governor
be requested to communicate to the Right Honour-
able the Secretary of State the opinion of this Council,


that the charges against the Protestant Episcopal
clergy of the colony, contained in the letter addressed
by Dr. Lang to Viscount Goderich, were unfounded
and unwarrantable, and that the publication of the
same was a highly improper and censurable act.
The opinion of the Legislative Council, and the
vote of censure to which it led, were no dead letter
to me. At the time when the vote was passed and
published in all the newspapers of the colony, there
were from fifty to a hundred reputable individuals,
whom I had carried out from Scotland to the
extremity of the earth, looking me every Saturday
evening for the wages of their labour, earned in the
erection of buildings for the education of the long-
neglected youth of the Australian colonies, while the
weekly supply of funds for the carrying on of so
extensive an undertaking depended entirely on my
own personal credit and the favour of the public,
both of which the vote of the Legislative Council
tended, as it was doubtless intended it should, almost
completely to destroy. The amount expected to be
contributed by the public for the establishment of
our Institution was £3,500 ; but it then amounted
only to £I,BOO, and there it stood. It had simply to
be supplemented, as it was, from my own resources,
to the extent of not less than £1,700, to entitle the
promoters of the undertaking to an equal amount from
the Government, to which they did prove themselves
entitled at my sole expense , and which they received
from the Government accordingly. Had all this not
been done at the proper time, the noble experiment
with which I was identified in the importation of
the Scotch mechanics would not only have proved
an abortion, but exposed me to a whole series of


prosecutions by the mechanics themselves for breach
of contract, and overwhelmed me besides with the
ridicule and laughter of the community. To show
how speedily the peculiarly hostile proceedings of
the Archdeacon operated to my prejudice, a friend
of my own in the colony had endorsed hills of
my acceptance to the amount of £I,OOO, for the
carrying on of the undertaking, till the funds of the
Institution could he rendered available for the pur-
pose. Immediately after the passing of the vote of
censure, I received a pressing requisition from my
friend for tangible security, as my name alone was
no longer deemed sufficient. I accordingly gave
him a security on my dwelling house, but caused the
house to he advertised for sale forthwith. It was
sold, accordingly, in a few weeks after, and realised,
together with some building ground adjoining it,
£2,250. I had thus the satisfaction of very soon
seeing my friend entirely out of danger. The house
was situated on the summit of the ridge that separ-
ates the two beautiful coves or inlets of the harbour
of Port Jackson, around which the city of Sydney is
built. It commanded a view of the harbour as far
as its noble entrance in front, and of the interesting
lake scenery in the upper part of it in the rear. I
had laid my account to live and die in it; but he
who is called, in the good providence of God, to
struggle with principalities and powers, on behalf of
his fellow-men in the colonies, must learn to do
violence to his own feelings on occasions of emer-
gency, and even to take joyfully the spoiling of his
goods.
I had other property in Sydney, to the amount of
upwards of £2,000, which was also brought to the


hammer for a similar purpose in the course of the
same protracted struggle; for as the number of
mechanics necessarily employed at the educational
buildings rendered a large expenditure absolutely
necessary on the one hand, it was found, on the
other, that no part of the public funds allotted by
Lord Goderich for the carrying on of the undertaking
could he procured for a whole twelvemonth after its
commencement. The funds I allude to were to he
advanced hy instalments, provided that an equal
amount should have been previously expended hy the
promoters of the undertaking; security to he given
to the Government on the buildings for the ultimate
repayment of the advance at the expiration of five
years.* The buildings, however, were erected on
ground belonging to the Trustees of the Scots Church ;
and it was determined by the Crown lawyers of the
colony that the latter could not give a security till
they were empowered to do so by an Act of Council.
But an Act of Council was not easily procurable; and
as it was necessary in the meantime to obtain funds
from some quarter or other to carry on the work, the
trustees of the Scots Church offered personal security
for the due execution of the mortgage as soon as its
execution should be practicable. The Legislative
Council, however, being constituted judges in regard
to the sufficiency of the security, would not be satis-
fied with anything hut the bond. The bond was at
length prepared by a private solicitor, and cost twelve
guineas; but as His Majesty’s Attorney-General, the
♦ Lord Goderich never intended that the loan or advance should be repaid.
He said so himself in my own hearing in Downing Street, when Earl Grey,
then Lord Ho wick, was present, in December, 1830. The security was required
merely to insure the due appropriation of the amount.


late John , Esq.,* refused to examine it on behalf
of the Legislative Council, of which he was a member,
unless I sent him a fee —I sent him five pounds. I
regretted that the sum was so small (although it was
more than I could well afford at the time) ; for the
honourable gentleman’s salary as a Crown lawyer was
only £1,200 a year!
The Institution that was thus established main-
tained a vigorous and healthful existence in the city of
Sydney for ten years thereafter, although it never
received a sixpence from the State besides the loan or
advance of £3,500 for buildings. During that period
it had given a superior education for the time to
upwards of five hundred of the youth of the colony.
It was all along under the management of three
graduates of three different Scottish universities whom
I had brought out from Scotland for the purpose on
two different occasions, and had classes, besides the
usual branches of an English education, for classics,
mathematics, and natural philosophy.
The supposed profits of squatting, or grazing, were
so great, even in the eyes of literary and professional
men, in the years 1811 and 1842, that I found it imprac-
ticable to keep the Institution in existence any longer,
without assistance from the State. I therefore memo
rialised Sir George Gipps and the Legislative Council,
setting forth the case as I best could, and praying
for salaries of only a hundred a year each for the three
gentlemen who had charge of the Institution. This,
however, the niggardly Government of Sir George
Gipps not only refused, but immediately instituted an
action against myself for the repayment of the loan
advanced by the order of Lord Goderich in the year
♦ Afterwards one of the puisne judges of the colony.


1831. Sir George Grey, when Under-Secretary of
State for the Colonies, in 1837, had told me in Down-
ing Street, after I had given evidence for three days
successively before the late Sir "W illiam Molesworth s
Select Committee of the House of Commons on
Transportation —in the course of which he had seen
what sort of services I had individually been render-
ing to the colony —that the Government had certain
claims on the ecclesiastical property with which I
was identified in Sydney (meaning particularly the
loan advanced by Lord Goderich), which they would
willingly cancel if requested to do so. But I deemed
it so utterly inconceivable that the Local Government
would ever act as they actually did in the matter,
that I took no action in the case, and lost the oppor-
tunity. But I had to fight ivith beasts at Ephesus in
those days, and this was merely a specimen of the
sort of warfare I had to wage all along. The prose-
cution lasted for at least two years, and cost me a large
amount for the defence; but I succeeded at length
in defeating Sir George and his myrmidons, even in
their own courts of law.*
* The Government prosecution, which had been commenced at the
instance of certain of my personal enemies, was instituted against the Trustees
of the Scots Church, who had granted the Government mortgage on the pro-
perty ; but when the case bad reached its last stage, and the men who had
instigated the prosecution were exulting in the prospect of seeing our Church
property brought to the hammer, I suggested to the counsel for the defence
that a cross bill might be brought in by the Elders of the Church to the
effect that the property in question did not belong to the Trustees, but to
them (the Elders), as the representatives of the congregation. The learned
counsel approving of this suggestion, a cross bill was at once submitted
by the Elders, and the case was lost for the prosecution. His Honour,
Judge A’Beckett, who presided in the Court, was in great wrath on the
occasion, particularly at myself, for what he alleged as the iniquity of my pro-
cedure in suggesting the cross bill. But I had no qualms of conscience in the
matter; believing, as I did, that the iniquity lay entirely with the prosecution.
Besides, admitting his Honour’s unfriendly feeling towards myself, of which I


Our Educational Institution subsisted after this,
although on a reduced scale, till the year 1854, when,
in consequence of certain educational measures of
much greater promise enacted by the Legislature,
it became extinct.
As it was necessary, under the arrangements I
had made with the Scotch mechanics, to have regular
employment provided for them upon their arrival in
the colony, I had directed the architect, whom I
brought out with them, to draw a plan for the erection
of four plain stone buildings on the ground allotted
for the purpose, for the accommodation of the masters
of our Institution, which I had ascertained could be done
at the time for three thousand pounds. The gentlemen
who were immediately thereafter voluntarily associated
with me as a Board of Management for the Institu-
tion, and who included gentlemen of 'the highest
standing in the colony, willingly accepted the plan
and estimate of the Scotch architect without ques-
tion ; but the latter, wishing, perhaps, to show off
professionally, on his arrival in the colony, took upon
him to erect a pile of buildings that proved but
indifferently suited for our purposes, and that, instead
of three thousand, actually cost twelve thousand
pounds —the buildings having progressed too far ere
the mistake could be rectified. I have never heard of
architects being included among the dangerous classes
of society; such, however, has been my own personal
was quite aware, I believe the real ground of his indignation was his having
been foiled in his own Court by a Presbyterian minister. The Government
mortgage on the property of the Scots Church, which Sir George Grey offered,
on the part of the Imperial Government, to cancel, in the year 1837, but which
was not done through my own fault, was finally cancelled, on the merits of the
case, by the Government of his present Excellency, Sir Hercules Robinson, in
the year 1877.


experience with the craft in New South Wales. But
mine has not been a solitary case of the kind in the
colony by any means; foi* at a meeting of a select
committee of our Legislative Council, or Local Parlia-
ment, on matters connected with our Institution many
years thereafter, the late D. C. Dalgleish, Esq., M.P.,
who was chairman of the committee, drew the atten-
tion of the members to the fact—then of recent
occurrence —that whereas the first Government esti-
mate for the erection of the Menangle bridge on the
Great Southern Railway did not exceed £15,000, it
actually cost £90,000. But the difference in the two
cases consisted in this—that while the greatly
increased cost of the bridge above the first estimate
fell upon the broad hack of the Government, that of
our Institution fell chiefly, or rather entirely, upon
mine.
Eor as the hostile proceedings of the Archdeacon
towards myself at once checked the flow of the public
bounty towards our Institution, as it was doubtless
intended to do, and virtually limited the contributions
of the public to £I,BOO, instead of £3,500, certain
gentlemen connected with the Institution insisted that
the progress of the buildings should be forthwith
checked or rather stopped; that all claim to the remain-
ing portion of the Government advance should be re-
nounced, and the mechanics —at least, most of them —
dismissed. To these terms, however, I could not accede,
considering my own engagement with the mechanics,
and especially the great experiment I was carrying on
in the matter of immigration on the one hand; and
the necessities of the Institution on the other. So
when the funds from the public failed, I had simply
to supplement the deficiency from my own funds (to


the extent of £1,700, which entitled us to a similar
amount from the Government), as I was fortunately
both able and willing to do. at the time.
But the Archdeacon speedily received, from an
unexpected quarter, such a recognition of his own
feeble defence of an indefensible position as he little
expected in the case ; for my humble efforts and pro-
ceedings, on behalf of the public in our colony, being
well and favourably known at the time in Downing
Street, and my virtual controversy with the Arch-
deacon on the merits of the Church and School Cor-
poration having attracted the notice of the Liberal
Government of King William IV., the King in
Council actually revoked the Royal Charter of the
Church and School Corporation of New South Wales,
and dissolved the Corporation (the very thing I had
been recommending all along) so early as in the fol-
lowing year (1833). Such, then, was the virtual
reply of the Imperial Government to the Archdeacon;
and I am happy to think that my own efforts and
sacrifices and sufferings should have contributed so
materially as they did to a consummation of such
transcendant importance to the welfare and advance-
ment of our colony.
As it will appear somewhat mysterious that a
mere Presbyterian minister like myself should have
been enabled to carry on our Institution in such cir-
cumstances as I have mentioned, single-handed as it
were, I shall state how one large item in my available
funds for such purposes happened to come into my
hands, as the case throws much light on the pro-
gress of the colony at a comparatively early period in
its history. In the year 1824, Mr. John Wylie, the
son of a respectable farmer in the parish of Dairy,


in Ayrshire, Scotland, arrived in the colony, as an
emigrant farmer, bringing out with him a sufficient and
respectable outfit for the purpose, including a hull
and cow of the best Ayrshire breed of cattle. In
consideration of this very important acquisition for
the colony at the time, Mr. Wylie received the largest
grant of land then given by the Government of the
day to emigrants of superior standing and means
viz. : 2,560 acres, which he selected in the beautiful
district of Illawarra, on the coast to the south of
Sydney, which was long regarded as the garden of the
colony. I had been acquainted with Mr. Wylie’s
family in Scotland, and naturally took an interest in
his settlement in the colony. But it was soon evident
in New South Wales, as it had been previously in
Scotland, that Mr. Wylie was destitute of that essen-
tial qualification for success as a colonist—strong
common sense. He could not manage his own affairs
with discretion; and after expending his valuable
outfit, including his high-bred Ayrshire cattle, which
would have been a fortune to a judicious man at the
time, unprofitahly and foolishly, he fell into debt and
difficulties, and came to me in Sydney again and again
for advice and assistance.* The latter I could only
procure for him through my acquaintance with per-
sons possessed of means, and willing to lend small
sums at interest in such cases, on my personal
security. One of the persons, to whom I was repeat-
edly indebted for Mr. Wylie on such occasions, was a
member of my own congregation, a Mis. McLeod,
• Had I not interfered in these circumstances on Mr. Wylie’s behalf, unable
as he was to have procured advances on his own security, and land being at
the time unsaleable and a perfect drug in the market, he would have been sold
off by the Sheriff, for the smallest amounts, ten times.


from the Isle of Skye, who had been sent out to
the colony for her country’s good, for the singular
crime of arson, or fire-raising, having set fire to her
neighbour’s house in an uncontrollable fit of jealousy.
Arriving in the colony during the government of
Major-General Macquarie, a Highlander also himself
from the neighbouring island of Mull, Mrs. McLeod
had obtained her colonial freedom from His Excel-
lency on her arrival in the colony, and was in a
respectable way of business on her own account in
Sydney on my arrival in New South Wales.
Mrs. McLeod’s rate of interest for the sums I
borrowed from her for Mr. Wylie was twenty per
cent. Remonstrating with her on one occasion, on
charging our unfortunate fellow-countryman with
what I thought such exorbitant interest, she replied
—for she was then married again to a'respectable
emancipist, and a well-known money-lender in Sydney
—“ Maister Lang, what can my husband do, when
people come to him offering him five pounds for the
loan of twenty pounds for a month ?” I confess I was
quite unable to answer this question, and was led by it
to regard the subject in a totally different light from
what I had done before. These borrowers, I ascer-
tained, were dealers who, with ready money in their
hands, could frequent sales in Sydney, or go on hoard
newly-arrived ships and purchase the captain or
officers’ private ventures, which they carried forthwith
to the weekly market in Sydney, and retailed at per-
haps four times the amount they had paid for them.
In such cases, I saw at once, as I could not help
doing, that the money-lender, being a virtual partner
in the speculation, had a right to share in the profits,
in the form of interest, as well as the borrower. In


this way, my Scotch ideas as to five per cent, being
the only proper rate of interest, had to he surrendered
at the instance of a female emancipist of Sydney, to
the dictates of right reason, and common sense.
I had continued to get advances for Mr. Wylie
till the amount for which I was responsible for him
amounted to upwards of £7OO. In these circum-
stances, Mr. Wylie, being a thoroughly honest and
honourable man, insisted that I should simply take
over his grant of land, and pay myself from the pro-
ceeds. To this, however, I could on no account
consent; but, as there was then a favourable prospect
of Mr. Wylie’s being comfortably settled on one-half
of his grant, including all his previous cultivation, in
company with two young Scotch farmers then
recently arrived, and relatives of his own, I agreed
to purchase the other half at the then current
price of land in tha colony, and pay Mr. Wylie
the difference, over and above the amount for
which I had become security for him. At a meet-
ing of Mr. Wylie’s friends, held in Sydney in the
year 1829, these arrangements were all adopted and
carried out, and I became the proprietor of twelve
hundred acres of land on the shores of the beautiful
lake of Illawarra, in New South Wales.
My second voyage from New South Wales to
England had been undertaken, as I have stated above,
in the year 1830. Mr. Wylie had, in the meantime,
resumed the possession and management of bis
land at Illawarra, along with the two Scotch farmers,
who were thenceforth in a sort of partnership with
him, agreeably to the arrangements made by his
friends in Sydney in the year 1829. On my return
to the colony, however, after my third voyage to


England, in 1884,1 found that Mr. Wylie had fallen
into had health in Illawarra, and been brought up by
the two Scotchmen to the hospital in Sydney, where,
after lingering under disease for a time, he died.
During the short period that had then elapsed,
from the year 1830, land in Illawarra, which, during
the whole period of the administration of General
Darling had been a perfect drug in the market, and
quite unsaleable, had acquired a considerable and
rapidly-increasing value ; so that very shortly there-
after, or in the year 1836, when I was under the
necessity of disposing of the twelve hundred acres
which had fallen into my hands in the way I have
mentioned, to maintain the struggle into which I had
been led for the public, it was worth £2 an acie.
That single item of property, therefore, brought me
not less than £2,400. The purchaser on that occasion
was my brother, the late Mr. Andrew Lang, M.L.C.,
who, after the gold discoveries, when the price of land
had increased very greatly above that rate, disposed of
a large portion of his purchase at from £25 to £3O an
acre, and was enabled on the proceeds, together with
the other property he possessed in the colony, to
live as a retired Australian nabob, on an estate he
had purchased in Devonshire in England, till he died
in the year 1874.
I cannot bring this fifth chapter of my Reminis-
cences to a close without calling the attention of the
reader to the very remarkable fact that the great
moral and material revolution for the benefit of this
colony, which originated in the importation of the
Scotch mechanics of 1831, was not indebted for a
single farthing of the expenditure it implied to the
Colonial Government of the period, but was conducted


exclusively, from its commencement to its close, at
the expense of a private individual, whom it almost
ruined in the process, and to whom it brought no
personal gain. Whether such a state of things is at
all creditable to the Government and Parliament of
this colony, I shall leave the reader to determine for
himself. This, at all events, is the last time I shall
mention the subject, whether in the way of narrative
or of appeal, being assured that posterity will do me
justice, which the Government and Parliament of
New South Wales have never yet done.
Lest any person, unacquainted with the remark-
able facts of our earlier history, should question the
accuracy of the statements I have made in this chap-
ter, in reference to my own expenditure and sacrifices
for the colonial public, I shall conclude with the
following extract of a speech delivered at a public
meeting held on my behalf, in Sydney, in December,
1870, by a highly competent and reliable witness,
the Honourable S. D. Gordon, who expressed himself
as follows on the occasion :
“He knew, as a fact, that if Dr. Lang had used the property that
belonged to him some thirty years ago for his own private uses,
instead of spending it in the introduction of immigrants, and advanc-
ing the welfare of the colonies, he would now have been one of the
richest men in the community. He knew that Dr. Lang once pos-
sessed properties which, if they had been disposed of at certain
times, when they could have been sold to advantage, would have
realised something like £IOO,OOO. But these properties were sacri-
ficed at a time when they could not be sold to advantage, in order to
pay the responsibilities which Dr. Lang incurred in introducing immi.
grants, and advancing the welfare of the colonies.”*
* Extract of a speech by the Hon. S, D. Gordon, at a public meeting on
my behalf, held in Sydney on the 13th December, 1870.


SYDNEY:
GIBBS, SHALLARD, AND CO.,
GENERAL STEAM MACHINE PRINTERS,
108 PITT STREET,
NEXT TO UNION BANK.




