

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE
ON
IMMIGRATION,
WITH THE
APPENDIX, MINUTES OF EVIDENCE,
AND
REPLIES TO CIRCULAR LETTER
ON THE
ABORIGINES.
NEW SOUTH WALES.
IMMIGRATION, 1841.
ORDERED BY THE COUNCIL TO BE PRINTED.
13 th August, 1841.
SYDNEY:
W. J. ROW, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, BENT-STREET.
1841.


EXTRACT FROM THE VOTES AND PROCEEDINGS OF THE
LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL, No. 1.
Tuesday, 8 June, 1841.
6. Immigration; Committee appointed to consider the Question of Immigration generally,
with the view of ascertaining the present and prospective demands of the Colonists for
Labour, and how the same may be most effectually and economically met, with instruc-
tions to examine Evidence, and report:—
The Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of Australia,
The Honorable the Colonial Mr. H. H. Macarthur,
Secretary, Sir John Jamison,
The Auditor General, Mr. James Macarthur.
Mr. Jones,
His Excellency the Governor then laid upon the Table the undermentioned Papers on
the subject of Immigration, viz.:—
(1.) A Copy of His Excellency’s Despatch to the Most Noble the Marquis of Normanby,
No. 164, dated 4 December, 1839; to be printed.
(2.) A Despatch from the Right Honorable Lord John Russell, No. 160, dated 7
October, 1840, with its enclosures; to be printed.
(3.) Report from James Denham Pinnock, Esq., Colonial Agent for Immigration, on the
subject of Immigration generally, for the Year 1840; to be printed.
(4.) Return by J. D. Pinnock, Esq., of the Number of Immigrants who arrived in the
Colony of New South Wales, from the Ist of January, to the 31st of December, 1840,
shewing the number, description, and cost, of Immigrants arrived by Government Ships,
and of those for whom Bounties have been paid ; shewing also the number and descrip-
tion of Immigrants who arrived Unassisted ; to be printed.
(5.) Return by J. D. Pinnock, Esq., dated 7th June, 1841, of the whole number of
persons, the Permissions for whose introduction into the Colony yet remain in force,
and for whom Bounties have been promised in conformity with the Government Notices
of 28 September, 1837, and 3 March, 1840; distinguishing the number of those for
whom Bounties have been promised absolutely, and conditionally.
(6.) Return shewing the Number of Persons, the Permissions for whose introduction into
the Colony will expire between 7 June, 1841, and 3 March, 1842.
7. His Excellency the Governor laid upon the Table, the undermentioned Papers respecting
the Aborigines of the Colony; viz :
(1.) A Despatch from the Right Honorable Lord John Russell, No. 128, dated 5 August,
1840, enclosing a copy of a communication received from the Secretary to the Church
Missionary Society, again bringing under the consideration of Her Majesty’s Government,
the state of the Society’s Mission in New South Wales, and urging the claim of the
Society to some further support in aid of that Mission ; and enclosing also, a copy of a
Report on the subject, received from the Colonial Land and Emigration Commissioners,
with the enclosures referred to.
(2.) A Despatch from the Right Honorable Lord John Russell, No. 132, dated 25
August, 1840, relating to the treatment of the Aborigines, and recommending that fifteen
per cent of the yearly produce of the Sales of Crown Lands should be applied to their
protection and civilization; to be printed.
(3.) A Despatch from the Right Honorable Lord John Russell, No. 161, dated 8
October, 1840, enclosing a copy of a Report received from Captain Grey, late Commandant
of an Expedition into the Interior of Australia, upon the best means of promoting the
civilization of the Aborigines ; Despatch and its Enclosures to be printed.
8. His Excellency the Governor laid upon the Table, a Despatch from the Right Honorable
Lord John Russell, No. 146, dated 5 August, 1840, enclosing a copy of a letter from the
Colonial Land and Emigration Commissioners, with Forms of two Public Notices intended
to give publicity to the New Arrangements regarding the disposal of Crown Lands in
New South Wales ; Despatch and its Enclosures to be printed.
The foregoing Despatches and other Papers relating to Immigration, the Aborigines,
and the Sale of Crown Lands, to be referred to the Committee on Immigration.


REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE
ON
IMMIGRATION,
1841.
I The Committee appointed by the Council on the Bth of June, 1841, to consider and examine
the subject of Immigration, have agreed upon the following Report.
The gratifying fact that the transportation of felons to these shores terminated on the
Ist of August last, from which period this Colony ceased to bear a penal character, could not
fail to be accompanied by a general, though, as your Committee trust, a temporary
inconvenience, in an increased deficiency of labour. In every description of employment and
of mechanical skill, but especially perhaps in the occupation of shepherds, the convicts had
been found useful; and on every establishment, and in every department of the settler s life,
the loss of the services of the assigned servants is felt, as their numbers are diminished by the
expiration of their periods of transportation, by their obtaining tickets-of-leave, or by death ;
while the channel is closed through which such vacancies have been heretofore supplied.
Your Committee refer to this state of things, not with a view to express any regret at this failure
in the supply of convict labour, the gradual extinction of which they are persuaded must exercise
an influence for good upon the social state and relations of this community, far out-weighing
the inconvenience and loss which are unavoidably attendant in the first instance upon so great
a change in the transportation system. But this notice of the effectsproduced by its cessation is
called for, in order to bring into prominent observation, the necessity of employing more energetic
measures than have been yet resorted to, for the purpose of supplying from purer and better
sources, the prevailing want of labour. Your Committee cannot doubt that the services of the
convicts may be in every instance replaced, provided that due facility and encouragement be
afforded to the introduction from the United Kingdom of labourers and handicraftsmen. In
directing their attention to the best and most effective method of affording that encouragement,
it has not escaped the observation of your Committee, that the most difficult kind of labour to
be provided, is precisely that on which the produce of the staple-article of this Colony mainly
depends. The growth of wool is the chief resource and support of this community, as will be
evident when it is observed that the export of this article during the year 1840, amounted to
more than 8,600,000 pounds weight, the estimated value of which exceeded half a million
sterling.* It will be found that there is no opposition of evidence or diversity of opinion as to
the fact that shepherds are the description of labourers whose services it is most difficult to
procure ; and your Committee do not hesitate to say, that this is too serious a subject to be
trifled with. Either some adequate remedy must be applied, or else not only the fortunes of
individuals, but the permanent continuance of the Colony in its present state and circumstances,
will be endangered.
This topic your Committee cannot doubt will command the consideration of the Council,
no less than that of Her Majesty’s Government; and the most urgent motives will not fail to
present themselves to call forth on the part of both, very prompt endeavours to avert a crisis
threatening such calamitous results. The destruction of the flocks, or even the deterioration
of their produce, to which the want of due superintendence must lead, as it impoverished the
land-holders of New South Wales, would deprive the British merchant, and manufacturer, of
that growing and already important mart for exports, which this Colony affords; it would
involve the destruction of a very large British capital invested here, as well as of that which
has been created through its agency; it would abolish an extensive emporium of shipping, and
a promising nursery of seamen ; and would cut off from the clothing districts of England one
chief source for the supply of that article on which the operations of their industry and their
consequent prosperity chiefly depend. Your Committee therefore feel assured, that in urging
upon the attention of the Authorities in England, the expediency of affording every facility to
the introduction of that species of labour in particular, which is required for the maintenance
of the chief article of Colonial produce and export, they are not advocating any narrow or local
interest, but are seeking support for one of the most important pillars of the Colonial
greatness of the Empire. # , .
Their first enquiries have related to the practical operations under which the introduc-
tion of Immigrants into the Colony has been conducted. During the past year, this has been
effected exclusivelyby means of the Bounty system; no ship chartered on account of Government
for the conveyance of Immigrants having arrived since the 21stof February, 1840. This transfer
of the business of Immigration to the exclusive management of one description of agency, has
not been contemplated with satisfaction by your Committee, any more than, they are
persuaded, it will be by the Council or the Colony in general. The desire of the Committee of
last year, was to find that the expenses attendant on the Government system, might be so far
reduced as to place it, in that respect, upon a par with the Bounty system ; and in this manner
they trusted that the two might be carried on simultaneously. Your Committee deprecate the
supposition that they have ever regarded this question in the light of a debate on controverted
topics
* Appendix (A.)
8,610,775 lbs.
£566,112.


•Appendix (B.)
* Appendix C.
topics between them and the Commissioners of Colonial Land and Emigration. On their part
there never existed any feeling of mere preference for either one or the other of the systems of
Immigration which been so much spoken of; and they may affirm, that throughout the Colony
generally the same degree of indifference prevailed as to the means which might be employed
for the introduction of labour, provided only, that the universally desired result were attained
without any superfluous expenditure. But in the course of their enquiries in former years,
your Committee could not but be struck by the excess of expenditure incurred in the
Government scheme of Emigration, compared with that which attended the Bounty system.
This difference it became them, as depositaries of the confidence of the Council, distinctly to
notice ; and in justice to themselves they must now remark, that the reasonings resorted to bv
the Commissioners, have failed to disprove the accuracy of the conclusion founded on official
statements, that the sum expended in the introduction of about 13,000 persons on the
Government system, exceeded what would have been the cost of introducing the same numbers
on the Bounty system, by upwards of 3671,000. Your Committee entirely concur in
the soundness of. the opinion expressed by the Commissioners “ that the cost is not
the first consideration in point of real importance.” It therefore does not appear to them,
upon what ground it is to be implied that this, namely the rate of expense, is “ the particular
which \ery naturally attracted the most attention in the Colony.” On the contrary, your
Committee on discovering the above stated excess of expenditure, directed their most earnest
enquiry to ascertain whether there might not be, as regarded more important particulars, some
superiority belonging to the Government system which should account for, and justify the extra
cost. Such superiority, had it been discoverable, they would at once have admitted as more
than a compensation for the excess of expenditure; that is, if proof had been afforded, that
such excess had been incurred in providing for the better treatment of the Emigrants, or had
been productive of a greater exemption from disease among them. But when, upon the most
careful enquiry, it was impossible to trace any compensatory properties attached to the
Government system, either as to the class of ships employed, or the mode of their fitting, and
when it could not be made to appear that there was any superiority on the part of that system,
in the description and character of the persons introduced, their sustenance and comfort
during the voyage, or in their medical treatment, as evinced by the state of health and the
average rate of mortality among them, it was not in the power of your Committee, to form or
to express any other opinion than, that the costliness of the one system above the other, was
not attended with any corresponding advantage either to the Immigrants or to the Public.
This conclusion, arrived at by a methodical process of enquiry, and recorded in the calmest
terms, is almost the only one which your Committee have pronounced as to the existence of any
opposition between the systems; and that without pledging themselves to a decided or exclusive
preference for either, if the cost and advantages of each could be equalized. It would be on
many accounts most gratifying to them, as it would afford the most certain and most extended
advantage to the Colony, that the two systems should be in concurrent operation, according to
the arrangement established by Sir Richard Bourke in 1837. The official prominence
for which the Commissioners contend in the management of their branch of
the business need not interfere, so far as your Committee can discover, with
the active employment at the same time, of respectable private Agents connected with the
Bounty system. Your Committee nevertheless deem it right to record their persuasion that
any interference with the latter, either by direct regulation and control, or indirectly, by the
imposition of conditions which should embarrass the proceedings of the parties who engage
in it, and occasion them to relinquish the occupation, would not be regarded with
satisfaction by the Colonists, who, from the experience of several years, have learned to rely
on the Bounty system for providing them, to a very great extent, with a regular supply of
labourers and mechanics, upon terms sufficiently economical; and, all circumstances considered,
with a very slight intermixture of unsuitable or ineligible persons. But while expressing
this conclusion with respect to the general character of the Bounty system, your Committee
consider it indispensable to advert with great disapprobation to the mode in which some few
of the private ships have been managed. The documents in the appendix, having reference
to these instances, while they prove the culpable neglect of some of the parties connected with
those ships, will also shew that due vigilance is exercised by the Colonial Authorities for the
detection and punishment of such misconduct.* Your Committee, however, most anxiously
desire not to be forced into comparisons, any further than a watchful concern for the
husbanding of the Colonial resources may require that they should be instituted. But
previously to quitting the subject, they must direct attention to the suggestion of the Land and
Emigration Commissioners, that the facilities afforded under the Bounty system to the class
of passengers termed Intermediate, should be done away with, in consequence of an objection
raised to them by the late Health Officer when examined before the Committee of 1839. It is
not difficult to urge conjectural apprehensions of the evils which may arise from the admission
of such passengers, either as regards the general accommodation of other Emigrants on board,
or their supposed greater liability to disease. The most secure and proper mode of deciding
the question must be, by a reference to experience; and on inspection of the Returns of sickness
and mortality during the voyages of all ships with Immigrants which have arrived here during
the last three years and a half, no indications are to be found of a less favourable state of health
on board of those ships by which Intermediate passengers were conveyed. On the contrary,
the most unhealthy ships during the year 1840—41, were the “Champion,” the
“ Margaret, ” and the “ Salsette ” ;* two of which had no passengers of the class in question.
As it is thus clearly shewn that Immigrants of this description may be conveyed with security
to themselves, and without risk to the ships by which they proceed, as they are generally
persons


persons of a class somewhat superior to the passengers who claim the Bounty, to whom they
set an example of regularity and good conduct, while they also, by the support which they
render to the Surgeon and officers, may contribute very much to the maintenance of order
on board; Your Committee most earnestly would discourage any interference with the practice
which has grown up in this respect. Such interference resting upon apprehensions of
danger not confirmed by experience, would have the effect of checking or of totally preventing
the introduction of a class of persons, who, without any charge upon the Emigration funds, add
at once to the numbers and respectability of the community. Among them are unquestionably
many who could not obtain a passage at the public expense, on account of their exceeding the
limited age. But these are most commonly relatives and connexions of parties going out in
the same ship as Bounty passengers, whom they are desirous of accompanying. In all
probability neither the one class nor the other would be induced to come to the Colony, but
for the existence of a system which thus enables each to obtain a passage upon terms most
suitable to its circumstances, and to gratify their desire of not being separated. Your
Committee cannot but express themselves adverse to the breaking up of a system which
works thus favourably both for the public and private benefit; and the doing away with which
would not, so far as they are able to discover, conduce to any useful end.
In another respect, that is, in recommending an extension of the age”within which
Immigrants shall be, upon certain conditions, eligible to receive a free passage, your Committee
are happy to find their opinion more closely in agreement with that of the Commissioners.
This subject engaged their attention to some extent last year; and during the present session
has been more carefully examined. As a general limit, it cannot be denied, that the age of 40
is very properly fixed; because the Colony cannot expect after that to enjoy the services of
the most active and useful period of life. But the most pressing want, now experienced,
appears to be that of shepherds; an occupation which calls for the exertion of steady attention
and regularity, rather than of vigour. A man approaching to 50, or being even of 50 years of
age, may be as well qualified as a much younger man to take charge of a flock of sheep. In
point of disposition probably he may be even more so, on account of his having acquired with
his years more stationary habits, in which the usefulness of a shepherd very much consists.
Your Committee have therefore given a fair consideration to the question, whether the parents’
more advanced age might not be equitably compensated, by their bringing with them a family
so far grown up as to be capable of rendering useful service. Such a family would be a
valuable acquisition, though the father or mother should be upwards of 40 years of age, if
their children were correspondingly advanced beyond infancy; if for example, the family
included daughters who would soon be fit for domestic service, and sons of an age to assist in
attending sheep. Such boys from being thus early habituated to the employment, would
grow up, it is reasonable to believe, in a permanent attachment to it. Upon these grounds
your Committee recommend, that married couples above 40 years of age, should be considered
eligible for a free passage if they be still hale and capable of work, and if in consideration of
every two years by which their age may exceed 40, they be accompanied by one child above
the age of 10 years. For example, if the parties be above 40, but under 42, they must have
with them one such child; from 42 years to 44, two such, and so on ; and if they shall be
above 48 but not exceeding 50 years, (which is the extreme limit) they must be accompanied
by 5 children, the youngest not being below 10 years of age. With reference to the nature
of a shepherd’s employment in this Colony, it is to be feared that some misapprehension
prevails in England ; leading it be supposed that none except those who have been regularly
trained to it can be qualified. The points of attention are, however, so few and simple, that
they may be mastered by any one possessing the disposition to observe and learn. With a
view to correct any false impressions which may prevail, a paper is inserted in the
appendix,* exhibiting a brief view of the shepherd’s duties, which, it will from this
appear, are such as any man, or even boy approaching to manhood, with steady habits
and ordinary activity, is qualified to undertake. It would be advantageous that copies of this
paper should be circulated as generally as possible in the United Kingdom, not only in those
districts where pastoral occupations prevail, but also in the manufacturing districts. Many
of the inhabitants of the latter, persons accustomed to sedentary habits, who are now at a
loss to obtain employment even at a low rate of wages, might be found willing to engage in
an occupation neither injurious to health, nor requiring laborious exertion, which at the same
time holds out the advantage of good wages and a comfortable maintenance. Your
Committee therefore recommend, that the meaning of the term “ labourer ” should be so
enlarged as to comprehend persons of this class, and that the regulations should be so
modified as to render them eligible for the bounty.
. The distress under which flock masters are at the present time universally
labouring, has its origin in two causes :—the very high rate of wages and cost of
rations demanded by shepherds, and the difficulty, amounting almost to an im-
possibility, of obtaining a sufficient number even upon those exorbitant terms. It has
been confidently stated, that the attendant expenses of a sheep establishment at this time, do
more than consume the profits arising from the sale of the wool. And your Committee have
every reason to believe that this statement is accurate, when sheep are kept upon purchased
land, and a large yearly allowance must be made for interest upon the capital sunk in the
purchase. On establishments beyond the boundaries, where the land on which the sheep
are kept has not been purchased, but is rented at an easy rate, there may still be an attendant
profit. A grazing establishment, even under these disadvantages, might still be carried on
with advantage, if there were a ready sale for the surplus of the increase. But in the stagnation
arising from the scarcity of labour, even this resource is effectually cut off: because few persons
can he found willing to invest capital in the purchase of sheep, when they are aware that
they
* Appendix D.


they cannot depend on being able to hire shepherds to take charge of them; and thus through the
absence of almost all demand, the value of stock has sunk in a disproportionate degree, and it is
not without difficulty that sales can be effected. Besides this, the importance of the shepherds
services being thus great, their tendency to frequent changes of employ is strong in proportion;
the masters are exposed to very great annoyance, and most serious loss, in consequence of the
prevailing determination of their men not to engage in service for more than a very limited
term certain, and of their general practice to quit as soon as their time expires, even when no
others can be found to replace them in charge of the flocks ; it is therefore not^surprising; that
under a sense of'pressing difficulty many settlers should have turned their thoughts to the
practicability of introducing a cheaper and more abundant kind ofdabour. A project which
was strongly recommended a few years ago, of hnnging down the Hill Coolies from India to
be engaged as shepherds, has accordingly been revived; and would appear to have commanded
more "attention, owing to the alleged success of the experiment upon a limited scale.
Your Committe have accordingly felt it their duty to bestow the utmost attention upon is
question ; and they have considered in every possible point of view, and with the advantage
of having had before them many intelligent witnesses conversant with the subject, the policy,
and expediency of thus having recourse to the services of the Hill Coolies. During the pre-
ceding session the subject was somewhat incidentally under the observation of this Committee ,
and in their last Report they stated their opinion to he favourable, notwithstanding many
objections of considerable weight, to the employment of those people for a limited period, by
the Colonists who might he willing to introduce them at their own charge, and upon condition
that provision should be made for their return to theif native country, at the expiration of
thei/covenanted terms of service. Were it possible to obtain full security that this expressed
condition would he fulfilled, your Committee, under the peculiar circumstances of the
Colony at this time, might still he willing to abide by their previous opinion .; but they cannot
conceal that the more attentively they have reflected on the means of establishing any system
for ensuring the removal of the Coolies from the Colony, after the expiration of a limited
period of service, the more impracticable, and hopeless, has such a measure appeare o
be. In reality they have arrived at a conviction, that if this race of people were to be once
introduced and extensively employed, their removal could not he effected m opposition to their
own feelings of interest, and the influence of proprietors unwilling to dispense with the
services of dependents to whom they had become habituated. To treat this measure fair y,
therefore, it must he viewed in connexion with its certain consequence of establishing here m
perpetuity a race of different origin, color, and habits from the European, and necessardy
doomed to occupy a station of inferiority. That this is the natural consequence ofthe
measure it is not unfair to conclude; because the expressed expectation is that the Coolie,
though equalling, if not surpassing the European in the employment of a shepherd, will yet be
satisfied to undertake it at a permanently lower rate of remuneration. Without this attendant
recommendation of comparative cheapness, no one, it is acknowledged, would urge the
introduction of Coolie labourers. Yet such a depression of wages below their natural level,
as the advocates for the introduction of Coolies anticipate, could not he maintained if the
labourer and his employer stood in the genuine relation to one another of master and sen ant,
nor unless the Coolie, though nominally free, were by the force of circmnstances deprived to some
extent ofthe privileges of a free agent. Your Committee, however, offer this observation, not as
concurring intfie expectation that Coolies could he for a continuance retained at a rate of wages
below the ordinary average ; their persuasion is rather, that m proportion as the Indian labourer
acquired skill, and still more as he became more sensible of his own value, his demands would
naturally enlarge and his rate of wages must rise Neither can it be expected that Indian
Immigration, if once commenced, would he limited to that description of servants which is
now principally contemplated. Other classes or castes, capable of performing every kind of
work, and no less accustomed than the Coolies to a low rate of wages, would speedily be led to
settle here : and the European workman must in the same proportion curtail his pretensions
as he would find himself more and more pressed by rivals ready to take any employment out
of his hands upon which he would not submit to an abatement. The ultimate settlement of the
scale of wages, would in all probability be at a medium height, beneath the existing rate, but
certainly much above that point of depression at which it has been too hastily assumed the
remuneration of the Coolie would be fixed. This therefore being the view of the case which is
sanctioned by reasonable calculation, the true question for consideration is, whether for the
sake of an uncertain and at the best, a transient relief, it, would really he worth while to
introduce into our social system a new element which could not fail to deteriorate, or it may
even be said, to deprave its constitution. The expectation of introducing Coolies for a time to he
limited, and of dismissing them when the present necessity ceases to exist, appears to your
Committee to be perfectly visionary. Not only, if once admitted must they permanen y
remain, but there will be a growing necessity for their introduction m greater num ers ;
beacuse it is evident that the apprehension of such rivalry will check the readiness of European
labourers to embark for this Colony, and even such of that class as may arrive, it is admitted,
will have a tendency to sink down into the state of employers of Coolies, rather than to
persevere in that course of strenuous exertion to which they were bred, and for the sa e o
which their introduction to the Colony was principally to be desired. Whatever defects may
be chargeable upon the state of society here, it is at present so unmixed m its composition as
to promise to supply materials for the fabrication of a social and political state corresponding
with that of the country from which it derives its origin. Your Committee therefore would
not willingly be the instruments of recommending any measure likely to interfere with what
appears at present to be the natural tendency of events. Their deliberate conclusion upon his


subject is, that the proper source from which relief should be sought for the present difficulties
of the Colony, is in a more extended Emigration from the United Kingdom; that for its
promotion the most energetic measures should be taken ; and that no time should be lost in
the adoption of such measures. With regard also to the admission of Coolies, they would
have it borne in remembrance, that the removal of the restrictions which prohibit it, could not
furnish that immediate accession of labour which is needed, and which the advocates of the
measure appear to assume that it would afford. No alteration can take place without
reference to the Executive Governments of India, in London and Calcutta; a proceeding in
itself attended with considerable delay ; and even if their concurrence should be obtained, an
additional interval must necessarily elapse before any importation of Coolies could possibly
take place. It should also be borne in mind, that the laws of this Colony oppose no
obstacle to their introduction into it, to any extent which might be determined by private
enterprise pursuing its own advantage* Your Committee therefore are of opinion that, in
leaving this an open question, so far as itself is concerned, the Government of this Colony has
done as much as in prudence it ought to do; and they cannot recommend its making any
positive effort to promote a measure by which it does not appear to them that the well-
understood and permanent interest of the Colony would be promoted.
It is however a natural and obvious suggestion that, when a dearth of labourers is thus
giving encouragement to the proposal of obtaining them from an external source, some prior
attention should be bestowed upon the practicability of rendering more available, the services
of the Aboriginal people of the Colony itself. Your Committee are far from wishing to deny
the fact, that the peculiar disposition and habits of this race of people, render every attempt
to domesticate them extremely difficult; neither can it be doubted, that even if that primary
obstacle could be overcome, the numbers of the native tribes within the limits occupied bv
Europeans are so reduced, that the engagement of the whole of them as shepherds, could
but partially abate the pressure of difficulty. But every motive of policy, even if those of a
higher nature were not to be considered, enforces the expediency of resorting to this resource,
so far as the survivors of this race of people can yet be made subservient to a purpose of utility.
Your Committee are not aware that it is within their power to prescribe any rules by which
this end is to be accomplished ; because it must be obvious that it depends much more upon
the prudence and humanity of the settlers, availing themselves of opportunities to attach the
natives to their service, than upon any code of positive regulations which could possibly be
framed. The general complaint against the Aborigines is their indisposition to labour, and
their apparently insuperable propensity to quit their tasks and occupations, at whatever time
they may be summoned to associate themselves for a season with their roving tribes. But it
will admit of a question, whether any such systematic and persevering attempts have ever been
made to subdue this propensity, as probably would have been resorted to by the settlers at an
earlier period, if the want and the value of labour had then been as sensibly felt as they are
at present. So long as convict labour was easily attainable, that of the native black was
slighted ; but now, under circumstances so changed, it should be so no longer. Even as it is,
there are instances to prove that the Aboriginal natives of the Colony, like all other human
beings, have a faculty which qualifies them for settled employments, and which, if duly
cultivated might possibly yet be turned to considerable advantage. The leading defect in the
system (if so it may be called) which has hitherto been pursued towards them, consists in not
remunerating them by fixed wages, of the value of which they might soon become sensible, and
might be made also to comprehend that they were given in repayment of their services. These
people have sufficient sagacity to perceive the footing upon which they are treated. The
casual provision which is allowed them, puts them under no sense of obligation, and the
apprehension of losing it occasions no feeling of alarm; consequently the invitation of their
confederates, suffices to draw them away from that, which may in most cases be termed the
scene of their idleness, more properly, than of their labour. Your Committee cannot but
think that, if there be any desire to profit effectually by the services of the natives, a different
course must be pursued towards them; and that they can be made to acquire the steady habits
of Europeans, only by being gradually put upon the same footing with them. In proposing
therefore, to improve the condition of these people, and at the same time to render their services
of value to the settler, by giving him some resource and security against those frequent
interruptions of them which at present occur, it is plain that the first step must be that
of making the natives feel how much it is to their advantage to work regularly at fixed wages,
and how greatly it is against their interest to forfeit them by irregularity and neglect. It is
not possible to believe that they could be permanently blind to this difference, if due pains
were taken to impress it upon their minds by the lesson of daily experience.*
Against this it is objected that even where they are domesticated in families, and in all
respects well treated and apparently happy, their disposition occasionally to wander away, on
the invitation or mandate of their tribe, cannot be repressed. But in the first place it is
questionable whether in such cases of domestication, the experiment of paying regular wages
has generally been attempted. In all probability this is not the case. Neither is it intended
to maintain that the mere payment of wages is likely to effect the end desired unless
accompanied by another engagement; namely, that the loss of those wages and other painful
consequences should invariably be the punishment of the act of misconduct, which it is now
found so difficult to repress. The native under present circumstances, has no sufficient motive
to resist the invitation of his countrymen; because he sustains no immediate loss, and, on the
conclusion of his wandering, is sure of being received back into that state of lax dependence
and irregular servitude, in which the greater part of his time is idled away. But if, by a sense of
mutual advantage, the settlers in every district could be induced to combine in a resolution not
only
* Appendix E
Ea. Eb.


tAppendix F. Fa.
Fb. Fc.
§ Appendix G.
§ Appendix H.
11.
§ Appendix K.
§ Appendix I.
t L.
only to pay wages to the native blacks, but also to refuse to employ any of them who should
have quitted the service of a former master, without leave or a sufficient warning, putting them
in this respect on a footing with well conducted European servants, it can scarcely be doubted
that the native who had learned to prize the advantage of regular industry, from knowing the
profits derived from it, would hesitate before he wantonly abandoned them. He would not be,
as now, ready to attend his countrymen in their vagrant excursions, when he reflected that
the employer whom he deserted would discharge him in consequence, and that none else would
hire him ; or in other words that if he should once desert his work and return to a bush life, he
must make up his mind to continue the bush life for ever afterwards. He would then have a
motive to weigh beforehand the consequences of his own decisions and acts ; whereas, under
their present treatment it is not surprising that they should persist in a wandering habit which
gratifies them for the present moment, and which they may relinquish whenever they think fit,
without being subjected to loss or inconvenience, on account of their having indulged it. It
appears scarcely necessary to add that the preceding observations can apply to such of the
Aborigines alone as are placed so far within the pale of civilization as to have the force of
their own barbarous customs to a certain extent weakened and controlled. Such a system of
regular employment can obviously not be thought of as yet among those more distant tribes
with whom scarcely any communication can be held, and whom it is even dangerous to
approach.
Your Committee have in the next place to consider the amount of the Land Fund
during the past year; and especially that proportion of it, which after payment of all the
expenses to which the Fund is subject, remains applicable to purposes of Immigration.
According to a statement of which a Copy will be found in the Appendix, the gross
Revenue derived from Land in the Sydney and Port Phillip Districts, between the Ist of July,
1840, and 30th June, 1841, amounted to 437 4s. 7d. ;f and it is shewn by a
communication from the Colonial Secretary,§ conveying the opinions of His Excellency the
Governor as to the expenses which should be defrayed from the Land Fund, that deduction
must be made on account of the Surveyor General’s Department, a portion of the charge for
the Treasury and Audit Departments, and the whole of the outlay for the benefit of the
Aborigines. It is most gratifying to your Committee to find that, burdensome upon the
Colony as the charge for Police and Gaols undoubtedly is, no portion of it, during the year now
under review, is to be derived from the Land Fund. The heads of expenditure above recited
may be calculated as amounting in all to about j 635,000, which sum being deducted from
the gross amount of the Land Fund, leaves 607 4s. 7d., disposable for the introduction
of Immigrants, up to 31st July, in the present year. Turning in the next place to a
comparison of this with the actual expenditure during the same interval, your Committee
find that the amount paid for Bounties and gratuities to Surgeons and Officers of ships
has been at Sydney, 657 16s. 6d§., and at Melbourne £47,668 14sf., making together
a total of £1 56,326 10s. 6d. To this must be added the expense of the Immigration Office for
the year, including the charge occasioned by the ships “ Champion” and “Margaret ” having
been placed in Quarantine. The total amount of these latter expenses has not been
ascertained; but when every requisite addition on account of them shall have been made to
the sum paid for bounties and gratuities, the outlay of the year it is evident will fall short of
the income ; or a balance of nearly a£60,000, may be carried forward in augmentation of the Land
Revenue of 1841—2, It may be however, proper to remark that in the above stated
balance at Sydney, is included the sum of £42,974 4s. 2d. advanced on loan to the Government
of New Zealand, up to the 19th June, 1841. The numbers of Immigrants who have arrived
during the period now under consideration are as follow :§ —men 2,425, women 2,565,
children 1,538, total 6,528; in addition to the above there have arrived at Port
Phillip 1,089 men, 1,155 women, and 549 children, in all 2,793. Under the Bounty
system, therefore 9,321 individuals have been added to the population of the Colony at
the public expense. In the Bounty ships have also arrived unassisted by the public, 1,454
men, 473 women, 352 children, or 2,279 individuals ; making the grand total of Immigrants
11,600. The aggregate numbers added by Immigration to the Colony since the
commencement of the system may be thus stated :—Government ships 12,770, Bounty ditto
14,641, unassisted 7,265, grand total 34,676. The average cost of introducing the
Immigrants of the past year has been £l6 15s. 5d., shewing an increase over the former
year of £2 4s. 9d., each. This arises from
Increased bounty on each adult . * . .11 0 0
Gratuities per head . . . . .0176
The remaining excess on the average arises from the smaller proportion of children this year ;
it having been reduced from 1 in 2.62 to 1 in 3.27.
As regards the average state of health, the general Return of the past year is not
unsatisfactory ; though this remark cannot be offered without exception. The “Salsette,” the
“ Champion,” and the “ Margaret,” have been the only ships on board of which a bad state
of health is to be complained of. These ships respectively have lost by death §l3, f 23, and f 42
at sea or in quarantine ; that is, 78 out of 789 embarked; or lin 10. The general average
of deaths, during the year, has been 299 out of 9620 ; or 1 in 32.17 : or, excluding from the
average the three ships above named, the deaths on board the remainder have been 221 out of
8831 or lin 39.96, which is a diminution upon the rate of former years. With a view of
elucidating the causes to which the existence of extraordinary mortality on board Immigrant
ships may be imputed, your Committee annex to their Report, an Extract from the Report
of a Board appointed for the purpose of ascertaining the circumstances which led to the
prevalence of so much sickness on board the “ Margaret.” It appears most reasonable and
necessary


necessary that there should be a superintending authority in England, empowered to inspect
all ships destined for the conveyance of Immigrants to this Colony, and to enforce an
observance of such regulations, both with regard to the ships themselves, "and to the’accommo-
dation for the passengers, as may afford a reasonable security against the danger of such fatal
results as have arisen, especially in the “ Champion” and the “ Margaret.” § Your Committee :
however, deem this the proper place to observe that, in their opinion, this power of inspection
and supervision ought to be limited to such particulars as concern the probable prosecution of
the voyage, without liability to more than an average amount of sickness and mortality. The
Commissioners appear to recommend that the investigation under their agency should be
carried far beyond this ; that it should include a personal enquiry of each individual Emigrant
as to the motives which have led him or her to determine on removing themselves to this
Colony. The ground assigned for this interference is certainly a good one; namely, to afford
security against any one being led by fallacious representations to Emigrate to the Colonies.
So far however as relates to the Colony of New South Wales, your Committee are of opinion
that it is scarcely possible to impose a false representation upon skilful and industrious
individuals, if they be merely assured that there is certain and constant employment at good
wages for as many of them as may design to make this Colony their future home. With
regard to delusive representations as to the superior advantages of any one Colony over the
rest, which it is the expressed desire of the Commissioners to check, your Committee entirely
concur in the opinion that every thing like deception ought to be checked. As to New South
Wales and Van Diemen’s Land, commonly termed penal Colonies, and on that account much
maligned, it may be right to observe, that the systematic employment of forced labour in them
during so many years, has alone conduced to furnish them with those accommodations, and
facilities of communication, without which the habits and intercourse of civilized life can hardly
be maintained. The towns, the public buildings, the churches, the roads, the bridges, the
mountain passes, the extent of cleared land, and the secure enclosures by which this country is
distinguished above those which surround it, afford at least some compensation for the partial
evils which a convict system may have occassioned, especially as those evils by the abandon-
ment of that system, are rapidly disappearing, while the advantages and comforts which have
been derived from it, will remain in perpetuity to the present inhabitants or to any who may
hereafter resort to the Colony. Your Committee therefore think that every discouragement
should be given to the proposal of authorising persons, totaly unaware of the features of the country
and of its peculiar recommendations, to enter upon a discussion with the body of people who pro-
pose to Emigrate, for the purpose of ascertaining the motives which have led them to determine on
that measure. With regard to this Colony, your Committee must repeat, it is not easy for those
to be misled who propose only to labour honestly, and desire no more than a bountiful
remuneration for their exertions. Persons of another class there may be, whose minds are
filled with expectations of a certain elevation to immediate wealth. These must be disappoin-
ted and ought therefore to be discouraged. But your Committee cannot fail to perceive the
danger that the agents of the Commissioners, in affording a proper warning to these, may
infuse needless scruples and suspicions into the minds of many who ought on every account to
be encouraged in their purpose of Emigrating; and it is therefore their decided opinion, that
it will be better to allow things to find their natural level.
But in one respect your Committee think, that a very salutary improvement might be
introduced; that is, in apportioning the stations of vessels chartered for Emigrants with greater
attention to the local circumstances and comparative claims of the various divisions of the United
Kingdom. Those vessels, as appears from a Return in the Appendix,f have been dispatched
from twenty different ports. But the Bounty ships from England have been confined to
London, Plymouth and Liverpool; and from Scotland, to Leith and Greenock; while one
third of the ships chartered by Government have sailed from Irish Ports. Your Committee
cannot pass unnoticed a circumstance which has attracted serious attention on the part of the
public; namely, that of the entire number of Immigrants brought to the Colony, one third
have been Roman Catholics.§ The ships from Plymouth have introduced 11 of that
denomination for every 15 Protestants; and from Liverpool, the proportions are as 11 to 27 ;
while from the Irish ports the numbers of Roman Catholics compared with Protestants, are
as 2to 1. There is obviously a departure from the principles of justice in an arrangement
which leads to such a result; the proportion above stated being widely at variance with the
respective numbers of the religious persuasions in this Colony; and with the relative
contributions of Protestants and Roman Catholics toward the Land Fund, from which the
means of supporting Immigration are derived. They are at variance no less with the admitted
principle, that the expenditure of that fund should be regulated by a just consideration for the
advantage of all parts of the United Kingdom. With a view, therefore, to correct the existing
inequality, and to afford a more general participation in the benefit of Emigration to those
counties in England and Wales from which a most desirable class of persons may be obtained,
your Committee beg to suggest, that Portsmouth, Milford Haven, Lynn, and Hull, should
for the future be included among the ports from which ships for the conveyance of Emigrants
take their departure.
W. G. AUSTRALIA,
CHAIRMAN.
Council Chamber , 1
Tjth July, 1841. J
SUPPLEMENTARY
§ Appendix M.
tAppendix N.
§Appendix Na.


SUPPLEMENTARY REPORT.
The Committee on Immigration, for the more complete fulfilment of the duty intrusted
io them, annex a few observations upon the documents which have been submitted to them by
direction of Ilis Excellency the Governor, since the preceding Report was completed. With
regard to the first of the questions proposed by the Commissioners of Colonial Land and
Emigration in their letter of 4th March, 1841, namely, “whether in families where there are
many adult sons and daughters, it would not be advisable to extend the limits of parents’
ages,” your Committee need only remark, that they have expressed an opinion favourable to this
suggestion ; proposing to allow an addition of two years to the age of parents, between 40 and
50, in consideration of each child of 10 years of age and upwards which shall accompany them.
In reply to the second question concerning the limitations imposed upon the description of
workmen for whom the Bounty might be claimed, and the expediency of extending the same
so as to include a greater variety of avocations, your Committee think it necessary to direct
attention to the principle upon which the Government Regulations have, in this respect, been
framed. The object has been to apply the resources of the Colony, that is the proportion of the
Land Fund which might be available for Immigration, to provide labourers in those departments
which areof the first necessity andimportancetothesettler’s welfare, or in pastoral and agricultural
employments. Upon this ground it was, that the offer of encouragement to the mechanical
occupations which contribute chiefly to convenience was more sparingly introduced in the
generality of cases, and in others was withheld altogether. Your Committee however would
not be indisposed to recommend some extension of the present conditions, so far as to make
sawyers and brickmakers eligible for the Bounty. They consider also that some advantages
might arise from substituting the term “Labourers” instead of “Agricultural Labourers” to
shew that it is not farming men alone who are intended, but men of all desriptions who may
be able and willing to occupy themselves in manual labour. Beyond that extent your
Committee would not be willing to go ; because they are aware that without a very positive
limitation of the kinds of employment on account of which the Bounty may be claimed,
there can be no security that funds will be sufficiently at command to provide labourers in
those occupations which must be carried on, or the ruin of the Colony would follow, such as
agriculture and sheep farming. With reference to the latter branch of employment it may be
right to repeat that although clothiers, weavers, and other manufacturers would meet with
little or no encouragemeat here at present in the exercise of their several trades, yet such of
them as might be disposed to apply themselves to the business of a shepherd, would be very
certain of meeting with regular and profitable employment.
Your Committee have also had under consideration the various regulations proposed
by the Colonial Land and Emigration Commissioners, with a view to produce uniformity and
prevent abuses in the general system of Emigration. The Abstract of Quarterly Returns
required to be furnished from the Colony by the Agent for Immigration, may probably be
attended with advantage. It will however be necessary that much latitude of judgment should
be allowed to that officer in making periodical returns of the rate of wages, and cost of articles of
consumption; the difficulty being very great in forming correct averages applicable to the
entire Colony.
So far as relates to enforcing proper rules as to the class and sea worthiness of ships to
be employed for the conveyance of Emigrants, and to ensuring that sufficient provision is
made for victualling them properly during the voyage, your Committee consider that the
inspection and approval of the Commissioners by their agents would be highly proper. Nor
would they recommend that such inspection should be limited to the particulars specified in
the Passenger’s Act; but it should be so extended as to ensure such fitting of the ships, and
the observance of such regulations on board as may promote decency, order, and comfort
among the passengers. Your Committee however are less disposed to anticipate
advantage from the proposed regulations relating to the inspection of certificates and the
measures for ascertaining the identity of the bearers of them, before any ship with Bounty
Emigrants is allowed to sail. Least of all do they believe that any useful results would
follow from the establishment of the practice of questioning the Emigrants when on
the eve of departure as to the motives and inducements which have led them to
determine on that step; or as to the representations by which they have been induced
to make choice of one particular Colony in preference to others. The mere institution
of such an enquiry, however cautiously or judiciously it may be conducted, will unavoidably
create a disposition on the one side to prefer many groundless complaints, and on the other,
that is on the part of the Bounty Agents, will give rise to irritation and disgust, by which the
whole system of Emigration must be seriously disarranged, if its entire cessation be not the
ultimate consequence. Your Committee therefore, dreading a result so injurious, would
seriously recommend the reconsideration to this extent of the proposed Regulations of the
Commissioners; and they are of opinion that if care be taken to ascertain previously to
sailing, the sea worthiness of the ship, the sufficient supply and good quality of the provisions,
and the arrangement of the passengers on board, in such a manner as to ensure proper order
and decorum among them, the investigation of all other particulars may be securely and
advantageously left to a Colonial Board of Enquiry; whose certificate of approval must precede
the payment of any portion of the Bounties.
W. G. AUSTRALIA,
CHAIRMAN.
Council Chamber , 1
12 th, August , 1841./


YEAR.
QUANTITY.
VALUE,
As entered in the
Returns of Exports.
lbs.
£
1822
172,880
Not known .
1823
198,240
1824
275,560
1825
411,600
>1
1826
552,960
48,384
1827
407,116
24,306
1828
834,343
40,851
1829
1,005,333
63,555
1830
899,750
34,907
1831
1,401,284
75,979
1832
1,515,156
73,559
1833
1,734,203
103,692
.834
2,246,933
213,628
1835
3,893,927
299,587
1836
3,693,241
369,324
.837
4,448,796
332,166
1838
5,749,376
405,977
1839
7,213,584
442,504
1840
8,610,775
566,112
APPENDIX TO THE REPORT
OF THE
COMMITTEE ON IMMIGRATION,
1841.
A
RETURN of WOOL EXPORTED from the COLONY of NEW SOUTH
WALES, from 1822, to 1840.
~ a E. DEAS THOMSON.
Colonial Secretary’ Office, 1
Sydney, lsi July, 1841. J
ie^7° TE i,~u'^ e , turn has been added information from Port Phillip, for the Year
1837, which had not been received when the Returns published in 1840 were made out.


B, 1.
Memorandum from the Agent for Immigration.
The gratuity to the Chief Mate
on the 29th of December, 1840, was withheld by direchon of His Excelle y,
commendation of a board of inquiry, m consequence of his gross miscona 5
voyage. Whilst the .« Argyle,” from Liverpool, was discharging trough
Phillip, in the month of AprU last, a J’X/m from the first Officer’s, and
carelessness lost overboard; the sum of £lO • , • va j ue 0 f the contents
£9 10s. from the second Officer’s gratuity; the urnted sums being the value
° f GrltS to the Officers are only paid on such Immigrants as may be considered by
the examining hoard as eligible to be imported on boun y. , t f tbe officers and
Inquiries have at various times been instituted intotheamduet m tn
Surgeons of Immigrant ships j but with the foregoing exceptions, no stoppag g
has taken place. j DENHAM PINNOCK.
B. 2.
Extract from a letter from Hie Honor the Superintendent of Port Phillip, to the Honorable
the Colonial Secretary.
Melbourne, January 25, 1841.
Sir,
• • M \Mxrh«
and further, h“
ioLproprietors.
I have the honor to be
Sir,
Your most obedient Servant,
C. J. LaTROBE.
The Honorable the Colonial Secretary.
B 3.
Extract from a Letter from the Agent for Immigration, to the Honorable the Colonial
Secretary, respecting Immigrant Ship, “ Salsette .
Immigration Office,
February 10, 1841.
I have also carefnUy perused all the evidence, and documents, forwarded to me by
Mr La Trobe relating to tie insufficiency and bad quality of the provisions and water put on
board*the“ Sidsette for the use of the" Immigrants during the voyage ; and after much
beg an°in'sufficiency of water; and notwithstanding the
It cannot oe* # * and Mr * * * I consider it was the duty of the Captain
statements ot Mr. - n f so essential an article was pot on board.
- d -t:-
ascertained; whmh was not 'the bread; and even had they experienced
JNO expiaiiduuus ~ « * * tWv aid it ought to have been of such quality,
rnTXiX -S paled, d toCe\ept in Ration. The same remarhs will
also apply to the. flour. some excuses f their badness may be deemed
admissible, inasmuch as it is admitted by all parties that there was both good and bad ,n
each cask. Mr.


Mr. * * asserts, that a very high price was paid for these articles, by the Affreighters,
to the same house that had previously supplied their ships with provisions ; and that they
cannot justly be blameable for their dishonesty in putting a mixed quality into each cask,
especially when the provisions were examined and approved of, by Lieut. Henry, It. N., the
Government Emigration Agent, at the Port of Liverpool.
I have the honor to be
Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
J. DENHAM PINNOCK.
The Honorable the Colonial Secretary.
His Excellency the Governor's Minute on the Foregoing.
The Bounties may be paid, but Messrs. ****** mus t be informed that
the whole duty of this ship, appears to me, to have been performed in an unsatisfactory
manner, and that, had the issue of the voyage been calamitous, the loss of the bounties would
not have been, in all proability, the only consequences which would have fallen on them.
The provisions appear to have been insufficient in quantity, and in great part had in
quality; and the mistake about the water, even concluding that it was only a mistake,
might have been attended with fatal consequences. The arrangement respecting Mr.
* * does not seem to me to have been a good one ; unless Messrs. * * * ’s future
ships are better managed, I shall not feel at liberty to grant any fresh permission to them to
import Immigrants.
G. GIPPS.
February 14, 1841.
B. 4.
Extract from a letter from His Honor the Superintendent of Port Phillip, to the Honorable
the Colonial Secretary.
Melbourne , March 9, 1841.
All the documents containing the evidence elicited by the Board were forwarded to the
Immigration Agent, at Sydney, to be laid before His Excellency; but I then stated my own
impression, that notwithstanding the defence of the supercargo, the provision made by the
Agents in Liverpool, for the comfort and health of the Immigrants, was very inadequate ; and
further, that the arrangements on board, were ill calculated to produce contentment among the
Immigrants, during a long voyage.
I have now, in recurring to this subject to state for His Excellency’s information, that
from the very week of their disembarkation, and before they could provide for themselves in
any way, a very considerable number of the Immigrants by the “ Salsette ” were attacked by
the low fever then rife in the town and neighbourhood. Many have since died, and in general it
has been observed by the Medical Men, that these Immigrants were, from previous hardship,
and insufficient nourishment, much less able to bear up against the disease than others, and
much more liable to sink, even after the fever had been subdued.
The fever assumed, in the case of many of these Immigrants, a new and more alarming
type, and appearing to spread, I was induced to nominate a Board of Health, to report upon
the state of disease in the town. From the urgent representation made to me by the
Gentlemen composing the Board, of the great extent of destitution and disease among the
“ Salsette’s” people, I further authorised the Colonial Surgeon, upon the requisition of two
Medical men, to issue certain medical comforts to those who were in a state to demand such
charity, although I was aware, that strictly speaking the parties had no claim upon Her
Majesty’s Government.
In so doing, the greatest economy has been recommended and exercised. I trust
that under the peculiar circumstances of the case, His Excellency will approve the steps taken,
and sanction the slight increase of the hospital expenditure which may be consequent upon it;
but I beg leave to observe, at the same time, that whatever expence has been incurred might
with full propriety be deducted from the Bounty otherwise claimable by the importer of the
Immigrants by the “ Salsette
I have the honor to be
Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
C. J. La TROBE.
The Honorable the Colonial Secretary.
His Excellency the Governor's Minute on the Foregoing.
Let a Copy of this be sent to Messrs. * * * * , and with reference to the Letter
written to them on the 20th Febuary, 41—1905, that in future the regulations will be most
rigorously acted up to in respect to any Immigrants they may import.
G. GIPPS.
March 21, 1841.
C.


No.
NAME OF SHIP.
DATE OF ARRIVAL.
PORT ARRIVED AT.
ON BOUNTY.
UNASSISTED.
ADULTS.
CHILDREN.
ADULTS.
CHILDREN.
Males.
Females.
Males.
Females.
Males.
Females.
Males.
Females.
1
“ Champion,”
5th October, 1840
Sydney ....
84
101
48
45
....
....
• • • •
• • • •
2
“ Margaret,”
28th March, 1841
Sydney . .
84
82
39
40
2
....
....
....
3
“ Salsette,”
2nd January, 1841
Port Phillip
50
59
48
31
—
—
—
—
TOTAL . .
218
242
135
116
2
—
—
—
C.
RETURN of the Number of IMMIGRANTS who Arrived in the Colony of New South, Wales by the Ships “ Champion “ Margaret and “ Salsette. >>
J. DENHAM PINNOCK,
Agent for Immigration.
Immigration Office,
Sydney, 30 th June, 1841.


D.
Sketch of a Shepherd’s Duties in New South Wales.
The duties of a shepherd in New South Wales are exceedingly simple :—a flock
usually consists of from 400 to 500 ewes, or from 600 to 1000 dry sheep; 3 flocks being
folded at one station. The shepherd is required to take his sheep from the fold in the
morning not later than an hour after sun-rise, to keep sight of them on the pastures,
throughout the day, and to bring them back at sun-set to the fold. They are then counted
over and left in charge of the night watchman, whose duty it is to take care of the flocks in
the folds until the morning, when each flock is again counted and delivered over to the
shepherd. In the lambing season, on well managed establishments, the ewes about to lamb
are withdrawn from the flock and kept separate, under the care either of the watchman, or of
some other person appointed for the purpose for a few days, until the lambs are strong enough
to travel with the flock. At shearing time, the flocks are brought in rotation to
the home station, to be washed and shorn. It is then the shepherds business (unless he be
also a shearer) to follow his sheep and take care that they are kept as free as possible from
any kind of dirt, until the fleece is in a fit state to shear, which in general is the case about the
third or fourth day after the washing.
From this account of the ordinary duty of a shepherd in New South Wales, it will be
seen that almost any one is capable of taking charge of a flock. Sheep are subject to very
few diseases, and with the treatment of these either the master or the overseer will be
conversant. In such cases, the shepherd has only to follow diligently the directions he may
receive from those under whose superintendence he is placed, and if possessed of common
intelligence he will soon be capable of acting for himself. In fact a weaver or button maker,
after a few months experience, will generally prove a better shepherd, in New South Wales,
than the man, who having been brought up as a shepherd in England, may have acquired
habits or prejudices exceedingly difficult to shake off, however unsuitable to the new position in
which he is placed ; in proof of this it may be noticed that some of the best superintendents
of sheep in the Colony are natives of London, Manchester, or Birmingham, and that few
professed English or Scotch shepherds are entrusted with the care even of a single flock.
The duty of a watchman is as easy as that of the shepherd; he sleeps by the fold, in a watch
box, trusting to his dogs to awaken him in case of the approach of a native dog or any other
cause of alarm ; he counts the sheep in and out, and shifts the hurdles. Nor is the life of a
shepherd at all irksome to those who have been accustomed to sedentary occupations ; on the
contrary, such persons have in various instances become strongly attached to it, which will
not seem surprising when it is considered that it is a life of very great ease, and freedom from
care. Indeed it is commonly remarked of the shepherds that they are more healthy, and
seem much more cheerful and contented, than any other class of farm servants. The wages of
a shepherd or watchman have been of late about a year on an average, with from 71bs.
to lOlbs. of meat, lOlbs. flour, 2ozs. of tea, and lib. sugar per week, or in the place of tea and
sugar, milk. a year is, however, as much, as at the present low price of wool, can be
given with profit to the sheep owner, and out of this sum a man of frugal habits may lay by a
considerable sum yearly, more particularly should he learn to shear, by which he may put a
few pounds into his pocket every summer in addition to his wages, and still more so, should
he by care and good management get charge of a breeding flock and obtain a prize for rearing
a large number of lambs ; again, if he be the father of a family, with two or three sons, from
12 to 15, or 17 years old, he may, after a short time, take charge of a station, the sons going
out with the flocks, whilst he acts as watchman, in which capacity he will have many hours
unoccupied during the day, which may be employed in improving his cottage and making his
home comfortable ; he may also cultivate a garden, or even a small field of corn, whilst his
wife would find full employment in domestic matters, the rearing of poultry, &c.; and should
there be daughters of sufficient age, they will be sure to obtain good situations as servants in
respectable families.
E.
Extract from Captain G. Grey's Report upon the best means of promoting the Civilization
of the Aboriginal Inhabitants of Australia.
This principle was, that although the Natives should, as far as European property
and European subjects were concerned, be made amenable to British Laws, yet, so long as
they only exercised their own customs upon themselves, and not too immediately in the
presence of Europeans, they should be allowed to do so with impunity.
I would submit, therefore, that it is necessary, from the moment the Aborigines of
this Country are declared British Subjects, they should, as far as possible, be taught that the
British Laws are to supersede their own, so that any Native who is suffering under their own
customs, may have the power of an appeal to those of Great Britain; or, to put this in its
true light, that all authorised persons should in all instances be required to protect a Native
from the violence of his fellows, even though they be in the execution of their own Laws.
So long as this is not the case, the older Natives have at their disposal the means of
effectually preventing the civilization of any individuals of their own Tribes; and those
among them who may be inclined to adapt themselves to the European habits and mode of
life, will be deterred from so doing by their fear of the consequences that the displeasure of
others may draw down upon them.
I


I have known many instances of Natives who have been almost or quite civilized, being
compelled by other Natives to return to the bush; more particularly girls who have been
bethrothed in their infancy, and who, on approaching the years of puberty, have been com-
pelled by their husbands to join them.
To punish the Aborigines severely for the violation of laws of which they are ignorant,
would be manifestly cruel and unjust, but to punish them in the first instance slightly for the
violation of these laws, would inflict no great injury on them, whilst, by always punishing
them when guilty of a crime, without reference to the length of period that had elapsed
between its perpetration and their apprehension, at the same time fully explaining to them
the measure of punishment that would await them in the event 6f a second commission of
the same fault, would teach them gradually the laws to which they were henceforth to be
amenable, and would shew them that crime was always eventually (although it might be
remotely) followed by punishment.
Some other principal preventives to the civilization of the Aborigines, in addition to
those I have already stated, are
Firstly—The existence of an uncertain and irregular demand for their labour ; thus they may
have one day sufficient opportunity afforded them for the exertion of their industry, whilst
the next day their services are not required, so that they are compelled once more to have
recourse to their former irregular and wandering habits.
Secondly—Their generally receiving a very inadequate reward for the services they render;
this, combined with their natural fondness for the bush, induces them to prefer that mode
of subsistence, which, whilst it is infinitely more agreeable, and less laborious, procures for
them nearly as great a reward as hiring with White People.
Thirdly—Their not being taught that different values are attached to different degrees of
labor, as well as to the skill and neatness with which it is performed.
Until this difficulty is got over, it appears evident that the Natives will only be
employed in herding Cattle, or in the lowest order of manual labour, which requires no skill,
and for which the reward they receive will be so small, as scarcely to offer an inducement to
them to quit their present wandering mode of life.
The Government, in order to create a supply of labour in the Colonies, have been in
the habit of giving certain rewards to those Individuals who introduced Labourers into them.
Now it would appear, that he who reclaims one of the Aborigines, not only adds another
Labourer to those who are already in the Colony, but confers such a benefit on his fellow
Settlers, by rendering one who was before a useless and dangerous being, a serviceable
member of the community, that this circumstance alone entitles him to a reward.
E. a.
Minute by His Excellency Governor Sir George Gipps, on Captain Grey's Report to the
Secretary of State, on the means of improving and civilising the Aborigines of New
Holland.
The first fourteen paragraphs of the Report, represent the evils, which, in the- opinion
of Captain Grey, grow out of a practice, or supposed practice, of treating the Aborigines as a
conquered people, and of allowing them from a feeling of generosity, to be governed by their
own laws, in matters wherein they only are concerned.
I am of course unable to speak of the practice in other Australian Colonies, or to say
what may be the language held by the Governments of those Colonies towards the Aborigines;
but the practice alluded to by Captain Grey, has not for many years past been sanctioned by
any act of the Government of New South Wales ; the.language held by this Government being,
that the Aborigines are Her Majesty’s subjects; and that whilst they are entitled in every
respect to the benefit and protection of English Law, they are amenable also to the penalties
imposed on infractions of the law, whether the offence be committed against one of themselves,
or against white men. The practice of the Government also, is, as far as possible, in
conformity with this language; and no Law save English Law, or to speak more correctly,
the Law of the Colony founded on English Law, is recognized as being of any force in it.
It is true that in administering the Law, and especially in enforcing the penalties of it,
a difference is frequently made, between savages who understand it not, and persons of
European origin; but this difference is invariably in favour of the savage; and if it were not
so, the Law would become the instrument of the most grievous injustice.
It is only the more obvious offences against society, that can, with any degree of
justice, be visited against the savage with extreme severity,—such as murder, rape, violence
against the person, and other offences, which, there can be no doubt, should be regarded
alike by the savage and the civilized man, as deserving of punishment.
The next five paragraphs of Captain Grey’s Report, relate to the disadvantages which
the Aborigines are supposed to labour under, from the inadmissibility of their evidence in
Courts of Law.
On this head, it is only necessary to remark, that an Act of Council was passed in this
Colony, in the year 1839, (111 Victoria, No. 16.) to admit their evidence, and that it was
disallowed at home, the disallowance of it being notified to me, by the Secretary of State, on
the 11th August, 1840, and published in the Government Gazette of this Colony, on the


It seems to me however essential to remark, that the inadmissibility of their evidence,
acts perhaps quite as often in favour of the Abrorigines, as against them. The hardship of
the exclusion of evidence that might be favourable to them, is always urged on the Jury, both
by their Counsel, and by the Judge; and is again taken into consideration by the Executive,
in carrying into effect the Judgment of the Court. The admission indeed of their evidence
was in 1839, as much called for in this Colony, by persons who had suffered from the
aggressions of the blacks, as by those who advocate their civilization ; and complaints have
long been loud, that whilst the penalties of the Law are rigorously, enforced against persons
who commit violence on the Aborigines, the Aborigines themselves are, when brought into our
Courts, almost invariably acquitted.
This has operated, there is some reason to believe, very unfavourably for the
Aborigines, as from the difficulty and uncertainty of bringing them to justice, there is a
disposition engendered in the minds of the less principled portion of the white papulation, to
take the law into their own hands, as was the case, when about three years ago, not less than
twenty-eight Aboriginal natives were barbarously murdered in the Liverpool Plains District;
an act of atrocity for which seven white men paid the forfeit of their lives on the scaffold.
I may further observe, that Counsel is usually assigned by the Supreme Court, to any
natives brought for trial before it; and that the Government always provides the attendance
of Interpeters, when they can possibly be found. Mr. Threlkeld, a Missionary of the London
Society, has usually acted on such occasions; and he must, I doubt not, consider it his
business to protect the natives, as well as to interpret for them.
I have moreover recently, on the application of the Chief Justice, appointed a standing
Counsel for the Aborigines, who will receive a fixed payment or fee from the Government, for
every case in which he is engaged. The fee is to be three guineas for every case in Sydney,
and five guineas in the Country. The remainder of Captain Grey’s report, lam disposed to
think by far the most valuable part of it, as it relates to the means by which the Aborigines
may be induced to become voluntary laborers for wages.
I consider this the most important part of the report, because I am myself firmly
persuaded, that next to the diffusion of Christian Instruction, the use of money, or to speak
more correctly, the enjoyments which the use of money commands, are the most effectual of
all means that can be resorted to, in advancing civilization.
I have on various occasions, and particularly in answer to an address presented to me
at Wellington Valley, by the inhabitants of the County of Bligh, endeavoured to persuade the
settlers of New South Wales, to look to the blacks for a supply of labour.
I have also, seriously contemplated the introduction of rewards to persons employing
them, somewhat after the manner that is suggested by Captain Grey, but have hitherto been
deterred from attempting it, by the fear of the abuse to which such a practice might lead, and
the certain difficulties that would attend on the distribution of the rewards.
It is by the employment of the Aborigines as labourers for wages, and the education
of their children in Establishments conducted either by Missionaries, or Official Protectors,
that I consider the civilization of the Aborigines of this Continent must be worked out, if it is
ever to be accomplished.
It may perhaps be observed, that my opinions with the respect to the employment of
the Aborigines, are at variance with those of many persons, who consider it essential to keep
them as far as possible out of contact with white men.
I agree with these persons in thinking, that Missionary, or other establishments for
the education of Aborigines, should be placed as far as possible from the resort of ordinary
settlers, and I have accordingly directed the fixed establishments of the Protectors to be so
placed in the Port Phillip district; but at a distance from these establishments, I consider
that it is by contact with white men, and by being placed as nearly as possible on a par with
them, that the civilization of the Aborigines is most likely to be advanced.
It must be admitted indeed, that this will frequently expose them to temptations, which
they may not be strong enough to withstand, the men to the use of ardent spirits, the
women to be seduced from their husbands or natural protectors.
Already however, a law exists in the Colony, which inflicts a penalty of £5, on any -
person who may be convicted of giving or selling spirits to an Aboriginal native; and a law
may perhaps be devised that shall give further protection to the women,
It also to be observed, that during the last Session of the Council, an Act was passed
to prevent the Aborignes, as far as possible, from using or having fire arms.
* GEORGE GIPPS.
Government House, Sydney,
8 Jidy, 1841.
E. b.
(copy.)
Colonial Secretary’s Office.
Sydney, 22nd April, 1841.
Gentlemen,
Referring to the conversation which the Governor had with the Members of
the Committee of the Church Missionary Society, shortly after his return from Wellington in
the month of December last, I am directed to express to you His Excellency’s readiness to
devote the sum of £5O per annum, to the purchase of rewards for distribution amongst the
Aborigines belonging to the Missionary Establishment at Wellington Valley.
the
2nd Victoria, No.
18, sect. 49.
4th Victoria,
No. 8.


The rewards should, the Governor considers, he given equally to children as to adults,
and should be awarded for general industry, and good conduct, as well as for proficiency in
school exercises, or in the mechanical or agricultural skill.
The prizes should consist principally of useful articles, and especially of such as come
frequently into use; books may of course be given, but they should not he exclusively
religious books.
It is by no means to be understood that the whole sum of £5O, is necessarily to be
expended in every year ; the expenditure should, on the contrary be at first kept considerably
within the £5O, in order that the prizes may be increased in number and value in future
years, should the effect produced by them, render such an increase advisable.
The grant is made for five years certain, and during these five years, the unexpended
balance of one year may be carried on to the next; no part of the money, however, must be
applied to any other purpose than that for which it is granted.
I am directed to add, that whenever the number of Aboriginal children (or persons
under the age of sixteen) at the Establishment shall on the average of the whole year, be not
less than fifty, the amount allowed for rewards will be increased to £lOO, per annum.
I have the honor &c.,
(Signed) E. DEAS THOMSON.
THE CORRESPONDING COMMITTEE OP THE
CHURCH MISSIONARY SOCIETY.


Proceeds of the Sale of Land and Town Allotments . . .
Quit Rents paid or Redeemed
Rents of Lands temporarily Leased
Gross Revenue . . £
CHARGES AS ESTIMATED
Surveyoi General’s Department
Aborigines
One-third of Treasury and Andit Office
Total Charges . . £
Applicable to Immigration . . £
Sydney.
Port Phillip.
TOTAL.
f
55,827 2 6
9,016 10 4
2,831 12 4
182,761 19 5
238,589 1 H
9,016 10 4
2,831 12 4
67,675 5 2
182,761 19 5
250,437 4 7
18,840 0 0
2,000 0 0
2,200 0 0
5,690 0 0
5,500 0 0
600 0 0
24,530 0 0
7,500 0 0
2,800 0 0
23,040 0 0
11,790 0 0
34,830 0 0
44,635 5 2
170,971 19 5
215,607 4 7
F.
ABSTRACT OF THE REVENUE arising from CROWN LANDS in NEW SOUTH WALES, from Ist July, 1840, to 30 th June, 1841, with the probable Charges thereon
during the same period.
Audit Office, Sydney, New South Wales,
14 tk August, 1841,
Wm. lithgow,
Auditor-Oeneral.


PERIOD.
Proceeds of the Sale
of Land and Town
Allotments.
QUIT-RENTS.
Redemption of
Quit-Rents.
Rents of Land
Temporarily Leased.
TOTALS.
REMARKS.
Sydney.
September
October .....
November
December
Port Phillip.
16th Augnst to 30th September .
October .....
November
December
Total
£ s. d.
7,762 10 5
8,188 14 3
6,849 2 7
2,069 14 8
£ s. d.
398 18 4
337 9 10
747 3 10
158 12 0
£ s. d.
6 13 4
£ s. d.
1,566 18 6
30 0 0
£ s. d.
9,735 0 7
8,556 4 1
7,596 6 5
2,583 10 11
The Abstract appended to the Report on Immigration in
1840, included the proceeds of Land sold at Sydney,
from 1st July to 31st August in that year, amounting
to £17,835 2s., and of Quit-Rents and Temporary
Leases amounting to £1089 3s. 7d.—-Total £189245s. 7d.
The Abstract appended to the Report on Immigration in
1840, included the proceeds of Land sold at Port Phillip
from 1st July to the 15th of August of that year,
amounting to £83282 3s. 8d.
355 4 3
24,870 1 11
1,642 4 0
6 13 4
1,952 2 9
28,471 2 0
24,874 19 11
7,207 13 4
2,948 0 9
10,090 9 6
24,874 19 11
7,207 13 4
2,948 0 9
10,090 9 6
45,121 3 6
45,121 3 6
69,991 5 5
1,642 4 0
6 13 4
1,952 2 9
73,592 5 6
F. A.
ABSTRACT of the REVENUE arising from CROWN LANDS from the 1 st September to 31s£ December, 1840.
Audit Office, Sydney, New South Wales.
July 26 th 1841.
¥m. LITHGOW,
Auditor-General.


PERIOD.
Proceeds of the Sale
of Land and Town
Allotments.
QUIT RENTS.
Redemption of Quit-
Rents.
Rents of Land Tem-
porarily Leased.
TOTAL.
REMARKS.
f
SYDNEY.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
January
• • •
1,068
0
10
444
13
3
12
14
2
212
6
10
1,737
15
1
February
2,0^8
4
3
681
9
3
231
14
2
33
11
10
3,044
19
6
March
1,159
9
9
1,795
8
0
312
3
4
298
18
8
3,565
19
9
April.
823
10
2
1,194
13
9
382
2
6
6
6
0
2,406
12
5
May .
3,975
8
5
432
6
8
1
0
0
67
0
7
4,475
15
8
June .
3,997
5
2
784
17
11
119
5
10
147
6
3
5,048
15
2
13,121
18
7
5,333
8
10
1,059
0
0
765
10
2
20,279
17
7
January
•
February
March
18,953
0
0
18,953
0
0
April.
30,943
10
9
30,943
10
9
May .
3,002
1
6
3,002
1
6
June .
1,460
0
0
1,460
0
0
54,358
12
3
54,358
12
3
Total
67,480
10
10
5,333
8
10
1,059
0
0
765
10'
2
74,638
9
10.
F. b.
ABSTRACT of the REVENUE arising from CROWN LANDS from January to 30 th June, 1841.
Audit Office, Sydney, New South Wales.
July 2 6 th, 1841.
W. LITHGOW,
Auditor General.


(Stations oeyvnu/ me iimus uj juuuwow/v, 't wv * —
DISTRICT.
Number
of
Stations.
Number
of Acres
under
Cultivation
Number of Persons in each District.
STOCK.
Amount of
Assessment as
calculated on the
number of Stock
given.
Free.
Bond.
TOTAL.
Horses.
Cattle inclu-
ding Calves
above six
months old.
Sheep.
including
weaned
Lambs.
Male.
Female.
Male.
Female.
Port Macquarie . . • • ...
New England . . • , •
Liverpool Plains ...•••
Bligh ...***••
Wellington .
Lachlan ...••••
Murrumbidgee • ••••*
Maneroo
20
66
130
40
60
98
152
152
519
413
388
217
506|-
2,517
2,58 7\
2,348!
81
365
570
223
467
461
661
904
19
38
71
33
46
148
135
222
139
350
507
179
285
254
410
474
6
’ ’ 6
9
U
2
3
6
245
753
1154
435
801
865
1209
1606
101
279
1197
191
429
1154
1537
2297
6667
16,373
110,529
21,995
29,640
36,399
68,231
87,338
12,070
232,126
267,107
134,865
165,530
101,389
180,057
235,925
68 1 6!
589 8 3!
1262 4 10
420 16 6
535 9 4
453 2 11
820 15 6
1066 1 81
718
9,496|
3732
712
2,598
26
7068
7185
377,172
1,329,069
5216 0 71
ABSTRACT from the SFmUSZIS ZriptZ/Uve Stock.
Colonial Treasury
Sydney, Bth July, 1841.
STEPHEN GREENHILL,
FRANCIS L. S. MEREWETHER,
Acting for the Colonial Treasurer.


G.
Colonial Secretary 1 s Office,
Sydney, c l7th July, 1841.
Sir,
I do myself the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 26th
instant, No. 149, stating, that the Clerk of the Councils has, by desire of the Chairman of the
Immigration Committee, applied to you to furnish him with a Return of all charges upon the
Land Fund, up to the latest period, exhibiting the balance now actually applicable to
Immigration purposes.; and requesting therefore, to be informed of the nature of the Expenses
which the Governor may consider should be defrayed from the said fund. .
In reply, I am directed to inform you, that His Excellency considers the following to
be legitimate charges on the Land Fund. „
Ist. The expenses of Survey and sale including the whole of the Surveyor General s
Department, and one-third of the expenses of the Treasury and Audit Departments.
2nd. Expenses incurred on account of the Aborigines, in which he includes one-halt
of the Border Police, and Crown Land Commissioners.
3rd. The charges for Immigration.
And Sir George Gipps trusts that from the Ist of January, 1840, this arrangement
may be considered as taking effect.
The Lords of the Treasury have, however, given their consent to an arrangement, by
which in New Colonies Fifty per cent, of the Land Fund, may be applied m aid of the
Ordinary Revenue, (if required,) and the permission given three or four years ago to apply a
portion of the Land Revenue of Port Phillip to the Ordinary expenses of Government has
never been revoked. , ~ , , T .. ,
The Governor holds it therefore, to be competent to the Local Legislature,
to apply half the Land Revenue of the Port Phillip District, to the ordinary expenses of
Government, although he hopes there may be no necessity for so doing. lam directed to
add, that it is essential to explain, and always to keep m mmd, the difference which exists
between the Crown Revenue, and the Land Fund.
The Crown Revenue comprehends Quit-Rents, Licenses to Depasture Stock, or to cut
Timber on Crown Lands, and some few other items, as well as the Revenue derived from the
Sale of Land; the essential character of it being, that it is not raised by taxation, and that it
may therefore be appropriated, even in Colonies that have Representative Assemblies, under the
authority of the Crown alone, and that no authority save the Imperial Parhament can
interfere in the appropriation of it.
The Land Fund is a branch only of the Crown Revenue, and consists exclusively of
the money raised by the sale of Land, and properly speaking by the sale only of wild
land, or of that description of land, which was granted gratuitously up to the year 1831.
Improved lands, and especially lands in large towns, such as Sydney, are not of this
description, and the proceeds arising from the sales of them are applicable to purposes of
local improvement in the first instance —rather than to Immigration.
I am further directed to observe, that as to the balance applicable to Immigration at
the present moment, it is impossible to ascertain it with any correctness. His Excellency
considers all the Funds of the Colony to be in reality applicable to Immigration repeated
pledges having been given by the Legislative Council, with the full concurrence of the Pubhc
at large, as far as the opinion of the public can be collected, that Immigration shall be
supported to the utmost extent possible; even although it be necessary to anticipate the
proceeds of the Land Fund, or to mortgage the ordinary Revenue for the purpose.
I have the honor to be
Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
E. DEAS THOMSON.
THE AUDITOR GENERAL,
&C., &C. &C.


No.
NAME OF SHIP.
DATE OF ARRIVAL.
DIED DURING
THE PASSAGE.
Born
during
THE
Passage.
DIED IN
QUARANTINE.
NUMBER
LANDED.
AMOUNT
PAID AS
BOUNTY.
GRATUITIES
TO
SURGEONS,
OFFICERS,
&c., &c.
TOTAL COST
TO THE
COLONY.
Adults.
Children.
Adults.
Children.
Adults.
Children.
to
13
s
to
to
<U
1
to
CD
13
s
O)
Pm
to
a>
S
S
1
<L>
pM
to
O)
13
£
to
0)
Pm
to
QJ
13
X
s
13
S
0)
Pm
CO
13
S3
to
<D
Pm
CO
O)
P c3
s
$
-a
a
Pm
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
Premier.. .. .. .. .. .. .. ., . ,
Anne Gales .. ..
Formosa.. ..
Lady Clarke
Theresa ..
Mary Anne
Coromandel .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
Isabella Watson
Lord Western ..
Elphinstone
Champion
Isabella ..
Royal Consort ..
Argyleshire
Symmetry
Royal Sovereign
Lady M'Naughten
Resource
Perfect ..
William Money
Ganges .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .,
Alfred ..
Conrad .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ,
Marquis of Hastings .. .. .. .. .. ,,
Jane Gifford
Posthumus .. .. .. .. .. .. ., ..
Brothers..
Portland.. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..
Glenswilly .. .. .. .. .. .. ,.
Berkshire
Susan ..
Margaret
Bussorah Merchant
Sir John Falstaff
James Mathieson
Orestes ..
Moffatt ..
Earl Grey .. .
2nd July..
12th July
14th July
14th August
28th August
8th September ..
20th September..
3rd October
5th October
5th October
18th October ..
9th November ..
12th November.,
11th December..
16th December..
16th December..
22nd December..
26th December
1841.
19 th January
31st January
4th February ..
13th February ..
11th March .,
11th March
11th March
13 th March
25th March ,.
28th March .. .,
5th April
13th April
14th April
14th May
31st May
24th June
1
1
1
2
4
2
3
2
3
9
2
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
1
1
3
3
4
3
4
1
3
5
2
1
19
3
1
4
7
*7
i
i
11
1
5
12
2
3
1
2
2
3
5
1
1
16
1
1
8
5
3
4
2
3
4
1
4
3
2
1
2
5
3
2
1
1
4
2
4
4
2
3
2
3
1
1
1
2
2
2
3
4
2
5
2
3
1
2
3
1
i
i
••
• •
46
9
79
93
5
100
4
10
87
73
84
105
83
87
1
52
110
91
3
3
2
91
18
88
81
1
88
75
108
92
100
84
39
32
65
68
163
105
65
9
69
90
6
113
11
7
89
66
101
136
88
91
1
62
106
103
6
3
2
104
25
78
133
1
87
64
147
84
88
82
39
48
70
85
110
96
25
8
51
1
2
*4
9
53
48
29
28
56
12
19
16
22
9
19
18
50
39
23
32
19
39
38
25
27
52
25
20
16
10
41
3
3
2
5
20
45
22
26
55
20
16
11
1
2
17
11
17
14
36
36
23
20
14
40
37
33
29
46
24
25
2,883
490
3,264
3,304
198
3,879
270
366
3,248
3,037
3,910
4,633
3,639
4,108
38
2,474
4,516
4,021
171
108
96
3,921
912
3,331
4,256
38
3,836"
3,096
5,105
3,689
3,822
3,754
2,007
1,905
2,945
3,672
5,482
4,114 |
0
f0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
20*6
261
13*8
222
185
20*7
56
186
226
*234
195
254
206
202
188
132
117
176
204
293
224
8
13
2
7
5
15
10
0
5
3
18
0
5
17
12
4
8
7
0
14
2
0
■■
0
0
6
0
8
0
0
0
0
0
0
5
0
0
0
0
0
2,883
490
3,264
3,304
198
3,879
270
366
3,248
3,037
3,910
4,643
3,845
4,369
38
2,612
4,738
4,206
171
108
96
4,128
968
3,517
4,482
38
4,070
3,291
5,359
3,895
4,024
3,942
2,139
2,022
3,121
3,876
5,775
4,338
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
8
13
0
2
7
5
0
0
0
15
10
0
5
0
3
18
0
5
17
12
4
8
7
0
14
2
16
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
°
8
8
0
0
0
0
6
0
0
0
0
6
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
6
0
0
0
0
0
0
6
TOTAL
14
30
71
89
52
47
1
2
••
• •
2425
2565
818
720
104,538
0
0
4,119 |
16
1
6 108,657
H.
RETURN of PERSONS who arrived at SYDNEY \ NEW SOUTH WALES, in PRIVATE SHIPS, on BOUNTY, from Ist JULY, 1840,
to 30 th JUNE, 1841.
Immigration Office, 1
ZOth June, 1841. »j
J. DENHAM PINNOCK,
Agent for Immigration.


No.
NAME OF SHIP.
DATE
OF ARRIVAL.
DIED DURING
THE PASSAGE.
BORN
DURING
THE
PASSAGE.
DIED IN
QUARANTINE.
NUMBER LANDED.
AMOUNT
PAID
AS
BOUNTY.
GRATUITIES
TO
SURGEONS,
OFFICERS,
&c. ,
TOTAL COST
TO THE
COLONY.
Adults.
Children.
Adults.
Children.
Adults.
Children.
CO
CD
£
Cfi
OJ
•a
s
<u
pH
4
£
j3
a
s
<u
PH
CO
O)
13
£
CO
0)
13
a
a>
Ph
CO
a>
13
£
<5
13
2
0>
pH
.
a>
<D
13
£
CO
<d
13
2
pH
co
a>
£
co
<u
13
2
a>
Ph
CO
a>
£
CO
CD
13
1
CD
En
£
s. jtl.
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
Coromandel
Marmion ..
Theresa
Isabella Watson
East London
Himalaya .. .. .. ,.
Vesper
Orient
Perfect
Salsette ..
Ariadne ”
Fergusson
Sir Charles Forbes
York ;;
Oeorgiana
Argyle 1st.. ..
Neptune
John Cooper
Argyle 2nd
Duchess of Northumberland
Frankfield
1840.
10th July ..
8th August
18th August
18th August
29th August
30th September ..
14th December ..
14th December .,
2nd January ..
8th January
15th January
21st January
6th February
25th February
1st March..
29th March
4th April ..
12th April..
3rd June ..
7th June ..
Total.
• •
• ♦
*2
1
2
2
1
*3
1
*3
1
*4
1
1
8
1
1
2*5
3
4
2
6
1
15
*4
2
2
1
3
3
1
2
1
2
2
2
1
2
4
2
1
2
64
1
99
6
1
63
8
81
3
50
11
94
68
2
57
87
113
8
59
114
100
80
1
167
13
1
86
17
91
3
59
11
103
81
2
65
88
110
8
89
85
95
l
1
2
5
24
1
48
3
13
15
2
38
20
15
4
45
22
56
1
2
13
7
10
12
31
3
18
16
1
24
9
15
4
34
13
51
2,617
50
3,008
342
40
2,812
540
3,462
134
2,691
448
3,968
3,046
106
2,798
3,505
4,427
354
3,492
3,991
4,450
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
6
;
0
0
0
s
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
**175
193
153
173
215
20
198
256
12
16
17
8
1
8
18
14
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2,617
50
3,008
342
40
2,812
540
3,637
134
2,691
448
4,161
3,199
106
2,798
3,678
4,642
374
3,492
4,189
4,706
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
12
0
0
0
16
17
0
0
8
1
8
0
18
14
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
8
8
44
32
17
16
••
••
••
••
1089
1255
315
254
46,281
0
0
1,387
14
0
47,668
14
0
I.
RETURN of PERSONS who arrived at PORT PHILLIP, NEW SOUTH WALES, in PRIVATE SHIPS, on BOUNTY, from Ist JULY, 1840
to 30th JUNE, 1841.
N*®* 'The Deaths which occurred during the first six months have not been ascertained,
Immigration Office, 1
Sydney, 30th June, 1841. /
J. DENHAM PINNOCK,
Agent for Immigration.


IMMIGRANTS ON BOUNTY.
IMMIGRANTS UNASSISTED.
TOTAL OF EACH CLASS
•
Adults.
Children.
Adults.
Children.
TOTAL.
Adults.
Chil<
Iren.
GENERAL
FPfkT A T.
Males.
Females.
Males.
Females.
TOTAL.
Males.
Females.
Males.
Females.
Males.
Females.
Males.
Females.
Sydney
2425
2565
818
720
6528
954
312
115
99
1480
3379
2877
933
819
8008
Port Phillip
1089
1155
295
254
2793
500
161
71
67
799
1589
1316
366
321
3592
Total
3514
3720
1113
974
9321
1454
473
186
166
2279
4968
4193
1299
1140
11600
K.
RETURN of the Number of PERSONS who arrived in the COLONY of NEW SOUTH WALES from the Ut JULY, 1840, to the 30 th JUNE, 1841,
ULIUKJy o f the MumO J dmnguUhing those lnught out m BOUNTY from those who defrayed the Cost of their own Passage.
Immigration Office, 1
Sydney, 30th June, 1841. /
J. DENHAM PINNOCK,
Agent for Immigration.


No.
NAME OF THE SHIP.
DATE OF ARRIVAL.
DIED ON
Adults.
BOARD.
Children.
1 r
REMARKS.
1
Premier..
2nd July
4
Bounty
2
Formosa
14th July
. .
4
do.
3
Lord Western ..
3rd October ..
2
1
do.
4
Elphinstone
5th October ..
4 .
1
do.
5
Champion
5th October ..
9
12
do.
6
Isabella ..
18th October ..
2
4
do.
7
Royal Consort ..
9th November..
1
8
do.
8
Argyleshire
12th November
2
16
do.
9
Royal Sovereign
16th December
1
5
do.
10
Lady M'Naughten
16th December
2
7
do.
11
Resource
22nd December
••
1
do.
.>■- * ■' p- ■ o • .
23
63
No.
NAME OF SHIP.
DATE OF ARRIVAL.
DIED ON
Adults.
BOARD.
Children.
REMARKS.
1
Alfred..
19th January ..
2
2
Bounty
2
Marquis of Hastings
4th February ..
2
2
do.
3
Jane Gifford
13th February..
• •
1
do.
4
Brothers
11th March ..
1
6
do.
5
Portland..
• • ,,
11th March ..
• ,
10
do.
6
Glenswilly
• •
11th March ..
1
3
do.
7
Berkshire
13th March ..
• .
1
do.
8
Margaret
. .
28th March ..
6
35
do.
9
Bussorah Merchant
5th April
• .
4
do.
10
Sir John Falstaff
13 th April
2
2
do.
11
James Mathieson
14th April
1
12
do.
12
Orestes ..
14th May
4
12
do,
13
Moffatt..
31st May
1
3
do.
14
Earl Grey
24th June
••
1
11
do.
21
104
44
167
NAME OF SHIP.
DATE OF
ARRIVAL.
DIED ON BOARD.
DIED IN
QUARANTINE.
REMARKS.
Adults.
Children.
Adults.
Children.
Champion
1840.
5th October
9
12
2
••
Bounty Ship.
NAME OF SHIP.
DATE OF
ARRIVAL.
DIED ON BOARD.
DIED IN
QUARANTINE.
REMARKS.
Adults.
Children.
Adults.
Children.
Margaret..
28th March ..
6
35
1
••
Bounty.
L.
RETURN of the MORTALITY which occurred on Board the IMMIGRANT SHIPS,
which arrived at PORT JACKSON, during the Year 1840.
RETURN of MORTALITY continued from Ist JANUARY, to 30 th JUNE, 1841.
RETURN of SHIPS put in QUARANTINE during the Year 1840.
RETURN of SHIPS put in QUARANTINE during the Six Months ending 30 th JUNE,
1841.
July 27 th, 1841.
ARTHUR SAVAGE,
Health Officeer,


M.
Extract from the Report of the Board appointed to inquire into the cause of Sickness and
Mortality , on board the Immigrant ship ’‘Margaret”.
Immigration Office,
Sir, Sydney, April 19, 1841.
We are of opinion, that not the slightest shadow of hlame, can attach, either to the
Surgeon, or Commander of the “ Margaret ” who indeed appear to have used every exertion
to mitigate and overcome the sickness which prevailed. We found, these opinions on the
evidence which we have received; and we more especially beg to draw His Excellency’s
attention to the statement made by Doctor Galloway, a Surgeon in the Royal Navy ; which,
from his having brought out seven vessels with Convicts and Immigrants to this Colony, we
consider to be particularly worthy of consideration. That Officer expressly states that the
provisions of the ship were good, the medical comforts sufficient, and the height of the ’tween
decks averaged nine feet, and that the great mortality is to be attributed to the Immigrants
themselves; this opinion is corroborated by the Commander of the vessel, and by three of
the most intelligent of the Immigrants.
Under such circumstances we cannot but exonerate the affreighters from any wilful
neglect in their arangements towards ensuring a happy termination to the voyage; but we
nevertheless consider it of the utmost importance that the necessity should be strongly
impressed upom them, of using the greatest caution in the selection of the Immigrants, who
may in future be sent in their ships. • It may be clearly inferred from the accompanying
evidence, that the majority of the “ Margaret’s” Immigrants were greatly deficient in the
necessary articles of common clothing, so requisite for the preservation of cleanliness and
health, to enable them to undergo the hardships of a long voyage. And we would more
especially instance the family of Monahan, alluded to in the evidence of Mr. Wm. Mace.
Although as has been before stated, no specific fault can be found with the ship, we
are nevertheless of opinion that she is not of the class most suitable to the service last engaged
in, though so lofty in the ’tween decks, she was but scantily supplied with side ports, and
those of the least possible size; whilst at the same time she was entirely unprovided with
what we consider to be of the utmost importance, viz., stern ports in the hospitals—a provision
which cannot be too strongly insisted on, in all ships engaged for the conveyance of
Immigrants.
She was also built in North America, where the spaces between the timbers, are
usually filled with salt to preserve the wood, and consequently from their dampness most
unhealthy. We are unwilling to draw invidious comparisons, but it cannot be denied that
Immigrants sailing from Liverpool, are far inferior in every respect to those from other ports.
We have the honor to be
Sir,
your most obedient servants,
J. DENHAM PINNOCK,
W. H. CHRISTIE,
ARTHUR SAVAGE
H. H. BROWNE.
The Honorable the Colonial Secretary.
Extract from the statement referred to in the foregoing Extract.
Dr. Thomas Galloway R. N., states to the Court as follows :
During the voyage there were forty-one deaths; he considers that twenty-three deaths
out of the forty-one, were caused by Scarletina; in the remaining cases other diseases
assisted in the mortality.
He considers the fever to have been the result of natural causes, but it was greatly
aggravated by the slothful habits of the Immigrants, and their continued disobedience to the
orders that were promulgated for the maintenance of their health and comfort.
He received every support from the Captain and third mate, the first and second
mates behaved as ill as it was possible to do, giving every opposition to him, and encouraging
the discontented part of the community; the height of the vessel between decks,
averages nine feet.
Mr. William Mace, who acted as constable on board, states, that he considers a family
of the name of Monahan, brought the Scarletina on board, and that the disease was greatly
aggravated by the filthy habits of the Immigrants, by their refusing to take the medicines
prescribed, and by their non-attendance to the order given by the Doctor, he does not
consider the vessel, or any one connected with it, to have either produced, or augmented, the
disease, as the provisions were good and plentiful, and the medical comforts sufficient; he
lost a fine child on board, but is perfectly satisfied with Dr. Galloway’s attention and mode of
treatment.
Governor’s Minute on the foregoing.
The gratuities must be withheld from the officers whose want of attention is complained
of.
G. GIPPS.
N.


SAILED FROM.
Government. |
Bounty. |
Protestants.
Roman
Catholics.
Total.
RECAPITULATION.
London
11
18
2921
129
3050
Plymouth
0
57
6040
4477
10,517
Liverpool
0
21
2754
1150
3904
Bristol
3
0
694
9
703
Cowes
1
0
260
O
260
Greenock
4
10
1270
28
1298
Leith
2
3
538
3
541
Isle of Mull
1
0
279
32
311
Oban
1
0
320
2
322
Cromarty
3
0
702
60
762
Lochinvar
1
0
208
0
208
Tobermoray
2
0
382
122
504
Isle of Skye
1
0
212
0
212
Limerick
2
0
49
407
456
Cork
5
0
190
1222
1412
Londonderry
2
0
373
180
553
Belfast
2
0
456
41
497
Waterford
1
0
43
219
262
Kingstown
3
0
230
524
754
Unknown
0
1
38
3
41
45
110
17,959
8,608
26,567
N.
STATEMENT of the PORTS from which VESSELS Sailed with EMIGRANTS for
NEW SOUTH WALES.


YEAR.
PORT JACKSON.
PORT PHILLIP.
Government Ships.
Bounty Ships.
Government Ships.
Bounty Ships.
co
1
+->
+->
o
(S
8
O
o
§
a
o
Ph
CO
1
8
' o
CL,
GO
O
-4->
o
§
a
o
PS
CO
9
4-
CO
<u
O
5-
Ph
CO
3
'S
u
'a
3
s
o
Ph
CO
4->
1
to
<u
O
£
CO
'o
.g
o
s
o
Ph
1838
1839
1840
1841
3633
3636
762
856
1361
627
1074
2395
2099
1849
135
469
1788
1722
229
153
173
727
1229
182
603
865
Totals..
8031
2844
7417
4114
382
2129
1650
N. A.
ABSTRACT of the number of Protestants and Roman Catholics introduced
into the Colony of NEW SOUTH WALES, at the cost of Government,
distinguishing those brought out in ships Chartered by Government from
those imported on Bounty.
J. DENHAM PINNOCK,
Agent for Immigration.
Immigration Office,
2>oth June, 1841.


MINUTES OF EVIDENCE.


LIST OF WITNESSES.
PAGE
SIR T. L. MITCHELL . . . 1
JOHN MACKAY, ESQ. . . 3—28
JOHN LORD, ESQ 8
CHARLES CAMPBELL, ESQ. . .12
EDWARD HAMILTON, ESQ. . . 14
STEWART RYRIE, ESQ. . . .16
WILLIAM LAWSON, SENR., ESQ. 17.
PAGE
TERENCE AUBREY MURRAY ESQ. 19
CAPTAIN P. P. KING, R.N. . .22
MAJOR EDWARD LOCKYER . . 25
GEORGE COX, ESQ. . . .27
ROBERT SCOTT, ESQ. . . .30
JAMES DENHAM PINNOCK, ESQ. 33
REPLIES TO CIRCULAR LETTER.
PAGE
REVEREND JOSEPH DOCKER 36—49
HENRY BINGHAM, ESQ. . . 36
GRAHAM D. HUNTER. ESQ. . . 37
WILLIAM RYRIE, ESQ. . . .37
JAMES WALKER, ESQ. . . .38
EDWIN ROUSE, ESQ. . . .38
G. B. BOULTON, ESQ. . . .39
MR. BENJAMIN BARBER. . .39
J. G. PHELPS, ESQ. . . .40
J. W. PASSMORE, ESQ. . . .41
WILLIAM ROADKNIGHT, ESQ. .41
PAGE
JOHN RAE, ESQ 42
T. AUBREY MURRAY, ESQ. . . 43
CAPTAIN P. P, KING, R. N. . . 43
JOHN PETER, ESQ. . . .45
GEORGE SHELLY, ESQ. . . .45
THOMAS B. WILSON, ESQ. . .46
HUGH MURRAY, ESQ. . . .47
ALEXANDER F. MOLLISON, ESQ. 47
ALEXANDER THOMPSON, ESQ. . 48
F. MACKENZIE, ESQ. . . . 50
H. OAKES, ESQ 5 0


IMMIGRATION COMMITTEE.
MINUTES OF EVIDENCE TAKEN BEFORE
THE
IMMIGRATION COMMITTEE.
THE RIGHT REVEREND
THE LORD BISHOP OF AUSTRALIA,
IN THE CHAIR?
TUESDAY, 15 JUNE, 1841.
Sir Thomas Livingston Mitchell, Knight, Surveyor-General of the Colony, called in and
examined :
1. The Committee have requested your attendance for the purpose of obtaining information in
regard to the extent and probable value, First, of the undisposed of Crown Lands comprised
within the limits of the nineteen Counties constituting the Old Colony of New South Wales, and
described in the published Government Order dated 1 4th October, 1829 ; * and Secondly, of
the Country lying to the Westward of those Counties, extendingto the Eastern boundary of South
Australia, and bounded on the South by the courses of the rivers Murrumbidgee and Murray.—
Can you in the first place, inform the Committee what number of acres of Crown Lands remain
unalienated, within the nineteen Counties above referred to ? A Return is in course of
preparation which, when completed, will enable me to answer this question with tolerable
accuracy; in the mean time I can only state generally, and in round numbers, that the
total contents of the nineteen Counties are about twenty-four millions of acres, of
which the quantity granted and sold up to the Year 1836, was about four millions and a-half
of acres; and allowing five hundred thousand acres to have been disposed of during the
last five*years, the number of acres alienated by the Crown will be about five millions, leaving
about nineteen millions of acres yet undisposed of.
2. Can you inform the Committee what proportion of those nineteen millions of
acres is suitable for Agricultural and Pastoral purposes? I cannot at present, but I
made a report to the Government in the Year 1834, from which much information
respecting the soil in each County may be obtained.
3. Can you inform the Committee what proportion of those nineteen millions of
acres you consider saleable, and what is the amount of purchase money that such
saleable proportion would probably realise? The Report to which I have just alluded
will furnish the best information I can give on this point. It will be obvious from that
report, that the saleable proportion depends much on the formation of Roads.
4. Do you think that the new regulations allowing Lands to be sold in the
Southern or Port Phillip division of the Colony, at the uniform price of one pound per
acre, which regulations will soon probably be in force also in the Northern or Moreton
Bay' division, will prevent or materially retard, the disposal of Land within the nineteen
Counties, put up for sale by auction at the minimum price of twelve shillings per acre?
If the Lands within the nineteen Counties, are uniformly put up for sale at the minimum
price of twelve shillings per acre, Ido not think they would, but if higher prices than
twelve shillings per acre are exacted for the Crown Lands remaining undisposed of
within the nineteen Counties, I apprehend very little, or none will be sold whilst Lands
of superior quality can be obtained in the new divisions or districts at the uniform price
of twenty shillings per acre.
5. Do you mean then to express an opinion favorable to the system of sale at a
uniform price ? Ido not; I mean only to say that considering the relative value of the
best Lands in the new districts, which only will of course be selected so long as any
remain for selection, and of the Land which remains still undisposed of within the nineteen
Counties, if twenty shillings per acre be deemed a fair average value for the former, or
if
Sir Thomas
Livingston
Mitchell.
15 June, 1841
'
■
*The proclaim
tion was made
■ at a much later
period—by
Letters Patent
—after the
’ rough descrip-
■ tions referred
to had been
substantially
altered by the
Government.


Sir T. L.
Mitchell.
15 June, 1841.
if they can be obtained at that price, I would consider twelve shillings per acre as the full
value of such parts of the latter as may he saleable at present. Considering the greater
facility of communication with Sydney which will be possessed by occupants of Lands
within the nineteen Counties, I would deem those Lands as well worth twelve shillings
per acre to them, as the choice Lands in the new Districts are worth twenty shillings per
acre to new settlers, who have roads and bridges to make markets to create &c.
I ought not however, to omit to remark, that although I am of opinion that considerable
quantities of Land within the nineteen Counties might find purchasers if offered for sale
by the Government at the minimum price of twelve shillings per acre, yet Ido not expect
that such purchases will be made chiefly by newly arrived Immigrants; but, on the
contrary, I am of opinion that the purchasers would rather be land-holders possessing
contiguous Lands, persons already settled in our Towns, possessing Capital and looking
to the capabilities of the Land when brought into value by improvements still to be made,
and to the greater demand for available land, when concentration followed. But with
regard to the new population so much wanted, it sefems clear that so long as in those
Southern Districts the mode of sale at a uniform fixed price is adhered to, if we wish to
induce Immigrants possessed of Capital to settle amongst us, we can only hope to do so
by adopting a similar mode of sale, and offering our lands of secondary quality at a
proportionately lower price.
6. You have expressed your opinion of the necessity of adopting the system of sale
at a uniform fixed price in the nineteen Counties, if that system is to be adhered to in
the Southern and Northern Districts; but what is your opinion on the abstract question
of adopting the system of sale at a uniform fixed price for the disposal of Crown Lands ?
I consider the sale by Auction, as it has worked well in this Colony, the best system as
yet devised for a pastoral Country; all it appears to me to want to suit present circumstances,
seems to be the sale, by private tender, of Lands not sold after having been put up to
auction. But considering abstractedly the intrinsic average value of Land in Australia,
in reference to the annual return or interest on the purchase money which those Lands
will produce, my opinion is, that the average prices which have been paid for Crown Lands
purchased under the system of sale by Auction are considerably beyond their real
value, that is, in reference to any immediate return to be derived from those Lands
when occupied with a view to either Pastoral or Agricultural purposes. If I were asked
why this should be—my reply would be, that not only are the prices demanded too
high, but too little land has been brought into the Market —particularly at Port Phillip,
and the result has been a great profit to speculators, without any material benefit to the
Land Fund.
7. In respect to the Land to the westward of the nineteen Counties, and bounded
by them on the east, by the Murrumbidgee and Murray on the south, and by South
Australia on the west, can you inform the Committee what extent of that Land you
are of opinion might be made immediately available to the purposes of Immigration, and
at what price it might probably be sold ? I think that along the whole western frontier of
the nineteen Counties, to the distance westward of about forty to fifty miles, or about
the average breadth of a County, the Land generally, is very suitable for grazing
purposes, and that much of it would sell at the average rate of twelve shillings per acre.
8. Are you aware that the whole of the Land which you have just described as likely
to be saleable, is at present occupied under Depasturing Licenses ? I believe a considerable
portion of it is so occupied.
9. What is your opinion as to the policy of throwing open that Land for sale, and
thus compelling occupants under the Licensing system to go still further to the westward ?
If I must point out how a Revenue can be raised by the sale of Crown Lands, I must say
that our necessities render it expedient that those Lands should be sold.
10. But looking at the true interests of the Colony, without reference to compulsion
by the force of circumstances, do you think it would be desirable to put up those Lands
for sale? I think that to put up those Lands for sale over the heads of the present
occupants might be impolitic, especially at this time; but to determine the boundaries of
the Counties, and to allow those to purchase who could do so, would not, I think, be
impolitic. Speculators might certainly annoy occupants, but it is to be considered that
there are now much finer fields for speculation, and that our Western-Lands could only
be of value to the people occupying them, and these might be allowed the right of
pre-emption for certain periods—and the right made even transferable by the squatters—
to whom it might afford, in some cases, relief from those difficulties now felt by most
people who have depended on Stock as a source of profit or income.
11. Generally then, is it your opinion that a sufficient fund for the purposes
of Immigration can be raised by sales of Land within the nineteen Counties ? I do not
think it can.
12. Does any alteration of the system occur to you by which a sufficient annual
fund might be raised by sales of Land in the middle District ? I cannot suggest any
alteration in the system of sale now in operation in the middle District, because, as I
have already observed, I consider the sale by Auction—at a fixed upset price—the best
of all modes of sale. There is, however, an amendment which I would suggest, and which
has always appeared to me very desirable, and that is, the sale of those Lands by private
tender, or “by the candle,” which have been offered for sale by Auction, and not bid for.
The Lands so remaining after a public sale in the United States of America are, I
believe, open in this manner to sale by private tender.
13.


13. Can you inform the Committee what are the operative causes which make the
difficulty of realising a fund by the Sale of Crown Lands in the Middle District so much]
greater than in the Northern or Southern District? The greater extent of available
Land; the promised ready means of obtaining it; in fact, the Southern District comprises l
an extent of good country, equal to three times the area of the-,nineteen Counties, and
the whole of this is open to purchase at £>\ per acre, for, although the surveys for the
sale of small portions do not extend far, the Special survey system will meet the public
demand.
14. But is there any cause why, in proportion to the good land still remaining
unalienated in the Middle District, there should not be as great facility in raising a
fund, as from the good land in the Southern District ? Because, in point of fact, we have
but a small proportion of good Land now accessible in the nineteen Counties which has
not been already taken up; and in reference to the Land to the westward of the nineteen
Counties, its distance renders it less available. I am of opinion, however, that with
Convict labour On the requisite roads and bridges, it would be possible to raise from it,
for many years, a fund sufficient for all the purposes of Immigration. The soil along the
banks of the rivers Lachlan, Murrumbidgee, and Murray, is good, and would support an
agricultural population throughout nearly their whole extent. These rivers water the extensive
regions to the westward of the nineteen Counties, and if they were not so far from the coast and
from roads, I have no doubt that their banks would be fully taken up. On inspecting the maps
of locations, it will be seen that they range along the lines of rivers, but we have no rivers,
within the nineteen Counties whose banks partake of the same favourable character for
agricultural or grazing purposes as those of the Murrumbidgee and Murray. —I think that if a
township were laid out in a good situation at the junction of the Lachlan and Murrumbidgee,
or near where the latter river joins the Murray, and the Land measured for immediate sale
there, and population could be thereby induced to concentrate about such an inland spot, the
rest of the river banks might come into demand and acquire a value, especially as the route
between Sydney and Adelaide must be in that direction. Such an interior settlement might
be favourable to the accomplishment of other desirable objects, besides the sale of Land; the
conciliation, for instance, of the numerous and ill disposed native tribes, who arc likely to
molest our outstations, while they are also becoming more and more formidable. These,
natives derive their subsistence chiefly from the fish in the rivers Murray and Darling,
and are, probably, the most numerous united body of natives at this time in all Australia.
New fields would thus be opened to such small farmers as might depend upon the produce of
the land. I may add, that the power of making towns in the central District, and which is
no longer vested in the Government in the Southern or Northern, might, when judiciously
exercised, be much in favour of the Land Sales—especially if the towns were laid out in
connection with a general system of roads—But I allude to an arrangement so very general
as to reach indeed, beyond even the territory under consideration. The banks of the
river Darling partake much of the same grassy character, and along the extensive plains
bordering the banks of this long river, a level and direct line of communication may in time
be opened over land, from the shores of South Australia to the heart of the Northern District
behind Moreton Bay. With the exception of the immediate banks of the rivers abovementioned,
and whose courses are laid down in the maps, I can say, without hesitation, that the rest of
the intervening Country, and extending as far Westward as I have travelled, and Eastward to
where the proposed new Counties would reach —as I have already observed—is an unprofitable
desert, consisting of barren scrubs of soft red sand naked plains, covered with salsolaceous
plants, or ridges of quartz and sandstone, where very rarely indeed, is any water to be
found.
TUESDAY, 22 JUNE, 1841.
••>* »>■ * 17: ''I'f'Xl .y ; 2k ;*•* r y,\ v .jHfe ' Jt’ j /.
John Mackay, Esq., late of Bengal, Indigo Planter and Merchant, now of Sydney, called in
and examined:—
1. You have resided in India for some years I believe? Yes, for about twenty-eight
years.
2. Were you in the habit of employing Coolies there? For the greater part of
that time ; for about twenty, years.
3. As field Labourers ? For every purpose, excepting as In-door Servants.
4. What description of people are known by the name of Coolies—are they people
of a particular caste ? The word Coolie means a labourer; the labouring classes of people
of every caste in India are called Coolies, indeed I may say all are so called excepting
the higher castes.
5.
: Sir T. L,
Mitchell.
15 June, 1841
J. Mackay,
Esq.
22 June, 1841


John Mackay,
Esq.
22 June, 1841.
5. In what capacity do you think they might be most usefully employed in this
Colony ? As Agricultural labourers, and particularly as shepherds.
6. Have you employed any Coolies yourself in this Country, or have you any experience
in respect to their employment by other people ? I have employed them myself, and
have seen them employed by others.
7. As shepherds? Mr. John Lord took twenty of a number of them brought here by
myself nearly four years ago, and he has employed them ever since, as Shepherds on his
Land upon the River William, and finds them, as I understand, better than Europeans,
being more attentive, especially in the lambing season; I visited the Coolie shepherds
myself three years ago, and found them doing well.
8. Are you aware of any causes which would prevent their being employed here,
if the Colonists were so inclined ? I know that Laws have been passed in India to
prevent their leaving that Country, but I am not aware of anything peculiar in the
circumstances of this Colony to prevent their being employed here; the Laws I refer to
were passed in India in compliance with orders from the Board of Control, in London.
9. Has Mr. John Lord those people still in his employ ? He has.
10. You presented a Memorial to the Government in 1836, on this subject? I
did, two.
11. What were the principal suggestions that you made in those Memorials?
The Memorials were printed, and will be found among the Council Records ; and what I
then said I still adhere to.
12. Is the demand for labour now, as great or greater than it was then? Greater
certainly.
13. Is there any perceptible change either physically or morally upon the Coolies
brought here by you, since their arrival ? I think the moral habits of the forty-three who
came here with me have generally improved, with the exception of those of two, who are
however of a bad caste.
14. Have they associated much with European labourers during their stay here?
Very little.
15. Are they Hindoos or Mahometans? They are neither, they can hardly be
said to be of any religion.
16. Has the employment of these people enabled you to forego the employment of
European labour ? It has.
17. Has it enabled you to obtain such European labour as you required, at a cheaper
rate ? No, because the number which I employ, is too small sensibly to affect the general
price of labour.
18. Is the demand for labour so great, that the introduction of Coolies would not
! throw any Europeans out of employment? Certainly the introduction of Coolies might
cause fewer Europeans to be employed as shepherds, but there would be abundance of
employment for them otherwise; Europeans seldom like to be employed as Shepherds;
and besides, the cost of employing them is much greater than that of employing Coolies.
19. Can you state what the difference of cost would be? A European • shepherd
would not cost less than £SO a year, at present, for wages and rations; Three persons
would be necessary to take charge of 1000 sheep, who would cost 56150; an Indian
shepherd would not cost more than at the utmost, or a 660 for three of them; and
supposing 1000 sheep to produce from 2,400, to 2,Booibs, of wool; and taking the
average to be 2,600ib5., the difference of cost between European and Coolie shepherds
would make a difference in the price of wool of about Bd. per lb.
20. You say the Coolies are fit for being employed as Agricultural labourers
also? Yes, with the exception of holding an English plough, which I have never known
any of them equal to.
21. —ls there any reason that you know of to prevent their acquiring, in time, a
knowledge of mechanical trades ? None that lam aware of.
22. Then would they not gradually come into competition with a more numerous
class of English labourers than shepherds or Farm labourers? In course of time they
might possibly do so, but I do not think they would be disposed to remain longer in the
Colony than the five years they agree for.
23. How long have Mr. Lord’s Coolies been here? About three years and a half.
24. Have they shewn any disposition to return to their own Country? About a
year ago many of them said they would remain in the Colony, but as the termination of
the period of their agreement approaches, all of them, except the few who have saved
but little or no money, talk of returning to their own Country.
25. "Would you not consider it advisable to offer them even higher wages than they
at present have, rather than allow them to leave your service without having it in your
power to supply their place ?—I should be glad to offer some of them double the wages
they at present have, and a few of them even more than double, in order to retain them,
but I have not yet made such an offer to any of them.
26. Would not such experience of the profit to be derived from remaining here,
induce them to stay in your service ?—I think that some of them might remain here, but
as the period for which they are engaged draws near its termination, the greater part
seem more anxious to return home ; especially those who have saved money, which all of
them, except one or two, have done in my own service ; I do not know what is the case
with respect to those in Mr. Lord’s service, but I think it must be much the same.
27. If proprietors in general Mere to engage Coolies in the same proportion that
you have done, would not this enable them to dispense in the same proportion with
European


European labour, and so to render it less valuable ?—ln a great measure it would, in so
tar as regards shepherds, but it would not enable them to dispense altogether with
European labour; for instance, I think the Coolies cannot use an English plough and!
know that none of them are Mechanics. ° 3
28. Is it not possible that Landed proprietors, finding the great pecuniary ad
vantage attendant on the employment of Indian labour, might be induced to employ it
as extensively as possible, so as in a great degree to surround themselves with Indians
and m the same degree to dispense with the service of Europeans ?—I think as far as
they could they would do so, but not to the entire exclusion of Europeans; European
ploughmen and Mechanics must in all cases continue to be employed, as well as
European domestic Servants Of almost every description.
29. But would not there he a continual tendency in the Coolies to acquire those
descriptions of skill m which they are now deficient, so as to come gradually more and
more into competition with Europeans?—Not beyond field labour; they may acquire
more dexterity in field labour of all descriptions, except ploughing; but I have
never seen any of them attempt to become Mechanics of any kind; the difference of
wages even m their own Country is as 2 to 16, and yet that has not had the effect of
inducing them to attempt to become carpenters, &c.
3°. But in their own Country does not the existence of Caste almost operate as a
prohibition against their entering into any fresh mode of employment, however profitable
or desirable it may be?—No, it does not amount to a prohibition, but there is a feeline:
or disposition m individuals not to aspire beyond the condition in which they were bom •
this prejudice is so strong, as to render their acquiring the knowledge of any mechanical
Trades almost impossible. But if a Coolie wished to become a mechanic there is
and habits t 0 prevent him ; the P r <>™tion exists only in their own prejudices
31. Would not their experience of our customs gradually free them from their
prejudices, and lead them to acquire skill in other modes of employment ?—I do not
think it would in any thing beyond mere field labour; at any rate I do not think that
the prejudices of people- coming from India for a limited period only, could be so far
have that effect UP ° n JOimS people ’ broUght up from their youth in this Colony, it might
32. Have you considered how far it would be for the political and moral benefit of
this Colony to have spread over all parts of it men of the Coolie Caste, continually
entering into competition with the European labourer, and from the inferiority of their
habits, enabled to underbid him in the labour market, and so continually to depreciate
his services .—I can not say that I have given that question the degree of consideration
which it merits, but I am not inclined to think that the introduction of Coolies can
materially affect this Colony either morally or politically, and if at all, certainly not
prejudicially in either way; their moral habits will not suffer by comparison with' those
of the peculation of any Country; and politically, I conceive their introduction would
materially benefit the Colony, m extending and improving its resources; I would not
wish to see them spread over the face of the Country indiscriminately with all classes but
as they would only come for a limited period, and in very limited numbers in proportion
i Euro P ean Population, few or none would in my opinion remain; indeed Ido not
think there would be a trace remaining of them ‘in a generation hence; moreover it is I
believe not to be expected that we shall have cheap labour until we have a superabundant
population; when Europeans and their descendants multiply in the Country, and every
flat and valley susceptible of profitable employment, is occupied, and thriving Villages
arise m every eligible position, (and the time may not be far distant when such may be
the case) the Country will be m a position to depend on its own resources alone, not onlv
for labourers to till the ground and tend its flocks and herds, but also for everv
necessary as well as comfort of life; Coolie labour, as well as every other description of
Foreign aid, will then cease to be required, and such things will only be remembered as being
among the other anomalies m the history of the early progress of this Country ’ 6
33. Would not your first impression be, that it would tend to reduce the European
character to the level of the Indian? Character depends so much on early habits that
Ido not think the European character could be much affected by it; and it would be
found that the Indian labourers would seldom or never aspire to the attainment of anv
improvement in their condition, which could affect the European. y
34. Would it not appear to you, that the European labourer must relinquish some
of his present habits to enable him to compete with the Coolie? The effect would
certainly be to reduce the rate of wages, but I do not think it would have any effect unon
the intellectual or moral habits of the European. J 1
35. Would not the effect in the United Kingdom he, to check the disposition to
Emigrate, if it were known that there existed in this Colony a class of people constantly
operating in this way to keep down the price of labour? It might, partially, at first •
but when a sober industrious European labourer was informed that by saying a little
money here, he might himself become an employer of cheap Coolie labour, he would be
more disposed to Emigrate, and such parties would come in greater numbers. I know
indeed some Gentlemen of capital in India and England, who have been deterred from
coming to this Colony by their knowledge of the high price of labour here, but who
would readily come if they saw a prospect of obtaining cheap Coolie labour, which would
enable them to employ their capital profitably; I have however considered it to be my
duty
J. Macfcay,
Esq.


J. Mackay,
Esq.
22 June, 1841.
duty to advise them not to adventure to the Colony so long as the present scarcity of
labour exists. „ ~ „
36. But if persons of capital should come to this Colony with. the purpose ot
depending entirely, or almost entirely, on the labour of Indian Coolies, would not the
consequence be, that a state of Society must prevail which would be any thing ut
desirable?" They would employ as many Coolies as they could, no doubt, because they
would come out and bring their capital with that view ; that would be the inducement to
come; I know two persons of large property at this time, who would come here if they
could be sure of having Coolie labour; but they would nevertheless be obliged to employ
Europeans as grooms, in-door servants, and ploughmen. -
37. If Coolie labour should become superabundant, would it not have the effect ot
enabling many Europeans of the working classes to employ Coolies under them, and
thus cause the condition of the European labourer to be improved rather than deteriorated.
That is my opinion; but I do not think (and I say this deliberately) that Coolie labour
can ever become superabundant. ' ~ , ,
38. Do you think there is any reason to suppose that Coolies could .be procured
in such numbers as to cause the supply to be superabundant, or in excess ot
the demand for their sendees? I think not; there is now so great a competition lor
their labour in India, that it would prevent their coming m such numbers as to affect the
present rate of their wages ? _ . .
39. Is it really your opinion that the condition of the European labourer would
be improved by his being enabled to become an employer of Coolie labour. Such is my
opinion; I speak only of such Europeans, as by sobriety and industry could save money,
and thereby have it in their power to employ Coolies. .
40. If the European labourer were enabled to employ the Coolie m his own service,
instead of himself serving a master, would it not have the effect of. making European
labour still more scarce, and therefore still more expensive than it is at present. It
would have that effect at first, but I think more of the labouring classes of Europeans
would come here if they found that they could employ the Coolies.
41. Are you of opinion that the employment of Coolies by those Europeans who
are or have been labourers, would take place? Ido expect.that such would be the case.
42. In proportion as the Coolies might acquire skill in other., occupations besides
field labour, would not the same consequences follow, of tlieir being employed m such
occupations in preference to Europeans, because obtainable at a cheaper rate of wages .
It is not my opinion that they would take up other occupations; they ne\ er do so. in
their own Country. I look upon it as next to impossible for any Coolie, after passing
the a*e of 18, to acquire skill in any other occupation than that in which he was trained.
43. Do you suppose the Coolies to be incapable of- acquiring skill in «my
mechanical occupation ? Coolies are suitable only for the most simple kinds of labour.
44. Do you think the condition and habits of the Coolies have been improved,
or the contrary, since coming into your service ? From their better, food in this Country,
they have acquired more bodily strength than they possessed when in their own Country;
they cannot plough; but they use the grubbing hoe better than Europeans do; and are
far more efficient in weeding, and with a little trouble in teaching them, would become
equally useful in reaping &c. . . ,
45. Might not the prevalent employment of Coolies render European labourers
less willing to come to this Country, and make it more difficult at the same time to
retain in that condition such as should arrive? I certainly think that European
labourers of sober and industrious habits would come here in greater numbers when they
found that, by saving their money, they could themselves employ Coolies; and I do not
think that Coolies could ever be brought from India in such numbers as to interfere
with the employment of European labourers, upon such terms as they would be quite
contented with. . . „ T ! ,
46. Have any of the Coolies left families in their Native Country? I do not with
certainty remember, but they were examined on their arrival here, and the information
''-sought by the Committee may be obtained, I suppose, from the Report of that
examination; I think that seven of them left families in India; one of them brought a
child with him. . „ . . „ .
47. Have many of them been able to save money out of their wages ? ihe whole
have ; the greater part of them have saved from £ls, to £2O ; I believe, such a sum
would enable a Coolie in his own Country to. live very comfortably with his family for
the remainder of his life; some of them, after going home and spending some time with
their friends, would, I have no doubt, return io this Colony.
48. Then you think it decidedly advantageous to Coolies to be allowed to come
here for a few years ? I do. . .
49 If Coolie labourers were introduced here in great numbers, would it be
necessary to enact any Law for their protection? I think it would; even should only
half the number at present required be introduced.
50. Should that Law embrace an engagement on the part of their employers to
return them to their own Country at the expiration of the term for which they were
engaged, or would that be provided for in the regulations made in India in respect to the
permission for them to emigrate ? I think it should be provided for by enactments, to
be made in this Colony; and that a bond should be taken from every man employing
Coolies, obliging him to return them to their own Country at the expiration of their
agreement, unless of their own free will they chose to remain.
51.


51. Have you a copy of the agreement made with the Coolies brought here by
you? I have, *it is written both in the English, and in the Native Indian languages, (copy
put in.
52. Have you a copy of the Law passed by the Indian Government to prevent the
Emigration of Coolies? I have. + (a printed copy put in.)
A.
Indian Labourer's Permit.
No.
X engage to serve. or such
person as I may be transferred to by him, as a free labourer with mutual consent to be
declared before a Public Officer for the period of five (5) years from the date of this contract
on a monthly salary of Company’s Rupees five (5) and food and clothing as follows viz:—
Rice 14 Chittacks'j One Blanket
Dholl 2 Chittacks l n » Two Dooties
Ghee \ Chittacks r y One Chintz Jacket Yearly.
Salt i Chittacks J One Lascars Cap
One Wooden Bowl _
Also one lota or brass cup between four persons, and Medical attendance and Medicine when
required, and to be sent back to Calcutta at the expiration of my term of service, free of all
expence to myself, should such be my wishes, subject to the terms of my general Agreement
executed this day of 18
Cakutta his mark.
B.
FORT WILLIAM
LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT,
THE 21th MAY, 1839.
The following Act is passed by the Honorable the President of the Council of India in
Council, on the 27th May, 1839, with the assent of the Bight Honorable the Governor
General of India, which has been read and recorded.
Ordered, that the Act be promulgated for general information.
ACT, No. XIV, OF 1839.
I. It is hereby enacted, That Acts No. XXXII of 1837, and No. V of 1837, be
repealed on the first day of July next. _, , ~ T , .
11. And it is hereby enacted, That on and after the said first day of July next, every
person who shall make with any Native of India any contract for labour to be performed in
anv British or Foreign Colony without the Territories of the East India Company, or who
shall knowingly abet or aid any Native of India in emigrating from the said Territories for
the purpose of being employed as a Labourer, shall be liable on conviction before a Magistrate,
or Justice of the Peace, to a fine not exceeding two hundred Rupees for every Native so
contracted with, aided, or abetted, and in default of payment of such fine, shall be liable to be
imprisoned for a term not exceeding three months. . - A . . .
11l Provided always that nothing in this Act contained, shall be taken to apply to
anv Native Seaman, who shall of his own free will contract to navigate any Vessel, or who
shall embark on board such Vessel in pursuance of such Contract, or to any person who shall
contract to serve as a Menial Servant only, or who shall embark as such Menial Servant.
I. P. GRANT,
Offg. Secretary to the Government of India .
FRIDAY,
J. Mackay,
Esq.
22 June, 1841.
* A.
t B.


J. Lord,
Esq.
25 June, 1841.
*c.
FRIDAY, 25 JUNE, 1841. .
John Lord, Esq., of Sydney, Merchant and Landowner, called in and examined:—
1. The Committee understand that you have been for some time in the habit of
employing Hill Coolies in your service ; —will you have the goodness to state their number and
. how you employ them ? I have nineteen ordinary Coolies and one Sirdar; the Sirdar and
seventeen of the Coolies have been employed at my farm at "William’s River about years,
principally as shepherds, in which capacity, as well as in that of general farm servants, they
have given every satisfaction, and are themselves I believe equally satisfied.
2. In saying that they have given satisfaction as general farm servants, will you state what
kind of farm work they are qualified to perform ? They are efficient in the field with axe or
hoe, and are expert at reaping with a sickle, but I have not tried them with the scythe, they
are expert also in the culture of tobacco and Indian corn, but I do not consider them adapted
for ploughing or driving bullocks; indeed the bullocks do not appear to like them; as
watchmen they are vigilant in guarding drays, and preventing the cattle from straying, but
they are not employed to watch sheep, as they are not so wakeful as white men, nor can they
be so well relied upon in counting in the sheep into the folds; as shepherds however they
are equal to the best white men. One of those in my service keeps 650 sheep, which is a
very large number for our part of the Country, which is woody and hilly.
3. Have you sustained many losses of sheep under their charge, as compared with losses from
flocks in charge of white men ? I have no exact information as to this point, but I conclude
there is no ground for complaint, or I must have heard of it.
4. In speaking of white men do you refer to Convict or to free shepherds ? I refer princi-
pally to Convict shepherds; I have but 3 free shepherds; I have found a general disinclination
among white men to undertake the employment; the few that I have were formerly prisoners.
While Convicts they were used to tend sheep, and they are now fit for nothing else; no person
would hire them l'or any other service. I have not one free Immigrant shepherd in my
service, but my farming operations are principally carried on by free labour.
5. Have you ever heard any repugnance expressed by the Coolies to the occupation of a
shepherd ? Never; the Sirdar tells them what they are to do, and manages them ; they make
no objection ; it suits them better than any other employment, while white men do not like
it; it appears to the white man too much like solitary confinement on a great scale.
6. Is it the practice with you to send out the sheep at sun-rise, and bring them in to fold at
sun-set ? It is; they are sent out at sun-rise, and at sun-set they are brought in, and
delivered over to the watchmen.
7. Is it the practice of the Coolies to take but one meal a day, and that after sun-set ? lam
not certain, but I think their practice is to take out with them in the morning a little toasted
rice, which supports them during the day, and that after their return at night, they take their
principal meal; at first it was necessary to give them their ration daily, as they would eat it all
at once; now however it is issued to them the same as to other servants, and they evince every
disposition to adopt the European mode of living.
8. Supposing that you had the opportunity, would you employ them in greater numbers ? I
would, if I were permitted, at once import one hundred, and in that case I would retain only
as many white men as might be required for farm work, which the Coolies are not so well
adapted for. My impression is, that the Coolies would make good Stockmen, as they ride
well, and walk well.
9. Were the Coolies in your service indented to you, or engaged under any particular
agreement? They were engaged under agreement to Mr. Mackay, and by him transferred
to me under the same agreement, which I now produce. The substance of this agreement
is, that they are to serve Mr. Mackay, or such other person as he might transfer them to, as free
labourers, (such transfer to be with mutual consent of the parties, to be declared before a
Public Officer) for the period of Five Years, on a monthly salary of five rupees, or ten shillings,
and clothing and food as follows ; clothing;—one blanket, two dooties (or wrappers,) one
chintz jacket, one lascar’s eap, and one wooden bowl yearly; food ; —rice 14 chittacks,
Dholl (Pulse) 2 chittacks, ghee, (Indian butter,) \ chittack, and salt } chittack, daily ;
also one brass cup between four, and medical attendance and medicine when required;
and. to be sent back to Calcutta free of all expence to themselves, at the
expiration of their term of service, should such be their wish :—each man has a copy of this
document, and to it is annexed his personal description, and a ticket describing his name,
and other particulars, and certifying that that individual contract had been inspected by the
Superintendent of the Calcutta Police, and the contents thereof fully explained to the party
named in it.
10. Have;you had any difficulty ih conforming with the terms of this agreement as to food
and clothing? There was a difficulty at first as to both, in consequence of its having been
found, almost impossible to procure some of the articles specified ; but they readily agreed to
accept equivalents, that is, a ration of flour, beef, ginger, and salt, and articles of English
clothing instead of their own, according to the scale in the document which I now produce •*
(document put in.) This document also contains a Statement shewing the comparative cost
of maintaining these People and White Men.
11.


11. In a pecuniary point of view what do you conceive is the extent of the advantage of
employing Coolies instead of white men? The paper I have just put in will shew that in
the employment of one hundred Coolies, as I have before proposed,' the advantage would be
that about £I9OO would pay their whole cost for a year, whereas the same number of free
white men would cost more than double; besides too, the Coolies are much more easily
managed than white men, whilst their efficiency in such work as they can perform is quite
equal.
12. In a flock of 1000 sheep what would be the saving per lb on the wool in consequence of
employing Coohes instead of free emigrant Shepherds? Assuming that each fleece would
weigh 2afts the produce of wool from the 1000 Sheep would be 2500ft5.; and calculating
that the 1000 sheep would require the services of three men, the saving on employing two
Coolies as shepherds, and only one whiteman as watchman, instead of three white men,
would be the difference between their expences, which would be about £47, or about 4M
per ft on the wool.
13. Could you obtain Free men as shepherds at the present time, at an expence of £42 each
per annum . I think I could not; the calculation I have given in was made in 1839, at which
time wages were £25 per annum; they are now much higher for shepherds, even as high as
j-L i- , e I™ mi g rants hardly engage in that occupation on any terms ; but I find
no difficulty in obtaining such men as farm labourers.
14. Supposing you were enabled to introduce a continued succession of Coolies, what
arrangements should you make for their employment ? I should employ new comers as
shepherds, and those who have been hitherto employed in that occupation, I should make
watchmen, and so do away altogether the necessity of employing white men about the sheep.
1 5. What further saving in the ft of wool would this produce? The additional savino-
would be about £24 per annum on each man, or about 2d in the pound of wool, making
with the former saving I have stated, nearly seven pence per pound in all; and if the free
mans wages be calculated at £3O per annum, the saving per pound will be as nearly eight
pence as possible. ° j
16. What proportion would this bear to the present average price of wool per pound? About
one half; the price given in Sydney, taking one year with another, being about Is. 4d. per
pound. Indeed my impression is, that sheep farming cannot be profitably carried on at the
present high price of labour.
17. Have you ever employed any of the Native Blacks of this country as shepherds, or in
any other capacity on your farm, and what is your general impression as to the practicability
of so employing them generally ? I have never employed them as shepherds; I have
employed them, however, in washing sheep, in which I found them quite as useful as white
men ;. 1 should hardly have got through the washing last season without them.; as to the
practicability of employing them generally, I have not considered it, but judging from their
migratory habits, I do not think they could be generally employed in any permanent
occupation. I had a boy for 2\ years, who was clothed and fed- in the kitchen, but he
ultimately returned to his tribe in the bush.
18. Would not the tendency of the employment of Coolies be, to diminish the necessity for
the services of white men as shepherds and watchmen ? It would.
19. Do you think that the same consequence would follow in regard to the other occupations
of white men. Ido not think so; the introduction of Coolies would not interfere with the
emand for European Mechanics, or persons who have come out as Immigrants seeking
employment as farm labourers ; Indeed I do not think the Coolies would become competitors
with Europeans in any occupations except those of shepherding and sheep watching • In
fact I should consider them as coming only to supply that kind of labour which we look for
m vain from European Emigration.
20. Have you had much opportunity from personal observation of knowing the habits and
disposition of the Coolies m your service? My opportunities of personally observing them
have been for about two months in the shearing season every year since they have been with
me, and twice or thrice on other occasions for about a week in each year.
21. Can you state whether their inclination is to establish themselves permanently here, or to
return to their own country ? I do not know what their general inclination in this respect may
be, but some of them have expressed an intention to remain here permanently, and have said,
that if they do go back to their own country, it will be only to return here with their wives!
If they had their wives I think many of them would remain, who may not otherwise do so.
i e y bad their wives with them, would you be equally willing to engage them?
I should be even more willing to engage them, as they would then be more likely to remain
permanently on the farm, and I should not be troubled with changes.
23. Would not the tendency of your proposition be, permanently to establish two different
races of people in this Colony ? If the Coolies did not return, it certainly would have that
tendency.
24. If Coolies were generally introduced into the Colony, would not the natural course of
things be, that great landed proprietors would, as far as possible, surround themselves with
them ? I think they would be generally sought after as shepherds, in consequence of the
cheapness of their labour, and that some persons might even engage them as house servants.
25. Must they not change their native habits very much to fit them for house servants?
** *\ a tural]y change their habits from inter couse with us; in fact they have done so
already, m point of food and clothing; I have two at my house near Sydney, one of them
employed as a shepherd, and the other in the garden, cutting wood, bringing grass for the
cows, fetching water with a bullock-cart, turning the mangle, or in any other general work;
these
J. Lord,
Esq.
25 June, 1841.


J. Lord,
Esq.
25 June, 1841.
these men at first saved money, which they lodged in the Savings Bank, but they have latterly
become so fond of dress that they now spend the whole of their earnings in that way.
26. From what you have seen of these men and others in your employ, do you think them
utterly unqualified for all other descriptions of employment than what they now engage in ? I
have not tried them in any other way ; there is no knowing what they might do ; they might
be employed in vineyards or gardens, and in other light works; but I think they would
generally be confined to some inferior employment, not requiring great skill or strength.
27. Do you consider them generally inferior in capacity to Europeans? I do.
28. From the cheapness of Coolie labour, do you think it at all to be apprehended that free
Emigrants, comihg out to this Colony as labourers, would become employers of Coolies? 1
think they would be apt to employ tbem whenever they began to become farmers themselves.
29. Do you think it would encourage Immigrant labourers more readily to become farmers?
The facility of getting cheap labour would undoubtedly tend that way.
30. Do you think that this would benefit the European labourers ? As the European labourers
saved a little money they would likely become farmers and might employ a few Coolies, and
in this way, I think the Coolies would benefit the European.
31. Do you not think it probable that the character and morals of a European labourer could be
improved by his power of obtaining and employing the labour of persons inferior to himself
in strength and capacity ? lam not prepared to say what would be the effect, upon the
European population of the Colony, of having Coolies in their employment, but I should
think it ridiculous to apprehend any moral danger from it, which could at all affect an
Englishman.
32. Have you observed, with regard to the Coolies employed upon your farm, that the
Europeans treat them as inferior creatures ? I have observed nothing of the kind, nor have
I any apprehension that it is so; but I ought to say that, to prevent anything of the kind, I
have made arrangements for keeping them separate; but whenever in their employments they
do come together, they agree very well.
33. Have you observed any disposition on the part of the whites to domineer over them . . I
have not, but lam not sufficiently there to know much on this point; I have given strict
injunctions that nothing of the kind should be allowed, and if it did occur I should certainly
have heard of it. _
34. Have you, as their Master, a more easy control over them than over Europeans: Certainly;
they are more easily controlled and managed than Europeans; for they are naturally more
docile and tractable. _ >
35. Have they made any saving of money whilst in your service ? They have ; I have with
me, Saving’s Bank receipts, belonging to three of them, which shew that their deposits amount
to upwards of £ 16, or, on an average, more than £ 5, each; with respect to the others, I think
that in 3| years, they have drawn the wages only of one year, (although they regularly get their
monthly order), and have therefore, on an average, 2j- years wages due to them, (or notes for
that amount unpresented for payment) ; and I shall allow them Saving s Bank interest on the
balances in my hands.
36. Do you think them much influenced by the desire of gain ? They are as much so as any
men in the Colony; they understand and look sharply after their own interests.
37. By that means can you induce them to undertake any task or work that you wish to have
performed ? I have not tried that.
38. Should you think, when they become better aware of what are the more profitable kinds of
manual labour among white men, that the hope of profit will induce them to apply themselves
to them ? I think it might; when they see that they can obtain larger wages, they may
endeavour to do so ; but I think they cannot go beyond a certain limit; at least in the present
generation. ...
39. But as far as they could go, would they not become more and more competitors with
the Europeans ? As far as they could go, they certainly would; but I think that would not
be so far as to interfere with European labour.
40. What do you consider would be the effect of the extended introduction of Coolie labour,
upon European Emigration ? I think an extensive introduction of Coolie labour would
enable sheep, stock, and all other kinds of property to maintain a fair value, and render
pastoral establishments more prosperous, and occasion an increase of the land fund, by which
means European Emigration might be carried on to a greater extent than ever. Wool is our
staple export, and is the basis of the prosperity of the Colony; but without shepherds
wool cannot be produced; and experience proves to me that from barely hireable immigrants
alone, shepherds cannot be supplied, and that to avert the complete annihilation of this
principal source of the wealth of the Colony, which must result from the want of shepherds,
recourse must be had to other more immediately available means than European Emigration;
and it seems to me that it is to the introduction of Indian Coolies we must now look for a
plentiful supply of labour of a description at once cheap, and suitable to the nature and
exigency of our pastoral wants ; I say this from real experience and personal observation, as
being the only person in this Colony who has fairly tried Coolie labour for a length of time,
on an extensive establishment in the Interior.


c.
Calculation of the Cost of a Free Man.
Per Week. Per Annum.
™ s - and. £ s. and. £ s* and.
Flour 12ibs. . . . @0 3 . . 0 3 0
Beef lOibs. . . . @0 3 . . 0 2 6
Jea ift @2 0 . 0 0 6
Sugar 2ibs, . . . .@O3 . . 006
Cost of rations for a week £ 0 6 61618 0
W *B“ 25 0 0
Cost of a Free man for a year . . 41 18 0
Calculation of the Cost of a Prisoner.
s. and. £ s. and. £ s. and.
Flour lOfbs @0 3 . . 0 2 6
Beef Bfts. . . . @0 3 . 0 2 0
Tea 2oz @2O . . 003
Sugar lib. . . . @0 3 . . 0 0 3
Soap 2oz-.... .... 001
Cost of Rations . . . . . 0 5 1 13 4 4
SLOPS.
may. AUGUST. NOVEMBER.
s * s. and. s. and.
1 Jacket .701 Shirt ..231 Duck jacket 5 0
1 Pr.trowsers 7 0 1 Pr. boots . 7 9 1 Pr. trowsers 4 0
1 Shirt ..23 1 Shirt ..23
1 Pr. boots .7 9 10 0 1 Pr. boots . 7 9
1 Blanket .10 0
34 0 19 0 ...... 33 0
Tobacco and small sundries 0 10 0
Actual cost of a Prisoner for a year . .. .. 1617 4
Calculation of the Cost of a Coolie.
Flour lOifts. . . . @3 . . % 2 ‘yi £S ‘ d *
Beef 3P)s @ 3 0 0 10^
Chillies, Ginger. . . . . . . 0 0 1
Cost of Rations . . . * • 3 7 9 6 4
Wages 10s. per month . . . . , 6 0 0
Passage and expences from Calcutta, average . 2 o 0
Ditto ditto to Calcutta, not yet known.
Slops.—l Jacket 75.; 1 Pr. Trowsers 75.: 1 Blanket 6s. •
1 Red Cap Is! Bd. ..... ’ , .
• 1 1 O
£ 8 8 Q
the 7 Nations Calculati ° n is nothin 9 allowed f or Superintendence, or waste in issuing
MONDAY .
J. Lord,
Esq.
* >
25 June, 1841.


C. Campbell,
Esq.
, * *
5 July, 1841.
MONDAY ; 5 JULY, 1841.
Charles Campbell, Esq., of Sydney, called in and examined:—
I. The Committee understand you are engaged in sheep farming to a considerable extent?
I have been so since 1835; and my Father has been so since the Year 1825.
, 2. What description of labour have you been accustomed to employ, in charge of sheep ?
Convicts as well as freed and free labourers, but chiefly freed; a proportion of the free are
Scotch shepherds imported by myself.
3. Have you had difficulty of late in obtaining a sufficient supply of labour for that purpose ?
Not of late.
4. Have wages and the cost of other allowances much increased ? If I were to express an
opinion founded on personal experience, I should say that the wages of farm servants and
shepherds have been slightly reduced within the last six months.
5. What is your calculation of the total cost of maintaining a free Immigrant shepherd at this
time ? During the present year I have hired men at £24, £25, and a Year, with a single
ration; and the other day I engaged a Highland shepherd, who had been nine months in the
Colony, at £2O, and his two sons, one 13, and the other 12 years of age, at 3612, each,
allowing the family, on account of the Mother, four rations ; and computing the extra ration
at £ls, the joint wages of these three shepherds will not exceed £6O, or £2O each; but
calculating the average wages at £25, and the cost of the ration at £ls, the expence of each
free man would be a Year ; this however refers only to men employed on stations within
the boundaries of Location ; I would estimate the wages of shepherds generally within the
boundaries at from £25 to £2B, and of those without the boundaries (I speak of the Southern
districts only) at a Year.
6. What proportion of your flocks is generally within the boundaries? About two thirds at
present.
7. Have yon sustained many losses in your flocks from shepherds leaving you without due
notice, and your being in consequence not prepared to replace them by others ? No, none.
•8. Do you keep your flocks in larger numbers than you would wish to do, or would do, if
shepherds were more easily obtainable ? No ; sometimes I put from 800 to 1000 dry ewes,
wethers or weaned lambs in a flock ; but generally I have two shepherds and one watchman
to every 1000 sheep.
9. If free labour only is to be employed at the present prices in the charge of sheep, can sheep
farming be carried on at a profit? Not if we are to buy land at twelve shillings an acre ; It
appears to me that we are trying to effect a natural impossibility, viz to make land dear where
it is extremely plentiful, and labour cheap, where from the nature of things it must be inadequate
to the demand, and consequently dear ; I do not think it desirable to reduce the wages of a
shepherd, drawing a single ration, below £24 a year, supposing the shepherd to be a full grown
man, because if that man marry, and have to support a wife and one or two young children, he
would have to pay £ls for their victuals, and would have only £9 left to buy clothing for
himself and family, and to educate his children.
10. Do you consider that you are suffering more at the present time from want of labour, or
from want of a market for your surplus stock? We suffer most from the want of a market,
and I do not think that this should be ascribed so much to the want of labour as to the
increased price of land combined with the very low price of wool; Ido not hesitate to
acknowledge, however, that the cessation of assignment has been partly instrumental in
preventing persons from purchasing sheep on speculation, although I must add that four years
ago, when sheep were at a very high price, ewes bringing so much as fifty shillings a piece,
free and freed shepherds obtained within two pounds of the rate of wages I am now giving;
the chief difficulty that I have to contend with as a flock master and land holder (not a
squatter), is the cheapness of meat, I cannot afford to sell mutton fed on purchased land under
four pence a pound.
11. From what class of people do you find shepherds most readily obtained? From
the Freed convicts who have been trained to the charge of sheep during their servitude ; The
English Immigrants are not so well qualified as Scottish Highlanders, and indeed we can
turn their labour to better account. Men who have been accustomed to occupations of a
sedentary character, such for instance as cotton spinners, weavers, tailors, and all similar
classes of people, would make better shepherds than Agricultural labourers would. There is
a strong dislike to the lonely, monotonous and indolent life of a shepherd, among all men who
have been accustomed to an active life.
12. What kind of accommodation is provided for shepherds and their families at the Es-
tablishments and Stations ? Slab huts ; I allow a hut containing two rooms to each family;
most of my huts, designed for families, are shingled, and comfortable enough for our mild
climate.
13. From your observationsupontheprobable extent of European Emigration, are you of opinion
that a sufficient number of shepherds can be obtained from that source ? I should be of that
opinion certainly, if the system of introducing Immigrants were carried on on proper principles,
but not so if the present system were to continue of bringing out chiefly young married
couples. Parents with large families of children from 10 to 18 years of age are, in my opinion,
the most suitable description of Immigrants for this Colony, and the most easily obtained at
home.
14.


14. Have you formed any estimate of the number of shepherds and watchmen required to
attend duly to the sheep now in the Colony ? I have, and beg to submit it for consideration
of the Committee, premising that the number actually employed at this moment cannot
be far short of 9,000, allowing three men to every 1,000 sheep ;my estimate is as follows : 1
Sheep 3,000,000 Supposed number at present in the Colony.
150,000 Given number of casual deaths per annum at 5 per cent.
350,000 Supposed to be slaughtered.
500,000 Decrease.
2,500,000
800,000 Increase, at 80 per cent, supposing one-third of the whole number
of sheep to be breeding ewes.
3,300,000 Total next December.
3,000,000 Total last December.
300,000 Actual increase during the year.
For which say 1,000 additional shepherds, watchmen, and bullock drivers would be required.
Each new settler would want a hut keeper, a bullock driver, a stockman, and two farm
servants, able to fence, &c, &c, say five in all.
Compute the number of new settlers, i. e. persons either just arrived, or sons
of old settlers, or retired officers, professional men, merchants and
shopkeepers, who may, during the current year, establish themselves
as farmers or landholders, at 400; this will give as the number
of additional farm servants and labourers wanted .... 2000
Number of shepherds and watchmen, according to my calculation . . 1000
Required in our towns, as servants, labourers and mechanics . . . 1000
To supply the place of such as shall cease to be servants, especially
shepherds, and shall become small farmers &c. .... 1000
Male Adults .... 5000
Their wives, sisters, and daughters ........ 5000
Total number of adults of both sexes that, in my opinion, will be required 1
annually for the next two years by the Inhabitants of the Central > 10,000
Colony of New South Wales . . . . . .
I believe that Immigration to the extent here assumed, will keep wages at the rates I have
mentioned, or something under. I would remark, however, that the wages of shepherds,
unless care were taken to send us a peculiar class of Emigrants, viz ; —men about 50 years
old, with sons of 10 to 18 years of age—might rise considerably, because the strongest men, par-
ticularly farm servants, will not become shepherds if they can get any other kind of employment.
I feel certain that I have not under-rated the quantity of labour required, because I have taken
no account of the accession which our available strength will derive from the young children
who will every year be gaining sufficient strength to qualify them for service, nor have I
alluded to the possibility— I ought to. say probability —of the married women gradually
superseding the other sex in managing daries, cooking, and hut-keeping, occupations which
only the paucity of women has thrown, in our Interior, upon men, who are not so well
qualified for them, and might be much more advantageously employed otherwise. If, too, as
I apprehend will shortly be the case, our sheep farmers within the boundaries reduce the
number of sheep kept by each to 2000 and 4000, fewer men will be required by that class of
Colonists, for if, instead of one settler occupying 20,000 and 30,000 acres of land, and the
distance between the settlers’ houses being, as at present, 8 to 12 miles, they each occupy
only 6,000 acres, and their houses and farm yards be only three miles asunder, native dogs
will gradually be destroyed, and the sheep be left for a portion of the day without a shepherd
between the boundary fences, or, at all events, watchmen may be dispensed with, which would
at once cause a saving of one man to every 1,000 sheep, or one-third of the number of
shepherds required. The principal objection now urged to the employment of
married shepherds, viz., the protracted absence of the husband from his home
and the consequent defenceless state of the wife all day, would also be removed. My estimate
of the number of sheep at present in the Colony, is founded upon the quantity of wool exported,
taking as the average produce, of each sheep free from scab.
15. Is there any other source than that of European Emigration from which you think the
extent of labour which is required could be obtained ? Yes ; if we regard a supply of cheap
labour abstractedly, we can be supplied to any extent from the countless population of British
India ; and I presume, that were an experiment on a large scale made by the Government, it
would not be found impossible gradually to convert the Aborigines of this country, a tribe of
indolent hunters, into indolent shepherds. I think the introduction of Coolies would benefit
large Flockmasters for a time ; I do not think that, for the present, more than 3,000 or 4,000
would be brought hither, unless Sugar and Cotton were grown to the north of Port Macquarie ;
Ido not believe that the large sheep establishments can be continued unless Coolies, or
Convicts be obtainable, or unless the price of pasture Land be reduced to five shillings an
acre. 16.
C. Campbell,
Esq.
5 July, 1841.


C. Campbell,
Esq.
5 July, 1841.
E. Hamilton,
Esq.
5 July, 1841.
16. Do you offer that opinion after having considered the moral and political consequences of
such a measure, as well as its immediate effect upon pecuniary interests ? To the introduction
of Coolies, or any other race of men without wives and families, I think there are, in a moral
point of view, many serious objections ; but in a political, I am not aware of any ; the relief
afforded to the Flockmaster, by the introduction of Coolies, would only be a temporary one,
and to the Landholder such a measure would not be beneficial.
17. What is the average price of sheep at this time ? From ten to twelve shillings; a sale
of 4,500 sheep was lately effected at thirteen shillings, but I do not know the proportion of
ewes.
MONDAY, 5 JULY, 1841.
Edward Hamilton, Esq., of Cassilis, Settler, called in and examined:—
1. The Committee understand you are engaged in Sheep Farming to a considerable
extent ? I have been so engaged since my arrival in the Colony, about sixteen
months ago.
2. What description of labour have you been accustomed to employ in charge of Sheep ? I
have on my establishment free, convict, and freed men, but there are no free men in
charge of my sheep.
3. Have you had difficulty of late in obtaining a sufficient supply of labour for that
purpose? Very great difficulty at certain times of the year; at shearing time, and at the
Lambing seasons in particular. At these seasons extra hands are required, and the wages
asked are so exorbitant, that it is almost better to run the risk of loss through a deficiency of
men, than to employ them on their own terms. I know many instances in which wages atthe rate
of 155., and even 20s. per week, have been paid to Shepherds during the shearing season.
4. Have wages and the cost of other allowances much increased in consequence ? Except
at the seasons before mentioned, the price of labour in the Cassilis District remains tolerably
steady at <£3o a year, but with the very large weekly ration of lOib of flour, 9ib of meat, 3oz. of
tea, and of sugar.
5. What is your calculation of the total cost of maintaining a free Immigrant Shepherd at this
time ? A free Shepherd cannot be maintained at the present time under .£SO a year.
6. What proportion of your flocks is generally within the boundaries? My flocks are all
within the boundaries.
7. Have you sustained many losses in your flocks from Shepherds leaving you without due
notice, and your being in consequence not prepared to replace them by others ? I have not;
but some of the proprietors in my immediate neighbourhood have ; owing to the extreme
facility of getting employment, it is difficult to induce men to enter into an engagement to
serve for any length of time ; few will bind themselves for more than three months, and at the
expiration of that time they invariably strike for an increase of wages. I know an instance in
which a flock of ewes and lambs were shepherded during last shearing season by four different
shepherds within a fortnight; the injury done was very great. Though I have lost no sheep
through the desertion of the flocks by any of the shepherds, my sheep have materially suffered
in condition from the scarcity of labour, and the impossibility of inducing men to enter into
a long engagement. The shepherd who is under an engagement to serve but for a short time,
is utterly indifferent about the condition of his flock, and the master is not able to exercise any
control over him.
8. Do you keep your flocks in larger numbers than you would wish to do, or would do, if
shepherds were more easily obtainable ? Ido certainly.
9. Are the sheep generally suffering from the over crowded state of the flocks? They are
not thriving so well as they would if they were in smaller flocks.
10. Do you consider the fleece has deteriorated in quality and quantity from these causes?
My experience is yet too limited to enable me to answer that question; but the deterioration
of the carcass is very obvious.
11. If free labour only is to be employed, at the present prices, in the charge of sheep, can sheep
farming be carried on at a profit ? I think sheep farming on a very large scale may be carried
on at a profit, notwithstanding the present high price of free labour; on a small scale I
certainly think it cannot, so large is the proportion which the expences bear to the produce;
but I do not think that sheep farming, even on a large scale, will yield the current rate of
colonial Interest, namely ten per cent on the capital.
12. Do you consider that you are suffering more at the present time from want of labour, or
from want of a Market for your surplus stock ? I consider that the want of labour is the
primary cause of the present depreciation in the value of stock, because it deters people from
making purchases; and unless some measures are promptly taken to relieve the present
distress, the depreciation will be still greater; but the flock master is not only suffering from the
impossibility of disposing of his surplus breeding stock, but, owing to the scarcity of labour,
wethers are, generally speaking, in poor condition, and the price which the butcher can
afford to give cannot remunerate the breeder.
13. From what class of people do you find shepherds most readily obtained? From the
Emancipist class; I have not a single free shepherd on my Establishment; the few free men
I employ having all refused to take charge of Sheep at any wages.
14.


14. To what cause do you attribute the general dislike to the life of a shepherd, and
the continual disposition to change ? The dislike which Englishmen so generally evince
to the life of a shepherd, is attributable chiefly to their being accustomed at home to live in
villages and to be employed at hard bodily labour, which has given them a distaste for the
sedentary employments and monotonous life of a shepherd. The common answer of an active
able-bodied man, when asked to hire as a shepherd, is, that he will not “ crawl ’ after Sheep.
15. What kind of accommodation is provided for shepherds and their families at the
Establishments and Stations ? They have all good slab huts, 20 feet by 12 feet; I have not a
bark hut on my Establishment, but if I had, I should consider it as comfortable as the
residence of any man of that class iji England.
16. How many men are generally placed at each station ? Three; two shepherds, and a hut
keeper, who acts also as watchman. .
17. How far are the stations generally from each other 1 The distance varies from two to
eight miles; there is no intercourse allowed between the stations, but I have no doubt it
takes place after dark when the flocks are in the pens ; the shepherds are in the habit of
meeting on the runs, contrary to express orders, and thereby incurring the risk of mixing the
flocks ; this habit is one of the greatest evils a flock master has to contend with, but it is so
natural, that lam not surprised at the difficulty of preventing it.
18. From your observations upon the probable extent of European Emigration, are you of
opinion that a sufficient number of shepherds can be obtained from that source ? Certainly
not; the number of European Immigrants who arrive in this Colony each year, depends
entirely on the amount of the land fund; and I see every prospect at present of a diminution
rather than an increase of this fund, so that a greater scarcity of labour than what we are
now suffering from is much to be apprehended. The principal contributors to the land fund
are the flock masters, and of course, they will not purchase without some fair prospect of
remuneration. To maintain the land fund at it its present amount, something must be done
to povide a more adequate supply of shepherds, and I cannot anticipate such a supply from
European Emigration. Ido not think that a twentieth part of the able bodied men who
arrive by any Emigrant Ship, hire as shepherds; the advantage which the flock masters derive
from European Immigrants is therefore small and always uncertain ; and this, as I have before
said, is attributable to the general antipathy which British Immigrants have to a shepherds
life. Indeed, unless some means are devised of procuring an ample supply of shepherds,
independently of those afforded by European Emigration, it seems to me that the flock masters
will be ruined, from the combined effects of a still greater depreciation in the value of their
flocks, and the increased insubordination of the persons who have charge of them; such a state
of things would undoubtedly lead to the abandonment of sheep farming by every prudent man.
19. What would be the effect upon the Colony of the abandonment of sheep farming, or its
general reduction ? Avery great diminution of its prosperity, if not utter ruin.
20. Can you suggest no other field of industry, in which it would be possible to employ
Capital at a profit in the Colony, so as to produce articles of exchangeable value for imports of
external growth or manufacture, and to provide a sufficient substitute for the present export
of Wool ? None worth mentioning; but if there be, I conceive that it can only be succesfally
worked in co-operation with sheep farming; I mean that sheep farming is the essential
condition, if not the only means, of the prosperity of this Colony.
21. Does the vital prosperity of the Colony then, in your opinion, depend upon its obtaining
an adequate supply of sheep labour at a moderate rate? It does; in my answer to a previous
question I have stated that, in my opinion, every effort of industry must be paralysed if the
sheep farmer be compelled to give up his flocks. _
22. Is there any other source than that of European Emigiation from which you think the
extent of labour which is required could be obtained ? I have heard that it is possible to
obtain very excellent labourers from India, who would be more likely to make good shepherds
than any we can get from the United Kingdom ; Coolies have been tried in this Colony, and
with great success, as I have heard. One great advantage of Coolie labour is, the cheap
description of food to which the Coolies are accustomed; they live chiefly on rice—and flour is
the most expensive article in the ration furnished to the European.
23. Do you offer that opinion after having considered the moral and political consequences of
such a measure, as well as its immediate effect upon pecuniary interests ? I do not think that
the moral and political effects of the introduction of Coolie labourers can be otherwise than
beneficial to the Colony ; they are a very orderly well behaved class of people, and their example
might possibly produce some beneficial effect upon the Aboriginal Natives ; I wish to observe
that this opinion is given not abstractedly, but with reference to the peculiar circumstances of
this Colony; if an ample supply of labour could be obtained from European sources, I should
certainly deprecate the introduction of Indians; but this is out of the question, and
consequently I advocate the importation of Coolies, under the firm conviction, that the moral
condition of the European labourer will be elevated rather than degraded by it; It is impossible
to over-rate the evil influence of a general scarcity of labour; the insolence and insubordination
of the lower orders in this Colony arise entirely from it; a good character is here of no
consequence, as the master is compelled to employ the first comer, without reference to conduct
or character; the lower orders are fully aware of this necessity, and avail themselves of it in
every way; an utter disregard of the outward decencies of life, as exemplified in habitual
drunkenness and the use of brutal language, is one of the many evils which exist to a fearful
extent in this Colony, and which I attribute to the demand for labour being so much beyond
the supply of it; self-interest is in my opinion the chief motive of good conduct, and under
existing circumstances we cannot expect the benefit of its influence; some persons are averse
to
E. Hamilton,
Esq.
5 July, 1841.


E. Hamilton,
■ Eel l-
uy ’ "
swarfttvriP
btewart Kyne,
sq '
6
une ’ •
to the introduction of Coolies, from a fear that the European would feel himself degraded by-
earning his livelihood in the same field as the Indian; but I think this apprehension quite
groundless, and that it arises principally from a disposition to look upon the Indian as a slave;
but unless a man’s condition depends on his color, I can see no affinity between the African
negro and the coolie; the latter is industrious at easy labour; he is a trustworthy domestic
servant, and excels in various trades such as tailoring and shoemaking; It should also be
borne in mind by those who object to the importation of coolies, that it must be limited in
extent and duration; we require it at the present moment to relieve us from our difficulties,
and to enable us to keep up that fund whereby alone we can increase, or rather maintain the
supply of European labour; It will, I presume, be carried on entirely through private resources,
which will cease to be applied in that way when the importation is no longer profitable.
24. Do you think that the habits, morals, and condition of the Coolies would be improved by
their employment in this Colony ? Ido not think that the contact of the Coolies with a people
who at least profess Christianity, can do otherwise than improve their moral condition.
25. What do you consider would be the effect on British Emigration of introducing a
sufficient supply of labour from any foreign country, to carry on sheep farming to the extent
which the wild pastures of this country, so far as it is yet known, would admit ? I consider
that the demand for European labour would not be diminished by the introduction of Coolies ;
the quantity of productive land in this Colony, which is now out of cultivation owing to the
want of labour, must be enormous, and we should always find plenty of farm employment for
the able bodied Emigrants from the United Kingdom, whilst the Coolies would be almost
exclusively occupied in the charge of sheep.
TUESDAY, 6 JULY, 1841.
Stewart Eyrie, Esq,, called in and examined; —
1. Have you been long and extensively engaged in sheep farming ? For the last fourteen
years, to a considerable extent.
2. In what manner have you, up to this time, provided for the superintendence of your flocks?
Up to the last year, chiefly by assigned convicts,
3. Is their number in your employ now much diminished ? Very much diminished; probably
four-fifths reduced; but I cannot state the exact number without reference. ’ 1 3
4. Do you suppose that to be the usual case with other persons similarly engaged as flock-
masters ? I believe it is ; so far as I know, it certainly is.
5. Has the reduction in the number of convicts caused you to experience difficulty in obtaining
shepherds ? A good deal, and when obtained it has been at a ruinous expence. &
6. What do you estimate the yearly expence of a free Immigrant shepherd to be? Excepting
one man and his wife, I have not hitherto employed Immigrants; I have been served by ticket
of-leave men, or convicts who have obtained their fredom; I think these latter ask rather lower
wages, and are more useful, as they have generally acquired a knowledge of the duties of a
shepherd while they have been in servitude; as to the Immigrants, independently of the
exorbitant wages they expect, they are quite unacquainted with the matter, and for the first few
months at least, are not of much service.
7. What do you consider the annual average cost of maintaining a man of the class you speak
of, wages and rations both included? I cannot get a man under at‘2s per annum wages on the
average; besides giving him a pair or two of boots, and a ration of meat, flour, tea’ sugar
tobacco, salt and soap, which costs ten shillings a week, without allowing for the expence of
carting from Sydney. * 1
8. In what direction and at what distance are your sheep stations? Chiefly at Maneroo
Plains to the southward, about two hundred and seventy miles from Sydney, and one hundred
miles and upwards from my own residence at Amprior.
9. Are the whole of your flocks beyond the boundaries ? Just now I have from ten to eleven
thousand sheep beyond the boundaries.
10. Have you increased the number of sheep in each flock beyond what you would wish in
consequence of the scarcity of shepherds ? Generally I have not; sometimes, in cases’ of
emergency, I am obliged to have very large flocks, even as many as two thousand together •
but the country where I am is rather favourable to this, as it is open, and therefore a large
flock is not so subject to the depredations of the native dog as they would be in a close forest
11. Is not the keeping of so many sheep together very detrimental to them ?It is very much
so ; for example, after lambing, if there be two ewe flocks of six hundred each, with lambs by
their sides, in case one shepherd deserts his flock, the two must be united, making two
thousand four hundred sheep in charge of one man; and so they must remain, because
afterwards, it would be hardly possible to separate them, and to put the proper ewes’ with the
proper lambs; and they suffer greatly from going in such numerous flocks.
12. Do you mean that the fleece suffers as well as the sheep ? The sheep suffer in health
and therefore their fleece also suffers, both in quality and in quantity ; as, from beina- in sneh
crowds, the lambs tear off the wool by treading upon the ewes. 5
14


European labour, and so to render it less valuable ?—ln a great measure it would, in so
far as regards shepherds, but it would not enable them to dispense altogether with
European labour; for instance, I think the Coolies cannot use an English plough, and I
know that none of them are Mechanics.
28. —ls it not possible that Landed proprietors, finding the great pecuniary ad-
vantage attendant on the employment of Indian labour, might be induced to employ it
as extensively as possible, so as in a great degree to surround themselves with Indians,
and in the same degree to dispense with the service of Europeans ?—I think as far as
they could they would do so, but not to the entire exclusion of Europeans; European
Ploughmen and Mechanics must in all cases continue to be employed, as well as
European domestic Servants of almost every description.
29. But would not there be a continual tendency in the Coolies to acquire those
descriptions of skill in which they are now deficient, so as to come gradually more and
more into competition with Europeans?—Not beyond field labour; they may acquire
more dexterity in field labour of all descriptions, except ploughing; but I have
never seen any of them attempt to become Mechanics of any kind; the difference of
wages even in their own Country is as 2 to 16, and yet that has not had the effect of
inducing them to attempt to become carpenters, &c.
30. But in their own Country does not the existence of Caste almost operate as a
prohibition against their entering into any fresh mode of employment, however profitable
or desirable it may be ?—No, it does not amount to a prohibition, but there is a feeling
or disposition in individuals not to aspire beyond the condition in which they were born ;
this prejudice is so strong, as to render their acquiring the knowledge of any mechanical
Trades almost impossible. But if a Coolie wished to become a mechanic, there is
nothing in his Caste to prevent him; the prohibition exists only in their own prejudices
and habits.
31. Would not their experience of our customs gradually free them from their
prejudices, and lead them to acquire skill in other modes of employment?—l do not
think it would in any thing beyond mere field labour; at any rate I do not think that
the prejudices of people coming from India for a limited period only, could be so far
removed; but upon yonng people, brought up from their youth in this Colony, it midit
have that effect.
32. Have you considered how far it would be for the political and moral benefit of
this Colony to have spread over all parts of it men of the Coolie Caste, continually
entering into competition with the European labourer, and from the inferiority of then-
habits, enabled to underbid him in the labour market, and so continually to depreciate
his services ?—I can not say that I have given that question the degree of consideration
which it merits, but I am not inclined to think that the introduction of Coolies can
materially affect this Colony either morally or politically, and if at all, certainly not
prejudicially in either way; their moral habits will not suffer by comparison with those
of the population of any Country; and politically, I conceive their introduction would
materially benefit the Colony, in extending and improving its resources; I would not
wish to see them spread over the face of the Country indiscriminately with all classes, but
as they would only come for a limited period, and in very limited numbers in proportion
to the European population, few or none would in my opinion remain; indeed I do not
think there would be a trace remaining of them in a generation hence; moreover it is I
believe not to be expected that we shall have cheap labour until we have a superabundant
population; when Europeans and their descendants multiply in the Country, and every
flat and valley susceptible of profitable employment, is occupied, and thriving Villages
arise in every eligible position, (and the time may not be far distant when such may °be
the case) the Country will be in a position to depend on its own resources alone, not only
for labourers to till the ground and tend its flocks and herds, but also for every
necessary as well as comfort of life; Coolie labour, as well as every other description of
Foreign aid, will then cease to be required, and such things will only be remembered, as being
among the other anomalies in the history of the early progress of this Country.
33. Would not your first impression be, that it would tend to reduce the European
character to the level of the Indian ? Character depends so much on early habits, that
Ido not think the European character could be much affected by it; and it would be
found that the Indian labourers would seldom or never aspire to the attainment of any
improvement in their condition, which could affect the European. "
34. Would it not appear to you, that the European labourer must relinquish some
of his present habits to enable him to compete with the Coolie? The effect would
certainly be to reduce the rate of wages, but I do not think it would have any effect upon
the intellectual or moral habits of the European. 1
35. Would not the effect in the United Kingdom be, to check the disposition to
Emigrate, if it were known that there existed in this Colony a class of people constantly
operating in this way to keep down the price of labour ? It might, partially, at first;
but when a sober industrious European labourer was informed that by savino- a little
money here, he might himself become an employer of cheap Coolie labour, he °would be
more disposed to Emigrate, and such parties would come in greater numbers. I know
indeed some Gentlemen of capital in India and England, who have been deterred from
coming to this Colony by their knowledge of the high price of labour here, but who
would readily come if they saw a prospect of obtaining cheap Coolie labour, which would
enable them to employ their capital profitably; I have however considered it to be my
duty
J - Macka y,
Esq-
-22 June * * B4l,


J. MaCkay,
Esq.
22 June, 1841.
duty to advise them not to adventure to the Colony so long as the present scarcity of
l&bour exists.
36. But if persons of capital should come to this Colony with the purpose of
depending entirely, or almost entirely, on the labour of Indian Coolies, would not the
consequence he, that a state of Society must prevail which would be any thing but
desirable ? They would employ as many Coolies as they could, no doubt, because they
would come out and bring their capital with that view; that would be the inducement to
come; I know two persons of large property at this time, who would come here if they
could be sure of having Coolie labour; but they would nevertheless be obliged to employ
Europeans grooms, in-door servants, and ploughmen. _
37. If Coolie labour should become superabundant, would it not have the effect ot
enabling many Europeans of the working classes to employ Coolies under them, and
thus cause the condition of the European labourer to be improved rather than deteriorated?
That is my opinion; but I do not think (and I say this deliberately) that Coolie labour
can ever become superabundant.
38. Do you think there is any reason to suppose that Coolies could be procured
in such numbers as to cause the supply to be superabundant, or in excess of
the demand for their services ? I think not; there is now so great a competition for
their labour in India, that it would prevent their coming in such numbers as to affect the
present rate of their wages ?
39. Is it really your opinion that the condition of the European labourer would,
be improved by his being enabled to become an employer of Coolie labour ? Such is my
opinion; I speak only of such Europeans, as by sobriety and industry could save money,
and thereby have it in their power to employ Coolies. _ ,
40. If the European labourer were enabled to employ the Coolie in his own service,
instead of himself serving a master, would it not have the effect of. making European
labour still more scarce, and therefore still more expensive than it is at present? It
would have that effect at first, but I think more of the labouring classes of Europeans
would come here if they found that they could employ the Coolies.
41. Are you of opinion that the employment of Coolies by those Europeans who
are or have been labourers, would take place ? I do expect that such would be the case.
42. In proportion as the Coolies might acquire skill in other occupations besides
field labour, would not the same consequences follow, of their being employed in such
occupations in preference to Europeans, because obtainable at a cheaper rate of wages ?
It is not my opinion that they would take up other occupations; they never do so. in
their own Country. I look upon it as next to impossible for any Coolie, after passing
the a»e of 18, to acquire skill in any other occupation than that in which he was trained.
43. Do you suppose the Coolies to be incapable of acquiring skill in any
mechanical occupation ? Coolies are suitable only for the most simple kinds of labour.
44. Do you think the condition and habits of the Coolies have been improved,
or the contrary, since coming into your service ? From their better, food in this Country,
they have acquired more bodily strength than they possessed when in their own Country;
they cannot plough; but they use the grubbing hoe better than Europeans do; and are
far more efficient in weeding, and with a little trouble in teaching them, would become
equally useful in reaping &c.
45. Might not the prevalent employment of Coolies render European labourers
less willin o, to come to this Country, and make it more difficult at the same time to
retain in’ that condition such as should arrive? I certainly think that European
labourers of sober and industrious habits would come here in greater numbers when they
found that, by saving their money, they could themselves employ Coolies; and I do not
think that Coolies could ever be brought from India in such numbers as to interfere
with the employment of European labourers, upon such terms as they would be quite
contented with. .
46. Have any of the Coolies left families in their Native Country? I do not with
certainty remember, but they were examined on their arrival here, and the information
sought by the Committee may be obtained, I suppose, from the Report of that
examination; I think that seven of them left families in India; one of them brought a
child with him. „ , . „ .
47. Have many of them been able to save money out of their wages ? Ihe whole
have ; the greater part of them have saved from -£ls, to £2O ; I believe such a sum
would enable a Coolie in his own Country to live very comfortably with his family for
the remainder of his life; some of them, after going home and spending some time with
their friends, would, I have no doubt, return to this Colony.
48. Then you think it decidedly advantageous to Coolies to be allowed to come
here for a few years ? Ido. . .
49. If Coolie labourers were introduced here in great numbers, would it be
necessary to enact any Law for their protection? I think it would; even should only
half the number at present required be introduced. *
50. Should that Law embrace an engagement on the part of their employers to
return them to their own Country at the expiration of the term for which they were
engaged, or would that be provided for in the regulations made in India in respect to the
permission for them to emigrate ? 1 think it should be provided for by enactments to
be made in this Colony; and that a bond should be taken from every man employing
Coolies, obliging him to return them to their own Country at the expiration of their
agreement, unless of their own free will they chose to remain. _


51. Have you a copy of the agreement made with the Coolies brought here by
you? I have, *it is written both in the English, and in the Native Indian languages, (copy
put in.
52. Have you a copy of the Law passed by the Indian Government to prevent the
Emigration of Coolies? I have, f (a printed copy put in.)
A.
Indian Labourer's Permit.
No.
T engage to serve_ or such
person as I may be transferred to by him, as a free labourer with mutual consent to be
declared before a Public Officer for the period of five (5) years from the date of this contract
on a monthly salary of Company’s Rupees five (5) and food and clothing as follows viz:—
Rice 14 Chittacks "I One Blanket "1
Dholl 2 Chittacks I Two Dooties (
Ghee \ Chittacks f auy One Chintz Jacket )> Yearly.
Salt Chittacks J One Lascars Cap
One Wooden Bowl J
Also one lota or brass cup between four persons, and Medical attendance and Medicine when
required, and to be sent back to Calcutta at the expiration of my term of service, free of all
expence to myself, should such be my wishes, subject to the terms of my general Agreement
executed this day of 18
Calcutta ~ .
his mark.
B.
FORT WTLLIAM
LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT,
THE 27th MAY, 1839.
Th e following Act is passed by the Honorable the President of the Council of India in
Council, on the 27th May, 1839, with the assent of the Right Honorable the Governor
General of India, which has been read and recorded.
Ordered, that the Act be promulgated for general information.
ACT, No. XIV, OF 1839.
I. It is hereby enacted, That Acts No. XXXII of 1837, and No. V of 1837, be
repealed on the first day of July next.
11. And it is hereby enacted, That on and after the said first day of July next, every
person who shall make with any Native of India any contract for labour to be performed in
any British or Foreign Colony without the Territories of the East India Company, or who
shall knowingly abet or aid any Native of India in emigrating from the said Territories for
the purpose of being employed as a Labourer, shall be liable on conviction before a Magistrate,
or Justice of the Peace, to a fine not exceeding two hundred Rupees for every Native so
contracted with, aided, or abetted, and in default of payment of such fine, shall be liable to be
imprisoned for a term not exceeding three months.
111. Provided always that nothing in this Act contained, shall be taken to apply to
any Native Seaman, who shall of his own free will contract to navigate any Vessel, or who
shall embark on board such Vessel in pursuance of such Contract, or to any person who shall
contract to serve as a Menial Servant only, or who shall embark as such Menial Servant.
I. P. GRANT,
Offg. Secretary to the Government of India.
FRIDAY,
J. Mackay,
Esq.
22 June, 1841.
* A.
1 B.


J. Lord,
Esq.
25 June, 1841.
FRIDAY ; 25 JOT#, 1841.
John Lord, Esq., of Sydney, Merchant and Landowner, called in and examined:—
1. The. Committee understand that you have been for some time in the habit of
employing Hill Coolies in your service ; —will you have the goodness to state their number and
how you employ them ? I have nineteen ordinary Coolies and one Sirdar; the Sirdar and
seventeen of the Coolies have been employed at my farm at William’s River about years,
principally as shepherds, in which capacity, as well as in that of general farm servants, they
have given every satisfaction, and are themselves I believe equally satisfied.
2. In saying that they have given satisfaction as general farm servants, will you state what
kind of farm work they are qualified to perform ? They are efficient in the field with axe or
hoe, and are expert at reaping with a sickle, but I have not tried them with the scythe, they
are expert also in the culture of tobacco and Indian corn, but I do not consider them adapted
for ploughing or driving bullocks; indeed the bullocks do not appear to like them; as
watchmen they are vigilant in guarding drays, and preventing the cattle from straying, but
they are not employed to watch sheep, as they are not so wakeful as white men, nor can they
be so well relied upon in counting in the sheep into the folds; as shepherds however they
are equal to the best white men. One of those in my service keeps 650 sheep, which is a
very large number for our part of the Country, which is woody and hilly.
3. Have you sustained many losses of sheep under their charge, as compared with losses from
flocks in charge of white men ? I have no exact information as to this point, but I conclude
there is no ground for complaint, or I must have heard of it.
4. In speaking of white men do you refer to Convict or to free shepherds ? I refer princi-
pally to Convict shepherds; I have but 3 free shepherds; I have found a general disinclination
among white men to undertake the employment; the few that I have were formerly prisoners.
While Convicts they were used to tend sheep, and they are now fit for nothing else; no person
would hire them for any other service. I have not one free Immigrant shepherd in my
service, but my farming operations are principally carried on by free labour.
5. Have you ever heard, any repugnance expressed by the Coolies to the occupation of a
shepherd f Never; the Sirdar tells them what they are to do, and manages them ; they make
no objection ; it suits them better than any other employment, while white men do not like
it; it appears to the white man too much like solitary confinement on a great scale.
6. Is it the practice with you to send out the sheep at sun-rise, and bring them in to fold at
sun-set ? It is; they are sent out at sun-rise, and at sun-set they are brought in, and
delivered over to the watchmen.
7. Is it the practice of the Coolies to take but one meal a day, and that after sun-set ? I am
not certain, but I think their practice is to take out with them in the morning a little toasted
rice, which supports them during the day, and that after their return at night, they take their
principal meal; at first it was necessary to give them their ration daily, as they would eat it all
at once; now however it is issued to them the same as to other servants, and they evince every
disposition to adopt the European mode of living.
8. Supposing that you had the opportunity, would you employ them in greater numbers ? I
would, if I were permitted, at once import one hundred, and in that case I would retain only
as many white men as might be required for farm work, which the Coolies are not so well
adapted for. My impression is, that the Coolies would make good Stockmen, as they ride
well, and walk well.
9. Were the Coolies in your service indented to you, or engaged under any particular
agreement ? They were engaged under agreement to Mr. Mackay, and by him transferred
to me under the same agreement, which I now produce. The substance of this agreement
is, that they are to serve Mr. Mackay, or such other person as he might transfer them to, as free
labourers, (such transfer to be with mutual consent of the parties, to be declared before a
Public Officer) for the period of Five Years, on a monthly salary of five rupees, or ten shillings,
and clothing and food as follows ; clothing;—one blanket, two dooties (or wrappers,) one
chintz jacket, one lascar’s cap, and one wooden bowl yearly; food ; —rice 14 chittacks,
Dholl (Pulse) 2 chittacks, ghee, (Indian butter,) \ chittack, and salt } chittack, daily ;—
also one brass cup between tour, and medical attendance and medicine when required ;
and to be sent back to Calcutta free of all expence to themselves, at the
expiration of their term of service, should such be their wish :—each man has a copy of this
document, and to it is annexed his personal description, and a ticket describing his name,
and other particulars, and certifying that that individual contract had been inspected by the
Superintendent of the Calcutta Police, and the contents thereof fully explained to the party
named in it.
10. Have you had any difficulty in conforming with the terms of this agreement as to food
and clothing? There was a difficulty at first as to both, in consequence of its having been
found almost impossible to procme some of the articles specified; but they readily agreed to
accept equivalents, that is, a ration of flour, beef, ginger, and salt, and articles of English
clothing instead, of their own, according to the scale in the document which I now produce ;*
(document put in.) This document also contains a Statement shewing the comparative cost
of maintaining these People and White Men.
11.
* c.


of wool ? I can not; I believe the natural capabilities of the Colony to be very great, but I
can not imagine that it will, or can, for a century yet to come, produce any article
which would be likely to conduce so much to the internal wealth of the Colony as wool does
now; if it ceases to be a wool growing country, it ceases to be a place of commerce; if it
continue a wool growing country, its prosperity and its commerce will increase, and the
Colonists will have the means of cultivating other articles of export, which will rise into
importance in time, and may prove a substitute for wool, in ages yet to come, when sheep
farming may necessarily cease.
23. Does the vital prosperity of the Colony then, in your opinion, depend on its obtaining
an adequate supply of sheep labour, at a moderate rate ? Most certainly.
24. Is there any other source than that of European Emigration, from which you think the
extent of labour which is required could be obtained? Yes; from all I can learn it seems that
labour of a description very well suited to our wants can be had cheaply and abundantly from
India; but, if it were possible, it would be far more desirable to obtain it from the United
Kingdom; in the present circumstances of the Colony we ought to procure labour from every
quarter that would readily afford it; men must attend to their immediate wants in preference
to those which are remote; and our present necessities are so urgent, that twenty thousand
men, if landed within the next three months, would all obtain employment.
25. Do you offer that opinion after having considered the moral and political consequences of
such a measure, as well as its immediate effect upon pecuniary interests ? The opinion which
I have expressed respecting the introduction of Coolies, has reference solely to our immediately
pressing wants ; I would be sorry to see them permanently established among us, as a mixed
race would thereby be formed, which might materially affect the future condition of this
Country ; this is the most purely British Colony that has ever existed, and 1 should like it
to continue so; but as I see no prospect of having our wants supplied by Emigration from the
United Kingdom, I imagine that the ruin of the present Colonists must be the result, unless
we procure labourers from India; the total number of Immigrants introduced last year,
was about 8,500, of these about 3,600 were labouring men; the remainder were women and
children; the increase of sheep in the Colony during that year must have been about 639,000;
that number required the services of 852 shepherds, 426 watchmen, 160 overseers, 320
draymen, 100 shearers and washers, besides hut-keepers at head stations, hurdle makers, and
hut-builders &c., in all about 2,000 men, without taking into consideration the numbers
required to supply the places of those shepherds who, during the year, adopted other modes of
life; if the number thus estimated be deducted from that of the effective labourers who
came that year, few, I apprehend, will be found to have been available for other purposes ; the
wants of the Colonists for those other purposes are well known, and I am confident that 50,000
persons of all descriptions would have been no more than sufficient to supply them; that
number would have afforded about 20,000 labourers, who might readily have obtained
employment at remunerating rates.
26. Is the present necessity for labour then so great, as to overcome the repugnance you would
otherwise feel towards the introduction of labourers of a different race ? The Colony at present
suffers from a want of labour, which has been accumulating for years, and now presses on it so
heavily, that I think no man interested in its immediate or future welfare should for a moment
hesitate in using his best endeavours to obtain Coolies, as the supply of labourers from the
United Kingdom is wholly inadequate ; nor do I suppose that this would at all diminish the
amount of Emigration from Great Britain and Ireland, but rather serve to increase it—and to
increase it should be an object of paramount consideration with every Colonist; the Coolies,
I imagine, would be employed merely in pastoral occupations, whilst European Immigrants
would be required for agricultural purposes, and as mechanics; this division of labour between
the two races, would be rather in favour of the condition of the Coolies, as they would he kept
altogether apart from European labourers; they would thus have their own society, and still
persevere in the observance of their own customs.
27. Do you think that the habits, morals, and condition of the Coolies would be improved by
their employment in this Colony ? Certainly; but I speak in ignorance of their habits, and
moral character; I suppose them, however, to be a semi-barbarous race, and I cannot but
suppose that they would be in some degree improved by intercourse with a civilized and
Christian people.
28. Is that supposition consistent with the expectation you have expressed, that they would
remain altogether apart from European labourers ? Certainly ; for they would still have full
opportunity for observing the superior habits of civilized life, and though kept apart from
the European labourers, they would be in constant communication with their employers, and
it is rather from them that improvement in knowledge, habit, or conduct would be derived,
than from the working classes; and besides, they would still be subject to all the milder
influences which it might be advisable to exercise in the amelioration of their moral or
religious state.
29. What do you consider would be the effect, on British Emigration, of introducing a
sufficient supply of labourers from any foreign Country to carry on sheep farming to the
extent which the wild pastures of this Country, so far as it is yet known, would admit; I
think that an influx of capitalists and labourers from the United Kingdom would be the
result of such an accession of labour; the advantage of cheap labour for the purposes Oi
sheep farming ought, it seems to me, to be obvious to every one —it would redeem the
Colony from the ruin on which it is verging, and place it in a state of the greatest prosperity.
30. Is not the present high rate of wages one great cause of the prevailing unwillingness to
invest capital in sheep farming ? Yes, certainly.
31.
T. A. Murray,
Esq.
1 July, 1841.


T. A. Murray,
Esq.
7 July, 1841.
Captain P. P.
King, R.N.,
8 July, 1841.
31. Have you formed any estimate of the number of shepherds and watchmen required to
attend duly to the sheep now in the Colony ? From a calculation which I have made it
seems that there are about 4,639,247 sheep now in the Colony; and, at the rate of 750 in each
flock, they would require:—
6185 Shepherds.
3092 Watchmen.
1030 Overseers (one to every six flocks).
2060 Draymen (two to every six flocks).
500 Shearers &c.
*. 500 Hut and hurdle makers &c.
13,367
This calculation is based upon the official returns of the wool exported during a certain
number of years ; by these it appears that the quantity in
lbs.
1836 was . . . 3,611,118
1837 .... 4,273,715
1838 .... 5,428,993
1839 .... 6,597,981
1840 .... 7,668,960
From this statement it appears that the progressive increase of every successive year may
moderately he estimated at a sixth; therefore, if the quantity exported in
1840 was . . . 7,668,960
in 1841 it must have been 8,947,120
and in 1842 it will be . . .10,438,306
The sheep to produce that are in existence at present, and if we estimate the fleece of each at
the average weight of the number I have stated must now be in the Colony; the
sheep must increase in the same ratio as the wool, and, if one-sixth be added as the increase for
1842, we shall then have 5,412,454, and in like manner 6,314,529 in 1843 ; by this, if the
calculation is extended, it will appear that we shall require 5000 persons to attend to the
increase of sheep alone in those two years; the number of persons required to take charge of
the increase of 1839 and 1840 was by no means so great, yet we suffer much from want of
labour now, although 1417 prisoners were assigned, and 4446 male Immigrants arrived in
1839 ; and 1556 prisoners were assigned, and 3637 adult male Immigrants arrived in 1840—
being a total for those years of 11,056; the Colony would of course require a much greater
number for the next two years.
32. What proportion does the increase on your own establishment bear to the entire number
of your flocks : I think one third of the total number may be added on that account.
33. What is the average price of sheep at this time ? I think the average price at present
may be considered to be about ten shillings, but it is very difficult, almost impossible, to effect
sales.
34. What was the average four years ago? About twenty-five shillings, and sales were readily
effected.
35. Four years ago, when those high prices prevailed, was it customary to receive immediate
payment ? Immediate payment was easily obtained, but now, sheep can not be sold even on
credit.
THURSDAY, 8 JULY, 1841.
Captain Phillip Parker King, R. N., called in and examined: —
1. As Commissioner of the Australian Agricultural Company, you have, of course, great
experience in the practical business of sheep farming ? I have had the experience of about
ten years—as a private settler, in the first instance, and latterly, as Commissioner of the
Company.
2. How long have you filled that office ? Rather more than two years.
3. Do you find any increasing difficulty in carrying on the management of the Company’s
flocks, and if so from what cause does it arise ? Yes, very great difficulty, owing to the
scarcity of labour ; shepherds are so scarce that the flocks which formerly usually contained
only 400 sheep, are now averaging about 800 ; and wherever the character of the country will
admit of it, they contain from 1000 to 1100 sheep.
4. Have the wages and expences of shepherds much increased of late, as well as the difficulty
of obtaining them ? Within the last two years shepherd’s wages have increased one-third,
and the difficulty of obtaining them is so great and increasing, that to provide in any manner
for the care of the sheep, the Company is compelled to give up Agriculture to a great extent;
I should explain however, that the greatfclifficulty is, once to obtain servants, for after they have
engaged themselves to the Company, they usually remain ; from the nature of the Company’s
establishments and stations it has an advantage over private Settlers, as it is very much
removed from thoroughfares and separated from other establishments which might hold out
inducements to the men to leave its service; in this respect, therefore, the difficulties are
rather less than those of the private settler.
5. What is the yearly cost of each shepherd to the Company, supposing him to be a free
man ? At Port Stephens a free shepherd’s wages is twenty-five pounds a year, and the cost
of his rations may be estimated at about twenty pounds, so that his yearly cost to the
Company


Company may be stated at forty-five pounds; on the stations in the interior however, the
wages have recently been increased to thirty pounds a year; most of our free servants have
families, and in this case the wife receives two thirds, and each child one half a mans ration,
which of course considerably increases the expence of such men. t
6. Do you think that the interests of the Company are injured by the practice which you have
been forced to adopt, of keeping the sheep in such large flocks ? Very much so ; from the
crowded state in which, from the want of a sufficient number of shepherds, the flocks are
necessarily kept in order to their being within view of the shepherds, our wethers, which used
to average fifty pounds each, do not now exceed forty pounds; this however applies only to
the sheep kept in the wooded country; in the open country they do not deteriorate, or losem
weight; with regard to the wool, it is difficult to say whether it has deteriorated or not
from the crowded state of the flocks when feeding, for there are many other causes which
may operate to improve or deteriorate its quality; there is no doubt however, that when flocks
are so large, they become delicate in constitution from the limited pastures to which they
must, under these circumstances, be necessarily confined ; and the strength and elasticity of
fibre, for which the wool of this Colony has hitherto been so much celebrated, has in this
way lately very much deteriorated. . . T j
7. Do you think that under present circumstances sheep farming is remunerative : Under
present circumstances, I should say certainly not; and if sheep farming only be considered, it
is certainly not remunerative even to the Company, although in the aggregate of its large
concern, the profits of one department counterbalance the losses upon another; speaking as
a private sheepholder, the returns of a sheep establishment do not meet the expences, and a
great sacrifice has to be made yearly to meet them. _
8. What is the practice of the Company with regard to the disposal of their surplus stock '
By a yearly public sale when it can be effected, but at the last sale only one fourth of the
usual number was disposed of; the increase of sheep last year was nearly 20,000, half of
which would have been sold if purchasers had been present; I attribute the Company not
having sold the usual number, to an expectation on the part of many, that the sheep would
be sold at whatever price they would fetch, a large number of ewes having been, about the
time of the sale, sold by private individuals, pressed by circumstances, for from ss. to 7s. a
head; the price at which a few were sold, namely, fifteen shillings, was much greater than
tlicir marketable value*
9. Should you suppose that if shepherds were more easily obtained, there would be a readier
sale ? I have no doubt this circumstance operated to prevent the sale being so large as usual,
because I believe there are considerable sums of money in the hands of individuals who would
purchase if they could procure shepherds. . .
10. Have you noticed among Emigrants from the United Kingdom, an indisposition or dislike
to the occupation of a shepherd? Very great, and unless indented to serve as shepherds, the
Immigrants will not do it; the Company have lately imported one hundred Irish labourers
from the neighbourhood of Cork, indented to serve as agricultural labourers, at wages of £ 1.)
a year and rations ; on their arrival, upon being desired to take charge of sheep, they
generally refused, a few were however prevailed upon and some ordered to do so, but they
either lost large numbers or starved their flocks, so that I was under the necessity of removing
them ; and notwithstanding that £\Q a year in addition to the wages they originally agreed
for was promised to them if they took proper care of the flocks, not one of that importation of
labourers is now in charge of sheep.
\i # Are you aware whether the same dislike to the care of sheep exists on the part ot
Emigrants arrived in the Colony from other parts of Ireland, or from England and Scotland ?
I think the dislike to shepherding prevails equally among all classes of European labourers,
whether from Ireland, England, or Scotland. #
12. Can you account for such a feeling—is it anything in the nature of the employment itself,
or peculiar to this Country, which occasions it ? It is so different a mode of life from what
they have been accustomed to, that they do not like it. .
13. Is it reasonable to expect that out of the whole number of Emigrants from Europe
during the next year or two, a sufficient supply of shepherds will be furnished to remove or
abate the present distress ? Judging from past experience I do not think there will be a
sufficient supply; generally speaking, every person having sheep would, I think, require to
double his present establishment, and would do so if labour could be obtained at a sufficiently
14 Have you ever taken into consideration the possibility of obtaining from any other source
a sufficient number of men qualified to act as shepherds? I have, and have made
representations to the Directors of the Company on the subject; I have looked principally
to Chinese, proposing to employ them as shepherds under their own countrymen as
overseers ; I have been in correspondence with a gentleman in China on the subject, but
the late disturbances there have put an end to my negotiations; with respect to the Hill
Coolies I originally felt an antipathy to the employment of them, but our want of labour is
now sogreat, that the Colonists I believe would generally be glad to avail themselves of
their services *
15. As you have served on the coasts of South America, you may have been able to form an
opinion as to the advantage of engaging any of the inhabitants of Chili ? Ido not think it
would answer for general service ; I have six in my employment now as horse breakers and
muleteers, but I think they would be useless for any other service, unless perhaps
stock keeping; they would also be very expensive, as we should have to incur the expence not
only of their introduction, but also of their return at the expiration of three years, which could
Captain P. P.
King, R.N.
8 July, 1841.


Captain P. P.
King, R. N.
«*JulyWß4l!
not amount to less than fifty pounds for each man, besides wages of twenty-five pounds a year
and rations; I have not tried them as shepherds, feeling satisfied, from the wandering mode
of life m which they have been brought up, that they would not do justice to the flockf • and
fiom the independence of their character, that they would not be submissive enough to be
employed a the dry, unvarying daily routine of a sheep station ; in the employments I °now
W them engaged in, I find them very valuable and useful servants; t7Se advantaZ
from the services of any foreigner it would be I think, in most cases, absolutely necessary to
superintendence of their own countrymen, or at least of persons
16 You have stated that you were at first opposed to the introduction of Coolies but that
“f? circumstances you think the Colonists would be glad to employ them—is it
eant by this that your objections are so much abated that you think it would be for the
advantage of the Colonists to have them, and that you yourself would employ them ?
mZnrpnfW disadvanta g es wbicb would attend them introduction; I consider the
mixture of blood as a great disadvantage, and their religion to be equally objectionable • but in
W P re "T e S ? rClt 7 of it would be better to have them J than none at all
1 hln i k fr l om , the I cha . rac ter I have heard of the Hill Coolies, that they would be likely
a 'c good shepherds, if well selected; there would perhaps be great difficulty in
distinguishing the good from the bad, so as to make a good selection. g 7
jjJ yoU r i l t !! nplate their employment in any other capacity than that of shepherds''
th7rhlr r( 7 arefittedfor other employment; bit lam very ignoVant of
n l ?' If lt - S J l^! d P rove to be tbe case that they are capable of performing other kinds of
iw’ ? r ,i Ve competitors with the Emigrants from the United Kingdom •
and wouid not the knowledge that such was the state of things here, tend to discourafe our
Zn !lS e L- r °!; coming to this Colony? I think it would tend to reduce the price of
labour, and might in that way discourage, the emigration of our own countrymen -but I have
] r W ZI7 Med t he 6 i n m° y f Sn J ° f Coolies in an J otber way than as shepherds.
iy. Would there not probably be also a disposition among the labouring class of Europeans to
ngage the services of Coolies, instead of themselves continuing to work for hire ? *Onlv as
shepherds and domestic servants. umy as
not “ consequence of the terms of the Company’s Charter, had a larger
propoition of assigned convict servants within the last two years, than has fallen to the share
of he setters generaHy ? No, certainly not; the assignments that have lately takenplace
the Company have been to the Coal Works at Newcastle, in which service I am pledged to
duri n «T n two I la s t v ( .r P y Tto the Agricultural Establishment at Port Stephens
during the two last years, we may have had about twenty assignments, but have lost bv some
obtaining tickets of leave, and others becoming free, upwards of one hundred and
fity convicts; m comparison with other large establishments the Australian Agricultural
Company have not had apparently their fair proportion.
fr °m 10,000, to 12,000 working hands were to arrive in the Colony during the next
nofthink it n would d ° nUmber WOuld CXCeed tbe wants of tbe Colonists ? Ido
i 2 ' pr °£ or ,?T , of tbat numb f, do y° u tbink would be required as shepherds? I think
e fourth of that number would find ready employment as shepherds.
rnlnrTZ a "T ber of Emigrants from the United Kingdom been brought into the
Sjtr? gthel fi th r yea^ to kee P U P something like a fair proportion between the
supply of labour and the demand for it, do you think the difficulty to which you have alluded
t 0 become shepherds, would exist in the same degree? Ido
deCreaSed; to that particular
Sf * n ? t tbink . tbe objection to become shepherds may in some degree be attributed to
h,ghlylUCratlTC “4 £ the mo“l;
25 Have you had any opportunity of observing the effect of the present high rate of wa-es
ZZ T he T, m °u al Char t cter l & n d general habits of the working classes? As far as my experience
that then-habits of industry and subordination have greatly deteriorated
the facility of obtommg a subsistence enabling them to spend half their time hi dissipation-
LdaSepZtations' toWE ?’ but in a S ricultural establishments!
ana at siieep stations the bad effect of such high wages is not so conspicuous.
6. Do you think that the real hardships of a shepherd’s life in New South Wales ire
greater than those in England, or other parts of Europe ? I think the shenhenk life ■
Australia is perfectly different from what it is in any other pari of the worid £ It,^thv
IW,m tl" of those who are shepherds arises chiefly from its monotonous character and
from their being shut out from communion with their fellows; tins feeling liowvei
diminished by habit, for I believe that Convicts who have bien obliged fo Zne thliftiZ l
shepherds, in most cases prefer that mode of life, for they geneX enva"e in the^Le
thCir tiCketS -° f - ka ™’ “> d "k s hepherds ‘that^he
27. Should you not think that by perseverance in attempting to induce EuroDean- tn tah*
who do o e“Xe°h.t a s S o e as h T d ’ ei,deavourin S t 0 im P r °™ the comforts of those
a ° engage m it, so as m some degree to remove the monotony comnlained nf
thSlZt dl -T f lmatlon f ! S bt gradually be subdued, even among the free population ? Yes I
think it might among the well disposed; but I look more to° the rising P genmrion for the
growth


growth of such a feeling; the readiest and surest means to produce such a feeling would be,
to give the shepherds some interest in the flocks committed to their charge.
28. Has your experience led you to think ill or well of the state of society in Countries where
there exist superior and inferior races, the latter of which is chiefly employed in labour;
and is not the effect of this mixture to cause labour to be regarded as somewhat disreputable,
and to generate habits of sloth in the superior class ? Considering the question as one of a
general character, I do not think I should be induced to anticipate favourably of such a state
of society, nor is it unreasonable to fear that the mixture alluded to, may have the result
supposed by thequestion.
29. If the sheep in this Colony were to be generally put under the charge of Coolies, can you
see any probability of Europeans, or their descendants, ever resuming the occupation of
shepherds, so as to admit of the service of Coolies being dispensed with after they have once
been introduced ? If Coolies answered the purpose of shepherding, I think the occcupation
would remain in their hands for a considerable time ; other labourious occupations, more suited
to European Immigrants, and for which the Coolie is unfitted, will readily present themselves;
how long this state of things would last, must depend upon the number supplied by European
Emigration’; if the number be small and restricted, the necessity for employing the
Coolie must for some time be maintained; but as it may be naturally expected that the
increase of Emigrating families will in the course of years be considerable, I think there can
be little doubt that the Colony will, after a time, be sufficiently supplied with labour to dispense
with the further introduction of labourers from India.
30. Taking the evils and disadvantages probably attendant on such a state of things into the
account, would you nevertheless recommend the trial to be made of introducing Coolies into
this Colony ? I have before stated that lam not an advocate for the introduction of Coolie
labour if it could be avoided, but I see no possibility of meeting the difficulties that now
present themselves to the exertions of the Colonists in maintaining the prosperity of the
Colony, by the production of its only staple—fine wool—without availing themselves of every
description of labour that can be procured; Coolie labour has been already introduced on a
small scale, with success, and I therefore do not hesitate to recommend the strongest way, the
fair trial of the experiment.
THURSDAY, 8 JULY, 1841.
Major Edmund Lockyer, of Ermington, in the County of Cumberland, and of Lockyers-leigh,
in the County of Argyle, called in and examined :
1. Asa sheep farmer on an extensive scale, have you experienced much difficulty of late in
obtaining a sufficient number of shepherds ; and if so, will you have the goodness to state to
the Committee, from what causes this has arisen ? I have had great difficulty, but my
principal establishment is situated at Lockyers-leigh in the County of Argyle, a distance of
one hundred miles from Sydney, and on this account, perhaps, the difficulty I have experienced
in obtaining labour has been greater than it would have been, had my establishment been
nearer to Sydney, the principal labour mart; as it is however, when shepherds leave my
employ, which is frequently the case immediately on the expiration of the term for which
they are respectively engaged, unless induced to remain by a great augmentation of wages, it
is next to impossible to supply their places; the average wages which I have been usually in
the habit of paying to each of such men employed on my establishment at Lockyers-leigh
are, twenty-five pounds per annum, besides rations, the cost of which I estimate to be at least
twenty pounds ; one great cause of the present scarcity of labour in my neighbourhood is the
abolition of assignment, and the absence of all other means of obtaining servants but from
Immigrant ships, the labourers by which are generally all engaged immediately on their arrival
at Sydney, so that only very few reach the interior; under these circumstances our chief
dependence is on the labour of ticket-of-leave holders, and persons becoming free by servitude;
but their numbers are very inadequate to our wants.
2. Do you think it possible to carry on sheep farming upon those terms, permanently, with
a prospect of profit, either upon purchased land of your own, or upon Government land
held under license beyond the boundaries? Under the present circumstances of the Colony,
and at the existing high rate of wages, it is quite impossible to carry on sheep farming
profitably, even on my own purchased land; and if I were to depasture my flocks on
Government land, it must be at the risk of the land being purchased from me by someone else,
after I had expended considerable sums in such improvements as are always absolutely
necessary on an establishment of any magnitude; the present low prices of wool too, and
the impossibility of effecting sales of stock, combine to shut out the flock master from any
adequate cash return for his outlay of capital in meeting the necessary expences of his establish-
ment ; I myself have stock to sell, and have even had offers to purchase, but I advised the
friends who applied to me, not to purchase, because I knew they could make no advantageous
use of the stock.
3. Do you think it probable, from the experience you have had, that European Emigration
will furnish a sufficient number to make labour as plentiful and cheap as is necessary to carry
on sheep farming with profit? It is my opinion that it will not; Ido not think that one
fourth of the Immigrants introduced on bounty, are employed as farm labourers, or shepherds,
having reason to believe that many take small farms on clearing leases, whilst others remain
about
Captain P. P.
King, R. N.
8 July, 1841.
Major Edmund
Lockyer.
BJuly^lß4l.


Major Edmund
Lockyer.
8 July,, 1841.
about the town, engaged in various mechanical emyloyments ; Immigrants generally have a
g re at dislike to engage in any employment which would take them into the interior.
4. Have you formed any judgment as to the number of labourers, shepherds especially,
required to remove the present difficulty and expence of engaging them? I should say that
from 10,000 to 12,000 would not be more than sufficient; many proprietors have ceased ta
increase their flocks, from the impossibility of obtaining shepherds; and to shew how
completely the flock master is at the mercy of those in charge of his sheep, I may mention
that twelve of my shepherds left me a few weeks ago, because I would not increase their wages
from £25 to £3O per annum, from which circumstance I have of necessity been obliged to
increase the number of sheep in each of my flocks ; previously to this I usually had 400 sheep
in each flock, but now I have from 600 to 700, which is a number by far too large, and more
than any one shepherd can do justice to ; I know by experience, that sheep kept in larger
flocks than from 300 to 400 do not thrive nearly so well as those kept in flocks of about those
numbers, nor is their wool by any means so good; and when breeding flocks, in particular,
are kept in larger numbers than from 300 to 400, the loss is very great indeed.
5. Would the introduction of so large a number be likely to reduce the rate of wages so much,
as no longer to afford a fair and sufficient remuneration to the labourer ? I should think that,
in the present scarcity of labour, it would certainly not reduce the average rate of wages below
twenty-five pounds a year.
6. Have you directed your thoughts to any other source from which such a supply of
shepherds as the exigency of the Colony requires may be obtained ? I have ; being unable to
sell my sheep here, I sent one thousand lately to Valparaiso on speculation, and directed that
twenty Chilians should be engaged for me; other persons have also ordered Chilians to be
engaged for them, to the extent, as I have heard, of from three to four hundred; the
gentleman who is to bring them, and who has lived twelve or fourteen years in Chili, says
that he can obtain them at about twenty pounds a year wages, and their rations, which are
not to include tea or sugar; a very useful class of people could also be introduced from
India, as shepherds and labourers; from the knowledge which I acquired of these people
during a military service of sixteen years in India, I feel convinced that they can be obtained
in great numbers from Poonah in the Mahratta territory near Bombay—which is a pastoral
country—and at half the rate of wages usually paid to Europeans ; I think these people would
prove more useful than the Hill Coolies; a class of Malirattas might be obtained also who
would make excellent bricklayers, rough carpenters, brick makers, masons, house servants,
horse breakers, farriers &c.; in fact there are among them numbers who could be advantageously
employed in every description of labour.
7- Are there such associations among the Indian tribes as are composed of robbers and
murderers by profession ? Yes there are; among all the various tribes of India there are
associations," the members of which are bound together by secret engagements to commit
every species of crime, robbery and murder included; but I do not think there is any risk
whatever that people of this description would volunteer to emigrate from their country.
8. Do those associations exist principally among the people in the towns or in the country ?
They have such associations everywhere throughout India, from the towns on the coast
to the far interior; notwithstanding which, it is my opinion, that if there were 30,000
Asiatics introduced into this Colony, there would not be so much thieving among them as
there would be among a third of that number of Europeans.
9. As the associations are secret, the individuals who compose them cannot be generally
known to the Police ? The individual members of these associations are not generally known
to the Police ; but I have recently heard accounts of some of these people having been detected
by the Police in acts of outrage, and made to suffer the penalty ot their crimes; the
members of these associations are often engaged in trade, and it is customary with them,
whenever, by chance, they meet a person in the course of their business whom they have ascertained
to possess money, to shew him every kindness, and to enter into conversation with him
calculated to inveigle him into a situation where he would be completely within their power,
and then to rob, and perhaps murder him.
10. Would your knowledge of the facts you have stated, and of their general character, cause
you to hesitate in employing these persons ? So far trom it, that, if I could get the same
member of Indians that I now have of Europeans, I should be very glad to discharge every
European and have none but Indians in my service ; my reason for this is, that the Europeans
in my service, knowing I cannot replace them at pleasure, set no bounds to their exactions,
and are constantly dissatisfied, though they have never been so well off before; we are also
put to great expence by the issue of tea and sugar as part of the European ration, the
quantities being -jib. of tea and 2lbs. of sugar per week to each individual an exaction which
I think the settlers ought to resist, as the men might just as reasonably insist on tobacco
being issued to them as part of their ration; the Indian labourers would be much more
contented with considerably less wages, and would be more easily managed; and by a due
observance of the terms of their respective agreements, and kind treatment, they would soon
acquire a competent knowledge of our usages in herding sheep ; I am of opinion also, that
there would not be the difficulty which many apprehend in respect to their food, as they will
eat both flour and meat, but not so much of the latter as Europeans would; rice however, is
their common food in India—being cheaper than flour—but I always found them prefer flour or
bread, when they could obtain it; they would not require tea, but I should recommend their
being allowed a pound of sugar each per week, which the settler could well afford to do, as
their wages would not be more than from twelve to fifteen pounds a year; these are my only
reasons for preferring Indians to Europeans; if the latter were to be had on equally reasonable
terms, I should not require Indians—l should prefer Europeans. H*


11. Do you suppose that any of the Hill Coolies are engaged in the associations you have
mentioned? No doubt of it; there are persons of all classes engaged in them.
12. Have you ever made the experiment of employing the Aborignes of this Country, and
if so, to what extent, and with what success ? I have made every endeavour to induce them
to undertake some steady occupation, and have employed one as a constable, but I never
could induce any of them to remain with me for any length of time.
13. Was that individual in the receipt of regular wages as a constable ? No, he was not; but
he was always supplied by me with whatever he wanted; on the occasion of the murder of
Mr. Roach, an overseer of the late Mr. Futter, this Aboriginal was the means of the
murderers being detected ; and on another occasion, he and another native captured five aimed
bushrangers; I used frequently to employ the Aborigines in washing sheep, but I was obliged
to desist in consequence of the bad treatment they received from my European servants.
14. Did you ever place that one man, or any of them in this condition —that, if they went away
when invited by their countrymen, they would lose the wages which they would earn by
remaining at work ? Never; they knew, however, that when so employed they might have had
wages if they pleased, but they were so much under the influence of their tribe, that none of
them dared to accept of them.
15. Supposing that all the Aborigines in your district were to engage themselves as servants,
are they in sufficient numbers to produce any sensible diminution in the dearth of labour which
you describe to exist there ? Certainly not; and they are diminishing fast; there are now
very few remaining; Ido not think that ten of the Goulburn tribe are now to be found in the
district.
TUESDAY, 13 JULY, 1841.
George Cox, of Winbourn, Penrith, Esq., called in and examined:—
1. The Committee understand you are engaged in sheep farming to a considerable extent ?
I am ; having about 7,000 sheep.
2. What description of labour have you been accustomed to employ in charge of sheep ?
Formerly I employed prisoners, but since the discontinuance of assignment, I have employed
ticket-of-leave men, and freed convicts, with a few Immigrants and their wives.
3. Have you had difficulty of late in obtaining a sufficient supply of labour for that purpose ?
I have frequently experienced much difficulty in obtaining labour.
4. Have wages and the cost of other allowances much increased in consequence ? Fully one
hundred per cent.
5. What is your calculation of the total cost of maintaining a free Immigrant shepherd at this
time ? From to .£SO per annum, including rations.
G. What proportion of your flocks is generally within the boundaries ? AU my flocks, but
one, are within the boundaries.
7. Have you sustained many losses in your flocks from shepherds leaving you without due
notice, and your being, in consequence, not prepared to replace them by others ? Only by
being compelled, on such occasions, to give even a higher rate of wages to others to supply
their places than that already stated.
8. Do you keep your flocks in larger numbers than you would wish to do, or would do, if
shepherds were more easily obtainable ? I kpep them in larger numbers than formerly, but
not so large as materially to injure them.
9. Are the sheep generally sulfering from the over crowded state of the flocks? I believe they
are in many instances.
10. Do you consider the fleece has deteriorated in quality and quantity from these causes?
I should say it has not, judging from the condition of my own wool.
11. If free labour only is to be employed, at the present prices, in the charge of sheep, can
sheep farming be carried on at a profit ? Looking to the prices of sheep and wool at this
time, I should say, that at the present rate of wages, sheep farmipg does not pay above five
per cent, on the capital employed in it.
12. Do you consider that you are suffering more at the present time from want of labour, or
from want of a market for "your surplus stock ? lam myself suffering at present more from
the latter than the former cause.
13. Is it your opinion that the want of a market may be traced to the want of labour ? The high
rate of labour causes us to feel most severely the greatly depreciated state of our stock market;
no doubt the want of a market for breeding stock, particularly sheep, arises principally from
the difficulty of obtaining shepherds, therefore I may say, that the want of labour is in a great
measure the cause of the great depreciation in the value of breeding stock ; besides, if there
were more mouths to eat it, butchers’ meat would be higher also.
14. From what class of people do you find shepherds most readily obtained ? From ticket-
of-leave men, and freed convicts.
15. Do the Immigrants continue in your service, or are they frequently changing? Immigrant
labour has been so high, that I have not, until lately, and then from compulsion, employed
much of it; I cannot therefore speak positively to this question.
16. To what cause do you attribute the general dislike to the life of a shepherd, and the
continual disposition to change ? I cannot say that shepherds in my service have been more
prone
Major Edmund
Lockyer.
8 July, 1841.
George Cox,
Esq.
13 July, 1841.


George Cox,
Esq.
13 July, 1841.
John Mackay,
Esq.
14 July, 1841.
prone to change than other labourers; most freed prisoners like a change, which is attributable,
perhaps, more to the desire to shew they now can change, than to any other feeling.
17. What kind of accommodation is provided for shepherds and their families at the
establishments and stations ? Those with me have each a slab or bark hut, containing two
rooms.
18. How many men are generally placed at each station? Three; two shepherds and a yard
; but if one of the shepherds be a married man, his wife performs the latter duty.
19. How far are the stations generally from each other? From two to ten miles, according
to the quality of the pasturage.
20. From your observations upon the probable extent of European Emigration, are you of
opinion that a sufficient number of shepherds can be obtained from that source ? Most
certainly not; as, were it not for the freed prisoners, I should think more than half the sheep
in the Colony would be without shepherds.
21. What would be the effect upon the Colony of the abandonment of sheep farming, or its
general reduction ? This is a question of too much importance for me to venture any positive
opinion on; but I certainly think its effect would be most ruinous; and yet, a continued want
of labour must lead to it sooner or later.
22. Can you suggest no other field of industry in which it would be possible to employ
capital at a profit in the Colony, so as to produce articles of exchangeable value for imports of
external growth or manufacture, and provide a sufficient substitute for the present export of
wool ? Ido not myself know of any other resource that we have, which would compensate
us for the loss of our wool and mutton; but being almost colonial myself, I am not a
a competent judge of what our climate can produce, that has not yet been tried.
23. Does the vital prosperity of the Colony, in your opinion, depend upon its obtaining an
adequate supply of sheep labour at a moderate rate ? Much of our prosperity certainly
depends on our procuring a sufficient supply of shepherds ; if this could be obtained, it would
tend also to reduce the cost of all other descriptions of labour.
24. Is there any other source than that of European Emigration from which you think the
extent of labour which is required could be obtained ? I can only answer this question by
repeating what I have heard others say, who know more of the people of other countries than
I do, which is, that Coolie labour would be cheap.
25. Do you offer that opinion after having considered the moral and political consequences of
such a measure, as well as its immediate effect upon pecuniary interests ? I should infinitely
prefer our owncountrymen, in a religious point of view particularly; but, as the old adage says,
necessity has no law, and seeing no other means at present of obtaining a sufficient supply'of
labour than that open to us by the introduction of Coolies, I do recommend its adoption
forthwith.
26 Is the present necessity for labour then so great, as to overcome the repugnance you would
otherwise feel to the introduction of labourers of a different race ? Ido think it is, and I fear
it is likely to become even more so.
Do you think that the habits, morals, and condition of the Coolies would be improved bv
their employment in this Colony ? What their habits or morals are Ido not know ; but I
certainly think their condition would be improved by it, as I have always understood they live
badly in their own country.
28. What do you consider would be the effect on British Emigration, of introducing a sufficient
supply of labour from any foreign country to carry on sheep farming to the extent which the
wild pastures of this country, so far as it is yet known, would admit ? I should think we
could find abundant employment for all the British Emigrants that are likely to come to our
shores, at remunerating wages, but certainly not at such high rates as the scarcity of labour
now enables them easily to obtain.
29. ■_ Is not the present high rate of wages one great cause of the prevailing unwillingness
to invest capital in sheep farming ? I think it is a principal one.
30. Do you not think that, independently of the high rate of wages, the difficulty of
obtaining any shepherds whatever occasions the great repugnance which now exists to the
employment of fresh capital in sheep farming ? I think there are two causes which occasion
it; one is, that many people do certainly find great difficulty in getting shepherds ; and the
other is, that sheep are now at so low a price, that people are afraid to purchase them, fearing
that a continued scarcity of labour will make capital vested in sheep even still less lucrative.
31. Do you find that the native youths of British descent frequently become shepherds ? I do
not recollect more than one instance of it; the life is too tame—too monotonous tor them;
they do not like it; they prefer being stock keepers.
'WEDNESDAY, 14 JULY, 1841.
John Mackay, Esq., late of Bengal, Indigo Planter and Merchant, now of Sydney, re-called
and further examined:—
1 . In the event of the present restrictions on the Emigration of Indian labourers being removed,
and of their being extensively introduced into this Colony, are there any precautions you
would recommend in selecting them in their own country ? I would strongly urge that the
selection of all the Emigrants from India should be confided to one Agent at each of the
Presidencies of Calcutta, Madras, and Bombay, and to no more; and that these Agents
should, if necessary, be placed in communication with an Agent here, appointed under the
sanction


sanction of this Government; my reasons for this are, first, that I think it the only method
of ensuring the best selection of Coolies ; secondly, that it will also ensure their being sent to us
in the proper season; and thirdly, that it will shew the people and Government in India, that
the abuses which did formerly exist in sending Coolies from that Country, will be avoided so
far as respects New South Wales.
2. Can you state what those abuses were? or those chiefly complained of in India and
elsewhere ? When the demand for Coolies became general and urgent in the Mauritius
some years ago, all parties employed their own Agents to select them, in consequence of which,
and of the vast numbers daily required, many low unprincipled hirelings, such as crimps, &c.,
were so employed, who, instead of going into the Country, where alone the proper description
of people could be obtained, engaged all the idle vagabonds about Calcutta, including thieves
and robbers eluding justice ; but this was not all—many people of higher caste, and numbers
who were not labourers, were seduced in various ways, and packed off on board ship before
they knew what they were about, or where they were going; very similar abuses were
prevalent in our own Country not many years ago, in enlisting men for the army and navy ;
latterly however the Bengal Government established very proper regulations for the suppression
of these abuses, but it could not prevent from embarking men of bad character, who were
desirous of leaving their own Country only to elude justice ; and in some instances too, the
crimps I have spoken of got hold of young men of good connexions, and others, and seduced
them into drunkenness and the perpetration of various outrages, in order to induce them to
quit the country.
3. How do you think the appointment of only one Agent at each Presidency would guard
against those abuses ? The respectability of the party I consider in itself as no small guarantee
in that country, and the employment of only one Agent would also prevent competition, which I
look upon as the only source of such abuses ; I should observe, too, that the Government
regulations formerly existing, and which would now no doubt be renewed, provide that all
must pass the examination of a medical officer belonging to the Government service, to
ascertain that no person embarks who is either defoimed, or under the influence of any local
or chronic disease; and that after such examination they must all appear before the proper
Police Officer, in order that it shall be seen that they all understand the nature of their
engagements, and that they quit the country of their own free will; the medical officer is
authorised to receive a fee of one rupee for each person examined.
4. How are the Agents to be paid, and how could respectable persons be obtained to fill the
situation ? The highest rate of commission was thirty rupees for each Coolie embarked, which
is ample remuneration, provided the whole go through one hand or firm.
5. By whom is the Agent to be nominated ? I think the Government here should appoint a
competent individual to act as Agent for Coolie Immigration in Sydney, in conjunction with
whom there should also be a Committee of the most respectable and intelligent Colonists,
who should be in correspondence with the Agents in India, who should also be approved by
this Government—and that these Agents should not be changed except with the sanction of this
Government, and under the recommendation of the Committee; the Agent here should be
paid by a small fee on each Coolie introduced, and his duty should be to carry into effect the
resolutions of the Committee; no Coolies should be introduced except those ordered
■ through the Agent and Committee, for settlers whose applications have been approved by them.
6. Are there any other precautions which you would recommend to be used in bringing Coolies to
Sydney ? I think the Captains of the ships bringing them should, besides their passage
money, be allowed a premium on every man pronounced by a Government medical officer here
to have arrived in good health ; I do not mention any regulation as to food, accommodation,
&c., as these are matters which will be looked into by the Agents in India, where the
Government regulations provide for a sufficient quantity of sound food being put on board,
under the superintendence of an officer of the Custom’s Department; but a sufficient supply
of suitable clothing should be stipulated for by the Agent here, to whom and the local
Committee, all these preliminary arrangements should be wholly entrusted.
7. Do you think Coolies should be introduced indiscriminately on the application of all
parties desirous of employing them, or would you recommend any restrictions in this respect ?
As I conclude the Coolies will come only for a limited period, say five years, and that few if any
will settle permanently in the Colony, I think the parties applying for their introduction should
be required to shew to the satisfaction of the Agent and Committee here, not only that they
really have the means of employing them after their arrival, but also of defraying the expence
-of their passage back to India, should they desire to return there after the expiration of the terms
of their several agreements; and, with respect to applicants resident in the Country, they should
also be required to come under engagement to pay the earnings of each individual Coolie
monthly into the Saving’s Bank, either in person or by an agent; this latter regulation I should
consider of great importance, as it would not only secure to the Coolie the regular payment of
his wages, and tend to establish in him habits of saving, but would prove to the
Government of India, not only that the Coolies will be better treated here than in their own
country, but also, that whenever they return to India, they are likely to take with them ample
means for their comfortable subsistence during the remainder of their lives, and, from the more
civilized habits which they will have acquired during their sojourn here, be better able to
appreciate the value of their improved condition; I would not recommend that Coolies should
be employed in any part of the Colony where they would be more than one day’s journey
from a Magistrate, to whom, if oppressed, or in any way aggrieved, they would soon find their
way; and from the facility with which many of them make themselves understood, I feel sure
they would soon be able to make their case known; no Goolies should be brought from India
excepting
John Mackay.
Esq.
A \
14 July, 1841.


John Mackay,
Esq.
14 July, 1841.
Robert Scott,
14 1841
jiiiy, 1#
excepting under indentnre or agreement to persons whose applications have been previously
approved, as before suggested, and none should be allowed to be brought on speculation; this
would prevent the many needless disputes between the Coolies and their Employers which
would otherwise arise, and from which both parties would be sure to suffer considerably •
neither should any transfer of indenture be allowed, even with the sanction of the Coolie
himself, unless with the approval of the nearest Magistrate; in sending Coolies from India
they should be embarked at Calcutta, Madras, and Bombay, in the months of November
December, and January, only, as, if much later embarked, the passage here would occupy double
the time, and its commencement would be, in all probability, in adverse stormy and unhealthy
weather. 7
WEDNESDAY, 14 JULY, 1841.
Robert Scott, of Glendon, Esq., called in and examined:—
1. You have been engaged and are still engaged in sheep farming? Yes, very extensively,
in the Darlington District, on the Hunter’s River; it is about eighteen years since I bought
my first flock from Mr. Macarthur.
2. In what way have you hitherto been supplied with shepherds ? In the first instance I
employed Convict shepherds, but latterly the greater part of my servants have been free men.
3. Have you been able of late to engage as many shepherds as you required ? On the contrary*
I have experienced very great difficulty in engaging shepherds, and have been obliged to take
any description of men I could get, many of whom have been wholly ignorant of shepherding;
these observations apply to every description of labourers.
4. Have wages and other expences greatly increased ? Very greatly.
5. Can you state the yearly expence, at present, of a free Immigrant employed as a shepherd ?
I should think it cannot be under including rations and all other expences; the wages
would be about
6. Do you keep your sheep at this time in larger flocks than formerly, and than you yourself
would wish, if labour were more attainable ? Yes, in much larger flocks than they used to be or
ought now to be kept in ; formerly, I employed four men to every 1000 sheep, three of them
as shepherds, and one as watchman, besides the superintendents; but how, the same number of
men have charge of from 1500 to 1800 sheep, and even 2000.
7. Do you think that the sheep are injured by going in such large flocks ? I have not the
slightest doubt of it; there are no fat sheep at all now, except such as are placed in small
flocks, and at choice stations; the sheep are more harassed in large flocks, and they have
greater distances to travel for their food, as the homesteads are trodden and eaten bare for a
long way round.
8. Is it in the quantity of their wool, or in its quality, or in their general condition, that the
sheep are injured ? I do not think it is the quality of the wool that is injured, that I think remains
as fine as it used to be, or better; but the quantity both of wool and mutton is certainly
much diminished, although, so far as respects my own flocks, I have taken the greatest pains
to keep up both, by a constant supply of fresh rams, without any regard to expence, and
never using any until by actual weighing at shearing time, their wool is found to come up
to a given standard; indeed I have observed that my flocks have been deteriorating in weight
for some years, although I keep a stud flock expressly for their improvement.
9. If free labour only is to be employed at the present cost, and at the present returns for
wool and stock, can sheep farming; be carried on at a profit ? It cannot be carried on profitably
any where, except perhaps on the interior stations beyond the boundaries, where the cost of
land is nothing more than the fee for a squatting license, and the assessment, and in those open
countries where sheep may be kept in flocks of 1000 each; but to attempt to carry on sheep
farming on purchased land, would be certain ruin.
10. Have you observed that the pasturage is also injured by sheep going together in such
large numbers ? I have no doubt that it greatly injures the pasturage, especially where the
flocks are folded; lam aware that in England, folding is considered beneficial, but here I
know it to be positively injurious.
11. Are you at the present time able to dispose of your surplus stock to advantage? lam
not; I cannot sell even my fat stock at any thing like reasonable prices.
12. Is the want of a Market in your opinion attributable to the scarcity of labour, or to what
other cause do you assign it ? In a great degree it certainly is attributable to the* scarcity of
labour, inasmuch as that sheep farming, owing to this scarcity of labour, is at present decidedly
a losing concern, and therefore persons will not now engage in it, thereby rendering our surplus
stock unsaleable, and the prices of fat stock are kept low by the excessive competition of needy
persons forced to sell during the present period of general distress ; none can now enter into
sheep farming, except such as, having money, take advantage of the Market and the general
distress, and purchase stock for a fourth part of its full value, speculating upon a rise hereafter
and treating it rather as a mercantile transaction than a regular and permanent branch of
business ; but such depreciation in the value of stock, consequent on the present scarcity of
labour, cannot otherwise than ruin the proprietors of purchased land, who may be considered as
representing the true and best interests of the Colony.
13. When free Immigrants engage as shepherds, is it their general disposition to continue in
the same employ, or do they frequently change ? I think it is their disposition generally not
to remain long with one master; I do not assert this to be characteristic peculiarly of
shepherds,


shepherds, it is I think the disposition of servants generally in this Colony ; and I am sorry
to say that I think one cause of this disposition to change arises out of the conduct of the
masters themselves, who very frequently endeavour to obtain the services of their neighbour’s
servants, by bribing them with offers of higher wages, and taking them without a character-
such is the extreme scarcity of labour.
14. Do they appear generally to prefer the life of a shepherd to other kinds of employment ?
So far as my observation has gone, I should say they do not; particularly the newly arrived
Immigrants, who seem to have an unconquerable dread of the bush, black fellows, &c., as is
clearly proven by the fact of our being obliged to give as high wages to a shepherd to perform
a duty which either a boy or a weakly man could perform equally well, as to a hard working
agricultural labourer; indeed so great is the difficulty of inducing newly arrived Immigrants to
engage in the business on any terms, that I now never attempt to hire them from the ships.
15. To what causes do you attribute that dislike among the free Immigrants ? The solitude
of a shepherd’s life, is, in the first place, contrary to those habits of unrestricted intercourse
with their fellows in which the generality of Immigrants have been brought up ; and in the next
place, the loitering and listless nature of its duties is altogether opposed to the energetic character
of the British people, accustomed as they usually are to active employments; besides these
causes which operate to deter them from engaging as shepherds, the newly arrived Immigrants
are, as I have said before, full of imaginary fears of the bush, black fellows, snakes, &c.
16. Are the shepherds employed by you chiefly married or single men; and what is the
nature of the accommodation for them at the stations ? I cannot at this moment tell the
proportions of married and single shepherds in my service, but I have both ; I think the
married men are the steadiest; that is, they are not so much inclined to wander from service to
service as the single men are; as to their accommodation lam peculiarly situated in that
respect, having a large extent of land of my own, on which, ever since I foresaw the approaching
termination of the Assignment system, I have exerted myself to build good substantial double
cottages, of which I have now from 20 to 30, having two rooms in each, and fit for the
accommodation of the 50 families for whom I have sent to England on the Bounty System ;
at the stations beyond the boundaries, where the occupier of Government land has not an
hour’s certain tenure, no man in his senses would go to the expence of building good or
permanent cottages, and the consequence is, that the shepherds, and even their masters, live in
a state of great discomfort.
17. Should you imagine, judging from past experience, that a sufficient supply of shepherds
can be relied on from Europe ? Certainly not; and every year the demand and supply are
becoming more disproportionate.
18. What do you consider will be the consequences on the general prosperity of the Colony,
if immediate measures be not taken to obtain an adequate supply of labour at reasonable
wages ? Inevitable ruin; for we cannot, as it is, raise even the necessaries of life, or convert
others into a state fit for the Market; this is distinctly shewn by our immense imports of flour,
salt meat, butter, cheese, hams, &c., &c., &c., to the value, I should think, of not less than
£ 200,000 yearly ; and these are articles, all of which ought to be, and indeed could be raised
in the Colony, if we had a sufficient supply of labour.
19. Can you suggest any source from which the present deficiency of shepherds you have
described may possibly be supplied ? I have long been endeavouring to get labourers from
the agricultural districts of India; from among the Hill Coolies, Mahrattas, and the people
of Madras.
20. What number of Coolies do you suppose will suffice to supply that deficiency? Taking
the total number of sheep at present in the Colony at four millions, and allowing three Indians
to every 1,000 sheep, the number at present required would be 12,000 ; an addition of 2,400
would be wanted the following year, and an annually increasing number in proportion to the
increase of the sheep; that is, if the whole of the sheep were to be tended by Indians; but
this would not be the case, as many Europeans, from choice or inability to perform more
laborious or arduous duties, would continue to be shepherds.
21. Do you contemplate the permanent employment of Indians as shepherds in this Colony?
Certainly I do not desire that, but on the contrary, whenever a sufficient number of European
labourers could be obtained at a moderate rate of wages, I would altogether dispense with the
services of the Coolies ; and I would form a fund from the beginning to return them to their
native Country, which I am led to believe they would all have a strong desire to do.
22. Will you explain to the Committee what regulations you would propose in order to obtain
the introduction of Indian shepherds, to secure their proper treatment whilst in this Colony, and
to enable them to return to India at the expiration of any given period ? I would propose
that the Coolies should be introduced into this Colony only through the intervention of the
Governments of India and New South Wales; that in this country there should be a
Committee, appointed by the Government, through whom all applications for Indian labourers
should be made, and through whom they should be introduced under a form of Indenture
approved of by both Governments; that these Indentures should pass through the police
authorities in India, in order that the Indians should fully understand their contracts,
and that no improper castes or people should be engaged; that the people should
be examined by a Medical Officer in India, in order to ascertain their bodily and mental
health before sending them; that there should be but one authorised Agent in each
Presidency to hire the Indians; that no private Agents should be employed at all; that upon
the arrival of the Indians in this Colony, their Indentures should pass through the Committee,
and be countersigned by them, and that none but such should be legal; that upon the
Indenture being delivered to the master here, he should deposit a given sum to enable the Indian
to
Robert Scott,
Esq.
r~—\
14 1841,


Robert Scott,
Esq.
* A *
14 July, 1841.
, to return to his native Country on the expiration of the term of his service, if he should so
desire; that the Indians so introduced, should be subject to the Laws of the Colony, in the same
manner as European servants; and that the Indentures should be of the description referred to
• in the New South Wales Act.
23. Do you know that there are, throughout India, associations of professional thieves and
murderers ? Ido ; and the precautions of having only one highly responsible Agent to engage
the people in India, and of requiring the Indentures to pass through the police authorities
there, have been suggested with a view of providing against the introduction of any members
ot such castes here, and they would be found, I think, quite sufficient to guard against any
danger which might otherwise be apprehended on that head; in proof of which I may mention,
that out of*Forty-three Indians introduced by Mr. Mackay, only one man was suspected to be of
that description, and he is considered the cleverest man amongst them, but his association
having been broken by his removal here, he is now reformed and behaves very well; I ought
to mention here that the men introduced by Mr. Mackay, all underwent the inspection of the
police and medical authorities at Calcutta.
24. Are you aware whether any means have been adopted at the Isle of France to prevent
the introduction of persons of bad character from India ? I believe none; and it is in
consequence the evils reported to have resulted there, from the introduction of Indians of
bad character, that we insist upon so many precautions being taken before engaging any to
be introduced here.
25. How do you propose that the Agents at the Indian Presidencies should be appointed and
paid ? I would propose that those Agents should be appointed by the Indian Government,
with the approval of the Government of this Colony; or if that were found to involve too
much delay, they might be appointed in any other way which promised to secure the services
of men of high character ; they could be paid by a commission of thirty rupees for each approved
man they sent to us, which sum is the highest commission ever paid on such a transaction.
26. Do you conceive that the payment by a commission per head would be the best mode to
secure a proper selection of persons by the Agent ? I know of no better mode, provided the
Agent be of the highest respectability.
27. You have spoken of the existence in India of associations of bad characters; —what do
you believe to be the character of the class of Indians whom you propose to introduce into
this Colony for shepherds ? All that I have heard of them, from persons well acquainted with
the agricultural population of India, has been extremely in their favour; they are said to be
a quiet, tractable, and harmless, race of people.
28. Do you consider them to be inferior to Europeans, physically, or in general capacity ?
They are clearly inferior to Europeans, both as respects their physical and mental capacity;
that is, they are unequal to such employments as require great personal strength or endurance,
or demand the exercise of the higher intellectual powers.
29. Do you contemplate the adoption of any means by which their moral character and
intellectual capacity may be improved during their residence in this Colony ? The mere
associating them with a superior race of people would, in itself, tend to elevate their intellectual
capacity; and as to their moral conduct, I believe it will be found to bear favourable contrast
with their brother labourers with a white skin ; moreover, association with Europeans will tend
to remove their prejudices, and consequently render them more susceptible of future
improvement.
30. "Would the Indenture to which you have alluded in a former part of your evidence, be of
the same description as that prescribed by the New South Wales Act, for English labourers
emigrating to this Colony ? The Indenture which I should propose would be the same as
that appointed by the New South Wales Act, modified to meet circumstances; in short, I
would recommend that they should be engaged in every respect upon terms similar to those
on which we engage British free labourers, with the addition of a stipulation that they should
be returned to India on the expiration of the period for which they were engaged.
31. Should you consider the introduction of Indian shepherds, so desirable were it not for the
cheap rate at which their labour may be obtained 1 Their cheapness is certainly a very great
inducement to employ them, as well as their docility and fitness for the occupation.
32. Would you continue to employ Indian shepherds, supposing that you could obtain
Europeans at the same rate of wages ? Certainly not, if I could obtain a sufficient number of
European labourers of a suitable description; but I think that impossible at present.
33. Do you propose to introduce any Indians, except under Indentures ? Certainly not; I
propose to bring none but such as shall be Indented to the persons who apply for them ;
I would, by every possible means, prevent their being imported upon speculation.
34. Is it a part of your plan that the expence of the passage should be defrayed out of the
Land Revenue ? No; my plan is, on the contrary, that every expence, both in India and
here, present and future, should fall upon the individual to whom the Indian is Indented,
which in itself I think will be sufficient security that not more than is absolutely necessary
will be introduced.
35. Do you suppose that the introduction of Indians as shepherds, will lead to an increase of
the Land Revenue ? Cheap, abundant, and efficient labour, from whatever source derived, will
bring renewed prosperity to the Colony at large, and no doubt investments will be made in land,
which cannot be done with any view to sheep farming at the present prices of land and wool
in a country where the usual calculation is three acres to the maintenance of one sheep,
which would, @ 12s. per acre, give an annual rent of 3s. 7d. per sheep—more than the net
value of any fleece.
36. Would not the creation of capital in the Colony lead to the purchase qf land, and thus
increase


I increase the Land Revenue, and the means of introducing European labourers. Yes; x think
it a natural result that some portion of the Capital gained would be employed in the pmchase
of land, and the creation of capital would to that amount increase the iund available tor the
introduction of European Immigrants. , , ,
37. Are you aware of any article of export, besides that of wool, which can be advantageously
produced in this Colony at the present time ? No; lam not aware of any article of export
that we could produce at present in the Colony, with any prospect of being able to enter into
successful competition with other countries producing the same commodity; indeed we do
not raise the very necessaries of life in sufficient quantities for our own consumption ; but had
we labour, we could not only do this, and so reduce a large amount of our imports, but also
produce many exports for which the climate and soil are well adapted —such as silk, many dyes
and drugs, vegetable oils, flax, timber, salt, meat, tannin, &c.
38. Do you not consider it probable that European Immigrants, who are brought out by means
of the Land Fund, may themselves become employers of Coolie labour ?. As the European
Immigrants acquire wealth and farm establishments for themselves, there is every probability
that they will employ Coolies indiscriminately with other labourers; connected with this subject,
I may mention, that numbers of Coolies, who where Indented to the planters at the
Mauritius, are now, after the expiration of their Indentures, employed at a very high rate ot
wages, as high, I have heard, as five dollars a week; in fact the Coolies are quite as well aware
of the value of their labour as Europeans are, and can make equally good bargains tor
themselves.
THURSDAY, 15 JULY, 1841.
James Denham Pinnock, Esq., Agent for Immigration, called in and examined
1 The Committee are desirous of obtaining from you a statement of the progress of
Immigration, from the date of the Returns which you furnished last year, to the present
time ? Government Immigration ceased previously to the date of the Report from the last
Committee, and all the Immigrants who have arrived since that time, have been imported on
Bounty • I hand in a Return on this subject, in continuation of that furnished by me to the
Committee of last year; and also one shewing the number of outstanding absolute and
conditional permissions to import Immigrants on Bounty, which have been granted by His
Excellency the Governor, up to the 30th June, 1841. (Returns put in.) .
2 Have you observed, during the past year, an equal demand for labour of various kinds, and
an undimmished facility of obtaining employment at the same rate of wages as before ? The
demand is as great and the wages as high as ever; I produce a table of the average rates of
wages given at present. (Table put in.) _ . . . . . . ..
3. Has the cessation of Government Emigration caused any relaxation m the careful selection
of Emigrants for whom the Bounty is claimed ? No; I do not find that there is any
disposition to introduce persons of an inferior description since the Government system has
been discontinued. .
4. Has the Bounty been refused on behalf of any for whom it was claimed during me past
year? Yes, it has been refused on many ; whenever the parties on whom it is claimed are
not in strict accordance with the regulations, whether as regards age, health, or any other
adequate cause, the regulations are enforced, without, however, seeking occasions to throw
captious difficulties in the way; they are in fact fairly construed.
5. Do you think the proportion of those who deserved to be rejected has exceeded one in
one hundred ? I should say not.
6. Have there been instances in which the Governor has not confirmed the recommendation ot
the Board, when it has been in favour of the Bounty being paid? None; and on the other
hand, when their recommendation has been to withhold the Bounty, it has in every instance
been’approved by his Excellency, although frequently appealed against.
7. Can you state whether the amount of Bounty withheld in such cases has been so great as to
operate as a check to persons engaged in bringing out Emigrants ? Certainly not; there
seems to be a general disposition on the part of the Importers to adhere to the regulations;
they are of course liable, in their turn, to be imposed upon by intending Emigrants, but I do
not think that any Importer wilfully attempts to evade the regulations.
8. Do you see any reason to apprehend that persons, not really of the class of labourers, are
brought out as such in the Bounty ships ? I have no doubt that we may have* been
occasionally imposed upon, but there is no system which would be entirely free from this
9. Have any instances been detected of attempts to introduce parties of that description under
the Bounty system ? Yes; there have been some few instances in which the Bounty has
been improperly paid, and others in which it has been improperly claimed ; in the former, the
amount has been received back from the Importer, and in the latter altogether withheld.
10. Have you detected similar attempts at delusion in the Government ships. Such
instances have occurred.
11. Was the passage money recovered back in such instances? It was not; there is no
remedy in such cases in Government ships.
12. These cases, however, bear so small a proportion to the general number, that they probably
constitute the exception rather than the rule ? Decidedly so, under both systems,
13.
Robert Scott,
Esq.
15 July, 1841.
J. D. Pinnock,
Esq-
-15 July, 1841.


J. D. Pinnock,
Esq.
15 July, 1841.
13. Do you consider the gratuities which are now granted to different Officers and Overseers,
under the Bounty system, amount to so much as £1 10s. per head for each Immigrant landed ?
No ; I make the amount to be about 18s. 9£d, according to the following calculation, viz ;
Surgeon ib g'
Master ........... 30
First Mate
Second ditto . ......... 10
Third ditto 10
There is also granted to the Schoolmaster £5; to the Hospital 17 0
Assistant £3 ; and £2 to every Overseer over each fifty
passengers; these sums will, in an average Bounty ship
bringing 250 passengers, amount to £lß —and divided
amongst that number give, per head, about ... 16
The Surgeon is also allowed a gratuity of 10s. 6d. per head for
infants under one year of age and for those born on board,
and for w hom Bounty is not paid ; these generally average
about 3 percent., say 7 in a ship of 250 Immigrants ; divide
therefore 735. 6d. among that number, and it will give per
head an addittional ........ 3^-
And, as before stated, a total per head of . . . 18 gi
14. Has the system of gratuities answered ? Decidedly ; it has been found of great advantage.
15. Have any instances occurred of the gratuity being withheld ? Yes; in consequence of
misconduct on the part of an Officer of one of the ships, the Immigration board was directed
to inquire into the case; and the Governor, on their report, ordered the gratuity to be withheld.
16. Do you think the Bounty system has improved, or otherwise, as regards the health"
comfort, or respectability of the Immigrants, since you gave your evidence last year ? generally
speaking I think it has improved ; we are getting a better class of Immigrants every year • the
Immigrants by the last ship, the “ Earl Grey,” are as fine a body of .people as I have ever seen.
17. Do you think that the recent Regulations, requiring the previous approval of the Local
Emigration Agents in England, will tend to throw any obstacle in the way of the Bounty
system ? I think it very probable that such will be the case.
18. Will the principle of granting certificates interfere in any way with the check which has
been imposed here for the purpose of preventing the importation of improper persons contrary
to the Regulations ? It will entirely supersede it, because we cannot refuse to grant Bounty
claimed on account of those on whose behalf is produced the Commissioner’s certificate.
19. Have you any suggestion to offer for the improvement of the Bounty system ? No.
20. Are you of opinion that there is a probability of an adequate number of Immigrants being
brought out under the Bounty system ? I do not think that any system will supply the
number required to meet the rapid increase in the demand for labour in the Colony. ™ *
21. Do you imagine that the number of Emigrants likely to be brought out under the Bounty
system wdl absorb the funds which it is probable may be at the disposal of the Government
to appropriate to this purpose ? I should say that any number of eligible Immigrants could
be procured under that system, and that the limit must be determined only by the amount of
disposable funds.
22. Do you consider that the parties who have received promises of Bounty will avail
themselves of them to the full extent? No; many of those promises will soon expire and
others will not be acted on ; but I calculate that about 15,000 persons will be imported on
Bounty during the present year ; about 6,000 have already arrived, and I think 9 000 more
may be expected; one half perhaps will arrive at Port Phillip.
2 J- Ara y ° U awar ® of ita havi,, g been publicly stated, that a great and increasing proportion
of the Emigrants from the United Kingdom are Roman Catholics ? I have certainly heard
such a statement made, but it is incorrect. 3
24. Are there documents in your possession from which the accuracy of such statement can
be ascertained ? There are.
25. Can you furnish a return shewing what the proportion has been from 1838 to the present
time ? I can. r
26. The Committee will be glad to receive that Return ? I will immediately prepare it.
27. Are you aware whether any considerable number of the Immigrants avail themselves of
the accommodation on board ship, which, under the late regulations, the owners are bound to
allow them for ten days after their arrival? Nearly all.
28. Is there still a prevalence of those scenes of distress and impropriety which were said
heretofore to have occurred, in consequence of their being compelled to leave the vessel almost
immediately after their arrival, and in many cases when they had no place on shore in which
they could obtain shelter or accommodation? Most decidedly not; unless biou°ht on
themselves by refusing a fair rate of wages prior to the expiration of the ten days, in° which
case they are compelled to leave the ship.
29 Can you suggest any mode in which such disorders can be prevented, which would be
preferable to the mode proposed in the last report of this Committee, and since adopted, of
allowing them the option of remaining on board, if they pleased, during a time within which
in the generality of cases, they might meet with employment ? I can suggest no method in
substitution


substitution for that which, compels the Importers to maintain them on board ship for ten
clear days after their arrival, unless the old system adopted in reference to Government
Immigrants be applied to Bounty Immigrants; viz:—that of receiving them into the
Immigrant Barracks ; I cannot, however, refrain from expressing my conviction that such a
measure would be fraught with the evils which I formerly alluded to as existing when that
system was in operation ; T must, in repeating this opinion, disclaim the most remote idea of
being actuated by any feelings of harshness against friendless Immigrants arriving in the
Colony, or a desire to prevent them from obtaining a fair rate of remuneration for their services—
the competition of Masters to obtain them will always prevent such an attempt ; but neither
do I wish to encourage Immigrants, brought out at the cost of the Colonists, in combining to
keep up too high a rate of wages ; such was the result when they were received into the
Barracks ; and as I am satisfied that no person need be out of employ at the expiration of the
ten days, provided he will accept fair wages, I feel it my duty on these grounds, and not from
motives of mere economy, to recommend its continuance; I may observe, however, that there
is certainly some inconvenience attached -to the necessity of proceeding on board ship to
engage labouiers, but I think that that may be easily and economically obviated by an
Immigration Office and yard being provided near the Shipping Wharfs, and in a more
central situation, as recommended by me to the Committee on a former occasion; such an
arrangement would soon create a regular labour market, and remove the inconvenience before
alluded to ; I would also recommend that Bounty Immigrant ships should be prohibited from
breaking bulk, and thereby greatly incommoding their Immigrants by filling the ’tween decks
with lumber &c., until the expiration of the ten days; and also that they should be compelled,
if possible, to be moored alongside some wharf or other place convenient of access.
CIRCULAR.
Replies to the following Circular Letter on the subject of the Aborigines, addressed to
Gentlemen residing too remote from Sydney , to expect the favour of their personal
attendance upon the Committee. r
No. 41-4 Council Office,
Sydney, 12 th June, 1841,
Sir,
_.. Excellency the Governor, in his opening Address to the Legislative
Council on the Bth instant, having suggested the possibility of having recourse to the
services of the Aboriginal Natives of this Colony, with a view in some measure to supply the
prevailing want of Labourers in all Agricultural and Pastoral operations, the Committee which
has been re-appomted by the Legislative Council, to consider and report upon the subject of
Immigration, are desirous of obtaining such information as to the practical success which has
attended the employment of the Aboriginal Natives, as may enable them to decide how far
the same may be feasible upon a more extended scale.
lam therefore directed to request, that you will have the goodness to reply, at your
earliest convenience, to the following questions, for the information of the Committee, and to
enable them to report their opinion to the Governor and Council upon this highly important
subject; your replies to be written on this sheet (with the addition of more sheets if necessary)
and returned under cover to me. J '
I have the honor to be,
Sir,
Your most obedient humble servant,
Wm. MACPHERSON,
Clerk of Councils.
1. Have you been in the habit of employing any of the Native Blacks upon your
Establishment ? J
2. If such be the case, please to state what numbers you have generally had so engaged;
whether they have continued in constant employ; what has been the nature of their occupation*
and how you have been satisfied with their assiduity ? ’
3. Have they been accustomed to receive wages, or other remuneration for their labour • and
if so, of what kind, and to what amount ?
4. From your experience of their disposition and capacity, what opinion have you been led to
form of their usefulness ; and also as to the possibility of attaching them regularly to the
Establishments of settlers, in the capacity of hired servants—whether as shepherds or farm
labourers ?
5. Can you offer any suggestion as to the means by which they may be more readily induced
to engage m the above, or in any other useful occupations ?
Eiease to state the amount of labour which you have known any of them to accomplish, by
the day, week, or month ; what you consider their average services as compared with those
of Europeans ; and in what manner they may be most readily induced to exert themselves ?
J. D. Pinnock,
Esq.
15 July, 1841.


Rev. Joseph
Docker.
31 Dec. 1840.
H. Bingham,
Esq.
14 June, 1841.
7. What do you consider to be their prevailing character and disposition as Labourers ; and
what are their numbers, so far as you can form an estimate, in your immediate neighbourhood;
describing the limits to which your calculation extends ?
Extract of a Letter from the Reverend Joseph Docker, to His Excellency Sir George Gipps,
dated the 31s£ December, 1840.
“ In consequence of the unfortunate occurrences which took place at the stations of
Messrs. Mackay and Chisholm, both near neighbours of mine, and of rumours of murders and
depredations elsewhere committed by the blacks, it has lately been extremely difficult I may
sav almost impossible, to procure free labour here at any price. At different times I have
applied to my agents both at Yass and Melbourne to hire and send me men, but without
success Although unrestricted as to wages, their answer has been, that labourers cannot on
anv terms be induced to come. Under these circumstances I determined to empioy the
Aboriginal Natives as shepherds and watchmen. I cultivated a more intimate friendship with
them in September last—l gradually employed them —found them to be excellent shepherds,
faithful and honest, and I now have the pleasure to report that they have the sole charge of
mv sheep, consisting of between 6,000 and 7,000, young and old; thus engaged, fourteen
men receive regular supplies of food and clothing, and eight or ten more are occasionally
employed and fed.”
Henry Bingham, Esq., Commissioner of Crown Lands, Police Station, Tumut River.
24 June, 1841.
1 I have one Native Aboriginal Police-man, and when not on duty with me in the bush, he
will do any thing he can that I may require. My public duty does not admit of my
attending to any other pursuits, or I have no doubt I could attach others to me. #
2 I have frequently had the natives to cut bark, and grind wheat, though not wanting it, in
order that they might do something for any food or presents I might give them, and they har e
ih r The*remuneration blacks most desire, is a very liberal allowance of fresh meat
4 I consider the Aboriginal Natives are a very shrewd, cunning, and intelligent people, and
a neonle of great observation and quick powers of imitation; but there are great difficulties
in the way of attaching them to the establishments of most settlers as otherwise they
would make most excellent and superior shepherds and stock-keepers. The assigned servants
have generally a great dislike to them, and are jealous of seeing them employed, and
threaten them, and the natives, finding themselves uncomfortable, will not of course remain at
the stations : the treatment that they have been in the habit of receiving from this class of men,
and from parties who ought to have known better, until recently checked by the establishment
of the Border Police, has been one great and baneful source of all the hostilities and aggressions
committed on the whites ; the spirit of revenge lies deep and long m their breasts, and the
innocent suffer at times for the guilty ; and I would fuither remark on this point, that the
unfortunate promiscuous intercourse that has taken place so much in this Colony between the
settlers’ assigned servants, and the Native Aboriginal women, until recent measures have
Partially checked the same, has much increased the dislike of the Aboriginal Natives to the
whites • and it is melancholy to dwell on the fact that infanticide is frequent among them, as
the Native Aboriginal men cannot bear to see the half caste children, and the gins destroy
them in the wild bush. . . . ,
5. I have remarked that where the assigned servants are kept from much intercourse with the
blacks, the latter will more readily engage, if required, in such pursuits as shepherding and
stock-keepino - , provided there is a kind and humane person at the head of the establishment;
I should consider that a large increase of married Immigrants in the interior beyond the limits,
would be one great means of attaching the blacks to the stations ; and the exercise of a more
liberal and generous spirit among the wealthy stockholders beyond the limits, by permit-
ting their superintendents to give them fresh beef occasionally, instead of directing their
stock-keepers uncourteously to drive them off their runs, on the futile grounds that they
frighten the cattle, would tend much to the same great end; the parties themselves would, if
they understood their own interests, save most considerably by the line of conduct I have
pointed out; as if the blacks are kindly requested to traverse any particular direction of a cattle
run' when hunting, they will do so, if on friendly terms ; they have no desire to disturb the
cattle, but it is an excellent and good excuse for indolent stockmen, who in some cases see their
master or superintendent but seldom. . . . . . v , , .
6. I have known some of the Aborigines of both sexes, (particularly the gins) who, during the
dav performed as much work about a house or farm as any European house servant; I have
seen them milk cows, drive a team, &e.; hut I consider that as shepherds or stockmen, they
would be most useful; Ido not think them adapted either by climate or temperament for direct
hard manual labour. . . . , ~ ..
7. I consider that they do not fancy the simple occupation of an agricultural labourer ; it is
inimical to their disposition and temper; but as shepherds they could still range the forests and
as stockmen they could do the same. The number of blacks m the Murrumbidgee District may
be estimated at from 1,500, to 2,000. District


District of Bligh,
Commissioner of Crown Lands' Office,
„ June 2 §th, 1841.
OIR,
a ln answer *° y° ur Circular regarding the Aborigines of this Colony, I bee to sav
that I have always found them to he of an indolent, lazy, and careless disposition; lam
aware ot some instances m this District where a black is found to do the work of a European
but these are exceptions to the generality of them; I consider the work done by a native
black, compared with that of a European, to be about one-third; the native blacks are never
paid m money for what they may do for the settler, but in rations, such as tea, sugar
tobacco, flour, and meat; lam perfectly certain that no settler would risk his flocks in
the hands of a native black. The female blacks used at one time to herd sheep, and they did
it very well, but that was from their being taken from the blacks to whom they belonged, and
made slaves of, which often led to bloodshed, but which has been entirely put a °stop to
within the last two years. A native black will for a few days work well for you, he will then
tell you, that he must go to the bush and look for his brother black fellows; if you are angry
with him or harsh, he will leave your place, and that clandestinely.
I have the honor to be,
Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
GRAHAM D. HUNTER,
. Commissioner of Crown Lands.
Wm. Macpherson, Esq., 1
Clerk of Councils. J
William Ryrie, Esq., Yereng, on the Yarra Yarra.
8 July, 1841.
1. I have, frequently.
2. Various numbers ; never more than a dozen or fifteen at one time, and only for three or
tour days continuance; they have been employed in cutting bark, washing sheep
and gathering potatoes when the crop was lifted; when there was any person to overlook
them, they finished the work they engaged to perform, but with a good deal of urging.
3. they have always received food in return for their labour; also tomahawks when cutting
bark; every day they were employed they had a large mess of soup made from beef, with
vegetables m it, and a portion of bread for each, ready for them when they returned from
work; two or three of the women undertook the cooking of the food, and in the evening
before returning to their camp, they received a further reward of one pound of flour and a
few ounces of sugar each.
4. The adults are all able to work, but are not all alike disposed to do so; many of them
on arriving at a station are anxious to get employment during their stay, while others would
not perform the most trifling piece of work for any remuneration, preferring to go hunting
others in any sort of labour; some would willingly remain at the stations
which they have become attached to, and make themselves useful, were they allowed to do so
y the rest of the tribe; I consider that their wandering habits, which appear to be guided
by those who possess most influence in the tribe, completely prevent their being voluntarily
attached to any establishment in any capacity. J
j t^ l ey - liaVeneVerr i. l^ ainedinoretllan a few da y s atatime upon my station, and even then
shifted their camps to different parts of it during their stay, lam unable to state any means
by which they might be induced to remain permanently in any capacity on an establishment •
but as some have expressed a great desire to ride on horseback, a few might be made uesfnl as
stock-keepers.
6. The principal work they have done for me has been cutting bark, of which I did not
keep any account. The only opportunities I have had of comparing their services with those
of Europeans, were during sheep washing, at which they assisted well during the first hour
but subsequently flagged in their exertions, and frequently came out of the water to warm
themselves at a fire, complaining of the coldness of the water, which was unfelt by the
Europeans; they would have taken more than double the time to wash the sheep than the
Europeans, if they alone were employed. The method I have invariably pursued to induce
them to work, and found to be of most avail, is to give the promised reward to those only who
will work, and on no account to give any thing to the idlers.
' They have no steady habits of labour, and whatever they undertake is performed by fits
and starts, requiring to be urged pretty often to go through with their job, particularly if it
should be of three or four hours continuance, as any trifling occurrence that takes place will
divert their attention. I can form no estimate of their numbers in this neighbourhood, as
they merely pay flying visits, and are generally accompanied by natives from other tribes. I
am consequently unwilling to hazard even a guess concerning the number of the tribe which
belongs to the Yarra Yarra.
JAMES
G. D. Hunter
Esq.
/ >
26 June » lß4l •
wiiiinm n»r'»
Z
,
8 July, 1841.


, w „
j arae s Walker,
.. -A
BJuly, 1841.
Edwin Rouse,
Esq.
9 July, 1841.
James Walker, Esq., J.P., Wallerowang.
8 July, 1841.
1 I have, both here and at my out-stations on the Castlereagh River.
2*. I have had a native of the Country on the Castlereagh River living with me here for upwards
of two years; he has assisted in milking cows, riding atter cattle or horses, and accompanies
me on any journeys I have occasion to make to my stations ; there are usually 4 or 5 at my
breeding herd station on that River; they milk the cows, bring them home in the evening
&c., and generally remain on the spot, performing many services which it would be almost
6 wlw about the stations, get milk, 9our, meat, and —ally
tea, and sugar ; generally speaking, they get all the food tbsy
remain; their services are very valuable, looking up stray cattle, and breaking mle
milk, &c.; to the young man (about eighteen years of age) who has hved with me two
years, I give all the clothes he requires, which are of the same quality as are used by free
. mechanics; he gets his food with the other servants in the kitchen, and I have branded
two of my best 3 year-old heifers for him ; I allow him £lO a year as wages.
4 Their services are most valuable and highly useful; their capacity is equal to the care of
any kind of stock; their dispositions are good, but they are susceptible of fits ot passion and
sullenness, which however, soon wear off; they seem fickle, and sometimes appear to act
from motives or impulses, which it is not easy to account for satisfactorily, from any analogy
our own feelings or sympathies enable us to apply ; kindness and justness in all dealings with
them will attach them to the service of a settler ; they would however I think occasionally
break their engagements at first, from their imperfect knowledge of the nature of a mutual
contract, though after a time, when they become acquainted with their advantages, and
are aware that they are protected by authority, and considered as being hired and entitled
to receive rations and wages in the same manner as white men, they wdl m all probability
remain, and be regular at light work, particularly riding amongst stock, and m many cases,
they will follow a flock of sheep. ~ , . ~ . . . ~, •
5. I would suggest that the terms on which they are hired should be registered, and their
wages or live stock accounted for to some authorised individual or body; they would
themselves either dissipate or be cheated of their earnings: in some cases the white
people of the lower classes would view and treat them with jealousy as being competitors with
them in the labour market; I cannot say I think any plan to ameliorate their hard fate and
make them useful to the settler could be devised, that would not be surrounded with many
difficulties for a time, from the very different relative positions in which we have heretofore
stood towards each other; those who have been longest in contact with the white
population, are the least useful, whilst they have adoptedmur vices.
6. I can only state generally, that the quantity of labour they perform when at work is small,
indeed they have never come under my notice as labourers for more than an hour Or two at a
time in harvest; hard work is not suited to their disposition, they prefer nding, driving
cattle, going out on journeys, &c. , . , . . ,
7. They like uncontrolled liberty and freedom; amongst themselves they appear to have few
restraints ; they are acute, intelligent, and shrewd, and well disposed ; in short it is impossible
that Europeans, taking possession of a country and living amongst the Aboriginal Inhabitants
of it, could maintain a better understanding with them than for many years past has subsisted
in this part, and also on the Castlereagh River, since stock was first taken out there ; we have
abridged all their natural sources of existence, and they appear satisfied to receive our food in
exchange for services occassionally rendered us; in this immediate neighbourhood, that is,
the country from the northern borders of Argyle, by the Abercrombie River to Bathurst
Plains, (not including the Bathurst tribe,) and from thence to Capita, I suppose there are
not above 40 or 50 of both sexes and all ages; their numbers I think have diminished since I
first came to this part in 1823 ; though they are occasionally seen intoxicated and resort too
frequently to the neighbourhoods of public houses, they have not abandoned their natural mode
of procuring food; but still continue to place their chief dependence for a supply in hunting.
Edwin Rouse, Esq., Guntewang, near Mudgee.
9 July, 1841.
o' nfave employed six native blacks occasionally to assist my stockmen, in the care both
of horses and cattle, and also to assist my bullock drivers, and have invariably been satisfied
with their conduct. „ , , . „ . ~ ,
3. I have allowed them a sufficiency of clothing, food, and tobacco.
4 From my experience of the disposition and propensities of the Aboriginal natives of this
district, I am led to believe, that the present generation will be of very little service, either as
shepherds or farm labourers; there is, however, a possibility of attaching them regularly to the
Establishments of settlers in the capacity of hired servants.
5 The suggestion I have to offer is, that every Aboriginal native who may be disposed to hire
or engage, for any time or period, should be considered beyond the control or authority of the
elders and chiefs of the district or districts to which he or she may belong, otherwise, whatever
kindness may be evinced towards them, or however attached they may become to any family


or establishment, they will, so long as their native rulers are allowed to exercise an unjust
influence over them, be valueless to the community, and every effort to render them a
permanent benefit, will be fruitless.
6. The amount of labour they perform, and their average services as compared with
Europeans, I must leave others to determine who have seen them work; I believe they 'will
be most likely to exert themselves in assisting at sheep washing, bullock driving, and stock
keeping.
7. My opinion of their prevailing character and disposition as labourers is, that they are
indolent, and prone to wander; their numbers seem to be fast decreasing, as I cannot muster
above four or five who really belong to the immediate neighbourhood in which I reside.
G. B. Boulton, Esq., Native Dog Creek.
16 July, 1841.
1. I have.
2. I have never had more than three, and never succeeded in keeping them on the establish-
ment for a longer period than three weeks at any one time. I have never been able to get
them to do more than assist in washing sheep or cutting bark; for two or three hours they
work very well, but after that they are of little or no use.
3. When employed cutting bark, they are paid in rations, but during the shearing I pay them
six shillings per week, and allow them 12 pounds flour, 15 pounds meat, 6 ounces tea, four
pounds sugar, and \ pound Colonial tobacco, per week.
4. They are very useful in tracking lost sheep, cattle and horses, also, as I before stated, in
cutting bark and assisting in washing sheep. I do not think it possible to attach them
regularly to establishments, as generally speaking, they seldom remain longer than a week or
ten days in one place; I have repeatedly tried to engage them as shepherds, and offered a 625,
per annum, and rations to them, but have not been able to get one to stay with me. As
labourers they would not in my opinion be worth their rations, they are so excessively indolent.
5. I believe the settlers have tried every means to induce them to work, but with very little
success. Ido not see the slightest possibility of inducing the adults to engage in any useful
occupation; but I have every reason to believe that if schools were established for the education
of the Aboriginal Native children, they would in a few years in some measure supply the
demand for labourers, and be of great benefit to the Colony.
6. I have never known one of them to do a days work; I consider an European’s labour per
day, to be equal to what it would take four natives to do ; they are not at all adapted for
hard work, and the only way they could become of any real benefit to the settler, would be in
following sheep, if they could be induced to give up their wandering habits.
7. As I before stated, they are too indolent to become of any real use as labourers. I need
only add, they are too indolent to grind wheat, when it is given them. I only know of two
instances of their staying for any length of time on an establishment, and these men at times
take to the bush, and remain away for a month or six weeks ; no dependence can be placed on
their staying.
As none of the questions relate to the Aboriginal Native children, I avail myself of
this opportunity of stating my opinion, that if some means could be adopted by the
Government for the education of the Aboriginal Native children, they would in a few years
in some measure supply the demand for labourers; I would therefore recommend
that schools should be established in the different districts for the education and conversion
of these unfortunate children, whence after remaining for a time until they are in some mea-
sure weaned from their former habits, they should be removed to Schools down the country,
which would prevent any of the tribes having influence over them; I am well convinced, if
Bewards were given to those Natives who would give up their children to be educated, that
they would willingly do so, and by this means more would be accomplished in twelve months
towards the conversion of these unfortunate people to Christianity, than has hitherto been done
since the Mission was first established. The progress made by the children now under
the care of Mr. "Watson, will fully bear me out in this assertion, as they know and understand
a great deal more of the contents of the Bible, than most European children do, of the same
age. The Government having now 15 per cent, of the land fund ’set apart by authority, to be
expended on the Aboriginal Natives, lam sure they could not expend it better, than by
establishing Schools for the education of these children,; as a proof ©f what little can be
done with the adults, I need only mention the little success that has attended the very
great exertions made by the Mission at Wellington Valley.
Mr. Benjamin Barber, Hume Biver.
16 July, 1841.
1. Yes.
2. Various numbers, as they occasionally visit the station; one boy, about fourteen years old,
has been in my service for two years attending cattle, and in very few instances has lost any;
he has also been on the road with the team, and was very useful in tracking bullocks when they
were lost, or driving cattle or sheep up or down the country; others have also been engaged
and performed this duty faithfully; and some have been entrusted with flocks of sheep, but
their stay never exceeded a few weeks ; in one instance, I had a black for three months to attend
a flock of sheep, and he did it as well as a white man.
3.
Edwin Rouse,
Esq.
9 July, 1841,
G. B. Boulton,
Esq.
9 July, 1841.
Mr. B. Barber,
16 July, 1841.


Mr. B. Barber,
I6~juiv 1841
’
J. J. Phelps,
F.sq,
<6 July, 1841,
-3. We pay them with articles of food and clothing, which seem to satisfy them best, as
they do not know the value of money; if they stay for a month or two, they are satisfied with
these articles, and a blanket when they leave, which must be promised beforehand as a reward
fore their good conduct, and on no account withheld from them.
4. In some things they are truly useful, for instance in cutting bark, and assisting in washing
and shearing sheep ; to attach them to a place would be impossible, although they frequent
those stations most where they are best fed; if they could be induced to leave their tribes
and to indent themselves to kind and humane masters in distant parts of the Colony, they
would make faithful servants ; the only way this could be effected, would be to persuade
them to volunteer their services, and to obtain permission from the other blacks, otherwise
it would cause discontent, and perhaps bloodshed; they are best adapted for shepherds and
stockmen, as they are averse to hard labour.
5. The only means that I can suggest, would be for the settlers to feed them well; also to
endeavour to reconcile those white people who are averse to them, as the nearer they are allied
to the whites, the nearer they approach to civilization ; also to distribute them to the settlers
so that each may have his home ; and the settlers not to encourage each others blacks it
they leave the stations; they may be induced to stay at a station, simply by giving them
a brass plate, and they ever afterwards designate the giver as their master.
6. I have had one black in my service for three months, attending a flock of sheep; during that
time his services were equally valuable as those of an European ; at sheep-washing, I consider
two blacks equal to one white man in minding sheep for which they are best adapted, and it
they could be induced to do so their services would be equally valuable as those of Europeans ;
by promising them a blanket or a brass plate, and by treating them kindly, they become
attached to their masters, and while they will stay they can always be made useful in
some way.
7* They are not disposed to continue at any kind of labour for more than a few hours in a day ;
to induce them to stay at one kind of labour would be impossible ; there are three distinct
tribes in this neighbourhood, the Hume or Uradgerry, the Weiro or Ovens, and the Unangan or
Lower Hume, consisting of about 200 in each tribe; the Hume blacks are the most civilized
and approach the huts without fear; we are in the centre of these tribes, and they extend over
a country of about 1,000 square miles.
To conclude, it is much to be wished that a person were appointed who would
endeavour to organize a system in each district, to protect the blacks from oppression ; a
person in the character of a Missionary, or Catechist, would be the most desirable, as he could
instruct the whites, and endeavour to cultivate their morals, as well as those of their
sable brethren, as it is certain there is a deficiency in morals among the whites as well as
the blacks; under such circumstances we might hope to see the blacks make themselves
useful, but at present they have an example of nothing but vice before them, from our own
countrymen, who are in a sad state of moral discipline, religion appearing to be entirely
forgotten among them; and I fear little can be done for the blacks until the whites themselves
become better men.
J. J. Phelps, Esq., Wellington.
16 July, 1841.
1. Yes.
2. The greatest number at any time engaged on my establishment has been fourteen males
who have continued for three and four months at a time; they were principally engaged in
sheep washing, at which work, I found them as efficient as white men.
3. At sheep washing, I allow them one shilling per day, and as much rations as they and
their wives, &c., if any, can consume. I have known them to earn three pounds, in two months
besides being amply supplied with food.
4. Owing to their independent spirit, and love of a wandering life, acquired before their
knowledge of white people, I fear the difficulty of turning the present generation to permanent
useful purposes, would be great, as I have known them to leave their work in the most hurried
time, and go off into the bush to attend meetings of their tribes, &c.
5. I fear there would be little use in attempting it with with the present race of adults, for
the reasons above stated, but I am of opinion that the younger ones, if properly trained to
agricultural pursuits, &c., at some public institution, could in time be made useful members of
society, as J know from experience, that after associating for any time with whites, when
young, their ideas and native habits become quite changed.
6. One shilling per day is the highest wages I have known them to get; in many instances
their services are fully equal to those of Europeans, though the contrary is the case with the
majority of them; kind treatment, and placing them, as much as possible, on an equality with
yourself, most readily induce them to exert themselves, as they look down with the greatest
disdain on convicts, perfectly understanding the cause of their inferior condition; they are also
well aware of the great disadvantage they labour under in a Court of Justice, and, in case of
dispute, of the difficulty of recovering wages due to them, owing to their evidence not being
admissible. 5
7. They are too unsteady a race to engage in any permanent employment, but when
they give their mind to it they are good labourers; I calculate their numbers from Wellington,
along the Macquarie to Mount Harris, to be about one thousand, besides women and children!
J-


J. W. D. Passmore, Esq., Molong Nyrang.
19 July, 1841.
I' Yes ’ m iiad - a^out 15 natives employed in sheep washing; since then, two have at
different periods been employed in taking care of horses, say for 3 or 4 months at each time •
and one for a short time as shepherd. ’
2. This is answered in part by my reply to Question 1; in answer to the latter part, I cannot
say 1 was satisfied with the manner the work was performed.
3. Yes; the usual ration given to my free hired servants has always been allowed to the
natives when at worK, and in addition, tobacco, blankets, and slops,—in many cases making
the labour ot each cost ten shillings extra per week. °
4. I consider that although they may be for a time usefully employed in some light
occupation, which, from its novelty, conveys to their minds pleasure, rather than the means of
gaming a livelihood, —such as riding after stock, horses particularly—yet, speakingof the present
generation, it is impossible to count upon their remaining permanently at any establishment
tor so soon as the novelty in their improved condition wears off, they invariably resume the
roving life they have been accustomed to, returning only at uncertain intervals, when hunger
or the caprice of the moment, may direct them. & ’
5. I have already stated that I consider it impossible to work any useful reform in the adult
native; some good might be effected among the rising generation, by the formation in the
mtenor, or an establishment similar in its working to that proposed by Mr. Robert Owen for
the benefit of the lower orders of the mother country; such an establishment would require a
clergyman, and several strictly moral married artisans, for the purpose of teaching the natives
their various trades ; the profits arising from the sale of the various articles produced at the
establishment, should be equitably divided among those who assisted in bringing the articles
into a marketable condition; small grants of land might be offered as premiums to the natives
for good conduct; they should be encouraged to take an interest in agriculture, and having
thus made the native feel the comforts of a home, and that he has some property at stake I
think he would soon lose his taste for a precarious living in the bush. Religion could in the
meanwhile be gradually instilled into their minds, but force or restraint of any kind should be
avoided as much as possible; it would be absolutely necessary to forbid the white population
from approaching within a certain number of miles of the proposed establishment as it is
I believe, but too well authenticated, that while the natives are slow enough in acquiring the
useful qualities of the convict population with which they are surrounded, thev shew great
aptness in picking up all their vices. J &
?• "With regard to the first part of this question, it will be seen by my replies to questions
1 and 2, that I cannot satisfactorily answer the point; comparing their work with that of
Europeans, I should say one of the latter was fully equal to ten of the Aborigines • The plan
I adopt to induce them to exert themselves is, never to give them even their rations until the
work for which they have contracted is completed, otherwise thev would invariablv sleen and
smoke their time away instead of working. J F
7.. They are indolent and cunning; the former inherent, but much of the latter acquired from
mixing with the convicts ; it is difficult to form an estimate of their numbers Derhana
there may be about 200; I speak of the tribes of Molong, Borea, and Billibong. ’ P
William Roadknight, Esq., South Geelong.
19 July, 1841.
V 1 ha 7cJj een “ S e hablt ,°( em P% in g the black natives upon my establishment, from
June, 1836 up to the present time; they listed mein i 836, to build a bridge over the
Marraboul River ; this was the first bridge erected at Port Phillip 6
2. Duriug the years 1837, 1838 and part of 1839, I had them employed in numbers varying
from three to twenty; three lads have contoured to be employed on my establishment S, to
the present time, with an oceasronal absence of a few days, when they generally inform me of
therr mtentron ;in 1839 I did not find them so well disposed or wilLI to work - in 1838
I had them employed as shepherds; one man continued that duty for three months in
succession; others were employed assisting to clear land for cultivation and fencing- I
employed them at this early period not with any view to profit, but to conciliate them being
convinced from my experience in Van Diemen’s Land, that if not brought to habits of
usefulness they would ultimately be exterminated; I have been perfectly Satisfied with the
people 7 ° f many ° f hCm; perhapsthere is a s much difference in them as among white
3 ‘ l bave ™ ade ’{.a ™ le not t 0 g iv f. . them money, from an idea that it would be improperly
used by them in their present condition ; those who have only worked occasionally with me
I have remunerated with flour rice, and sugar, and those who continued at their work with
clothing, blankets, knives, and tomahawks ; the lads who have so long remained with, and
who I believe are attached to me, I supply with food and clothing regularly; their clothing may
cost about per annum, and their food, varying little from that of Europeans, about £2O
per annum. In this manner I have expended from 1836, to the present time, three and a-half
tons of flour, one hundred pairs of blankets, besides clothing, knives, tomahawks, rice,
4.
J. W. D. Pass-
more, Esq.
19 July, 1841.
W.Roadknight
Esq.
19 July, 1841.


W.Roadknight
Esq.
19 July, 1841.
John Rae,
Esq.
20 July, 1841.
4. Generally speaking, I think them well disposed, and in point of capacity not inferior to
Europeans ; of their usefulness there can he no doubt; under judicious management lam of
opinion they might be induced to attach themselves to settlers; their tastes for occupation
vary much in the same manner as white people’s.
5. There will doubtless he much difficulty in accomplishing this most desirable object, yet
I am not inclined to consider it impracticable ; very much will depend upon the persons
under whose management this important measure may be attempted ; In the first place I
beg to suggest the propriety of making a smallreserve of land for each Tribe; and lam induced to
believe that if 3 small hut and piece of this land, with blankets, mattresses, cooking utensils,
and implements for the cultivation of potatoes and other vegetables, (nothing being allowed
to be removed from the establishment,) were allotted to each family, with a moderate supply of
provisions judiciously issued, many would be induced to locate themselves ; thus a village could
be formed where their labour would be useful and available to the white population ; some would
in a short time he induced to hire themselves (under the guidance of the person placed in charge
of the village or settlement,) to the settlers, in different occupations. In no case should two
tribes be encouraged to meet, they have always some injury fancied or real to revenge, and
bloodshed is commonly the result of such meetings. This I consider to he one great cause of
the failure of all the attempts hitherto made for their civilization.
6. As stock-keepers and even shepherds, when they can he induced to remain, their labour
is little inferior to that of the generality of our uninstructed European servants. At laborious
employment, such as cutting timber with a cross-cut saw or an axe, I have known some
of them perform in one day as much labour as Europeans of the description I have named, hut
on an average the labour of a native is perhaps not more than one half that of a European;
to induce them to exert themselves, I have found it necessary to provide a hut and blankets
for them, with a regular, though not over abundant supply of food, at the three usual meal times.
7. I consider them perfectly honest towards their employers; I do not consider them
generally industrious, though I know of some exceptions; I have found them quite tractable
under kind and humane treatment, accompanied by a proper degree of firmness, and I can hear
testimoney to their gratitude ; I have not at this moment an opportunity of forming a correct
estimate of their numbers; that portion of the County of Grant, commencing at the
Wairaby River, and extending thirty miles west of Geelong township, may probably contain
about one hundred and forty men, women and children; and I beg to add that it is of these
tribes only I am enabled to speak.
John Rae, Esq., Hume River.
20 July, 1841.
1. I have been constantly in the habit of employing the native blacks upon the different
establishments under my superintendence.
2. I have had, generally, one or two who remained a great portion of their time on the station;
I have always found them most useful, and willing to do any thing in their power that I
required them to do ; I have frequently employed them in searching after stray cattle, or horses,
and have been much pleased with the way in which they did their business, and the care they
took of their horses ; they are particularly fond of riding, and it is my opinion, if properly
trained, they would make most excellent and careful stock-keepers; in such pursuits I have
found them shrewd and intelligent; I have frequently had seven natives stripping bark for roofing
huts, &c., and have always found them most willing to get me any quantity I required.
3. The remuneration for their labour, in a great measure, depends on the distance from a
township or store; when near either they soon learn the value of money, and expect,
and ask, for some trifling sum; in the Mannas country, money is of no value to them,
and I usually pay them with some article of clothing, or a blanket, tomahawk, &c., according
to the quantity of work they do ; I always give them rations when at work, and have their
meals cooked for them; they have no care beyond the present, and I have known them make
away with a week’s rations in one day ; I have had one or two on regular rations, but finding it
impossible to make them use any thing like economy, I have discontinued giving rations
to them.
4. From my knowledge of their disposition and love of change, I think it next to an
impossibility to employ them as shepherds, or labourers, in sufficient numbers to enable the
settlers to feel the benefit of their labour.
5. It has frequently come under my observation that, when a native black has been retained
on a station for any length of time, the tribe to which he belongs use every means in their
power to induce him to leave, and in the event of not doing so, I have known instances in
which the life of the party was in danger until he did leave ; I cannot assign a reason for this ;
it also appears to me, that there is a very bad feeling towards the blacks, prevailing
in the minds of the assigned servants and labourers generally; the blacks are often
badly treated by this class of persons, who get them to do some work under promise
of a reward, and when the reward is earned, they drive them away without giving it; such
treatment the blacks do not forget, and the character of laziness they have acquired is, I think,
in a great measure to be attributed to their unwillingness to he a second time imposed upon;
they never forget a promise made to them, and if broken, they will never again trust that
person; I have frequently seen the natives remain contentedly, and work well, when away
from their own part of the country, and not under the control of their own tribe.
6.


6. It is impossible to form an estimate of their services as compared with Europeans, the
usual work of each being so very different; however, in any work they have been accustomed
to, I think their services would be of value; In stripping bark, I consider one native can do
as much as two Europeans ; they generally stripped for me ten sheets each per day ; I have
known them strip so many as fifteen sheets per day; the sheets average generally six feet long
and four feet wide; as stockmen, I consider an intelligent black to be very little inferior to a
European. By exciting some degree of emulation amongst them, I have found them exert
themselves exceedingly.
7. As farm labourers or shepherds, I-do not think they could be induced to remain; their love
of change is so great, that no reward could induce them to remain a single day longer than it
suited their own convenience; as stockmen, I think they could be readily induced to remain
for some time; but they are so wedded to their wandering life, that I think, when the novelty of
that pursuit was worn off, they would leave; the tribes that usually frequent this part
of the district, amount to about forty-five men, women, and children; my calculation extends
twenty-one miles south to the Hume River, about sixty miles north towards the Bugong
Mountains, west about sixteen miles towards Mr. Osborn’s station, and east about twenty miles
towards the head of the Hume River.
T. Aubrey Murray, Esq.
21 July, 1841.
1. I have occasionally employed them for a day or two, but have never been able to establish
them permanently on my farm; they in general shew a determined dislike to settled habits of
any kind.
2. I have never been able to employ more than one or two at a time, unless when bark was
to be stripped, when they engaged in greater numbers, that pursuit being more consonant with
their usual habits of hunting.
3. They in general receive either clothes or rations, rather than wages, as remuneration for
their labour ; generally speaking, Ido not think the amount adequate to their services; I
have myself been more successful in employing them than my neighbours, chiefly because 1
have made it a rule that they should receive allowances proportionate to the value of the work
performed.
4. I have seen a great deal of them in every way, and consider it impossible to make them
useful labourers; their love of independence is too great, and habits of wandering too strong
to admit of it.
5. I can offer no suggestions on the subject, being convinced that the attempt would be
besides, I question whether their condition would be improved by the change.
6. The greatest amount of work 1 have ever known performed by a black, was not more than
one third of what a white man would have done in the same space of time.
7. As labourers I consider them to have shewn no character, as they have been but little
employed ;in general perhaps they are idle ; their numbers in my part of the country are
limited, and are not more than one to ten square miles. This calculation extends to the
Queanbeyan district; in some parts of the Colony they are more, and in others far less
numerous; generally speaking, I think it impossible to render them useful as labourers;
they are aware of the great superiority of civilized life, and consider themselves, to use their
own term, stupid in comparison with white men; but they are so wedded to their own habits—
supporting themselves with so much ease by the chase—that it can scarcely be expected they
should adopt ours.
P. P. King, Esq., Captain, R. N., and Commissioner, for Managing the Affairs of the
Australian Agricultural Company.
21 July, 1841.
1. Several native blacks have been employed by the Australian Agricultural Company, but
the Company is so situated that the conduct of the natives resident within its influence, cannot
be fairly comparable with that of those residents in other parts of the Colony; one principal
reason for this, is the absence of public houses, around which, wherever they are, the natives
congregate, and by the prostitution of their wives, find ready means to purchase drink;
another is, there being no individual in the immediate neighbourhood of the Company’s
establishment, to interfere with the protection and kindness shewn to the natives by
the Company’s servants; under these circumstances the Company possesses an in-
fluence over them that is perhaps known in no other part of the Colony. I allude more
particularly to the natives of the Gloucester and Manning, for those of Stroud and Carrington,
being nearer to the public houses of the William’s River, and Raymond Terrace, are less
useful and more inclined to leave any service or work in which they may be engaged;
throughout the establishment the greatest care is taken to prevent any aggression on the part
of the Company’s servants towards the blacks; this is well known and valued by them ; in
consequence of this, the occasions of ill treatment are very rare; all serious cases are brought
before the Police Magistrate, whilst for slighter aggressions, punishment is given by stoppage
of indulgence or gratuities, as the case may deserve.
2. The number engaged, or employed, varies very much; very few can be considered as
permanently employed; three or four have herded flocks, with little or no cessation,
for
John Rae,
Esq.
t * *
19 July, 1841.
T. A. Murray,
Esq.
21 July, 1841.
P. P. King,
Esq.
21 July, 1841.


P. P. King,
Esq. ’
( >
21 July, 1841,
for 6 and 8 years; and a few have acted as constables, and some as domestic servants; they
are fond of being employed as stockmen, but they do not like the trammels of constant
attendance ; when disposed to absent themselves, they go off without in the least considering
our convenience, or apprizing us of their intention; their absence is frequently long, and
when they return they resume their employment, if permitted, quite as if nothing had
happened.
3. We have recently engaged two blacks as stockmen, at eight' pounds a year, with
slops and rations; how long they will stop with us remains to be seen, it is an experiment
worth trying, but I have little expectation of its success; the remuneration generally to
blacks, is rations and clothes, and occasional jobs are paid for by tobacco and flour, sugar, and
tea.
4. I can form no favourable opinion of their usefulness, principally on account of their volatility
and dislike of being expected to be regular in their attendance ; and if no dependence can be
placed in them, they cannot be very useful; lam of opinion, that it will be unavailing to
attempt to attach them to the establishments of settlers, except in very rare cases ; however
well disposed individual blacks may be, the other blacks will prevent them remaining long in
any one place.
5. Every inducement has been held out to them to engage in useful occupations for a
continuance, but generally without success.
6. I cannot offer a satisfactory reply to this question ; I do not think any act of labour is per-
formed by them, unless it be pulling in a boat, which, at Port Stephens, I have known them
to do for many hours, frequently from 20 to 30 miles a day ; as messengers also, they are
very active, and will easily travel 20 miles a day; Ido not think they would undertake any
work of a laborious character, such as digging, carrying weights &c., if they did they would
soon get tired and sneak off.
7. The numbers are difficult to trace, but judging from a muster of natives last Christmas,
when the Company gave their usual feast at each of their stations, the numbers are not
under the following statement: —
In the neighbourhood of Carrington, there mqy be about 60
“ Booril . . . .20
“ Stroud . . .100
“ Gloucester . . .130
say . . 310
There is a considerable extent of country between the Australian Agricultural Company’s
east boundary, and the sea coast, from which few of the natives visit the Company’s establish-
ments, probably the number may be 150, or more, certainly not less; their character as
labourers may be summed up in a few words; whilst at work they are willing and cheerful, but
if idly disposed, no inducement can prevent their slyly walking off; they are impatient of
control, and require to be coaxed to do any thing ; if payment is promised and given before
the work is completed, they will do no more ; on the whole, if they were inclined to work,
they would, for pastoral services, be most useful to the settler, but from their general character
I conceive them to be in a great measure very useless. As the questions do not relate to their
character and disposition, otherwise than as pastoral and agricultural labourers, I shall leave
the subject without further remark.
Statement shewing the amount of expence incurred in paying native blacks—the nature
of services performed, and the number of blacks permanently employed from Ist January , to
31$£ December, 1840.
Blacks permanently employed, who receive regular rations and clothing.
At Sheep Stations . . .15
Cattle do . .4
Horse do . .1
In Boats . . . .1
Asa Constable . . .1
Total. . . .22
Amount of expence incurred on account of native blacks, being the cost price of
provisions and clothing, and the estimated value of provisions produced on the Estate.
Sheep Department ; Cost of articles supplied . £. 254 1 6
Add, say for 10,4691b5. of meat, being produce of the
Estate . . . . . . 174 9 8
Cattle Department ; Cost of articles supplied. . 41 11 11
Add, say for 1,3141b5. beef, 4385.; 42Ibs. pork, 145.;
tobacco, 14s. 6d.; being produce of the
Estate . . . . . . 23 6 6
Stxjd Department ; Cost of articles supplied . . 515 3
Add, say for 156|ibs. beef, produce of the Estate . 212 2
8 7 5
Amount carried forward . £5Ol 17 0
Boats


Amount brought forward . . £ 501 17 0
Boats ; Cost of articles . . . . .879
Add, say for 6-l6ibs. of tobacco, 9d,; 469ibs. flour,
1565. 4d.; 258ibs. beef, 865.; being produce of
the Estate . . . . .12 3 1
Incidental ; Cost of articles supplied for blacks, as
Constables, killing native dogs, and going on
messages . . . . . . 26 10 7
Add, say for 656ifes. beef and mutton, being produce
of the Estate ... . . . 10 18 8
559 17 1
The blacks have three bullocks supplied as a Christmas feast, not included in the
above.
There were no blacks upon wages in 1840; but two commenced on Ist April last,
at the rate of 3610 per year each.
John Peter, Esq., Yass,
21 July, 1841.
1. I have.
2.1 have sometimes had as many as 20 employed at one time, and generally have about seven;
of these there are only six on whom I can depend; two of them have been employed regularly as
shepherds for the last 12 months; another for a shorter period; the fourth is a boy who has
been with me for upwards of 2 years; the remaining two are young gins, whom my wife has
taken under her care; one of them has been with me upwards of 2 years, the other not quite
so long; none of the six shew any inclination to join the tribe in their excursions, more
particularly the gins, who, notwithstanding the frequent threats of the tribe, testify the utmost
Teluctance to join them; I have found them useful principally in washing sheep, stripping
bark, reaping, and shepherding; I may likewise mention that there are others who would
stop with me, if I could find any occupation for them other than shepherding, which many
dislike; in every case in which I have employed the blacks I have been well satisfied with
their assiduity.
3. I have never been in the habit of giving them wages, or any other remuneration but their
rations, and a little woollen clothing during the cold weather.
4. From the experience I have had amongst them, I am of opinion that they might be made
useful, and attach themselves to stations, only for the inroads which other tribes are constantly
making, which keep them in a constant state of alarm, and seem to me the principal cause of
their wandering habits ; until this is put a stop to, and so long as they are permitted to fight
their own battles, and kill those who are domesticated—which is a frequent occurrence
they can never be got in any numbers as shepherds.
5. By kind treatment on the part of the settlers, who should take care that those they
employ are kept as much as possible separate from the European servants, who look upon
them with jealously, and treat them harshly; and by teaching them to apply to the
Commissioner of the district for redress of any depredation committed by other tribes ; and by
severely punishing those who take the law into their own hands, the natives would no longer
have the same inducement to wander about.
6. I have known some of them to strip forty sheets of bark in a day, reap three acres of
wheat per week, and asssist in fencing, &c., and in all cases in which I have employed them,
I have found them very little inferior to the assigned servants; and by occasionally giving
them a few articles of clothing, they will exert themselves to the utmost.
7. As labourers they are rather slothful, but when employed for any length of time, this
gradually wears off, as it is only the natural result of their previous habits; from the point
where the Port Phillip road crosses the Murrumbidgee, for 50 miles down and 20 back, the
Aboriginal population does not much exceed J 00, of whom not more than 45 are males above
the age of puberty.
George Shelley, Esq., of Tumut,
21 July, 1841.
1. Yes.
2. I have had four native youths employed at different periods; one remained one year,
assisting among cattle, and then deserted; another remained for a period of three years and
then left, returning occasionally, as best suited his own inclinations; the third remained about f
four years, at different employments, then joined his tribe; he also returned when asked to
assist in collecting cattle, or in any light employment, but he will not remain more than six or
eight weeks at one time; the fourth has been in my employment about ten years, never
leaving me during that time, except for a night or so, when his tribe happened to he in the
neighbourhood; he is usually employed as shepherd, or stockman’s assistant; the services of
those spoken of, have not been of much value to me ; there has been a great want of diligence
and
P. P. King-,
Esq.
21 July, 1841.
John Peter,
Esq.
/
21 July, 1841.
G. Shelley,
Esq.
21 July, 184 L


G. Shelley,
Esq. ’
(
21 July, 1841.
T. B. Wilson,
Esq.
21 July, 1841.
and activity shewn; their services could not be depended on for one day; if put to laborious
employment, they are constantly idle, even when most required to act.
3. The principal remuneration they receive, is clothes and food; with the exception of
one or two, they know not the value of money; and unless supplied with clothes when
applied for, they become dissatisfied, sulky, and lazy, and will refuse to work ; the generality
of them require more remuneration than their services are worth.
4. I am of opinion that it is impossible to attach them to an establishment so as to make
certain of a continuance of their services ; they will not adhere to any agreement if it
interfere with their habits of wandering when they wish; judging from my experience, now
sixteen years, of their manner, habits, and customs, I should say that they are such as
preclude the possibility of making them useful; lads from six to ten years, are the only ones
that possibly can be persuaded to stay, but upon ariving at the age of manhood, even
they will join their tribe ; as stockmen and shepherds only will they answer.
5. I have offered every inducement to the men to give up their children to me, but they
have no control over them, and it rests with the child itself; and in very few instances can
they be persuaded to leave their parents; the only suggestion I can offer is, to get
the children from the parents, and teach them to work from their infancy.
6. I have not known an instance of a black fellow performing laborious work for even one day;
one European would do as much laborious work in one day as four black fellows ; nothing
would induce the married men to work at any thing but cutting bark or sheep washing, and
at the latter work, they cannot remain in the water more than half the time a European can,
if the day is at all cold; food and clothing is the only inducement for the young men to
stay.
7. They are too lazy and idle, and when asked to perform work which requires manual
exertion, they will immediately leave your establishment; the number in this district,
known as the Murrumbidgee district, I conceive to be about 400.
Thomas B. Wilson, Esq., J.P., Braidwood,
21 July, 1841.
1. Ever since I became a settler in the interior (upwards of 5 years ago) I have been in the
habit of employing the Aboriginal Natives; more so, perhaps,- than any other landed
proprietor in this neighbourhood,
2. I have had occasionally upwards of 50 men, women, and children, on the farm;
from 12 to 20 at work: —none of them ever continued in constant employment, it is in vain
to expect that any of them will do so ; the Aborigines have chiefly been employed by me in
clearing land, and in this way they have rendered me some benefit, but I was obliged to be
constantly with them, as so soon as I left working so did they ; they have also been of service
during sheep washing, and, very rarely, during harvest; they are occasionally very useful as
stockmen.
3. All the Aborigines employed by me have always had rations issued to them in the same
manner and proportion as issued to my hired and assigned servants; the chief usually came
to the stores and witnessed the issuing of the rations, according to the fixed scale; they were
also supplied with slop clothing, tea, sugar, and tobacco; but I never gave them any
money, being aware that they would put it to an improper use.
4. I have gained some knowledge of the disposition and capacity of the Aboriginal Natives
of New Holland, from an uninterrupted friendly intercourse with them, (viz: —on the north,
west, south, and east coasts,) for upwards of 20 years, as is known to several honorable
Members of Council, and the conclusion I have come to is, that the present race of the Aborigines
will never be generally useful, and that it is impossible to attach even the most civilized of
them regularly to any establishment, however well regulated, in any capacity whatsoever ;
they may be, as they have been, occasionally useful as stockmen and messengers —but they
are totally useless as farm servants or shepherds; any attempt to employ them, especially in
the latter capacity, would only end in vexatious disappointment.
5. On this subject a fine spun theory might easily be formed, but as no good practical result
would follow, I decline entering on the question, which I consider a problem, not yet, and
never likely to be, satisfactorily solved.
6. I cannot accurately answer this question; but I may state in general terms, that the
amount of daily labour of the Aborigines, falls far short of that of the European; I may
here observe that in answer to Q. 2, I have stated that none of the natives have continued in
constant employment; I shall state one exception, an Aboriginal Native (son of the chief
of the district) remained with me upwards of 2 years; he was latterly employed in the
kitchen and to wait at table, in which latter capacity be acted when his Lordship the Bishop
of Australia did me the honor of a visit; I certainly thought that he was civilized, but after
having obtained possession of anew suit of clothes, &c., he left the place about midnight, and
the next time I saw Mundilly, he was, (perhaps more becomingly) dressed as a savage
chief; he evidently - preferred a precarious existence—perfectly uncontrolled—to every
comfort in a state of thraldom.
7. An invincible antipathy to any regular and continued labour, however moderate, I consider
to be one of the principal features in the character of the Aborigines; and that in
consequence they are not, and never will be of any real use to the settler. In this district
the Aborigines are rapidly diminishing ; the births, from sufficiently obvious causes, bearing
a very small proportion to the deaths ; and lam of opinion that in a very few years the
Aboriginal


Aboriginal race will entirely disappear. The present native population of this district does
not, lam certain, exceed 50, although I believe upwards of 200 blankets are yet supplied; in
these times of reform and economy this is deserving of attention ; although this subject could
easily be swelled to many pages I shall conclude by observing, that from the days of
Bennelong to the present time, the manners of the Aborigines have not changed, nor are they
likely to change, and that the Committee therefore, in devising means for obtaining colonial
labour, ought to leave the Aboriginal inhabitants of New Holland altogether out of the
question.
Hugh Murray, Esq., Lake Colac.
21 July, 1841.
1. I have.
2. I have frequently employed five or six of the youths on my establishment, at light work,
such as driving bullocks, planting potatoes, and shepherding; they do their work well, but do
not generally remain constant at it; in a few instances they have shepherded for me for three
or four months, without a fault, and in these instances, I have found that they did not leave
from their own inclination, but were compelled to do so by their tribe.
3. I have always given them food, clothes, or tobacco, for their labour ; they expect to be
so remunerated. .
4. I consider that they have sufficient capacity to render themselves useful to the settler, in
almost every branch of a pastoral establishment; but so great is the attachment of each to his
tribe, and of the tribe to its locality and habits, that I do not think it possible to attach them
regularly to it in their present state ; their civilization to a great extent must first be effected.
5. °I am of opinion that youth only could be worked upon to advantage, avoiding coercive
measures ; I cannot suggest any more feasible means for their civilization, than that of insti-
tutions, in which industry may be made the ground-work of it, extensively spread throughout
the Colony, and conducted by practical men, under the inspection of the Commissioner of the
district. Ido not think it out of place to remark here, that I consider the establishment of
Protectors to the Aborigines, to be unattended with the slightest beneficial result either to the
natives, or the Colony, and therefore, a useless and extravagant waste of money, which has
caused great dissatisfaction in every district I am acquainted with.
6. They are invariably so unsteady at laborious work, that I cannot judge of the amount they
mio-ht perform; at light work such as I have described, I have often known them perform as
much as a European; a promised reward of food or clothes, is the only means I have ever
used to induce them to exert themselves.
7. I consider them apt to learn, and clever at work, trustworthy when property is put into
their charge, submissive, and easily taught obedience and respect, but on the whole, naturally
inclined to indolence. I estimate the number in my immediate neighbourhood. Lake Colac,
to be about thirty-five; in a circumference of 20 miles, from that point, I consider there are
about three hundred.
Alexander F. Mollisson, Esq., Melbourne, Port Phillip,
24 July, 1841.
1. Occasionally. .........
2. I have had four lads at different times ; they were employed only in bringing m horses
from the run, and on errands : they remained a few weeks and then returned to their tribes ;
I have frequently employed the natives in stripping bark, in assisting to drive sheep, and as
guides; they were very soon tired of even this light and desultory employment.
3. Food and tobacco while employed, and occasionally clothes.
4. I have known only one aboriginal native permanently employed, he was a shepherd, and
did his duty steadily and judiciously for more than a year ; I believe them to be quite capable
of acting as shepherds, bullock drivers, or assistant stockmen, but I do not think that the
adults will ever generally become domiciled as servants in any employment.
5.1 conceive that we must first learn their language more perfectly, or teach them ours, before
we can hope to effect any great change in their habits ; I would further suggest, that the
orphan male children (whom the tribes readily give up,) should be interchangeably removed
two hundred miles from their tribes, and apprenticed to settlers ; also, any other boys, not
orphans, whom their parents would consent to part with. .
7. The tribe inhabiting the country in which my stations are placed, are called the Jajowrongs;
Ido not know their numbers; I have not seen more than fifteen adult males, but believe
them to be much more numerous ; I do not believe that (even with the best management), a
sufficient number of aboriginal natives will ever be trained as shepherds or farm labourers, to
make any sensible impression on the demand for labour.
Alexander
T - B 7llson '
A q ~
f 2l July ” 184l '
H. Murray,
Esq.
, 1
21 July, 1841.
A. F.Mollison,
Esq.
( A
24 July, 1841.


A. Thomson,
Esq.
1 August, 1841
Alexander Thomson, Esq., a resident of six years amongst the Aborigines of Australia Felix,
and formerly Colonial Surgeon of Port Phillip.,
1 August, 1841.
1. Often.
2. Two or three at a time as shepherds; they stop sometimes a week, aud sometimes a month.
3. Clothes, blankets, and food.
4. The plan of attempting to attach the Aboriginal Natives to the establishments of settlers,
as labourers, without some previous preparatory moral instruction, is fraught with so many
and serious considerations, affecting the collective interests of the natives, as to render any
experiment of this kind entirely unadvisable. By this plan I know not what provision could
be made for the aged and infirm. Very few settlers, it is presumed, could be induced to incur
the burden of supporting the women and children, whose usefulness must be very limited ;
nor could the settlers give that personal attention to the peculiar habits and wants of these
people, which would be necessary to secure their orderly behaviour, and promote their comfort.
However well inclined towards the Aborigines might be the disposition of the settlers, their
necessary intercourse with the prisoners, and other servants employed on large establishments,
would subject them to the most dangerous moral influence, and augment, to a fearful extent
the occasion of those miseries which have already, in so many instances, terminated in loathsome
diseases, conflict and death. Under the present state of things, no one but a personal observer
is capable of forming an opinion of the increase and increasing miseries of these people, arising
from their intercourse with the white population;. one of these calamitous results which I will
mention for the sake of illustration, is the increase of prostitution, and the aggravated misery
by which it is followed. The motive of avarice, or the desire of European property, added to
the dictates of depraved passions, are inducements to the commission of this crime; it is
become a kind of traffic, carried on at the expense of degredation, suffering, and destruction
of life; it is followed, not only by the misery and sometimes death of the unhappy victims
of this intercouse, but its bitter effects are suffered by their offspring, while numbers of
half-caste infants are murdered as soon as they are born, To this source of evil might be
added many others, which tend to' lessen their numbers, debase their morals, lead to
violence and outrage, and create a barrier to the spread of knowledge and civilization. Were
it determined by any coercive measure to compel the blacks to remain at stations contrary to
their inclinations, their condition would be aggravated by the annexation of slavery. But
such a measure is wholly inapplicable to the condition of the blacks, inasmuch as it furnishes
no motive to the Aborigine sufficiently powerful to induce him to forget the habits and pur-
suits of savage life. To promise him a grant of land, at the end of three years settled
servitude with one individual, would have no influence, for he considers the land to be his own—
indeed every family has its separate portion ; to work in order to his being fed and clothed,
is a tax much too great; and as his inclination is a much more powerful principle than his
judgment, the motives for wandering are strengthened by the price required for its
relinquishment; this course of remark, applies not only to this particular mode of civilizing,
but to every other which offers motives of no higher import. *
5. & 6. To suggest means for the amelioration of the wretched condition of the Aborigines of
this country, at once appropriate and efficient, it is indispensable that the true cause of their
calamities be ascertained; for if the remedy proposed be applied only to circumstances which
are obviously the effects of a cause, the insiduous operation of which is not duly estimated
disappointment must necessarily ensue; a careful consideration of this perplexing subject
will, it is presumed, lead but to one conclusion, viz; that the vagrant and indolent habits
existing amongst these people, as well as the distressing privations civil, and social, which they
endure, are traceable to no other cause than their fallen and sinful condition ;* a condition
which involves no radical distinction between them and other communities, save that which
presents the relative changes resulting from the elevating influence of moral instruction, and
consequent Christianization. It is submitted then that the most advisable, nay the 'only
certain means of bettering their condition, is to make them acquainted with our holy religion,
by introducing amongst them such ministers of the gospel as are influenced by the constraining
love of God, who, while they engage in the undertaking after the apostolic example, “ counting
not their own lives dear to them,” strive to convince them in life and manner how' they ought
to labour, and thereby support themselves. In introducing amongst them, even this plan,
regard must be had to their relative and civil circumstances. It must be remembered that
the numerous tribes are in every respect distinct, that the country occupied by each tribe has,
amongst them, well defined limits, that there are almost endless variations in the dialects
peculiar to the several tribes, that they are very jealous of their hereditary interests, are often
involved in fierce contentions, and are little disposed to confide in those who profess equal
concern for the welfare of every tribe ; hence the establishment of missions to separate tribes
is likely to operate most successfully in ensuring the entire confidence of the people, lessening
the difficulty of attaining an adequate acquaintance with their language, manners and customs
as well as ascertaining and obviating the causes of those frequent collisions which occur both
amongst themselves and the colonists. The Right Honorable Lord John Russell, in a late Des-
patch to His Excellency Sir George Gipps, on the treatment of Aborigines of New Holland, states,
(when speaking of the difficulty in making reserves of land for the natives,) that “thereare two
sources of mischief” which “mar themost benevolent designs of this nature; the one arising from
the inaptitude of the natives to change their desultory habits, and learn those of settled industry;
the other from the constant inroads of Europeans, to rob, corrupt and destroy them.” Bu^
thes e


these two sources of mischief are so far from being obstacles in making reserves, that they may-
be urged as very powerful reasons why such portions of land should be appropriated for their
use. For, notwithstanding the erratic habits of the natives, their strong inclination to in-
dolence, and natural dislike to acquire a knowledge of, and to engage in, arts of civilized life,
yet, the transition from their present circumstances, to that in which they would be placed on
reserves, would be scarcely felt, especially so, when contrasted with the change they must
undergo, if they aie attached in small parties to settlers, when they would be cut off from
their endearing attachments, and deprived to a very considerable extent of social intercourse.
In regard to the inroads of Europeans, I see no means of preventing these, unless such
reserves are made, or the natives themselves banished from the land of their birth. His
Lordship in the Despatch just referred to, states also, “it is but too clear that the only
effectual remedy for this lamentable evil is an organized force, adequate to keep both parties
in check, and confine each to the limits which the Government shall assign. But this remedy
is so expensive, and requires so much vigilance, so much temper in every soldier and constable,
and the territory to be traversed is so large, that it is after all imperfect.” To remove these
difficulties, and to meet the emergency of every case, I would recommend the following simple
plan, and I venture to predict, that if fifteen per cent, of the land fund were appropriated for
the use of the natives, (being guided in my calculations by the last year’s revenue,) that the
temporal and spiritual wants of every native within the territorial limits of Australia Felix,
would be amply supplied, so far as human agency is necessary.
Ist. That a reserve of land be made for each important tribe, a part of which ou°ht to
be hunting ground.
2nd. That a Missionary be appointed to each station, to take the spiritual charge of
the natives, and to have the general management.
3rd. That a respectable person be appointed, to take charge of the temporal depart-
ment, who should also instruct the natives in agricultural and other operations.
4th. That the Establishments be connected with, and under the control of, one of the
Missionary Societies in England. This would secure piety in the principal agents; and the
whole would be conducted on the most economical principles.
•ita. 4 hat abstracts of the accounts, and reports of the progress of the natives &c. be
made to Government twice a year.
In pursuing the work in this manner, it might be advisable to restrain the tribes to
the limits of their own territory, and prohibit their resorting to the stations of settlers without
permission; this I apprehend might at first be very easily accomplished by the extension of a
vigilant and active police, who should occasionally visit the stations until the natives were
acquainted with the regulations.. In every instance of aggression they should be brought to
justice, and slightly punished, whether these aggressions be perpetrated on the persons and
properties of the Colonists, or on their own people, even though they be in the execution of
their own barbarous and savage customs. I perfectly agree with the opinion expressed in
Captain Grey’s report on this subject, for the reasons there assigned, and that they ought
also, to be amenable to British Laws, and be allowed to give evidence in court, both when natives
only are concerned, and when aggressions are made upon them by Europeans. That civiliza-
tion would proceed in a ration proportionate to the moral influence of Christian instruction, is
demonstrable by the universal concurrence of all historical testimony, whether reference ’be
made to the invariable triumphs of the gospel, or the universal failure of all merely civilizing
schemes. Under discreet management therefore, and by the blessing of Almighty God, it
might be hoped, in process of time, that such would be the proficiency of the natives in indus-
trious pursuits, that proper persons in want of labourers might be allowed to hire them on
just and equitable terms.
7. Three tribes, between Geelong and the Lakes, about 400.
The Reverend Joseph Docker, Melbourne,
3 August, 1841.
Sir.—ln reply to your letter of the 23rd ultimo, in which you request me to
communicate to you, for the information of the Committee of the Legislative Council appointed
to consider the subject of Immigration generally, whether the Aboriginal Natives formerly
employed by me are still in my service, I have the honor to state, that, in the month of March
last having had occasion to visit Melbourne, I received a letter when there, acquainting me
that the blacks were committing outrages, and that several heads of the sheep under their
charge had been discovered near some water-holes; on my return to the Ovens they had all
fled, from a consciousness, I suppose, of their misbehaviour and an apprehension of my
displeasure, and I have not seen a black since. This circumstance, however discouraging it
may be to the expectation of their being rendered permanently useful, does not alter the
opinion I had formed of a great many of them; were a few of the worst characters
weeded out, and summarily punished on the spot when detected in the act of committing
offences, by solitary confinement or otherwise, and could the great body of the different tribes
be kept at a distance, and not permitted to mix with the well behaved, I still think a
certain number of them might be safely and usefully employed as shepherds ; but to keep all
right, it would be requisite that a judicious overseer should constantly live among, and be
himself one of them. At the time I expressed my opinion to His Excellency the Governor
I felt justified in describing them as good shepherds and honest men, for, with their assistance'
under the guidance of one white man, I had from a flock of 1200 ewes, an increase of not
less than 96 per cent; and what induced me to believe them to be honest was, that when I
left my tent in the midst of them at the distance of three miles from my head station, I never
found that any thing had been stolen; I also felt at all times secure from danger; they were
always glad to see me; I never carried fire arms. There are other traits in their character
which exhibit them in a very favourable light, which prove that when well treated, they have
a
A. Thomson,
Esq.
I August, 1841.
Rev. J.Docker.
3 August, 1841


Rev. J. Docker
< '
3. Aug., 1841.
J. Mackenzie.
Esq.
4 Aug., 1841.
11. Oakes,
Esq.
4 August,
1841.
a regard for the safety of their master’s property. I recollect on one occasion, when alarmed
by a report that on the following day they were to have a hostile visit from some of their
white neighbours, they brought each man his flock (6000 and upwards) within sight of my
hut, and thenwent away, saying, “ we will return in two or three days, when cooler (white man’s
wrath) is all gone”. This they did, and I again employed them, although I suffered much
from the mixtures of the different flocks.
You wish to know how I remunerated them; I gave them as much as they could eat;
to each shepherd a ration of beef or mutton, and that of the best quality, lor there are
epicures even among the blacks, viz.:—4ibs. per diem or 26fts. per week, also Sibs. of the best
Sydney flour, -.fib. tea, l|tb. sugar, and 3 or 4 figs of the best tobacco—“baal (not) Colonial”—
to several I gave blankets, but the number I do not recollect. Having replied to the queries
contained in your letter, which I received this evening, I must defer answering the Circular
to a future day, although from my imperfect knowledge of the Aboriginal character and brief
experience of the bash life, I tear I shall not be able to furnish much information that
will be found to be practically useful.
I have the honor to be Sir, your most obedient servant,
JOSEPH DOCKER.
f MI Macpherson, Esq., Clerk of Councils, &c., &c., &c.
F. Mackenzie, Esq., King-pan ot Creek, Goulburn River, Melbourne.
*' 4 August. 1841.
1. I am occasionally in the habit of employing the native blacks,
2. I seldom employ more than from five to ten, male and female ; they seldom can be induced to
remain more than from two‘‘to six days at a time, and work irregularly and only for a few
hours a day ; the men strip bark for roofing &c., lop the boughs of trees injurious from their
shade, bring in firewood, grind wheat, weed cultivated ground, dig potatoes, and look for
stray horses or cattle ; the women do the same work with the exception of stripping bark and
lopping trees. They woik quickly, but not steadily, and never can be induced to remain
lojjp* iji one place. • • • * i
3 I have been accustomed to pay them for their services in wheat, potatoes, garden stuff,
sugar, and other food, in proportion to the work they do. ....
4 Ido not know, how the adults can be induced to relinquish their wandering habits,
which must be the’first step towards rendering them useful; but if seminaries were established
for the purpose of civilizing and educating the children, I think most of their parents would be
induced to leave them to the care of Europeans, on being convinced that they would be fed
and not ill used ; coercive measures would probably be necessary at first, in order to induce
the children to remain. Those seminaries ought to have a ceitam quantity of land attached
to them for cultivation and depasturing some sheep and a few quiet cattle; a master to
instruct’ the boys, and a matron for the females and younger children, with assistants
according to the number of blacks kept at the establishment, would also be necessary; they
might be taught to read and write, and accustomed by degrees, to labour, and look after sheep
andjCatt e. ese sem j nai i e s for four to six years, and accustomed to the use of European
food and clothing, I think they might eventually become useful members of society.
6 Their services are so desultory*, that it is impossible to state the amount of their labour,
or give an estimate of the proportion it bears to that of Europeans. The rewards which will
induce them most readily to Work, are warm articles of clothing, especially blankets, and food,
as flour, rice, su°-ar, fresh meat of any kind, particularly mutton ; they are also very partial
to the small axes* usually called tomahawks, as well as to clasp knives, pipes and tobacco.
7 They work quickly but not steadily; there are seldom more than twenty at my station at
once and generally not more than half that number; and I think not more than 100 to 150
who’visit me at various times ; their country is the upper part of Goulburn River and its
tributaries; thdy‘however travel down to Melbourne, a distance of sixty miles, being on friendly
terms with the Yarra tribe. ■
H. Oakes, Esq., Commissioner of Crown Lands.
4 August, 1841.
1. Occasionally, as guides in travelling. . ._ , ... , .
2 From ten to twenty; white they remained with me, I have been satisfied with their
conduct but I have known them commit robbery and murder immediately afterwards.
3 They have always looked fdf payment at the end of my journey, which I have invariably
given them, in food, tobacco and clothes—giving to each man a suit and a blanket.
4 when they have fallen into the hands of Europeans at an early age, they have frequently
become good stock-keepers and shepherds, as well as tolerable house servants; they have
been usually well fed and clothed by their masters; it has not been customary to give them
wages, though I have known them highly gratified by the receipt of money,
5 if SU ch natives as I have above referred to, could be prevailed upon to go amongst the
wild tribes which I think they might be, by means of rewards, I am ot opinion, that numbers
of all ages would come in, which might lead to the civilization of some few of them ; I very
much desire an opportunity of making this experiment.. ,
6 I have had to opportunity of judging, but if anything could induce them to work, toma-
hawks, small axes; and clothes would; by means of tomahawks, and axes, they would be
enabled to procure a living without resorting to robbery.
7 I cannot yet form any correct opinion of their numbers; those I have seen of the wild
tribes are lively intelligent, and contented, so long as they are well fed, and encouraged in
idleness, but the moment they are required to work, however easy of performance the task
may be, they tak their departure.
