

Immigration In Action
igest Of the
AUSTRALIAN CITIZENSHIP CONVENTION
Convened by the Commonwealth Department of Immigration and
held in Canberra
from January 23-27, 1950
THE Spirit of Australia’s
new nationwide drive to
make migrants feel at home
in Australia is captured in
this happy picture by a
Department of Information
photographer. He was on
his way to the opening of
the Australian Citizenship
Convention in Canberra in
January when he saw this
colourfully dressed young
couple racing hand in hand
towards the Albert Hall.
The children are 11-year-old Helen Berskluhi, who comes
from the Ukraine, and 13-year-old Euan Davidson, of
Canberra. Helen reached Australia six months ago with
her parents, who are now working in the national capital.
Euan was bom in Drummoync, New South Wales, of a
Scottish father and English mother.
During convention week, Helen, like many of her fellow New Australians,
wore the rich national costumes of her native land. Not to be outdone,
Euan donned the uniform he proudly wears as the "baby” of the Canberra
Highland Society’s Pipe Band. Helen and Euan are firm friends and
demonstrate how easy it can be for the New Australians from Britain
and Europe to find their place in die Australian community.


A PEOPLE UNITED MET TO PLAN
WELCOME TO MIGRANTS
Sunshine, Harmony At Nation's
First Citizenship Convention
Part of the pattern of Australia's future greatness emerged in glowing colour
against the peaceful green and amber background of the nation's capital during the
week which began on January 23.
Canberra, for that week, was a convention city as 200 delegates represent-
ing 100 national organisations gathered under a common urge—the urge to extend
the hand of welcome to migrants coming to Australia.
The skies of a sunny week competed with the brilliant hues of floral, art and
flag displays while delegates moved towards conclusions aimed to make the New
Australians as happy and contented in our community as the native-born.
Atmosphere Of Resolve And Goodwill
The city of Canberra was in car-
svaT mood, but the mood of the
was one of determina-
tion and resolve. The harmony
which attended all meetings in the
flag-bedecked Albert Hall and the
vine-clad Grammar School, was its
most convincing assurance that the
convention was getting Australia i
off to a good start in its drive to I
make the migrants welcome. 1
- -ThrireiTeais of the Convention was
this: In August, 1949, when new,
.settlers were reaching Australia l
from Britain and Europe in unpre-
cedented numbers, it was recognised I
that their rapid assimilation could I
not be effected solely by action on I
an official level, no matter how skil-
ful or well intended.
Assimilation of such large num-
bers could be achieved only by the
work of the Australian people them-
selves through their church and vol-
untary bodies. It was recognised,.
too, that although many organisa-
tions were doing splendid work, their
(Kfiferts were not co-ordinated and
there was no general plan for pro-
gressive assimilation of the newcom-
ers. .
. It was decided that all these bodies,
all State and Federal authorities
and government officials dealing with
the problem, should meet together
to pool their experiences, and to plan
collectively for the future. And so
the idea for an Australian Citizen-
ship Convention at which all inter-
ested bodies could attend was born.
In an invitation extended by the
then Prime Minister, Mr. Chifley, the
objects of the convention were stated.
Briefly they were:
1. Ensuring appreciation by Aus-
tralians of privileges and obliga-
tions of their citizenship;
2. Overcoming difficulties con-
fronting immigrants;
s 3. Offering facilities and friendship
v. to immigrants for attaining
citizenship; and
'The most effective
k ■ I “of the work of churches and
voluntary organisations assist-
ing in the satisfactory assimila-
■' tion of immigrants.
The National General Secretary
of the Y.M.C.A. in Australia, Mr.
John T. Massey, was loaned by that
body to undertake the organisation.
He travelled from State to State
interviewing State Premiers and
Ministers, inquiring of voluntary
organisations and churches, sensing
the response to the idea, launching
Good Neighbour Councils in the
States where such councils or their
equivalent did not exist and address-
ing and conferring with those already
in existence.
None dissented from the plan. The
Prime Minister’s invitation to State
Governments to participate was en-
thusiastically received. Churches
and voluntary bodies unstintingly
promised their support.
Representatives from all parts of
Australia began to arrive in Can-
berra on January 22. From north,
south, east and west, plane after
plane converged on Fairbaim airport
bringing the delegates to Australia’s
most representative assembly.
★
Opening day, January 23, dawned
clear, bright and sunny. It was
perfect Australian weather —an
augury, a smiling promise for the
success of the week that lay ahead.
Albert Hall, scene of the official,
opening, was decked with flags 1
which ruffled in the breeze. All
around were soft green lawns, col-
ourful gardens and graceful trees.
In front of the hall was a large
floral map of Australia with each
State portrayed in a different col-
our—crimson roses, daisies of deli-
cate ivory, gold flecked dahlias and,
a solitary red rose picking out :
Canberra. It was an artistic con-
ception patterned and presented by
New Australians, their tribute to the
occasion.
In the afternoon, as newsreel
cameras whirred and the Canberra
City Band played stirring music, car
after car swept up to the portals of
the Albert Hall to set down the
Ministers of the Crown, the State
and Federal Parliamentarians, the
dignitaries of the various churches,
and the representatives of philan-
thropic bodies throughout the Com-'
monwealth.
As the time moved on to S p.m.,
the Prime Minister, Mr. Menzies,
arrived. He was welcomed by the
Minister for Immigration, Mr. Holt.
Together they moved up to the dais
| to take their places with Mr. Chifley,
jwho represented the Federal Opposi-
tion, and the former Minister for
Immigration, Mr. Calwell.
The dais was framed with shrub-
bery and behind it, the stage of the
Albert Hall was decorated with the
Commonwealth coat of arms and
the six State shields, each lit by a
tiny spotlight.
Mr. Holt’s speech and those that
followed were an inspiring beginning
to what was to be a memorable
week. Political opponents spoke fromi
the same platform and expressed
the same views on the need for
assimilation. They set the note of
harmony which was to prevail.
After the opening ceremonies,
delegates boarded Commonwealth
buses to travel to Yarralumla, resi-
dence of the Governor-General, for
an official reception.
That night, the delegates saw an
arts and crafts exhibition at the
Canberra University College pre-
sented by the New Australians. This
display was tangible evidence of the
gracious skills the new settlers have
brought. Delegates saw the New
Australians in their national cos-
tumes, and came to meet at first
hand the people whose happy assimi-
lation into the community was to
be their concern.
The convention assembled next
morning to hear Mr. Holt review
what had been done in. immigration
planning and to outline the Govern-
ment’s immigration plans for 1950.
He revealed bold, imaginative plans
for the future. He left the visitors
in no doubt thai immigration to
Australia would proceed unabated
and with ever increasing momentum.
Mr. Holt then left the convention to
its deliberations.
The remainder of the day was
taken up with informative addresses.
Delegates were provided with copies
of the new booklet "Migration in
Action/’ which discussed the machin-.
ery already existing to assist mig-
rants. Speakers amplified the sub-
ject matters covered there.
The Director of the Commonwealth
Office of Education, Professor R. C.
Ivo Kauniste, the 12-year-old Estonian
actor in the assimilation film "No
Strangers Here," lost no time in
offering Mrs, Harold Holt, wife of
the Minister for Immigration, some of
the toffee he received at a curtain-
call presentation at the film's premiere.
Mills, explained the machinery and
methods used by the Commonwealth
Government to educate newcomers
into the Australian way of life and to
improve their knowledge of the Eng-
lish language.
The Chairman of the Common-
wealth Immigration Planning Coun-
cil, Mr. John Storey, told delegates
i of the effect of large numbers of new-
I comers on the Australian community
and the part that the newly formed
Council could play in the smooth
assimilation of these thousands of
new settlers into industry and the
community.
Mr. T. H. Pitt of the Department
of Social Services explained the var-
ious benefits to which British and
European migrants were immediately
entitled and those that would accrue
to them with the passing of the years.
The afternoon’s assembly concluded
with an address by Mrs. Caroline
Kelly on the general pattern of assi-
milation.
★
At night, delegates gave an enthus-
iastic reception to the premiere
screening in the Albert Hall of the
Immigration Department's film No
Strangers Here.
This film, which was produced by
jthe Department of Information for
1 the Department of Immigration, de-
picts the lives of a new Australian
family in their early days in a
small Australian town.
The film was warmly praised by
1 the Minister for Immigration, Mr.
Holt, and the Minister for Informa-
tion, Mr. Howard Beale. At the end
of the screening, Mr. Holt introduced
the producer of the film, Dr. K. Stern-
berg, who presented the cast of the
I film to the audience.
! On Wednesday the convention
broke up into discussion groups after
speeches by Maj.-Gen. F. G. Galleghan
I Sir Arthur Rucker, and Major Gen-
I eral C. E. M. Lloyd explaining the
work of the International Refugee
Organisation in Europe, and by Miss
Hazel Dobson who told of the work
that the Immigration Department’s
| social workers are doing for new
I settlers.
I That night a brilliant musical fes-
[tival was presented by British and
European migrants. The arts and
crafts exhibition on Monday night
had revealed the manual skills the
New Australians had brought to
Australia. Wednesday night's con-
cert established beyond doubt the
graceful contribution of culture and
artistry that these people could make
to the enrichment of Australian nat-
ional life.
On Thursday, Australia Day, dis-
cussion groups continued till the
afternoon when delegates assembled
at an impressive naturalisation cere-
mony, conducted by Mr. Justice
Simpson, of the Supreme Court of
the Australian Capital Territory,
when six New Australians stood be-
fore the judge, and with open Bible
jin hand swore their allegiance to.the
King and their loyalty to Australia.
At the end of the naturalisation
ceremony, delegates went to Parlia-
ment House where they were pre
sented to the Minister for Immigra-
tion and Mrs. Holt. During the gar-
den party at which the Minister and
Mrs. Holt entertained the delegates
to the convention, colourfully costum-
ed New Australian children gave a
performance of their national dances.
On Friday the closing stages of the
convention took place.
Delegates returned to their own
homes inspired and confident in their
ability to carry through successfully
the great tasks of assimilation that
lay ahead.
They were happy that the Austra-
lian Government had called them to
talk together, to discuss problems and
to formulate plans.
They now had the whole picture
of assimilation clear in their minds.
They could see how the contribution
that their own organisations had to
offer could be fitted into a national
pattern.
hiqeAi


CASE FOR MIGRATION
IS IRRESISTIBLE,
SAYS PRIME MINISTER
The Prime Minister, Mr. Menzies, when officially
opening the convention on Monday, January 23, warned
delegates of the great danger in an unpeaeeful world,
of a country of vast area and enormous resources
peopled by only a few millions.
Mr. Menzies said that a certain hostility towards
migration still existed in Australia and pointed out that
Australians must remember that they were all either
migrants themselves or the descendants of migrants.
He praised highly the immigration policy and
activity of the previous Government under the Prime
Ministership of Mr. Chifley and the Ministership of Mr.
Calweii.
"There is one thing upon which
we can all agree," he said. "I
can say this on behalf of my own
colleagues in the present Govern-
ment—and that is, that the attack
made upon the problem of immi-
gration in this country under Mr.
Chiffey and Mr. Calweii deserves
the deep gratitude and warm
praise of every Australian.
“There has been in Australia, and
perhaps still is, certain active, or, at
least, passive resistance to migration
on the great scale. It has required
a great deal of thought, of course,
and of energy to attack this problem,
and to produce the result that we are
now able to see.
“From 1924 to 1929, when the
former considerable period of migra-
tion to Australia occurred, our net
migration was .64 of one per cent,
of our population each year. In 1948,
the year in which Mr. Calwell’s pro-
gramme was developing momentum,
the figure rose to .72 of one per cent.
—a perceptible advance on the figures
for 1924-1929. But in the first six
months of 1949—the latest figures
available the figure rose to 1.65
per cent., which is a remarkable
achievement.”
Problem Is Vital
Mr. Menzies said that the delegates
should stress the need for migration,
because unless Australians were all
convinced of this need they would
never understand how to deal with
migrants. The first thing to under-
stand was that this problem was
vital.
“If everyone of us In Australia
understood that migration was vital
to our existence, growth and develop-
ment, then we should regard every
migrant as our friend, and we should
go to no end of trouble to make every
migrant feel at home/' he said.
“And if that happened all over
Australia we would not need to have
this convention; we would not need
to call people together to work out
ways and means to produce just this
end result.”
There were certain problems in
the old world and the new which
gave rise to the need for migration,
said Mr. Menzies. In the old world
there was an enormous pressure of
population upon resources. In Great
Britain the population had now
reached 50,000,000, pressing hard
upon resources which some said
were adequate only for 10,000,000, or
15,000,000 fewer people. The same
situation existed in. most of the coun-
tries of Europe.
In Australia there was exactly the
converse position. Australia had the
pressure of enormous resources upon
inadequate population.
“We must also keep in mind,” Mr.
Menzies said, “no matter how much
we may dislike it, however great our
own goodwill towards other countries,
however unquestioned our desire for
peace, this is not at present a peace-
ful world.
“If we want to make our contri-
bution to the pacification of the
world, it is our duty to present to
the world the spectacle of a rich
country with a great people, with an
adequate population—with a popula-
tion which may justly say to the rest
of the world: ‘We are here; we pro-
pose to maintain our integrity as a
nation; and our warrant for that is
that we are using the resources which
God has given into our hands.
“The case for migration on a great
scale is, Indeed, an irresistible one.
“I have spoken so far about the
problems that give rise to migration.
Let us turn the page over, so to
speak, and consider for a few mo-
ments the problems to which migra-
tion gives rise—the problems that
arise here because of this remarkable
stream of people coming into Aus-
tralia. And we must approach those
problems with well-balanced minds.
“We are not to become partisans
in these matters. We are not to
assume that the Australian critic is
always wrong; but we must certainly
not assume that the migrant is
always wrong. As sensible Aus-
tralians we must approach the prob-
lem of our adjustment to a great
wave of migration in a fair and
balanced way.
“And if we do there are some
aspects of our adjustment which must
"Must Discard Prejudice"
Mr. Menzies said that it must
never be assumed that the people who
migrated to Australia in the 19th
century were the people who could
best be spared. Rather, they were
the people who had the spirit of ad-
venture in them, who were not afraid
of a six months’ journey to Australia,
and who were prepared to tear up
their roots in their own country and
to go to a land of which they knew
nothing.
“Whatever we in Australia have
in us of courage, initiative or any
resource, we got it from them,” he
said.
“We are not discussing strange
events. We are discussing family
events. We are discussing how we, in
our ctay ana generation, can help
people who are in exactly the same
position as were my grandfather and
my grandmother. We can afford to
consider this problem as one that
domes ngnt bade jtiomje and that
makes its appeal to everything that
we have in us that is good.
"We must strike down at its very
inception the rather insular ten-
dency that exists in the minds of
some persons to object to a man be-
cause of his race or his religion—
to raise matters of sectarianism or
racialism.
strike us as almost humorous. For
instance, I am told —although I per-
sonally have not encountered a great
deal of it that in some circles
it is quite correct to refer rather
contemptuously to ‘Pommies’ a
‘Pommy’ being, presumbly, some-
one who comes from the old world,
from Great Britain.
“Frankly, I think that that is
mostly pretended ignorance, because
if it is not pretended it is just too
silly for words. I suppose that it
would be correct to say that of all
the people in this hall this afternoon,
and of all those listening to me on
the air, a clear 95 per cent, are either
(a) ‘Pommies', (b) the sons or
daughters of ‘Pommies’, or (c) the
grandsons or granddaughters of
‘Pommies’.”
“I want to say at once, not only
personally but also as the head of
this Government, that I have no
patience whatever with those ideas
because I know, as I hope that all
Australians know, that as an Aus-
tralian, I have a simple choice.
“If I do not want a man to come
to my country to live, then I must
keep him out. If I let him in, then
he must be a member of my national
family. There is no middle course.
.A man, woman or child who comes
here to settle is either not acceptable,
and therefore is not admitted, or he
or she becomes an Australian —a
member of this community, k mem-
ber of our nationality, a member of
our brotherhood, and, in the best
sense of the word, a member of our
family.
“Prejudice against a migrant be-
cause of race or origin is not a sign
of pride but a sign of stupidity. It
is almost as foolish as if we were
to conclude that because a man
from Poland speaks broken English
he is of a mind inferior to our own,
whereas the truth is that at least
he speaks broken English and we
have not begun to speak Polish at
all,
“Remember that we ourselves
(and when I say 'we ourselves’ I
The Prime Minister, Mr. Menzies, officially opening the convention. He set the
keynote for the convention with the message: "If we admit migrants to our
country, we must admit them to our national family."
am speaking for the 95 per cent, of
our people who derive their origi&-
from the British Isles) are some-
thing of a mixture. In our less
modest moments we are prepared to
admit, are we not, that this mixture
has done great things to the world —
that it has provided a toughness of
fibre, a sensibility of outlook and a
genuine missionary spirit that has
been of great service to the world.
“Of course it has. No man ought
to call himself British who does not
feel thankful to God for what the
British people have been able to do
in this world, and not, least of all,
in our day and generation in this
century. Yet we are, of all people,
the most mixed. We are the product
of wave after wave of movement of
peoples from the Caucasus west-
ward.
“If someone wants to say silly
things about a man because he is a
Jew, let us take pride in the fact
that one of the greatest soldiers in
the world in this century was an
Australian Jew. If someone wants
to talk about somebody else because
he is a German, let us take pride in
the fact that the German settlers
in this country have made an imper-
ishable contribution to the wheat
industry of Australia and to the
whole history of rural development
in Australia.
“We have one great task. It is
not to treat the migrants as foreign
colonists, as I hope they will not
treat themselves, but to understand
that they have com© here into a free
country.
“It is a country in which there is
no royal road to success. It is a
country in which the prizes go to the
industrious and me skilful and to
those who labour here. It is, there-
fore, a great and expanding country.
“When they come here, we must
receive them as Australians. We
must receive them into the brother-
hood of our country. We must say
to them, in effect, that, whatever
may be the circumstances of the
past, when they have lived here for
a few years they will all be Austra-
lians, they will all be British, and
they will all be, as we are, the King’s
men and the King’s women.”


"MIGRATION A GREAT ADVENTURE," MINISTER
Commonwealth and State Governments were united in the drive to welcome
migrants into the community. Here the Commonwealth Minister for Immigration,
Mr. Holt (centre, seated) talks with five Migration Ministers. Back row, left to
right: Mr. L. Thorn (W.A.), Mr. W. M. Moore (Q'land), and Mr. E. R. A. Howroyd
(Tas.). Front, left to right: Mr. J. G. Arthur (N.S.W.), and Mr. W. W. Leggatt
(Vic.). South Australia's Premier and Minister for Immigration, Mr. Playford, also
attended the convention opening.
Mr. Chifley Asks
For Understanding
Mr. Chifley called on the people of Australia to
extend the utmost tolerance, consideration and help
generally to the migrants coming to this country.
Mr. Chifley, who was speaking at
the official opening of the convention,
said: "I apeak with considerable feel-
ing when I endorse the appeal for
understanding which the Prime Min-
ister has made.
“We must remember that it ia a
big adventure for people to pull up
their roots in countries where they
and their families have lived for
many years to come to Australia to
start a new life.
“I cannot but admire their courage,
particularly in view of their scant
knowledge of the English language
in many instances.
“We in this country were fortunate
enough to escape, in the main, the
great suffering and privation that
was endured by millions of people
[n Europe during the war.
“I enjoin you to show to these
people the utmost kindness and to
prove to them that we are anxious
to absorb them as citizens of this
Australia. My remarks apply equally
with relation to migrants from the
Old Country.”
Mr. Chifley said that there was a
pressing national necessity for Aus-
tralia to increase its population in or-
fler to develop its resources. Tens of
millions of people in the world had
little or no hope for their future well-
being. In many instances there was
ahead for them nothing but misery,
unemployment and starvation.
In bringing these people to this
sountry, Australians would serve
their national interest by enabling
he development of the continent’s
resources, and by building Australia
is an English-speaking stronghold in
he Pacific.
Beyond the national interest, the
mmigratlon policy to which Australia
was committed would give to the
people of the war-ravaged countries
of Europe opportunity to become
citizens of a democratic, freedom-
loving country, and to build for them-
selves a full life in Australia.
“Despite the inevitable difficulties,”
he went on, “I believe that we should
continue to bring to this country
hundreds of thousands of migrants
from Great Britain and European
countries. We should secure people
accustomed to hard work, if they are
available. If migrants should be ob-
tained from Holland, I should be pre-
pared to join in a welcome to them.”
As leader of the Government that
was in office when Mr. Calwell initi-
ated the convention, Mr. Chifley said
that he thanked all representatives
of organisations and other people who
had attended and would take part
in the discussions.
He wished also to thank the new
Government for carrying on the
policy that was being pursued when
it was elected to office.
Concluding, Mr. Chifley said: “I
earnestly appeal to the people of this
country to do all possible to brighten
the lives of the migrants coming to
this country and to make Australia
a better place for them in which to
live.”
(When introducing Mr, Chifley at
the official opening, the Minister for
Immigration, Mr. Holt, said that the
migration programme of the Chifley
Government had been a spectacular
success which could not have been
launched without the active support
of the then Prime Minister. “It was
typical of Mr. Chifley that he was
one of the first men to offer co-opera-
tion and advice when I was installed
in office,” Mr. Holt said).
"Migration on the scale adopted
by Australia is a great risk—a
great adventure, *’ said Mr. Holt.
"But it is a risk which must be
taken if we are to survive. It is an
adventure upon which we launch
ourselves gladly.
j “We believe, with that optimism,
which is a natural product of our
| sunny country, that this is one
lof the best ways by which we can
I build the free, happy, prosperous
Australia of our dreams. It is not
an easy course we have set ourselves.
But no Government could do much
more to make migration succeed
than Australian Governments have
done, and are doing/’
"We Must Do Our Part"
Mr. Holt suggested that private
citizens and voluntary organisations
proved that Australian citizens were
good neighbours by taking over mi-
grants at the stage where Govern-
ments could do no more for them,
, and thus help them become assimi-
lated.
'Mr. Holt continued: “We hear
much talk about the need for mi-
grants to become assimilated quickly,
and it is, of course, most desirable
that the migrants should do so. But
assimilation is a two-way process. It
is not sufficient for the migrant to
make the effort to learn our
language and to adapt himself to our
ways. We, as citizens, must do our
part. We must prove to be good
neighbours.
“During the war emergency public-
spirited citizens rallied together to
form patriotic societies to do what
they could for the men and women
of the services. But peace can have
her victories no less renowned than
those.of war.
Carefully Planned Scheme
“We want to make our migration
programme a great victory for peace,
and this calls for special and emer-
gency measures. I should like to
see the kind of people who did such
splendid work in the war years, the
kind who are represented here to-
day, combine in each of our shires
and municipalities to form welcome
committees and make it their job
to co-operate with the migrants in
their own localities. I give you that
suggestion in the hope that you will
consider it in the course of your dis-
cussions.”
Mr. Holt said that delegates were
assembled to help Australia make a
success of the migration programme.
He added, “We shall measure that
success not merely by the numbers
of migrants we can attract to this
country, not merely by the added
production and development which
will flow from their labours in our
midst, not merely by the added
security which their presence will
bring to us, but also by the manner
in which we take them into our
community life, and by the greater
happiness we are able to give them
in their new homeland. You are
here to help us achieve full success.”
Mr. Holt drew attention to the
thoroughness with which migration
to Australia from Europe had been
planned. Migrants were under official
supervision and care from the time
TELLS CONVENTION
Future security objectives, admirable in themselves,
must not be allowed to exclude the risk and adventure
inseparable from imaginative planning and pioneering
development. Migration was such a risk.
The Minister for Immigration, Mr. Holt, said this in officially
opening the convention in conjunction with the Prime Minister, Mr.
Menzies, He described the convention as "unique in the history of
Australia."
of their first selection and medical
examination.
“They are screened for security
purposes/' he said. “They come to
Australia in shipping provided for
them. They are placed in a Govern-
ment reception centre on arrival in
Australia. Here they are again
medically examined and given some
teaching in our language and way
of life to equip them for entry into
our community life. Clothing and
accommodation are provided where
needed.
“No more comprehensive plan has
ever heen put into operation.
“I a-m happy to say that In
return they are making diligent
and valuable contribution to national
production. They are making that
contribution where the need is
greatest—in producing materials for
building, in work on our public
utilities, in the steel industry and
on our farms, in the getting of
timber and the building of dams, and
in work in our hospitals and welfare
institutions.
“In addition to tens of thousands
■of migrants employed elsewhere,
1 more than 50,000 displaced persons
from Europe are employed in the
manner I have indicated.
Welcome to Delegates
Welcoming delegates to the conven-
tion, Mr, Holt said:
“My first duty is to welcome you
on behalf of the Australian Govern-
ment. Indeed, you are doubly wel-
come, because in the first place that
welcome is expressed through you to
the organisations which so many of
you directly represent, and in the
second place the welcome is given
to each of you personally.
“You are here in your personal
capacities because of the public spirit
you have already shown as citizens
which has prompted the invitation
extended to you to come to this
convention.
“The calibre and variety of repre-
sentatives are such that I feel con-
fident that this will be a fruitful
convention and that out of your
discussions recommendations will be
made which will be of great assist-
ance to the Government.”
Tribute to Former Govt.
Mr. Holt paid unstinted tribute to
the former Government and Minister
for Immigration, Mr. Calwell, for the
success of the convention and of
Australia’s migration programme
generally.
“This convention,” he said, “is the
outcome of arrangements made by
Mr. Chifley’s Government, and the
plans for it were made by Mr.
Calwell, Arrangements for the
convention were well in hand when
the new Government assumed office.
“I am happy to say that when 1
informed Mr. Menzies of those plans
he unhesitatingly endorsed the pur-
poses of the convention and agreed
to address the conference.
“Indeed it is a happy augury that
|he is with us here today. He will
I leave you in no doubt, I am sure,
I that his Government will prove
equally as energetic and ambitious:
in its migration proposals as was the
Government led by Mr. Chifley
which laid such solid foundations for
the success of the programme.”


Flow Of Migrants Is
Greatest In History
Australia's population growth from immigration
and natural increase was now more than three percent.
Yet it was generally accepted that a nation's capacity
to absorb and assimilate new people was about two
per cent.
These figures showed Australia's remarkable achievement in her
migration programme, said the former Minister for Immigration, Mr.
Calwell, in an address at the opening of the convention.
Mr. Calwell said that, compara-
tively, Australia was doing as well
today in welcoming newcomers as
the United States of America had
done at any period.
“I was destined to be the first
Minister for Immigration in the his-
tory of Australia,” he said. “I re-
member during the difficult years of
the war the late Mr. Curtin, who was
then Prime Minister, said at a Cab-
inet meeting that we would have to
have a Minister for Immigration
when the war was over.
“Such vision was typical of Mr.
Curtin. He foresaw clearly the
necessity for developing our popula-
tion as much as possible,
“Following the death of Mr. Curtin
the Ministry of Immigration was es-
tablished,”
Battle For Ships
Mr. Calwell said that of 21,000,000
tons of British shipping afloat when
World War II broke out, only
7.500.000 tons remained after the
war. He went abroad in 1947 to
ascertain if ships could be got for
the migration programme, and if im-
migrants were available to fill them,
from Displaced Persons’ camps in
Europe.
“I had to consider,” said Mr. Cal-
well, “those people who were known,
generically, as Balts. I remember
quit© a number of distinguished
people asking me what a Balt was.
After I came back from Europe I
was able to tell them more about
this very good type of citizen.”
Mr. Calwell said that, after dis-
cussing Baltic immigrants with rep-
resentatives in London of the Inter-
national Refugee Organisation, he
had to move quickly as America
planned to take a number of these
people. England and a number of
other European nations had taken |
them.
“After consulting the Prime Min-
ister I told the representatives of the
International Refugee Organisation
that Australia would’ be glad to take
12.000 Baltic immigrants if the In-
ternational Refugee Organisation
could provide the necessary shipping.
“At that time the furthest place to
which the European citizens were
being taken was Brazil. Because of
the distance of Australia from
Europe, and because I was conscious
of the fact that 1.R.0. did not have
as much money as it required, and
did not have many ships, I realised
that unless we made some offer to
pay something additional to Our nor-
mal contribution to that organisation
it would not be able r td ’give us the
12.000 immigrants that we were
hoping for.
Big Scheme Starts
“I therefore suggested that Aus-
tralia make an ex gratia payment
to the International Refugee Or-
ganisation. Its representatives were
rather startled that any country
should offer to make ex gratia pay-
ment, because it had been finding it
difficult to get some South American
countries to make any payment at
all. I had to cable back to the Prime
Minister, as he was also Treasurer,
and obtain his approval. I received
a cable authorising me to go ahead
and we then proceeded with the
planning! stages; of the .scheme and
were able to have it implemented ex-
peditiously and send many new
settlers to our country. We housed
them in former Army and Air Force
camps where they received courses
of instruction in English.
“After their arrival we prepared
them for their life in Australia and,
through the agency of another de-
partment of the Australian Govern-
ment, placed them in remunerative
employment.
Everyone Must Help
It was the task of all to help the
Government of the day in absorbing
New Australians, Mr. Calwell con-
tinued. “We must make these New
Australians part of our national life
ahd treat them as if they are an
integral part of our nation.
“We must not, as we have done
in the past, blame them for not
speaking English and ostracise them
aS if we were their superiors, and
then, like the ancient Scribes and
Pharisees, unctuously condemn them
for segregating themselves. That has
been the cause of previous pockets
of immigrants segregating them-
selves.
“I should like to emphasise the
enormous success that America has
had with immigration by the simple
method of encouraging the people of
Europe to come to America’s shores
and, from the day of their arrival,
encouraging them to believe them-
selves 100 per cent. Americans.
“There is no nation in the world
that needs population as much as
Australia does at the present time.
I have never attempted to make
politics of immigration because I be-
lieve that the augmenting of Aus-
tralia’s population in peace time is
as important as the defence of the
nation in wartime. For that reason
I believe that immigration in peace
time, like defence in wartime, cannot
I be made the plaything of politics.
America would not be great today
if it had not had its great men like
Roosevelt and Eisenhower, who were
of non-British extraction.”
Notable Australians
Most people who had won fame
in Australia came from British
stock, said Mr. Calwell, but notable
exceptions were General Monash and
Sir Isaac Isaacs. In the last war
one young man, of VJgoslav parent-
age, had won the Victoria Cross.
Introducing Mr. Calwell to the con-
vention, Mr. Holt said: “Mr. Calwell
had taken the decisions and made the
recommendations for this conference
some months ago. In all substantial
respects , the decisions were well in
train when I assumed office. The
immigration policy sprang from the
vision of Mr. Calwell and was de-
veloped by his drive, energy, and
personal capacity, in conjunction
with his first-class administrative
staff. A combination of all of those
things has achieved the spectacular
result of which the Prime Minister
has already spoken, I express to Mr.
Calwell, on behalf of the Government
and the people of Australia, not
merely appreciation of his presence
here today, but also our thanks and
gratitude for the spectacular job
that he has accomplished. He has
taken the immigration policy far
along the road to success; he has
(performed one of the most remark-
able jb*bs in the history of this fc'tftm-
try in that restfefct.’*
“I have always felt that the best
way to assimilate new peoples into
any country is to make them part
and parcel of the community, neither
showing them preference nor dis-
criminating against them,” Mr. Play-
ford said.
“I believe that the best way to as-
similate new citizens is to give them,
as far as is practicable to do so, the
same rights and privileges as are
possessed by the people generally and
to impose on them the same obliga-
tions.”
Mr. Playford said that Australia
must its housing problems so
that .when heSv citizens arrived it
would y not be necessary for them
The Minister for Immigration, Mr. Holt, with Mrs. Holt and a group of
delegates admire the floral convention emblem on the opening day of the
convention. The display was prepared by a Latvian and consisted of a map of
Australia, done in dahlias and roses, resting on a boomerang of flowering plum
leaves with a background of silver poplar leaves.
Premier Pledges
States To Help
The obligation of seeing that migrants were pro-
perly received and educated and became assimilated
into the Australian community was in a great degree
a matter for State Governments, the Premier of South
Australia, Mr. Playford, said at the official opening
Mr. Playford was speaking on behalf of the State Parliaments.
to be placed in holding camps. Homes
must be provided for them quickly.
“I want to say to Mr. Calwell, the
former Minister for Immigration,
that when the States found them-
selves in great difficulties about
housing, they appreciated the action
of the Federal Government in taking
steps to relieve the States of the
burden of providing housing accom-
modation for European migrants,”
Mr. Playford went on.
“I assure the new Minister that
since the inception of the migration
programme every State Government
has done its. utmost to assist the
Australian Government with this
problem,”


MINISTER OUTLINES MIGRATION
POLICY OF MENZIES GOVERNMENT
# To increase the annual intake of migrants to the highest level possible and
maintain it over a long term.
0 To ensure that British migration is first and foremost in order to retain,
as much as possible, the fundamental composition of the population.
These are the basic points in the migration policy
of the Menxies Government for the next 12 months.
They were revealed in an address to the convention by
'u* u u , 4 , a- 1
me Minister for Immigration, Mr. Holt, on January 24.
Mr, Holt further revealed that !
the Government is planning:—
• To absorb 200,000 new settlers
in 1950 from all sources and to main-
tain that annual rate in subsequent
years, aiming to make Australia's
population more than 10,000,000 by
1960.
• To get half the 1950 total from
British sources. Of the 100,000
British migrants, 70,000 to be in-
troduced under free and assisted pas-
sage schemes (compared with some
40.000 in 1949).
• Special measures to introduce
“unnominated” British migrants, i.e.,
those who have no relatives or
friends in Australia able to nominate
and accommodate them.
• Use of certain existing Immigra-
tion Centres (now used for Displaced
Persons) for the reception and tem-
porary accommodation of British
migrants, and a programme of work-
ers’ hostels to specially accommodate
British migrants.
• Continuation of the present
nomination system, in which State
Governments co-operate with the
Commonwealth.
• Every encouragement to the
30.000 British people who are ex-
pected to settle in Australia on their
own volition in 1950.
• Absorption of an additional
27.000 Displaced Persons up to the
end of 1950,. in addition to the 110,000
of these new settlers which the pre-
vious Government undertook to
accept up to June 30, 1950. Of the
110,000, about 87,000 had already
arrived up to the end of 1949, leaving
a total of 50,000 Displaced Persons
to be absorbed during 1950.
• Introduction of Dutch migrants
on a very much greater scale than
before, these to come from both In-
donesia and Holland. “The Common-
wealth Government will be glad to
receive 10,000 Dutch migrants during
1950,” said Mr. Holt.
• Drawing of the remaining
40.000 migrants (balance of the 1950
target of 200,000) from those eligible
under the Empire and Allied ex-Ser-
vice, Maltese and Eire Assisted
Passage Schemes, as well as foreign
migrants from all countries who are
eligible for admission to Australia.
Mr. Holt urged the widespread
formation of citizens’ voluntary or-
ganisations to help, in a neighbourly
spirit, New Australians to deal with
their many problems.
Mr. Holt said: “The programme
we have in mind is designed for the
next 10 years, and I hope will con-
tinue indefinitely within the lifetime
of all of us in this hall.
“We must remember that the
opportunities for augmenting our
population come in waves. The
position now, when there are hun-
dreds of thousands of European and
British people who would gladly
migrate to Australia at a time when
their own countries are in some
economic distress, or when the dis-
turbed post-war conditions of Europe
have uprooted so many people and
have left them with such feelings of
distress that they want to get away
to new lands, may be totally different
from the. conditions 10 years hence.
“When the present conditions In
Europe have altered we may very
well find ourselves back at the point
where we were some years ago when,
instead of increasing our population
by immigration, we were losing
people by emigration. Therefore, we
must embark on the most ambitious
programme that we feel we can suc-
cessfully cope with in a manner
which will not build hostility and
resistance over the next few years,
which will make it impossible for us
to carry on in the years ahead. So
we attach importance to numbers.
“Secondly, we attach importance
to ensuring that British immigra-
tion is first and foremost, in order
to retain, as closely as we reasonably
can, the present balance of our
population. This is a British com-
munity, and we want to keep it a
British community living under
British standards and by the methods
and ideals of British parliamentary
democracy.
“We have no fear that those whom
we have already brought to this
country will weaken that position,
but in order to maintain it as we
desire to maintain It we must keep
a proper balance of migrants so that
the British element will be predom-
inant and that our British institutions
will persist. I am certain that that
is a thought which will commend
itself to you all.
“We are now planning to bring
out a total of 200,000 settlers in 1950.
This will be a substantial increase
on the numbers which came in last
year when, I think, between 160,000
"Therefore, we have decided to
bring to Australia a considerable
number of selected British migrants.
State Governments have given valu-
able assistance in handling personal
and group nominations and will con-
tinue to operate in this field.
“There are, however, large num-
bers of British people who are de-
sirous of settling in Australia, but
who are unable to do so because they
have no relatives or friends here to
nominate and accommodate them.
The nomination scheme is limited to
that extent, and we will therefore
take special measures to introduce
such unnominated British immi-
grants.
“The new plan will mean that to
the extent that nominations through
the States fall short of 70,000 persons
the Commonwealth will be respon-
sible for introducing the balance,
“Indications are that in 1950 the
Commonwealth Government will in-
troduce some 37,000 migrants out of
that total of 70,000, as the capacity
of the States may not exceed 33,000.
“In order to handle this large
number of Commonwealth-sponsored
British migrants the Government
will earmark certain of its present
immigration centres used for Dis-
placed Persons for the reception and
temporary accommodation of British
migrants on their arrival here.
“Those migrants will be passed out
either to jobs with accommodation
found by their employers in the
States or to the Commonwealth Gov-
and 170,000 new settlers came to
Australia.
“Knowing something of the task
that was involved in bringing last
year’s new settlers in you will have
no illusions about the difficulties
ahead of us in taking in the sub-
stantial stream proposed for this
year, but we are no less determined
than the previous Government to
bring suitable migrants to this
country in the greatest numbers that
we can manage. We have, therefore,
set ourselves for the current 12
months this target of 200,000 new
settlers from all sources. We desire
to maintain that annual rate in sub-
sequent years so that the Australian
population will total more than
10,000,000 by 1960.
“The number of British migrants
budgeted for is 100,000, of whom
70,000 will be introduced under the
Free and Assisted Passages Schemes,
compared with about 40,000 in 1949.
“So far as British immigration is
concerned, in recent years we have
relied entirely upon the nomination
system. People coming to Australia
were nominated by relatives or
friends in Australia who were able
to assure them of accommodation
when they arrived.
“That scheme has worked very well
indeed. The State Governments have
co-operated in the problems that have
arisen and as a result a considerable
number of British migrants has come
to this country in the post-war years.
“Already there are signs that the
number is tapering off gradually. Of
course, as Australians nominate their
friends and relatives overseas the
number of those who are able or
desirous to do so is continually
shrinking. We have to face up to
that particular situation.
SPECIAL MEASURES FOR
UNNOMINATED MIGRANTS
ernment-operated hostels, so that
they may be employed in essential
industries.
“A programme of workers’ hostels
will be launched to accommodate
British migrants. A feature of this
programme ■will be the establishment
of some of these hostels in country
areas in order to provide labour for
rural and secondary industries and to
aid in decentralisation. The object
of the Commonwealth Government in
taking the initiative in this matter
is to ensure that firstly British mi-
grants who otherwise would not have
had an opportunity under the nomina-
tion system tp settle here will now
be able to do so, and, secondly, that
the labour so necessary for essential
industries in this country will be pro-
vided.
“Under the hostels’ programme
those living in the Government hos-
tels will be allocated to such work
while they remain in Government-
provided accommodation. That is
somewhat of a variation on the con-
tract arrangement. We bring un-
nominated migrants out to Australia
and until they can find their own
niche In the community we keep those
who desire to remain in the workers’
hostels, from where they are allo-
cated while they remain in these hos-
tels, to the work we require them to
do.
“The Commonwealth scheme will
be complementary to the present
nomination scheme in the States
which, of course, is particularly valu-
Mr. Holt
able and which will continue to
operate. In addition to the 70,000
British migrants received under
these schemes in 1950 it is also an-
ticipated that approximately 30,000
British people will settle here who
have come as full fare paying passen-
gers. That has been going on, and
will continue, and it will be given,
naturally, every encouragement by
the Government.
“You will see from the figures that
I have given that not all the mi-
grants that we are to introduce will
require accommodation to be found
for them. Many of them will come
here under the nomination system
and find accommodation with friends
and relatives, or under group schemes
with accommodation provided by
their employers.
“To increase the future figures that
I have mentioned by adding to the
proportion of Displaced Persons who
come here this year would Inevitably
mean a corresponding reduction in
the number of British migrants
which we could take this year.
“We feel you will approve the pro-
portions that we have announced.
They represent in our mind a prac-
tical programme and to vary them
in any particular direction very much
would place strains on us that we
feel we could not cope with in this
current 12 months. We hope the
programme will prove to be a thor-
oughly balanced and satisfactory
one.
“I mentioned the programme of
200,000, of which there will be some
100,000 British migrants and ap-
proximately 50,000 displaced persons.
Provision is also being made for the
introduction of Dutch migrants on a
very much greater scale than hither-
to.
“We would be glad to have Dutch
migrants in Australia because the
introduction of Dutch migrants to
other parts of the world has had ex-
cellent results, particularly in rela-
tion to rural production.
“It is aimed not only to settle here
young Dutch servicemen from the
United States of Indonesia who
otherwise would be repatriated to
Holland, but also Dutch workers
from Holland. The small parties of
Dutch migrants who have already
arrived have established a splendid
reputation and the Dutch Govem-
• MORE; Page 18.


"STAND FOUR-SQUARE"
EXTENDING
WORK
OF STATES
Firm assurances that the
Governments they rep-
resented would be behind
the Commonwealth Gov-
ernment's immigration
plans were-given by the six
State Immigration Minis-
ters on the second day of
the convention.
The Ministers also made
reference to the housing
question and emphasised
the point that New Aus-
tralians would be a power-
ful factor in speeding up
the production of all types
of goods which Australia
so urgently needs today.
Points they made were:
Mr. J. G. Arthur, Minister for Immi-
gration, New South Wales:
“The problem of migration is pri-
marily the concern of the Common-
wealth. Indeed it was almost the
exclusive responsibility of the Com-
monwealth until the Chifley Govern-
ment sought the help of the States
and delegated certain authority to
them which they readily accepted."
Mr. Arthur Said the problem
of providing accommodation for Aus-
tralians as well as migrants was
worrying all States, hut that every
Australian should be realistic in the
matter.
He added: “We can say with some
justification to our critics that the
new settlers have made a great im-
pact on the progress, development
and production of this country.
“I stand four-square with Mr.
Holt and his Government in rela-
tion to the migration policy which
he has outlined to the convention- I
give him the assurance on behalf
of the New South Wales Government
that we shall he only too happy to
co-operate with him in every way.”
Mr. W. W. Leggatt, Minister for Im-
migration, Victoria:
“It is mainly the responsibility of
the States to see that migrants are
absorbed, assimilated and properly
looked after.
“The first big problem to be tackled
is the problem of organisation. In all
States organisations have been es-
tablished principally to assist British
migrants. Those organisations could
be extended to cater for the assimila-
tion and absorption of all New Aus-
tralians.
“I stress the point made by Mr.
Holt that effective organisation is
absolutely necessary if we are to
avoid overlapping.
“The problem of housing was
stressed by Mr. Arthur. As he has 1
said, that is the main problem which
the States have to face; but we must
not forget that there are other prob-
lems which are not linked up with
the problems of housing and organisa-
tion."
Mr. Leggatt said questions of the
social entertainment and psychologi-
cal approach to new settlers from
Europe should also receive attention.
Mr. W. M. Moore, Minister for Mines
and for Immigration, Queensland:
“Queensland has been most fortu-
nate in the functioning of its ar-
rangements for the reception and
after care of migrants. Of approxi-
mately 8,000 new settlers in Queens-
land, only 100 have returned to their
homelands, and the reasons for the
POLISH NATIONAL DANCERS
WAIT FOR CURTAIN CALL
"Striving For A
Great Purpose."
"This convention is the first of its kind to be held
in Australia, and perhaps in the world," said the official
Chairman, Mr. O. D. A. Oberg, in his first address to the
delegates. "That fact emphasises the great task that
devolves upon us all of making every effort to achieve
the purposes for which the convention is convened."
“We congratulate the previous
Government upon its foresight, which
I is evidenced by its vigorous immigra-
tion policy. We commend the ex-
Minister for Immigration, Mr, Cal-
well, for the outstanding personal
services that he has rendered to the
development of that policy.
“We pay deserved tribute to the
leaders of the State Governments for
their effective co-operation. We note
I with satisfaction the future policy
| enunciated by the Prime Minister,
Mr. Menzies, and by the Minister
for Immigration, Mr. Holt. I feel
sure that under Mr. Holt's leader-
ship there will be still further
achievement in migration and related
development.
“Well may our recommendations
become the basis of action for the
future social, economic and national
developments of Australia;
“It augurs well for the successful
outcome of this convention that we
have here assembled, motivated by
a common purpose, representatives
of the Government, commerce, indus-
I try the latter including employer
I and employee organisations cul-
| tural interests, the churches, and
activities of every description.”
The measure of the convention’s
success would be determined by the
co-operation of all in facing the
problems that must arise. “I dedi-
cate myself to your service and to
the success of this convention,” he
concluded. “Let us all to our res-
pective tasks.”
This group of excited New Australians
from Poland make last-minute adjust-
ments to their Old World costumes and
their 1950 make-up before taking the
stage to delight the audience with
Polish national dances at the "New
Australians Make Music" concert.
return of even that small number
i fall into less than a dozen categories.
I think that is an excellent result, i
“I quite agree with Mr. Holt that
the problems of receiving and looking
after migrants throughout Australia
generally could not be considered by
any body more appropriate than the
present gathering.
“I assure Mr. Holt that in ironing
out the many difficulties that con-
front his Government, it will receive
the same co-operation and happy col-
laboration that characterised our
relationships with the previous Com-
monwealth Government."
Mr. L. Thorn, Minister for Lands and
Immigration, Western Australia:
“I hasten to assure Mr. Holt that
the Western Australian Government
will be solidly behind him in this
great national undertaking.
“We believe that immigration is a
national question of great importance
and we feel that now the migrants
are offering in such numbers we
must make the fullest endeavour to
populate this great country of ours.”
Mr. E. R. A. Howr&yd, Minister for
I Tourist Activities and Immigration,
1 Tasmania;
! “I have often pointed out that as
soon as we in Tasmania overcome
the housing problem we shall have
gone a long way towards solving
many of our other problems, includ-
ing immigration.
“I assure Mr. Holt, and the State
Ministers, that we in Tasmania will
co-operate with the Commonwealth
Government. I am happy to know
that Mr. Holt and his colleagues in-
tend to carry on the immigration
policy of the previous Government,
which did a very good job in that
direction.
“I believe in the truth of the
phrase: ‘Populate or Perish’.”
Introducing the chairman, Mr.
Holt said that Mr. Oberg was a
man who had been a great figure
In the community life of Australia I
for many years. "He has taken a
public-spirited line on the problems
affecting Industry and commerce,
and the relations between employ-
ers and workers, In a manner that
has earned respect throughout
Australia."
Mr. Oberg said that whatever he
had done had been a privilege and
an opportunity to show how much
he valued the opportunities that his
native country had given him.
“I hope that I shall not be accused
of any undue degree of presumption
if I endeavour to commit the conven-
tion to its high responsibility and the
duties that await it,” he said. “I
realise the responsibility that has
been cast upon me, but I remind
delegates that they share that respon-
sibility with me. It arises from our
obligation to ensure a successful con-
clusion to our deliberations.
‘‘The presence and support of the
leaders of opposing political parties
emphasises the supreme importance
of the convention, in which national
considerations far transcend party or
sectional viewpoints. Our determina-
tions will be of great importance to
the future of Australia, and even to
the overall development of the British
Commonwealth of Nations.


EDUCATION PLAYS VITAL ROLE IN ASSIMILATION,
CONVENTION IS TOLD
"Everyone Must Help"
"I suggest that everyone who comes in contact
these newcomers whose native tongue is not
English, should remember that the New Australians have
a smattering of our language, and that they are sensi-
tive," said the Director of the Commonwealth Office
of Education, Professor R. C. Mills, in his address to the
convention on the second day of the sittings.
They want to learn and should be encouraged by
their fellow workers and by their neighbours, and the
members of voluntary organisations," Professor Mills
added.
He told delegates that a thorough appreciation of the magnitude
of the task of educating the New Australians in our language was
provided by figures given by the Minister for Immigration. Mr. Holt.
“In order to deal with the problem
of introducing these people into
our society,” said Prof. Mills, “the
Department of Immigration sought
the advice of the Commonwealth
Office of Education. It was obvious
that the Commonwealth’s responsi-
bility was to deal with the educa-
tional problems of foreign - born
migrants, and we, in turn, went to
the State Departments of Education.
“The Commonwealth Office of
Education tackled the problem of the
education of the migrants with the
aid of the State Departments. Their
help has proved invaluable. When
education began at Boneglila, when
we were faced, rather suddenly, with
the first arrivals, it was hard work.
But it was fun, in a way, or, at least,
all my officers treated it that way.
Now, however, the education starts
in the camp before they leave.” j
Radio Lessons Help
Professor Mills then described in
detail the educational set-up, ex-
plaining the work done in the centres,
and the holding centres for women
and children, the continuation classes
held at night and- at week-ends in
State schools for New Australians
working in districts throughout the
Commonwealth, and the correspond-
ence lessons, all checked by the staff
of special tutors, which have proved
so successful. He paid a high tribute
to the assistance given by the Aus-
tralian Broadcasting Commission for
its weekly radio lessons, adding,
“Most people admit that these les-
sons are a very good method of deal-
ing with the problem of giving the
new settlers an improved knowledge
of our language.
“We owe a great deal to the teach-
ers in the centres and the continua-
tion classes. There are about 1,000
teachers occupied in this work. Not
all of them are members of the
State Departments. They do not un-
dertake this work for fun, but rather
because they have a kind of mission-
ary zeal. We have about 800
continuation classes going on, cater-
ing for some 13,000 students. We
have used all the resources available
to us in teaching aids for the carrying
out of this very difficult process.
“We are but an educational an-
cillary—this problem is primarily the
problem of the Department of Edu-
cation. The fact that we have be:n
asked to assist is merely evidence of
the very good judgment of that De-
partment.
“We have had in mind two things.
First, we give the newcomers a start
in using English. Of course their
command of English varies from
nothing to very considerable English.
Secondly, we try to give them a
start in understanding our society.
We have woven these things together.
“Among the newcomers there hasi
been an insatiable demand for know-!
ledge about Australia. People in thei
centres and on the ships have been|
adamant in their demand to know
what kind of country they are corn-
ing' to. They face the very difficult
labour of trying to learn the
language. The language difficulty has
created many problems.
Schools in Centres
“Everyone who is familiar with our
migrant centres such as those at
Bonegilla and Bathurst, will realise
what hives of industry they are. In
these centres the emphasis is on em-
ployment; in some cases education
comes a bad last. However, we arc
persevering, although we realise that
j we are up against a difficult problem.
We should like to keep the' new-
comers for at least six months, and
then pass them out gradually, ac-
cording to their knowledge of Eng-
lish.
1 “There is a natural desire on the
part of the newcomer to get to work,
and to become a bread-winner. If
we tried to keep a man in the centre
for six months in order to teach him
English, he would be dissatisfied. All
we can do in the short time available
is to teach basic needs in English.
“No one should be complacent
about the results of teaching English
in the migrant centres. We have
taken the migrants as far as we
can in the time available to us. When
they went out into employment, they
came up against very difficult prob-
lems. We have done our best to give
the average newcomer a very small
knowledge of English, but education
I should be a continuing process.
] “One encouraging thing is the ap-
preciation by the newcomers of the
work done in education. The res-
ponse to any further kind of develop-
ment, will, I am sure, be the same.
Nevertheless, we have great problems
to overcome. Do not let us get away
from this convention saying that this
is the greatest migration scheme we
could ever have, and that we are
doing more than any other country.
The question we must face is how
far we still can go. It is a general
problem, not only of making these
newcomers feel at home, but also of
fitting them into the society in which
they are to live.
| Cultural Contribution
1 “Our principal aim should be to
alter the term New Australians hy
taking- away the adjective ‘new’ so
that all of these people will regard
themselves as Australians. We think
of them sometimes as contributing
to our good by having them here.
There is not the slightest doubt in
the minds of us who know the kind
of people who will come here, that,
although we shall always remain
predominantly British in our civilisa-
tion and culture, those qualities will
be enriched by the contribution
made to them by European migrants.
“The best way to encourage that
contribution is to afford help to our
migrants."
Mr. T. R. M. Sloane, N.S.W. De-
partment of Education, said that in
the country areas of New South
Wales 106 centres had been estab-
lished for adult education, with 2,017
people enrolled. In Sydney there
were 11, with 1,392 people enrolled.
, “In high schools headmasters are
I asked to encourage new pupils to
1 visit the homes of pupils who have
■ been at these schools for a conaider-
| able time,”' he s.'id. “The New Aus-
-1 tralian pupils are mingling readily
I and happily with the pupils of Old
| Australia.”
I Mr. G. Osborne, Chief Inspector of
| Primary Schools Victoria, said that
his Department had accepted full res-
I ponsibihty for supplying teachers for
I the education of both adult and child
migrants in Victoria. An acute
shortage of teachers created a prob-
lem, but the best types of teachers
available for this particular work
were being selected.
Main problem was how to get the
women, and particularly the married
women, to attend classes. The Depart-
ment had social workers visit them
and point out to them the import-
ance of learning English.
“If we do not get the mothers to
the classes to learn good English,”
said Mr. Osborne, “we shall have the
migrant families all speaking their
own tongue in their own homes, and
I consider that that should be
avoided.”
Child migrants of various ages un-
able to speak English presented a
real problem, particularly if they
showed a lack of educational back-
ground in their own country. “We
have endeavoured to overcome that
| problem by having very small classes
and, where necessary, by giving in-
dividual instruction.”
The Victorian Department of Edu-
cation had developed a system of
correspondence courses based to some
extent on similar courses of the Of-
fice of Education, said Mr. Osborne. I
“We have adopted certain features
of that course and certain features
of our own course for the education
of young children learning English
“We have developed our own cor-
Teaching Of Adults
Presents Problem
The greater difficulty of assimilating adult
migrants and in particular mothers of migrant, families
into the Australian way of life, as compared with the
task of assimilating children, was the theme of several
speakers representing the Education Departments of
the States when they addressed the convention
respondence course to guide our own
teachers in the teaching of migrant
children throughout Victoria who are
actually within the normal course
standards, and we have found it very
helpful indeed."
Mr. L. D. Edwards, representing
the State Director-General of the
Department of Public Instruction,
Queensland, referred to the problem
of migrant communities in northern
Queensland.
While the average Australian had
not shown any feverish desire to mix
freely with newcomers, neither had
the older immigrants made any
serious attempt to master English.
Very few of the first generation of
southern Europeans had married
outside their own race.
The children, however, readily
learned English and were readily as-
similated.
Mr. C. M. Griggs, Superintendent
of High Schools, South Australia,
said that Italian and Greek settlers
who had come to South Australia
in earlier years had tended to con-
gregate in Adelaide and Port Pirie,
but not in isolated groups such as
had formed in Queensland. The
children had been taken into nor-
mal schools and many of them had
become leaders. Some had won bur-
saries.
Mr. P. Hughes, Secretary for Edu-
cation in Tasmania, said that teach-
ing migrants English was only the
, initial process in teaching them to
live. Every effort must be made to
overcome the tendency for new arri-
vals to segregate themselves, so that
they could be assimilated into our
population and absorb our culture
and ideals as rapidly as possible
Mr. Murray Little, Director of
Education, Western Australia, urged
the formation of mothers' clubs and
the co-operation of all parents*
groups, in every part of Australia,
to devise ways and means of bring-
ing migrant and Australian mothers
together through their children.
One of the chief faults of Aus-
tralia's previous immigration policy,
said Mr. Murray Little, was that the
mother stayed at home and never
learned the language.
The Minister for In-
formation, Mr. Howard
Beale (right) greeted
his predecessor in the
Ministry, Mr. Arthur A.
Calwell (left) at the
premiere screening of
the new assimilation
film, "No Strangers
Here." The film was
launched by Mr. Cal-
well, adopted and
completed by Mr.
Beale.


MIGRANTS WILL ENRICH AUSTRALIA
Large scale immigra-
tion gave the major impe-
tus and opportunity to
Australia to push ahead
with developmental pro-
jects more vigorously than
had been so far possible,
the chairman of the Com-
monwealth Immigration
Planning Council, Mr. John
Storey, told the conven-
tion on Tuesday.
Mr. Storey gave a survey
of the economic, indus-
trial and defence implica-
tions of rapid population
growth.
"Let us hold tightly to the belief
that, despite the difficulties and at
times doubts we have, by immigra-
tion alone we can make the lives of
our children happy and secure,” he
said.
Mr. Storey said Australians might
be expecting too much from the adult
migrants coming to Australia.
"I fear that our people expect that
almost overnight the new arrivals
will become Australians,” he said.
“They feel that the New Australians
should be eager and anxious to learn
to speak English, irrespective of their
degree of intelligence; that they
should want to play cricket and foot-
ball. The point I make now is that
the migrant children are the ones on
whom we should concentrate.
“Let the adults amongst the mi-
grants lead the lives to which they
have been accustomed. We should
not drive them too hard. Let them
settle down to work. Let us, of
course, teach them all We can and
help them, but do not let us be too
expectant.
“A Polish gentleman who came
here 30 years ago as a migrant and
who has since established himself
most successfully said to me only
yesterday: ‘The people you are bring-
ing here do not understand the things
that are happening to them; they do
not believe that all this favourable
treatment can last. They do not
really believe that they can go on
drawing regular wages every week
and that they are assured of shelter
and food. They cannot understand
that they do not still have to en-
gage in pettifogging rackets and sur-
reptitious practices in order to live.”
Facing Problems Ahead
Mr. Storey said the purpose of his
paper was to consider briefly some of
the economic, industrial and defence
implications of rapid population
growth, and to examine the action
being taken and further required to
ensure the satisfactory absorption of
large numbers of migrants into the
Australian economy.
The questions to be considered
were:—
• What do the immigration ob-
jectives mean in terms of new
houses, schools, factories, hospitals
and other kinds of buildings, trans-
port facilities, communications,
plant and machinery and other
sorts of capital goods ?
• How could it be ensured that
large numbers of newcomers would
be absorbed in ways which would
contribute to the maximum devel-
opment of the economic structure
of the country?
• Whose task was it to face up
to the problems of economic ab-
sorption, and what action would be
required of the community as a
whole ?
“There are great economic advan-
tages to Australia in immigration.
There are large numbers of workers
amongst the migrants. There is nor-
mally a high ratio of workers in any
Prosperity Is Ahead,
Says Chairman
Of Planning Council
large migration of peoples, and this
certainly applies to recent migration
to Australia. This is very important
for us today.
“Our factories lie idle too many
hours each year. Factory buildings
and machinery, erected and installed
at enormous cost, should be working
more than 6,000 hours a year, where-
as today they work an average of
2.000 hours. If we double the num-
ber of productive hours worked, and
so make the machinery in our fac-
tories produce for 4,000 hours a year,
costs will come down dramatically.
"The demand for labour of all
kinds will probably continue to be
high in the period ahead as the ex-
pansion of industry takes place in
response to the growing requirements
of an increased population,”
Mr. Storey said that immigration
created many problems, discomforts
and difficulties, as well as providing
opportunities for development
Although there were immense op-
portunities ahead for the development
of our industrial structure and re-
sources, there were very real difficul-
ties in carrying out the degree of
expansion necessary to enable Aus-
tralia to hold a much greater popu-
lation.
Immigration on the scale that was
taking place threw out a strong chal-
lenge to industry, to the great trade
unions, and to the community as a
whole, to face intelligently up to
those tasks. Increasing population
would make very great demands upon
a wide range of secondary and ser-
vice industries.
More Houses Needed
Perhaps the most direct and chal-
lenging implication was that for the
building industry, where there was
not only a large backlog of arrears
of construction and maintenance, but
a direct requirement of houses and
other sorts of buildings more or less
proportionate to population increase.
If the population kept growing by
about 260,000 a year it would be
necessary to increase very substan-
tially the output of all kinds of
buildings, including factories, shops,
schools and hospitals. The housing
output would need to he increased
from present levels of 55,000 to
60.000 a year by at least 30,000.
This was a challenge not only to
the building industry, hut also to in-
dustries which supply the materials
so vital to the production of build-
ing materials—particularly coal, iron
£tnd steel
All public bodies must plan for
an expansion qf their cities, towns
and municipalities, Mr. Storey said.
They must think in terms of town
planning, houses, schools, hospitals,
fire brigades, ambulances, recreation
halls, administrative buildings, tele-
phone exchanges, water and power
supply, sewerage, shopping centres,
roads and transport.
"it is interesting to note that at
the planned rate of population in-
crease,” he went on, "we will need
to supply throughout Australia every
four years physical facilities in the
shape of houses, shops and buildings
of all kinds, road, transport, etc.,
equivalent in magnitude to the city
of Melbourne or four times that of
Brisbane or Adelaide, and twenty
times that of Hobart.
"Every new worker in any section
of the building industry makes a con-
tribution to the housing problem in-
finitely greater than his own modest
demands upon materials.
The present output of dwellings
was about 25 per cent, higher than
proportionate to population increase.
"The early supply of labour and
materials to the great development
projects is of serious importance.
The Government is creating a Min-
istry of National Development, which
will doubtless apply itself to this
great task. Water conservation,
power, roads, etc., must parallel the
advent of a large influx of people,
not alone to permit the expansion of
existent industries, but to achieve
the maximum possible decentralisa-
tion of industry.
“We know of the much publicised
and immensely important projects,
such as the Snowy River plan, the
Morwell scheme, the harbours of
Eden, Portland and Clarence Head,
the Burdekin and Ord River projects.
We know of the enormous amount
of work ahead of the Railway or-
ganisations, and in our forests.
"Plans such as the Macleay River
County Council’s Styx hydro-electric
project, the Clarence County Coun-
cil’s Gorge hydro-electric scheme,
the Hume hydro-electric station, and
so on with dozens of other all-im-
portant development projects are es-
sential to the great era of expansion
and development ahead of us.
“Satellite towns of a permanent
nature can be built in association
with a number of these projects, for
which the materials must be made
available. They must not be shanty
towns and need not be part of the
capital cost of the project. By this
means, impetus can be given to the
decentralisation of our populations
and of industries. A great opportu-
nity is thus presented to us to widen
the distribution of our population and
I believe we will take it with en-
thusiasm.”
Discussing the defence of Australia
Eleven-year-old Polish pianist, Sam
Offman played a Chopin composition as
his contribution to the musical festival
entitled "New Australians Make Music"
at the Albert Hail on the nights of
January 25 and 26.
Mr. Storey said that days in which
we lived in security under the pro-
tection of the British Navy had
passed.
"We escaped conquest in recent
years by the narrowest of margins,”
he said. "Our ability to defend our-
selves depends on our industrial capa-
city and on having available adequate
numbers of people. Because of our
small numbers, our ability to produce
armaments, ships, aeroplanes and all
the necessities of modern war is so
small that it is frightening.
"The enormous importance of a
high rate of immigration is such that
public goodwill ana knowledge are
primary requirements. Employers
who by their actions or words arouse
staff antagonism to the employment
of New Australians will be guilty of
a great disservice to our country.
Union leaders who restrict employ-
ment of New Australians, deny them
union membership or cause industrial
friction because of them will likewise
be guilty. Both can jeopardise the
future security of our children."
Mr. Storey continued: "You may
now ask whose task it is to assess
these varying implications of popula-
tion and to take the action necessary
to ensure the necessary growth of
the economy in a balanced manner.
My answer is that fundamentally it
is a responsibility of us all to ensure
that the newcomers are absorbed and
housed. Even those who are not very
directly concerned can assist by being
helpful, tolerant and receptive to-
wards the migrants.
Planning Council's Task .
"A great responsibility rests with
the Commonwealth and State Gov-
ernments, which must give a wise
guidance to the community. To assist
in this way, an Immigration Plann-
ing Council has recently been,
lished, consisting of leading men
from a wide range of industry and
others with special knowledge of
economic and industrial problems.
The Council comprises twelve full
members, thirteen associate members
and more than fifty consultants on
particular industries. The approved
functions are:
• "Planning and reviewing pro-
gress in absorbing migrants Into
industry and developmental pro-
jects;
• "Advising on ways in which
immigration can contribute to a
desirable pattern of development
in Australia, with due regard to
decentralisation and the general
distribution of population.
• "Examining major problems
and difficulties connected with the
accommodation and employment
of migrants.
"The Council is examining the
impact of increasing population (in-
cluding immigration) upon the build-
ing industry, primary production,
fuel supplies, and the general ques-
tion of regional development. The
Council is also examining generally
the implications in terms of develop-
ment and investment expenditures,
of population increase at the rate ex-
pected to be achieved. The organisa-
tion of the Council has not yet been
fully developed.
“It is envisaged, however, that ad-
visory bodies on the problems of
particular industries will be set up
where appropriate. The Council will
work in the closest collaboration with
Commonwealth and State Govern-
ment Departments concerned with
employment, primary and secondary
industry and development, and with
organisations of employers and em-
ployees.
"Nothing in life is more satisfying
than the feeling that you are playing
a part in a great undertaking—that
you are aiding a great development
—and so giving all of our people the
opportunities that come from expan-
sion and growth, and the security
that comes from increased production
capacity. Let us get on with it with
enthusiasm and vigour, each playing
our part with determination and per-
-1 sistence.”


hey, Helen
“I liked that Hat dance they did
in the courtyard at Parliament House.
Yes, they' re Lithuanian girls doing it.
They came from Sydney.
"That painting on the wall was a beaut.
I saw it when Mum took me to the
Arts and Crafts Exhibition. A man
and his son painted it. That’s the man
on the ladders Werner Linde’s his name.
His son’s name was Gurt.”


, look at them . . .
Gosh, Helen, Jo your girls wear
those funny dresses all the time in
Europe?
Of course not, silly. They’re heavy
and hot , you know, and they take months
and months to make. VVe only wear
them on special days.
Well, it seems a bit silly to me. We
don’t do that sort of thing in Australia.
No, Euan? VVhaf about those
lovely hilts?
Oh, they’re different. My Dad came
from Scotland and, well, we wear these
sometimes to remind us of special days
in Scotland.
And it’s fust the same with us,
Euan. You like to wear Scottish clothes
sometimes because your father came from
Scotland. We are Australians now hut
sometimes , like today , we like to bring
out our funny dresses as you call them.
Gosh, Helen. I like the dresses all right.
They’re bright, and sort of
not funny really. And they go all ri giit in
those funny old dances of yours.
There you go again , Euan. Funny.
They’re not funny.
W ell, we don’t do dances like them in
Australia.
No? My teacher says many Aus-
tralians learn folk dances . And yesterday
I saw you dancing over two big swords
and you were clever , you only kicked them
once.
Aw, fair go, Helen. That’s the Scottish
Sword Dance. Scots have danced that
for years and years.
Yes, Euan, for years and years.
And all old countries have their national
dances and songs.
Well, 1 don’t know about that. Australia
hasn’t any.
Yes you hare. You have dances
from Britain. Maybe one day some of
you might do our dances.
I reckon that’d be good-oh.
Will you teach me the Sword
Dance . . . and the jig? And I shall
teach you our dances, too?
Gee Helen, could we learn ad those
fun—, lovely things you people can do?
But yes, Euan. What do you say?
Good-oh.
A conversation that could have taken
place between Helen Bersklubi end Euan
Davidson, our cover children.
"Didn't you like the Latvian Mill
Dance the school children from Cowra
did? It was good the way they kept
spinning around just like a windmill.


"Something very beautiful, delicate and well worthwhile has come into our lives," the Minister for Immigration, Mr.
Holt, said when opening the Arts Festival. He said that a truly Australian national culture had not yet been developed but it
would be the better for European influences brought into it by the New Australians. Here two Polish women are admiring
a chess set, hand-carved in traditional characters.
Handicrafts Display Revealed
A Wealth of Talent
By a Staff Writer
It was a strange experience going to the arts and
crafts display by our New Austral, 'ns at Canberra's
University College on January 23, the first night of the
convention.
It seemed that you were stepping straight out of one world
into another.
If was a soft warm night, the
scented air drifting in from the
hills—-a typical fragrant Australian
night.
And then I stepped from the night
into the brightness of the foyer of
the College. From somewhere above
came the strains of music—music
made by New Australians. All
around there were national costumes
—brilliant, colourful and redolent of
centuries of cultural background.
It was interesting to watch the
many visitors to this show, making
their way upstairs. I watched this
staircase for some time, and there
was no exception—a sudden pause, a
gasp of admiration at the mural
covering the whole wall above the
approaches to the display rooms.
A really beautiful thing this mural.
It’s noble, imposing. It’s factual and
symbolic at the same time. A nation
is being built by New Australians
and old Australians. There are
symbols of plenty, of commerce, of
modern towns and cities, of the
broad open spaces of good rich soil
awaiting the touch of the tiller’s hand
to pour forth its abundance. And
in the foreground, strong, resolute
New Australian men wresting the
flag forward in the nation’s march
to full development.
Then into the halls where the
various national displays were set
out. Here was beauty of another
kind —a colourful, bright intricate
beauty. In the furthest room I
stopped and a pleasant Ukrainian
voice asked me could he help. Yes,
he could and he did. This display
not only contained items of excep-
tional beauty and outstanding; crafts-
manship but the arrangement itself
was extremely interesting and ar-
tistic.
It had the left side set out as a
typical Ukrainian sitting room. Deli-
cately worked cushions and cloths,
linens and silks “the woman’s
room,” as the attendant described it
On the right was the “man’s room”
—books and papers, humidors, boxes
and the rest.
I could have put a lot more time
in there but there was so much more
to see—a plethora of lovely things :
all around. So I wandered back past j
the beautiful dresses and patterns
and the nationally garbed dolls made
at the Bathurst Reception Centre,
past the tapestries and finely worked
cloths of Latvia, past Greece and the
strikingly beautiful face that looked
out from the right hand corner . . .
on to the Yugoslav Serbian display 1
of linen and silk work and the quite
small golden curtains that flanked
their exhibition. These curtains had
been made in Australia and had
been valued in Sydney. Just a few
yards of silken material but glori-
ously worked. And the value? £l5O.
At Estonia I spoke to an attrac-
tive little lady, Miss Suzanne Raid.
She was the attendant and she
explained that the finely wrought
silver work on display was Estonia’s
most important handwork.
To Lithuania. There in the
centre, a striking national costume—
and the beads—the clear, light amber
beads that Lithuania is famous for.
Alongside was the Polish display.
The attendant here, Mr. Constantine
Medvetzky, with tall and brilliant !
plumes rising from his head gear, i
was an impressive figure. |
There were many things to look at
in this section. But it was very hard
to take one’s eyes off a little chess
set, hand-made and every figure a
little doll In the national costumes of
the people from the Tatra mountains. I
In an inner room there were some
very good samples of water-colours
and paintings. Mr. E. R. A. How-
royd, Tasmania’s Immigration Min-
ister was in this art room when I
walked through and I asked him
what he thought of it all. Mr. How-
royd is not a man who enthuses
easily. But he did this time. “Here,”
he said, “is the evidence, the proof
of what these people can contribute
to the cultural life of Australia. We
must use it.”
Back in the main display room,
I came across Miss Gertrude Owen
and Mrs. J. W. Ashton of the Wom-
en’s Voluntary Services.
Mrs. Ashton said that she hoped
that the display would be sent to
every State to give all Australians a
1 chance to see it.
The Rev. A. T. McNaughton, rep-
resenting the Presbyterian Fellow-
ship Association at the Citizenship
Convention gave me his reaction to
the display:—“The first thing that
strikes me is the excellent standard
of craftsmanship. It is a challenge
to Australians to bring the same
painstaking care and patience into
their own lives —not only in this type
of work but in everything they do.”
Out again into the cool Australian
night—and people coming away—
New Australians and “old” Austra-
lians. Old Australians in a very new
land —New Australians from the an-
cient lands of Europe. This night
we had seen some samples of the
age-old culture that these New Aus-
tralians have brought to us and
which they are anxious to share
with us.
OUR HELP
SOUGHT
IN IRO's
LAST DAYS
Th.e International Refu-
gee Organisation will ask
various countries to accept
as settlers some of the
"hard core" of Displaced
Persons who will be left in
its camps when it ceases
operations on June 30.
This was revealed on the con-
vention's third day by Sir Arthur
Rucker, K.C.8., C.B.E,
Assistant Director General of the
1.R.0.
Sir Arthur said that the 1.R.0.
expected to have about 187,000 per-
sons in its European camps and an-
other 200,000 now receiving 1.R.0.
subsidies on its hands on June 30.
Of these about 25,000 make up
what he described as the “hard core.”
“By hard core I mean people who
need permanent Institutional care for
themselves and their dependants,” he
said. “They include young specialists
and engineers of from 40 to 45 years
of age, scientists, schoolmasters,
professors and what you will.
“For them we are starting a new
scheme. We are asking the various
countries whether they would be will-
ing to sponsor these people and re-
ceive them. In Canada there is a big
movement afoot to get Rotary to
introduce these people to individual
companies and other organisations
such as banks needing specialists of
various kinds.
“The 1.R.0. could then produce
dossiers relating to these people, set-
ting out their qualifications so that
the companies, or organisations con-
cerned could see for themselves
whether any one or a number of
them could meet their requirements.
Talks With Government
“I have had some discussion with
the Australian Government on this
matter. Naturally, such a scheme
would give rise to special problems
here. I do not know yet whether
the Australian Government will find
it possible to allow us to launch such
a scheme here. I know that it would
do so if it could, and that gives
great encouragement.
“I obtained Mr. Holt’s permission
to mention this matter and I
should be glad if the discussion
groups would consider whether such
a scheme could be launched here.”
Outlining the work of 1.R.0., Sir
Arthur said it was a specialised
; agency of the United Nations Or-
i ganiaation which has a budget three
or four times as large as that of the
parent body.
He said its task was to help the
chief sufferers of war—those people
j of non-germanic race who were left
I after the war in Germany, Austria
I and Italy, and certain groups of pre-
war refugees, the so-called Nansen
refugees and certain groups of Span-
ish and Chinese refugees.
“We are not an international
refugee organisation in a big sense.
For such an organisation thousands
of millions of dollars would be re-
quired and they are not available,”
Sir Arthur said.
He added: “The help given covers
much more than mere maintenance.
It covers vocational training and in-
stitutions we have set up for their
rehabilitation. There is resettlement
for those who are capable of being
resettled and we send home any who
are willing to go home. Provision is
also made for legal protection.
“It is our duty to see that these
people are not abused in the lands
in which they are presently residing.”


Must Understand
Other Cultures
We must learn to distinguish the cultural differ-
ences that exist amongst our migrants. We tended to
lump them together as ’'foreigners" and tried to solve
the problem of assimilation in a "blanket" fashion.
There was no easy way of assimilation.
I world the Australian permit came
first. Unlike the Italian migrant the
refugee is usually a sophisticated
person and a great majority of such
refugees are cultured people, making
their contribution to the arts and
sciences.
“The Albanian is a Moslem, for
the most part coming from a very
wild tribal life. He comes from a
country where only the head of the
tribe has a vote. Imagine how much
he has to learn of democratic free-
dom, and what an amount of assimil-
ation will be required to make him
into an Australian.
“Many of these Displaced Persons
who have come from cultured Europe
have been in concentration camps and
have had the ideology of different
national parties in Europe drummed
into them. They come to our shores
weared' and tired.
“We must not lump them together
as ‘foreigners/ We must study
them so that on the one hand we can
help them more readily and on the
other hand pardon them more gener-
ously;
“Many Australians say that non-
British migrants do not assimilate;
in fact that they are simply not Aus-
tralians.
“Do we consider what is an Aus-
tralian ? Do we do anything to evolve
an Australian way of life or are we
just drifting along borrowing from
and imitating Britain, Europe and
America? We might well have a
look occasionally at our Australian
way of life that we are asking the
migrants to adopt.
“We are a young vigorous nation
and we have the opportunity to be
great. We can, if we wish, discard
all the old worn-out hates and fears
and create a new world wherein men
can live together in friendship and
peace.
“Just because we are having, as it
were, this brand new chance to re-
state our ideals and way of life we
|hould seize the opportunity to the
“We are the only nation in the
world which has this brand new
chance.”
One of the most warmly applauded items at the “New Australians Make Music”
concert was this one In which children from the Ukraine, Latvia, and Lithuania,
wearing their traditional costumes, sang "Waltzing Matilda." With them is the
former Latvian soprano, Magda Vitans.
New Australian Makes
Plea For Tolerance
A moving plea for tolerance and understanding on behalf of
Australia's new settlers from Europe was made on the third day of the
convention by Mr. Ingomar Netliv, a native of Estonia, who now works
for the Department of Immigration in Canberra.
Speaking on behalf of all new Aus-
tralians from the Displaced Persons''
camps in Europe, Mr. Netliv said
that like all other peoples, New Aus-
tralians had their faults and weak-
nesses, but that they wished to be
given the chance to prove that they
also had their good points.
“We shall do everything possible
to show our loyalty to this country
so that very soon we shall be re-
garded not as New Australians, but,
like you, as Australians,” Mr. Netliv
said.
“In the years not far ahead, you
will, I am sure, feel that we are
proud of tills country, and I hope
This was the theme of a pro- |
vocative address to the convention ,
entitled, "What is Assimilation?" :
by Mrs. Caroline Kelly, Research
Fellow of the Department of An-
thropology, University of Sydney,
Mrs. Kelly emphasised the import-
ance of inculcating in our people an
appreciation of the culture posses-
sed by many of the European mi-
grants and the need to realise that
so many of their customs differed
from our own. Because their cus-
toms and traditions were so different
from our own many of our people
treated them contemptuously, she
said.
"We must make every effort to
alter that attitude of mind in our
people because many of the customs
and traditions of the newcomers are
very beautiful and are well worthy
of adoption.”' Mrs. Kelly continued:
"Ambqssqjllte of Culture"
“One of our foremost tasks is to
treat these people as ambassadors
of culture. This is a glorious oppor-
tunity for Australia to rid itself of
many of its old hates and prejudices.
Let us wipe out all bigotry and intol-
erance, which has so spoiled our so-
cial life in the past.”
Mrs. Kelly related her experiences
with a number of young Jewish child-
ren who had just arrived in this
country.
“I shall not distress you by telling
you of the brands and scars that
they bore on their bodies. In any
event the children were happy, joy-
ously happy. All they asked was.
‘Where are the beaches? Can we join
a cricket club or see a football
match?’
"After I talked to them and won
their confidence, I was terribly dis-
turbed when one of them, looking at
me from the depth of his big dark
eyes, asked me in almost a whisper:
‘Will we meet any anti-semitism in
Australia?’
“As I looked back into those big
trusting eyes I wondered if I could
truthfully answer him. I said, ‘No,
dear, you will not’. I hope I was right.
"Not Slave Race"
“We must be patient and under-
stand the actual problems of the in-
dividual migrant. Each one has his
own particular problem based on his
own particular background.
“Many Australians seem to take
the attitude that migrants are being
brought to this country merely to do
jobs, such as domestic service,
which Australians do not want to do
themselves. That is almost as if
we were bringing in a slave race to
work for us. I know that that is
a strong statement, but that is how
the position looks to me.
“Unless we bring in migrants at
all social levels and standards of cul-
ture it will be a very bad thing in-
deed.
"To illustrate my point that there
are different cultures and standards
among non-British migrants,” Mrs.
Kelly continued, “take as an ex-
ample three migrants, an Italian, a
European refugee and an Albanian.
What have they in common?”
"The Italian came because he
wished to leave the rule of Mussolini.
He looked here for political peace.
“The refugee. came not by choice
but because out of all the permits
to land that he sought all over the
DELEGATES GIVE SUPPORT
TO IMMIGRATION POLICY
Before +he convention began its deliberations on the second day,
deiegates commended the work done by the Commonwealth and
State Governments and pledged support in implementing the national
undertaking of immigration.
The delegates unanimously agreed
to the following resolution, which
was moved by the Rev. Fr. G. H.
Crennan, and seconded by Bishop E.
H. Burgmaim:—
“On behalf of the organisations
represented at this first Australian
Citizenship Convention, delegates
express to the Commonwealth
Government, and particularly to
the responsible Minister, the Hon
H. E. Holt, their appreciation for
its having called this convention,
and thank them for the facilities
provided.
“We record warm appreciation to
the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon.
R. G. Menzies; the Minister for
Immigration, the Hon. H. E. Holt;
the representatives of the Opposi-
tion, the Rt. Hon. J. B. Chifley,
and the Hon. A. A. Calwell; the
Ministers of the States and their
representatives of the State De-
partments of Immigration and
Education; and other officials for
their personal attendance, and
thank them for their assistance
in approaching: the national prob-
lems to be considered by this con-
vention.
“The convention also commends
the work already done by the
Commonwealth Government and
by the State Governments in col-
laboration with it in so construc-
tively approaching; the problem as-
sociated with New Australians, and
pledges it support in every prac-
ticable way.
“Finally, this convention con-
veys to the Department of Immi-
gration and its officials keen ap-
preciation for their courtesy and
co-operation and for the efficiency
of all the arrangements for. the
convention/'
Mr. Holt thanked the delegates for
their resolution and said he would
be delighted to convey its terms to
the Prime Minister and his colleagues
and officers.
that you will be proud of us,” he
1 added.
When introducing the speaker, Mr.
O. D. A. Oberg, Chairman of the
convention, explained that Mr. Net-
liv had arrived In Australia in Oc-
tober, 1948, and that he had had
few, if any, lessons in English.
“I feel sure that if I had gone
to his country in October, 1948, I
should not now be able to speak Es-
tonian as well as he speaks our
language,” said Mr. Oberg.
Mr. Netliv said New Australians
realised that their problem was a
difficult one, as their historical back-
grounds did not always enable them
to co-operate freely with one an-
other.
“At the exhibition and the concert,
15 nationalities will be rep-
resented. In the past the peoples of
many of those countries have been
hostile towards one another,” said
Mr. Netliv.
“However, those who come here
are all bound by the common tie
of being New Australians,” he added.
Appeal for Understanding
“I ask you to display sympathy
and understanding towards us be-
cause we have our own big difficul-
ties and handicaps to overcome.
“We are fighting hard to learn and
understand your ways and to help
you get rid of the feeling that, among
you, we are foreigners.
"In all countries there are differ-
ent ways of life and different prac-
tices. Please remember we are do-
ing our best to learn your way of
life. If you find in our ways some-
thing a little different that could,
with usefulness, be adopted in Aus-
tralia, we shall be very happy.”
It was most encouraging, said Mr.
Netliv, to see Australians taking
such an interest in New Australians.
It made the newcomers feel that
they were needed in the country, not
only as labourers and helpers In
industry, but also to take part In
the cultural, spiritual and religious
life of the community, as represent-
ed by the church, the home and the
State.


COLOURFUL FINALE TO MUSICAL FESTIVAL
Many Social Services
Available To Migrants
A comprehensive picture of the Australian social
services structure was given the convention by Mr. T.
H. Pitt, of the Department of Health and Social Ser-
vices, in a paper read at the second day's sittings.
Mr. Pitt said that since the turn of
the century, State and Common-
wealth Governments had developed
and expanded social services and
many of the experiments had earned
for Australia the reputation of being
the “social laboratory of the world.”
At the beginning of his address
Mr. Pitt invited delegates to study
a booklet entitled “Social Services
of the Commonwealth.”
After outlining the early develop-
ment of social services in Australia,
Mr. Pitt said that the Common-
wealth Department of Social Services
was responsible for the administra-
tion of the Social Services Consolida-
tion Act which embraced the follow-
ing benefits: Maternity Allowances,
Child Endowment, Unemployment
and Sickness Benefits, Widows’ Pen-
sions, Invalid Pensions, Age Pensions,
Wife’s Allowance, Child’s Allowance,
Funeral Benefits, Rehabilitation of
Physically Handicapped Persons.
He said that in addition to the
Commonwealth social services he had
already referred to, there were other
types of benefits administered by the
Health Department.
These consisted of hospital and
pharmaceutical benefits and tubercu-
losis allowances.
Qualified persons occupying beds
In public wards of public hospitals
were provided with free treatment.
For this the Commonwealth paid to
the State Governments 8/- a day for
each patient, and credit of 8/- a day
was allowed against the hospital
fees of those occupying beds in non-
public wards.
Hospital benefits were payable to
persons ordinarily resident in Aus-
tralia and were not subject to a
means test.
Pharmaceutical benefits were
available to sick persons, who might
receive, without cost to themselves,
such medicines within the scope of
an approved formulary, as were pre-
scribed for their treatment by a leg-
ally qualified medical practitioner.
Both hospital and pharmaceutical
benefit were payable to those ordin-
arily resident in Australia and were
not subject to a means test.
Tuberculosis allowances were pro-
vided through the agency of the
States for tuberculosis sufferers to
encourage them to refrain from
working and to obtain medical treat-
ment, thus minimising the spread of
tuberculosis and promoting the bet-
ter treatment of the disease.
“Most of the Commonwealth so-
cial services that I have outlined
are financed from the National Wel-
fare Fund which was established in
1943,” said Mr. Pitt. “This fund is
maintained firstly by a Social Ser-
vice Contribution levied on individu-
als on a graduated scale rising to a
maximum of 1/6 in the £1; secondly,
by a payroll tax collected on all pay-
rolls in excess of £2O per week; and
thirdly, by any necessary supplemen-
tation from consolidated revenue.
“Social services are also provided
by State Governments, local authori-
ties and voluntary agencies.”
HOME LIFE
WILL HELP
NEWCOMERS
Miss Hazel Dobson, officer-in-
charge of the Social Welfare Section
of the Department of Immigration,
addressed delegates at the third
day's sitting and suggested methods
by which New Australians could be
made to feel more at home.
Miss Dobson referred to the fact
that many of the delegates belonged
to organisations which had begun the
task of assimilation of newcomers
before there were any social workers
connected with the Department of
Immigration, and asked for their
further co-operation in the co-ordina-
tion of the work that is going on.
It was sad, she said, to know that
people were leaving the centres at
times and going out to places where
there were no voluntary organisations
to help them or no special person
with whom the social workers had a
link and who could tell what the New
Australians were like as individuals.
“Social workers are useful in many
ways,” said Miss Dobson, “but they
constitute only one group of many
groups of persons whose whole heart
is in their jobs and who want to do
something to remove the difficulties
that confront the people and prevent
them functioning freely.
“We talk to people and try to find
out what their difficulties are. Then
we ring up members of the volun-
tary organisations and say to them,
‘We feel that in this particuar in-
stance you are the persons who can
help most. Will you do something
for us?’ We have never yet been
This was the gay scene that ended
the musical festival in the Albert
Hall on January 25. After the last
item all the artists gathered on the
stage and were thanked by Mr.
Holt (at microphone on right). The
children from Cowra Holding Centre
are assembled in front of the stage.
turned down, and the response to our
requests has been most heartening.”
Miss Dobson described tours that
she recently made of Queensland and
parts of South Australia, where, in
isolated places she found wives of
new settlers with very little know-
ledge of English, and a shyness in
approaching Australians that was a
very big part of the problem of
assimilation.
“The children present no problems,”
she added. “As to the parents of
the children, even if they do not
know our way of life because they
were too old to learn afresh when
they came here, or have lived too far
from the towns, their hearts are with
their children. These children be-
long to Australia and are real Aus-
tralians, and because of that the
parents also regard this as their
country, although sometimes they
have no words with which to express
themselves.”
Telling of some personal experi-
ences among the newcomers, Miss
Dobson said: “You can make a person
very easily understand the main
things that you want them to under-
stand, that is, that we entertain for
them feelings of human warmth and
friendliness. It is very easy to do
that if we abandon our reserve. A
Finn, who thanked me at the end of
one of my talks to them almost had
tears in his eyes as he said, ‘Please
thank the Government for sending
someone out to us so far away.
Miss Dobson added that if the
Australian people asked the new-
comers into their homes and, in an
informal way, tried to supplement
their formal teaching, they would
find very rapidly that the newcomers
would begin to understand the Aus-
tralians and the Australians would
begin to understand them.


NEW FILM
TO HELP
MIGRANTS
"No Strangers Here" Is the title of
the assimilation film produced by the
Department of Information for the
Department of Immigration. The film
tells the story of a New Australian
family—mother and father, daughter
and son —who come to live in a small
Australian country town. It is a
simple story without a plot, set against
a typically Australian background. Its
message is that, provided Australians
will be friendly to the newcomers,
there need be no strangers among
us.
Producer Is Dr. K. Sternberg, who
was commissioned to make the film
less than four months before the pre-
miere showing on January 24. In that
time he had to find a story, a cast,
settings, and produce the film which
runs for 45 minutes. So finely worked
out was his production schedule that
the first print of the film was not
received in Canberra until four hours
before the premiere.
The film will later be shown through-
out Australia. It is also expected that
it will have an overseas release.
Leading roles in the film are taken
by John Fernside, veteran Australian
actor; Eric Reiman, Estonian-born actor
who has played many important parts
on the Australian stage; Ailita Blumanis,
20-year-old Latvian girl; Ivo Kauniste,
12-year-old Estonian boy; Xenia Dau-
guvet, a prominent actress in Lithuania
before the war; and Australian artists
Shirley Patterson and Buck Braynard.
☆
At right Mr. Holt presents two of
the stars of the film to the premiere
audience in Albert Hall. He is shak-
ing hands with Mrs. Xenia Dauguvet,
a New Australian from Lithuania, who
plays the part of the mother. Behind
her is Australian actress, Miss Shirley
Patterson.
Below: Film personalities who were
presented to the audience after the
showing. Left to right: Miss Shirley
Patterson; producer Dr. K. Sternberg;
Ivo Kauniste, 12-year-old Estonian, who
plays the part of the son; and Mrs.
Xenia Dauguvet


SIX NEW AUSTRALIANS: After they had received their citizenship
certificates at a ceremony in the Albert Hall on Australia Day, these
men were congratulated by the Minister for Immigration, Mr. Holt.
From left to right they are: Julius Roth (American), Oswald Water-
voort (Dutch), Simon Gudem (Norwegian), Mr. Holt, Alexander Sain
(Yugoslav), Jens Andersen (Danish), Edward Oleskiewicz (Polish).
DELEGATES SAW AN IMPRESSIVE CEREMONY
OF NATURALISATION ON AUSTRALIA DAY
Australian Day (January 26), which fell during the convention, was marked
by an impressive naturalisation ceremony in the Albert Hall, where delegates
assembled to see six men receive their A ustralian citizenship certificates in accord-
ance with the procedure laid down by the new Citizenship Act.
;u
Before the ceremony began, the
Minister for Immigration told the
gathering that the impressive func-
tion they were to witness had been
Introduced only as recently as Aus-
tralia Day, 1949.
He told them the reasons why it
had been considered desirable to
change the procedure by which an
applicant for naturalisation
hia papers.
"Previously." said Mr. Holt, "it had
been the practice to grant citizenship
in a manner which did little to bring
home to the candidate the significance
of the occasion.
"It also did less to bring home to
the Australian community the fact
that there was being added to their
numbers a fully fledged citizen, one
who had been duly admitted to en-
joy that status.
“The procedure was simply this.
An oath of allegiance was taken be-
fore a clerk of courts. That could be,
and usually was, a private affair
and did little to Impress the appli-
cant with the significance of the
step he was taking. His citizenship
papers were later forwarded to him
by post.”
Mr. Holt said that the first Min-
ister for Immigration, Mr. Calwell,
had wisely decided, and with a pro-
per degree of national spirit, to make
the naturalisation ceremony some-
thing that would register more
strongly in the mind of the appli-
cant and would make people in the
same locality aware of what was
happening, so that they would make
more welcome the applicant into their
midst.
The new ceremony, which was held
in open court, comprised the renun-
ciation of former allegiance, an datti
of allegiance to the British Crown,
: the conferring of a certificate and
: an address on the responsibilities and
■ privileges of citizenship by the pre-
siding Judge.
Mr. Holt said that the date of the
ceremony had been especially selected
, as It was Australia's national birthday.
1 He thought that a ceremony held
I on that day would focus the atten-
tion of Australians as well as re-
cently arrived migrants on the priv-
ileges and responsibilities possessed
by Australians citizens.
Mr. Holt quoted the following
words, used by the first Governor,
Sir Arthur Phillip, when he landed
' on the shores of Sydney Harbour on
January 26, 1788:
. “I don’t doubt that this country
will prove the most valuable
acquisition Britain ever made.
“We have come here to take
possession of this fifth great con-
tinental land mass on behalf of
• the British people, and have
founded here a State which will
s become the benevolent patron of
i all nations of the Southern Hem-
[ isphere.
“How grand is the prospect
which lies before this youthful
nation!”
; It was not the custom of Austra-
lians to celebrate as a people, said
• Mr. Holt, and In the past it had not
. been the custom to celebrate our
; national day as did the people of
5 many other countries.
> He considered, however, that the
• coming generations could be made,
in a short time, to realise the national
I greatness into which they were en-
■ *tering and the significance of their
i national celebration. ;
, "We have been aided in our de-
velopment by the renown won abroad
for Australia from the exploits of
our servicemen and women,” said
Mr. Holt.
“We have achieved, in proportion
to population, , great fame in the
world of sport. That has removed
any inferiority complex which our
minds had developed.
“In the field of statesmanship, I
believe that men who have made a
great name for themselves, men like
Mr. Menzies and Dr. Evatt, have
won for Australia a proud place in
the councils of the world.
“These are all circumstances
which I believe will build up in our
hearts a feeling of pride in our
country and its achievements and
a desire to recognise our first birth-
day and the succeeding birthdays as
days of great significance in our
lives.”
There wes a hushed silence in the big
auditorium when Mr. Justice Simpson,
of the Sunreme Court of the Aus-
tralian Capital Territory, called the
applicants before him individually.
Each applicant repeated after the
Judge the words by which they re-
nounced their foreign nationalities
and then, taking the Bible in their
right hands, swore allegiance to the
British Crown.
The words of the renunciation and
oath were clearly audible to every-
one in the hall as they came through
amplifiers.
After the oath, Mr. Justice Simp-
son, shook hands with each appli-
cant, congratulated him and handed
him his certificate of citizenship.
When the last man had received
his certificate, the Judge turned td
the mien and addressed td them a
THESE MEN ARE NOW
AUSTRALIANS
The men who received their citizen-
ship papers at the Albert Hall cere-
mony came from each State of the
Commonwealth. There were:—
Julius Roth (Victoria ], American
ex-G.I. Married to an Australian girt
and employed as a cartographic
draughtsman by Victorian Government.
Oswald Gerhard Watervoort (WA),
Dutch. Served with the Royal Nether-
lands Navy during the war. Married
to Australian g|r|. Business manager.
Simon Peter Gudem (Q.), Norwe-
gian. Served in New Guinea with the
A.I.F. Employed as a carpenter by the
South Coast Hospital Board.
Alexander Sain (N.S.W.), Yugoslav.
Served in the Royal Yugoslav Army
under British Command in the Middle
East. Employed as a leading hand in
a margerine factory.
Jens Andersen (Tasmania), Danish
Served In British mercantile marine
during the war. Employed as a car-
penter at Australian Paper Mills.
Edward Oleslciewicz (S.A.), Polish.
Served with Polish and Royal Air
Forces. Employed as radio mechanic.
few words on the significance of their .
act.
They had, he said, acquired Aus-
tralian citizenship and British nation^. 1
ality, and were now not only obliged
to serve the Crown, but also entitled
to its protection.
"All men are equal before the
law,” Mr. Justice Simpson told them.
“That applies in its widest possible
sense, from the Prime Minister to
the most junior constable. . All are
liable to any breach of the law that
they commit, , and if you. suffer at
their hands you may sue them or
ariy of thgni.”


HOW D.P. MIGRANTS ARE SELECTED
Security Check Is
"As Adequate As
Man Can Make It"
A description of the way in which New Australians
are selected in Europe and how they are sent to Austra-
lia was given the convention by Major-General F. G.
Galleghan.
General Galleghan, Australian delegate to the
General Council ot the International Refugee Organi-
sation and its current chairman, returned recently from
the command of the Australian Military Mission in
Berlin, where he was responsible for the direction and
control ot the Australian selection teams and tor the
administration of all Australian migration work in
continental Europe.
General Galleghan told dele-
gates that under the 1.R.0.
charter, a Displaced Person was
free to choose whether he would
be repatriated to the country of
his origin, resettled overseas or
remain in the country of his pre-
sent residence.
There was no foundation whatever
in accusations made by Russia and
her satellite countries that Australia
or the 1.R.0. coerced Displaced Per-
sons to migrate to Australia and
other overseas countries.
The greatest problem that the Aus-
tralian selectors had to - face was
probably that of rejecting applicants.
Practically all of the rejections were
on medical grounds.
“It is heart-rending when a fam-
ily which has built up so much of its
hopes on an opportunity to resettle
overseas is rejected because one
small child of three or four has a
spot on its lung,” he said.
He denied, too, that there was any
national discrimination in choosing
migrants for Australia.
“The only qualification that a Dis-
placed Person must have to come up
for selection by Australian officials
is that he must be under the care
of the 1.R.0./’ General Galleghan
said. “The only test is the test of
being a worthy and recommended
Displaced Person.”
The first introduction of any Dis-
placed Person to Australia was
through posters, maps and films pro-
duced by the Department of Informa-
tion. Booklets and other material
followed.
In Germany, Austria and Italy
alone there were more than 400 re-
fugee camps spread widely over those
countries. Some held 200 to 300 per-
sons and others 4,000 or 5,000 or
more.
It was impossible for the Austra-
lian selection teams to visit all the
camps. The 1.R.0. had arranged for
Resettlement Centres to be main-
tained in the main theatres. There
were about 12 of those centres in
Germany, Austria and Italy.
A Resettlement Centre was a place
to which the 1.R.0. moved Displaced
Persons from static camps so that
they might be interviewed by a Re-
settlement Commission from one of
the resettling countries.
Although the United States and
Australia were taking most of the
Displaced Persons, Great Britain,
France, the South American and
other smaller countries, were also
interested.
At the Resettlement Centres the
final documentation of a Displaced
Person took place. When a Displaced
Person claimed that he was entitled
to be taken under the care of the
1.R.0. he was subjected to a medical
screening and to a security screen-
ing to ensure that he was a Dis-
placed Person and had no relation
with Nazi Germany, Nazi Austria
or Fascist Italy.
If the eligibility officer of the 1.R.0.
accepted what was told and what
was documentated, the Displaced
Person came under the care of the
1.R.0.
After having been documentated
in an ordinary static camp, the Dis-
placed Person, by way of the pub-
licity notices, films and other methods
and by the programme initiated by
the organisation to counsel Displaced
Persons about what was best for
them, then volunteered whether he
would be resettled overseas, remain
where he was or go back to his
original home.
“In other words 1.R.0, officers
make examinations and if they feel
that the applicant would pass the
rigid Australian tests, the applicant
qualifies to go before idle selection
team,” he said.
“There are two Selection Officers
and one Medical Officer in each team.
“First the Displaced Person, his wife
and family are examined by an Aus-
tralian Medical Officer, although
1.R.0. has already carried out a medi-
cal examination. If they pass the
Australian doctor they then go on
to the two Australian Selection Of-
ficers. The documents are before
these officers. The Displaced Per-
sons are examined and cross-examined
about where they were between 1939
and 1945. The memory has to be
good to remember all your move-
ments, and it is all recorded. If a
Displaced Person makes one slip in
answering a question, he is deferred
for further investigation.
“Then comes the question of
security screening.
“The newspapers in Australia
have often raised the question. There
are at present in Europe a team of
highly-skilled intelligence officers,
who have made their contacts, and
done it very well. If there is the
slightest doubt on the part of the
two Selection Officers the case is re-
ferred to the security screening offi-
cer before decision Is finally made.
EDUCATION PROGRAMME
TPHE Displaced Person having been
selected was then either removed
from the Resettlement Centre to a
static camp to be prepared to move
to a transit camp, or remained in the
Resettlement Centre to be ultimately
transferred to the transit camp.
There were three transit camps in
the Naples area for migrants.
“From the moment the teams se-
lected a man for Australia, I forbade
the use of the term ‘Displaced Per-
son’ any more, and from that mo-
“If there was still any doubt when
I was there, the case was referred
for my personal decision.”
Giving more details of the
security screening, General Galleghan
said: “First, there are in Germany
what are known as the British In-
telligence Service and the American
Intelligence Group. On top of all is
the Document Centre, where, thanks
to the efficiency of the Germans there
is a record of every man who, either
compulsorily or voluntarily served in
the armed forces of Germany or its
satellites, and a complete record of
the whole Nazi Party.
“It can be determined at a glance
whether they were members of that
party or simply fellow-travellers.
“So far as a member or ex-member
of the Nazi Party coming to Aus-
tralia is concerned that is impos-
sible.”
“On the .other hand there are other
types of people who would be a very
serious security risk in this country.
The security screening is as adequate
as human ingenuity and administra-
tion can make it.
If the Displaced Person was ac-
cepted by the team the two Selection
Officers conferred on suitability or
type.
They had to keep in their minds
that they had two duties. They had
primarily a duty to send to Australia
people whom they felt would fit into
and understand the Australian way of
life. Then they had a second very
serious responsibility - a responsi-
bility to humanity.
“I can report without hesitation,
and with every confidence that your
representatives in Germany are
carrying out both of these duties
there with the utmost credit to them-
selves,” he said.
ment he became a ‘New Australian’/'
said General Galleghan.
In the transit camps the New Aus-
tralians lived for the first time un-
der the Australian flag. There the
re-orientation programme on behalf
of Australia -was initiated. They
were met first by employment offi-
cers from the Department of Labour
and National Service, who, to save
time in Australia, filled out forms
so the whole question of movement
and final disposal was sifted before
The scene in the Albert Hall, Can-
berra, as the Minister tor Immigration,
Mr. Holt (at microphone] asked the
Prime Minister, Mr. Menzies, to open
the convention. The Prime Minister is
seated on Mr. Holt's right, and the
Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Chifley,
on his left.
the Displaced Person arrived In Aus-
tralia.
At Naples the education pro-
gramme began with the teaching of
the English language. There was an
education supervisor, two other Aus-
tralian highly-skilled school teachers,
and 80 Europeans, qualified to teach
English who were supplied by 1.R.0.
Just prior to embarkation, usually
three to four weeks after a New Aus-
tralian arrived at a transit camp, he
was moved to the embarkation camp
at Bagnoli, the old Fascist headquar-
ters.
He stayed there two or three days
before embarkation and another team
of Australian doctors carried out the
final medical examination.
On the trip to Australia there was
on every transport a teacher, and
another officer of the Department of
Labour and National Service, and
their re-orientation continued.
“One of the things we have tried
to inculcate in Europe/’ General Gal-
leghan continued, “is that there
should be in Australia no nationality
bridge at all. It was for that reason
that I ordered all Displaced Persons
after selection to be known as New
Australians. I see every day since
I have come here, and I have heard
it in conversations, people referring
to Latvians, Poles and Czechs. I
should think that if you referred to
them as New Australians it would
be better. If you must mention their
former nationality it would be better
to say ex-Latvians, or ex-Poles. I
give it to you with strong recom-
mendation that we should have no
nationality groups whatsoever in this
country.
“This question of admitting Dis-
placed Persons to Australia has, I am
afraid, been considered by the ma-
jority of Australians as one of pure
economics, I ask you to pause and
think somewhat more in the terms of
humanitarian outlook.
“We in Australia are fortunate to
have the country to provide shelter
for these Displaced Persons, and it
is the humanitarian duty of any na-
tion of goodwill to do so.”


• CONTINUED
FROM PAGE 6.
ment is anxious to foster immigra-
tion of Its people to Australia. The
Commonwealth Government recipro-
cates this feeling and considers that
many splendid migrants, especially
suited for rural work will be obtained
from this source.
“The Commonwealth Government
will be glad to receive 10,000 or more
Dutch migrants during 1950 and will
utilise existing Immigration Centres
for their reception and temporary
accommodation pending their being
passed out into the community.
“Australia requires to increase its
primary production, not so much for
its own needs, but to supply the
markets overseas that we require to
provide us with the funds to import
our own requirements from those
markets. We have, therefore, open-
ed up negotiations with the Dutch
authorities to ascertain how many of
these young ex-servicemen from In-
donesia can come to Australia.
“Unfortunately, it does not appear
as if the numbers that we can get
from that source will be very great.
We have come a little more late in
the day into this field than we would
have liked and as a result it appears
that not more than a very few
thousand will be available from that
source. We have already opened up
negotiations to bring out 1,500 of
these migrants as early as possible.
We are also hoping to get Dutch
migrants from Holland, where, we
understand, there are available, in
considerable numbers, migrants suit-
able for rural work.”
Referring to the primary purpose
of the convention, Mr. Holt said:—
“As you are all aware, a pro-
gramme of the scale I have indi-
cated will involve very great strains
on the Government. It will involve
the taking of special measures, the
provision of hostel buildings, accom-
modation and the like, and the
making available of additional ship-
Ding. It will involve the making of
a!T sorts of administrative arrange-
ments through the Departments
directly concerned.
“We must make the migrant feel
at home and help him to become as-
similated by the friendship which we
hold out for him. We must also
continually keep educating our own
people on the details of the pro-
gramme so that the migrant will re-
Contribution To Industry
“Last night some of you took the
opportunity to see something of the
handicraft and cultural work of the
migrants who have come to Aus-
tralia. I believe that in proportion
to their numbers, they obviously
contain a very high proportion of
skilled people; people skilled with
their hands; people with artistic
taste and background, who will make
a very notable addition to the cul-
tural life of their new country.
“Indeed added production will be
gained from the cultural impact that
they will make upon our community
life. We, in turn, will be able to
inject quickly into them a recognition
of the ideals and targets of our
British parliamentary democracy
which should be able to assure them
a free, happy life in the future.”
Immediately after the war Aus-
tralia was suffering a net loss from
migration, said Mr. Holt. More people
left the country than came to it in
1945 and 1946. In 1947 the net gain
to Australia was only 12,000 persons
—as contrasted to an average net
gain from natural increase, in the
years 1939 to 1947, of about 70,000
persons a year.
“Last year we were able to add as
the result of migration 80,000 addi-
tional people to the labour force
which is a very considerable addi-
tion,” said Mr. Holt. “Only 42 per
cent, of our own population forms
part of the working force, and we
get a much bigger proportion from
migration, which has already reached
approximately 55 per cent. That
large proportion of migrants is added
almost immediately to the labour
• Railways 2,150 Displaced
Persons employed on N.S.W. Rail-
ways and 2,500 on S.A. Railways,
doing vital track maintenance and
other work.
• Polish migrants have been res-
ponsible for spectacular achieve-
ments in hydro-electric developments
in Tasmania.
• Warragamba Dam project,
N.S.W., has now achieved the
scheduled rate of progress as a re-
sult of employment of Displaced Per-
sons.
• Geelong, Victoria, augmented
water supply substantial progress
made possible by employment of Dis-
placed Persons.
• State Rivers and Water Supply
dam and irrigation works in Vic-
toria advent of Displaced Persons
has overcome lagging progress.
• Queensland record sugar crops
harvested with aid of Displaced Per-
sons.
• Rural and pastoral pursuits in
N.S.W. 600 Displaced Persona em-
ployed.
• Fruit crops in various States
considerable assistance given by Dis-
placed Persons in harvesting.
• Private domestic service
about 3,500 migrants employed.
Newcomers Create Jobs
“If we can achieve our target of
■10,000,000 population in 10 years time,
we will not only have done extremely
well, but we will have sustained
some very great difficulties and
strains on our economy in the pro-
cess. It is not merely a question
of providing more housing or more
jobs; as the population grows in the
proportions I have indicated you will
find the strain developing on school
accommodation, hostel accommoda-
tion, public buildings, all sorts of in-
strumentalities and institutions
which have been built up to cope
with a certain population. If you
add 20, 30 or even 50 per cent, to
that strain, additional provision has
to be made.
“If we are going to add population
in that proportion, obviously we do
not think of clustering it around our
already overloaded capital cities.
There is a tremendous job ahead of
this Government and this country,
and you, the people interested in
public welfare, have ahead a tremen-
dous job of planning for the future.
“The previous Government took
the necessary steps to establish two
advisory bodies in my Department.
One is the Immigration Advisory
Council, which can be, and has been
in the past, of very great help in
dealing with some of the sociological
and psychological problems which
arise out of large scale immigration
problems. The other is the Immigra-
tion Planning Council, of more recent
growth but with a very big job ahead.
It devotes itself to giving advice
where new industries may be located
and where migrants in great num-
bers may usefully be placed in
various parts of the Commonwealth.
It is planning, imaginative and vis-
ionary work of the highest order.”
Mr. Holt paid a tribute to the work
of the Employment Service of the
Department of Labour and National
Service. “It now has a very big
national job to do in relation to the
successful placement of many tens
of thousands of migrants,” he said.
“I am glad to have this opportu-
nity of publicly complimenting it. I
believe that one of the wisest deci-
sions of the present Prime Minister
was to link together the work of the
Department of Immigration and the
Department of Labour and National
Service. They operate, of course, as
separate entities, but so many of their
problems dovetail that it is very
convenient to have policy and admin-
istration in relation to the two
departments linked in the way in
which they are now linked. I believe
that that link represents at any rate
a big machinery advantage over the
previous state of affairs.”
ceive a warm welcome from our own
people.
“In that field the Government can-
not successfully function to any great
degree. It is in that field that you,
the delegates to this convention, can
do very valuable community work.
“You all have your own organisa-
tions. Many of them are doing very
valuable work, but perhaps some of
them are not very widely scattered
throughout the Commonwealth, or at
least not sufficiently widely scattered
to enable them to cope with the
problems which we ask them to face.
“I suggest that if it is practicable
to do so you should form branches
in each shire and municipality and
enlist the services of public-spirited
and well-meaning citizens who, in a
neighbourly spirit will be able to deal
with many of the problems of the
new Australian.”
Mr. Holt said that people on the
spot would know the conditions that
existed in their particular locality.
“Part of your task will be to see
that you avoid overlapping of
activities which will prevent us from
getting the kind of service we need
in all parts of the Commonwealth.”
“The problem of developing Aus-
tralia, improving conditions, having
works completed and getting the es-
sential production of steel, timber and
the like for the building industry
carried on with the labour offering in
Australia, was indeed great. Frankly,
I do not know how we could have
faced up to that problem without
some special measures.
“Although I do not suggest indus-!
trial conscription, that possibility |
would have had to be faced if we 1
did not have available tens of
thousands of people able to be placed,
and who were glad to make that
contribution as part of the v service
given by them in return for the
sanctuary they were given in this
country. They were placed in those
essential industries when we could
not get them manned in any other
way. That is a thought which should
filter through a little more than it
has in the minds of those who may
be inclined to be too critical.
“The addition made to our com-
munity life by migrant labour has
not been solely in the realm of ma-
terial production.
force available for development and
production. With the development of
selection systems it is hoped that the
proportion will become even higher.”
One very valuable consequence of
the influx of migrants from Europe
in particular had been that their
labour had been made available in
places to which it was very difficult
to get Australian workmen to go.
“Our men and women in Australia,
who have their own family ties and
who are settled in a particular com-
munity are not, generally speaking,
attracted to employment on the great
developmental projects such as the
hydro-electric schemes and the dam
building schemes. It is by no means
the same hardship or sacrifice for a
migrant, who has not got his roots
in any particular locality, to work
upon projects of that kind.”
The Displaced Persons, he said,
had been diligent and good workers,
and had made a substantial contri-
bution to Australian production. He
gave these examples:—
• September, 1949 N.S.W. cem-
ent production, 53,000 tons; 11,000
tons greater than in June, 1949.
• November, 1949 increase in
N.S.W. brick production to 32,000,000
bricks a month, highest figure since
June, 1929. Production in Victoria by
Displaced Persons of 45,000,000 extra
bricks during the year. Increase in
N.S.W. tile production, 10 per cent.
• B.H.P. steel works now operat-
ing at 80 per cent, of capacity, as
against 65 per cent, last year.
• Australian Iron and Steel Com-
pany works, increase to 12,000 tons
a week, from 9,500 tons a week.
• Iron Knob, South Australia
employment of 50 Displaced Persons
has greatly increased production of
iron ore.
• N.S.W. timber production is now
at a level that cannot be increased
without opening up new areas.
• Victorian timber production
additional output by Displaced Per-
sons employed, 3,000,000 super feet
a year.
• Melbourne’s winter firewood
requirements a problem for years
past met last year by Displaced
Persons alone. Also production of
15,000 tons of firewood for Mildura
irrigation pumping station.
• Fifteen per cent increase in
overall production of refined sugar
by Melbourne works of the Colonial
Sugar Refining Company, as a result
of employment of Displaced Persons.
Sugar bag manufacture increase
from 50,000 to 90,000 a week.
• Supply of 800 Displaced Per-
sons to the South Australian motor
building industry had rectified a pre-
carious position.
• Staff shortages in hospitals and
welfare institutions greatly eased.
Almost all positions for domestics in
hospitals filled.
“I take the opportunity of com-
mending the previous Government .
! and commending the policy that was
1 exercised in the leadership in the
[ Australian Trades Union movement,”
said Mr. Holt. “There was a fear at
the outset on the part of many of
the members that such a large influx
of migrant labour from abroad would
result in a degree of competition for
Australian workmen and deprive
them in many cases of jobs that
would otherwise have been available
to them. There was also a fear that
an influx of migrant labour from
Europe where, perhaps, working con-
ditions and wages had not been es-
tablished on a scale comparable with
that of Australia, would mean a
lowering of the standards here.
“Neither of those fears has been
realised. Far from the number of
jobs available in Australia diminish-
ing, the records of the Department
of Labour reveal that the number of
positions offering to-day in Australia,
despite this influx of some 170,000
people last year, Is greater than it
was 12 months ago.
“The migrants who come to Aus-
tralia themselves create a new set
of demands upon the production
economy. Many of them come here
with little more than what they
stand up in. The things that they .
will need can only be made available ;
by the development of the Australian ,
economy.
“The previous Government very
wisely insisted that wherever migrant
labour was to be employed, wages
and conditions had to be maintained
at a standard equivalent to that en- ;
joyed by appropriate Australian '
labour. There has been no attempt •
made on nor any damage done to the ;
standards of Australian working i
men and women and, on behalf of my
Government, I can give the public .
an assurance that that policy will be ;
continued by the present administra-
tion.
“Mr. Calwell told you yesterday ;
that the rate of addition to our popu- ■
lation by means of natural increase
and by means of the immigration :
programme amounts to something a
shade over 3 per cent, per year. He i
stressed the fact that that is a very
high percentage, based on the ex- !
perience of other countries in con- !
nection with immigration. ;
“Quite obviously, strains are going ;
to be placed upon our economy if ;
we are to make a success of the »
absorption of this volume of increase :
to our population. These are the i
risks that we referred to yesterday ’
which we feel that we must neces- I
sarily take in the cause of national i
survival. ]
MINISTERS IMMIGRATION POLICY


GENERAL ASSEMBLY RECOMMEENDED THAT. . .
Nearly 50 resolutions, all designed to assist the
quick assimilation of migrants into the Australian
community, were formulated by delegates to the
Australian Citizenship Convention after two days'
deliberation in discussion groups.
Each group was charged with the consideration of
specific items like education, publicity and social
welfare. Each was invited to volunteer any original
ideas they thought would help the assimilation drive.
After groups had discussed the problems, recommendations
were submitted to the full assembly for adoption. The resolutions
have now been placed before the Commonwealth Department of Im-
migration tor consideration and implementation where practicable.
...Below are details of the resolu-
tions carried. The list does not
give all resolutions verbatim. The
reason for this Is that in various
resolutions the preamble followed
similar lines, while some recom-
mendations were duplicated in
different resolutions.
In addition, the list has been cor-
related to gather together the recom-
mendations under appropriate sub-
ject headings.
GENERAL PREAMBLE
Object of all resolutions was to
attain one of the following objec-
tives: —
1. A better understanding and ap-
preciation of Australian citizen-
ship and responsibilities;
2. A sympathetic understanding
of the urgent need for, and
value of, full-scale immigration;
3. Acceptance of full responsibili-
ties to all migrants;
i. Good mental attitudes leading
to the minimising and ultimate
removal of prejudices, sus-
picions, resentments and fears
towards immigrants and foreign
visitors; and
5. The cultivation of neighbourly
attitudes and the easing o£
strains so that strangers may
soon feel that they “belong" in
Australia.
The following resolutions were ad-
vanced to forward those aims:
EDUCATION
1. The Commonwealth Office of Education, the
State Departments and the Australian Broad-
casting Commission should be Invited to use
their existing instrumentalities, such as school
broadcasts (particularly the national series ,
known as "The World We Live In") and i
school publications, universities, adult educa-
tion authorities, and teacher* 1 colleges
should be invited to co-operate by taking
appropriate action to bring the aims of the ,
convention to the notice of their student*. 1
2. Camp* conducted by Education Departments, 1
National Fitne** organisations and other
agencies engaged on similar work (e.g.
Y.M.C.A., Y.W.C.A., Boy Scouts, Girl Guides,
church and social clubs ate.) should include
a proportion of New Australian children
wherever possible.
3. European migrants who are qualified teachers
who have been in Australia for a fixed i
period (to be determined), who have taken !
steps towards their naturalisation (as far
as they can) and who are suitable in other
respects can be profitably employed by
Education Departments after undergoing a
further appropriate course of training. This
matter should be referred to the next con-
ference of Directors of Education for the
consideration of the formulation of common
principles acceptable to all States.
4. Migrant children should have the same edu-
cational rights as Australian children. Migrant
children approaching the school-leaving age
should be encouraged to continue at school
until they reach an adequate standard and
any restrictive regulations governing scholar-
ships should be relaxed, if necessary, to
enable them to receive an education con-
sistent with their individual abilities. Whan
the children of migrants reach school-leaving
age, they should not be allocated to em-
ployment if their parents want them to
continue their education and are able to
support them, and the Commonwealth and
State Governments should be asked to relax
such regulations as would prevent the ful-
filment of these aims. Selection for educa-
fion beyond the statutory school leaving age
should be the responsibility of the State
Education Departments.
5. Facilities should be made available for adulf
education in every phase of Australian life
and every encouragement should be given
to New Australians to participate in suitable ;
adult education schemes by universities or !
other means. I
6. The co-operation of all Australians should
be sought to give New Australians activa
encouragement to obtain Instruction In
English.
7. The Commonwealth Department of Immigra-
tion should be asked to investigate, as a
matter of urgency, the establishment in all
holding centres, of decentralised pre-school
groups In all holding centres under the
direction of suitable teachers.
S. The Commonwealth Government, as part of
its immigration policy, should make addi-
tional grants to States to assist them to
expand their facilities to meet the Influx
of migrant children 1 and avoid the further
overcrowding and understaffing that would
otherwise result to the detriment of both
Australian and New Australian children.
9. It is suggested that valuable assistance could
be rendered, in due course, by qualified
migrants in the education of their own people,
and as interpreters at such places as post
offices, railway stations and social service
centres where they could help migrants whose
native language is not English.
Therefore It is recommended that a de-
partmental survey be undertaken to obtain
I the necessary information for evolving a plan
to carry Into effect the above suggestion.
SOCIAL
1. The various State and other school com-
mittees and organisations, the parents and
citizens' organisations, mothers' clubs, ex-
student associations and other organisations
have an important function to fulfil in keep-
ing in close touch with the parents and
particularly the mothers of New Australians
in our schools. It is therefore suggested that
these bodies invite New Australian fathers
and mothers to participate in organised
activities such as parties, picnics, sports
gatherings, musical evenings, hikes, etc., In
which both old and new may join to the
advantage of both.
2. The basis of our approach to questions of
immigration and assimilation should be essen-
tially humanitarian. At the same time, em-
phasis should be laid on the responsibilities
and privileges of Australian citizenship. In
view of the strong racial and religious
prejudices prevalent In Europe, whence many
New Australians have come, special emphasis
should be laid on the furtherance of toler-
ance and goodwill as distinctive character-
istics of Australian citizenship.
3. Recognising the value both to "old" and
"new" Australians of personal contacts for
overcoming prejudice and in fostering un-
derstanding and friendly service, we com-
mend to churches, organisations, families
and individuals the importance of the per-
sonal approach in the assimilation of New
Australians. To this end it is recommended
that such means as personal correspondence,
fostering of inter-family friendships, invita-
tions to homes, social occasions, hospital
'visitations and various forms of personal ser-
vice be encouraged by churches and or-
ganisations In city and country areas.
In this regard, we recognise the need
for some co-ordinating body to promote ,
effectively the welfare of newcomers and I
to channel the goodwill and practical as-
sistance of the churches and voluntary’
organisations.
4. Organisations, where possible, should invite
and encourage the admission of New Aus-
tralians to membership and give them the
opportunity to participate in the administra-
tion and activities of such organisations.
5. Where a considerable number of New Aus-
tralians reside In a capital city, large town
or other area In which existing organisations
cannot provide the necessary facilities, social
centres should be set up where Australians
and New Australians could meet socially to
promote informal education, especially of
adult women. The premises and equipment
of such centres should be provided by the
Commonwealth Government and the centres
controlled by the appropriate organisation
or organisations.
6. The people of Australia should strive,
through their Governments, their associations
and as individuals to remove all obstacles—
physical, social, national and racial—that
prevent prompt and- complete assimilation
of all immigrants. They should also strive
to create the conditions that will encourage
their mutually satisfactory assimilation.
7. Pains should be taken to leave to the
migrant his initiative in the choice as to how,
and to what extent, he shall enter and par-
ticipate in our mutual activities, and en-
courage him to show by his own development
in his new life what contribution he can
make to the future of Australia.
8. Where a husband has private accommoda-
tion in which he end his wife can live to-
gether, and where he has the means to I
support her, an application to the Depart* I
ment of Immigration for her release from
her contract with the Government should
be granted forthwith. All married migrant
couples should be advised of this policy.
9. Wherever possible, families should be kept
intact. Where for purposes of employment
the family Is unavoidably divided, every
step should be taken to reunite its members
at the earliest opportunity.
10. The Sunday in each year nearest to Aus-
tralia Day should be set aside for special
attention to migration and the ideal of good-
will and fellowship towards immigrants. The
co-operation of all churches should be sought
for this purpose. I
11. We approve the idea of workers' hostels)
being widely established in city and country
areas where immigrant families can live to-
gether more easily than under the present
camp conditions.
12. We agree with the preservation of the arts
'and crafts of New Australians and the en-
couragement of the inter-relation of old and
New Australians in eisteddfods, etc.
13. Municipalities, churches and other organisa-
tions should be asked to compile and keep
up to date a list of all local British and
non-British immigrants In their districts, and
to send them a special invitation to suitable
social functions with a request for their
help where feasible.
PUBLICITY
1. The Minister for immigration should be re-
quested to ask the Prime Minister to call
immediately a conference of Press, radio
and film interests to enlist their further
support and co-operation in a wide publicity
campaign.
2. The Department of Immigration should be
requested to arrange for the freer illustra-
tion and wider distribution of the pamphlets
it Issues from time to time.
3. It is suggested that employers' organisa-
tions end trade unions can play on im-
portant part in promoting the rapid assimila-
tion of migrants thus-—employers’ organisa-
tions with the assistance of the Departments
of Immigration and Information, could in-
form employers and management generally
of the part they can play in avoiding and
meeting difficulties met by migrants par-
ticularly in their relationship with other em-
ployees; trade unions could encourage and
inform their organisations and shop stewards,
who have been suitably advised and in-
structed, in the part they can play in
bringing about greater understanding be-
tween Australian employees and New Aus-
tralian employees.
4. Official publicity material for distribution
to migrants should include an explanation
of the alms, objects and functions of Aus-
tralian trade unions as compared with those
of European countries; Non-British New
Australians, both before and after naturalisa-
tion, should be provided with information
regarding the procedure necessary to effect
a change of name so that they may decide
upon a change If they themselves consider
it advisable.
5. Immigrants should be given factual Informa-
tion to furnish them with convincing replies
to damaging or subversive propaganda In
overseas publicity. Governments should fake
steps to remedy any faults indicated by
Justifiable criticism. And any complaints by
immigrants should be referred to the De-
partments concerned.
1 Furthermore, there should be a continuous
and systematic study of problems and favour-
able factors experienced adult
and children, and a similar study of the
relationships of Australians and immigrants
with each other.
EMPLOYMENT
1. The Department of Immigration should be
asked to supply information to all interested
organisations or councils concerned with the
problem of placing in employment widows
and widowers with children.
2. It is felt that European migrants have a
very definite place in broadening the econ-
omic and cultural education of Australians:
in industry—by the establishment in Aus-
tralia of industries to produce commodities
not previously manufactured here, such as
pure silk goods, tine glassware and handi-
crafts, etc.; and In culture— by the enrich-
ment of our culture In the fields of music,
art, folk dancing, architecture, etc.
3: The Commonwealth Immigration Planning
Council should be requested to give urgent
attention to special problems associated with
the absorption of migrants into industry and
commerce and the greater use of emoloyer
and employee organisations to that end; and
the consideration of the problem of alloca-
tion of migrants throughout industry.
4. Although the drafting. Into employment of
New Australians has bean generally successful,
there are still a number of cases where the
allocation of jobs has been unfortunate. It
is. therefore, recommended that New Aus-
tralians should be advised of the voluntary
associations competent to help and advise
them in the districts to which they are sent.
In cases where jobs are found by migrants
to be unsuitable they, or a voluntary or-
ganisation acting on their behalf, should
be allowed to make representations to the
Commonwealth Employment Service for a
change of employment. In the event of dis-
allowance In the first instance, the matter
should be referred to the Regional Employ-
ment Officer and the Commonwealth Im-
migration Officer in that State jointly for
recommendation to the Minister as the final
authority.
5. Representations should be made to State
Governments, registration boards and other
competent authorities that New Australians
holding professional qualifications of repute
should be admitted to registration for their
respective callings, after passing the appro-
priate examination and following a reason-
able period of training or readjustment suffi-
cient to assure their competence In accord-
ance with Australian standards. The States
(should be asked to make this period in each
case the minimum possible to secure this
result end also that the period should be
uniform throughout Australia.
6. New Australians should be encouraged to
gain experience and training so that those
adapted may be established eventually In
rural Industries.
CITIZENSHIP
1. Informative articles concerning Australia and
Australian citizenship, as supplied by the De-
partment of Immigration, should, where pos-
sible, be regularly published (in English and
the respective foreign language in parallel
columns) in foreign-language newspapers
printed in Australia. The -question of the
extended use of existing foreign-language
newspapers as a means of educating new
arrivals of European origin and these already
here should be Investigated.
2. In its plans for a fritting annual calibration
of Australia Day on January 24, the Federal
Government should make a feature of special
naturalisation ceremonies on a Common-
wealth-wide basis on that day.
OTHER RESOLUTIONS
1. For the present "New Australian" is a suit-
able term when referring to Immigrants, but
should be discontinued when referring to
those who have been naturalised.
2. In its plans for a fitting annual celebration
continuing education and enjoyment of New
Australians, shires and municipalities should
be urged to provide, in association with
Governments, adequate free library services
for all sections of their communities, includ-
ing New Australians.
3. The appropriate organisations responsible for
the promotion of music, art, literature and
other cultural activities should be approached
with a request that reciprocal liaison with,
and appreciation of, immigrant culture be
effected by them .
4. Recognising the vital importance of housing
In the general assimilation of migrants and
their relationship with the Australian people,
we urge the Governments to expand their
housing programmes as rapidly as possible.
To this end we urge the Commonwealth Gov-
ernment, in conjunction with the State authori-
ties, immediately to implement a plan to
Import suitable prefabricated units for tem-
porary accommodation and to erect such
units In areas where labour is required for
essential work, and to seek the assistance
of organisations in their operations.
5. While recognising the extensive work being
done by churches and voluntary organisations,
we recommend that existing Good Neighbour '
Councils, New Settlers' Leagues and similar
co-ordinating bodies in each State be en-
couraged fo extend their membership to
include all churches, voluntary organisations,
and employer and employee organisations in-
terested in immigration; and to extend their
activities to cover every aspect of assimila-
tion of all new settlers.
1 b. For the successful future of 'Australia, a
continuity of the aggress*'? policy for secur-
ing suitable immigrants is essential to over-
come the problem of inaclaquate population.
Following Sir Arthur Rucker's appeal, the
Commonwealth Government should be re-
quested to continue receiving a full quota
of Displaced Persons to help complete the
work of the International Refugee Organisa-
tion provided the flow of British migrants
Is not thereby reduced.
We. the members of this convention,
promise to do our part in seeking the in-
terest and co-operation of our respective
organisations in the assimilation of as many
immigrants as the Government Introduces.'
7. Satisfied immigrants should be formed Into
interpretative groups to help In the assimila-
tion of all new arrivals in order' to prevent
their becoming disgruntled, or dissatisfied.
8. To ensure the maximum personal co-opera-
tion from the members' of represented or-
ganisations in securing good mental attitudes
and public relations regarding all immigrants,
delegates should report fully fo their 'Or-
ganisations on the work of this convention.
?. Recognising that the large influx of people
from overseas including children who are
learning our language, Is a peace-time state
of national emergency, it Is recommended
that all radio programmes, especially serials,
be examined to eliminate all character im-
personations in which incorrect, unpleasant
or offensive methods of speech or inferences
are employed.
!0. Government and local government bodies
should be requested to display prominently
the names or railway stations and streets.
11. The Postmaster-General’s Department >..’ild
be asked to give consideration to spelling
in full the names of suburbs in the telephone
books.
12. It was agreed that the word '’assimilation"
was preferable to the word "Integration" ap-
plied to the process of introducing migrants
Into the community.
13. Convention decided that the term "New
Australian" should be taken to include ' all
immigrants irrespective of their racial origin
unless the sense of a resolution was ob-
viously intended otherwise.
14. The convention recognises the value of fhe
work already done in the field of assimila-
tion by Commonwealth and State Depart-
ments, and by voluntary and other organisa-
tions within the State. It recommends that
all such work and related activities be co-
ordinated through a committee within each
State and extended in every possible way
by existing organisations.
To achieve this objective it Is recom-
mended that a co-ordinator be appointed
by the Commonwealth- Government and that
his principal duty be to co-operate with
the co-ordinating committee established in
each State whereon all existing church and
voluntary organisations and other instrumen-
talities interested in the work of assimilation
should be represented.
Resolutions of thanks and appreciation were
passed by delegates. These vml appear in the
full report of the convention to be published
later.


Delegates to the Citizenship Convention
Of Canberra Grammar School
Produced bv -he Department of 1 nlorn'ation, and printed and published to' the Department
-d ln-n-V,r. r :or Canberra, by The Fedn-.ai Cep+d Pros d Arlst. Ltd, Braddon, A.C.t.
