

IMMORALITY:
Its A-wful Oonseq.tjen'Ces,
The ‘W-a.'x" to Avoid It.
DELIVERED TO MEN ONLY,
A LECTURE
IN THE PROTESTANT HALL, SYDNEY,
October Bth, 1883.
S < AND PUBLISHED AT THE SOCIETY’S REQUEST.
2' s <
g i
«. ►. o ) I
• o < _ _ ....
R. ►, o
f & i o
i> H
( &&tso
'oesr-gS
►, u, ca ii
, * t: S £ M
si a*
>'Q
KwM s E o
I£l i “
►V 2 g " = Z
(j® s S 3
►> ca S? § §
f r pq s, ° o
A hJ • UJ O
H ta k I <
I S! I
►> O • 5
&T j
“Unto the Pure all Things are Pure.”
SYDNEY
J. L. Holmes & Co., General Book and Job Printers, 315 Pitt Street.
1884.
Its Fascin-A-Ting Temptations.
REV. CHARLES OLDEN,
j UNDER THE AUSPICES OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE NEW SOUTH WALES
rg i , SOCIAL PURITY SOCIETY,
"•i < Alin Dl IDI IQUCn AT TUC cnPICTV'Q DCniICQT
The Very Rev. the Dean of Sydney in -the Shair.




ADVANCE AUSTRALIA.
AUSTRALIAN BUILDERS’
PRICE BOOK.
Fourth Edition, Revised, Enlarged and Corrected to Date.
ARCHITECTS, CONTRACTORS & AMATEURS,
AND THOSE WHO ARE ABOUT TO BUILD.
CONTAINING :
AN EPITOME OF THE BUILDING MATERIALS OF
AUSTRALIA, THE COST OF LABOUR ONLY
AT THE CURRENT RATE OF WAGES,
WITH THE
PRICES OF BUILDING MATERIALS IN MELBOURNE,
SYDNEY, ADELAIDE, &c.
ALSO :
TABLES, NOTES, AND EXAMPLES OF ESTIMATING,
With Rules for Measurement.
CHARLES MAYES.
Architect and Civil Engineer.
Entered at Stationers’ Hall, London,for Great Britain and Her Colonies.
PRICE, 7s. 6d.; POST FREE, Bs. 6d.
Published for
]. w. It CIOTKE, § £OTIOJ\[EIt
»&6 OTAHKEI JBIIILUIXOS, SYimiEV.
THREE DOORS FROM MARKET STREET,
ALL KINDS OF ACCOUNT BOOKS MADE TO ORDER.
Received splendid Notices from all the leading Newspapers in the Colonies.




IMMORALITY:
Its FAsciiriLTiisrG Temptations,
ITS A-WFUL CO3STST3Q,TTT!DSrOT3S,
Thie ‘WLayx~ to Avoid It.
October Bth, 1883
A LECTURE
IN THE PROTESTANT HALL, SYDNEY,,
REV. CHARLES OLDEN,
UNDER THE AUSPICES OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE NEW SOUTH WALES
SOCIAL PURITY SOCIETY,
AND PUBLISHED AT THE SOCIETY’S REQUEST.
Tie ¥ery Rev. tie Dean of. Sydney in tie Blair.
“Unto tub Purr all Things are Pure.”
SVDJNEV
J. L. Hoi.mes & Co., General Book and Job Printers, 315 Pitt Street.
1884,
/359-f


INTRODUCTORY NOTE
OF THE
COMMITTEE
OF THE
|jp |jal£s foetal ;|uriig ;|oqctn.
The object of this Society is “to promote true morality and to
discourage immorality in all relations of social life,” and among
the means to be employed for this end is “ the delivery of social
lectures.” Two such lectures had already been delivered, and the
Committee invited the Rev. Charles Olden to deliver the third.
He readily acceded to this request, and the earnest and powerful
address contained in the following pages is the result. The Dean
of Sydney, President of the Society, occupied the chair, and the
platform was filled with a company of ministers and other influen-
tial public men. The Protestant Hall was densely crowded with
an audience consisting exclusively of men, a large proportion being
young men, and doubtless exposed to the dangei’s and temptations
against which the lecture was designed to warn and arm them.
The lecturer’s manly and outspoken utterances were listened to
with the utmost attention, and were frequently responded to with
loud and hearty applause. In fact his own enthusiasm for the
cause of morality seemed to excite similar feelings in the breasts
of his hearers, and it was not a little encouraging to the Comxxiittee
that so large an assembly—nuxnbering something like 1200 men—
should display so deep an interest in the subject, and so lively a
hatred of the sin against which it is the business of the Society to
protest.
The lecture is now published with a view to the wider diffu-
sion of the facts and arguments which it contains ; in the hope that
the perusal of them may lead to a deeper and more wide-spread
interest in the work undertaken by the Society.


PREFACE
4_
The conception, plan, and development of this Lecture are my
own; and, with the exception of the portion named below, were
thrown very much into their present form before consulting books.
My original desire was to produce a small pamphlet, which could
be read in ten or fifteen minutes. However, when the Committee
of the N. S. W, Social Purity Society asked me to lecture, I made
a more careful study of the subject and more ample preparation.
I gratefully acknowledge my indebtedness to Dr. Hime’s excellent
book on Morality, which should be in the hands of all our
young men. It was he who first called my attention to the
shallow fallacies drawn from a false philosophy, in support of
immorality. There are also not a few of his suggestions incor-
porated in other parts of this lecture. I am also indebted to
other writers. More anxious to produce a useful lecture than to
lay claim to originality, I have accepted a suggestion wherever it
was to be found. At the same time I have not been a mere
copyist; but have thought out the subject for myself, going to my
own mind for arguments, and to my observation and general
reading for facts and illustrations. I have also clothed the whole
in my own language. Painfully conscious of the many imperfec-
tions of this lecture, it is my earnest prayer that God may make
it useful. If by its perusal one man should be prevented from
effecting the ruin of one woman, I shall be thankful.
CHARLES OLDEN,
November 28th , 1883.
Bowral, N. S. Wales.


NEW SOUTH WALES SOCIAL PURITY SOCIETY.
CONSTITUTION.
I. That this Society he called the “New South Wales Social
Purity Society.”
11. That the Society be composed of Annual, Life, and Honorary
Members, who shall, at a General Meeting to be held in September of each
year, elect a Committee of Management of not less than twelve, including
President, two Vice-Presidents, Secretary and Treasurer, such committee
having power to add to their number ; three to form a quorum.
111. That any person subscribing yearly a sum of not less that five
shillings be a Member, and that any person making a donation of not less
than three guineas be a Life Member ; and that Honorary Members be
appointed by the Committee.
OBJECTS.
I. To promote true morality and to discourage immorality in all
relations of social life.
11. To advocate and promote amendments in the laws relating to :
1. The protection of young females.
2. The establishment of the paternity of illegitimate children.
3. The support and education of such children, and the
responsibilities of their parents.
4. Seductions and civil actions thereon.
5. The harbouring of fallen juveniles.
111. To promote social and moral improvement by :
1. The circulation ot pure literature.
2. The suppression of impure literature.
3. The delivery of social lectures.
4. Petitions to the Legislature.
5. Efforts to reclaim the erring, especially juveniles.
The duty of every Member of this Society will be to promote the
objects herein specified, and to further the suppression of vice and the
advance of virtue.
Subscriptions and donations thankfully received by the Hon. Treasurer
of the Society, Benjamin Short, Esq., No. 1 Sydney Arcade, George
Street, Sydney.


LECTURE.
As I have looked forward to this lecture, one thing has pro-
foundly moved me, and made me shrink from the task. It is the
overwhelming importance of my theme. It rises as high as
heaven; it sinks as deep as the lowest hell; and it touches every
sacred thing in existence.
Yet these same considerations have supplied me with the
most substantial reasons for taking up the subject. I will
name two of them. The first is, the importance of living a
moral life. Someone has said, “ There are two great rocks in
life, on which every man must either anchor or split—God and
Woman.” So many men split on the latter rock, that it is
necessary to raise a warning cry to the young men of New South
Wales, For a man to split on this rock, is such a disastrous and
total wreck, of such a gallant ship, with such a precious freight;
—a freight which excites the hopes and fears of his dearest
friends, and which involves his own temporal and eternal welfare.
My second reason is to be found in the immense number of
fallen women, who, like thousands of more or less sunken rocks,
abound in the ocean of life. It is estimated that there are
ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY-FIVE THOUSAND (145,000) FALLEN
WOMEN
in the United Kingdom. In other words, if you could stand on
London Bridge, from six o’clock at night till six o’clock in the
morning, and one of these fallen women should pass you every
two minutes, you would have to stand there more than a year of
nights before the last of these wretched and outraged women would
have passed you. Could such a procession be formed, it would
be enough to make angels weep !
What is more interesting to us, and more to the point of the
lecture, is to find out the number of fallen women in our city.
The most recent and reliable statistics tell us there are
FIVE HUNDRED PROSTITUTES IN SYDNEY AND ITS SUBURBS.
In the nature of things, this cannot include those who carry
on this life clandestinely. Nor does it include the known prosti-


tutes of the provincial cities and towns of the colony. Nor can
we think it includes many of the mothers of the 1263 illegitimate
children born in New South Wales in 1881. Putting all these
things together, we are compelled to fear there are several
thousand women in our colcfny leading a more or less immoral
life.
Who supports this army of fallen women ? They must be
supported by large numbers of men, of all ranks and ages ; and
in some instances by youths, and even boys. It is not simply
the men of the city who visit these women. It is well known
that many men from the country take the opportunity of a visit
to the city to go to houses of ill-fame. The young man from the
country is the object of the special attention of the city prostitute.
Let us suppose that each one of the five hundred courtesans of
Sydney leads astray one hitherto moral man per annum; and
that is a very moderate calculation, for some of them are so eager
in their pursuit of sin and gain, that they corrupt the minds of
boys, to increase the demand for their infamous trade. If you
accept my calculation, that five hundred men, per annum, are led
into sin, by means of immorality in Sydney ; you may well stand
aghast at such a loss, and worse than loss, to our community.
A high-minded, strong, enterprising, and godly population is the
truest wealth of any community. Surely then, any honest effort
to stop this enormous waste is sufficient reason for calling you
together.
I propose to speak to you on
THE SIN OF IMMORALITY.
What is meant by Immorality ? All impurity in thought and
action; any gratification of our procreative faculties, except in
■ honourable marriage ; all that is covered by the expression, “ The
Social Evil impurity in high life, as well as in low life ; prosti-
tution, whether it walks our streets, or hides in secret chambers ;
all solitary self-indulgence. I take my stand on the seventh
commandment, “ Thou shalt not commit adultery,” as interpreted
by our Saviour, “ Whosoever looketh on a woman to lust after
her hath committed adultery with her already in his heart.”
(Matt. 5, 28.) Ido not propose to take up exclusively any one
part of this monster evil; but to touch them all in turn, giving
special prominence to the worst, viz., the seduction of innocent
and unsuspecting girls.


I.—FASCINATING TEMPTATIONS TO
IMMORALITY.
You have a direct personal interest in this question, for you
will be tempted as sure as you are a man.
A. TEMPTATIONS OF A PERSONAL CHARACTER.
Let us thank God that there are, in all ranks of our community,,
thousands of
WOMEN, WHOSE MORAL PURITY IS WHITER THAN SNOW.
The whitest snow will take a stain ; but there is with us female
purity that is absolutely unstainable, under any circumstances
whatever. Nevertheless, you may, at any day, be tempted by
DESIGNING AND FASCINATING WOMEN,
who move in more or less respectable positions in society. Some-
times beautiful women, and, shame to say, married women, may
lay a snare for your feet. The respectability of their surround-
ings may throw you off your guard ; while their personal attrac-
tions and seductive insinuations may exercise a dangerous
influence over you. Occasionally you may have in your power
A WOMAN OF WEAK # MORAL PRINCIPLE.
Her moral weakness, her liability to go astray, would render her
an easy prey to your lust. Keep out of the way of such a
woman. If that be impossible, be on your guard, and do not take
advantage of her evil tendency.
I come now to tread on sacred ground, and to tell you of
a temptation that will not come from a woman, but that may
come from yourself, or the devil, or from both, I will suppose
you have gained the affections of
A PURE AND LOVING WOMAN.
Maybe you had to win your way to her affections, but you
succeeded, and now she loves you with all her heart. Your love
and companionship have become to her a necessity of her being.
To lose them would be worse than death. Under similar circum-
stances, many, unworthy of the name of men, have put such love
to a terrible test. Rather than lose the affection of the man she
loves, and too blind, or inexperienced, to realise that any man,
who could put her affection to such a trial, was utterly incapable
of true love, and equally unworthy of her confidence, she has
surrendered herself to his passions; and in her shame been


deserted by him. Should ever such a temptation present itself
to you, I implore you, by all that is sacred, put it away from you.
By the treasure of that pure girl’s affection—by the wealth of
love with which she is prepared to enrich you at the marriage
altar—by the long years of mutual joy you may hope for in each
other’s society, as well as by the gulf of misery into which you will
both fall if you effect her ruin—l beg you to
STRANGLE THE DEVIL THAT IS IN YOU AND CAST HIM OUT !
Should you use the power that pure girl’s affection gives you over
her, to drag her down to destruction, there is no expression in
any language that would be too black to characterise your con-
duct, and no curse that ever fell from the lips of God or man
too heavy to fall upon you !
You are almost sure to be tempted by
COMMON PROSTITUTES,
whose brazen face and shameless conduct will at first repel you,
but whose power over you will grow, if you put yourself
frequently in their way.
“ Vice is a creature of such fearful mien,
That to be hated needs but to be seen ;
But seen too oft, familiar with its face,
We first endure, then pity, then embrace.”
You may be invited to places where these unfortunates may be
found, such as T he dancing pavilion,
where
“ Youth and pleasure meet
To chase the glowing hours with flying feet.”
The gilded hall—the blaze of light—the sparkling wine—the
“ voluptuous swell ” of the music—may have strong attractions
for you. Add to these things, the powerful appeals that will be
made to your passions, by the bewitching smile, the flattering
tongue, the attractive dress, the graceful movements and soft
embracements in the dance, of some beautiful woman whom you
know to be dissolute —and the picture of your temptations is
complete, and your fall inevitable.
Many a man has been led into a life of sin by some sudden
and unexpected temptation, which it is quite unnecessary to
particularise. But while some have been thus ensnared, others
have been saved by the supreme disgust with which they have


repelled the tempter, or by resisting the temptation in loyalty to
conscience. In whatever form temptation may come, the only
safeguard is to be found in that love of purity which is advocated
in the third part of this lecture.
Sydney Harbour Excursions.
What a sight Circular Quay presents on some beautiful day in
holiday time! One beholds, with delight, the masses of pleasure-
seekers—the crowded steamers —the ships gay with bunting—the
graceful yachts—the bands of music—the deep blue of the sky,
and the charming beauties of the harbour. Sad that such days
should contribute to the prostitution of our city ! There can be
no doubt that they have done so; and that both young men and
young women have fallen into the snares laid for them. Such
times have always had their dangers. The poet Crabbe wrote
warningly of English excursions more than a generation ago.—
Then youth beware, when all around conspire
To banish caution and awake desire ;
The day’s amusement, beauty, feasting, wine,
These accents sweet, and this soft hour combine,
When most ungarded then to win that heart of thine. ’’
It is to be feared that sometimes even at Sunday School
Picnics more harm has been done in a day than could be undone
in a lifetime. This is no impeachment whatever of the character
of the teachers or senior scholars. The indiscriminate way in
which the public have been admitted in crowds, on payment of a
small sum, has defied the utmost efforts of the teachers to prevent
evil, I rejoice in the attention which has lately been directed to
this matter, and trust that the promoters of Sunday School
Picnics will exercise the utmost care as to the persons whom they
admit to the grounds; and that parents will not allow their
daughters of tender years to go down the harbour without
putting them under the care of their teacher, or some other
trustworthy friend.
Temptations to Immorality are often Fascinating.
It is necessary to point out how fascinating this temptation is.
It appeals to the most powerful feelings of our nature—is so
secret—its early surroundings are so attractive and agreeable—
there is everything to disarm suspicion and throw a man off his
guard—exposure is frequently deferred, and there is an absence
of those repulsive surroundings that attend some crimes.


Beauty enchants—music excites, and wine benumbs the better
feelings—so that
THE HOUSE OF THE STRANGE WOMAN IS BUILT ON ENCHANTED
GROUND.
Unfortunately, the spell of the enchantment is not broken until
it is too late.
These temptations to immorality will be more or less powerful
according to circumstances and the strength of your passions.
Some of them will lose their power, because the temptation and
opportunity will not meet. When the temptation is upon you,
the opportunity will be wanting. When the opportunity presents
itself, the temptation will have lost its power. At other
times, the temptation will come like a flame of fire; and the
devil and some dissolute woman will arrange the opportunity.
Then you must fly or fall.
B. TEMPTATIONS ARISING FROM FALSE PHILOSOPHY.
Such temptations are not to be despised. It is philosophy that
rules the world. “As a man thinketh in his heart, so is he.”
Unfortunately, there are abroad many false sentiments, snatches
of songs, maxims, &c., &c., as familiar in some men’s mouths as
household words ; but they are fatally misleading on this important
subject. These expressions are made use of in the workshop, at
the place of business, and at the street corner. You are sure to
hear them. We propose to show the shallowness and fallacy of
some of them.
Fallacy No. 1. Fornication is quite Natural.
The term natural is often misunderstood. Our nature consists of
three parts, or principles of action ; viz. (1) Our appetites, which
we possess in common with the lower animals, and which are
always impelling us to do something, irrespective of right or
wrong; (2.) Conscience or judgment, whose prerogative it is to
direct our motives of action by the highest laws; and (3). Self-
love, which, though entirely opposed to selfishness, impels us to
seek after our own true happiness, and is never opposed to
conscience. For a thing to be perfectly natural, it must be in
accordance with our nature, considered as a whole, and not agree-
able to our lowest powers only. When our appetites are opposed
to conscience and self-love, the former must always yield to the
latter. Judged by this standard, fornication is decidedly


unnatural.* It will thus appear, that by saying this sin is perfectly
natural, it is meant that it is in accordance with some men’s
appetites or inclinations. Granted. But will it do for anyone to
blindly follow his inclinations? It is one man’s inclination to lie;
anothers to steal; anothers to commit murder. Not one of
these is worse than the inclination some men have to acts of
seduction. It cannot possibly be worse to murder a woman
outright than to drag her down to prostitution. We are com-
pelled to imprison some men, and even to put them to death, for
following their inclinations. And we shall need to restrain men’s
desires in this direction, by the force of moral suasion and by the
penalties of the law.
Fallacy No. 2. Sexual Ixtercouk.se is Necessary to Health.
Admitted that, in some cases, sexual intercourse may be necessary
to the highest development of health. But when a man takes
to a life of fornication for the sake of his health, you have a
right to expect him to be consistent all round. He knows, or
ought to know, that perfect health demands that a man should
keep regular hours in going to bed and in rising ; that he should
be abstemious in eating and drinking, and especially in the use of
intoxicating drinks. Moreover,
PURITY OF MIND IS NECESSARY TO PERFECT HEALTH.
Watch the kind of man I am speaking of; and see how com-
pletely he is throwing dust in his own eyes, or trying to throw it
in the eyes of others, when he says he is living an immoral life
for the highest development of health.
We will suppose that yours is a case in which sexual inter
course is necessary to health. Will you suffer most by living a
life of celibacy, and using all proper means to promote purity of
thought, or by visiting drunken, filthy, diseased women? To
imagine that you can live in the committal of this sin without
the surroundings of drunkenness, or the danger of disease, is to
live in a fool’s paradise. Honourable marriage promotes health
and lengthens life. Immorality shatters health and shortens life.
Fallacy No. 3. Many Men in Influential Positions are
Immoral, therefore I may be so too.
To name this fallacy is to expose it. Yet it is a most powerful
temptation, and the stumbling block over which thousands fall.
That a wrong thing is fashionable and popular, can never make
* Abridged from Dr. Hime.


it right, nor ward off its consequences. By our own actions we
must stand or fall. “ Every one of us shall give account of
himself to God.”
Fallacy No. 4. Many Men have sown their wild oats when
Young, and have afterwards settled down to a Married
Life. It has made no difference to their happiness,
AND I INTEND TO DO THE SAME.
I deny that many men have lived immorally, and that it has not
interfered with the happiness of their married life in after years-
Without any breach of confidence, or the mention of any name,
medical men have told me of young men who have come to them
on the eve of their marriage, in an agony of distress. Having
contracted disease from immoral women, and hoped that that
disease was entirely cured, they have been distressed to find new
symptoms of syphillis showing themselves within a short time
-of their intended marriage. Sometimes the postponement of the
marriage has been compulsory; and all sorts of ridiculous excuses
have been made. Thus a young man has been known to go with
his arm in a sling for a month, on the pretence that he had broken
a finger. Meanwhile the wedding has had to wait, but for a far
more serious reason than a broken finger. In other cases, the
disease has manifested itself soon after marriage; and the conse-
quences have been terrible to the unsuspecting bride. In 1879
there were 874 female patients in Dublin Lock Hospital, suffering
from venereal diseases. Of these 13 per cent. —more than one
hundred—had contracted the disease from their own husbands.
It is not every man who breaks off his life of immorality on
the occasion of his marriage. A short time ago, one of the
leading ministers of this city published a letter, written by a
wife and mother, whose happiness had been destroyed by the
discovery that her husband was living an impure life. That
letter was the wail of a broken heart.
There is living in New South Wales to day, an honourable
old man, nearly seventy years of age, who not long ago told the
lecturer that he formed immoral habits in his youth, broke them
off on the occasion of his marriage, and had never resumed them.
Yet, at intervals, the temptations of his youth had come back to
him, during the forty years of his married life. Then what
becomes of the fallacy that it does not make any difference after
marriage what sort of a life you lived before?


There have been those who though immoral before marriage,
have henceforth kept their marriage vows. Let us take the most
favourable view of the case, and suppose that the man has con
tracted no disease, and broken off from his sin for ever. Is it an
equal match ? Is it a fair thing to require the bride to bring
absolute purity to the marriage altar, while the bridegroom has,
maybe for years, consorted with prostitutes?
As for your taking up this sin for a season and then relin-
quishing it, you do not know that you will ever have the power,
or even the will, to give it up. Of all the fascinations in the
world, the snare of the strange woman is the hardest to break.
Fallacy No. 5. It can Make no Difference to the Woman, if
I only visit Those already Fallen,
This is a most plausible way of putting it. It is as much as to
say I am determined to gratify my passions, but my generosity
will not allow me to push some innocent girl into the mire.
There are two standpoints from which we may view this fallacy.
First. Should all men abstain from immorality, the entire
body of fallen women would be compelled to abandon their life
of sin, and no others would enter upon that career. You may
say, “What am I among so many ?” You are but one; but the
thousands who visit immoral women are made up of units. It is
a truism to say that if we could gain you and all such as you
the Social Evil would cease to exist. Your individual action
will make the world better or worse. It is of the utmost
importance to gain your personal influence in the cause of purity.
Second. Many efforts are made for the restoration of fallen
woman. Doubtless she is, at times, powerfully striven with by
the Holy Ghost. Thank God, foul as she is, she may yet be
restored to purity. Her conscience, reason, and immortality are
marks of the Divine image not yet stamped out of her. She yet
possesses many possibilities of good.
“You may break, you may ruin the vase, if you will,
But the scent of the roses will cling to it still.”
The woman whom you visit may at that time be moved to a
better life. From the depth of her degradation she may be
daring to lift her eyes to heaven. She may be venturing to take
the first difficult step in the way of reformation. I say difficult
step advisedly, for if anyone finds it hard to begin a new life,
it must be an outcast woman, hemmed in as she is on all sides.


Your impure visit to her, at such a time, may hinder her salva-
tion. But for you she might have been restored to purity. You
thus become the stumbling block over which she makes her final
fall. So that it may make all the difference in the world whether
you visit a fallen woman or not. Do you object that this is an
extreme case? I maintain that it is a possible one.
What must fallen woman think of society—of professions
of honour and religion—at those times when she is the subject of
unutterable loathing of her own infamy and of the man who
first hurled her down from her innocence, and of the men who
still keep her down ? Knowing better than we can even guess,
the wealth, the pretensions, the hypocrisy, of the men who visit
her and her unhappy sisters, how must she at one time reflect
with pride on her conquests and her power—power to shatter
homes, to ruin reputations, and break fond hearts—and at another
time shrink with disgust from everything bearing the form of
man, or making any pretence to respectability, honour, or
religion!
Fallacy No. 6. Prostitution is a Necessity.
Some believe that a proportion of the women of each generation,
whom they are pleased to call “ the priestesses of humanity,”
should be sacrificed to the supposed good of society. I deny that
prostitution is a necessity in properly regulated society. That it
is a necessity in the present state of the world, starts the ques-
tion, Who makes it a necessity ? It must be God or man. It
cannot be the thrice holy God, who continues to command, “Thou
shalt not commit adultery,” and who visits with his wrath every
immoral man and woman on earth. Man makes the necessity.
He does this by his cowardice, in leading the innocent astray and
then deserting her ; by supporting vast numbers of women in
a degraded position, for the gratification of his passions; by
driving a woman from society and fraternising with her seducer ;
by enacting laws, which are at once a disgrace and a cruel
wrong; —laws which make it a greater crime to steal a small sum
of money than to plunge a whole family into sorrow, by the
seduction of one of its members. These are the things that
make prostitution a necessity. Can you conceive of a more
humiliating libel on men, than to say that it is impossible for them
to exist without inflicting on woman such a frightful injury as is
involved in “ The Social Evil ?”


Such are some of the fallacies put forth by false philosophy,
in support of immorality. They are shallow and misleading.
Whether the temptation comes to you under the cover of false
philosophy, or in some grossly sensual form, your own passions
will give power to it; and if unchecked, they will lead you to
become the tempter. It has been well said, that every man
carries about him so much gunpowder, and Satan and the world
are always trying to get a spark into the magazine.
Your Passions are Perfectly Right while under Proper
Control.
Many young men are distressed that their passions are so strong,
and that certain physical symptoms should manifest themselves
in early manhood. It is a disgrace and a sin that fathers should
not speak a few words of counsel to their sons on this matter
How much evil would this hinder, and how much good it would
do ! What Christian parents so foolishly and wickedly neglect,
quack doctors and other designing men are quick to do, in order
to put money into their own pockets. They publish pamphlets,
in which they play upon the fears of the ignorant, by asserting
that something is radically wrong, and that unless a more or less
expensive course of treatment be undergone the most disastrous
consequences will follow. Do not be misled by them. You may
hush your fears. However, should you be convinced that some-
thing is wrong in your case, ask the advice of some experienced
friend, or pay a visit to some trustworthy medical man. Do not
be distressed that your passions are so strong. There is no sin in
that. Sin lies in their abuse, not in their possession. Strong
passions are generally associated with force of character, and are
often coupled with commanding ability. It is not your weak,
goody-goody, passionless men who bless the world as they pass
through it; but men who, if they had not been downright good
would have been downright bad. By the help of God, they have
laid strong hands on their evil tendencies, and have gained the
victory of self control. Paul said he was a “man of like
passions ” with us. He also said, “ I keep under my body, and
bring it into subjection : lest that by any means, when I have
preached to others, I myself should be a castaway.” (1 Cor. 9,
27.) lam asking you to engage in a great battle, and to win a
splendid victory. There has never been a fiercer struggle, at
the point of the bayonet, or at tin; mouth of the cannon, than


that in which we strive to overcome our tendencies to evil. The
victories of Alexander the Great, who conquered the world and
died of his own drunken excesses, are nothing, as compared
with the victories of the man who gains the splendid conquest of
self control. Such a conquest confers true nobility on the
conqueror for time and for eternity.
Behold in the strength of your passions and the fascination
of your temptations, the possibility of a disastrous fall, or the
opportunity of a splendid and eternal victory !
lI.—THE AWFUL CONSEQUENCES OF
IMMOEALITY.
You will be surprised to find so long and black a list.
A. IMMORALITY DEBASES MAN’S NOBLEST POWERS.
1. It Produces Hardness of Heart or Moral Insensibility.
You have often wondered how men can desert the woman they
have seduced. Still further, that they can turn from her misery
to plan the ruin of another. It is not that a sudden impulse
carries them away, for they spend months in maturing their plot.
They even lay wagers on their powers of seduction. How can
they do this? Because this sin hardens them, and turns them
into
SCOUNDRELS AND VILLAINS.
At times everybody has been shocked, to find that some one who
was occupying the pulpit, had for sometime been leading an
immoral life. How dared he enter the pulpit under such cir-
cumstances ? Because this sin had rendered him “ past feeling,”
and turned him into an unblushing hypocrite. We have all
heard of “ the whore’s forehead.” Immorality has the same
hardening effect on a man that it has on a woman.
“ Och ! it hardens all within,
And petrifies the feeling.”
2. For the Time Being it is an Effectual Barrier to the
Soul’s Salvation.
The Holy Spirit cannot save anyone while he continues to live
an immoral life. Impurity in thought and action is singularly
fatal to those divine promptings which lead to our eternal good.
It is a mistake to suppose that salvation is deliverance from so
much tire and brimstone. “It is the deliverance of man from
the guilt, power, pollution, and punishment of sin, and his
restoration to the favour and image of God.”


3. It Robs a Man or his Personal Purity.
A young man should count the cost before he parts with his
personal purity. There is a delicacy of feeling—a tenderness of
conscience—a kindliness of heart—a high sense of honour—an
appreciation for the respect of others, together with respect for
oneself—an exalted idea of true womanhood—a straightforward,
manly, and hopeful view of the responsibilities of life—which is
the birthright of nearly all well trained people. It is that which
sits with so much honour upon the father. It is almost a divine
grace in the mother. It is that which gives such ingenuousness
to the heart, and such openness to the countenance of the son.
It is that which makes the face of the plainest daughter so
beautiful, that it does any honourable man good to look upon it.
When a man loses his personal purity, he sells this birthright;
and his whole being becomes deteriorated. He sinks to a lower
level in the scale of being; and every sacred thing in heaven and
earth becomes different to him. He loses the charm, the beauty,
the wealth of being.
Wordsworth has put this thought into beautiful language,
and thus represents a man bemoaning the loss of the innocence of
his youth :
“ It is not now as it hath been of yore ;
Turn whereso’er I may,
By night or day,
The things which I have seen, I now can see no more.
“The rainbow comes and goes,
And lovely is the rose,
The moon doth with delight
Look round her when the heavens are bare ;
Waters on a starry night
Are beautiful and fair ;
The sunshine is a glorious birth ;
But yet I know, where’er I go,
That there hath passed away a glory from the earth.
4. It Corrupts and debases the mind, and disqualifies Men
for the Grandest Purposes of their Being.
It is not denied that men of great intellect and mighty powers
have lived an immoral life; but their immorality has cut them
off from accomplishing the loftiest purposes of their being. Such
men have done some good, but they would have done more had
they been pure in life. No man, however great his intellect, can
lift society to an atmosphere of truth and honour, unless he lives


in that atmosphere himself. True greatness springs out of
sterling character : a large heart, intense love of virtue and hatred
of evil, unflinching courage, unswerving rectitude, the fear of
God, the love of man. Many would-be leaders of thought are
spending their time over the accidents of power—merely weaving
sentences and choosing words—forgetting that “ out of the
abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh..” No man can be a
true leader of the people unless he has within him the moral as well
as the mental machinery to produce thoughts that will inspire
men to good deeds. The immoral man has no such resources.
He may deliver a stirring oration, or paint a great picture, &c.,
but he is living a mean, cruel, pusillanimous life; and there must
ever be wanting in his picture, or whatever he does, that which
only a pure-minded man could put into it. There will also often be
present that which shows the degraded mind and the impure
thought. He could never write “ Paradise Lost ”or the inspired
book of Isaiah. It would be as impossible for him to do the
apostolic work of Paul or the merciful work of Howard, as it
would for a blind man to paint a rainbow. Nor could Milton
and Isaiah, Paul and Howard, have so blessed the world had they
been immoral men.
B. IMMORALITY INFLICTS MANY EVILS ON THE BODY.
1. It leads to Horrible Diseases.
Syphillis is a horrible, and, in some cases, an incurable disease.
Sir William Gull has stated, that if a man contracted true
syphillis, it was incurable ; and his very ghost would, on rising,
exhibit it. The suffering is so great, in some stages of the
disease, that we may here appropriately refer to the vial
poured out by the fifth angel—“ They gnawed their tongues for
pain, and blasphemed the God of heaven because of their
pains and their sores, and repented not of their deeds.” (Rev.
xvi. 10, 11.)
2. It shatters a Man’s health, and in many cases leads to
an Early Death.
Dr, Hime, writing in Ireland, says, “Whole wards in our
hospitals and lunatic asylums are filled with its victims. From
it there spring consumption, scrofula, lunacy, idiocy, paralysis,
and impotency.”
Dr. E. Blackwell writes, “ Many of the foreign health-
resorts are filled with young men of the richer classes of society,


seeking to restore the health destroyed by dissipation. Oould
the simple truth be recorded on the tombstones of multitudes of
precious youths, from imperial families downward, who are
mourned as the victims of consumption, softening of the brain,
<kc., all lovers of the race would stand appalled at the endless
record of these wasted lives. ‘ Died from the effects op
Fornication’ would be the true warning voice from these pre-
mature graves.”
Another medical man, describing a bad case of syphillis,
speaks of “ the foul, loathsome ulcer; the poison eating away
gradually, slowly, but surely, the flesh; the eyes gone, the nose
destroyed, giving to the face a most hideous aspect; the bones
of the skull eaten, exposing the brain; the mark of manhood
obliterated altogether—a loathsome, living death.”
Syphillis so seriously affects health that it is usual for some
Life Assurance Societies to decline proposals from men suffering
from it.
In some cases the disease is transferred to
AN INNOCENT AND UNSUSPECTING WIFE j
who discovers in her diseased and suffering condition the first
painful suspicion and the most irrefragable proofs of her husband’s
recent infidelity, or former immorality. In other cases
HELPLESS LITTLE CHILDREN ARE THE VICTIMS.
They are handed over to a life of disease or to an early death.
One of the doctors quoted above, says he once saw a beautiful
little boy. Upon examining his mouth, he found the roof half
eaten away with syphillitic ulcers. What must be the feelings of
any father, with a spark of love in his nature, as he beholds his
children branded with a loathsome disease, or carried to an early
grave, the result of their father’s sin !
It is a mistake to suppose that only those who continue in a
long course of sin contract disease in its worst form.
YOUR FIRST AND ONLY ACT OF IMMORALITY
may sow the seeds of disease, which, if neglected, may become
incurable. Let the young men of the colony know that disease
is fearfully prevalent among the fallen women of Sydney; and
that in many cases it exists in a virulent form. You will now
be prepared for the inevitable conclusion, that widespread
immorality will undermine the health of the community, and
lower any people in the scale of nations.


C. IMMORALITY IS A GREAT CURSE TO SOCIETY,
1. If you lead some Innocent Girl astray, you will bring
Disgrace, Misery, and Ruin on your Victim.
For a moment think of the future of such a one! Driven
from home by her own sin and your villainy, she becomes an
outcast. She gives herself up to a life of infamy, in order to
keep body and soul together. She consorts with drunkards and
profligates; and becomes a thief, in order to increase her gains.
In habitual drunkenness she tries to drown the memory of the
past, and to deaden the stings of conscience. Her blasphemy
and obscenity are shocking. She more or less frequently appears
in our police courts, and is sent to gaol. In some cases she
commits murder and dies on the gallows, or is imprisoned for life.
Such is the end of the woman who loved you not wisely but too
well, and whom you destroyed.
Some young women die of shame and suffering on the
occasion of the birth of the child that was conceived in sin and
born in disgrace. It is well they do, and that death covers them
and their shame with the mantle of charity, A few years ago a
young woman in New South Wales became a bride, a mother,
and a corpse within a fortnight.
“ When lovely woman stoops to folly,
And finds too late that men betray,
What charm can soothe her melancholy,
What art can wash her guilt away ?
The only art her guilt to cover,
To hide her shame from every eye,
To give repentance to her lover,
And wring his bosom, is—to die. ”
Ten thousand pities that she, whose face but a year ago was like
a garden in spring time, whose heart was the home of pure
affection, and whose future was as full of hope and sunshine, as
her figure was of grace and beauty, should to-day fill a dishonoured
grave! Worse still, that this should be the result of her betrayal
by the man in whom she placed the most implicit trust ! I have
not one word to say in defence of the act by which a woman
surrenders her virtue. It is wrong—fatallywrong. But this I
will say, that while the man sinks by the degradation of that
which is lowest in him —by his brutal passions and thoughtless
selfishness, without a single redeeming feature in his conduct; in
not a few instances, the woman falls by the subversion of that which


is highest in her. It is the nature of woman to delight to have
some sacrifice to make for the man she loves with all her heart.
In such a case as we are considering, the woman sacrifices her
honour as no woman ever should. She does wrong; and pays for
it in a tarnished name, a broken heart, and an early death.
It would be a fancy picture to think of
THE SEDUCER AT THE GRAVE OF HIS VICTIM,
for it is to be feared he never goes there. In cases of seduction,
the only remedy is to marry the unhappy girl. Even this door
is often closed. There may have been some happy marriages of
this kind; but we all know there have been many wretched ones.
The foul blot has remained, —the ground of endless recrimina-
tions and the cause of unfathomable misery. In such marriages,
there is an absence of that moral purity and the confidence which
is based upon it, so necessary to domestic happiness ; and the
presence of that sense of compulsion, which is alien to the
free-will offering which every man and woman should bring to
the marriage altar. As the years roll by, it becomes increasingly
sad that the father and mother can never write down in the
family Bible the date of their marriage, and that of the birth of
their firstborn.
The following poem, written by Clement Scott, Esq.,
appeared in London Punch a few years ago. It shows the
unhappiness of some of those marriages that follow in the wake
of seduction.
“ Only a Shop-Girl ! Stop your sneer ! or listen at least to her tale, and
then
You’ll feel the ache, and you’ll taste the tear, in the hearts of women who
trust in men.
It wasn’t like this in the dear old times, with mother and father alive, that
day
When a party of innocent country girls went off to the cricket, where
gentlemen play;
And it seemed no harm, in the eventide, when the sun had sunk and the
tents were furled,
To wander away to the leafy lanes, by the side of the ‘ handsomest man in
the world.’
There was nothing on earth that he could not do ; she knew so little, and
he so much :
His touch was tender, his eyes were blue ; —Dear women ! you know there
are thousands such !
With women so silly, and men so vain, ’tis sweet to begin, and sorry to
stop,—
It was only a Shop-Girl learning to love ! Only a Girl of the Shop !


“ And the man meant well—as they sometimes do—and ho loved this child
in his selfish way ;
He could speak so soft, and his eyes were blue, and he bought so much—
with so little to pay ;
But her father stormed, and the mother she wept, and the dear little home
in the country lane
Was emptied quite of its great delight—she had gone, and could never
return again.
For youth that loves—it’s the way of the world—will leave old age, that
has loved in the lurch ;
And the careless lovers to London came, to be married by law—yes !
instead of the Church !
So they dreamed a little, and, when they awoke, it wasn’t the good little
woman who shirked,
For she took her place at the counter-side, where many a brave little
woman has worked ;
But the country roses left her cheeks ; if she didn’t quite starve, she was
ready to drop.
It was only a Shop-Girl learning to live ! Only a Girl of the Shop !
“ But the lips that love can be lips that lie, and the manly mouth may be
cruelly curled,
Though women keep loving the eyes that are blue, and liking the
‘ handsomest man in the world. ’
So the toy that is broken is thrown away, and the heart embittered that
once was prized ;
And women who work like slaves can find their labour of love is at last
despised.
They profess to be sick of the shop—these men—who nail their wives to
counter and till ;
They snarl and snap when they find her faint, and proceed to curse when
they see she’s ill :
For brave little wives must be mothers at last, —there is little for three,
when sufficient for two ;
So the Gordian knot is cut by the man—who departs, as such chivalrous
gentlemen do.
’Tis only a wife and child who are left, by the cowardly fool, or the
ignorant fop ;
And it’s only a Shop-Girl—thinking of sin—only a Girl of the Shop !
“ Only a Shop-Girl ! Spare her, men ! who have sisters to love and
mothers to pray ;
She would like to be honest, but must not look ill ; at least, so the good-
natured customers say :
So they kindly suggest that a downtrodden wife does not fit with the
trade of a practical age,
And she looks the wide world pretty full in the face, and turns, with a
sigh of relief, to the stage


Not the stage as it should be—the stage as it is—with its dazzle of jewels
and glamour of dress,
Where womenkind buzz round the candle of fame, and scorch their poor
wings—they could scarcely do less !
From the shop to the stage ’tis a natural step—for the bitter in spirit and
broken in heart,
Who find that, no matter how little the wage, the profession contrives to
be mightily smart!
But the life is worth living ! So gay it becomes ! From pleasure to
pleasure it spins like a top;
See ! it’s only a Shop-Girl—painting her face ! —only a Girl of the Shop !
“What a sermon is here! Is Morality dumb ? Or why doesn’t Virtue
whine and preach
At a woman who’s driven from shop to the stage, and discovers that
honesty’s out of her reach ?
She thinks once more of the days at home! as down on the pillow she
sinks her head;
She sees her sisters flauntily fine, and hears her little one cry for bread !
And then comes love —not the old, old love, as she felt it once in the
country lanes—
But a passionate fever of gilded youth,—who reckons the cost, and who
counts the gains ?
Still, a dinner or so in a time of need ! and a soft new dress for a lovely
- form !
Are things that most women are grateful for, —they are sails of life that
weather the storm.
Only a Shop-Girl fallen away ! —by the road of life ! Samaritan, stop !
Only a Shop-Girl! Waiting the end ! Only a Girl of the Shop 1” .
2. You WILL BRING Disgrace ANI) SORROW ON THE PARENTS AND
Friends of your Victim.
If you should be guilty of an act of seduction, you will justly
bring upon yourself the curse of a broken-hearted father and
mother! Pause and think of the sacrifices that father and
mother have made for their child, and how the happiness of their
declining years is bound up in her welfare ! Sometimes a brother,
in the heat of his anger, has shot down his sister’s seducer.
However much we may regret the act, we must admit that the
punishment was richly deserved.
You will also have to look for the wrath of Him who estab-
lished the family circle. In his Decline and Fall of the Roman
Empire , Gibbon has a passage in which he shows that it was
impossible for an offender to escape the power of Rome. There
was no need of troops of soldiers to convey him to his place of
exile. If he should cross the borders of the empire to people


beyond, those savage tribes would purchase their peace with
Rome by handing over their prisoner. But what was the power of
Rome to that of an Almighty and Ever-present God, who always
punishes the impenitent wrongdoer ? It is true that, in some cases,
Divine justice seems to be shod with wool, but it strikes with
fist of iron. In the punishment of immorality, justice often flies
on the swiftest wings, and brings the most terrible retribution.
I have seen immoral men snuffed out of the world like the snuff
of a candle. “Be not deceived; God is not mocked: for whatsoever
a man soweth, that shall he also reap. For he that soweth to
his flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption : but he that soweth
to the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting.” (Gal. vi.
7,8.)
3. It leads to Drunkenness and Poverty.
That it leads to drunkenness is self-evident, for it is often by
means of drink that men and women first fall into this sin. It
is by the same means they are kept in it. That it leads to
poverty is equally true. Solomon never spoke a truer word than
when he said, “ By means of a whorish woman a man is brought
to a piece of bread.” The disclosures of our Divorce Court
prove it to be a most expensive sin. It also leads to the forma-
tion of habits which are ruinous, and to the neglect of that
course of thrift and industry so necessary to the successful pur-
suit of business. Thousands of men have sacrificed positions of
honour and comfort to gratify their unchaste desires. Many facts
go to show that, by adopting an immoral life, young men dis-
qualify themselves from entering in at those wide doors of
usefulness and affluence, that Providence throws open before
them.
4. It leads to Robbery.
It is an expensive sin. The money must be had somewhere. I
once saw a man condemned to five years on the roads, or
other public works of the colony; and while I cannot give you
absolute proof, it was generally known that he had stolen to
support his mistress. Many acts of embezzlement on the part of
persons in positions of trust may probably be traced to this sin.
On the other hand, how many immoral men are the victims in
cases of robbery ! Now and then an instance comes before the
courts, and there are doubtless many others in which men submit
to the loss in silence rather than suffer exposure.
MANY OF THESE WOMEN ARE THIEVES AS WELL AS COURTESANS.


5. It destroys Domestic Happiness.
Under Fallacy No. 4 I have shown how fatal immorality is to
domestic happiness. The subject is capable of great variety of
treatment, and of endless illustration. Though I shall not enter
at length on the subject here, I must direct attention to the
frightful wrong done when a married woman is seduced. It is
ruin to her. The injury done to her husband and children is
immeasurable and irreparable.
6. It leads to Murder.
Was it a mere accident that made these two commandments
follow each other, “ Thou shalt not kill,” and “ Thou shalt not
commit adultery ?” If so, it w'as a most suggestive coincidence.
Our Saviour directly connects the two, “ For from within, out of
the heart of men, proceed evil thoughts, adulteries, fornications,
murders,” etc, (Mark vii. 21).
THE MURDER OF CHILDREN
Before birth by abortion, after birth by strangulation, starvation,
desertion, &c.
THE MURDER OF PARAMOURS.
Bad men and women have often been known to take the life
of a guilty companion. Hardened by sin—maddened by drink,
and hounded on by jealousy—the clenched fist, the toe of a boot,
or the point of a knife, has been but too effective a weapon. One
cry of ‘ Murder,’ and the fatal work is done. Then comes the
terrible awakening in the felon’s cell. That unhappy man, when
he took his first step in vice—amid the perfume of roses, and in
the company of some fascinating woman —never intended to
come to the gallows. But every step he has taken has brought
him nearer to his tragic end. The only wonder is that he did
not arrive there before.
7. It leads to Suicide,
In her desertion, many a poor girl has drowned herself and her
unborn child.
“ Mad from life’s history,
Glad to death’s mystery,
Swift to be hurl’d—
Anywhere, anywhere
Out of the world !”
Only the man who has been hardened by the sin of immorality,
could live under the conviction that his cruelty and cowardice
had driven a confiding girl to a suicide’s grave.


8. It leads to both Murder and Suicide.
It is not an unusual thing for a man to kill his paramour, and
then take his own life. Sometimes three lives have been
attempted and taken, A wronged husband has taken the life of
his guilty wife, that of her seducer, and then murdered himself.
WHY SHOULD IMMORALITY LEAD TO MURDER?
Because its surroundings are those of lust, hatred, jealousy,
deception, intrigue, foul outrage, and cruel wrong.
Before leaving this long, but incomplete list of the conse-
quences of Immorality, we may pause to look upon the old age
of the seducer, for some few immoral men live to be old. His is
an old age robbed of all that makes it honourable and desirable;
—the respect of the young, the love of friends, the recollection
of a well-spent life, the hopes and consolations of religion. Hi 3
passions have outlived his power to gi'atify them. Hie sins of
the past have made it impossible that he should now enjoy the
companionship of the wife of his youth. She has long been dead
of a broken heart. The man in his old age is as wicked as ever,
and still continues to corrupt the minds of the young when they
come in his way. Who would envy him his death bed 1 Can
that be a desirable state in which to die, when the remembrances
of his victims haunt him like so many spectres 1 His dying
pillow is full of thorns that pierce. Of the eternity that awaits
him, perhaps the less said the better.
I do not say all these consequences will follow in every case
of immorality. That would be impossible. Some of them follow
all sin of this class; and if you become immoral, the worst of
them may fall upon you.
You may be disposed to say, I do not intend anything like
that. I just want a little fun and a little pleasure, and then to
have done with it. That is your mistake, as it has been the
mistake of millions. A young man of my acquaintance, who
had blighted his prospects by immoral associations, once said, “ I
had no idea such serious consequences would follow.” But they
followed, nevertheless.


HOW TO AVOID IMMOEALITY.
I desire above all things to make a few practical suggestions,
which may be of service.
A.—THINGS TO BE DONE.
I.—Form Right Views on the Subject.
It is of the utmost importance that you should be correctly
informed on a matter of such moment. In order to this, I have
endeavoured to appeal to your understanding, so as to convince
your judgment. It is impossible for any honourable man to
approach this question without emotion, but it is your convictions
that I desire to carry with me. I have maintained that immorality,
in all its forms and at all times, is wrong, and that nothing can
make it right; that it is a sin against God, against oneself, and
against society. Is this view of the case right? Look the
question full in the face—get all the information you can. Make
up your mind definitely, and stand by your convictions.
2.—High Moral and Religious Principle is the only Safeguard.
Joseph’s reply to Potiphar’s wife should be adopted by us all,
“ How then can I do this great wickedness and sin against God V’
(Gen. xxxix. 9.) In this, as in all other things, “The fear of the
Lord is the beginning of wisdom,” So-called freethought cannot
be any help to you. Anything that puts the God of the Seventh
Commandment further from us, weakens the morality of the
community. Immorality is not simply a serious mistake, or a
grave error of judgment. It is a sin against God and man.
3. —Earnest Prayer.
Evil is too deeply rooted in our nature to be overcome by our
own unaided effort. Combine personal effort with earnest prayer.
God helps those that help themselves. Our Saviour cast out
unclean spirits. He is able to cast the unclean spirit out of men
now. Cry to God against your own evil tendencies, and He
help you.
4.—Cultivate Purity of Thought.
This is the key of the entire position. Keep your thoughts
pure, and the battle is won. How to do this is the question.
There is but one way. You must get a pure heart. Make the
fountain pure and the streams will be pure. The Holy Ghost can
make the foul heart clean, and will do’so in answer to prayer. It
is folly to try to be pure and holy without the converting grace of


God. Purity of heart is a real charm to drive away evil thoughts.
Happy are they who go through life as the lady in Milton’s Comug
went through the temptations of the forest in which she was lost.
Virtue, springing out of love to God and man, will enable you to
overcome the corruption that is in the world through lust. Let
us then pray God to “ cleanse the thought of our heart, by the
inspiration of His Holy Spirit.”
6.—Be Industrious.
Do not be afraid of hard work, for there is a blessing in it.
Besides keeping you out of mischief, it will do you positive good.
Look at the successful men of this city, whether they are in the
commercial, political, or professional world. What has made
these reputations—these colossal business firms 1 Hard work has
been one of the foundation stones. There is great virtue in the
sweat of the brow, and the sweat of the brain. A few years ago>
one of the most successful and honoured merchants in Sydney, at
a banquet given in his honour, on the eve of his departure for
England, took the public into his confidence, and told us the secret
of his success. He insisted on hard work. He said he began
life by collecting accounts. It was his custom to rise soon after
Sunday midnight, in order to be ready to begin collecting by 9
o’clock on Monday morning. That would be too hard work for
most of us, but the danger is generally in the opposite direction.
6.—Seek Mental Culture.
There are proposals to extend the advantages of our
University to those who are engaged in business during the day*
Our Technical College is already in operation, and there are large
libraries within your reach. Would it not be a good thing to
cultivate your higher faculties 1 Make the acquaintance of the
great thinkers of the past and of the present. You are an
immortal being. It would be absurd to suppose that we shall not
carry the advantages of our mental culture into the next world*
How this consideration dignifies intellectual refinement and
power ! Mental culture has ten thousand advantages; but at
this time we specially insist on one, viz., that it will so fill our
mind with elevating thoughts and pursuits that we shall despise
thoughts of evil.
7* —Undertake Some Useful and Benevolent Work,
Make home bright and happy. Lay your gifts on the altar
of your country. Be useful in your city, your municipality, your


neighbourhood. Teach in the Sunday School. Yisitthe sick.
Rescue the fallen. So spend the day that you may never lay your
head on the pillow at night without feeling that you have done
some one a good turn. Pick up the orphan from the gutter, and
give him a start in life, and visit the widow in her affliction. By
Divine grace, good deeds like these will make us hate impure
thoughts with a perfect hatred. Moreover, they will throng our
dying chamber with angels, and people heaven with friends. Just
try it.
B.—Be Manly. Never Strike a Foul Blow.
If you never strike a foul blow, you will never be guilty of
an act of seduction ; for that is the foulest blow that is ever
struck on God’s earth.
9. —Recreation.
Let your motto be—
work or play.
You must play sometimes. Be careful that your recreation
be not of an evil nature or tendency, that you take it in good
company, and at proper times, and it will do you good. There is
the recreation of reading, society, friendship, music, observing
nature, art, &c., &c. Recreation in the open air and in the light
of the sun is better than that taken amidst clouds of tobacco
smoke, fumes of whisky, the excitement of the gambling table,
and utterances of blasphemy.
10.—Adopt a Few Simple Rules of Hygiene.
e.g. — Cold bathing, regular and vigorous exercise in the
open air, good hours, moderation in eating and drinking ; abstain
from intoxicating drinks, avoid late suppers, etc.
11.—Honourable Marriage.
This is at once God’s great remedy against impurity, and His
reward of chastity. I have had to warn you against bad women ;
permit me now to call your attention to the good. Next His own
favour, the greatest blessing God gives to a man in this world is a
good wife. “ She will do him good and not evil all the days of his
life,” Some take a different view of marriage, but this is the.
correct view, notwithstanding. In all ages men have written in
praise of the good woman ; but the best description was written
3000 years ago, and is to be found in the 31st chapter of the book
of Proverbs. If you obtain such a wife (and such good women are
to be found in New South Wales as well as in other parts of the


world), you will be one of the happiest of men. A gentleman
filling an honourable position in Sydney, who married young, on a
small income, and whose income has largely increased, told me
that he owed his escape from the temptations of city life, to an
early and pure attachment. As a proof that the God of nature
puts the stamp of his approval on early marriages, I am told that
the Tables of Life Assurance Societies show that the man who
marries at 22 lives on an average 10 years longer than those who
do not marry at all. lam not advocating imprudent marriages..
They are ten thousand times worse than none.
B.—THINGS TO AVOID.
I.—Shun all False Remedies.
Contagious Diseases Acts are shams and delusions, and worse.
They thrust woman further into the mire, vastly increase
prostitution, and do not protect from disease. Some who are
initiated into the dark windings of vice, will suggest a variety of
remedies by which they promise to shield you from the more
flagrant consequences of immorality. Shun these things as you
would a serpent. They seek to make the crime secret and safe,
whereas you must be as anxious to escape the sin as its
consequences.
Many pursue a course of secret, solitary indulgence, which is
most disastrous in its consequences to the physical, mental, and
moral nature. This form of sin is believed to be very prevalent.
If permitted to suggest a remedy, I should say—
(1.) Go to bed tired at night.
(2.) Get up on first waking in the morning. Do not wait for
the second sleep. It is the experience of many young men to have
strong sexual desires on first waking. This Is said to arise from
the most simple and natural causes, e.g. the attitude of the body
during sleep, &c. Both the desire and its causes will be removed
by rising as soon as you awake. There is no need whatever to
give way to an act of mutual or solitary sin in order to relieve
nature. The morning bath, early devotions, exercise in the open
air, mental culture, attention to the most commonplace duties will
be a far better preparation for the business of the day than day.
dreaming in bed, thinking lascivious thoughts, and giving way to
a disgusting habit.


2. Bad Pictures and Bad Books.
Regard as your bitter enemy the man who would put these
things in your hands. It may seem a simple and harmless thing
to read an immoral book or to look at an indecent picture. A
book may be bad though you cannot find in it one particular
word that will shock you. Its tendency may be bad, and the
most corrupt thoughts may be suggested in the most carefully
rounded sentences. Why should you fill your mind with the
germs of impurity from such sources? You may never be able
to forget what you see or read. Surely there are plenty of good
books and beautiful pictures in the world !
3. Filthy Conversation.
Careful observation shows that many of those who engage in
filthy conversation become unclean in life. “Out of the abundance
of the heart the mouth speaketh.” Some are very glib in telling
spicy anecdotes full of impure suggestions. Do not use unclean
language yourself, nor allow anyone else to do so in your pre-
sence. We must not use our Divine gift of speech to befoul the
moral atmosphere with filthy conversation.
4. The Theatres,
While admitting with pleasure, that some of those who go on to
the boards of the theatre are men and women of upright life;
yet it is notorious that the opposite is often the case. What
shall we say of many of those who go to the theatres, and of the
immoral associations that are met in the streets at the close of the
performance ? Keep away from the ordinary theatre, if you desire
to be pure.
6. Promiscuous Dancing.
My own opinion is that all dancing is best left alone : but
dancing with anybSdy and everybody, at public places, is sure to
lead to evil. “ Can a man take fire in his bosom and his clothes
not be burned ?”
6. Fly from all associations of Evil,
Jeremy Taylor points out, that we do not so much require a
shield to defend our purity, as a pair of wings that we may fly
from temptation. Keep right away from impure people and
places.
In suggesting a remedy against impurity, I have been trying
to picture
A COMPLETE MAN;


whose whole soul is consecrated to the cause of purity, and who
takes to himself the whole panoply of God. I most earnestly
recommend you to use the entire antidote here suggested. Be
specially careful to get a new heart.
But if you do this, can you keep away all thought of evil ?
No. It may still assail you. However, you will have only one
thought of evil where formerly you had a hundred, and the
remedy suggested will give you both the will and power to drive
the evil away. If you cannot prevent a bird from lighting on
your head, you can at least hinder him from building his nest
in your hair.
The Man who is already Fallen.
What of him ? “ Let the wicked forsake his way, and the
unrighteous man his thoughts: and let him return unto the
Lord, and He will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for
He will abundantly pardon.”
The Prodigal had “ devoured his living with harlots ”, yet he
was restored. So there is mercy for you. By God’s help, break
off your sin at once. Make all the restitution in your power,
and begin a new life. I once knew a young man obtain a
situation a thousand miles away, in order to break away from
immoral surroundings.
IT MAY BE NOW OR NEVER WITH YOU.
Contrast between a Pure and Impure Man
Take the worst case first. He loses his personal purity,
kindliness of heart, and self-respect. He visits houses into which
filtrate the very dregs of society. He keeps bad hours, loses his
employment, comes to poverty. Possibly he becomes a drunkard
and a thief, and in some cases a murderer. He contracts a
horrible disease, and carries about with him a corruption worse
than that of a corpse. If you admit the idea of a seducer, the
case becomes worse. He is a villain and a scoundre I—a heartless,
godless wretch. He is a thief, robbing homes of their brightest
joys, and women of that which is more precious than life. He is
a murderer, and has killed his victim and her parents by the slow
process of a broken heart. He is a low, mean, deceptive, cunning
coward. He is a liar of the deepest dye, and has broken vows
most solemnly made. He is the worst of neighbours, for children
of the most tender years are not safe in his company. He is an


■enemy to the State, throwing his illegitimate children on the
country for support, and supplying thieves and prostitutes to be
sent to gaol at the public expense. Our prayer for him is that he
may amend his life, and if he will not do that, his power for evil
may be taken away. On the occasion of his dea,th, we may say of
him what Emerson has"said of others, that the only use he will
ever be, is to manure the ground with his corpse. On the other
hand, think of the man who leads a pure life, and enjoys the love
of a good woman. In addition to the companionship, comfort,
happiness, honour, health, and lengthened life, which are the
usual fruits of honorable marriage, he gains other priceless
advantages. In ten thousand instances the love of a good
woman has been the inspiration which has led men to take an
honourable position in society. To win the esteem of the woman
he loves, to reflect on her the honour he may win, to minister to her
•comfort by the competence his industry may gain—these and similar
aspirations have led thousands of men to make a mark in the
world, who, but for some such motive, would have sunk down to
a useless and selfish life. Moreover, some of the noblest things
that have ever been done have been suggested or inspired by some
good woman—a mother, a sister, or a wife. And when such a
man has returned home disheartened, conscious of having been
worsted in the fight, it has been to be consoled under his dis-
couragements, and to receive fresh inspiration to renew the struggle,
which has ultimately been crowned with success. Such a man is a
■ good neighbour. In many way she benefits the place in which he
lives. He is a good citizen, and adds to the material and moral
worth of his country. When he dies he leaves behind the
memory of an honoured name and the force of a good example.
After his death he lives again on earth in that race of healthy,
and virtuous sons and daughters who follow in their father’s
steps. I may well say, look on this picture and on that, and
ehoose bet wen them.
It now remains for me to close with a personal appeal
I base this appeal on two grounds :
First.—Generosity to Woman,
Before you lead a girl astray, think of the misery into which
you will plunge her. Take a long look into that seething mass of
woe that is caused by man’s inhumanity to woman. How much
must such a woman suffer, as she sees herself robbed of father


and mother, and all the sacred associations of her girlhood.
These blessings are gone from her for ever ! For her there
remains nothing but the common streets, the cup of drunkenness,
the slavery of bad men’s passions, the stings of remorse, the
hopelessness of despair. Lower and lower she sinks—deeper and
deeper she plunges—until death does his merciful work. Let us
hope that in her last hour she finds mercy with God.
“ Picture it—think of it !
Dissolute man !
Lave in it, drink of it,
Then if you can.”
I press this appeal upon you, because it is with man more
than with woman that the remedy lies. We know what a curse
to society a bad woman is, and how she ruins both boys and men.
But that is her revenge on man, for the irreparable wrong he did
her in the first instance. It is true that, in some cases, woman is
the cause of her own fall : but in most cases it is man who
thrusts her down. If men, from generosity to woman would
control their passions, we should soon see that prevention which
is better than cure. Miss Slice Hopkins asks, whether it is
better to support an ambulance at the foot of the precipice ta
pick up a few of the women who have fallen over, or to fence in
the precipice at the top 1
My second appeal is based on
The Love of Country.
It is a great honour to address a large audience like this, com-
posed entirely of men, and, in a certain sense, representative of
the rising generation of Hew South Wales. I reflect, with
unqualified pleasure, on the mark the young men of Australia
are making in the world. In field sports their success has been
immense, and they have lowered the wickets of the best cricketers
in the world. It is gratifying to see the place where some of
our students have written their names on the honour lists of the
Universities of England and Scotland. It is still more pleasing
to see the way in which native-born Australians carry themselves
under the responsibilities of life. As medical men, politicians,
merchants, tradesmen, sailors, ministers of the Gospel, and
barristers, we have men of distinguished ability, who were born
under our Austral sun. Where do you read of a country which
has made such progress in the first century of her existence?
What the future shall bring forth, who shall say ?


But it is necessary to remember that the prosperity of a
country depends largely on its morality. I have assumed that
the people are the true wealth of the country. If this be so, we
cannot afford for a single boy to become a larrikin, or one girl to
go on the streets. What is the value of a healthy and virtuous
young woman to this country ? If she retain her virtue, marry
and become the mother of children, her value cannot be esti-
mated. If she fall, and corrupt all around her, no figures can
represent the harm she does. By the love of your country, do
not, to gratify your passions, turn her aside from her holy
destiny!
Then there is that larger view of
THE FEDERATION OF THE AUSTRALASIAN COLONIES,
when our differential railway-rates and our mutual jealousies
shall be done away—when the various colonies will be more
nearly related—and when by our individual and collective
example we shall tell more directly on each other. When
Federation comes about, if New South Wales can carry into it a
race, pre-eminent for the honour of her men and the virtue of
her women, she will not only take a prominent place in the
Union, but the other colonies will be induced to follow her
example, and that will tell upon successive generations throughout
the world, and let us hope to the end of time.
J. L. Holmes & Co., Printers, 315 Pitt Street, Sydney.


