

G.-A P
PETH Pfrwi
PoV to to *7*
Mg*
IMPERIAL CO-OPERATION
LEAGUE.
AUSTRALIA’S PART IN IMPERIAL DEFENCE.
Report of Proceedings at Puncheon to the Right. Hon. Sir
George Reid, K.C.M.G. (High Commissioner for Australian
Commonwealth).
A luncheon of the League was held at the De Keyser’s Royal
Hotel, Victoria Embankment, on Wednesday, 6th July, 1910,
when the Right Hon. Sir George Reid, K.C., K.C.M.G. (High
Commissioner for Australian Commonwealth), was the principal
guest, and delivered an address upon “ Australia’s Part in Im-
perial Defence.” The Right Hon. the Karl of Onslow, G.C.M.G.
(President of the League), occupied the Chair, and amongst those
attending were : The Viscount Hill, Sir J. Fortescue Flannery,
Bart., M.P., Sir Henry Kimber, Bart., M.P., Sir Thos. Robinson,
Sir Theo. Peel, Bart., Lady Peel, Hon. T. A. Brassey, Lady
Taverner, Col. Hon. F. C. Bridgeman, Mr. Donald Macmaster,
K. M.P., Hon. W. Peel, M.P., Mr. George Lloyd, M.P., Mr. C.
Sydney Goldman, M.P., Mr. A. D. Steel-Maitland, M.P., Mr. J.
Cathcart Wason, M.P., Mrs. Wason, Mr. E. Crawshay Williams,
M.P., Mr. Sanford Evans (Mayor of Winnipeg), Mr. Fred Feather-
stonhaugh (Vice-President of the Empire Club of Canada), Mr.
L. S. Amery, Mrs. Roy-Batty, Colonel Warden, Mr. A. Berriedale
Keith, Capt. L. D. Phillips, Lieut. L. H. Hordern, R.N., Mr. H. $.
Boyd, Lieut.-Col. A. W. A. Pollock, Mr. F. Blake Crofton, Mr.
Lowther Bridger, Miss N. Baxter, Mr. Evelyn Ansell, Mr. I. T,
Hawkins, Mrs. Hawkins, Miss Hawkins, Mr. S. Rosenbaum,
Miss Hilda Luxton, Mr. Edward Duveen, Mr. Howard d’Egville
(Hon. Sec.).
The Chairman.
The Earl of Onslow, in proposing the health of the guest,
said :—Sir George Reid is one of those who comes to this country
as an Ambassador of a great sister State, representing her aims


and her aspirations, and he is an honoured guest welcomed by
the King and the people of this country.
We look upon these great Oversea Dominions as examples of
democracies. There are those in this country who think that
National Service is in some way inconsistent with democracy.
Australia and New Zealand, on the other hand, have given us an
example which shows us that the true spirit of democracy is that
every man should be equal at least in the service which he gives
to his country and his Empire.
Ladies and Gentlemen, you know that at these luncheons it
is not the practice to make long speeches, and therefore I will
venture, with your permission, merely to ask you to accord a
hearty welcome to Sir George Reid, to drink his health, and to
listen to what he will say on the share which Australia has taken
in the defence of the Empire.
Address by Sir George Reid.
Sir George Reid in responding said, my Lords, ladies, and
gentlemen,! beg to thank you very heartily for drinking myhealth,
and I should express my thanks in more copious language under
other conditions, but this is a time trial, on account of the
shortness of your proceedings. I wish to thank the distin-
guished Chairman for presiding at this luncheon—it revives
many pleasant Australian memories to see his name at any time.
It has been a great pleasure to me to enjoy the—may I say-
friendship of Lord Onslow, and he, like many other distinguished
servants of the Empire, never seems to forget the pleasant enthu-
siasm with which they were always received and treated in the
distant Dominions of the King.
Now, with reference to the part which Australia is playing
in the defence of the Empire, some changes have taken place of
late years. I think about forty years ago, when the British
battalion was withdrawn, an arrangement was arrived at by
which Australia should be responsible for land defence, and that
Great Britain would be responsible for Naval defence. That
arrangement, without any formal change, has been broken up
by the marvellous progress of events in naval and military history
since that period of forty years ago.
I think I may say that up to three or four years ago, or there-
abouts, we in Australia were in a mood of perfect contentment.
We thought that the British Navy was prepared to deal with
every and any combination of antagonists that could possibly be
dreamed of, and whilst we felt that, the question of naval and
military defence did not seem to us to be a very pressing one


But some mysterious events seem to have taken place during the
last three or four years, to which we do not need to allude par-
ticularly, but which have revealed the necessity for waking up
all over this Empire. Waking up on questions of naval defence,
waking up on questions of military defence.
The first thing even a civilian knows now is that war is sudden,
sharp, and decisive within a very brief period. The old style of
war, which lasted about forty years before you really got to close
quarters, suited us well, because we were never prepared, so far
as I know. I have got a sort of recollection that when the
Crimean War began, and the soldiers were sent out, it was for-
gotten that they had stomachs which required a fair amount of
nourishment, and that the boots and other equipment were not fit
for their duty. That sort of thing is a disgrace to any country.
The least a country can do for its soldiers and its sailors is
thoroughly to prepare in order that, when the time comes, they
will have everything that humanity and skill can suggest to give
them their best chance of fighting for the flag.
Great improvements have been made of late years ; even we
in the civil ranks know that; but there is a great soldier now
who does not seem to be particularly busy—Lord Kitchener. I
hope that that great military genius will not be allowed to fade
away into dignified obscurity. A very distinguished Frenchman
said to me the other day : ‘ ‘ Do you know what I think the most
peculiar thing about the British people ? When they get a really
great general, they seem to like to have him about as far away as
they can put him." Well, I don’t think that is good business,
except in time of special emergencies. However, that is a local
matter, and I have nothing to do at all really with the policy of
defence as it is to be carried out by the Mother Country. We
in Australia are carrying out our defence in our own way, and it
is not for us to interfere in any shape or form with the people or
the Ministers of the Mother Country. We must leave to them
the duty of providing for their share in national defence.
Military Training.
In Australia we are beginning to do more for the Empire than
we have ever done before. All parties have agreed to a system
of national compulsory training, which will apply not only to
young men between the ages of eighteen and twenty-six, but will
even apply at an earlier age ; and I would like to make this one
remark —when boys are boys, the compulsion of military training
is one of the greatest pleasures you can give them, because it


takes them away from the drudgery of school. So I think all
parties in England might make a non-party question of the policy
of giving all the thousands of boys in the English schools the
beginnings of a training which will make them soldiers in the
days to come.
Now we are doing that in Australia. Twenty-seven years ago,
when I became Minister for Education in New South Wales, we
had a little cadet system under our Military Department of which
nobod}- took the slightest notice. I brought it away from the
Military Department and put in into the Education Department.
And that really is the place for the cadet system, because they
are great men in the Education Department, but very small in
the Military Department. However, we have thousands of
cadets now in Australia—l think about 60,000 —and we have
got thousands and thousands of scouts. Under the present
system the State will have in about seven years about 200,000
well-drilled men in Australia. That will cost the Commonwealth
something like a year, which may not sound large, but
you will remember you are dealing with a population of only four
and a third millions.
The Navy.
Then as to the Navy, We are beginning to show that we
have got all the tendencies of our breed. We want to have a
Navy, and while this Navy is going to be a very small one at
first, it is going to be a very vigorous one, and when Australians
begin a thing I can tell you that they know how to push it along.
It is a great thing for the Empire this Australian Navy. We are
going to have one of the best cruisers afloat, which will cost us
something nearly up to two millions, and this is, it should be
remembered, nearly ten shillings a head for every man, woman,
and child in the whole Commonwealth, Our Navy will cost
about three-quarters of a million a year to begin with, so that we
will be spending nearly two and a half millions a year on our
naval and military preparations.
But far stronger than that is the feeling that lies behind it.
Believe me, Australia never so clearly perceived, as she does now
perceive, that her own defence is part of the scheme of Imperial
Defence. That is the first lesson to learn : that our defence
must not be a defence segregated—it must be as much as possible
a defence aggregated. And the Australian Government is animated
by a strong desire to bring its forces into the closest touch with
the British Forces both by sea and by land.


Of course, the idea may be at first, Australian defence round
the shores of Australia ; but when any danger comes —we hope
it never will come—Australia will be found willing and anxious
to bear her share in the defence of the ’Empire.
In contemplating the increase of armaments, I cannot help
expressing the hope that people will become sane just about the
time when armaments are being so increased that war may
seem their only justification. The danger of incessant military
preparations is that they may reach a stage at which common
sense demands that some use ought to be made of them ; but
I hope that before that day comes common sense will demand
that that sort of expenditure of muscle and energy and money
shall cease.
But in the meantime this Empire has got to get stronger and
stronger every day. While the war spirit is possible, we have
got to get stronger and stronger by sea and b} r land, because we
well know that if our fleet goes down, the Power that destroys
it will never allow another British fleet to appear on the face of
the waters. It is a battle we have got to fight at any moment,
once and for all, and the whole of the destinies of this Empire
may be staked upon the fate of one great encounter.
»So long as we keep our forces in an efficient state, we know
the men behind them will not fail us. We know the men that
will man our ships and line our regiments will do all that is
required, provided they get the right chance, the right education,
and the right commissariat.
Peaceful, Development.
Now all these things are being thought of; but above all
these preparations for the fortunes of war, there is a grander
feeling still, and that is, that the great populations of the Empire
are coming more and more closely together in the ordinary affairs
of peaceful development. I thoroughly believe in that sort of
preference which enables a locality to prefer its own products
first, and then the products of other parts of the Empire. That
is a sort of preference which need not wait for Acts of Parliament;
it need not wait for the result of great political battles. You
will not get much out of Acts of Parliament at any tune, but if
you will only begin to-day to make a choice in favour of British
goods and Colonial goods, you will have a measure of Tariff
Reform which would not require the Royal Assent, but it would
get to work all over the Empire.
As years go on, the centre of national utility and reform is


changing. As we become more and more enlightened, we come
to see that after all Parliament is not the true centre of reform.
The true centre of national reform lies in the hearts and under-
standing and habits of the whole people. Here is a very good
way of beginning a great national reform, throughout the length
and breadth of the whole British Empire. Eet us apply these
principles. Patronise the industries of the town in which you
live, then next of the country in which you live, and then next
of the Empire in which you live, and when you have done that,
in your own daily purchases, the political questions will not be
of any very intense gravity.
I thank you very much, ladies and gentlemen, for your great
kindness.
Subsequent Speeches.
Mr. A. D. Steel-Maitland, M.P., said : —My pleasant duty is
quite briefly, in accordance with the usual etiquette of these
luncheons, to propose the health of our Chairman, Lord Onslow.
Might I, however, for just one minute express what I am sure
is our unanimous appreciation of the remarks which Sir George
Reid has just made.
I am quite certain that we all of us have liked to hear what
our guest has said about the spirit which animates Australia in
connection with defence. The keynote perhaps of what he has
said is contained in his words, that Australia recognises that her
own defence is a part of the general scheme of Imperial defence,
not segregated, but aggregated ; and I rejoice for my own part
that this is a purely non-party occasion of meeting, when we can
all assent to such words as he has uttered, knowing that they
are in complete harmony with the previous utterances of our
present Secretary of State for War. Mr. Haldane laid down
precisely the same principle in saying that our defence must be
not segregated but aggregated ; when he looked forward to, for
example, not a General Staff for each separate nation, but an
Imperial General Staff on the same lines as Sir George Reid has
stated, viz. one which shall be above those of each separate
nation, and should look to the interests of the Empire as a whole.
Well, gentlemen, my real object and my pleasure is to propose
the toast of our Chairman. I am quite sure that we are all
grateful to have a President who also attends our luncheons.
I will use no more words, except to say that it is peculiarly
advantageous to us that we have a man as President of our
Eeague, who not only has held high official office in this
country in party Ministries of the past, but who holds a most


responsible position in the House of Lords. But perhaps, above
all, I may remind you Lord Onslow has held one of the great
positions, as one if I may call it of our great pro-Consuls, and
who therefore as President of this League as well as our Chairman
to-day, unites responsibility and knowledge of office at home with
knowledge of the Colonies, in one of which he was a very distin-
guished Governor. I therefore ask you to drink to the health of
the Chairman, Lord Onslow.
Lord Onslow, in returning thanks, said 3 —l would venture with
permission to suggest that in drinking the health of the
Chairman this afternoon you wish to include in it the officials
and those who are responsible for the success of these luncheons.
Usually the more distant parts of the Empire copy the good
institutions which they find in the Mother Country, but in
these luncheons we are copying one of our great Dominions over
the seas. We are copying the example of Canada, where these
luncheons have been held for some time past, under the Canadian
Clubs, and, by making the proceedings short, we give business men
an opportunity of coming during that hour at midday which they
must have for the purpose of refreshment and relaxation, and
hearing words such as have been addressed to us to-day by
Sir George Reid, which may make a lasting impression upon
them, and have a permanent effect upon Imperial policy.
I sincerely hope that all those who are members of this League
will do what they can to increase the membership. I believe it
does immense good, not only by means of its public, but also by
its private gatherings, and the more we can get people together
to hear the sentiments which inspire the great Dominions Overseas,
which have been so well uttered to-day by Sir George Reid, the
more shall we be united in resisting any attack which may be
made upon the Empire from outside.
The company then separated.
{Reprinieafrom “The United Service Magazine,” August, 1910.]
PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITED, LONDON AND LECCLES.


V.„
