

THE
IMPERIAL A RCADE,
H0TEL,
PITT to CASTLEREAGH STREETS,
SYDNEY.
Illustrated from Photographs.


James SANDY & Co.
'ESTABLISHED 1850.
BRITI SH
OIL AND COLORMEN,
IVnfr Actistic WutcaKtxiiiKz,
271 & 330 GEORGE STREET,
Near G.P.O.
A complete and Varied Stock of the Newest and
most Effective Designs of
ANAGLYPTA, LINCRUBTA-WALTON, WALLPAPERS,
And other Artistic Decorations always on view at
their Show Rooms, 330 GEORGE STREET.
Rainters & Artist’s requisites at Cheapest Rales,
Estimates and :‘Patterns Shipped f ree on Application .




Imperial Arcade .Sydney.
Pitt Street, Elevation.
(From a '’ho raph.)


Imperial Arcade Premises,
SYDNEY.
rpHE Imperial Arcade Premises, which have been in course of erection
during the past two years, are situated between Pitt and Castle-
reagh streets, the arcade forming a thoroughfare parallel to and about
midway between King and Market streets. The premises have a frontage
to Pitt-street of 65 feet 6 inches, and to Castlereagh-strect of 64 feet 6
inches, whilst the arcade thoroughfare extends to 333 feet between the two
streets.
The buildings, including basement, consist of seven floors. The height
of the buildings generally, from basement floor to ridge of roof, is 114 feet.
Accommodation is provided on the ground floor for thirty-eight shops,
inclusive of three to Pitt-street and two to Castlereagh-street. Entrances,
stairs, and lifts to hotels, which occupy the upper floors, commencing with
portions of the first floor, and to cafes, which occupy the .basement floor,
are provided from both streets, also from the arcade.
On the basement floor, also commencing with the second floor and
upwards, the premises are arranged as two distinct properties, the one
having its frontage to Pitt-street, and the other to Castlereagh-street.
Provision has been made that the two properties can be amalgamated at
any time, both in the cafes and the hotels. The cafes on basement floor
are lofty, remarkably well lit and ventilated. Every convenience lias been
arranged for first-class establishments. Connected as they are by service
lifts to the kitchens of the hotels on the sixth floor, the objectionable
effluvium of cooking will be avoided.
Within the arcade proper, approached by three wide staircases communi-
cating with ground floor, the first floor provides accommodation for twenty-
nine shops or offices, with lavatories suitably arranged. These offices
are fronted by a loggia or gallery, connected from either side by three
bridges, placed in positions to suit the stairs from ground floor. Arcading
in front of the loggias support the glazed roof of the arcade, together with
the upper side-walls of the hotels. The arcade roof is of iron construction,
glazed with Helliwell’s patent glazing bars. The ventilation in roof has


been adequately attended to, and, as the height from floor of arcdea to
ridge of roof is 60 feet, the thorough ventilation of the arcade has been
rendered a certainty.
The main buildings to Pitt and Castlercagh streets arc arranged as:
billiard-rooms and reading-room on the first floor ; stairs and lifts, both
passenger and service, are provided for this and the upper floors from the
entrances in streets and arcade on the ground floor. The second floor is
occupied by dining-rooms, to the street fronts, the full width of buildings ;
also bedrooms to either side of boundaries. The third floor contains
reception and drawing rooms, also private sitting-rooms to street fronts,
with bedrooms at the sides of boundaries. The fourth floor provides
accommodation for the principal bedrooms in main buildings, fronting the
respective streets, whilst bedroom accommodation is arranged for female
servants employed in the hotels at the south side of arcade premises ; also
laundries and drying yards. The kitchen apartments, including servants'
hall and bedrooms for male servants, are situated on the fifth floor.
The rooms on second, third and fourth floors, facing Pitt and Castle-
reagh streets, and consisting of dining-room on second floor, reception and
drawing rooms on third floor, and principal bedrooms on the fourth floor,
have wide balconies in front, from which extensive views of the city are
obtained.
Every floor of the hotels is amply provided with lavatory accommodation,
and service-rooms, connected by lifts from the kitchen.
Omitting servants’ accommodation, there are thirty-six bedrooms in the
Pitt-street hotel, and thirty-nine bedrooms in the Castlereagh-street premises.
The largest bedroom contains 4820 cubic feet of space, and the smallest
1400 cubic feet ; thus indicating the superior accommodati >n arranged.
The promises are remarkably well-lit throughout. An ingenious method
of securing permanent light and ventilation from the side boundaries on
every floor, commencing with the basement, and regarding which, is
claimed the priority of use in Sydney, has been the formation of V shaped
areas in side walls. Another noticeable feature in the premises is, that,
although the decline in level from Castlereagh-street to Pitt-street is over
13 feet, all the various apartments in the different floors are a similar
height on their respective floors ; and that all floors and ceilings are level
without steps at the doorways.
The sanitary arrangements are as perfect as the requirements of the
Water Supply and Sewerage Department dictate. Inspector Clark, of the
Sewerage Department, has had the work under his supervision, and the


feport of the Sewerage Department, of which Mr. Smail is Engineer, is as
follows :
The whole of the drainage and sanitary plumbing, also water-tittings
have been carried out under the supervision of the Inspectors of Board of
Water Supply and Sewerage.
The Sanitary Work has been designed on the most approved modern
lines. The provision for ventilation and trapping has been well carried
out ; and all conveniences for the interception of gases &c., have been pro-
vided. The sanitary fittings—comprising water-closets, baths, lavatories,
and cisterns are of the most modern type. Special care has been taken to
ensure complete aeration of tin whole system. This has been attained by
separating wastes of lavatories, baths, &c., and water-closets, by sectional
’ventilation. There is ample storage of water for sanitary and culinary
purposes. The work, generally, is of a first-class quality, and reflects great
credit upon the p’umber, Mr. Oatley, who has carried out the work to such
a successful issue. The difficulties to be overcome in dealing with the
sanitary plumbing, of such a large building, with so many ramifications
can only be appreciated by the plumbing craft ; and the company have
every reason to be congratulated on the quality of the workmanship exhi-
bited in the building.
Mr. J. L. Bruce, the Lecturer on Sanitary Engineering at the Sydney
Technical College, who has examined the sanitary plumbing of the Arcade
Premises, says that the plumbing fittings are as nearly perfect, from a
sanitary point of view, as is possible under the difficult conditions involved in
such a building. The skill with which the rain, water, lavatory waste, and soil
pipes have been separated from each other, disconnected from the drains and
sewers, and provided with thorough ventilation under exceptional difficulties,
is worthy of all praise, and I have no doubt that the arrangements are per-
fectly effective. In the whole of the extensive fittings there does not
appear to be a single drain, soil, lavatory, or rain pipe which is not
efficiently protected from the influx of sewer gas, and which has not
effective provision for the clear passage through it of a current of fresh
air, and with the exception of some small matters which it would be
affectation to term faults, which certainly would never become a danger to
health, not a single sanitary objection can be taken to the arrangement of
this extensive work.
The whole of the work appears in striking and honourable contrast,
with far too much of the plumber work, existing in the city, and so
reflects the greatest credit, no less on the designer and the workmen than
on the proprietary, who have evidently spared no expense in efficiently


safeguarding the tenants from the little understood, but insidious and
potent dangers arising from defective sanitation.
The lifts, of which casual mention has been made, are ten in number.
They have each a travel of 92 feet, and have been manufactured and
erected by the Australian Waygood Elevator Company, to the specification
and under the supervision of Messrs. John Coates and Company,
Hydraulic Engineers, Pitt-street, They are of the type known as sus-
pended, two of them being of the highest class of passenger elevators, and
the remainder dinner or service lifts for the hotels and cafes. The working
pressure of 700 lbs. to the square inch is supplied from the mains of the
Sydney and Subuiban Hydraulic Power Company. The Hydraulic cylin-
ders and valve gears are fixed in the well-holes, and the hand cords for
starting and stopping the machines are brought into positions convenient
for the attendants. The cars of the passenger elevators are oak framed,
with walnut panels and pilasters ; they are fitted with bevel-edged mirrors
and upholstered leather seats. The tops are finished in a coving, which
affords ample ventilation. Each car is provided with a combination
bracket for gas and electric light, the supply of gas and electricity being
conveyed to the cars through flexible tubes or cables.
Each passenger elevator is worked by four flexible steel wire ropes, the
moving ends of which are attached to the safety apparatus beneath the
floor of the car, two on each side. The provisions made to prevent accidents
are very complete. Each of the steel wire I'fting ropes is strong enough
to safely raise the maximum load, but in addition to this precaution the
safety apparatus beneath the floor of the cars is so adjusted that should
any one of the ropes even stretch, it immediately comes into operation, and
prevents further movement of the car in a downward direction. The
entrance doors on each floor are fitted with self-acting locks, which can
only be opened from the inside by the attendant. Each passenger
elevator is fitted with electric bells and indicator board in the car, to notify
required attendance at the several floors, and each of the service lifts has a
complete system of speaking tubes. The total aggregate consumption of
water per complete trip for the ten lifts is only 35-28 gallons, the cost of
which is far below that of working by private installation of pumping
machinery.
A full gas service has been introduced throughout the premises, which
has been arranged according to the instructions and under the superin-
tendence of the Inspectors from the Australian Gaslight Company.
In addition to the gas service, there is a very complete electric lighting
plant, and in order to avoid the possibility of any temporary breakdown,




■>-g> Imperial
Interior looking tow
C F


Arcade,'Sydney.
aros Castlereagh Street
r o m 9 Pbof-o^raph^




the plant is in duplicate, either section of which would be capable of supply-
ing the more important lights. This plant consists of two double cylinder
high pressure horizontal steam engines, in combination with multitubular
boilers, manufactured by Messrs. Marshall, Sons, and Company, of Gains-
borough, England. These engines are each capable of developing 60 horse
power, and even under full load, run remarkably smoothly, and with very
little noise. Particular attention is drawn to the complete and easy way
that all the working parts of the engines are lubricated. A small reservoir
of oil at one side of the engines supplies fine brass tubes, which lead to the
various parts requiring oil, adjusting screws, regulating the supply. In
addition to the fly wheels, which are of increased diameter, there is a large
pulley on each engine shaft, so as to enable a second dynamo being driven.
Each boiler is provided with a feed water heater, by which the water,
before being forced into the boiler, is heated with the exhaust steam.
At present there are three dynamos, two of the Williamson Electrical
and Engineering Company’s “ Manchester ” type, each capable of supply-
ing 450 sixteen candle power incandescent lamps and compound, wound so
that no variation of speed is required as the number of lamps in use is
altered. These dynamos are driven direct from the engine flywheel, and
run at the slow speed of 600 revolutions per minute. There are six
collecting brushes on each machine, and when the whole of the lights are
on no sparking whatever is to be observed.« These machines are of very
high efficiency, and certainly they are compact and well made. The third
dynamo, which is used for working the arc lamps, is of the Thorason-
Houston pattern, and is provided with an automatic regulator, insulated
cables connect these dvnamos to the main switchboard, which is a hand-
somely finished piece of work, all the switches being of polished brass with
mahogany handles, mounted on a base of enamelled slate, the whole being
framed in a heavy mahogany frame.
There are a considerable number of switches on this board
for controlling the lights in various parts of the building, and there
are also instruments for indicating the electrical pressure, and the
quantity of current being produced. This switchboard has been made by
the Williamson Electrical and Engineering Co., in Sydney, and will com-
pare fevourably with the best English make. From this switchboard large
main copper cables with a heavy insulation, run up through the main walls,
and branch away throughout the entire building. Over seven miles of
cable and wire have been used in the installation. The entrances and the
arcade are lighted by 14 Thomson-Houston arc lamps of 1,000 candle-
power. These lamps are suspended by copper conductors, from pulleys in


the roof, and counter weights are used so that the lamps can be easily
pulled down for trimming. In the two hotels, there are used for the best
apartments handsome combination fittings. These fittings enable either
the electric light or gas to be used. In the rest of the buildings, a more
simple arrangement is adopted, the lamps being suspended from ceiling by
silk covered wires. For the most part the lamps are 16 candle-power, and
a few 8 candle-power. Each lamp is provided with a switch, so that the
lights can be readily turned on or off. Mr, H. Rowley, Consulting Elec-
trical Engineer, of Melbourne, who has been the electrical adviser of the
Arcade Co., states that there is a very complete system of safety fuses, and
that all the requirements of the Insurance Companies have been most
rigidly observed. The entire electrical plant has been supplied and
installed by the Williamson Electrical and Engineering Co., Ltd., of 15
Pitt-street, Sydney, and of Manchester, England, who have also fitted up
the premises throughout, with electric bells.
The whole of the ground floor, also the first floor of hotels, is of fire-
proof construction, and careful attention has been given to the arrange-
ments throughout the whole of the extensive premises, to appliances for
the prompt extinction of fire. Hydrants and hoses are situated at every
suitable point, whilst escape ladders and disconnecting iron doors ensure
the safety of life, even in the event of a fire. The whole of the fire service
has been arranged to the satisfaction of Mr. Superintendent Bear, who
states that the whole of the fire service, hose, &c,, together with the iron
doors, and the escape ladders, leave nothing to be desired, in the way of
protection of life and property.
The floors of the main arcade, also the basement and balconies are laid
with Stuart’s Patent Granolithic. This material has practically no com-
petitor approaching it, for its great durability. Granolithic pavements
rank among the most pleasant to walk upon, being superior to the flag
pavements or asphalte blocks, which soon wear and become uneven. The
name “ Granolithic ” was selected by Mr. Stuart, because of granite
pulverized forming one of its chief ingredients.
The ornamental glass throughout is by Messrs. Ashwin and Falconer,
who, in the circular headed windows, over the principal entrances have
utilized some Australian flowers, for decorative purposes in a bold and
effective-manner.
The plate-glass (about 20.000 feet), the mill-rolled glass for the roof,
and the bentplate, in the Pitt-street front, were supplied by Messrs. James
Sandy and Co., 271 and 330 George-street. The same firm also supplied
the silver bent-plate on the ventilators, which lias proved a successful and
attractive internal decoration.


The premise which are in the French Renaissance style, are an important
addition to the street a architecture of Sydney. The front to Pitt-street is
relieved in skyline by a tower 156 feet high, from pavement level to top of
Hag staff. Altogether the successful completion of such important premises
reflects credit upon all who have been connected with their erection.
Mr. Thomas Rowe, F.R.1.8.A., has been the architect, with whom has
been associated Mr. W. Wright Campbell, M.S.A., and Mr. Alex.
Sellar, has been the clerk of works.
The B'oemal Opening.
13 ETWEEN 200 and 300 gentlemen assembled in the Imperial Arcade, Pitt.
street, on Thursday, 16th July, about noon, to become participators in the
formal opening of that avenue. A few minutes past noon Mayor Manning mounted
a small platform placed on one end of the balconies, and in a few words declared
the arcade open. The block of buildings he considered a credit to the city of
Sydney, and he thought it an honour being invited in his capacity as chief magis-
trate of the city to declare it open for business.
Subsequently a large number of gentlemen sat down to a first class luncheon
(prepared by Compagnoni) laid out in one of the of the Castlereagh-street
Hotel, Mr. R. Chalmers (one of the directors) presided, and among the others seated
round the tables were Mayor Manning, Messrs. B. B. Smith, M .L.C., J. Macintosh
M.L.C.. Aldermen Martin, Jeanneret, Lees, M.P.’s ; Kippax, Dean, Hart, Beare
Captain Bloomfield, Messrs. Dowel, M.P., Daniels (Town Clerk), R. Teece, Deloh-
ery, Russell Jones, Williamson, F. C. Jarrett, J L. Sharrock, Thomas, Meeks, Al-
fred Bennett, S. D. Hesp, Rowley, Hiscocks, W. A. Stuart, VV. J.
Wilson, Thomas Rowe, (architect), W. Wright Campbell, and George Withers (
(director).
The toast of •‘The Queen” having been honoured,
The Mayor proposed, “Success to the Imperial Arcade.” He said a careful in-
spection of the building had been made,land they had all seen the result of much
care, and thought and wisdom, for it certainly required great consideration on the
part of the directors to achieve such results. (Applause.) He considered a great
success had been achieved, and that the avenue would prove one of considerable
public benefit. Such avenues were much needed in this city, and he might direct
attention to another, which the City Council had recently approved of, viz., from
Castlereagh-street to the Post Office. (Applause.) Having a railway station
opposite the Imperial Arcade, as proposed, would be of great advantage to the
company, and he felt sure that those gentlemen would reap a reward thereby they
didinot foresee. No one could say that when the arcade was planned the directors
knew of the intentions of the Railway Commissioners in this matter. (Hear,
hear.) He was sure the people would appreciate the labours of the company.
(Applause.)
Mr. Chalmers first returned thanks. As the Mayor had suggested, the venture
in its infancy had given the directors a'great amount of thought, but they sought
the advice of men competent in such matters, and the result those present had seen.


He admitted that the directors had never thought that there was any possibility of
a city railway station being placed right in front of the door ; but, apart from
that, there was sufficient evidence in the shops and offices already let to make the
financial success of the venture an assured fact. (Applause.)
Mr. George Withers (another of the directors) also responded.
Alderman Dean proposed ‘ The Architect.” testifying, in flattering terms, to the
part Mr. Rowe had taken in beautifying the city of Sydney. He remembered the
time when certificates for building in Sydney for £SOO were considered large trans-
actions, and on one occasion in building a terrace of houses he had gone to Mr.
Rowe for £I,OOO, and had been met with a look of astonishment. (Laughter.) The
arcade they were in was a credit to Mr, Rowe’s firm.
Mr. Rowe, in responding, said he should like the citizens to go through the arcade
and examine it, particularly the basement, which would be a great acquisition to
the city in the summer time, Referring to the hotel accommodation, he said that
in this respect Sydney the last few years had redeemed its ilf. Ihere was a time,
very recently, when travellers to this city hastened out as quickly as possible,
simply for the want of good accommodation. He had been prepared to acknow-
ledge Mr. Dean a good builder and a gbod alderman, but he also found him an
eloquent speaker. There were some remarkable features in this building, one
being that, notwithstanding the fall in the ground, there were no steps at entrances
to shops and offices. Mr. W. Wright Campbell deserved the utmost praise for his
work (Hear, hear), and he had been assisted by a good clerk.of works, Mr. Sellars.
(Hear, hear.) He had, indeed, figured largely in the building and rebuilding of
this great city, and thanked them for the compliments paid him. (Hear, hear).
“The Commercial Interests of New South Wales,” was proposed by Mr. Richard
Teace, and responded to by Mr. Alfred Meeks.
The Chairman proposed “ The Mayor,”
In reply, Mr. Manning said, referring to some of his actions since he had been
elected to his present position, that the citizens must have men to represent them
who could say “ No.” Public men should never truckle to the voters, but should
lead the people. He had heard it said that the voice of the people was the voice of
God. But in those days there must have been false gods. He certainly did not
believe that to-day the voice of the people was the voice of God; and, in his
career he should always endeavour to cultivate the great art of saying “ No,” (Pro-
longed applause).
Other toasts honoured, were, “ The Chairman,” and “ The Press.”
Re-printed from The Building and Engineering Journal, 6 Clarence-st., Sydney.






Imperial Arcade, Sydney.
Interior looking towards Pitt Street.
Fro m a Phohograph^




WU.I4AMSOW
Electrical a Engineering Co., Ld.
15 PITT STREET, SYDNEY.
Electrical Engineers and Contractors
FOR
CENTRAL LIGHTING STATIONS,
HOUSE and WORKS LIGHTING,
ELECTRICAL TRANSMISSION OF POWER,
GENERAL ELECTRICAL & ENGINEERING WORK.
AGENTS FOR
MATHER & PLATT’S
Electrical Machinery and “Manchester” Dynamos.
CONTRACTORS FOR THE
ELECTRIC LIGHTING
OF THE
BOROUGH OF REDFERN,
IMPERIAL ARCADE (including 2 Hotels, 08 Shops).
ARCADE STREET,
GARRICK THEATRE,
EMPIRE HOTEL,
Messrs. HARDY Bros.
And the Residence of
Hon. JOHN EALES, Morpeth, <&c., &e
Pull information as to Electric Lighting on application to
15 PITT STREET.


CTT JAR 'T’CI
GRANOLITHIC PAVING.
Offices ot the Company: KING & MACQUARIE STS. SYDNEY.
Melbourne Office: 531 COLLINS ST.
The Imperial Arcade First Floor and Basement are laid
with this splendid Pavement.
fl# faying can bi laid in permanent flours.
Specimens can he seen in the Imperial Arcade, and
in all the principal Street of the City.
Practically everlasting.
TESTING GRANOLITHIC AT LEITH DOCKS.
:o:
Landing measuring 4 ft. 6 in, x 4 ft, 4 in, x 8 in. Width between the bear-
ings, 4 ft. 2 in., carried a load of pig iron, weighing 13 tons, without breaking.
Step measuring 5 ft. 6 in. x 11 in. x 7 in. Width between the bearings
s,ft. 2in., carried a load of pig iron, weighting 3 tons 4 cwt., without breaking.
