

COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
Imperial Conference.
SPEECH
BY THE
Rt. Hon. W. M. Hughes, P.C., M.P.
(PRIME MINISTER),
[From the “Parliamentary Debates,” 7th April, 1921.]
Mr. HUGHES (Bendigo—Prime Minis-
ter and Attorney-General) [2.56]. —(Ey
leave). —I said yesterday that if public
business permitted I would make to the
House a statement in reference to a Con-
ference which is to be held in London in
June of this year, and to which the Prime
Ministers of the overseas Dominions have
been invited. It has been assumed by
the press, and stated from the public
platform, that this Conference has
been called to consider changes in the
Constitution. That is not the case. The
Conference to consider alterations in the
relations between the different parts of
the Empire is to be held, possibly next
year. The Conference to be held in June
next is called to deal with certain definite
matters, which I shall mention in de-
tail. In view of the fact that it is not
proposed at this Conference to deal with
constitutional relations between the vari-
ous parts of the Empire any lengthy dis-
cussion in relation thereto would be out
of place; but, having regard to what has
been said on the subject, some few re-
marks from me seem to be called for,
0.6758.
It would appear that those gentlemen
who have rather severely criffcised me for
refraining to disclose what are my
opinions in regard to the Constitution are
profoundly dissatisfied with the Empire
as it is. What they desire, if one is to
deduce the : r intentions from their words,
is to substitute for this structure,
fashioned by time and circumstance,
under which we have progressed and
flourished—a structure empirical and
illogical, but which is the most convenient
and flexible ever conceived for the
purposes of a free people—they, I say,
desire to substitute a Constitution .based
on some logical plan which they them-
selves have devised. Precisely what that
plan is we are not told, but if one is to
read between the lines, they desire to
create some sort of Imperial Parlia-
ment —although I admit they repudiate
that suggestion—or, failing an Im-
perial Parliament, an'lmperial Council,
which, although, perhaps, not clothed
with legislative powers, will have
authority to deal with'matters now en-
tirely in the hands of the various Legis-
latures of the Empire, With these gentle-
men I do not at all agree. It appears to


me that they are entirely ignorant of the
historical, geographical, and ethnological
principles and circumstances of the Em-
pire. They do not seem to understand
that this thing which we call a Constitu-
tion—if we can apply so definite a term
to a thing so indefinite is, happily for
mankind, not the work of philosophers or
Constitution-mongers—lias not been de-
vised according to any plan, and has de-
veloped, not of deliberate purpose, but
haphazard. There never was a time when
this so-called Constitution of ours was
crystallized. It is now, as it always was,
in a state of flux. Its basic principles
aro the full and free recognition of the
autonomy of the various parts of the Em-
pire, and its complete adaptability to the
changing circumstances of a progressive
people. If we look back across our com-
paratively short history, and contrast our
relations with the Mother Country in the
days of our infancy with those of to-
day, we see great changes in form, but
none in substance. As our circumstances
have changed, as we have progressed,
authority and power suited to our re-
quirements have been given to us. There
was a time when the handful of people
who were settled in this country were
governed by nominee Councils under the
direct control of the Colonial Office.
When the Colonies had sufficiently ad-
vanced, independent self-government was
granted them. Time passed, we grew
from infancy to adolescence, and at last
stood on the very threshold of manhood.
With every advance our powers of self-
government increased until at length,
some twenty years ago, dignity and added
authority were given to us by the Eederal
Constitution under which we are living
to-day. During the five years of war
bur country progressed, and its circum-
stances changed more than in a genera-
tion of peace. In the supreme hour of
the Empire’s trial the Dominions proved
themselves worthy of their breeding.
The whole world recognised that they had
put on the toga of manhood and become
nations. The nations of the world recog-
nised us as their equals, and we were ad-
mitted into the League on a footing of
equality. If we look at the form of the
relations between, Britain and ourselves
during the interval that has elapsed since
Australia was first settled, we see con-
siderable changes, hut in substance our
relation remains the same. In my opinion,
no constitutional changes are called for.
Impartial history will record the fact
that the British Constitution is the
supreme achievement of the genius
of our race for self-government. His-
tory may be ransacked in vain to
find a parallel. If I were asked what
is, as it were, the legal tie that unites the
British Empire I say deliberately it is
the King—the Monarchy. I cannot
conceive of a British Empire held to-
gether under any other form of
government than a monarchy. The
people of Australia would never consent
to acknowledge as their ruler a President
elected by the British people. The
Monarchy is the constitutional principle
which binds us together. Ties of race,
of kindred, of common tradition, of lan-
guage—all these taken together go to
weave that web which neither the storms
of adversity nor the passage df time has
been able to destroy. But if we are asked
what is the material foundation of our
greatness, what are we to say? Upon
what does this mighty Empire of ours
rest? It rests, and always has done,
upon the British Navy. As surely as we
stand here this Empire of ours would
never have been built without British
control of the seas. By an all-powerful
British Navy this Empire has been built
up; only by a powerful British Navy can
it be maintained. I leave all further
reference to the Constitution at this
point, which is the most convenient for
dealing with the matters which are to bo
considered at the forthcoming Confer-
ence.
The Conference has been summoned to
deal with questions of foreign policy,
naval defence, and the renewal of the
Anglo-Japanese Treaty. Certain otheu
more or less subsidiary matters are also
set out on the agenda-paper. One re-
lates to communications, including wire-
less, between the various parts of the Em-
pire, but I shall direct my remarks
mainly to those matters which are of
fundamental importance. I take, first of
all, the question of foreign policy. The
attitude of the Australian people towards
foreign policy before the war was one of
indifference, partly begotten from our
geographical circumstances and our re-
moteness from those centres of popu-
lation which were, in the very nature
2


of things, regarded by us as being
most potent in directing the affairs
of the world. ' And our indif-
ference arose, too, from another
cause. We had lain so securely sheltered
under the wing of the British Navy from
the very day of 'the foundation of this
country that not only did war, which de-
vastated and destroyed other parts of the
world, pass us by unscathed, but even
rumours of war left us unaffected. The
very completeness of the protection which
the British Navy gave us was responsible
for the fact that the Australian people
took no heed of those things which
vitally concerned other nations, bringing
to them war, turmoil, and destruction,
and those upheavals which have made
history during the last 100 years. But
the recent great war changed those
conditions. Circumstances, to which
I shall allude later, have now
made' it necessary that we shall take
a keener interest in foreign policy.
No one would have imagined that from
the assassination of some obscure scion of
a royal house at Serajevo, war could
have come to this sea-girt Australia, and
to the whole world. If at that
time you were to have put 100
Australians up against a wall and
threatened to shoot every one who
did not know where Serajevo was, I sup-
pose .you would have had to shoot ninety-
nine of them. Yet from such an
incident out of a clear sky the
greatest war in history was let
loose upon the world, and we, in distant
Australia, were involved in it. It is a far
cry from Australia to Belgium, yet but
for the violation of the treaty of neu-
trality made by the great Powers with
Belgium, a treaty of which the over-
whelming majority of Australians were
in entire ignorance, England would
probably not have gone to war on the
4th August, 1914, and if she had
not gone to war the whole his-
tory of the struggle would have been
changed. As a result of leaving this
country 400,000 of our young men
have seen and learned many things
of foreign countries, and their
kindred have been naturally keenly
interested in all the movements on
that great stage upon which our soldiers
played so splendid a part. We
have at length become alive to the fact
that in the modern world no nation can
afford to be indifferent to what other
nations do, and that war may come upon
us from the most unexpected- quarter and
upon the most trivial pretext. We
Ci nnot affortl to ignore the foi;eign
■policy of other nations of our own
Empire. Honorable members know
very well that from the beginning
the foreign policy of the Empire
has been determined exclusively by
Britain, and, very properly so, for if the
Empire became involved in war, it was
mainly on the shoulders of the British
people that the burden of war fell; it
was certainly upon them that the burden
of preserving the security of the Empire
fell, whether in times of peace or in war.
This brings me to one of the subjects
to which I desire to direct the atten-
tion of honorable members. Certain
matters relating to the foreign policy
c: the Empire are to be considered at this
June Conference. We have been invited by
the British Government to take our part
in the councils of Empire, and to express
our opinion in regard to these matters
which it is now clearly understood involve
us as much as any other part of the Em-
pire. • I shall come later to a considera-
tion of what phase of foreign policy most
intimately affects us. At this stage I
turn to the question which is so inti-
mately related to it, that of defence.
To sea power we owe all that we have
—our freedom, our glorious heritage, the
glittering promise of our great destiny.
From the day Australia was founded to
the present time we have been a free com-
munity, enjoying all those privileges for
which the people of Britain fought for
centuries, and, having achieved, applied
to the varying circumstances of a world-
wide Empire. There is no privilege or
liberty that the British people enjoy
they have not freely handed to us. And,
securely sheltered under the broad wing
of the mighty British Navy, we have been
able to maintain those liberties and that
freedom to develop our heritage and
enjoy in overwhelming measure the bless-
ings of free government. And, as I have
said," all this —our wealth, our liberties—
rests upon the broad and sure foundation
of sea power. This brings me to the point
to which I wish particularly to'direct the
attention of this House and the country.
3


Quite recently a statement was made
by , the British Government of a most
portentous character, so far as Aus-
tralia and the Empire are concerned. It
was that Britain was no longer able
to maintain the navy at the strength
necessary for the- complete protection
of the Empire, and that the Dominions,
must do their share. We ought not
to be surprised at this declaration, be-
cause during the great war Great Britain
incurred a debt of some £7,000,000,000
or £B,OOO 000,000. She is still stagger-
ing under the tremendous blows received
during the conflict; she is exposed
to the fiercest industrial and commer-
cial competition; she is tom with in-
dustrial strife and internecine struggles.
Her people are demanding, quite rightly,
that attention should be paid to domestic
reform, that expenditure on naval and
military defence should be reduced. No
exception can be taken to this from the
stand-pomt of the British people, but
what does this mean to Australia? We are
5,000,000 of people, we have a con-
tinent very rich and capable of almost
infinite development, but within a few
weeks’ sail of the great mass of the popu-
lation of the world. We have boldly
announced that we intend to retain this
continent for ourselves, and we have set
up the banner of a White Australia.
The overwhelming majority of the people
of AustraFa believe in this principle, but,
in all the circumstances, it can hardly be
expected that the overcrowded countries
of the East can see the matter from our
point of view. How long would that ban-
ner fly unless behind it there were massed
the legions of the Empire, or unless ringed
about it there was the protection of the
British Navy? But we are now told de-
liberately that the British people can no
longer maintain this Navy at a strength
adequate for the defence of the Empire.
To Rome there came a crisis simi-
lar to that which now confronts us.
The Roman legions had invaded Bri-
tain and held it for some centuries, but
the onslaught of the barbarians made
it imperative that the oversea legions
should be withdrawn in order to
protect the citadel of the Empire. ■ The
Romans withdrew, and Britain was left
to her own resources with the result we
know of. What can Australia do?
What is the Empire to do in this
crisis ? The position could hardly be
graver. Last year we spent £3,352,000
or thereabouts on our Navy. It is only
fa r to Australia to point out that we
have spent on naval defence very much
more than all the other Dominions put
together; but our Navy is ludicrously
inadequate to defend this country. We
cannot defend ourselves. We have not
oven a plan of campaign for the Pacific.
Quite recently a conference was held at
Singapore which the Admiral of the
Australian Fleet attended, to consider
the defence of that portion of the Pacific
covered by the Australian Fleet and the
China Squadron; but as yet no plan of
operations has been agreed upon for the
China Squadron of the British Navy
and ourselves. Sir, we are confronted with
a position grave in the extreme. What
are we to do? What is our policy to be?
We depend for our very existence on the
maintenance of the control of the sea by
Britain. Britain says that. she can no
longer afford to maintain the Navy at
its relative pre-war strength, and calls
upon the Dominions to consider the ques-
tion, and presumably to contribute their
share. What are we going to do? The
Conference has been called to consider the
question. Upon its decision rests the
safety, the very existence of this Com-
monwealth, and, indeed, of the Empire
itself. For just as the Empire was built
up by and rests upon sea power, so will
it wither and decay as that power slips
from the hands of the British race.
In order that we may the better under-
stand all that is involved in any policy
insuring effective naval defence of Aus-
tralia, it is necessary to consider a matter
most intimately related to it. I turn,
therefore, to the consideration of the
Anglo-Japanese Treaty. We live in a
world which, thanks to the war, we
know, or ought to know, very well. We
are under no illusions. The veil has
been torn from our eyes, and the
purposes of nations have been revealed.
One great menace to the safety of man-
kind has been stricken down and
humbled; but will any one say that the
war, which was waged to end war, has
removed all danger of other wars? Has
there been a day since the signing of
the armistice, on the 11th November,
1918, when war has not raged somewhere?
4


I may be reminded of the existence of
the League of Nations. I have never
disguised my opinions of the League.
Yet, because Peace is a thing so greatly
to be desired, I have endeavoured, by in-
ducing Australia to become a member of
the League, to enable it to exercise that
influence upon the counsels and acta of
nations which its creators claimed for it.
But what are the facts? The League was
created to banish war by creating a tri-
bunal to which the nations could appeal,
substituting reason for force. Yet within
two days’ journey of Geneva, where its
Assembly recently sat, war was raging, in
which two members of the League were
involved. In the long list of resolutions of
the assembly there is not the briefest re-
ference to the fact that the thunders of
war, which the League was to banish from
the earth for ever, were shaking the earth
almost at its very doors. If, then, any
Australian is asked whether he will trust
his fortunes to the League of Nations or
to the sea power of the British Empire,
will he hesitate for one moment in his
answer? Let us not throw away the sub-
stance for the. shadow. The war was
to have changed many things, and has
done so; but how deep does the change
go? Has it changed the hearts of men?
Ho they now seek to settle their quarrels
by an appeal to reason instead of to
force? If not, the change is only skin
deep, and war is still the one great domi-
nating fact of national life. -Long ago it
was said by Marcus Aurelius, “Wouldst
thou confer upon any country the clouds
of warj then induce its Government to
disarm.” Is it not clear that if we are
to have peace, and that security which is
essential to the development of our heri-
tage, we cannot rely either on the League
of Nations or on ourselves alone? Are
our resources and our numbers such as
could in any circumstances insure ade-
quate defence? We must confess frankly
that they'are not. We speak at times
boastingly—l perhaps have led the van-
guard, in this. We speak of ourselves as
a nation, and our claim to be recognised
as a nation does not rest merely on our
own assertion. For the nations have ad-
mitted us to their councils on a foot-
ing of equality. We are a nation. But
let us not bo vainglorious or blown out
with conceit. We are a nation, only by
the grace of God and the power of the
British Empire. But for these our house,
splendid and glorious though it is, would
be as a house built upon quicksands.
If the British people asked, “What is the
Empire to us? Will it feed or clothe
or help us 4 Let us look to our
own affairs,” would they not be well with-
in their owp rights? Why should they
spend their money to defend us? What
do they gain from us? I do not ask
what do we gain from them, because
our gain is obvious. They might say,
“ Let us look to ourselves.” A Navy in-
comparably smaller than that required to
police this mighty Empire would suffice
to protect Great Britain itself. But in
that ease what of us —I speak not of the
other parts of the Empire hut of Aus-
tralia, which stands as a free nation on
the foundation of sea power, and on that
alone. At this Conference our circum-
stances and those of the whole Empire
must be placed before the people of
Great Britain. In these days much is
heard of economy, and the outcry for
it has not come too soon. But it is heard,
not in this country alone, but in all coun-
tries, and is the natural, consequence of
the reckless but inevitable extravagance
of the war. If Great Britain chooses to
economize, and commences with her
Navy, how will it go with us? What shall
we do?
I come now to deal more in detail with
the Anglo-Japanese Treaty. This Treaty
would have expired last year, but was re-
newed for twelve months, in order that
there might be an opportunity for its re-
consideration.
Mr. Watt. — There was no definite re-
newal. Would it not be correct to say
that it was allowed to continue?
Mr. HUGHES.—It was allowed to
continue; but it will expire.
Mr. Watt.— lf notice is given. Either
party may denounce it on the giving of
certain notice.
Mr. HUGHES.—UnIess the Treaty is
renewed, it may be terminated on the ex-
piration of twelve months’ notice, and
that will be given if it is not renewed. 1
need not dwell on the provisions of the
Treaty, because they are sufficiently well
known to honorable members. In effect,
they provide for joint action in the Paci-
fic by Great) Britain and Japan., What
5


that has meant to us, and what it means
to the world at the present time, should
be considered carefully by this Assembly.
What it means to us is evident. If we
were told that there was danger of war,
we should naturally, ask, from what
quarter? Who threatens us? We are a
peace-loving Democracy. Whom have we
assailed, or whom do we threaten? Is
any nation less blood-guilty than we?
Every citizen of Australia realizes that
the destiny of this country is to be played
on the mighty stage of the Pacific.
Therefore, when we speak of war and
foreign policy, we speak of foreign policy
in relation to Pacific problems and of war
as it. may come out of the East. Ho man
can deny that it is a thing more precious
than rubies that we should have an alli-
ance with the greatest Power in the East;
and no man who was not a criminal, who
was-not utterly dead to the duty that he
ow'ed to his country, would do anything
that might involve this country in war.
So, when we are asked what the Treaty
means to us, either in its present or
any other acceptable form, we are
to say that it, means everything to us.
For we should recollect that it is an alli-
ance between that Power under whose
wing we have been sheltered from the day
of our birth till now, and that other great
Eastern Power which has sprung up with-
in the lifetime of honorable members of
this House. So, in the face of these facts,
if we are asked, are wo in favour of a
renewal of that Treaty, I take it that, as
Australians who want peace, there can be
but one answer, we are. We must recollect
that tve live in a glass house. We must not
forget, though we speak boastingly—and
I am .not chiding the Australian for so
speaking, since he has much to boast of—
upon what pedestal we stand. We must
remember that our greatness is due—
mainly due, at any rate —to our occupancy
of a pedestal which, is not ours at all, but
which, has been given unto us for a cen-
tury or more by Britain. What are the
chances of the Anglo-Japanese Treaty be-
ing renewed? What are thd difficulties in
the way? These are the questions to
which I must now invite the attention
of honorable members. It is per-
fectly well known that the Japanese—
dn ambitions and an intensely, passion-
ately, patriotic people—have imagined
that they have causes for quarrel, or,
rather, of complaint, with ourselves be-
cause of our policy of a White Aus-
tralia. And, as we have seen lately,
there has been much talk of strained
relations between the United States
of America and Japan. How, in
this last lie the germs of great trouble,
the possibilities of infinite disaster to this
world. What is the hope of mankind?
What do thinking men everywhere
strive and pray for? Peace on earth.
And how is this to be secured?
This is no party question. I hope that
every honorable member will express
himself freely, remembering only that
every word said here in relation to other
nations is one which must be well weighed
before being uttered. Words , of counsel I
welcome; words of warning, too; but not
words which, lightly uttered, would make
a task that is now sufficiently difficult,
almost impossible. What is the hope of
the world? As I see it. it is an alliance,
an understanding, call it what you will,
between the two great branches of the
English-speaking peoples. How, here is
our dilemma. Our interests, our safety
lies in a renewal of the Anglo-Japanese
Treaty. Yet that treaty is anathema to
the Americans. An honorable member at
my right, who dissents, has his own
opinion; he may be more intimately ac-
quainted than myself with the viewpoint
of the American people; I hope he is.
We read almost every day of disturbing
rumours of great navies, the world long-
ing for peace resounds with the clang-
ing - of hammers, nations fervently
building more and more war ships,
and there is rivalry openly expressed
between those two great nations, the
United States of America and Japan.
America has said that she must have
the greatest navy in the world; that she
must have a navy sufficiently strong to
defend herself. To defend herself against
whom ? She has left the world in no
doubt, or in very little, On this point.
And these things concern and disturb us
greatly. For we not only have no quarrel
with America, but we have no quarrel
with Japan. We have our ideals; Japan
has hers. There is room in the world for
both of us. We want to live on terms of
amity with all the nations of the earth.
If I know the Australian people, they
desire with all their hearts to concen-
trate themselves on those domestic prob-
lems which mean more to the people of
6


the world than anything else. War is a
curse, and we must do all things within
our power to endeavour to prevent it.
What is the ideal at which we
are to aim at this Conference, and
elsewhere, by every means at our dis-
posal? It is, as I see it, a renewal of
the Anglo-Japanese Treaty in such form
—modified, if that should be deemed
proper—as will be acceptable to Britain,
to America, to Japan, and to ourselves.
That is the ideal. It may be said that
is impossible. It may be. I do not
think so. When one comes to the
alleged causes of the disputes between
Japan and America, they appear to be
trivial compared with the tremendous evil
which war would inflict upon both nations.
What do the Japanese want? They want
the right to hold laud in America, the
right of entry for such of their nationals
as so desire into the United States.
What is our own attitude? For
our attitude is very much like that
of the people of the western States of
America towards Japan. Indeed, any
honorable member who,, like myself, has
been to the western States, will say that
for all practical purposes we view this
problem almost eye to eye. What have
the Japanese to complain of in regard to
our treatment? First, let me say—speak-
ing now, as I believe, as the spokesman
of Australia upon this matter —that we
desire above all things to live in peace
and friendship with Japan. It is utterly
wrong for the Japanese people to think
thgt because we have passed certain laws
we regard them as our inferiors. We do
not. We admire their bravery, their
splendid patriotism. W© stand among
those who are loudest in admiration of
their magnificent achievements; for no
other nation has advanced so far in so
short a time. But, as I had the honour of
telling the representative of Japan at the
Peace Conference, while we were the
friends of Japan, and while we considered
them the equal to ourselves, we do not al-
ways invite all our friends into our house.
We have our ideals; they have theirs.
And I want the Japanese people to under-
stand clearly that we, the Australian
people, are anxious to live in peace and
friendship with them. If they com-
plain of any act of ours, I think they
complain without reason. Let me remind
them of their laws in relation to
foreigners. No foreigner may hold land
in Japan. Unskilled labourers may not
reside outside the foreign settlements, ex-
cept with the permission of the Prefectual
Government. For all practical purposes,
the foreign labourer is excluded; and,
under the' provision to which I have just
alluded, Chinese have been deported from
Japan. Naturalization is extremely diffi-
cult, if not impossible, in Japan other
than by marriage with a Japanese person.
Japan reserves her coasting trade for her
own ships. Our treatment of the Japan-
ese will compare quite favorably, I
think, with their treatment of foreigners
in general. We do not complain
of her treatment of our nationals.
We say, “ Those are our ideals.
This is our country; Japan is yours. We
shall, treat you with courtesy. We
desire your friendship. We want to
trade with you. But we cannot go
any further.” The Japanese are so
intensely patriotic that they do not
recognise naturalization by any coun-
try as denationalizing any Japanese.
A Japanese, no matter what he does, can-
not divest himself of his nationality. The
patriotism of the Japanese could not be
displayed in any more effective way. The
admission of Japanese labour, the right
to hold land: These are the main
grounds of the differences of opinion be-
tween the United States of America and
Japan. Do honorable members tell me
that such matters as these are not cap-
able of adjustment by peace-loving
nations? Do they not rather tell me that
it is the bounden duty of Australia to use
every means at her disposal to effect such
a modus vivendi as will secure a renewal
of the Anglo-Japaneee Treaty in a form
acceptable to Japan and the United
States of America ? Whether she is a
party to it or not is not material so long
as she does not regard the renewal of it
as an unfriendly act by Britain directed
against herself. For this is the dilemma
in which we are placed. While making
every effort to retain the friendship of
Japan we cannot make an. enemy of the
United States of America. Nor can
Britain do so. We must steer our
barque between Scylla and Charybdis.
In some way we. must, attain the calm
waters of port. . That is the mission'
7


which the- representative of Australia
has to fulfil.
I have put the matter to the House as
well as I could, and even if I laboured
it at greater length I do not think I could
make it clearer. I hope that honor-
able members will realize quite clearly
that, treaty or no treaty, the power of
the British Navy —whether it be an Im-
perial Navy to which we contribute sub-
stantially or not —is the foundation of
our greatness, the greatest assurance of
the peace of the world, and musfremain.
If that Navy should sink to the level of a
second-class Power, then no treaty is
worth the paper it is printed on. Sea-
power is the foundation, not only of our
greatness, but of our very existence.
Let the teachings . of history guide
your feet. Be not deluded by
phrases or by .vain hopes. There
is but one way by which this Empire has
been built up, and by that way only can
it be maintained. As for the Anglo-
Japanese Treaty, if we consider the
question from the stand-point of
Australia, and ask ourselves what we have
to gain by its renewal, the answer is
plain; we have everything to gain. If
we cannot secure a satisfactory treaty,
then it is obvious that any adequate
scheme of naval defence will involve us in
much greater expenditure, and this at a
time when our resources are strained to
the uttermost. As I have already said,
there is much cry at the present time
about economy. This is a direction in
which economy can most hopefully look
for success. A satisfactory treaty would
lessen the expenditure of Australia by
millions per annum. - Failure would
'throw upon us obligations that I ven-
ture to say could hardly be shouldered
by 5,000,000 of people.
This, then, is the position as I see it.
It may be put in a more favorable light;
but I have put it fairly, neither exagger-
ating the difficulties nor minimizing them.
I have set them out so that men may see
and judge for themselves just where they
stand. The question of what is adequate
naval defence for Australia—l mean, of
course, a naval scheme in which Australia
co-operates with Britain, and not a
scheme in which Australia assumes the
sole responsibility, since that could not be
thought of—depends on the outcome of
this Conference. Can we make such a
satisfactory treaty with Japan as will be
acceptable •to Britain and America ?
That is the point One might easily
say more than one should on this
matter, but I think that I ought
not to have said less than I have.
I have endeavoured to put the issues
fairly, and I leave it to honorable mem-
bers to say whether or not Australia
should be represented at such a Confer-
ence. Whatever may be true of Canada
—and, so far as I know, all the other
dominions are to be represented—Aus-
• tralia has the most to lose and the most
to gain at /that Conference. Canada’s
position is different from our own. We
have a coastline nearly three times as
great as that of the United States of
America, comparing mainland with
mainland, and, if we add her dependen-
cies and include our own, the proportion
is undisturbed. We are vulnerable on
every side. Canada’s boundaries, on the
other hand', extend for 3,000 miles along
the great American Eepublic. It is in-
conceivable that the United States of
America should attack Canada. The ut-
most good feeling prevails between the
two peoples. Canada is vulnerable on
only one side, because on the other the
British Fleet is alwavs within a few days
steaming distance. We, however, are at
the extremities of the earth, and nothing
but a scheme of naval defence adequate to
circumstances of the then existing foreign
policy, whatever that may be, will suffice.
If I am asked whether the Common-
wealth Ts to be committed to anything
done at the Conference, I say quite
frankly that this Parliament will have
the amplest opportunity of expressing its
opinion on any scheme of naval defence
that is decided upon, before the scheme
is ratified. As to the renewal of the
Treaty with Japan, this is my attitude,
and I submit it for the consideration
of honorable members: I am in
favour of renewing the Treaty in any
form. that is satisfactory to Britain,
America, and ourselves. lam prepared
to renew it in those circumstances. If it
is suggested that the renewal should take
a form which would involve the sacrifice
of those principles which we ourselves
regard as sacred, I am not prepared to
accept it. In such circumstances, I shall
bring back the Treaty to this Parliament.
I think I have put the situation fairly,
8


and since these .matters have sometimes
to be settled quickly, I want honorable
members to say whether they will give me
the authority I ask for. With regard to
the expenditure involved in any naval
scheme, the House will not be committed
to the extent of one penny. The scheme
will be brought before Parliament, and
honorable members will be able to discuss,
and accept or reject it. If honorable
members say that we ought to accept the
Treaty in any form, whether it involves
the sacrifice of those principles in which
we believe or not, I cannot agree j but I
am prepared to agree to anything short of
that.
I have a copy of the mandate given to
us over German New Guinea and all the
ex-German places south of the equator,
excepting Samoa, and, in order to enable
the whole matter to be debated, I move—
That the paper be printed.
Mr. Tudor. — 1 ask that the debate be
adjourned un|il Wednesday next. The
matter is one of great importance, and
such an adjournment would give honor-
able members an opportunity, before the
resumption of the debate, to read in Han-
sard the speech just delivered by the
Prime Minister.
Mr. Hughes. —-May I ask that some
other honorable member should also ex-
press an opinion. I want to get the sense
of the House as to what should be done
MELBOURNE : ALBERT J. MULLETT, GOVERNMENT FRINTEf
C. 5758. —2
9
