

IMPERIAL DEFENCE:
A grape?
READ AT THE COLONIAL AND INDIAN EXHIBITION BEFORE
A CONFERENCE OF
The Royal Colonial Institute,
FSr if 76
iSth JUNE, ISB6.
CAPTAIN J. C. R. COLOMB,
(.FORMERLY R.M.A.)
Lcmbon:
E. STANFORD, 55, CHARING CROSS.




H ilss/f
IMP ERIA LDE EE N C E.
CAPTAIN J. C. R. COLOMB
{FORMERLY R.MA.)
The object of this short Paper is to submit for your
discussion broad facts relating to the security of the
Empire in war.
It would serve no useful purpose to examine here
technical details which are the special province of
experts; but as provision for the Empire’s defence
deeply concerns all, so the discussion of main issues
apart from technicalities cannot be without public
advantage.
I think all rational men will agree with the assertion
that practical experience does not warrant any present
hope that wars have ceased or are likely to cease.
History is one long record of wars, with a general
tendency to accumulate in magnitude and results. In
our own time the political map of Europe and of Asia
has been wholly transformed by force. On the
American continent we have seen perhaps the bloodiest
war the world has yet witnessed waged by men speak-
ing our own tongue and holding our own faith. The
peace of Europe at this moment is the resultant of
diverse interests expressed in armed forces ready to
maintain those interests, and the dream of general dis-
armament has no place in the practical politics of any


nation. In point of fact, what is termed European
concert is due not so much to a belief in peace as to a
belief in, and a dread of, war.
I refer to this at starting because so many are con-
tent to escape from a rational consideration of the
question of defence by a general condemnation of the
evils of war. Those who hold that disarmament is a
possible policy for us, or any other nation, are neither
entitled to sympathy or honour so long as they have
not the courage of their opinions ; they have no title
to advise other nations to do that which they fear to
propose for their own. Such persons have never yet
suggested the propriety of breaking up our ironclads or
disbanding our army; until they do so others may be
excused for refusing to waste time in discussing theories
advocated by men who fear to put them to the only
logical proof.
As little do I concern myself with the arguments of
those who talk of war as if it were a game of lawn
tennis. They are few, but they make much noise, and
are generally men who most object to being shot.
They are the curse of any country, and are as much
the enemies of a rational programme of true defence as
those prophets of universal peace who dare nor propose
to practice what they preach.
Between these two extremes lies the great aggregate
of common sense —and, it is to be feared, common care-
lessness —as regards the question of Imperial Defence.
Precautions necessary to secure safety in war are plain
matters of fact, demanding cool calculation and calm
judgment.
With this short preface, permit me now to suggest
for your consideration one or two points which seem to
be most worthy of public attention.
In the first place, are you gentlemen from all parts
of our Empire satisfied that the fleet of the United
Kingdom is sufficient to secure the ocean interests of
the Empire in war ? The issue raised is a distinct one,
vital to the whole question of Imperial Defence. We


want facts and proofs, not opinions and beliefs, in
determining that issue. Let me point out that if our
fleet is not sufficient it will take at the least nearly
eighteen months before it can be made so, even if we
assume that the days of great ironclads—which take
three or four years to build —are over. My justification
for asking you to debate this is that there is no com-
petent naval authority who declares that the fleet of
the United Kingdom is sufficient for the needs of the
Empire in war.
It is, however, desirable to place before you one or
two general considerations —-not of a technical character
—upon which sound judgment, independent of “expert
opinion,” can be formed.
In past times, and down to a very recent period, the
line-of-battle fleet of England was always numerically
double that of our nearest neighbour—France. That
was the first principle of our national policy of defence.
It is so no longer. Silently and unobserved by the
people of the Empire it has disappeared from the
national programme for the provision of naval safety.
First Lords of the Admiralty, with the best possible
information at their command, have told us that the
battle ships of England do exceed those of France; by
how many ships is a matter they themselves dispute.
Taking an average of official statements, the excess
may be placed at about one-third. This third is
absorbed by duties of our fleet beyond European waters,
which neither France nor any other maritime power
has the same necessity to perform. Within the last
few days an ex-sea Lord of the Admiralty wrote to the
daily press, urging the want of more fast cruisers for
the “protection of our Colonies and commerce.” This
is a simple, independent confirmation of facts admitted
by responsible officials. The official information, there-
fore, to guide your debate comes to this : It is possible,
but not absolutely certain, that, were war to break out
to-morrow in European waters, we may have a
fleet about equal to that of one maritime power—


France. We know that for the protection of our
Colonies and commerce we shall be deficient of fast
cruisers.
The official excuse for this state of things is the
increased cost of modern ships. It is said we can't
afford to spend more. To assist your discussion on
this point I may mention the following facts -
That if we take national tonnage entering and clear-
ing national ports in a year as a standard of relative sea
interests, and France and French dominions on the one
hand, and the British Empire on the other, then
France spends on naval precautions for the protection
of sea interests one guinea a year to our threepence.
On the same basis of comparison, Eussia spends
annually one hundred and sixty times as much as we do.
Passing now from official statements and excuses, I
invite your attention to other tests not specially the
province of officials or experts.
Our national tonnage on the oceans and seas of the
world is what we require to protect in war. If we are
not prepared to protect it, that tonnage will be trans-
ferred to a neutral flag. The carrying trade of the
world and the national power of conveying goods from
one portion of our Empire to another, will cease to be
our own. I may remark in passing that the result of
so great a change may seriously alter not only our whole
maritime position, hut our territorial safety. With the
exception of India, the dangers of descent on British
territory at home or abroad is not primarily a question
of the number of men European Powers can put in the
field, but a question of their possession of sea transport.
We at home, I venture to think, do not sufficiently
realise that, dependent as we are mainly upon food
supply from over sea, parting with national tonnage
will be parting with our corresponding power to get
that food at all. We did not dare to enforce the
doctrine that food to the belligerent may be carried
under a neutral flag when France the other day, in
Chinese waters, asserted her rights as a belligerent.


The question whether our mercantile marine changes
flags depends upon whether freight can be obtained,
and whether war risks do not rise to a point destructive
of all profit. It is not a question of patriotism, but a
question of business. A patriotic owner may lay up
his ships rather than transfer them, but he certainly
can’t and won’t run them at a certain loss to his pocket.
The real danger to our commerce will not so much
depend upon the ultimate result of naval operations as
upon the immediate moral effect produced by knowledge
of the insufficiency of our arrangements for its defence
at the commencement of a war. The commercial
consequences must be measured not so much by the
actual number of vessels captured as by the extent of
the national interests operated on by the moral effect
thus produced. In 1863, for example, the Alabama
captured only some thirty merchantmen, more or less
insignificant items, but the moral effect produced
resulted in the transfer to the British flag of over a
quarter of a million tons of American shipping in that
year. The failure of the naval arrangements of the
Northern States cost America her carrying trade, and
us three millions of money. That result was produced
by a vessel without a base, and maintained only by the
resources of neutral ports, furnished under the pro-
visions of international law. The tonnage entered and
cleared the ports of the Federal States in the year
referred to was but about one-tenth of the tonnage
entered and cleared British ports last year. The
Alabama operated against a sea commerce equal only
to that of Australasia alone now. The maritime
interests of the Federal States in all the seas and
oceans of the world were then less than British
maritime interests in the South Pacific now.
If, then, we are to measure national consequences
of naval deficiency by reference to moral effect and
relatively to the extent of the mercantile interests
over which it operates, what figure would you put to
express the money value alone of the loss we shall


incur in war from the fact, authoritatively stated and
officially accepted, that we have not sufficient fast
cruisers “ for the protection of our Colonies and
commerce ? ”
There is another subject on which I invite your
opinion. Do you or do you not believe that the
distance and extent of sea area over which national
commerce operates is the chief consideration by which
can be determined the numerical strength of the fleet
required for its protection ? This is not a question for
experts so much as for intelligent public opinion. It is
public opinion, and not that of experts, which settles
the question of the strength of your fleet, and I entreat
you earnestly to consider this matter.
Do you really believe that comparisons between the
numerical strength of the British fleet and that of any
foreign fleet, even if it be largely in our favour, is any
satisfactory proof of naval security ? I do hope you
will discuss this very plain question, for you must be
well aware that this is the popular standard of measure-
ment adopted.
Let me put the case in a homely way. Take any
city—Melbourne, Sydney, Montreal, Cape Town, or
London itself. What is the standard by which the
strength of the police force is determined ? Is it by
statistical returns of the number of the criminal
classes, or is it by the area over which the persons and
property to be protected by the police are spread ? In
this case we do not confuse our calculations by the fact
that a policeman is generally equal in a physical
struggle to a couple of thieves ; but we are prone to
shuffle out of frankly facing our naval responsibilities
by expressing confidence in the pluck of our officers,
seamen, and marines. A British man-of-war with the
finest personnel in one latitude and longitude is no
answer to even a cowardly crew in an inferior craft
capturing our merchantmen in another. We can say
precisely what will happen if they meet; but the “ if”
is a question of our general naval arrangements, not of


the relative value of two ships. The “ Ferret frauds ”
illustrated the fact that we have much to learn even in
peace. Our fathers learnt a good deal from Trafalgar,
for they immediately increased their naval preparations
and increased the naval expenditure, and steadily
continued to do so year by year until Waterloo. The
naval expenditure the year before Trafalgar was only
half, that in the year preceding Waterloo. Expenditure
is no proof of efficiency, but in this case it is conclusive
evidence that by practical experience our fathers had
learnt that neither the relative strength of fleets, nor
the relative qualities of seamen, were true standards
by which to measure naval safety, otherwise it is quite
inconceivable that they should have increased their
naval precautions, because the French and Spanish
fleets had been almost destroyed, and the British
seamen and marines had proved their superiority.
The truth is, I venture to think, this : they had been
taught how precarious is sea supremacy, how great in
maritime warfare is the element of chance. What
they most feared, we apparently most trust. They
secured an island by giving practical expression to
their fears. Do we expect to preserve an Empire by
simply declaring our patriotism, for which we decline
to pay ; and expressing our hopes, because they involve
no extra expense ?
Given, however, a sufficiency of naval force, are 3-011
content that a majority of the coal depots of the
Empire should remain as they are, practically un-
protected ? That is not a question for experts, but
for British common sense, backing its opinion b\ r
British expenditure.
Lastly, have you confidence and faith in the system
by which the common defence of the Empire is
managed ? Let me give you an illustration of its
practical working as an aid to your debate.
Steam supplanted wind as the motive power for war
and merchant fleets more than a generation ago. From
that moment coal became a ruling factor in the question


of naval defence —the safety of coal supply a first
principle of sea security. The system which the
Empire trusts to provide for its defence in war can
produce in evidence of its efficiency but little more
than a paper correspondence conducted at intervals
between three departments respecting the defence of
coal stores. A triangular agreement has been arranged,
in effect that the United Kingdom should only supply
armaments to equip works constructed at the expense
of the particular localities where, for the safety of the
whole Empire, coal supplies should be secured. If
certain small communities, therefore, do not see why
they should pay extra for the delight of occupying a
locality of strategical importance, the United Kingdom
escapes the expense of providing armaments; and a
point, vital perhaps to the safety of the Empire’s
commerce, is left unprotected. Rightly or wrongly,
some of these communities suspect that when they
have spent their money on the works they may find
that a Home department will give them guns of an
inferior sort because they are cheap. Recent events
will not afford them much comfort. Under the existing
system of arrangement for British defence, the guns
for the navy are provided by a department over which
the navy has no control. The guns and stores for
works at coaling stations will be provided for by the
same department, and over which communities con-
structing these works can exercise no control. It is
but poor encouragement to them to find that the
Admiralty has had to put restrictions on the firing of
certain guns supplied for the service of the fleet. I
will, in confirmation of this statement, quote from the
Parliamentary Reports.
On the 20th of last month, in the House of Commons,
the Secretary of the Admiralty used these words:—
“ The Colossus has already fired off these 43-ton guns at
sea without any serious result occurring. (Laughter.)
Therefore, I think that if she were attacked by any
Greek or other vessels she would be able to defend herself


in a proper way.” Tire Secretary of the Admiralty was
then reminded of the fact that “ she is ordered not to
fire,” and he then stated—“ She is ordered not to use
the guns at target practice, but she is not ordered not
to use them in case she is attacked.” It is five years
ago since an ex-First Lord of the Admiralty, but a few
months out of office, stated to the House as follows: —
“ There could he no doubt that the naval guns of
England’s fleet are inferior to the new guns on board
the German, French, and Russian ships.”
Now, we are not here to discuss the merits of any
particular weapon, but the broad aspects of an Empire’s
defence; upon one of these, at all events, these decla-
rations of the official spokesmen of British naval power,
as it is to-day, throw a lurid light.
We in this crowded island are so enamoured with
the excitement of legislation that the rational discharge
of the plain common duties of administration are now
beyond the pale of popular regard. Without continuity
of business-like administration an efficient system can
neither be devised nor developed. Without real system
tliere can lie no real defence.
It is as well that our fellow-subjects in Canada,
Australasia, South Africa, and throughout our Empire
should take note of these facts. If we are content to
sow the wind in peace, are they content to reap the
whirlwind in war ? If not, it is a great and grave
question for British communities beyond sea to con-
sider carefully whether the existing arrangements for
the Empire’s defence are satisfactory? We are quite
accustomed to European Conferences to arrange for the
security of other States. The final question, therefore,
I venture to submit to you is this—ls it too much to
ask for a British Conference to arrange for the safety
of our own ?
Note. — Much that may seem obscure in this short Paper may be
made clear by reference to my recent lecture, “ Imperial Federation,
Naval and Military.” This will be given free to all who apply to the
Imperial Federation League, 48, St. Margaret’s Offices, Victoria
Street, London, S.W., for a copy.


