

IMPERIAL FEDERATION
AND THE
COMMONWEALTH
CONSTITUTION
AUSTRALIANS, WAKE UP!
"Eternal Vigilance is the Price of Liberty."
J. H. GATTS, M.H.R.
The motion referred to herein caused the
defeat of the Government in the Senate —
incidentally was the cause of the Senate
scandal —and forced the -Hug'hes-Irvine
Fusion to the country.
FEDERAL PARLIAMENT, MELBOURNE,
FEBRUARY 29, 1917.
Worker Print, Sydney—b262l.


IMPERIAL FEDERATION.
(February 29, 1917.)
THE HUGHES-COOK-IRVINE PROPOSITION.
Hon. W. M. Hughes, P.C., Prime Minister (West
Sydney), moved:
Whereas by reason of the existence of a state of
war, and by reason of the immediate meeting of an
Imperial Conference for the discussion of questions
of paramount importance to the Commonwealth and
to the British Empire, it is imperatively necessary
that the forthcoming elections for both Houses of
Parliament of the Commonwealth should be post-
poned : And,
Whereas, in the existing circumstances, this can
only be effected by an Act of the Parliament of the
United Kingdom:
Now therefore this House resolves: That the
Imperial Government be requested to provide by
legislation for the extension of the duration of the
present House of Representatives until the expiration
of six months after the final declaration of peace,
or until the Bth day of October, 1918, whichever is
the shorter period, and for such provision in relation
to the term of Senators, and the holding of Senate
Elections as will enable the next elections for the
Senate to be held at the same time as the next
general election for the House of Representatives,
and consequential adjustments to be made regarding
subsequent elections.


LABOR’S ATTITUDE.
AMENDMENT MOVED ON BEHALF OF THE
LABOR PARTY.
Mr. J. H. GATTS (Cook) [8.30]. —I move—
That all the words after “existence,” line one, be struck
out, with a view to inserting- such words as wilL cause the
motion to read as follows:
Whereas by reason of the existence of a coalition
Government formed behind the backs of the people, having
no popular mandate or endorsement, and consisting mainly
of the old Liberal party, whose policy and administration
were decisively defeated at the last general election held
in September, 1914, during the currency of the war, together
with a small number of -members who have deserted the
Australian Labor Party, and broken the written pledges
upon which they were elected, and it is intolerable that such
a Government should remain in office without popular
safiction; and
Whereas it is proposed that our control of the Common-
wealth Constitution and the amendment thereof should be
superseded by an appeal to the Imperial Parliament for
such an alteration as will enable the Coalition to retain
office beyond the ordinary term of Parliament as fixed by
the said Constitution; and
Whereas the delegates chosen by the Government to
go to the Imperial Conference in no sense represent Aus-
tralia; and
Whereas the principle of compulsory military service
abroad having been defeated at the recent referendum, and
in order that Australia may render the fullest support to
Great Britain, having due regard to the vital necessities
of the Commonwealth, and that this purpose can only be
effected by a Government enjoying the confidence of the
people:
- Now, therefore, this House resolves that an election of
the eighteen retiring Senators and the members of the
House of Representatives shall be held on the same day in
April or May of this year.
Amendment wrongfully ruled out of order by
ex-Labor member J. M. Chanter, Chairman.


IMPERIAL FEDERATION.
(Speech by J. H. Catts, M.H.R., in the Australian
Parliament, in moving an amendment to the motion
moved by the Prime Minister, from “Hansard,”
February 28, 1917.)
GREAT ISSUES INVOLVED.
Mr. J. H. Catts (Cook) : The motion under con-
sideration involves three matters of vital public
policy—
1. Extension of the life of Parliament to October,
1918, or until the conclusion of the war,
under a Government formed behind the
backs of the people.
2. A scheme to invoke Great Britain’s power
to disrupt the Australian Constitution in
defiance of the Constitution itself.
3. Representation at a special Imperial Confer-
ence by men whom Australia has repudiated
is fraught with the danger of restricting
Australia’s freedom as a self-governing
dominion.
PARLIAMENTARY INTRIGUES.
1. Extension of the Life of Parliament.—Aus-
tralia lias recently witnessed three intrigues for the
extension of the life of Parliaments. An election
was proceeding when war was declared. Mr. Hughes,
who was “out,” and Mr. Cook, who was “in,” con-
sidered the people would not change a Government
while the war was in progress. Mr. Hughes donned
the garb of the patriot, and demanded that the elec-
tions should not be proceeded with. On the other
hand, Mr. Cook and Sir William Irvine refused to
stop the elections, and quoted history to show that
elections had been proceeded with, during war, uni-
versally.


Then came a fine piece of manoeuvring. Sir
William Irvine said that the elections could not be
constitutionally stopped. Mr. Hughes mentioned
invoking the Imperial Parliament to alter the Con-
stitution as one alternative amongst others. Sir
William Irvine cried, "Ah, Mr. Hughes wishes
to invoke the Imperial Parliament to interfere
with our affairs. ” Mr. Hughes immediately repudi-
ated this by saying, "I said it could be done, not
that it should be done.”
Mr. Hughes and Sir William Irvine, Mr. Cook
and Mr. Watt, on behalf of their respective parties,
each repudiated the idea that Britain should alter
our Australian Constitution.
The language employed by Mr. Cook, and re-
ported in the Sydney "Daily Telegraph” on the 17th
August, 1914, is especially pertinent to the present
occasion. He said :
To have done so would have been to invite the Imperial
Parliament to deprive the people of a great self-governing
Dominion of the right to choose their own Legislature.
And, further, in the Sydney “Daily Telegraph” of
2nd September, 1914,'he said:—
To invoke the Imperial Parliament was, perhaps, the
last thing to be thought of in Australia.
An appeal to the Imperial Parliament to inter-
fere with Australia 's Constitution was, to the minds
of these men a little over two years ago, the last
thing to be thought of, an unpardonable offence,
notwithstanding that war and panic were raging.
The next example of the extension of the life
of Parliament scheme appeared in New South Wales,
when Messrs. Holman and Wade, both afraid to face
the electors, arranged to postpone the elections for
twelve months. Again, a Coalition and so-called
National Government was formed behind the backs
of the people. Again, the war was the excuse. A
Government which could have nothing to do with
the conduct of the war pleaded a " win-the-war ”
justification for depriving the people of New South


Wales of their constitutional right of electing their
Legislature at the proper time. Having postponed
the appeal to the country by trickery and fraud, this
Government have now sprung elections on New South
Wales by surprise, giving the electors one week in
which to enrol, hoping that by reason of the dis-
franchisement of tens of thousands of the citizens
of New South Wales, and by jerrymandering the
elections, to impose their despotic rule upon the
people.
Now in the Federal Parliament we have the
third bad example—another Coalition formed behind
the backs of the people, another so-called '“National
Government, 77 another so-called 4 ‘ win-the-war 7 7
policy, another base betrayal of the people, another
attempt at disfranchisement of the electors. The
“war 77 and the "flag 77 are being prostituted to
cover the most loathsome devices in order to divert
the attention of the people while their constitutional
freedom and liberty are being filched from them.
This instance amply justifies the famous remark of
Hr. Johnson, when patriotism was being abused, that
"Patriotism is the last refuge of the scoundrel. 77
SAVE OUR CONSTITUTION.
2. Invoking Britain to Disrupt our Australian
Constitution.—The six States of Australia agreed to
federate in one indissoluble Commonwealth. This
agreement was ratified by the Imperial Parliament
by the passage of the Commonwealth of Australia
Constitution Act. By this Act Great Britain not
only conceded full self-governing rights to the Com-
monwealth of Australia, but gave up its own right to.
interfere in our affairs. It virtually created us an
independent nation. Section 128 of the Constitution
sets forth the procedure to be followed to alter the
Constitution by a referendum of the people, and says
emphatically that “The Constitution may not be
altered except in that manner.” This section is the
pivotal point of Australia’s freedom and self-
government —the charter of our liberties.


It is a public scandal that there should exist in
an Australian Parliament men so recreant to their
trust, so disloyal to the people of Australia, and so
lost to a sense of their duty, as to attempt to invoke
the aid of Great Britain unconstitutionally to disrupt
our Constitution and interfere with our self-govern-
ment.
Such men should be impeached for their dis-
loyalty to Australia, for, if it becomes established by
precedent, inspired by Australia itself, that section
128 of the Constitution may be overcome and lightly
regarded, our freedom and self-government will
be in perpetual jeopardy from any accidental and
immoral coalition of politicians, recreant to their
election pledges, petitioning the Imperial Parliament
for an amendment of the Constitution.
It is nothing short of a calamity, both in the
Empire sense and in its Australian significance, that
this fresh apple of discord has been thrown amongst
us, for the people of Australia are not only threat-
ened with violence from without, but are menaced by
the threat that our freedom shall be exchanged for
slavery, our independence for the status of a subject
race.
If a Legislature 16,000 miles away may alter our
constitutional and individual status in defiance of
the Constitution itself, this self-governing Dominion
of Australia will be relegated to the position of India.
To thwart this foul conspiracy the passion and
strength of every true Australian should be aroused
m defence of Australia's most sacred and cherished
possession—our Federal Constitution.
SNEAKING IN IMPERIAL FEDERATION.
3. Purpose of and Representation at the Pro-
posed Imperial Conference.—Coincident with this
effort to establish new methods of altering the Aus-
tralian Constitution is the announcement of the crea-
tion of an Empire Federation with an Empire Con-
stitution.


Speaking in Parliament on the 22nd February,
the Prime Minister said:—
This war . . . has created many and vitally import-
ant problems—economic, political, national, and Imperial,
which compel our earnest and immediate attention. The
solution of many of these does not lie in our hands; they
are Imperial in their nature. Sir, the Dominions —that
league of free, self-governing nations, which form part of
what is called the British Empire—are now summoned to
a Conference at the heart of the Empire to consider great
problems. This Conference marks a new epoch in Imperial
development. The scope of its deliberations is so wide as
to cover all matters directly relating to the war or arising
out of it. The Conference will, for example, consider the
conduct of the war; peace, and the terms upon which the
Empire will agree to it; Imperial trade, including prefer-
ence; and the constitution of the Empire.
The following cable in the Sydney il Daily
Telegraph” of the 24th February, is significant: —
New York, Friday.—The Washington correspondent of
the New York “Tribune” has learned in diplomatic quarters
that the subjects of discussion at the Imperial Conference
will include the establishment of an Imperial Parliament,
with representatives of Britain and self-governing Domin-
ions, and India; the joint control of the Empires foreign
and Imperial policies; the consolidation of certain outlying
British possessions; greater self-government for India; the
participation of the colonies and India at the Peace Con-
ference, and the Dominions’ demand for a larger share in
the determination of foreign policy.
Several days previous to this, the Prime Minister
announced that Sir William Irvine s presence was
required at the Conference because of his special
constitutional knowledge.
“OH THAT MINE ENEMY ”
Additional light is thrown on the subject by
Douglas Sladen, who published in London, about the
middle of last year, an autobiographical sketch of the
life of the Prime Minister. This book by Mr. Douglas
Sladen was written with the Prime Minister’s know-
ledge, concurrence, and consent, as is shown in the
book itself in the fact that the Prime Minister has


written several of the articles, and by the indication
that the book was submitted to him.
This book, published with the concurrence of
the Prime Minister, is entitled, "From Boundary
Rider to Prime Minister; Hughes of Australia,” and
on page 44 there appears the following:—
In the three Cabinets in which Mr. Fisher was Premier,
Mr. Hughes was his Attorney-General, and on Mr. Fisher’s
resigning the Premiership in the autumn of 1915 to assume
the High Commissionership for Australia, Mr. Hughes
succeeded him.
Their being in London together may have some bearing
on a problem of the near future. For between them they
own all the powers over Australian affairs, which would
be vested in the Australian member of a Federal Council
of the Empire, if there were one or of the Australian member
of the British Cabinet, if after the war, the Cabinet were
always made to include an Australian, a New Zealander, a
Canadian, and a South African.
No workable plan to meet the case of Imperial Federa-
tion seems yet to have been devised. But it is certain that
the Dominions will be invited into the councils of the
Empire in some way, after the magnificent manner in which
they have supported the Empire in the war.
Having been accustomed to act together for so many
years, Mr. Hughes and Mr. Fisher have a better chance
of solving the problem of the new office which will fcome
half way between their own. For the moment the chief
importance of the position is that the new Ambassador of
Australia in London is a man thoroughly in touch with the
Labor Party, which is omnipotent in Australia, as well as
heart and soul in the war, and in the closest personal
association with the most brilliant and powerful Prime
Minister who has ever adorned, a British colony.
OUR ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL LIFE.
On page 102 of the same book, one of the Prime
Minister’s English speeches is reproduced, from
which the following is taken: —
Quite apart from the idea of a self-contained- Empire,
there is the idea of Britain as an organised nation. And
the British Empire as an organised Empire, organised for
trade, for industry, for economic justice, for national de-
fence, for the preservation of the world’s peace, for the pro-


lection of the weak against the strong—that is a noble
ideal. It ought to be; it must be ours. Let us take this
solemn lesson to heart. Let us resolutely, putting aside
considerations of party, class, and doctrine without delay,
proceed to devise a policy for the British Empire, a policy
which shall cover every phase of our national, economic,
and social life; which shall develop the tremendous re-
sources, and yet be compatible with those ideals of liberty
and justice for which our ancestors fought and died.
Mark the passage which advocates Imperial
Federation—‘ ‘A policy which shall cover every phase
of our national, economic, and social life.” That
shows the Prime Minister was preparing to throw
the ’Commonwealth Constitution into the melting pot
of Imperial Federation, together with our Australian
institutions, in the middle of 1916, before any
conflict arose between him and the members of the
Labor Party. It shows conclusively that the Prime
Minister had decided to attempt to carry the Labor
Party with him in disrupting the Australian Con-
stitution, and casting our economic position into the
crucible with India and Great Britain—placing our
trade into jeopardy—and that the ideals and aspira-
tions of this country were to be thrown overboard
and compromised by existing conditions, economical,
social, and industrial, in other parts of the Empire.
NEW ZEALAND PREMIER’S ASPIRATIONS.
Then, under the heading of the “Cost of the
Navy,” the following appears in the “Daily Tele-
graph” of the 26th February, 1917:
Sir Joseph Ward is talking* a good deal in England
about unity of the Empire and trade hostility against
Germany after the war. He would not let a German ship
coal in a British port, nor use the Suez Canal, nor much
besides. He would carry on the war after it was over.
Here is another suggestion of his in the “Empire Review 7 ’:
'With regard to the provision of the necessary funds for
founding and maintaining an Empire Navy, I would make
a suggestion. The population of the United Kingdom and
oversea countries, without counting India or the Crown
colonies, may roughly be said to -be 60,000,000 persons; if,
then, we agree upon a contribution of 10s. per head it would


provide an annual income of £30,000,000, which, at 6 per
cent, would provide in normal times the payment of interest
and make provision for a sinking fund of £500,000,000. With
this money at our disposal, we could build docks, as well
as provide coaling and oil stations in every part of the
Empire. We could also have a Navy so powerful and so
complete that no combination of enemies would dare to try
conclusions with its Fleet. Again, the plan I propose would
lessen the expense to the British taxpayer and also reason-
ably and equitably increase the contribution from overseas
Dominions. I venture to commend it to the consideration
of the Home and Dominion Governments.”
There is a comment on that by the financial
editor of the.‘'Daily Telegraph”:—
Now, to build another Navy and coaling stations at a
cost of £500,000,000 would require 20 per cent, per annum,
or £100,000,000, for upkeep and depreciation. Where would
that come from? The interest is only a small part of the
charge that would be incurred.
DESTROY OUR INSTITUTIONS.
The time limit does not permit of the considera-
tion in detail of the full meaning and effect of this
scheme of Imperial Federation, but such a scheme
will certainly mean this:
1. It wiir superimpose upon Australia an eighth
Parliament.
2. Heavy additional taxation will be required to
pay Australia’s share in this huge undertaking.
3. The Australian Constitution will have to be
recast and restricted. There cannot be a new addi-
tional Empire Constitution governing Australia with-
out taking away some of the powers of our present
Commonwealth Constitution.
Naval Defence.—An Australian-owned and con-
trolled Navy will soon become a thing of the past.
Land Defence. —Imperial defence means con-
scription within the Empire. If we are to be a part
of the Empire responsible for defending the whole
of the Empire, that means conscription over the
whole of the Empire and that Australians may be
compelled to fight on any frontier of the Empire,


whether it be in India, Egypt, Great Britain, South
Africa, or any of the British possessions in the
various parts of the world.
WHITE AUSTRALIA.
The White Australia policy would be imperilled
under such a scheme. There are 60,000,000 of white
people in the Empire, and 5,000,000 of these are in
Australia. But the Empire includes some 400,000,000
of colored people. In an Empire Parliament we
should have representation on behalf of 5,000,000 out
of 60,000,000 of white people, and if the colored
races are to be represented—and it has been said
that India should be included in the scheme—we
should have representation on behalf of 5,000,000
out of about 500,000,000 people. It cannot be expec-
ted that a ( Parliament of .tha t kind would permit us
to retain our White Australia policy.
PROTECTED INDUSTRIES
How would this proposal for Imperial Federa-
tion affect our protected industries? We should have
Free Trade within the Empire. Australian industries
would be swamped with the cheap labor goods of
Great Britain and India.
These are merely hints of what would occur if
the ambitions of this Welsh Prime Minister are given
effect to, this gentleman who goes to Great Britain
and does not say “Australia for ever best, 77 but
•“Wales for ever best. 77
AUSTRALIAN PATRIOTISM.
In this country we have two kinds of English-
men. There are Englishmen coming here who con-
tinue to consider themselves as Englishmen. There
are others who consider themselves Australians, and
are prepared to do their best for the land of their
adoption. Unfortunately, we have some Englishmen
here who would sacrifice this country. They are not,


never have been, and never will be, Australians; and
such a man is the man who, unfortunately, is Prime
Minister of the Commonwealth to-day.
THE COMMONWEALTH’S DELEGATION.
Australia should be represented at the Imperial
Conference only by thoroughly trusted Australians,
whether they have been born here or have come
here from the Mother Country. They should be
representatives of a Government that fully enjoys
the confidence of the people of Australia, and they
should go to the Conference only after a thorough
ventilation of the scheme of Imperial Federation in
the Parliament, in the press, and from the platforms,
of the Commonwealth. Instead of that, there has
been no open discussion of the question of Imperial
Federation.
These delegates are trying to steal off from
Australia without telling the people of the Common-
wealth what their real mission is. They are trying
to do something behind the backs of the people.
Even the colleagues of the Prime Minister have
never seen the invitation he received from Great
Britain, and do not know its real purport.
DISCREDITED REPRESENTATIVES.
The Prime Minister has left his party and re-
pudiated his written election pledges. He has been
expelled by all political and industrial associations
with which he was connected. His electorate has
disowned him, and the Commonwealth has declared
emphatically against his leadership.
The other two delegates—the honorable member
for Flinders and the Treasurer —were Ministers at
the outbreak of the war. They went to the country,
and the country emphatically ejected them from
office.


OUTRAGED PUBLIC OPINION.
The gentlemen who have been announced as,
Australia’s representatives to the Imperial Confer-
ence are opposed to Australian public opinion. On
the only vital point of Australian policy during this
war, namely, that of conscription for service over-
seas, they have been repudiated by the people of
the country.
The Prime Minister is. not an Australian by
birth; he is not an Australian in sentiment, but
merely an Imperial jingo.
The honorable member for Flinders is not Aus-
tralian born; he has never been Australian in senti-
ment, and he will never be Australian in sentiment.
The Treasurer, who is Australian born, is as
big an Imperial jingo as either of the other two,
and belongs to a period of x\ustralian history when
it was a disgrace to ask for anything made in Aus-
tralia, when it was good form to go into a shop and
ask for imported goods. Such a condition of things
existed then that Australian manufacturers had to
put English brands on their goods, and tell lies in
order to sell them.
The Treasurer, with all his frills and furbelows,
his red, white, and blue coats and sashes, his medals,
and his various letters of distinction that he always
put behind the speeches which he issues from this
House, belongs to that period. He has his eye on
Great Britain more than on Australia. In a word,
these three gentlemen are about the last three men
in Australia who should attempt to represent Aus-
tralian sentiment at the heart of the Empire.
AMBITIOUS MEN!
There are some gentlemen in this House with
aspirations in regard to Imperial Federation and big
positions in connection with it, such as representa-
tion in the Imperial Parliament and in the Imperial
Councils. The best interests of Australia are being


sacrificed to those ambitions, and it is about time
that some Australian began to speak out about the
matter.
AUSTRALIA AND THE WAR.
These gentlemen are moving heaven and earth
in order to prevent an appeal to the country. This
Parliament is due to go to the country within the
next two or three months. Why cannot they allow
Parliament to go to the country and permit the
people to say who should occupy the Treasury
benches? We will never have a workable Parlia-
ment here until the people give an endorsement of
those who occupy the Treasury benches.
Can we expect the voluntary recruiting to suc-
ceed when every man occupying a seat on the
Government side is a confirmed conscriptionist, and
when there is not a man in any position throughout
Australia in connection with the recruiting scheme
who is not a confirmed conscriptionist? Not one
man who is in favor of the voluntary system has been
asked to take one of these positions.
Can we expect Labor legislation from Conser-
vatives, or Labor administration from those opposed
to Labor? How, then, can we expect the best results
for the voluntary system from those who are pro-
nounced enemies of voluntarism? If Australia is
failing in all that it might be expected to do in
connection with the war it is due in the first place
to the fact that the Prime Minister came back here
and despotically threw down the apple of discord in
a country where there was unity of effort. He
divided the people into two hostile factions. His
Government is now endeavoring to carry out a sys-
tem which they said could never be made to succeed.
Every man concerned with the administration of the
voluntary system of recruiting now is an enemy of
what he is trying to administer. Can we expect
voluntarism to succeed in such circumstances? We
must expect the opposite.


AUSTRALIA! BE VIGILANT.
Australia does want to help the Empire, but
good Australians want to see that Australia is not
absolutely ruined. They want to see that Australian
interests are taken into consideration, but, unfor-
tunately, the major influences on the Government
benches do not care a hang about Australia. As
long as their ideas of Imperial Federation are con-
served, Australia can remain a mere tail-end of
Great Britain. If this Government, which professes
to have the confidence of the people, have the courage
to go to the people at the proper time, when Parlia-
ment shall expire by effluxion of time, Australia will
undoubtedly return a Parliament that will have the
confidence of the people, and that will do its very
best to see that, while helping the Empire in this
great war, Australian interests are fully preserved.
(This speech was. interrupted throughout by the
Chairman and by Couscriptionist Hughes-Irvine
supporters. The reported interruptions and attempts
at “gag” occupy as much space in the official
records as the speech itself. Owing to cost of print-
ing, the report of these interruptions has been
excluded.—J.H.C.)
Authorised by J. H. Catts, Macdonell House, Sydney.
Worker Print. St. Andrew’s Place, Sydney.
