

Imperial Federation
versus
AUSTRALIAN INDEPENDENCE.
A FEW WORDS ON THE SUBJECT
(BEING NOTES OF A SPEECH DELIVERED ON THE OCCASION OF A DEBATE
AT THE TASMANIAN HALL, HOBART, JUNE 18, 1889),
BY
ALFRED J. TAYLOR,
Librarian Tasmanian Public Library, and Member of the Howard Association and Royal
Colonial Institute, London.
“Not yet her day; How long, ‘not .yet?’
There conies the flush of violet!
And heavenward faces, all aflame
With sanguine imminence of morn,
Wait hut the sun-kiss to proclaim
The Day of the Dominion born.”
Brunton Stephens.
Tasmania::
The Mekcury” Office, Hobart.
1889.




Imperial Federation
versus
AUSTRALIAN INDEPENDENCE.
A FEW WORDS ON THE SUBJECT
(BEING NOTES OF A SPEECH DELIVERED ON THE OCCASION OF A DEBATE
AT THE TASMANIAN HALL, HOBART, JUNE 18, 1889),
BY
ALFRED J. TAYLOR,
Librarian Tasmanian Public Library, and Member of the Howard Association and Royal
Colonial Institute, London.
“Not yet her day; How long, ‘not yet?’
There comes the flush of violet!
And heavenward faces, all aflame
With sanguine imminence of morn,
Wait but the sun-kiss to proclaim
The Day of the Dominion born.”
Brunton Stephens.
flasmama:
The Mercury ” Office, Hobart.
1889.


THE CELEBRATED
"WALDEMAB
German Pianofortes.
Iron Framed. Overstrung. Full Tri-
chord. Full Compass. Best French
Chech Action. Bushed Ivory K eys
Burr Walnut Cases, or Black Pear
Tree Cases. Sconces.
MESSRS. J. WALCH & SONS have been
appointed Sole Agents in Hobart for the
Celebrated “WALDEMAR” PIANOFORTES.
These Instruments are a good example of the favourite
German Pianofortes ; they are of good tone, modern
construction, elegant in appearance, and moderate in
price. The Prices range from <£4o to £5O, with a
Liberal Discount for Cash, or if preferred, payments
can be made by Monthly Instalments extending over
one or two years.
Further particulars and Illustrated Catalogues
will be supplied on application.
J. IVALCII & SONS.


IMPERIAL FEDERATION
VERSUS
AUSTRALIAN INDEPENDENCE.
In rising to lead the debate on the side of those who believe
that Australian Independence would be preferable to Imperial
Federation,
Mr. Alfred J. Taylor (Public Librarian) said : He claimed first
of all to be a Citizen of the World, and then rejoiced that he was an
Australian. He would endeavour to look at the question they had
met to discuss, impartially, from two standpoints. (1.) From the
standpoint of one who believed that Imperial Federation was
altogether outside the range of practical politics; and (2) from an
Australian standpoint. Some of his hearers would remember that
during a recent debate with Mr. Parkin he (the speaker) had taken
advantage of the opportunity to refer to some of the difficulties in
the way of Imperial Federation that had been presented to his
mind. He had done this in the hope that those difficulties would
have been fairly met and answered, if they could not be wholly
removed. But in his reply upon the debate Mr. Parkin most
studiously avoided touching upon them, and they still remained
untouched. He would therefore repeat them that evening, and
trusted that some attempt at least would be made to dispose of
them. It was a noticeable feature with those who lectured them
upon Imperial Federation that they always dwelt upon the question
as if it were one as between the Mother Country and her Colonies
only, and ignored altogether the real core of the subject that they
professed to deal with. His friend had followed the same course
in his opening address that evening. But Imperial Federation
meant something more than that, if the words had any significance
at all, and he would ask them not to lose sight of that fact in their
consideration of the question they were about to discuss.
On Sunday last he (Mr. Taylor) had read for the first time
Seeley’s “ Expansion of England.” That was the book that the
advocates of Imperial Federation were always imploring them to
read. Well, he had read that book, expecting to find in it a most
impassioned appeal in favour of Imperial Federation. On the
contrary, however, he found that Professor Seeley so fully recognised
the difficulties standing in the way of the accomplishment of such a
dream that he would quote him as a witness that evening in support
of some of the objections he had urged in their hearing a few weeks
ago. Let them pause for a moment, and consider what those
gentlemen meant who talked so confidently about Imperial Federa-


tion. He took it for granted that the front page of their official
organ, published in London, “ Imperial Federation ” might be taken
as the flag and banner of the League. That page contained a list
of the British possessionsand dependencies printed m very prominent
type, and among them might be mentioned Ireland, Heligoland,
Jamaica, W. African Settlements,BechuanaLand, Hew Guinea,lndia,
etc.,etc. How, whenever they asked their “Imperial” friends to show
the practicability of the Federation they advocated, reference was
always made to the United States—and rightly so—because the United
States afforded a remarkable instance in modern times of Federation
upon a large scale. But they seemed to forget that the conditions
necessary to the Federation of the States were favourable from the
very commencement. Hot only were the boundaries contiguous,
but the people were of one tongue, one nationality, one leligion ,
and all their commercial and political interests were one. also; and
yet in spite of all this—to quote the words of a writer m the
British Quarterly Review- although the “Constitution was finally
settled in 1787, and the first Presidential election took place in
the following year, it was not': until 80 years afterwards that the
Constitution was definitely accepted by all as the basis of Union.
And it was accepted after the elaborate interpretations of Marshall
on the Bench, and of Webster in the Senate. After a controversy
extending over more than two generations; after the nullification
struggle of Calhoun ; after the compromise measures of Clay;
after "the Kansas-Hebraska conflict;, after the long and bitter
abolition controversy; after the secession of the Southern States,
and the greatest Civil war recorded in History. And during, all
this period the Constitution was the battle ground of American
Politics. Such has been the history of Federation on a large scale
under the most favourable circumstances which the whole world
could present.” f
The same favourable circumstances that led to the Federation o±
the United States could not be said to exist with regard to the
British Dominion. “The chief forces which hold a community
together,” said Professor Seeley in his “ Expansion of England,”
“are three —common nationality, common religion, and common
interest.” He (Mr. Taylor) would ask if those forces could be said to be
active at the present moment between the different possessions and
dependencies of the Mother Country that he had named. For
answer he need only refer to India. The population of India
under British Administration was about 257,000,000, and the
British-born population (exclusive of the Army and Havy—about
72,000) was about 90,000 ; and this was what Professor Seeley had to
say about the connection of Great Britain with that Country
“ While the connection between England with her Colonies is in
the highest degree natural, her connection with India seems at. first
sight, at least, to be in the highest degree unnatural. There is no
natural tie whatever between the two Countries: no community
of blood; no community of religion; for we come as Christians
into a population divided between Brahminism and Mohammedism.
And lastly, no community of interest except so much as there must
be between all Countries, namely, the interest that each has to
receive the commodities of others,” (p. 186).


“ The Indian Empire,” he said in another place (p. 191), “is so
different in kind, both from England itself and from the Colonial
Empire, that it requires wholly different principles of policy.”
Still further on in his remarkable book, he wrote : “ India is of
all Countries that which is least capable of evolving out of itself a
stable Government; and it is to be feared,” he added,—-and how
significant the admission —“ that our rule may have diminished what
little power of this sort it may have originally possessed. Eor our
supremacy has necessarily depressed those classes which had
anything of the talent or habit of Government” (p. 196), and
finally, he made this fatal admission —that the possession of India
“ confuses our minds with problems of hopeless difficulty.”
But Mr. Parkin had a very easy method of getting over this
difficulty. During that gentleman’s recent visit to Tasmania he
had made an admission which had surprised him very much. At
first he (Mr. Taylor) had regarded it only as a slip of the tongue;
but the admission had been repeated at the Town Hall—and it was
an admission that certainly seemed to indicate that Mr. Parkin had
not yet mastered the first principles of the subject he had professed
to discuss. “ How shall we deal with India,” Mr. Parkin had
asked, and he had answered himself in these words : “ We
will rule India for India’s good.” What! One portion of a
Federation rule another ! One portion of a Federation domineer
over another! Such a thing had never been heard of in the history
of Federation; for it was the soul and essence of a Federation that
each of its parts should be on an equality and enjoy equal rights.
The advocates of Imperial Federation where in sore straits when
they had to make such admissions as that. Another gentleman
had suggested that the natives of India might be treated as the
Indians of America were treated by the Hnited States; but the
comparison merely served to show how little thought was given to
the subject by those who talked so glibly about it. Professor
Seeley stated that “ the total Indian population within the territory
of the Hnited States, east of the Rocky Mountains, did not at any
time, subsequent to the discovery of America, exceed, if indeed it
ever reached, 300,000 individuals.” There was also this difference
between the natives of India and the Indians of America, that the
latter might at any time claim the rights of citizenship and exercise
the Franchise. Would the natives of India be permitted to do
that ? But that was not the only difficulty of the kind that stood
in the way of Imperial Federation.
“It is in the South African group,” said Seeley, “that the Nation-
ality difficulty is most serious. It is here a double difficulty. The
native tribes of South Africa instead of disappearing and dwindling
before the whites greatly outnumber them, and show a power of
combination and progress such as the Red Indian never showed.
. . . . But, secondly, the other difficulty, which arises
from the fact that the settlers themselves were at the outset not
English but Dutch, does not diminish or tend to disappear as it
has done in Canada ” (p. 49).
The geographical situation of the possessions and dependencies
of Great Britain offered an insuperable obstacle to Imperial
Federation. They were not only separated by national and religions


distinctions, and by the fact that they were without common
legislative and administrative machinery, and without any com-
mercial or political interests that could be said to be common, but
they were scattered over seas and continents and separated by
foreign states. The importance of such an obstacle had been fully
recognised by Professor Seeley. “When we look back,” he said,
referring to America, “ over the stages of her progress, we are able
easily to discover that she has been in several points remarkably
favoured by fortune. Imagine, for instance, that the original
colonies, instead of lying in a compact group along the coast, had
been scattered over the continent and had been separated from one
another by other settlements belonging to other European States.
Such a difference might have made the growth of the Union
impossible ” (p. 157).
Having thus briefly referred to what might be called the Physical
and Ethnographical difficulties that stood in the way of Imperial
Federation, he would now touch upon the political, tariff, and
“ conditional ” difficulties which stood in the way. Imperial
Federation necessarily implied a National or Central Parliament.
Now, even allowing the possibility of such a Parliament being
established, what power on earth could enforce its mandates?
Supposing Tasmania were called upon to contribute a share of the
cost of settling the Canadian Fisheries quarrel; and supposing the
local Parliament refused to vote the contribution. How could it be
enforced? Recource to arms would announce to the civilised
world that the union had ceased to exist. The difficulty in the way
of establishing such a Parliament had been fairly admitted by the
official organ of the League. In the issue of Imperial Federation,
for April 1, of the present year, the following passage occurred in
a leading article: —“ It is impossible to express, * authoritatively,’
the views of the League on (1) Imperial Freetrade, (2) the scheme
advocated in lieu of an Imperial Parliament in London, for the
simple but sufficient reason that the League has no views on these
subjects .” The tariff difficulty was illustrated in an account in the same
journal of an interview between one of the representatives of the New
Zealand Council and Sir Stafford Northcote. “ Mr.Beetham,” said the
report, “ referred to a visit to Sir Stafford Northcote, who entered
into the question of Imperial Federation with much earnestness ;
and, as a statesman should do, he appreciated the difficulties of the
position, viz., the question of the many tariffs, and asked if the
Colonies would consent —if proportionate representation were
granted —to enter into a Customs Union with the Mother Country.
This, Mr. Beetham explained, the necessities for raising revenue
would render impossible.” The “ conditional ” difficulties included
the absence of a National sentiment among the different parts of
the British Dominion, and the fact that those different parts were
not on a footing of equality. It would be unreasonable to expect a
Federation to exist unless the conditions of its existence were
present. Now, Federation, in the true sense of the words, implied a
unionof States that were equal. Could it be said that thepossessions
and dependencies of Great Britain were on an equal footing ? The
fact that there were dependencies gave the answer to the question.
No Federation could be more than a name that had not for its soul


and life a strong National sentiment, that had not for its founda-
tion the will of the people, and that had not the spirit of
patriotism that would make its people one in heart and one in
mind. That spirit was not alive throughout the British Empire at
the present time, and hence any scheme of Imperial Federation
could only be based upon a paper Constitution that would be as
worthless as a body without a soul.
Now to look at the Question for a few moments from an Austra-
lian standpoint.
It had been urged by their “ Imperial ” friends that Separation
or Independence would mean the risk of annexation by other
powers—the loss of influence and the loss of all the benefits that it
was urged they derived from their connection with the Mother
Country. With regard to Annexation it must be remembered that
the American Colonies won their independence when they had a
population considerably below that of the Australian Colonies at
the present moment, and at a time when the air was sulphurous
with the breath of War ; that the rich Argentine Republic, with a
population about equal to that of Australia, retained its indepen-
dence ; that Chili, with a population of only 2,526,969, retained its
position as a republic; that Peru, with a population of little more,
50 per cent, of whom were aborigines or natives, retained her inde-
pendence ; and that the Orange Free States, with a population
about equal to that of Tasmania, and 50 per cent, of whom were
natives, also remained free.
Mr. Parkin laid great stress upon the fact that owing to tele-
graphic communication England could now flash danger to any
portion of her dominion. What this was worth might be gathered
from the utterances of another recent visitor to Tasmania—Major-
General Strange—who, in his lecture at the Town Hall on April 1,
said (and it was remarkable how safely their opponents might be
left to answer each other) : —“ At present all the lines ran through
foreign countries, and were exposed to this danger, whilst, further,
it might be pointed out that when free from this they had to risk
communication being cut oft by natural causes—by volcanic
disturbances* or coral growths, which cut the precious line. There
had been no less than 33 interruptions in a period of four months
on this account. They knew the effect produced; the injury to
commerce, the alarm to colonists. The present Eastern telegraphic
line was in no sense a British girdle, for it passed from Australia
to Java, a Butch settlement, which would eventually become a
German possession, thence to the Malay Peninsula, across India,
Arabia, Egypt' —the battle ground of Europe in the past, and
therefore why might it not be so in the future —and met in one
centre upon that narrow neck of land, the Isthmus of Suez, met in
such a manner that one man with a tomahawk could sever the
whole with a few blows, and indeed could destroy communication
in a few hours were the cables 30 in number. Prom thence it
followed the shallow course of the Mediterranean Ocean, and
emerged on to foreign soil again. Need he point out how much it
was at the mercy of foreign hands ?”
It would surely, in all fairness, be admitted that some danger
attached to the connection of the Colonies with England. It was


not so many months ago that the following cable message appeared
in the columns of the Press :
London, May 23.
“ Yesterday’s issue of Le Gaulois, a Republican newspaper,
published in Paris, contains an article on the ‘ war awakening ’ in
England and the condition of the defences of the British Empire.
The tone of the article is unfriendly. Le Gaulois states that the
defences of England are probably capable of resisting any attack
that may be made upon them. The Colonies, it says, are England’s
only vulnerable point, and it is through the Colonies alone that Great
Britain can be successfully attached.” Closer connection with the
Mother Country would certainly tend to involve the Colonies in
wars not of their own making. At the Chamberlain banquet, at
Birmingham, on the 28th March, last year, Mr. John Bright
said : —“ I should like to ask the Federation people whether the
Colonies of this Country —Canada and the many Colonies—the
great Colonies —that cluster in the South Pacific, the Australian
Colonies —whether they think that these Colonies will be willing to
bind themselves to the stupid Foreign Policy of the Government of
this Country ? Will they be willing to undertake the responsibility
of entering into war, the seat of which is 10,000 miles away, and
in which they cannot have the slightest influence or interest, and
when they may not have been in the least consulted as to the cause
of quarrel for which this country was rushing into war. In my
opinion the Colonies will never stand a policy of that kind. If I was
a Canadian, or Victorian, or New South Walesman, or Queenslander,
or New Zealander, I would take good care, as far as I was concerned,
that my voice should never go in favour of any connection what-
ever with those complications in the foreign policy of the
Government of the Mother Country. It would be much better for
humanity, and for them, and for us, that these Colonies should be
under Governments of their own, and independent, and should not
meddle with quarrels in which they were not concerned. Let them
endeavour to maintain their own honour, and not take part in the
miserable quarrels, contests, and wars, which for a long time past
have disfigured the history of the Kingdom in which we live.”
(Applause.)
He (Mr. Taylor) was glad to hear them cheer those sentiments,
and he had been glad to find them re-echoed in the last number of
the Law Quarterly Review : —
“ The names of Assyria, Persia, Macedonia, Rome,” wrote Mr.
E. W. Burton in its pages, “ are eloquent witnesses to the ages of
that doom of decay which destiny metes out to colossal States. In
the interest of human civilisation it would be better far that the
young Anglo-Saxon communities should aspire to enter the rank
of nations, and assume the more ennobling responsibilites of full
citizenship, than that they, in their newly-attained manhood should
trammel themselves with bonds, to the destruction of which they
might have to devote all their matured energies. Twenty-seven
years ago the world beheld one-half our race engaged in fratricidal
conflict—may it never be the lot of humanity to witness the other
half in the throes of a civil war waged in every quarter of the
globe.”


As a distinct Nationality Australia would be free from many of
the restrictions and annoyances to which she was now subject. It
was more than probable that France would have yielded to the
request of a United Australia over the New Hebrides Question
when she did not feel inclined to give way to England at the loss
of prestige to herself. Then againthe Colonies would be free from
the annoyance of interference in their Legislation. England vetoed
the Queensland Chinese Bill. (They all knew his opinion upon
that subject, but at the same time in all fairness he was bound to
admit that the Colonies should be allowed to act for themselves in
these matters.) Then again she vetoed the Victorian Army
Discipline Bill, the South Australian Deceased Wife’s Sister Bill,
the New South Wales Divorce Bill, and practically the Marine
Board Bill. There were also the restrictions placed upon the
Colonies in economical and commercial matters. A short time ago
one of the Colonies had been enabled to develop its vast silver re-
sources, and a desire was expressed that it should be permitted to
coin silver as well as gold. The Imperial Authorities objected,
probably for the reason that a large profit attached to. the coinage
of silver. Strange to say the same Colony was permitted to coin
gold, which could only be done at a loss. The Colonies, ran the
risk of losing in other ways by a continuous connection with Great
Britain. A short time ago the Imperial Authorities decided. to
increase the duties on bottled wines; France in retaliation
threatened to increase the duties on Australian Wools. Last year
France at first declined to be officially represented at the Melbourne
Exhibition. Why ? Because England had decided not to be repre-
sented at the Exhibition now being held at Paris to commemorate
the Revolution of 1798; and other differences relating to matters of
little interest to the Colonies. Would they believe it when he
told them that English Trustees were not permitted to invest in
Colonial Securities ? And would they still further believe it that
under their present Constitution the Australian Colonies were not in
a position to enter into Commercial Treaties with America or
Foreign Countries however much it might be considered desirable
in their best interests to do so! And their delegates at the recent
Conference had agreed to this condition of things remaining, on the
ground that any alteration might interfere with the “integrity of
the Empire ” —whatever that might mean.
Before concluding, he wished to say a few words about the future
of Australia, and as bearing upon this branch of his subject he could
not afford to miss a reference to her growing population. The
ever courteous Government Statistician, his friend Mr. K. M.
Johnston, had worked out for him some calculations that afternoon
that might be relied upon as correct. Those figures showed that
the increase in the population of Australia during the last five
years had been at the rate of 4r09 per cent, per year. The same
rate of increase would double her population in about 19 years.
The increase by births only had been at the rate of 1'79 per cent,
per year, and that rate of increase alone would double hei popula-
tion in about 35 years. Taking Australasia—which would include
New Zealand and Tasmania—the rate of increase during the last


five years had been from all sources at the rate of 3’BB per cent per
year; and from births only at the rate of l - 87 per cent, per year,
which would give about the same results, practically, for Austral-
asia as for Australia. There was a significance about those figures
that he would ask them to try and realise.
Let it be clearly understood, as a last thought, that Australian
Independence did not mean the severance of the natural ties that
would always bind them to the Mother Countrv. He would always
be found working with those who were endeavouring to unite more
closely the English speaking races of the world. It would clearly
be seen, however, that this was a very different thing to all that
was necessarily implied in the words “ Imperial Federation.” The
only union worth trusting to must ever be the unity that had for
its life and soul a true National sentiment.
To conclude. It often happened that the many who stood by
the mighty loom, at which Nature was ever working, saw but the
flying shuttle as it travelled too and fro, or saw, in warp and weft,
but tangled threads and knotted skeins. But those who kept their
attention fixed upon Her busy fingers could see that She was
weaving a marvellous pattern that had some definite end in view;
and reading the future in the light of the work done in the past,
they could arrive at no other conclusion than that the future
destiny of the Australasian Colonies was in the direction of
Independence, based upon the broad lines of Nationality—an
Independence that would make them powerful for commerce and
peace; powerful for their common welfare; powerful for Righteous-
ness and good works throughout the world. The day of her
Independence had not arrived, but might they not say, in the
language of one of their own Australian poets:—
“ She is not yet. But he whose ear
Thrills to that finer atmosphere
Where footfalls of appointed things,
Reverberant of days to be,
Are _ heard infforecast echoings,
Like wave-beats from a viewless sea ;
Hears in the voiceful tremors of the sky
Auroral heralds whispering, ‘She is nigh.’ ”
* % * %
‘ Oh, fair ideal! Unto whom
Through days of doubt and nights of gloom,
Brave hearts have clung, while lips of scorn
Made mock of Thee as but a dream —
Already on the heights of morn
We see Thy golden sandals gleam ;
And glimmering through the clouds that wrap thee yet
The Seven Stars that are thy Coronet.”
“Mercury” Office, Hobart.


For Biliousness and Indigestion .
TORUS’
PODOPHYLLIN, TARAXACUM & RHUBARB
3? X Xa L S .
TOFLjIS’
Ist. Stimulate the Liver.
2nd. Purify the Blood.
3rd. Carry away the surplus bile, instead of
allowing it to permeate through the
system.
4th. Produce a permanent and natural action
of the bowels.
stli. Brace, strengthen, and invigorate the
Avhole system, producing the most
inestimable of blessings—Health.
The Podophyllin, Taraxacum, and Ehubarb Pills
contain no mercury, and can be taken without incon-
venience by the most delicate patient.
DOSE.—One or two twice a week, as required;
or one daily, after meals.
Prepared only by
3* W* tWWS
p
PHARMACEUTICAL CHEMIST,
(Late Manager to Songster and Company, London.)


nF 6^
vrw
eJlLsulla eJivsV
o/Avp
.1,
9
e)\Le^/ls
ESTABLISHED 1836.
T ~J?
I
V
\J
mTE
Desire to intimate, that in order to
CLEAR OUT remainder of their
WINTER GOODS,
Prior to STOCK-TAKING in July,
SPECIAL REDUCTIONS
H ave been made in all Departments.
DRAPERY,
CLOTHING, CARPETS,
BOOTS <& SHOES,
SCO., Sec.
