

IMPORTANT LETTER
NEW (DUBLIN CORPORATION)
Water timlia §itl.
(SESSION 1S01.)
G. FITZGIBBON, ESQ., M.C.
FEINTED FOE THE COMMITTEE OP CITIZENS WHO
OPPOSED THE FORMER BILLS.
DUBLIN :
printed
'Xb K
: fU ?V '37
Afr: t > ' I
PRINTED BY ROBERT CHAPMAN, TEMPLE-LANE, DAME-STREET,


H - I
fiiblin |lflu lliitfr Work
The Committee appointed in February of hist
.year, in reference to the Corporation "Water Works scheme,
Jiaving fulfilled the objects for which they were appointed,
request the favor of your attendance at a Meeting to he
held in the Commercial Buildings (Upper Room), on
I'Tui)A.Y, loth insb., at Three o’clock, when a Report will
he read, and any explanations given that may be required.
1 am, very respectfully,
On behalf of the Committee,
HENRY WIG MAM, Hon. Fee.
35, Capei.-stukut.
FeJiruut'j/ i Hh , 1 8(1:1 ■
B. S.—The Committee having requested Master Eitz-
gibbon to give them his views in reference to the present
project of the Corporation, he has kindly written them an
able letter on the subject, which has been printed, and a,
copy is sent herewith, to which the Committee, whilst
expressing no opinion on the subject, request your
VAI mC V LAI! ATT KN TI ON -


NEW (DUBLIN CORPORATION)
Water iill.
SESSION 1861.
TO THE COMMITTEE OF CITIZENS WHO OPPOSED THE WATER,
WORKS BILLS LAST SESSION.
Gentlemen,
In January, 1860, certain members of the
Municipal Council were promoters of a hill to legalise
a project for diverting water from a distant point of the
Liffey to supply Dublin, and. the solicitation of an Act
for that purpose had proceeded nearly to consumma-
tion without attracting the attention of the citizens, at
whose expense and risk the works were to be executed.
When the public became sensible of the dangers in-
volved in this undertaking, a meeting was convened,
and a committee was appointed to consider the subject,
and obtain sufficient time for investigation before the
city should be pledged to the execution of works which
might lead to an extravagant outlay, and end in dis-
appointment. The refusal of those who had designed
and were promoting that rash undertaking to grant an
hour’s delay to the request of a large body of citizens
who sought time for investigation, and the final defeat
of the promoters, to which that refusal exposed them,
are known to all who take an interest in the projected


reconstruction of the Dublin Waterworks. When the
defeat of the obnoxious bill was accomplished, many
of the committee who had been appointed to oppose it
considered that all the functions of that committee had
been discharged, and it became a question, whether they
should do anything more than to resign their trust,
and so replace the matter in the hands of those by
whom they had been appointed. Before the committee
determined what they should ultimately do, the Go-
vernment, with the best intentions, appointed a com-
missioner to investigate the subject in dispute, on
which the citizens were unhappily divided. Many
persons thought that this would lead to the discovery
and adoption of such a plan for improving our Water-
works, as would satisfy all parties, and produce that
unanimity so desirable in a matter which deeply
affects every inhabitant of the city. The Commis-
sioner, having heard a great number of witnesses, has
made his report, and attached to it a minute of the
testimony given by those witnesses. The report
shortly enumerates several schemes submitted for con-
sideration, and ends by recommending that the River
Yartry, which rises in the mountains of Wicklow, flows
through the Devil’s Glen, and falls into the sea at the
town of Wicklow,shall be turnedbackward, and brought
to Dublin, by an artificial conduit about thirty miles
in length, at an estimated cost of £295,992. This
report appears to be satisfactory to the promoters of
the abortive, and now abandoned, undertaking of the
last year, and a new bill has been framed for carrying
the work so recommended into execution. The com-
mittee appointed, as before mentioned, has expressed
an earnest desire to have my opinion of this proposed


work. Having, in the discussions of last year, very
frilly stated my views on the subject of the Waterworks
of Dublin, it is with great reluctance I recur to it ;
and the more so, as I find the true question for con-
sideration in it now confounded and overwhelmed in
a mass of immaterial testimony, inconclusive reason-
ing, and conflicting opinions. The Commissioner con-
cludes his report with the three following propositions
—which are his conclusions from the testimony laid
before him—viz. :—First—That the state of the pre-
sent supply of water to the city of Dublin is bad.
Second—That there is urgent need of an improved
supply. Third—that the best source from which an
improved supply can be obtained is the River Yartry.
To establish the first and second of these proposi-
tions, a great many witnesses were examined, who
described the pipe-water of which they spoke as foetid
and foul to a degree which rendered it unfit for use.
While I believe the facts deposed to by these witnesses,
so far as they spoke from personal knowledge, I cannot
believe the inference which they drew from these facts.
The water of which they spoke, from personal inspec-
tion, Ido believe was such as they decribed it. When
a respectable and intelligent man stated that the water
supplied to his house was offensive and grossly impure,
I believe what he took from his cistern was so. When
in October, 1859, a like fact was stated to me by a near
neighbour, I had no doubt that it was so ; but when I
knew, of my own knowledge, that the water taken
from my own cistern, at the same time, and derived
from the same pipe, within a few yards of his house,
was as good as any one could desire, I could not be-
lieve his inference that the pipe water in general was


bad. I concluded that his cistern was foul ; I advised
him to get it cleaned ; he did so ; the evil was cured,
and he has never complained since. I have no doubt
whatever that much, if not the whole of the evidence
as to the quality of the water at present supplied to
Dublin could be explained in the same way, if each
case were carefully examined.
There is, however, evidence which cannot be
doubted of the existence, in some parts of the main
pipes, of a substance, to which the name of spongilla
has been given, and which is, or easily becomes, cor-
rupt and fetid. We first heard of this substance
some four or five years ago, when an examination by
some members of the council was made of the water
in the basins of the city. Mr, Hawksley, at page 75
of the minutes of evidence, says that he had seen this
substance growing in the 24-inch pipe, which conveys
water from some of the basins, and that he saw it as
far as the lights used would carry the eye. Dr. Wilde,
at page 7, states that the last place he saw it was in
Stephen’s-green, at the corner of York-street, and that
he had previously seen it at the north-west corner of
Merrion-square. Pie does not state when he had
seen it in these places. I cannot find in the minutes
any evidence that this substance had existence
in the Dublin pipes earlier than 1854 or 1855, and
this appears to me an important date. It appears
from the evidence of Mr. Hawksley, page 75, that the
Corporation first turned its attention to the water
supply in the year 1853: at what time of that year
does not appear. In the view which I take of this
subject, it is essential to define what is meant by the
Corporation of Dublin in the discussion of it. The


legal meaning of this word comprehends the Lord
Mayor, Municipal Council, and all burgesses. But when
it is said that the Corporation, in 1853,turned its atten-
tion to the water supply in Dublin, and found it in
an unsatisfactory state, the word comprehends only
those members of the Council who so became active
on this subject; and when it is said that, in 1859, and
1860, the Corporation promoted a scheme for procur-
ing water from the Liffey, at Coyford, and solicited an
Act of Parliament to empower the Corporation to
execute that undertaking, at the expense of the citizens,
the word comprehends only those members of the
Council who constituted the majority of that body at
those meetings where the subject was discussed. By
what a small number this majority exceeded the
minority, who were strongly opposed to the scheme,
is notorious, and this distinction is essential to be
remembered in rationally dealing with the subject
now before us. It is obvious that any powers of tax-
ing the inhabitants of Dublin which may be conferred
on the Corporation must pass into the hands of the
persons who shall from time to time constitute the
majority in the meetings of the Council which shall be
convened for the purpose of exercising those powers.
Suppose it possible that selfish and sinister interests
may creep in, and may influence the minds of some
members of activity and ability to persuade, in such a
body, chosen by popular election, and let us imagine
that, in the execution of works requiring the expendi-
ture of half a million of money, in a time extending
over seven years, and probably a much longer time,
there may be in the Council some who would enter-
tain views of benefit from superintendence. of such


works, in the necessity for paid functionaries of various
kinds. If this be possible, not to say probable, it is
no violent inference that, to men entertaining such
views, a complicated scheme, involving works of great
extent and magnitude, costly and tedious in execution,
demanding much superintendence, and the attention
of many functionaries, would appear more desirable
than a scheme of great simplicity, of comparatively
small cost, demanding little or no superintendence,
and absolutely none beyond what the city engineer
alone could apply. Let us bear this in mind, and we
shall better understand some of the evidence laid
before the Commissioner, and now annexed to his
report. For instance, Mr. La Touche (at page 23)
K tof tha chai'ges the Corporation with having neglected to
BaSna. cleanse out the basin in which the canal water was
received, and from which it passed into the pipes. He
attributes this neglect “very much to the desire to
make a case against the pipe water and he states
“ that it was felt by himself and other citizens that the
water did not get fair play during the last year.” Mr.
La Touche spoke plainly, and it was impossible to mis-
understand his evidence. Accordingly, he was cross-
examined on behalf of the Corporation, as one who
had made an accusation against that body. The only
thing suggested by that cross-examination, to repel the
imputation of intentional neglect of the basin for the
purpose of making a case against the water, was the
fact that the Corporation had treated with the canal
companies for the supply. The answers of Mr.
La Touche to the questions put to him in this cross-
examination are expressive of his conviction that the
treaty thus alluded to was not founded in any earnest


or sincere intention of coining to an agreement with
the canal owners ; and, whether earnest or not, the
fact of treating with the canal companies in no way
disproved the imputation of intentionally neglecting
to clean out the basin. This imputation, if not well
founded, might have been easily. rebutted by proof,
either that during the half century which had elapsed
before the canal water was complained of, it had not
been the habit to cleanse the basins ; from which it
would follow that no recent neglect of them could be
justly urged against the Corporation; or it might have
been rebutted by proof,that,in fact, the basins had been
as well, and as often cleaned out since 1853, when the
Council first turned its attention to the unsatis-
factory state of the water, and began publicly to
decry it, as they had been during fifty years before.
It is very remarkable that no attempt was made
to prove, or even to assert, either one or the
other of these obvious answers to the charge of
wilful neglect, nor is there any express denial of the
truth of that charge, from the beginning to the end of
the volume of evidence brought before the Commis-
sioner by the Corporation, and now in print before the
Government and the public.
It must be remembered that the word Corporation,
as used by Mr. La Touche, signifies those members of
the Council, and those alone, who undertook to demon-
strate the impurity of the water derived from the
canals, and who subsequently became the promoters
of an undertaking to obtain water from another source.
The Commissioner, more than once, stated that the
Corporation stood there in rather the same capacity
that he stood in himself, not to support any special
plan, but to elicit facts, with regard to all the plans


proposed. (See pp. 27 and 30.) He may, therefore,
be taken as believing, that the Corporation—that is,
the active members of the Council who were desirous
of a new scheme of waterworks —felt no preference
for one scheme more than another. Noav, there were
two classes of schemes brought before him—namely,
one class complicated and expensive, not widely differ-
ing from each other, as to complication, magnitude of
works, and costliness of execution. Men desirous of
adopting a complicated and expensive scheme, may be
impartial and indifferent in the selection of one from
amongst these, which were all complicated and expen-
sive, and may yet be prejudiced against a simple and
less expensive scheme. The other class consisted of
only one, and that was the canal scheme, obviously
more simple and less expensive than any of the others.
It evidently did not occur to the Commissioner that,
in this view, the Corporation and the inventors of the
complicated schemes might have one common interest
0 f and one common wish to reject the canal water. It is
evident to every person of ordinary understanding,
whether he be an engineer or not, that the water of the
canals is attainable for the use of the city, at a very
much less expense, and at greatly less risk than that
from any other source ; that, of the cost of this water,
about £4,000 a-year, equivalent with a sum of
£lOO,OOO of capital, is in the shape of rent to the
canal companies, for the value of works already con-
structed at the expense of these companies, and that
the new works for taking the water from higher levels
cannot cost one half the amount required for The exe-
cution of any other scheme. That the required eleva-
tion can be chosen and regulated to the exact height


desired ; that the cost of the works for so deriving it
can be calculated,by anticipation, with perfect certainty
and precision ; that no engineering difficulties exist,
in the construction of the necessary works; that,
beyond the space for reservoirs, no land is to be pur-
chased, no private property or rights are to be invaded;
that the land at the points where reservoirs are
necessary is ordinary farm land, to be had without any
expensive proceedings, at a price certainly not exceed-
ing £lOO per statute acre for the fee simple ; that the
iron conduit from the reservoir to the city, being laid
beside the canal bank, on the land of the canal com-
pany, can be so placed, and will, at all times, and at all
points, be accessible for inspection and repair, without
entry or trespass on any private property ; that the
entire system of works will stand close to the city, the
most distant point being within less than five miles ;
that the construction of the works can he immediately
commenced without the expense of preliminary pro-
ceedings to decide claims for compensation ; that the
specification of these works is simple in character, and
little more can he necessary than to publish it fox-
estimates and tenders, which will soon result in con-
tracts, in the execution of which there is no ground
for apprehending any important abuse, or any danger
of failure. These are not all the advantages resulting
from the position of the canals, in relation to the
city and its vicinity.
The only thing that can, with any colour of reason,
be objected to this source of supply is the doubt which
has been thrown upon the sufficiency of the quantity
and the purity of the water.
I have read with attention the evidence on this sub-


ject, and it appears to me that it greatly preponderates
in favour of the canals over any other of the sources
pointed out to the. Commissioner by the several engi-
neers who propounded schemes for his approval. I
see much stronger reason for apprehending failure in
qrrantity and deterioration in quality in the water from
every other of the sources suggested than exists in the
case of the canals ; and the Yartry scheme appears to
me, in this respect, the most objectionable of all. The
water of that stream now passes to the sea through a
narrow channel, for a considerable portion of its course,
sunk in a deep ravine, and shaded by trees; and is,
therefore,not exposed now to more than ordinary dimi-
nution by evaporation, if to so much. This condition
will be very much altered when its water shall be
spread out in two reservoirs, one covering between
400 and 500 acres, and the other near, if not more
than 100 acres, situate both in a naked country, and
exposed to all the force of direct sunshine. The total
quantity of water, calculated according to the uncer-
tain theory of rainfall, as derivable from this stream,
is stated to be about 20,000,000 gallons per day. Of
this one-fourth is designed for the old channel to
Wicklow, to be sent down at a regulated rate, from what
is called a compensation reservoir, about 90 or 100 acres
in extent, in which this water is to he confined by an
artificial embankment 37 feet high. The other three-
fourths, amounting (it is said), to about 15,000,000
gallons per day, is to be stored in a reservoir of 400
or 500 acres in extent, for the supply of Dublin; to be
derived through a conduit, partly tunnel, and partly
iron pipe, to what is called a service reservoir, near
Stillorgan, of about eleven acres in extent, and which


will stand about 200 feet above low-water mark—that
is, about 180 above the pavement in Sackville-street,
and from this reservoir the water is to flow through
a large iron pipe, three feet in diameter, to Leeson-
street, from which it is to be distributed through the
main pipes in the several streets, in constant supply,
and at a pressure to vary from 180 feet downwards,
inversely, as the heights of the localities and houses to
be supplied.
Of all the schemes submitted to the Commissioner,
this is, in my opinion, the most complicated, the most
hazardous, and, it is admitted to be the most costly.
The inventor of this plan does not appear to have
been examined at all by the Commissioner; while the
projectors of all the other plans were examined, and
subjected to cross-examination by each other, being
the propounders of rival schemes, and each being
interested to expose the errors of the rest.
The Yartry scheme, and also that of Coyford, were
brought under the notice of the Commissioner by Mr,
Hawksley. This Yartry scheme had been formerly
submitted to Mr. Hawksley, and is mentioned in his
report to the Water Committee of the Council, dated
the 10th of November, 1858, in the following terms;—
“Mr. Hassard has also suggested, as an alternative
scheme, the employment of the beautiful waters of
the River Yartry and other adjacent districts, but at
a cost which that gentleman admits to have placed
these (otherwise the best sources) beyond the reach of
the community.” By that report it appears that Mr.
Hassard, as well as other engineers, had proposed, as
the most advantageous source, to take the water, in an
improved manner, from the canals ; and that he pro-


posed the Yartry only as an alternative, in case the
Corporation should fail to agree with the canal com-
panies. Mr. Hawksley, in the minute of evidence, in-
troduces the Yartry scheme in these terms: —“The
next scheme was one suggested and submitted by Mr.
Richard Hassard, with regard to the possibility of get-
ting a supply from the River Yartry. 'With regard
to that scheme, I have no more information than this
—that the water is very beautiful; in my opinion, the
purest water to be found, in a large quantity, in the
neighbourhood of Dublin. The river is situated at a
very considerable distance, and flows down to the little
port of Wicklow, into which it falls. Upon its course
are several very excellent situations for making a re-
servoir in the manner proposed by Mr. Hassard. There
is abundance of drainage acreage for this reservoir, but
there are no sufficient details furnished by Mr. Has-
sard to enable me to judge whether the storage room
is adequate or not. He has given in his own detailed
estimate of the cost, which, I believe, I have handed
in to you. It does not profess to be made on any very
exact data as respects the reservoir, and it was admitted
to me, by Mr. Hassard himself, that that particular
scheme was almost out of the question, on account of
the greater cost that would be required to bring it into
operation.”
The detailed estimate here referred to I understand
to be the document Ho. 31 in the appendix. That
gives the total cost in 22 items, in all amounting to
£250,000; but not seeing any item for the purchase
of land and compensation for injury, I, at first, supposed
the Commissioner, by adding a sum for these, made up
the estimate of £295,992, stated in his report. If this


were so, the sum of £45,992 added to Mr. Hassard’s
estimate would appear to be the estimate for the pro-
bable price of land, compensation for consequential
damage to property, and invasion of rights, together
with the costs of investigating such claims, and ascer-
taining the amount of each. I doubt that such a sum
would be at all adequate. In this case there will be a
double set of claimants for such compensation—viz.,
those from whose lands and from whose uses the water
is to be diverted; and those through whose lands it is
proposed to convey it, by conduits, to Dublin. The
Harbour Commissioners of Wicklow will, no doubt,
be claimants. They have lately, with much anxiety
for the improvement of that port, expended a large
sum—l believe, over £B,OO0 —to accomplish that
object. Part of this, and a large part, was spent in
deepening the channel and entrance of the harbour.
I have no doubt they will be loud in their complaint
at the abstraction of three-fourths of the water from
their river, and on the retention of all its flood-water,
on the scour of which (as engineers call it) they very
much depend for keeping their channel at the proper
depth.
Nothing can be more uncertain or delusive than an
estimate, by anticipation, of the sum to which the
claims for compensation may amount, in the execu-
tion of this undertaking. But, on closer considera-
tion, Ido not think that any estimate of this large
and inevitable expense has been made at all—at least,
none that can be relied on, for I see no evidence on
the subject in the volume before me. It appears to
me that the increased estimate of £295,992 resulted
from a departure from the plans to which the smaller


estimate of £250,000 related. In that estimate I see
four different sizes of pipes—viz., 18, 24, 30, and 36
inches, the total cost of which is stated at sums mak-
ing a total of £107,813. In the deposited plans, the
three-foot pipe seems adopted throughout, and this
would add about £34,000 to the cost. I also see that
only one reservoir is mentioned in the estimate of
1858, for which, and filters, a sum of £24,000 is set
down. In the deposited plans there are two large ad-
ditional reservoirs, not noticed at all in the estimate of
1858, and I would, from all these and other apparent
deviations, infer that the plans to which the estimate
of £250,000 referred were abandoned, and the more
expensive plan recommended by the report adopted
instead.
Another observable deviation is, that, in the estimate
of 1858, the tunnel is stated to be 2,640 yards, and in
the deposited plans it is 4,280, which makes a consi-
derable addition to the expense of the works, while the
omission of filters takes off a large sum. It thus ap-
pears that the plan and estimate for the Yartry scheme,
brought for the first time into public notice when pro-
duced to the Commissioner, in the end of August last,
has been widely departed from ; and that the plans
subsequently adverted to, and recommended in his re-
port, and the estimate therein mentioned of £295,992
were not made the subject of any evidence publicly
given before the Commissioner, and submitted to the
scrutiny and cross-examination to which all the re-
jected plans were exposed. That the Corporation, in
the last year, solicited an act for the execution of the
Coyford scheme, of which the ratepayers knew no-
thing, and for the consideration of which the pro-


moters refused to give time, was justly complained of,
and defeat of the bill was the consequence. We have Present wn
now a bill ready for the approaching session, to carry by mr '
into execution an undertaking wholly new, never
mentioned, never heard of, except incidentally, and
then only as a visionary scheme, too expensive to be
thought of, and of which nothing was known in
detail.
The Commissioner’s report was signed on the 20th
of October last. I know not the precise time it was
published, in a volume containing 194 pages of folio,
printed in small and crowded type, with an aspect
quite sufficient to deter ordinary people from attempt-
ing to read it, even if it was gratuitously presented to
them. To this plan, and to the important provisions
of the bill for compelling the ratepayers to pay for its
execution, it is essentially necessary to draw the at-
tention of those who may seriously suffer by it. I
therefore proceed with this most laborious and disa-
greeable task, the magnitude and tedium of which I
did not sufficiently estimate when I undertook to per-
form it.
Immediately after leaving the great reservoir, the Particulars of
water is to enter a tunnel 4,280 yards long, equal to Vmtiy SLlcmo,
nearly English miles. It is, from this tunnel, to
pass hy an iron pipe three feet in diameter, to what is
called a service reservoir, near Stillorgan, and thence
to Dublin by a similar pipe. From the very great
and numerous sinuosities, and variety of zig-zag
lengths of this pipe, in the vertical plane, to answer
the irregular shape of the ground over and through
which it has to pass, it is not easy, from the plans, to
ascertain its precise length ; but, exclusive of the


tunnel, I think the pipe must be about 23 miles long
from the near mouth, of the tunnel to Leeson-street
bridge.
It would appear that the land circumscribed on the
plans for the three reservoirs is not considered suffi-
cient for the undertaking, although amounting to
about 600 acres. The 16th clause of the bill confers
power to purchase, for the purposes of the act, any
quantity not exceeding 100 acres in addition. As to
the imprudence of undertaking to make such enormous
reservoirs, and the peril at which they must be main-
tained, I call attention to the following testimony
given by Mr. Hawksley to the Commissioner, and
printed at page 81 of the book, viz. ; “In all the cases
where I have been concerned, in which large storage
reservoirs have been made, great doubts have existed
as to the permanent security of the works; and of
late years, since the lamentable accident at Holmfirth,
it has been the habit of Lord Redesdale to insert in
all bills relating to reservoirs, obligations of a most
onerous character, and to give power to parties not
connected with the Corporation to open the sluices
and empty the reservoirs, no matter what may be the
results upon the towns and mill-owners in depriving
them of the water, and to take other measures which
are of a most stringent and objectionable character,
and which, if exercised, are of the most dangerous
character, as regards the continuity of the supply.”
“ Now, I do not mean to say that reservoirs are, when
well constructed, and upon perfectly secure ground,
very expensive to maintain ; but I know many
instances in which, in consequence of defects in the


construction, the subsequent annual expense of main-
tenance has been most serious,”
This is the testimony of Mr. Hawksley, the engineer
selected by the promoters themselves, and represented
by their publications as the most eminent on the sub-
ject of waterworks in Europe. So far as I can judge
from his reports, and from the minutes of his evi-
dence, I see no reason to detract from his title to a
high place in liis profession ; and I very much regret
that the Municipal Council did not act upon the clear
and unequivocal advice which he gave them in
November 1858, and take the supply of water from
the higher levels of the two canals. Had they done
so, they would have secured the approbation and sup-
port of all their fellow-citizens, I believe, without
exception, in the final result, and would have conferred
a lasting benefit on the inhabitants of the city, to a
great extent, if not entirely, commensurate with the
expenditure to be made in attaining it.
The principal ground upon which the canal waters
are rejected by the Commissioner is the existence of a
substance called spongilla in the pipes—a substancefirst
observed, and, for aught that appears, first coming into
existence after the date at which the cleansing of the
basins is stated to have been neglected. The city has
been for over sixty years supplied from the canals,
and from that level of each which is close to the city,
and evidently affected with many adventitious impu-
rities, which are wholly excluded from the higher and
more distant levels. The Commissioner, in his report,
states, that “ these canals, so far as their effect, upon
the water is concerned, may be regarded as nothing
more than large open ditches.” This is hyperbole ;


and is encountered by the expressed opinion of Mr,
Hawksley on the water of these canals, in his report,
10th November, 1858, in which he states, that these
waters, “in their future quality (that is, when taken
from the higher levels), will not sensibly differ from
the waters of Lough Owel, and the springs and other
unobjectionable sources by which the channels of the
canals are daily replenished.” And this statement is
further encountered by the testimony given to the
Commissioner himself by the same gentleman, and
printed at page 77 of the evidence. Speaking of his
proceedings and inquiries in 1857 and 1858, Mr.
Hawksley says : —“ I had ascertained, as was the fact
at that time, that the waters of the two canals were ex-
ceedingly clear and good in every respect (except hard-
ness), when taken at a high level,but that they received
many pollutions near the town, and within a few miles
of it.”
At page G 7, he states as follows—“ I may add that
the water of Lough Owel is very beautiful and very
soft, considering that it flows off the mountain lime-
stone. In consequence of the long time it remains in
the lake, it exhales carbonic acid, and drops a portion
of its lime; and thus the water that would be ex-
tremely hard on entering the lake, becomes in the
course of a long exposure, very much softer. The
water of Lough Owel is only about nine degrees of
hardness, which is within the limits of a proper supply
for the city. It may be termed, for all useful purposes,
soft water ; and it is water which softens by boiling,
until it becomes not harder than from one to two de-
grees.” At foot of the same page, 67, and top of next
page, he states as follows—“ Here I may mention that
I think far too much importance has been attached to


what we call degrees of hardness. Many persons sup-
pose that one degree of hardness means something sig-
nificant. ; and, therefore, that two degrees of hardness,
being the double of one, indicates very bad water, and
three degrees still worse, and that four degrees renders
the water quite unsuitable. Such, however, is not the
fact. Yery good water for washing, even when cold,
is water of nine degrees of hardness ; and if I found
that I could obtain water of that quality, at a mode-
rate expense, against a perfectly soft water at a much
larger expense, I should be quite prepared, from my
own experience, knowing what the wants and desires
and wishes of towns are, to recommend the Corpora-
tion to adopt the cheaper scheme.” Is it just or rea-
sonable to ignore or make light of testimony such as
this ? What stronger evidence is there to recommend
the Yartry water than this is in favour of the canal
water ?
As evidence of the impurity of the canal water, the
Commissioner quotes in his report the following pas-
sage from the testimony given by Dr, Apjohn “ The
amount of the organic matter, it will be seen, is very
considerable, reaching nearly 10 per cent. I may add
that it was of two kinds—a thready or filiform pro-
duct, which, when examined under the microscope,
appeared to he a conferva, or fresh water alga, and a
membraneous substance of a highly cellular structure,
having some resemblance to certain of the spongillse.
This latter exhibited two appearances occurring on
the sides of the basins and interior of the mains, partly
as an incrustation of slight thickness, and partly as
projecting growths of the size and nearly the shape of
the human fingers. These growths were recent; were


of a greenish colour; and, seen through a lens, ap.
pearecl studded oyer, particularly at the extremities,
with low conical projections. The organized products
just described, were penetrated by numerous maggots
which had the faculty of spinning threads like those
of the spider, executed rapid movements, and were
capable of inflicting bites. When a mass of the mixed
organic matters just described was placed in a basin
of water, putrefaction rapidly set in ; and in twenty,
four hours, an insupportably offensive odour was
evolved.” This evidence may be very much misun-
derstood, as it stands by itself in the report, unex-
plained by the analysis to which it refers. It relates
to an analysis, not of water, but of mud, very nearly
dry. The analysis is given at page 9, where the whole
substance analyzed is divided into 100 equal parts;
of these only 2J are water, —viz., l-45th part of the
whole mass. It is in this mud, or paste, and not
in any water, that nearly 10 per cent, of organic
matter was found •* the estimate is 10 per cent, of the
mud, not 10 per cent, of any water ; and I call parti-
cular attention to this fact. This deposit, which I call
mud or paste, was found within the basin, in Septem-
ber 1856, in the end of the summer season, and three
years after the date at which the members of the
Council began to investigate the subject of Avater sup-
ply, and in the middle of that period during which, as
I understand him, they Avere charged by Mr. La Touche
with Avilful neglect in the cleansing of the basin, for
no proof Avhatever was offered of any cleansing of the
basin from Avhich this deposit had been taken, at any
*ltis in this mud also, and not in any water that the maggots, &c., were
found.


time before that deposit was found. We, therefore,
are left in ignorance of the length of time taken to form
this deposit, and, consistently with all the evidence, it
might have been ten years since the last preceding
cleansing of the basin. Now, when we remember that
the water which deposited this sediment, had flowed
into the basin from the level of the canal nearest the
city, unfiltered, and subject to all the town pollutions
adverted to by Mr. Hawksley, we cannot be surprised
that organic matter, &c., was found accumulated in the
sediment. But that it was found in the sediment, is,
in my opinion, a very important fact in favour of the
water. It proves that this organic matter was merely
floating in suspension through the water, and easily
separated from it by any process of filtration, when it
was thus precipitated by its own gravity, as soon as the
water became still in the basin. Some questions were
asked of Dr. Apjolm by Mr. M'Mullen, touching an
analysis of the canal water, which had been made
by him in 1845, at the desire of Mr. M'Mullen, That
analysis is stated in a letter or report from Dr. Ap-
jolm, dated 4th June, 1845 (No. 9 of the Appendix).
That letter, after stating the analysis, concludes thus ;
—“ It thus appears, as might have been anticipated,
that the Dodder water, conveyed along the city water
course, contains less saline and organic matter than
that in the Portobello basin. The absolute amount
of these impurities, in both cases, is small; so that both
are, when compared with other waters, of excellent
quality, very pure ; and, as respects the canal water,
I have no hesitation in saying that the specimen of it
which I have examined is soft, sweet and wholesome,


and well adapted for domestic use of every descrip-
tion/
“ Before concluding this brief report, it may not be
out of place to add, that the exact determination of
the amount of organic matter in water is a thing of
very difficult accomplishment; and that from the
manner in which it is usually attempted, the relative
proportion of the organic to the saline ingredients is
sure to be exaggerated. I have paid much attention
to this point, in the course of the inquiry just con.
eluded, and I am quite certain that the quantity of
vegetable and animal impurities in the canal water—
impurities of which no natural water is ever destitute
< —-does not exceed that indicated by the analysis. I
may add, that the relative proportion is much too
small to leave any room for apprehending that their
presence can confer upon the water properties which
would render- it either disagreeable to the taste, or
injurious to the health.”* Dr. Apjohn, in answer to
Mr. M’Mullen’s questions, re-affirmed the accuracy of
his analysis of 1845 ; but he observes, “ that the
amount of organic matter, in one case being 3‘28,
and in another 2‘28, is a large amount of organic
matter ; and that, if at that time, viz., 1845, he had
the knowledge he afterwards acquired of the very
offensive nature in warm, weather, of the pipe water,
and if he had seen this spongilla, as he did afterwards,
growing within the pipes, and in the basin, he would
not have made the remarks as to the quality of the
water which he did ; that he did not wish at all to
* Tliis is Dr. Apjolm’s analysis and opinion of tlic water, Unit water being
taken in summer from u basin supplied from the most impure level of the canal,
nucl without filtration of any kind.


recede from the analysis ; lie believed it Avas perfectly
correct; but lie was noiv of opinion that he attached
too little importance to the organic matter ivliich the
water contained; that, at that time (1845,) looking
much to its amount, he did not think it likely to be
as prejudicial to ivater as experience aftenvards shoAved
that it really was.”*
This is substantially the entire of Dr. ApjolnTs tes-
timony for and against the Avaters of the canals. It
appears to me that there is no material Inconsistency
between his opinions of 1845 and 1860, when care-
fully and fairly considered ; and that his opinion of
1860 is entirely consistent with the excellence of the
canal water, properly treated and fairly tested. What I
understand by organic matter, held in solution in Avater,
is an infusion of particles which had belonged to organ-
ized bodies, such as animals and plants. Let it be
recollected that the sample in which 3'28 of organic
matter was found in the summer of 1845, Avas taken
from a basin of very small extent—l believe little
more than one acre—that this small basin Avas sup-
plied from that part of the canal most exposed to the
infusion of animal and vegetable matter, running, as
it did, past a great number of inhabited houses, along
the banks from the first lock to Portobello ; that the
great horse-barrack stands on this level, near the bank,
and a very short distance above the basin ; that Eich-
mond infantry barrack also stands near the commence-
ment of this level ; that a great portion of the banks
of this level is used as a promenade for a large popu-
lation ; that this is, of the Avhole canal, the level most
• Experience Following the neglect of the basins, i, c., effect Following adequate
cause*


difficult to protect from bathers and swimming of
dogs, and in which men and inferior animals are most
frequently drowned ; that this level has its banks
planted with large trees, the leaves of which, to a
great extent, must fall into the canal; that for two
miles immediately above the commencement of this
level, both banks are densely planted with old and
decaying elms, which end long before the eleventh
lock is arrived at, from which Mr. Hawksley advised
that the improved supply should be taken. These are
considerations to which I cannot find, in the Commis-
sioner’s report, or in the evidence, or in the Com-
missioner’s occasional observations, any vestige of
attention. The small basin itself was planted round
with trees and shrubs, and, I believe, a hedge for
ornament ; and, if Ave add to these sources of organic
matter, the neglect for years of the cleansing process,
our surprise will cease at the existence of the spongilla
which Dr. Apjohn states to be of recent growth, and
which Avas first observed about five or six years ago
and Ave cannot wonder that ten per cent, of the sedi-
ment of this Avater was organic. The surprise will
rather be that the Avater winch we have been using
for the last seven years, was not much worse than any
one has stated,,it to be.
These considerations force me to agree with Mr.
Latonche, in believing that the pipe-water of Dublin,
derived from the canals, has not got fair play in the
estimation of its quality. If it be true that, for over
fifty years, the basins were periodically cleansed, and
that for years before the water in them, and the sedi-
ment of the water, AA r ere submitted to chemical exami-
nation and analysis, this process Avas neglected, avc


can find no difficulty in accounting for the absence of
spongilla in the pipes, and the absence of complaints
in the city, during the fifty years which preceded the
neglect, and the presence of both for the years which
followed that neglect. The conclusion, from the evi-
dence before the Commissioner, is irresistible, that
this recent growth called spongilla was the product of
impurities negligently suffered to accumulate in the
basins.
The next consideration is the sufficiency in quantity
of the supply from the canals. The 33rd clause of
the bill limits the obligation of supplying water
imposed on the Corporation to the area of the borough,
and limits also to the same area the power of com-
pulsory taxation. The supply of water to any house
beyond the borough boundary must be the result of
voluntary agreement between the Corporation, on the
one hand, and the occupier of the house on the other.
"When, therefore, the 10th section extends the limits
of the act to such distant places as Killiney, in the
county of Dublin, and Delgany, and other places in
the county of Wicklow, it merely enables the Corpora-
tion to trade in the supply of water to people living
outside the municipal boundary. What may be the
result of this trading—whether gain or loss—is specu-
lation, and nothing else. To force the rate-payers of
Dublin to care for the supply of water to this extern
population, and to borrow capital on their security, and
apply it to this speculation, at their risk, appears to
me to he palpably unjust. I therefore think that the
sufficiency of the supply ought to be measured by the
number of those who inhabit the borough, and should
not, at most, be extended beyond the near vicinity,


making a rational addition for the probable increase
of population for a reasonable time to come. There is
no reason to believe that the population to be supplied,
even on the extended scheme, exceeds 286,000 at
present in the borough, and 64,000 is stated as living
outside. I take this from the testimony of Mr. H awks-
ley, pages 92, 93. Pie adds for the extern population,
64,000; but I cannot discover the limits to which he
goes. He thus makes a total of 350,000 persons to be
supplied, inside and outside the municipal boundary.
Pie states that the inhabitants within the borough oc-
cupy 24,654 houses; and, giving the same number of
inmates to each house outside as inside the borough
boundary, and estimating the number of extern
houses at 7,675, he arrives at 64,000 persons of all
ages in the extern districts, allowing about eleven and
a half persons of all ages to each house. Taking the
supply of water at ten millions of gallons per day, this
gives over 28 J gallons to each man, woman, and child;
which gives to each house, on the average of inmates,
327 gallons per day, imperial measure, which is equal
to three puncheons. Is there any house in Dublin
which consumes, for all uses, one-half this quantity ?
Plow many thousands are there which do not consume
one-tenth of it? At page 89 of the evidence, Mr.
Mallet computes the water used for manufacturing
purposes, including distilling and brewing, as not ex-
ceeding 150,000 gallons a day; but supposing it to be
even six times that quantity, the residue of ten millions
of gallons would give an extravagantly excessive amount
for domestic purposes. In this computation, I take
in the extern population, thus excluding all possibility
of doubt that ten millions of gallons per day is a


largely excessive supply for all the inhabitants of the
borough.
This, however, does not solely rest on calculations; canal* found
it has for over sixty years been the subject of constant
experiment. The water derived from the canals and t!t y for six| r
the branch of the Dodder has carried the citizens '*”
Dublin through the dry summers of 1810, 1826, and
1829. I lived in Dublin in 1826, which, according
to my recollection, was much drier than 1859. That
was the year in Avhich a large proportion of the oats
through the country was too short to be reaped, and
was pulled up by the roots, a thing which, I believe,
nowhere took place in 1859. Ido not remember any
complaints about the pipe-water in 1826, nor have I
any reason to think that it did not get fair play that
year. Complaints we had in 1859, and that is the
year to which, especially, Mr. La Touche applies the
absence of fair play to the water by those who had
the management of it in their hands. During the
whole of this long period of sixty years, the water has
been taken from the most impure level of the canals.
For the greater portion of that period the water from
the Dodder passed into the city basin by an open
conduit, running from Dolphin’s Barn to the basin,
and in that short course was largely polluted, there
being several tanneries close by, and a public footway
beside it. For some years past this conduit has been
covered over rudely with flags. The watering of
streets, since that operation has come into use, has
also been taken, in a large proportion, from the main
pipes. We have heard of cities and towns übi venditur
aqua , vilissima rerum , but I never heard of water
being sold in Dublin. It has been extensively sold


in Limerick, and in Belfast, but the scarcity of it
never approached that climax in Dublin. Ido not,
therefore, agree in the Commissioner’s conclusion
“ that the state of the present supply of water to the
city of Dublin is had.” Ido believe, and from my
first acquaintance with the basins I was always of
opinion, that a great error was committed by those
who placed them near the city. I often wished that
the wealth of the city would justify, and that the good
sense of the citizens would sanction, the large expense
of rectifying this error, exactly in the way designed
by Messrs. Hawksley and Neville, in 1858. Recurring
to the evidence of Mr Hawksley, laid before the Com-
missioner, I find, at page 67, that, on what he states
to be a safe basis of calculation, a supply from Lough
Owel alone may be relied on, sufficient for a popula-
tion of 170,000 persons—that is nearly one-half of the
entire population to be supplied, taking in the people
of the extra-municipal districts. To this must be
added the Avater of the Rathwire River, AAdrich also
flows into the Royal Canal, after it has received the
Avater of Lough Owel, and comes to Dublin. That
river enters the canal near Killucan, and yields the
driest day of the driest year, 2 millions of gallons (see
evidence of Mr. Mulvany, page 59.) Mr, Hawksley
(page 67), states three cubic feet, or 18 gallons per
day, to be sufficient for each person, but adds that the
peojde of Dublin will not be satisfied Avith less than four
feet,* and thus 2 millions of gallons, at this alloAvance
of three feet, Avould supply over 111,000 persons, or,
assuming the extravagant amount of supply suggested
by the promoters of the undertaking—namely, 12
• When, where, and how did the People of Dublin express this ? It must
have been the promoters of the scheme who told him so.


millions of gallons for 350,000 persons, i. e., 34 gallons
per day for each, the Rath wire River yields water for
58,823 persons, which, added to 170,000, demonstrates
a supply Rom the Royal Canal alone, for 281,000
persons, at 18 gallons per day for each, or, accord-
ing to the extravagant allowance of 34 gallons for each
person, it would supply 148,823 persons. In all the
discussions and treaties about the canal water it was
assumed, as an ascertained fact, that the Grand Canal
could supply three gallons for every two of the yield
of the Royal Canal. On this assumption, and adopt-
ing Mr. Hawksley’s allowance of 18 gallons for each
person, the water from both canals would be sufficient
for 802,000 persons— i. e., much more than double the
population of Dublin and the extern districts proposed
to he supplied. Or, assuming the excessive allowance
of 34 gallons per day for every person, old and young,
we have a supply for 370,000 persons, being 20,000
more than the entire population of the borough and
extern districts. But this is not all; for we have, in
addition to the canals, the water of the Dodder branch,
equal to 3 millions of gallons per day, sufficient,
according to Mr. Hawksley’s estimate, for 166,000 per-
sons ; oi’, according to the estimate of 34 gallons per
head, sufficient for 88,234 persons ; and thus the three
sources, of the two canals and Dodder branch, yield
water, at the smaller allowance, sufficient for a popula-
tion of 968,000, or at the larger allowance of 458,234,
the latter being in excess of the entire existing popu-
lation by 108,234 —a very ample margin for future
procreation. These calculations are founded upon
the testimony of Mr. Hawksley, the witness produced
by the promoters themselves.


There is not one word in all the evidence taken by
the Commissioner to contradict or qualify one fact
upon which these calculations are based. These
results, moreover, are verified by the best and surest
of all tests, the experience of sixty years, during which
these sources have supplied Dublin, without the aid of
any storage reservoir—l say of any storage reservoir,
for the existing basins are too diminutive to deserve
the name. lam also informed, but I cannot vouch
the fact, that from the defective condition of the exist-
ing pipes and service cocks, nearly half the water
which leaves the three basins is lost by leakage, If
this be true, it proves the monstrous extravagance of
the supply demanded by the promoters for the use of
the city.
For the foregoing reasons, and considering that for
more than fifty years the citizens did not complain of
a dearth of water, or of foul water, and regarding the
recency and the sources of modern complaints, I can-
not agree with the second of the conclusions derived
by the Commissioner from the evidence now before
me, viz :—“ That there is urgent need of an improved
supply.” Ido not believe there is any urgency in the
case. Ido believe, that the improvement of remov-
ing the basins to higher and more distant levels of the
canals is desirable, and ought to be accomplished as
soon as the financial prosperity of the city will justify
the expenditure necessary for the purchase of this
luxury ; but no sooner. In the execution of this
desirable work, I am also of opinion, that a storage
reservoir near the Grand Canal should be constructed.
No such reservoir, in my opinion, is necessary at the
Eoyal Canal ; because nature has made, at the sum-
mit level of that canal, an ample reservoir of 2,500


acres, from which the canal, cut for a great part of its
course through rock, is as good a conduit as any that
could be constructed. Every vertical inch of this lake
is equal to 59 millions of gallons, or six days’ supply
for Dublin, at 10 millions per day ; and every vertical
foot of water in it is, therefore, equal to ten weeks
supply for the entire population, giving each person
more than 28 gallons per day, if no rain should f ill dur-
ing that time, if the supply from the Grand Canal and
Dodder were stopped, and if the drainage of the catch-
ment were entirely suspended, which it never is, in
fact. Mr. Mulvany, who appears a very cautious wit-
ness, states at page 59, that the Grand Canal, on the
driest day, can safely supply from four and three-
quarters to five millions of gallons. The directors of
that company in 1858 proposed to guarantee 24 mil-
lions in every four days, although they thought it
was unsafe to warrant six millions on every clay,
because of the varying abstraction for navigation.
Taking it at live millions per day, and assuming a
reservoir of 40 statute acres, and 15 feet deep, at or
near the level from which the supply is taken, suppose
the 12th level, the result is this—if the city were
thrown entirely on the Grand Canal for water, i. e ., if
the supply from the Roy al Canal and from the Dodder
were wholly stopped, and if this occurred during the
driest summer remembered, the abstraction of ten
millions of gallons every day from this reservoir alone,
would be 32 days exhausting it. But, assuming that
the Royal Canal should supply four millions, and the
Dodder even one million (quantities below the smallest
estimate), this reservoir would not he reduced at all
during the longest drought of which we have any ex-


scheme assumes the work complete, when the water is
brought to Leeson-strect Bridge, and excludes also the
cost of filters, as being unnecessary for the Yartry
water, but which are provided for in the estimates of
Mr. Hawksley, and Mr. Mulvany, in the case of the
canals.
I have no doubt, when the water comes at the high
pressure proposed, that new pipes will be found neces-
sary in the streets, to a very large extent; but the cost
is capable of accurate estimate, and it is a cost equally
in cident to all the schemes; it may, therefore, be thrown
out of calculation, as a common quantity, in compar-
ing them.
To Mr. Mulvany’a estimate the Commissioner added
twenty-five year’s purchase of £4OOO a year, the rent
demanded by the Canal Companies ; and thus be
brought up the estimate of the Caual scheme to
£285,000, showing an excess of the Yartry scheme of
only £10,992. When I come, as I shall do presently,
to consider this Yartry scheme more in detail, this
will, I believe, appear a very delusive comparison.
The canal water supplied to the city, if not converted
to that purpose, must run to waste, and will be wholly
useless both to the owners of the canals, and to all
mankind. If it be fit for the use. of the city, it is a
wilful waste of property to the amount of, at least,
£IOO,OOO, to throw it away, and resort to the more ex-
pensive source of supply j and it cannot fail to be a
just ground of reproach to the two parties who shall
fail to agree as to the price of that which one of them
wants, which the other has to sell, and which is of no
value to the proprietor, unless purchased by the single
party who happens to want it. In such a case the


perience. Any apprehension, therefore, of a dearth
of water from these sources is wholly visionary. The
land for such a reservoir produces now not more than
about £4 per Irish acre of rent; therefore, £4 per
statute acre and 25 years’purchase is an outside price
for it, even on compulsory purchase; thus giving
£4OOO as the price of the land. We have the author-
ity of Mr. Hawksley that the ground is very suitable
and safe for a reservoir, as an y person may see who
looks at it. At 15 feet deep, the bottom of this reser-
voir, if placed at the 12th level, will stand more than
30 feet higher than Nelson’s head, and will be higher
than the proposed reservoir near Stillorgan.
The citizens should not be under any misapprehen-
sion as to the cost of this undertaking, even although
it is greatly less than any other. It was estimated by
Mr, Hawksley, in 1858, at £137,000, including the
expense of a connecting pipe from the south to the
north side of the Liffey. It was estimated by Mr.
Mulvany, in answer to the Commissioner (page 60),
at £185,000, but he states this to be an ample esti-
mate, and he includes in it the price of land, and a
reservoir of 40 statute acres on each canal. Ido not
understand Mr. Hawksley as contemplating any reser-
voir on the Royal Canal, nor so large a reservoir as 40
acres at the Grand Canal, and I therefore consider that
his estimate and Mr. Mulvany’s are not very widely
different. It must be remembered that neither of
these estimates includes the cost of renewing the street
mains, where the existing pipes may he found insuffi-
cient for the high pressure. No projector of any
scheme hitherto submitted has made any estimate of
this expense. The estimate of £295,992 for the Yartry


price demanded should he largely within the value—
that is, it should be very decidedly less than the like
commodity could be procured for elsewhere. Assum-
ing the interests of the ci izens t > be in the hands of
faithful agents and trustees, and those of the canal
owners in the hands of sensible and honest directors, I
cannot believe it possible, under such circumstances,
that the price should be the ground of breaking off
the treaty.
Solo question p 0 r foregoing reasons I reduce the matter in
3S between the ° _ . T
canals and the controversey to this single question —Is the canal
' ’ y ' water to be preferred to that from any other of the
accessible sources ? As the Commissioner has selected
the Vartry as the best of those sources, I shall narrow
the question to the choice as between the canals and
this stream. Having fully expressed my opinion of
the absolute fitness, both in quantity and in quality, of
the canal water, and stated the evidence upon which I
entertain that opinion, I now proceed to state Avhat I
think of the Yartry scheme, considered by itself abso-
lutely, and not in mere comparison with other sources.
The Vnvtry First as to the quality of the water. Assuming it
Scheme. to he at present entirely pure and excellent in all
respects, is it certain that it will continue to be so ?
Quality of its It is unquestionably certain that its sources are all in
comTjSuo-ua a mineral district ; that the principal stream, and all
its feeders, flow through a mineral district ; that the
projected course to Dublin runs also through a mine-
ral district ; and that the two great reservoirs near
Houndwood, in one of which, all the water for Dublin
must be first collected, before it begins to flow towards
/ a
the city, are in this mineral district, as is also every
acre of the catchment which produces this water. I


say this catchment basin is in a mineral district; because
Hind an old lead-mine, and also one in full work, within
about six miles of the catchment, and south-west of it ;
another lead-mine south of the former, also south-west
of the catchment, and only nine miles from it; a third
lead mine, at full work, in the hip of Shankhill, only
six miles from the catchment, and directly north of it
and not far from the line of the conduit to Dublin.
I find the copper-mines of Avoca, in full work, within
about ten miles of the catchment, and directly south
of it ; and thus I find this catchment basin situate in
the midst of these mines, which lie at nearly equal dis-
tances, at the opposite sides of it, and also in an inter-
mediate direction, viz., north, south, and south-west
of it. There is, therefore, serious ground for appre-
hending that beds of ore exist in parts of this catch-
ment basin itself. All the mines in this district have
proved very profitable—some of them so profitable
as to raise the present price of shares in them to 12 or
14 times what they origually cost. It is, therefore, no
violent presumption that, as the present mines shall
he exhausted, search will be made for new beds-of ore.
This ore lies inert, in most cases, and does not effect
the water of the catchment in which it exists, until it
is disturbed by mining operations. Then it is broken
up, brought to the surface, separated into parts rich
enough for smelting, and those which contain too small
an amount of metal to pay for that operation. The
material of both kinds is raised to the surface, is washed
by the rains, and sends down to the stream supplied
by the catchment an infusion of the metal, and thus
these streams become poisoned, fishes cease to live in
them, and they are unfit for the use of man and brute.


Immediately after the water leaves the great reser-
voir it is to enter a tunnel to he driven through the
hi Mi land towards Dublin for no less a distance than
4,280 yards —viz., about two and a half English miles,
at a depth, in some places, of 184 feet below the sur-
face. Whether lead ore shall occur in the course of this
tunnel can be known only by the experiment of mak-
ing the tunnel; and the risk of this experiment is on
the ratepayers and inhabitants of Dublin, as is also the
risk of new lead mines being hereafter, no one can tell
how soon, discovered, and worked, within the rain basin
that is to supply water for the city. I believe many
are alive who recollect when the river from the Meet-
ing of the Waters to Arklow was stocked with fish; and
I believe the working of the mines, in modern times,
has banished the fish, and poisoned the water. The
same, I believe, can he said of the stream which dis-
charges the waters of Gleudalough, since the lead mine
in that valley has been opened. For the effect on
health of a small mixture of lead with water, I shall
refer to the testimony of Dr. Corrigan, communicated
to the Commissioner in a letter from the doctor to
Dr. Gray, printed in the appendix, No. 37. He states
us follows : —“ There is another circumstance con-
nected with the admixture of any impurities with our
drinking water which we must not overlook —viz., slow
action—and this observation applies to all impurities
whether organic or mineral.* On this point chemistry
has given ns great assistance. We have all heard of
instances in which the health of the inmates of a house,
or of some large institution, has been gradually de-
* Soup, ten, coffee, milk, &c., nit largely impregnated with organic matter)
must, on this theory, he dangerous poisons*


teriorating, until, at length, it has been discovered
that the water has been acting slowly in a leaden
cistern or pipe, and a process of slow lead poisoning
has been going on. Those who are not familiar with
such subjects will scarcely be prepared to believe the
small quantity of poisonous material capable of pro-
ducing injury, as well as the length of time through
which they will exercise their slow poisoning and con-
sequent undermining of health.”
He then states several instances of poisoning from
lead , taken into the system in very small quantities,
by friction with the fingers, in some cases, and in one,
by breathing air impregnated with particles of that
metal. He states that, in two of these instances, it
took some years to break up the health irreparably,
and that in both death was the result. He does not
state any known instance of poisoning by the admix-
ture of organic matter. As to this, he states as fol-
lows; —“ Our knowledge of the slowly injurious effect
of organic impurities, and of their nature, is, as yet,
very imperfect, but we know quite enough to put us
on our guard as well against them as against mineral
poisons. We know that a very small quantity of
impure animal food may be as certainly fatal to life as
mineral poison, and we know that already the refuse
fluid from the manufacture of straw paper destroys
the fish in the streams into which it flows, as the me-
tallic impregnation has destroyed them in the rivers
of the county Wicklow.”
The wide distinction between feeding on impure
animal food, however sparingly, and drinking water
slightly, or even grossly impregnated with organic
matter, is too plain to need commentary. By impure


animal food, I suppose, putrid or carrion flesh Is meant,
and, although, on the authority of Dr. Corrigan, we
may believe that flesh may be in such a state of putre-
faction as to be an active poison, everybody knows
that it has been largely eaten, in a very putrid state,
and of a grossly carrion kind and character, with impu-
nity, by men during sieges, in cases of shipwrecks, and
many others, where, famine created a necessity for
using such food. As to the instance stated of the
destruction of fish, by the liquid which runs waste
from factories where paper is made from straw,
Dr. Corrigan does not assert it as a matter of which
he has personal knowledge ; and I do not believe that
any such effect was ever produced by that liquid,
My reason is this. Some years ago, the owners of a
paper mill of this kind, in which paper was made
solely from straw, were prosecuted by' the Corpora-
tion of Dublin for transmitting this same fluid waste
into the city watercourse near Saggart. Preparatory
to the defence of these men, Dr. Barker examined the
water, a very short distance, not more than one or
two hundred yards, below the point at which this
brown fluid entered the stream, and he could not by the
eye, or the taste, or by any chemical test, discover the
existence of any component of the fluid in the water,
and certainly there was not the least ground for be-
lieving that any fish was injured by it.
The straw from which paper is made is reduced to
a pulp by the action upon it of certain alkalis, and the
liquid, after its intended action on the straw, is allowed
to flow off, and is then nearly as dark, and rather
thicker than porter. A jar of this liquid, caught as
it issued from the factory, and before it reached any


water, was produced, in court at the trial, and was
pronounced by a very able chemist to be deleterious.
A man who lived close to the factory happened to be,
at that time, rearing two calves, and hearing the opi-
nion of the chemist, he stated that his calves had
been in the habit of drinking large quantities of this
liquid, undiluted, and immediately after it had flowed
from the straw. That same evening, in order to be
able to prove this fact beyond all doubt, a bucket full of
the undiluted liquid was, in the presence of several
witnesses, laid down to the calves, and they drank it
most eagerly, and were not a whit the worse, and
were apparently well content with the meal. It is
well known that water in which flax has been long
immersed will kill fish, but that water is very singu-
larly offensive, and its effect on fish is long known
and notorious, and even the subject of an old prohi-
bitory Act of Parliament. It was truly stated by Dr.
Apjohn that no natural water is entirely free from or-
ganic matter ; and it is evident that there must be
more or less of such matter in all water that lies ex-
posed in lakes, or runs in open channels ; for, in such
situations, plants, leaves, and animal matter of various
kinds, and in many ways, become mixed with it. The
dissolution of the bodies of the very fishes which die
in it must impart to it some particles of organic matter.
Life and health would be sadly precarious, if they could
be injuriously affected by such a mixture, which is not
discoverable by any of the senses given to us for our
protection. There seems to me no analogy between
such a mixture of organic matter and that of active
metallic poison.* The waters of the canals, taken from
* All the food of man and beast consists of organic matter.


the most impure level of each canal, and sent through
the pipes, without any process of filtration, have been
used by the inhabitants of Dublin for sixty years, and
no ground exists for suspecting that they, in any in-
stance, ever injuriously affected any person’s health.
What reason is there for believing that the same waters,
taken from the purest of the levels, and passed, through
filter beds of clean sand, as designed by Mr. Hawksley,
can ever be in the remotest imaginable degree un-
wholesome ? We have no such experience to give us
confidence in water derived from the centre of that
county, in which so many streams already flow with
waters tainted with metallic poison, the sources of this
poison lying on three sides of the rain-basin from which
this water is collected, and at no great distance from
it. I therefore think, that on the question of purity
and sanitary precaution, the balance of evidence greatly
preponderates in favour of the canal waters, and against
the Yartry water.
I next approach the sufficiency in quantity of the
Yartry water ; and it appears to me that the evidence
to establish it is very unsatisfactory and inconclusive.
The water in the canals is so circumstanced, that it can
be measured with very considerable, if not absolute,
accuracy, even if we had not the corroboration of sixty
years’ experience of it. Not so with the water collected
from an irregularly undulated surface of the rain basin
which supplies it. We have only the calculations
made from the varying and uncertain theory of rain-
fall and, drainage. This water is to be collected into a
reservoir of between 400 and 500 acres in extent, its
depth varying from 65 feet downwards, and therefore,
a vast amount of searching pres,sure will be exercised


on every part of it, both bottom and sides. Every
spring that exists in the extent of this reservoir, will
be converted into a leak by the weight of the accumu-
lated water. From this reservoir we are to have thirty
miles of conduit, partly tunnel, partly metal pipes, not
to mention the vast extent of the proposed service
pipes. It is difficult to calculate the amount of the
waste in the course of transit through these. At page
39 of the evidence, Mr, Bateman states that in Glas-
gow, at the dead hour of the night, between one and
two o’clock, the city pipes are drawing at the rate of
between 13,000,000 and 14,000,000 gallons per day,
most of which, he says, must be running waste. He
states, from a report of the resident engineer of that
city, that the waste from deficient cocks, from had
fittings, and water closets, was 7,000,000 of gallons a
day, and that he had in vain attempted to draw atten-
tion to it. Such a waste may be tolerable when the
supply comes from Loch Catrine, which will not he
sensibly reduced by the abstraction of 14,000,000 of
gallons. But in a case where the whole stock of water
is only 15,000,000, such a waste would be truly disas-
trous. If the water of the Yartry shall ever be turned
into the old pipes in Dublin, at a pressure of 200 feet,
it is not difficult to foresee the result, I have looked
at the deposited plans, and I confess my amazement at
the delineation on them of the pipes by which the
water is to flow to Dublin. These pipes form, in the
vertical plane, all sorts of curves and angles. The
passage across the Dargle may serve as a specimen, and
is but one of many such curvatures. The pipe first
descends at one side of the valley, nearly perpendi-
cular, for several hundred feet; then crosses the Dargle


River by a horizontal viaduct, and rises at the other
side of the valley. It is represented on the plan by
such a line as this—
It appears to me a bold prophecy which promises that
this work will ever be completed for the sum of
£295,992, considering its magnitude, its uncertainty,
the purchase of land, the invasions of property to be
paid for, and of existing rights to be compensated,
not to speak of the mechanical difficulties in construe-
tion. The promoters do not seem to have much faith
in the estimate; for, at a meeting of the Council, con-
vened for the approval of the bill, I observe that a
proposition to increase the borrowing power from
£300,000 to £320,000 was discussed, and negatived
only because such an alteration might endanger the
bill, on standing orders. Now, the ground upon which
it might endanger the bill, on standing orders, is, be-
cause those who are to bear the expense would, by
such an alteration in the bill, be curtailed of the proper
length of notice as to the total expense. If the bill
shall pass into an act, as it now stands, and if it shall
afterwards be found that £300,000 is not sufficient
for the work, the want of notice, and the surprise will
not be less to those who are to pay; but in that case, the
pressure on them will be irresistible; for it will place
the ratepayers in the dilemma in which they will have
only the choice either to go on and raise money for
the purpose of finishing, or abandon the work, and
lose the outlay already made.
I have before adverted to the necessity for renew-


ing and repairing the main pipes for distributing the
water, at high pressure, and in constant supply. The
service reservoir, at Stillorgan, is to stand about 200
feet above these pipes. In the lowest of our streets the
pressure, at present, on these pipes is less than 50 feet;
and in the high parts of the city, such as Mount]oy-
square and its vicinity, James’s-street, the Liberty, and
many other parts of the city now supplied, the pres-
sure varies from four or five feet upwards. In these
cases the new pressure will be a large multiple of the
old ; for instance, in the streets near the basins, which
stand about 35 or 40 feet above Sackville-street, the
new pressure will be 160 or 165 feet, while the present
pressure is only 15 or 20 feet—in one case less than
one-sixteenth, in the other less than one-eighth of the
new pressure. The maximum new pressure will he
four times the present maximum pressure, and this is
the case in the streets on the level of Sackville-street,
The leakage from every defective pipe and cock in this
level will be doubled by the new pressure. In those
cases, and they will be very numerous, where the pres-
sure is increased ninefold, the leakage will he trebled,
and so on in proportion to the square roots of the
heights. In the new waterworks, the supply is to he
constant, and, therefore, the leakage will also be con-
stant, and not, as at present, stopped during the in-
tervals between the days of supply. Thus the waste
by leakage will be doubly multiplied when the pres-
sure shall be multiplied, and its operation constant.
Powers, therefore must be given to the Corporation—
i. e., to those who shall constitute the majorities in the
meetings of the Council, as before explained, to repair,
alter, and renew the pipes, codes, and apparatus for


distributing the water, and these powers must be con-
tinually, and for ever hereafter, exercised. In order
also to carry on the trade of supplying the extern dis-
tricts, which, according to the present bill, extend to
Delgany, and other very distant localities, at both sides
of the Dublin Bay, powers must be given to the same
body to lay down pipes where none now exist, and to
construct machinery for distribution in those distant
places. Such extension of pipes, cocks, and other
works and apparatus for distribution through a region
of thirty miles in extent will necessarily multiply the
leakage, and other causes of waste, while the neces-
sary and legitimate consumption will also be largely
extended.*
The 58th clause of the bill, after conferring power
to borrow £300,000 for the purposes of the Act—that
is, for the purpose of defraying the costs of obtaining
the Act, and certain other expenses to be paid in re-
lation to it, and of defraying the expense of construct-
ing the great work itself of bringing the Yartry water
to the verge of the city, to which purposes alone this
sum is applicable—the clause concludes with the fol-
lowing proviso, viz. :—“ Provided always that the Cor-
poration may, from time to time, extend their distri-
butory and other works and pipes, when, and as
occasion may require, and, for such purposes, may
take up, at interest, on the like security, such further
sums of money, from time to time, as become neces-
sary to defray the expenses of such extensions, or any
of them ; but such further sums of money shall only
be applied for the purposes of such extensions.”
* Surveyors of works, watchmen, &0., must bo a large forco; and tboir super-
intondant will surely be an important funtionary.


Thus the Corporation are to have powers to be ex-
ercised at the discretion, or indiscretion, as the case
may be, of the majority of those members of the
Council who shall, from time to time hereafter, meet
on the subject, to extend main pipes, and other ex-
pensive works, without any definition of them, for
distributing water to such distant places as Booters-
town, Taney, Monkstown, Rathfarnham, Clontarf,
Killester, Kill, Killmacud, Crumlin, Dalkey, Killiney,
and Kingstown, in the county of Dublin, and the
still more distant localities of Bray, Powerscourt,
Delgany, Kilcool, Galaxy, Lower Newcastle, Upper
Newcastle, Deny lossary, and Killiskey, all in the
county Wicklow.
To the expenses of these works of speculation for
carrying on the trade of water supply to populations
in no Avay hound to take the water, there is no limit
in the hill; to the amount of money to be borrowed powers oftaxa-
for such speculations and works there is no limit tlon-
whatever ; hut it is to be borrowed on the credit of
rates, to be imposed by the Corporation, under the
compulsory process of the Queen’s Bench, and levied
by a receiver, armed with the authority of the Court
of Chancery, upon the people living within the bo-
rough, and not upon the security of any rates to he
levied on those beyond the borough, for such rates
will be founded on contract solely, and will be merely
voluntary, and may be discontinued, or never agreed
to. It is frightful to contemplate the extent to which
a power of this kind may be improvidently exercised
or abused in the hands of such an irresponsible body
as the Municipal Council. We may have well-founded
confidence in the members of the Council, who are


now soliciting these powers from the Legislature ; But
the act may not be a month old, when, on every ques-
tion touching the administration of it, these gentle-
men may be found in the minority at the Council
meetings.
The 45th clause of the bill limits the domestic
water rate to twelve pence in the pound on the valua-
tion of the houses ; and the 47th clause limits the
public water rate to three pence, these are limits of
the rates to be paid by all occupiers and owners of
bouses, in consideration of the supply, and for which it
may be supposed each citizen will get value. But then
comes the 61st clause, which enacts that “In case the
Corporation shall refuse or neglect to pay the interest
due on any such mortgages or debentures, airy mort-
gagees or debenture holders may, in addition to any
other remedies, enforce payment of any interest due,
and for six months in arrear on their respective mort-
gages or debentures, by the appointment of a receiver;
and the amount to authorise the requisition for the
appointment of a receiver shall be not less than l-40th
of the whole amount, for the time being, borrowed on
mortgage or debenture under this act and the said re-
cited acts ; ami it shall be lawful for such receiver to
apply to the judges of the Court of Queen’s Bench in
Ireland for a writ of mandamus to compel the Cor-
poration to make and cause to be levied such addi-
tional domestic water rate or rates, of such amount as
shall be sufficient to make good any deficiency in the
funds applicable to the payment of such interest; and
so from time to time ; and the said judges are hereby
authorized, on cause duly shown, to order and direct
such writ of mandamus to issue ; and if, and when


the same shall be made peremptory, the Corporation
shall, and they are hereby authorised and required,
to make or cause to be levied a rate or rates of such
amount, or as near thereto as may be, as shall be suf-
ficient to make good any and every such deficiency of
interest, and the costs and expenses attending the
recovery of the same.”
The mortgages and debentures in this clause men-
tioned are—first, those now existing, by which the
present pipe-water debt is secured, amounting to
£72,000 ; second, the mortgages or debentures to be
made for securing the sum of 300,000 which the act
authorizes the Corporation to borrow for execution of
the new works ; and, third, the mortgages or deben-
tures which shall be from time to time hereafter
made for securing such sums as the Corporation
shall borrow for defraying the expenses of ex-
tending their distributing pipes, and other works,
to the distant places before-mentioned. The rates
to he made for making good the interest on these
future and unlimited securities are to be in ad-
dition to the two rates of 12d. and 3d., whenever
these latter prove insufficient. The amount which
the securities of the 3rd class may reach in a few
years, is entirely without limit, and so, of necessity, is
the additional rate wholly without limit. Suppose the
Council, speculating on the wants, real or imaginary,
of the people in those distant places borrows money to
the amount of £IOO,OOO, and, considering the extent
of the area of supply, £400,000, or even much more,
may be spent on distributing pipes and works, it may
happen, that the inhabitants of those extern places
may refuse the water, or, after a trial, may give it up,


and cease to use it, and so discontinue the voluntary
rate, and thus leave the occupiers of houses within the
borough to pay, to the end of time, interest upon
money expended on works wholly useless to them.*
That such may be the consequence to the citizens of
giving power to the Corporation to trade in the
supply of water to distant places is too obvious to be
questioned. This is, therefore, a dangerous power,
and people should know that the promoters of the
present bill are soliciting this power for the persons
who shall, at all times hereafter, constitute the major-
ities at the meetings of the Municipal Council.
That the Yartry water will ever reach Leeson-street
at an expense of half-a-million of money I have not
the slightest hope—if, indeed, the undertaking be prac-
ticable at all. That it can be safely let into the Dublin
pipes without a further expenditure of £lOO,OOO, or
perhaps, £200,000,in repairing,staunching, and renew-
ing these pipes, is equally, in my opinion, improbable.
That the annual cost of maintaining and watching the
great reservoirs and other costly works incidental to
this undertaking will be enormous, to me seems very
certain ; and, supposing all this work accomplished,
the risk of constructing, and keeping full of water, two
such reservoirs as those intended, at an elevation of
600 feet above the sea, and depending on artificial
embankments, 37 and 65 feet high, impending over
the property, and the lives of thousands, in an exten-
sive and populous district, appears to me an insuper-
able objection to this Yartry scheme. When we
remember, a few years ago, the embankment of a
small tank, some nine or ten feet deep, in the Phoenix
* 1 here can be very little doubt that wlmt commences in voluntary contracts
will soon find its way to an Act of Parliament and become compulsory.


Park, with only a few perches of water behind it,
giving way and sweeping down the only house that
stood in its way, and killing three children, before
they could escape, we ought to shudder at the exist-
ence over our heads of 500 or 600 acres of land
covered to a depth of 60 feet with water, confined by
an artificial embankment 65 feet high. If the expense
of such a work were a matter of no moment, the peril
of it should forbid it, unless its construction were a
matter of absolute necessity.
I have stated my opinion that the repair and renewal
of our street main pipes, and the cocks and apparatus
connected with them, may require an expediture of
£lOO,OOO or £200,000; that the outlay on distributing
pipes and works for carrying on the water trade in
distant localities may reach to any sum from £lOO,OOO
upwards, but I have not adverted to the inevitable
expense of works to connect the end of the 3-foot
main, after it arrives at Leeson-street, with the distri-
buting pipes, whether old or new, through the city.
There is no estimate of this expense either in the Com-
missioner’s report or in the evidence attached to it ;
nor is it otherwise provided for in the bill than by the
proviso at the end of section 58, which gives power to
borrow, without limit, for the extension of distributory
works, within which designation this costly work must
be classed.
Taking all things into account, I apprehend it is qrute ®*omo
possible, if not probably, that the act now solicited, if a debt of one
it shall be passed, will, in the course of ten or fifteen
years, probably inamuch shorter time, involve the rate-
payers of Dublin in a debt of one million. It is easy
contemplate what poundage rate the interest of such a


debt will make upon the valuation of Dublin, in which
less than two-thirds of the houses are solvent, and how
far fifteenpence to the pound will go in paying it after
defraying the annual costs of maintaining water works
of the extent and nature now in contemplation. If
the work shall proceed and disprove my forebodings,
no one will rejoice in that happy result more than I
shall. What I express in this letter is not conceived
in any spirit of dictation, but submitted with very
sincere desire that any errors in it may be discovered
and prevented from misleading any one ; if any exist
in it, I am misled myself, notwithstanding a very sin-
cere desire to arrive at sound and true conclusions,
and a laborious effort to understand the subject.
In conclusion, if the ratepayers of Dublin desire a
system of waterworks, the first-cost of which must be
extravagant, and the ultimate amount of which cost
cannot, with any certainty,be estimated by anticipation
—■the difficulties in the execution of which must also
be very great, and can be only obscurely and partially
foreseen—the ever-recurring expenses of maintaining
which must be serious in amount under the most favor-
able circumstances, and may, in probable events, be
oppressive, or even ruinous—the very existence of
which must be a constant peril to property and to
life—the promised benefits from which are speculative
and problematical, and may never arrive—let them
select any one of the schemes for collecting, and deriv-
ing to the city, the waters of the mountain streams, as
proposed by the several inventors of these schemes. It
matters little which they select, they are substantially
all alike in these respects, and there is not any impor-
tant difference to determine the choice amongst them.


If the rate-payers be satisfied to effect a very certain,
a self-evident, and a very great improvement in the
present supply of water, both in purity and in pres-
sure for distribution, at an expense which, though
large, is but a fraction of the cost of any other scheme,
which is capable of exact pre-estimate, in the execu-
tion of which no engineering difficulty can arise, in
the maintenance of which future annual cost will be
trivial, and which will not threaten danger to property
or life, let them adhere to the canals. These have
been successively recommended by Mr. Touch, Mr.
Hawlcsley, Mr. Neville, and even by Mr. Hassard him.
self, the author of the Yartry scheme. The city has
had sixty years’ experience of them, under the most
unfavourable circumstances, the consequence of origi-
nal error in construction, the correction of which error
is the true desideratum.
My opinion, therefore, is, that for the three proposi-
tions deduced by the Commissioner from the evidence
laid before him, the following should be substituted
First—The state of the present supply of water
to the city of Dublin is defective, arising from the
wrong position and inadequate capacity of the basins.
Secondly—That it is desirable to have this defect
rectified, as soon as it can conveniently be accom-
plished.
Thirdly—That the proper mode of rectifying the
defect in the water supply is to carry into execution
the works for taking water from the canals recom-
mended by Messrs. Hawksley and Neville in 1858.
I am, gentlemen, yours faithfully,
G-ebald Titzgibbon.
10, Meeeion Square, North,
31$ December, 1860.


3 1508
00850180
