

PRICE
ONE SHILLING


Union Club Hotel
Telephone 265.
CHAS. E. PAGET,
Proprietor.
QUEEN ST., MELBOURNE
Director. ARTHUR C. TRAPP,
B. GOLDSMITH, ESQ. Manager for Australia
Tel. X 568.
FIRE INSURANCE Risks of every Description accepted at Lowest Rates


Impressions
A Victorian Abroad
Confessions
aughty Boy of the Fifties
(Being Sketches of Early Melbourne)
J. BEAR
(“J.8.")
Originally Published serially in “The Leader.”
(l^effiourne:
J. T. PICKEN AND CO., PRINTERS,
244-50 LITTLE LONSDALE ST.
COPYRIGHT.


I


PREFACE.
It is the unexpected that happens. When half a century in
Australia had about reconciled me to spending the remainder of
my days in the land of my adoption without hope of a commutation
of the sentence, behold me pacing the deck of a majestic P. and O.
Liner outward bound for my birthplace, London. Haste is a
merciful economiser of tears and farewells. Not the least of the
pleasures of going abroad, is that of return. Amid the kaleidos-
copic delights and wonder of travel is an ever-present yearning
to share one’s impressions with those left behind. To The Leader
I am indebted, and tender my grateful acknowledgements, not
alone for having in its columns helped me to unburden somewhat
of my obligations, but also for the kind permission of re-publica-
tion. If in these impressions I have said aught to offend the
susceptibilities of my good friends, John Bull and his family,
I throw myself on their great good nature and appreciation that
my strictures have been penned in a true Max O’Rellian sense of
friendship. In giving to my Early Melbourne articles somewhat
of a personal setting in the confession of certain of my youthful
delinquencies, my excuse must be that in a stern adherence to
fact my recollections of our City in the flush times were so
interwoven with my humble life as to be inseparable. To those
pleased to regard me as their enemy —there may be such —I commit
myself in Book-form, in the hope that they may find enough of
literary flesh on my bones to be worth the picking.
I have penned what follows since my return from abroad
under the spur of necessity to do something to appease the unrest
of travel sans preparation or note-taking en route, trusting wholly
to memory’s store of a confusedly happy time in parts beyond seas.


-i .-^^^-"'• >-'t:■'/-.■•'.-i% '■.. '•/;■;
-■;*-. ■■■'lt .->'■■ ■"•-•4 •..' Jf-' ■;'^'
‘ ‘'■s'*',
. / .7 -ars . ii.' ‘lO
v- 'l- i"- ■ --“';l.i
" -li.—*«■ - - jj,'^


CONTENTS.
Impressions of a Victorian Abroad
Glimpses of Ceylon - 9
La Belle France - - 19
Impressions of London 28
Windsor Castle - - 35
A Few of John Bull’s Characteristics - - - 41
Coster Bill of London Town 48
Mrs. John Bull and Her Daughter - - - - 53
Great Britain v. Germany and America - - - 59
i
Confessions of a Naughty Boy of the Fifties.
Old Melbourne Notabilities 63
G. V. Brooke in Tragedy and Comedy - - - 70
Braid’s Dancing Saloon 74
Old Cremorne Gardens - 78
A Crank’s Adventure with an Elephant - - 83
Bourke Street’s Wild Beast Show . - - - 90


I r ' -■ A
. -''. Jm . ■ -*. ‘ .


Impressions
of a
Victorian
Abroad




Glimpses of Ceylon
The Australian beyond seas may touch at many
lands, but for wholly novel and delightful impressions
he must surely give pride of place to fair Ceylon.
Nearing the harbor of this sunny, sweet-scented
clime what appears to be the eruptive result of innu-
merable submarine explosions soon reveal themselves
as due to the ocean’s unceasing attack on Colombo’s
colossal breakwater. One gazes with awe and admira-
tion at this impressive! and lasting monument of
human skill and achievement. Even in moderate
weather the waves rise, foam crested, as in anger,
to dash themselves impotently against this stern,
unyielding barrier, race madly along its wall, as
though to seek a breach, finally to be hurled vertically
a hundred feet or more into space and minute spray,
bejewelled into “ rich and various gems ” by rainbow
effects of great beauty! Our attention is soon drawn
from this fascinating, ever recurring display by the
approach of the pilot’s launch. On it comes, a mere
cork on the heaving bosom of old ocean, tossing it
about sportively like an indiarubber ball.
One holds His breath with dread as the tiny, grace-
fully-built, steam-driven craft recklessly dashes bows
on at our huge fabric towering majestically above it.
We sigh with relief when she turns with a graceful
sweep and is dancing beside us. The weatherbeaten
pilot may be seen balancing himself on the rail of
the bulwark, watching, cat-like, for his opportunity as
his boat rises and falls on the swell. Up she bounds
on the apex of a wave. At the imminent moment he
has sprung at and gained a footing on the by no
means inviting frail ladder of ropes dangling from
our rail. Up he skips nimbly, and is aboard shaking
hands with our skipper. They are on the bridge in
a moment, and the starting bell rings. Our mighty
line'r shudders throughout as though to shake off


its brief slumber, and we make for the port. Enter-
ing the harbor, scarcely has our floating palace come
to rest ere we are beset on both sides by a flotilla of
small, double logs, lashed together by cocoanut fibre
rope, each bearing one, in some instances two, scream-
ing Cingalese boys, sitting astride, or tailor fashion,
on their wobbly little craft. They use a paddle con-
sisting of a short, flat piece of thin wood, with which
they twist and turn it about or forge it ahead with
great dexterity. Amphibious young rascals, these, in
their element alike on or under the water. “ Here,
come on !” I say. “All lite, all lite; I di, I di, I di,”
is their deafening appeal, as, waving their arms aloft
w'ildly, they solicit the nimble copper coins plenti-
fully showered into the water by the passengers.
With these nude boys the mouth does service as a
purse. Every penny captured goes into the mouth;
so many, ofttimes, that one concludes that they must
swallow them, until some half dozen or more are taken
therefrom and proudly displayed in the hand. Hand-
some, merry imps, these boys, with their big, laugh-
ing eyes, and dazzling, superb teeth liberally displayed.
Their sleek, symmetrically moulded nude forms glide,
eel-like, in and out of the water as they dive to inter-
cept the rapidly sinking coin. It frequently happens
that there are several contestants for a single penny,
resulting in a short but sharp swimming match and
a submarine wrestling contest, visible to the onlookers
above, despite the propeller-like commotion in the
water. One shudders to think what would happen
to these human fish were a shark to put in an appear-
ance, but they seem to give no heed to any such
danger, although we learn that they are not infre-
quently taken. Not alone are these dusky youngsters
expert swimmers, but superb climbers. The
like, vertical walls of our huge P. and O. liner present
no difficulties to these adventurous youths; up they
come, clinging to nothing apparently with fingers and
toes, without even a loose or other rope to cling to.
Our bulwarks gained in a moment or two, they boldly
and fearlessly take a header of some 35 or 40 feet
after the much-prized threepenny bit.
Steam launches, row boats, and catamarans soon


swarm around us, bringing tropical fruits and vege-
tables or nondescript Eastern goods, or plying for
hire to the shore, some miles away. The catamaran
is a crude, risky-looking craft, but, handled by natives
to the manner born, the most timid traveller may
safely go down to the sea in this Eastern skiff, the
limit of his risks being sea sickness and a wetting.
In proof of this, there may be met whole fleets in all
weathers, on deep-sea fishing bent, many miles out of port.
Our roomy decks soon present quite an animated,
bazaar-like appearance, crowded with all sorts and
conditions of native trader.
The Cingalese merchant is perhaps the world’s
greatest salesman; his patience is infinite, and his
Eastern wares but too tempting to the simple Simon
from abroad. Verily, the Colombo trader obeys the
Biblical behest in his treatment of the stranger within
his gates; he is taken in, and mayhap suspects it; but
he is fleeced so pleasantly withal that he rather enjoys
his own taking down. From a sixpenny walking
stick to a twenty-guinea richly bejewelled brace-
let, the same irresistible, subtle persuasion is
brought to bear till the victim is vanquished. It is
as nothing that your tormentor asks pounds and
accepts shillings; sell they must, and will. The
purchaser, not unmindful, perhaps, of Shakespeare’s
dictum that “ the robbed who smiles steals something
from the thief,” laughingly pays up, thus gaining that
something as a trifling make-weight towards value for
his money. This master of his craft, with the devilish
cunning of the boa constrictor, salivas his victim well
before he swallows him, thus rendering the operation
quite pleasant and agreeable to both parties to the con-
tract. It is but fair to own, however, if one but have
the nerve to name his own price and stick to it, he
gets, in most instances, very good value for his outlay.
Ashore, in the main street of Colombo, the stranger
is literally mobbed by these picturesquely-garbed,
handsomely-featured harpies and their scouts, eager
to snare him into their bazaars. One readily complies
at first, lured by the assurance that he is invited to
see, and not to buy; but he soon tires of playing the
part of fly to these merciless human spiders. Temper,


patience, and, mayhap, purse, exhausted, he at length
forcibly resents their blandishments, brushing them
aside, and wends his way up the street in the scorch-
ing sun, and plunges eagerly into the grateful shade
of a magnificent avenue of tropical foliage. It is
in Colombo one sees the perfection of street tree
planting, the introductory scene to the tropical splendor
and wealth of verdure that abound throughout Ceylon..
There are two modes of travelling in this garden
of India, plus long distance railway service. The
one-horse, rather comfortable Parisian-like chaise,,
with its white or red turbanned Cingalee driver on
the box seat above; and, alternatively, the; popular
and handy adult’s perambulator, the jinrickshaw, seat-
ing one, and not infrequently two, passengers. It is
drawn by a native runner. A thin calico wrapper
around his loins, and a turban, constitute his attire,
which offers a striking contrast to his oil anointed,
dark skin and shapely form. The native proves a
capital substitute for the horse or motor car; he is
sure-footed, runs at a rapid and evenly-maintained
pace for miles; never seems to tire or become
“winded;” he neither shies, kicks over the traces
(there are none), nor bolts; better still, he guides him-
self and his handy vehicle, so that driving is unneces-
sary; nor is the trap encumbered by the presence
of a nosel-bag. All that the “ fare ” need do, there-
fore, is to sit tight and admire the scenery. This
human beast of burden steers himself and his over-
grown perambulator in and out of nondescript, oft-
times dense, traffic with a skill rivalling the London
cabby. Inland of Colombo, go where one may, one’s
surroundings are of surpassing loveliness and botanic
beauty. Palms, cinnamon, acacia, cocoanut, and
other trees of wondrous beauty in their variety of
shade, tint, and color, interspersed with multi-colored
flowers, abound in this Eastern elysium, all completing
a scene alike fascinating, fairy-like, and unreal to the
visitor fresh from the uninteresting sameness of our
Australian bush. In this veritable garden of Eden,
Ceylon, thel adopted home of but a sprinkling of
Europeans, chiefly officials, its chosen people, the
Cingalese, live and have their being mostly in the


open air, following their various, by no means arduous,
occupations, taking their simple alfresco meals, a light
diet of fish, fowl, and tropical fruits, by the roadside,
or, as a perpetual picnic, amid the grateful shade of
palm or acacia, apparently well content, happy, and at
peace with themselves and all the world —their world,
Ceylon. Despite varying castes of faiths, these simple
children of nature lead a pleasant, dreamy, arcadian
existence the visitor may well envy. To those not
born to it or acclimatised, the intensely hot and
humid climate is enervating—still, trying as it assur-
edly is, the langorous air is redolent of a spicy,
aromatic odor that does much to add to the charm of
one’s novel surroundings.
The tall-stemmed cocoanut tree, with its palm-like,
graceful top, is alike ornate and profitable. Not alone
is it valuable for its oil, but its fibre is put to many
useful purposes, such as the making of matting, rope and
the like. Oil mills abound, and the industry affords a liveli-
hood to thousands of natives, men, women and children.
The different castes and tribes are easily distinguish-
able of feature and garb, but each alike handsome
of feature and symmetrical of form, man and woman
alike of a natural grace and dignity of bearing all
their own. That they live in peace and amity, each
caste worshipping as it will, which was not always
the case, is due to the benign British rule, and the
inculcating by example of the right and wisdom of
religious freedom and tolerance.
The Parsee is of a distinctly Jewish cast of counte-
nance. It is evident by their sumptuous residences,
richness of apparel, and pretension to European dress
and equipage, that they are the best off of all the
natives. I learn that they act as bankers, money
changers, and, at times, lenders, to their less pros-
perous fellow-natives. Judging by appearances, they
thrive well and live sumptuously out of their “ money
and their usances.”
Of whatever caste, all the Cingalese would appear
to be well nurtured and cleanly in their scanty, but
always picturesque garb. Dress with them is scarcely
a necessity, nor need it concern anyone, native or
European, in a climate where clothing—like to the


Scriptural grasshopper—is a burden. The equivalent
of half a sovereign, I find, equips a European with
a complete and sightly costume of white drill and
straw hat, and in a country where all dress very much
alike, the apparel, unlike to European communities,
is of but slight assistance in proclaming the man
or his worldly circumstance. The Cingalese is tall,
well set up, and a graceful walker. His features are
finely and rather fe!minine, perhaps owing to his
wearing his carefully-groomed black hair so long that
he gathers it up off his forehead and on top of his
head in a knot, secured by a comb like to those used
by European women. So also do men and women
dreiss very much alike in robe-like drapery. Thus
it is often difficult to distinguish the sexes, leading,
not infrequently, to embarrassing and amusing mis-
takes—amusing in that no offence is taken, or it might
prove otherwise.
The young girls are mostly beautiful of feature and
form—as dusky beauty goes—of graceful carriage,
and seemingly very modest. Their meagre clothing,
often but a brightly-colored, thin shawl drawn tightly
around the hips, emphasises their charms, but not
immodestly. They deport themselves with a smiling
grace and unconscious dignity that their Western,
more cultured sisters might well emulate.
A quarter of an hour’s run out of Colombo in a
jmrikshaw, and the native village is reached. It is
simply a continuance of the road, converted for a
couple of miles into a street by closely-packed, flat-
roofed houses, or rather huts, rarelv of more than
one story, but roughly built of rubble 'stones and mud,
with here! and there a grotesquely ornamented reli-
gious Buddha or other temple of more pretentious
appearance. All are alike liberal in door and window
space, but lack any such fittings. Indeed, through-
out the island the need for all the air procurable
renders any such things as glass or door unsuitable,
lattice work supplying their places. There is over all
the glamor of the East that makes for one’s interest
in thdse villages, but stripped of that there is much
that is squalid and insanitary, bad and insufficient
drainage, the malodorous result being unpleas-


antly forced on one’s notice. That England should
have done so much to ameliorate the condition of
its loyal Cingalc-e subjects, and apparently neglected
the urgent need for sanitation, is to be deplored.
Colombo and its surroundings, so intensely and
picturesquely Eastern, is to the visitor like to a waking
dream—the springing into life and realisation of
scenes made familiar from his earliest recollection in
Biblical and other pictures. Driving through the
village, with its superb setting of tropical forest, amid
the busy concourse of its people, is to realise and live
a chapter or two of the “ Arabian Nights.”
One sees the wise man of the East with his vene-
rable snow-white flowing beard, in toga-like drapings,
and turbanned head, doubtless dropping words of
wisdom into the attentive ear of the youth. Through
the open window spaces are seen men busy plying
their various callings, the tinker, tailor, carpenter, lamp
maker and mender, reminding one of Aladdin, his
lamp, and the wonders that came of it. Here we see
many charming Rachael’s going to the well, with
pitcher dexterously poised on head, pausing here and
there to*gossip and laugh with others bearing in simi-
lar manner baskets of fruit or fish, sparsely-clad but
pretty children playing at their heels, much as children
do elsewhere.
An interesting feature of the traffic one meets in
and around Colombo is the heavily-built, clumsy
dray, with its rounded cover of bent laths and inter-
woven grass, drawn by one, ofttimes two, prettily-
formed, humped back little oxen, “ whose heads da
grow beneath their shoulders.” They are kindly
used, being willing servants, save! as to the ancient
mode of yoking—a short, stout log seating on the
hump in such manner as to force the nose close to the
ground, so that with every breath the dust, a familiar
fiend there as elsewhere, is drawn up into the
nostrils. Who is not familiar with this ancient turn-
out —the Eastern market cart, as depicted in Biblical
illustrations of the time of Christ As they were in
those ancient times, so are they to-day. Centuries
are as nothing in the unalterable, unchanging East !
The Cinnamon Gardens is a park-like, beautiful


reserve, wherein the European residents meet of after-
noons to play cricket, tennis, polo, and the like, in
defiance of climatic disadvantages. Boating is also
indulged in on the serpentine-like lake in the gardens.
Elsewhere than in Ceylon, a botanical fairyland, this
reserve would be a more striking feature. Colombo
possesses its “ Rotton Row ” in its grand, ocean-
skirted esplanade, where daily, from 4 to 5 p.m., all
the youth, beauty, and fashion most do congregate
and deport themselves, on foot and on horseback, in
carriage and pair, dog-cart, and high-stepping horse,
down to the humble jinrickshaw, seemingly putting
m an intensely uncomfortable two hours in silk hat
and Regent-street attire; the ladies similarly punished
by the cruel hand of fashion a la London and Paris.
The most favored of the many drives is that to
Mount Lavinia, situated on the coast, eight miles from
the port. The road undulates through cocoanut plan-
tations and rich natural verdure and shrubberies,
palms, acacias, and stretches of park-like grass, the
whole way resplendent with gorgeous, unfamiliar,
tropical wild flowers and blossoms, charming to the
eye, and rich in perfume. The “ Mount Lavinia ”
—a palatial hotel—affords us much needed refresh-
ment. Having duly admired the fine seascape view
from the colonnade, our polite and attentive native
servant_ directs us to the Buddha Temple. This
interesting place of worship is built in a cutting below
the surface. Descending by some half dozen quaintly-
ornamental steps, we find ourselves in a richly-
verdured quadrangle. Making our way, hat in hand,
to what is evidently the priestly residential portion of
the structure, we get a glimpse of a venerable father
of the faith in a striking yellow toga.
With snow white hair and beard, and fine patri-
archal appearance generally, he is poring over a large
brass-bound tome, and so deeply engrossed in its
study that he fails to notice our intrusion. Fearing
to disturb this holy man in his devotions, and about
to withdraw, we are accosted by another and younger
priest. With finger on lip he conveys to us that his
reverend brother may not be intruded upon, and leads
us to the opposite side of the court yard. Pausing,


in perfect English, lie smilingly asks if we would see
the temple: we assent gratefully, and are soon, but
not without a feeling of awe, in a dimly-lighted sanc-
tuary, in the presence of an artistically-executed figure
of the revered and much worshipped Buddha, mean-
ing, as our guide proudly informs us, the all wise,
or enlightened. The presentment of the saint is
cleverly carved in a sort of soap stone, and the lines
of the features and form are veiw fine. Buddha is
seated, the eyes closed, and head downcast. A mvs-
terious light from above, the source of which is not
perceptible to us, throws a sort of religious halo on the
face and form, making the statue very impressive.
Becoming accustomed to this dim, religious light, we
at length withdraw our gaze from the reclining figure
to find that the walls of the chamber, oblong in shape,
are covered with a sort of porcelain in pictorial panels,
fine in the contrast of coloring, but quaint and gro-
tesque in subject—a series "of pictures, in fact—
evidently telling a story. In educated, well-chosen
English, our priestly guide, philosopher and friend
opens his lecture by a short family history—not to
speak it profanely—of our deceased friend, Buddha.
It w'as interesting at the time, but details have faded
from my memory. I know that the impression of
his saintship left on my mind is that he was what we
would call nowadays a revivalist; that, had he lived in
our time, and of our people, he would probably have
become Prime Minister of England or a General
Booth, possibly a Tom Bent—however, living in the
time that he did, and of the East, wherein then, as
now, religion was, and is, the essence of their lives,
he naturally turned his attention, not to politics, but
to the founding of a new' and reformed faith, w'herein
belief in the transmigration of the soul played an
important part. Sketched brietlv and lucidly by our
fascinating friend and disciple of Buddha, by the aid
of the illustrations, it impressed me as being a good
work-a-day religion, as faiths go. not at all unlike
or inconsistent with that of the Christian, in that the
good were to be rewarded hereafter, and the evil-doers
punished. We had but to study the pictures seriatim
to see that personified virtue, represented by both


sexes, always came out on top; while the incorrigibles,
after having rather a better time than they deserved,
generally managed ultimately to fall into the arms of
an impossible sort of devil with horns, ever, like
Policeman X., lurking round the corner ready to run
them in. If the last picture be reliable, not only did
his Satanic Majesty do his duty, but with a zest
and enjoyment quite too fiendish to contemplate.
Impressed with what I had heard and seen, and forti-
fied by the reflection that perhaps a good half of the
present human race worshipped Buddha and his faith,
I had no hesitation in assuring our worthy showman,
if I may so call him without disrespect, that I thought
it a very excellent religion, and that, if I ever took
it into my head to try a change of faith, I might do
worse than sample his, putting it commercially, where-
upon he bowed, smiled, and returned the compliment
neatly by a counter-assurance that, next to Buddhism,
of all faiths he favored the Christians, as being not
dissimilar to and next best to his own, adding that he
and all the Cingalese had a great respect for our good
King Edward of England. The story of the pictures
I cannot recall, but I know that before he had finished
he had worked us up to quite a pitch of excitement,
and when the denouement came in the final scene it
struck me as a very sensational drama—a sort of
sanctified version of our Punch and Judy show,
I was surprised and pleased to learn from this holy
man that this costly temple, with all its artistic addenda,
had been built and completed at the cost of the British
Government, and presented to the faithful as a grace-
ful compliment, CHir modest donation of a few rupees
for “ the g(X)d of the church ” was gratefully accepted
with our cordial thanks, and we withdrew. Again,
in the quadrangle, we were much interested to find
a deputation of pretty native children, boys and girls,
each with a bunch of wild flowers, timidly presenting
them to the smiling, benign old father priest in return
for his blessing. Truly a pretty sight, inducing the
thought that a religion that encouraged little children
to pause in their play to offer respect and floral tribute
to its fathers could not be a very unchristianlike faith
after all.


La Belle France
MARSEILLES.
From Ceylon through the Red Sea, and out into the
Mediterranean, may be likened to the progressive
stages of the Turkish bath. Approaching the Red
Sea, the traveller has perspired so copiously for days
and nights that he has become sullenly defiant of
nature. She has helped herself so liberally of his
moisture as to have convinced him of his complete
desiccation. Yet he is but on the threshold of his
discomfiture. He has still to gasp, like to a fish out
of water, through those avdul three and a half days
of enervating moist heat and fluid exudation. He no
longer questions, as he has secretly done all his life,
the learned chemists’ dictum that two-thirds of this
mortal coil had once, in his case, consisted of water.
A modern Hamlet, yearning for the melting of his
too, too solid flesh, need but visit this fiery sea to be
accommodated. A feeling of angry scorn rankles in
the wanderer’s breast towards the seasoned globe
trotter, who had assured him that the Red Sea is
nothing as bad as cracked up to be, and had even
hinted at the possibility of his having to seek shelter
from the cold in an overcoat.
Meantime, he has passed through the Suez Canal,
and gazed shudderingiy at the glaring desert at either
side. To the aching eyes it appears limitless ! Cal-
cined white in the fierce sun rays, it is a desolate,
sterile wilderness, shimmering in a mirage of unchang-
ing, merciless heat. Mayhap, in the dim distance, he
sights a slowly toiling caravan of camels, heavily
ladened, and its Arabian escort, pursuing their
wearying way, apparently to nowhere, save, perhaps.


into that blood-red, angry sun level with the horizon.
Such living pictures, but rarely seen, add something
of interest and motion to the otherwise lifeless outlook.
These ships of the desert are soon lost in the cloud of
sand of their own creation, and the traveller’s tired
eyes turn for relief to that narrow ribbon of water,
while he thanks his stars that he rides on its bosom,
safe and aloof from the terrors of travel over that
moonlike, arid waste.
Emerging from the Red Sea into the refreshing,
breezy, invigorating, blue Mediterranean, his recent
climatic troubles forgotten, he is again pacing the
deck light of step and heart. In the panoramic
changes of climate, scene, and people lie the charm
of travel. Of the inscrutable East, and all that therein
is, for the time he has had his fill. With all on board,
he is eagerly looking forward to La Belle B'rance!
Marseilles is the next port of call. The course opens
up ever varying and picturesque scenery. Scarred,
rugged uplands and mountainous heights, with cathe-
dral-like summits, rear themselves abruptly out of the
sea, away heavenward. These coastal cliffs are ver-
dutelcss, apparently; of a limestone formation, pinky-
whit? in hue, with purple shadows, and neutral tint-
ing, wrought by the effect of light and shade, ever
shifting with the movements of the drifting, white,
fleecy clouds overhead. Nearing the harbor we pass
within biscuit-throw of the historic and renowned
“ Chateau d’lf,” on its seagirt isle, made famous of
history and by the magic pen of that master of
romance, Alexander Dumas. We gaze with awe and
wTinder at this ancient monument of a bygone iiar-
barous age. For the time forget that that long
suffering Edmund Dantes lived therein through mar-
vellous blood-curdling trials, tribulations, and adven-
ture but in fiction. There, is pointed out, the narrow
sea w'ashed ledge of rock from wdience he was hurled
sewn up in canvas, knife in hand, ready to cut his way
out of those dread funereal cerements to life, liberty,
and revenge! Every thrilling incident in that won-
derful novel, “ Monte Cristo ” —that story so fascinat-
ing in one’s boyhood—is recalled, wherein the great
novelist conjured so effectively with his theme of


unlimited love, unlimited wealth, unlimited revenge!
Recalling it all, busy with the thought of what horror
those grim, ocean-girt prison walls could disclose if
voiced, we turn away reluctantly to another, but no
less interesting, sight. It is a white mountain domi-
nating the whole country around. On its sharp apex
is a beautiful edifice, its lofty, clear-cut spire sur-
mounted with the erect figure of our mother gilded
in gold, the child Jesus clasped to the breast, her
hand uplifted pointing heavenward. Truly an impres-
sive sight, that Cathedral of Notre Dame, for its com-
manding position, grandeur, and beautifully chaste
architecture. This magnificent structure is visible
for many miles around on sea and on land. Verily,
Mother Church knows how to impress the eye, and,
through it, the emotions of her children!
Surely here is an eloquent sermon in stone in that
superb temple—a masterpiece in architecture that
one of whatever faith, having appreciation of art,
might well fall down and worship. Its interior is no
less impressive. Therein are to be seen and admired
priceless works of art of the brush and chisel by
famous masters, arranged effectively amid unique
ecclesiastical carvings in oak; and last, but by no
means least, an organ, grand in design and unrivalled
in tone. Than the Catholic Church, especially in
France, there is none more mindful of the value of
the twin sisters, art and music, as incentive to reli-
gious aspiration.
Marseilles is a busy seaport, as judged by the num-
ber of vessels loading and unloading at her crowded
wharves. A two-mile drive, and one has passed
through squalid, narrow, mean streets, and therein
obtrusive poverty huddled together in overcrowded,
grimy, malodorous tenement houses and decadent
hovels, the inevitable outer fringe of every old world
city. There to be seen and sighed over are ill-clad,
obviously ill-nurtured, pinched-looking men, from
youth to advanced age, and worn, slatternly women,
all alike hanging about the streets and cheap, evil-
looking wine cafes, with neglected-looking, ill-fed
children at their heels, all talking, blaspheming, ges-
ticulating—some quarrelling, few, if any, laughing


or happy looking; on the whole, a depressing experi-
ence. The city proper reached, however, such gloomy
impressions are effaced for the time from one’s mind
by the sight of fine, broad streets, thronged with
people in aspect well dressed, prosperous, and
contented. The deep blue sky and genial warmth
of August, tempered by a cool breeze from off the
sea, remind one of a bright spring day in Melbourne.
We are to experience, many of us for the first time,
a Catholic Continental Sunday. The boulevards
present to one on entering them a cool, refreshing
and park-like perspective of tree planting. Fine elms
chie%, all grown by time to quite forest-like perfec-
tion and girth, with splendid spread of bright green
leafage, tinged with autumnal red and yellow, between
which are had glimpses of gaily-colored awnings and
blinds, giving to the streets quite a fete-like, holiday-
appearance. Many of the large shops are closed,
the cafes generally, and nearly all places of
business, are open, and trading as on a week day.
One’s impression of Marseilles is that nine-tenths
of it consist of cafes and barbers’ shops, alike well
patronised. To mingle closely in a dense concourse
of people in a strange land, all around speaking a
tongue foreign to one’s own, is a unique event, and
gives rise to indescribable emotions, ending, after all,
in the conclusion that humanity is very much alike
the world over. Even in its diversities are felt that
universal kinship wrought by the supreme, unseen
hand called by our great poet “ Nature’s touch.” One
is not long there ere he is convinced that whatever
revolutionary feelings may be rampant in France as
regards religion, their church, and its observances,
have still a dominant hold of the hearts and minds of
the people. Following the trend of the multitude,
one soon finds himself face to face with a fine and
imposing-looking cathedral in the heart of the city,
said to hold 30,000 devotees, and not infrequently
filled, as at to-day’s Mass. Its fine conception, within
and without, an impressive service, and grand vocal
and instrumental music stir one’s religious sense,
respect and admiration. Facing this magnificent
place of worship is a splendid tree-planted reserve or


recreation ground of many acres. Elms of fine growth,
in three parallel rows, provide a complete canopy of
beautiful leafage over the whole, creating delightful
shade and coolness. The inhabitants in and around
Marseilles are said to number from 500,000 to 600,000.
Of these, roughly computed, at least a third were
assembled there on that Sunday afternoon, promenad-
ing or seated on portable chairs, many thousands of
which are there pro bono publico, listening to sweet,
bright, French music, selections from operas and
such like, discoursed exquisitely by a grand military
brass band of 60 performers, their gaily-colored
uniforms and accoutrements doing much to enliven
the scene. A long programme is played every Sunday
the year round in a gracefully ornamented, flag-
decked, central rotunda, for the pleasure and amuse-
ment of the people. It appears to be the common
resort and meeting place of all Marseilles—his wife
and children, who, favored of nature with a mild and
genial climate, spend all their time, save the night,
in the open air. Artistically designed, brightly
painted toy carriages, drawn by goats or bonny little
donkeys, harnessed tandemwise or in pairs, decked
with gaily-colored flowers, ply about these grounds
for the special use and enjoyment, at trifling cost, of
the little folk. Like many a joyful event in their
lives to come, that journey of unalloyed happiness
proves but of too brief duration, beginning in laughter,
and not infrequently ending in tears. To mingle with
and observe the manners and customs of those thou-
sands, young and old, and of all conditions, to
mentally note wherein, and in what respect they differ
from those of our own nation, to the sweet refrain of
inspiriting music, make up a very pleasant Sunday
afternoon, not, perhaps, quite orthodox, but none the
less enjoyable. Like to most novel experiences, it
proved in some respects disenchanting, especially of
one’s preconception of gay life, in light-hearted La
Belle France. With but few exceptions, the women
were poorly and carelessly clad, and of a shapeless,
unsymmetrical mould, denoting the absence of the
much maligned, but needful corset. They all have
fine heads of hair, apparently carefully dressed,


combed, and set up. For that reason probably a hat
or bonnet is quite an exception, the fair sex evidently
preferring- nature unadorned to anything in the shape
of what to mere mankind is summed up in the mysteri-
ous word “ a confection.”
I was fain to conclude, also, that the Marseilles
gentler sex are not comely, or even passingly good
looking; on the contrary, plain and commonplace of
feature, of a dull, swarthy complexion, sad looking,
inanimate, and expressionless. Marseilles’ mankind
do not impress one, in that they are small of stature
and generally inconsequential in build, bearing, and
appearance. Indeed, the workmen in their blue
blouses are by far the finer men in all those respects
than their assumedly better off and better dressed
neighbors. Perhaps it is that the apparel plays such
an important part in the judgment of men and women
alike in the eyes of an alien. He has preconceived
ideas and prejudices to overcome. To say that from
our point of view the French folk dress quaintly is
the mildest way of putting it. To the Englishman, or
Australian of to-day, the exaggerated peg-top trowser,
held out to the breeze by both hands in side pockets,
a bob-tail sac coat, cut in closely to the figure at the
back, and a straw hat two sizes too small, provoke a
pitying smile as grotesque and out of date, recalling
Bourke-street, Melbourne, thirty-five years ago; nor,
turning again to the fair sex, is the crinoline wanting
there to complete the long-forgotten picture. The
majority of the children are pretty, but in the Bri-
tisher’s eye are sadly handicapped by quaintness of
dress, tending to impress one with the idea that they
are not children after all, but miniature men and
women. Even the poorest, however, of both sexes
and their children are cleanly, self-respecting, and of
all things polite to each other, and more especially
to the evident stranger in their midst. Rough work-
men would rise, hat in hand, with “ Pardon, Mon-
sieur,” and tender one his chair, and their womenkind,
even their little children, were always considerately
polite in moving aside when impeding one’s view. It
is said that French politeness is but assumed and skin
deep. I humbly differ in that view; but even so, it


is none the less pleasant, sundered from home and
friends, to experience and appreciate kindnesses so
frankly tendered. I question, as an instance, if any
French lady would sit scornfully indifferent in a theatre
wearing a garden hat, however becoming, to the dis-
comfort and inconvenience of others. Nor would
her brother, wearing a top hat, remain deaf to the
appeal of “ Hats off in front.” As a community, they
do not strike one as being vivacious, gesticulative, or
particularly happy, as one might expect of people of
their reputedly gay nation, but rather as taking their
pleasures sadly, as they attribute to solid John Bull;
in that respect I have since had reason to conclude
they are quite distinctive from the Parisians. This
garden concert over, one is again moving with the
crowd, who disperse in all directions into the streets.
The broad pavements, in their brilliantly-lighted
causeways, soon present an ant-like activity. Mar-
seilles and his wife, and their pledges of affection, are
hungry, and must dine. To picnic under trees is of
common experience to all Australians; but to take
one’s meals on the flags of a populous city is some-
thing he has never even contemplated. It is a curious
and interesting sight, as one wanders along, to see
practically the whole population occupying about
two-thirds of the pavement, seated at small, round
tables, eating, drinking, and noisily talking. Young,
old, and all sorts and conditions of men, women, and
children are thus occupied, served by bustling garcons
waiters), dexterously balancing overloaded trays of
food, bottles, and glasses, submitting smilingly to
vituperative abuse, that seems to glide off them, figur-
atively, like water off the duck’s back, and is taken as
it is tendered, good naturedly. Here and there is a_
table of excitable youths, evidently of the student
class, drinking wine and beer, and caroling gay Cafe-
chantant music and song, to the evident delight and
amusement of their more soberly inclined neighbors.
It is, perhaps, only in France that people can eat,
drink, and talk simultaneously without inconvenience
or subsequent dyspeptic results. Nor is this open-
air, al fresco meal-taking confined to the larger streets.
Turn to the right or left, even to the lanes, the same


scene is being enacted, and so it goes on from sun-
down all the evening. Recall the evening of Mafeking
day in Melbourne, imagine the crowds of people
suddenly supplied with tables and chairs, gaily eating,
drinking, and making merry on the pavements to
strains of street music, and you have a fair idea of an
evening in Marseilles. Such a custom is possible
only in a cleanly-kept French town, where street
sweeping and watering preclude the possibility of dust
intruding as an unwelcome guest at the banquet, as it
would assuredly do in our vaunted Queen City of the
South, reigned over, not by a moribund eflfete city
council, but by his Satanic Majesty, King Dust. The
French folk are frugal in their food, as in other things;
still, what they provide is always well cooked, and
taken leisurely, of all things, gaily, and with a light
heart. His neighbor, John Bull, on the contrary, takes
his meals, much as he is said to take his pleasures, seri-
ously, but too often hurriedly. This may account for
the solid dulness of English communities as compared
with their more vivacious, cheerful friends across the
Channel. In the evolutionary moulding of a people,
the song writer is said to play an important part;
surely those who cook our food may fairly claim to
share the honors. Who shall say that “ Little Mary,”
facetiously so-called by one of those self-same song
writers, may not have much to do in swaying the
destiny of nations ? A striking, and, to the visitor,
pleasing, feature in Marseilles is the city dairy.
Neatly dressed, pretty maids may be seen smilingly
vending milk and butter fresh from the cow and churn;
while seen through an arch in the rear of the shop
is a room of stalls, wherein stand pretty little mild-
eyed cows, some chewing sweet-scented, new-mown
hay, while others stand dreamily chewing the cud of
contentment. No question as to the purity and fresh-
ness of the milk and newness of the butter in this
establishment. When, how and where the cows are
exercised, my limited knowledge of the language fails
me to inquire. Indeed, I preferred to picture to
myself their being led out to exercise by a silken cord
or ribbon by their charming attendants, the milk
maids.


Monsieur Tommy Atkins is much, and amusedly,
in evidence in Marseilles, where he struts with clank-
ing sword and spur, ogling the fair sex, shouldering
aside the mere civilian, and ruffling it with a harmless
sort of swagger. From an Australian point of view,
the little French Tommy, with his ill-fitting, baggy
dress, and self-assertive bearing, is nothing very
formidable. If he regards him at all, it is with a tole-
rant smile, as reminding him of nothing more warlike
or dangerous than the counterfeit soldier of the comic
opera. With a laugh he dismisses all suspicion of
the concealment of the Marshal’s baton in his knap-
sack. Let him but know the lad, and he will find him
a good, likeable little fellow, with a boyish tear lurk-
ing behind his assumption of bombast, as he speaks
affectionately of his mother and his home, from whom
and which he has been ruthlessly sundered to serve
three years, on the munificent half-penny a day, in the
service of his country. Commingled with a feeling
of pity is the recollection that it was such raw youths
as these that in the cruel year of 1870 bravely fought
and died, amid terrible hardships and privation, for
the honor and glory of France, from beginning to
the bitter, humiliating end, outclassed, not in courage,
but in generalship, by the skilfully trained and led
German army. They have the spirit of their forbears,
have these French boys, and need no defender.
When the time comes they will acquit themselves as
the soldiers of France have ever done in the past.
Should that occasion arise, I sincerely trust they will
stand, not opposed to, but shoulder to shoulder with,
the British army. The entente cordiale, now happily
existing between France and England, due in such
great measure to the tact and kindly aspirations of
our good King Edward, is deep seated and univer-
sally felt throughout France, as in England. There
is a mutual feeling that it will endure for years to
come. May it be for all time ! Leaving Marseilles,
it is with a feeling of liking and respect, not unmixed
with gratitude, towards a frank and kindly people,
met for the first time at home with pleasure, and
parted from with regret.


Impressions of London
The untravelled Australian has a comforting self-
assurance that, although he has seen nothing beyond
Australia, he has a fair conception of most countries
beyond seas—England included, especially London.
Descriptive accounts and the popular post card have,
he concludes, familiarised him with even more remote
climes and peoples. He embarks, outward bound,
from Melbourne, therefore, with the secretly-cher-
ished conviction that, go where he will, nothing very
much in the way of a surprise awaits him. Standing
amid the tropical wonders of Ceylon, his faith in that
respect gets fairly well shaken. But then, he reasons,
all that pertains to the East must prove more or less
unfamiliar, books notwithstanding.
London ? That mental note of interrogation gives
him uneasy pause, but with a shrug he returns with
an Australian’s tenacity to the idea that London, all
said, is but a sort of magnified Melbourne. Land him
in England’s capital, and the imaginative scales fall
from his eyes like magic, and he is lost in utter,
breathless surprise. London ! The very name has
from that moment a new meaning for him, and some-
thing akin to terror when face to face with, merged
in its cruel immensity. He is conscious of a shock
in the realisation of what it is to be but one insignifi-
cant human atom in five millions ! He is soon glad
to seek shelter from it all in the privacy and calm of
his room, that he may pull himself together and seek
relief to his tired, over-strained senses in oblivion.
But he is too mentally disturbed for sleep. He
realises for the first time that surprise, like other
emotions, may be so heavily struck as to set a cord


or pulse in his brain beating so painfully as to confuse
thought and defy rest. Picture him, say the next
day, cooled down, but still under more or less nerve
strain, plunged in that unbeginning, endless sea of
human unrest, wandering till footsore and weary the
great metropolis; or driving amid its dense vehicular
traffic, over its seemingly endless miles on miles of
busy shops, passing its huge trading palaces, innumer-
able theatres, palatial clubs, hotels, restaurants, art
galleries, museums, public buildings, churches, and
cathedrals, many miles of imposing residences, parks,
and gardens. On ending that memorable day he
plumes himself that he has seen much of outdoor
London. After many days so spent the truth comes
home to him that a year so devoted daily and he
could not exhaust all that is to be seen there. So
concluding, he systematises his sight-seeing. One
day he does the National Gallery, and feasts his eyes
and artistic appetite on many of the famous master-
pieces there, ancient and modern, so lost in admira-
tion that the whole day has flown as an hour, and he
wanders forth with regret, assured that he cannot yet
have seen a twentieth part of its treasures. Another
day is spent exploring, wdthin and without, the quaint,
historic old Tower of London. Curiosity directs his
wanderings to the East end, prying into mean streets,
fetid poverty and starvation, to shudder with the
thought that in the midst of untold wealth and luxury
are many thousands of human beings wanting warmth
and food from birth to age, or a premature grave.
Helpless, hapless beings, ever increasing and multiply-
ing, so that this human misery has no time limit, but
must go on ceaselessly in fulfilment of a hopeless,
predestined heritage of dire poverty and want. He is
not unmindful or unappreciative of unceasing, untir-
ing effort to cope with this trouble, but as an echo to
the thought comes the conviction that as long as
England herself to be made the tip and dump-
ing-gound for the human refuse of other nations, so
will the evil predominate. He empties his purse with
willing, even glad, bestowal. With a sigh of relief,


he turns to less painful surroundings. Amid brighter,
more heartening scenes, he strives to blot the memory
and pain of it all from his mind, and cannot. Sad
and depressed by the thought of Lrondon’s poverty,
emphasised by London’s inestimable wealth, he lashes
himself into anger in that he lacks the power to
throw much of the latter into the melting-pot for the
benefit and succor of those thousands of women and
tender babes dying by inches of cold, dirt, and starva-
tion. Coming to his senses, he is fain to admit that
his ethics are of the heart and not of the head.
Briefly, that he has been trying to persuade himself
of the practicability of the Utopian theory of universal
equality, forgetful that, strive as we may, poverty, like
water, will ever find its level. Of one thing he is
assured ere he leaves England, and that is that
throughout all classes better circumstanced, even to
those perilously nigh the brink of want themselves,
they are of all things charitable, ever giving of their
ofttimes scanty store to others.
Tiring of the sights of the city, he seeks the country,
and wanders England’s sweet-scented green lanes, and
avenues of such splendid trees as Australia boasts
not, and knows not of. In the autumnal dreamy, still
atmosphere, he drinks deep of its calm beauty and
restful quietude. Glimpses had through live hedges,
of 'luxurious grass ankle deep, with finely-bred,
well-conditioned cattle browsing thereon, evoke a sigh
as he thinks how the sight of such would gladden the
heart of the Australian pastoralist or dairy farmer.
Moved by the charm of it all, he is fain to admit a
pride in the thought that he, however lowly, is yet
a son of the Empire, of which grand old England is the
centre. Ere this, the scare of London has gone, and
he begins to appreciate all its wonders from a healthy,
normal point of view, even with a sense of gratitude
for all that it has already and must yet teach him.
His trip into the country has brought back his erst-
while, jaded yearning to drink deeper of the inexhaust-
ible fountain of art. He spends a day, maybe two,
going through the priceless Wallace collection, of


intrinsic value beyond estimate, but fancifully
appraised at six millions sterling, yet bestowed as a
thrice princely, munificent gift, together with its
palatial housing in Manchester-square, on the British
public. That he may assimilate and arrange in his
crowded brain all the wonders he has seen there, he
seeks rest of his aching sense of wonder and apprecia-
tion in a London theatre—one of its 200 places of
amusement. Of some 30 he has so visited, with but
few exceptions his impression is that, despite splendid
interior and orchestration, the performances, staged
and run uninterruptedly, often twice a day for a year
■or more, are still such as would hardly satisfy a Mel-
bourne audience. In theatricals, as in many things,
good, easy-going John Bull, he concludes, is easily
satisfied. Allured once more, he again essays the
East-End. Convoyed by a seasoned Londoner, he
visits Petticoat-lane fair on a Sunday morning, and
there stores away many amusing—many saddening—
memories of the human types of that quarter of squalid
London. The distinctively repulsive Hebrew vendor
of alike filthy-looking food and rags; the coster in
Lis Sunday-best, “ got up dossy to walk abroad with
Flossy,” his donah, many of them healthy-looking,
buxom girls, amusedly mindful of their personal
appearance, as expressed in loud, startling colors and
a fashion of apparel quite distinctive. These couples
are alike loud-tongued, frolicsome, and happy enough
in their own way, and after their own kind. He
grows very forgiving of the flaunting, brazen manners
•of the East-End girl. He sees them spending of their
scanty means in the purchase of food to thrust into
the eager hands of poor little street waifs, and many
like impulsive acts of kindness, and he is fain to
admit that, under their rough, uncouth manners, there
Teat womanly hearts. Nor does he fail to see
and pity many women, young and old, not in Petti-
coat-lane, but in the streets hard by, of modest bearing
—many of even refined appearance—but in their
pinched, anxious faces and but too scant, threadbare'


clothing, may be read their story of hopeless want.
In such localities the flaring gin palace, with its over-
fed, bloated, loudly-dressed, bejewelled proprietor,
induces the thought that these men, heartlessly batten
and grow fat on the hard and scanty earnings of these
poor people, that should be otherwise spent. Petti-
coat-lane itself in full blast is a unique experience,
curiously interesting and instructive in all that is
repulsive, coarse, and vulgar—one that he would not
have missed, yet would not care to repeat, in that it
is but too depressingly remindful of the sad, seamy
side of human existence.
In strange contrast to all this is a delightful day
spent in going over Windsor Castle, that stately abode
for generations of England’s kings and queens. With
awe and deference he treads lightly those State apart-
ments, and views there yet another marvellous collec-
tion of all that is rich, rare, and antique, wrought with
the brush, or chisel, needle, and metal work, besides
other things of absorbing historic association and
tradition. He stands bare-headed and breathless with
amazement at the ecclesiastical splendors of its magni-
ficent St. George’s Chapel; climbs up to the grand
tower of the castle by its narrow stone stairway, with its
curious loop-holed defences of ancient days, and pacing
its roomy, annular summit, gazes with startled delight
at the splendid cycloramic view of picturesque scenery
for miles around—a view, perhaps, unsurpassed in all
England. Finally, he finds himself as one in a dream
wandering the quaint old world village of Eton, with
its famous College in the vicinity, and smiling forgiv-
ingly at the mischievous frolics of the Eton boy out
of school, observes that, despite tricks and antics, all
are instinctively little gentlemen, and that school boys
are school boys the world over. Departing by train
for the “ great smoke,” he takes a last lingering look
at that grand palatial, castellated Windsor and its
surroundings, feeling that of all he has seen nothing
has so impressed him with the might and majesty of
old England.


Meantime he has sounded all the depths and shoals,
braved all the terrors, more or less imaginary, of
England’s winter; struggled and groped helplessly
as a blind man lacking staff and dog through whole
da>s of dense darkness, and the trials, tribulations,
and soul-searching chills of London’s fog; got home,
he knows not how, and by the genial warmth and
safety of the fireside laughed over its humors. He
has shouted and sung in sheer childish delight at the
enchanting, fairy-like vision of a white England under
“ beautiful snov/;” has walked light of heart and step,
in rapturous delight, through those very country lanes
we have spoken of ankle deep in snow; wandered, lost
in admiration, through those avenues of now leafless
trees, with their beautiful tracery of branches done by
nature into silver filigree, glinting in the sun.
The crisp, pure air, cold, but bracing, brings color
to his cheeks, and with it a sense of eager enjoyment.
In the midst of it all has come Christmas—Christmas
in old England—with the welcome warmth of glowing
coal fires and blazing yule log, in snug rooms decked
with leaves, mistletoe, and holly. For the time he is
made one of a happy family gathering, from the aged
grandparents to the great-grand-babe, met to spend
that festive season—to eat, drink, and make merry, as
all England does once a year, from the highest to the
lowest He joins with the rest in inordinate feasting,
toast drinking and merry making. He is surprised
out of himself, and is the loudest in echoing all the
good wishes and kindly sentiments common to the
occasion; a very boy again, he elects himself a gay,
laughing lingleader in clearing the furniture aside,
and is soon tripping it gaily “ up the side and down the
middle ” m a country dance, making no end of mis-
takes, to a laughing chorus of rosy-cheeked, blue-eyed
English girls and frolicsome youths. Anon he
accompanies bluff old mine host out into the crisp,
chill air, in each hand a foaming beaker of good old
English ale, his pockets stuffed with cakes to refresh
the waits singing Christmas carols to tuneful, instru-
mental accompaniment in the front garden.


In brief, by sharing in it, he has been imbued with
something of that feeling of universal brotherhood
of a Christmas in old England, rife with the glorious
Christian sentiment of “ Peace on earth and good will
to all men." He has come through it all a better and
a wiser man, more heedful of his own faults and tole-
rant of those of his neighbors. He has laughed
heartily at John Bull’s crass ignorance of Australian
its climate and resources; heard him
assert its inability to hold its own without the fatherly
help and patronage of, in John’s eyes, the only great
country in the world. Great Britain; and learned to
listen without irritation to good John’s often rudely-
expressed contempt for, and insular prejudices against,
all countries and people foreign to his own —including
their armies, navies, and even languages—in the
presence of, and in sympathy with, other aliens, who,
like himself, set off friend John’s great good nature
and hospitality, as against his little weaknesses of
character, and make allowance for him. By this time
his mind and the ambit of his views have broadened.
He no longer persuades himself that Melbourne, or
Sydney, or whatever city he may hail from, is perfect
or complete; that the Princess’s Theatre is unsur-
passed, nor that the Australian girl, charming as she
undoubtedly is, is incomparable; nor even that the
Yarra is as broad and busy of shipping, or more
malodorous, than the Thames. In short, he returns
home much improved in health, physically and
mentally, not a whit less enamored of his beloved
yVustralia or less appreciative of its natural advantages
over other countries he has seen, or its resourceful
potentialities for the making of a great nation, because
by travel and comparison with older countries he has
awakened to the fact that she must not alone be up
and doing, but be careful in the doing of it, in that
the eyes of the civilised world are upon her as on all
young countries. Yet, let her but set about her task
in a modest, frank spirit, admitting that she has still
from abroad much to learn and emulate, as Japan has
done, and this resolve will spell progress and pros-
perity.


Windsor Castle
William the Conqueror, when he wrested from the
monks the site of this stately residence of kings,
proved that there ran in his veins other than the love
of conquest; he gave to posterity lasting assurance
of his appreciation of the picturesque. Regarded
from a legal aspect, weighed in the scale of the law
of property of to-day, it might be questioned if
the clerics dispossessed ever had a tenable title, inas-
much as it had been conveyed to them by Edward
the Confessor for the somewhat vague consideration
of “ the hope of eternal reward, the remission
(assumedly by the donees) of all his sins and the sins
of his father, mother, and all his ancestors.” Onr
learned judges of to-day would hardly construe this
as a ” valuable consideration,” such as to pass the
fee simple, nor as a tenable deed of gift, even at the
hands of royalty. It may, however, be assumed, in
the absence of historic evidence to the contrary, that
the monks gave up peaceable possession somewhat
hurriedly, accelerated by the gentle persuasion of
William’s doughty bowmen at their unshod heels,
without pausing to argue nice points of law, accept-
ing in exchange certain lands in Essex, probably
thankful for small mercies and the retention of their
shaven heads.
Having snatched this, and probably many other
unconsidered trifles, William thereon caused to be
built unto himself a castle, and, as mere kings go,
had therein what doubtless our well-beloved Edward
the Seventh, in his ex-officio confidential moments,
would describe as a good time. Anyway, no one of


the present, standing on the summit of the grand
round tower, and taking in the magnificent cyclo-
ramie view, would question the Conqueror’s unique
taste for a residence. So, also, would he admit that
he made a fairly shrewd bargain in giving what did
not belong to him for that which belonged to someone
else. His predecessor, Edward of pious memory, in
disposing of it in consideration of future spiritual
reward, and in the best interests of his forbears, lacked
not a certain grim candor in thus immolating the
memory of his departed relatives on the altar of his
rather shabby opinion of them. The visitor of the
present time reads with curious and amused interest
the inscription, still undefaced, on the Winchester
Tower, “ Hoc fecit Wykeham.” That that gentle-
man, for his architectural services, should have tints
rendered his account, so to speak, to future genera-
tions, is excusable. One can picture the worthy
Bishop standing in his shirt sleeves, if he possessed
such a garment, on pay day, regarding ruefully in
his toil-roughened palm his munificent salary of seven
shillings a week, plus three shillings for his clerk of
works, and exclaiming, “ Dash it all, I must have
some reward beyond this, so here goes.” When called
over the coals by his Royal master for the claim he
had caused to be set up, he explained it away thus —
“ That the wealth and fame he had acquired had
been the making of him, and not that he was the
founder of the Castle,” showing that beyond consider-
able architectural ability he possessed a fine vein of
sarcasm.
The King, on the horns of a dilemma, had either
to accept his explanation or raise his salary, and
naturally chose the cheaper course. As for the clerk
of works, one is sorely tempted to inquire how many
years he had toiled to attain his exalted position under
Royal favor; how long he survived such crudescence
of prosperity to the tune of three shillings per week,
and whether he had a wife and pledges of affection
to support, as such poorly-paid clerks nowadays would


surely have; but history, including the domesday
book, is silent, save in the incidental mention of his
salary. We are fain, at least, to hope that Mrs. Clerk
of Works took in either washing or boarders, and
credit him with thus contriving to pull through to
ripe old age, and departing in the odor of sanctity and
affluence untroubled by prescient visions of a law
of minimum wage and an eight hours day.
The lower ward is entered by Henry the Eight’s
gateway on Castle Hill. Pacing beneath that ancient
portal, it is with a diffident sense of awe that one is
treading in the footsteps of many illustrious and
famous of history long since gone in the rendering
to nature of dust to dust. Passing beyond the shadow
of the arch and such ghostly thoughts, one is face
to face with the justly famous St. George’s Chapel.
Instinctively one steps back to get a more sweeping,
expansive view of its fine architectural contour and
pose.
Exteriorally it is satisfying and admirable, save,
perhaps, for an uneasy desire to disassociate it from
its fine, but detracting surroundings, to place it, aloof
and alone, in some commanding position. If without
it is impressive, entering within one stands breathless
and enraptured by the lofty grandeur of its interior,
its splendid sweep, of perspective aloftness, the
elegantly chaste tracery of its superb roof and general
decorative effect, all seen to perfection in the subdued
tinted light from its richly-stained glass windows,
supreme in themselves in all that is effective and
masterful in the harmony of colors.
The Albert memorial chapel is no whit less beauti-
ful in its pure chaste marbles, richly stained and artisti-
cally figured windows; its beautiful mosaic work, and
splendidly rich gold settings. In brief, in these two
grand interiors is the assemblage and harmonious
blending of all that is rich and rare in ecclesiastical
ornamentation at its best.
Entrance to the upper ward is had through a fine,
frowning piece of ancient defence work, known as


“ the Norman Gate,” The latter is centred between
two battlemented towers. Approaching it, were a
band of knights in armor cap-a-pie, on mail-
clad, sturdy steeds, to ride forth lance in rest, or a
pageant of gay gallants and my ladies fair, richly
apparelled, with hawk on finger, going gaily a-hunting
in the neighboring woods, it would but be in harmony
with the scene. By a postern gate, itself of historic
interest, in an adjoining portion of the castle, erected
by Queen Elizabeth, entrance is had to the fine castle-
flanked walk, known as the “ North Terrace,” Enter-
ing the castle by the grand staircase, one makes his
way to the fine state apartments; but he does not
pass up that stairway hurriedly. There is much there
to attract attention and induce thought in a fine and
varied collection of antique armory, coats of mail,
shields, crude weapons, and escutcheons of many
centuries past, when might was right. They are
interesting as showing what perfection plate and chain
armor work and the like attained in those bygone
days; also in comparing the warlike methods and
means of ancient times to those of to-day. Much
one sees there of coats of mail and visor are so
weightily clumsy and impracticable, from a modern
point of view, as to recall amusedly to the Australian’s
recollection Ned Kelly’s coat of mail and head gear
crudely devised from worn-out ploughshare and nail
can.
His fancy on the wing, he pictures a company of
these mailed men-at-arms and their heavily-capari-
soned mounts recalled to life and active service,
opposed to, or meeting in full tilt, a charge of, say,
our “ Scots Greys.” Shutting one’s eyes, one pictures
the result not without a sense of the ridiculous. In
the prophetic mood comes the thought that a com-
mander of a British man-of-war in the year 2000,
viewing a picture of one of our first-class warships of
to-day, may have the same amused contempt for our
present naval methods and equipments. Old Father
Time, as he flies along, sowing and reaping his human


crop, with never a pause to touch up his scythe on
the tombstones, if he have any sense of humor, must
find much to laugh over in what we are pleased to
term the evolution of human endeavor.
A turn to the left at the top of the grand staircase
leads us to the State ante-room. Casting one’s eyes
upwards one sees on its ceiling a finely-executed
painting by Verrio, representing allegorically The
Banquet of the Gods. The walls are hung and orna-
mented with mythological scenes, finely-wrought
tapestry, as also exquisite carvings by Gibbons, while
over the antique fireplace is a portrait of George 111.,
in Coronation regalia, by Sir Joshua Reynolds.
The “ Rubens room ”is next in order. One pauses
at the fine entrance door to gaze fixedly at the great
master’s head—not the spoil of the headsman’s axe,
but by his own divinely-directed hand—his decapita-
tion, but the creation of his brush, and color, as fresh,
life-like, and clear cut as a work of to-day. Herein
are to be seen many of the great master’s finest
works, interspersed with a number of beautiful paint-
ings by others of his school and cult.
In succession come “ The Council Chamber,”
“ King’s closet,” ” Queen’s closet,” “ the picture
gallery,” the latter no longer, as once, exclusively
of the masterful Zuccarelle’s achievements, but a mag-
nificent collection of pictures wherein, amongst the
masterpieces of many famous artists, may be seen
certain notable works of the great painters, Titian,
Rembrandt, Correggio, Bassans, Sabbatini, Claude,
and their respective disciples in art.
In the Vandyck room are what are esteemed as
two of the finest bronzes extant, namely, Prometheus
Chained to the Rock, and The Laocoon. What
remains, beyond its finely-embellished ceiling, is a
gallery of portraits of kings, queens, and others of
exalted rank and famous of history, rendered still
more illustrious at the hands of that greatest of
portrait painters, Vandyck. The Queen’s audience
chamber is remarkable for its finely-painted and richly-
ornamented ceiling by Verrio, and a splendid speci-
men of Gobelin tapestry, so exquisitely wrought as


to require close inspection to convince one that it is
not done in oils. Of many portraits of historic person-
ages on its walls, perhaps the most compassionately
attractive is that of the ill-fated Mary Queen of Scots.
And so one passes on through the Queen’s presence
chamber, rich in the memory of our well-beloved and
revered Queen Victoria, the Guard Chamber, St.
George’s Hall, grand reception-room, throneroom,.
ante-throneroom, ballroom, grand dining-room, and,
lastly, out into the grand vestibule.
Imagine this splendid and stately suite of royal
apartments, grand in dimensions and rich in orna-
mentation, as befitting the pomp and circumstance of
exalted rank, a complete series of art galleries, hung
with priceless and rare pictures, beautiful tapestries,
replete with cabinets, in themselves marvels of wood-
work and carving, filled with gemmed specimens of
the jewellers’ and goldsmiths’ art, crusted with dia-
monds and other precious stones, gifts, in not a few
instances, from loyal Indian princes to the late Queen
Victoria, its antique royal furnishing throughout
in keeping with its other attractions, and one may
have some faint conception of the castle. Nothing
short of a visit there can convey an adequate sense
of its magnificence, or the favor conferred by so
generously throwing it and its surroundings open for
the enjoyment of all the King’s subjects, rich and
poor alike. Finally, mount the grand Round Tower
by its narrow, roughly-masoned, ancient stone stair-
way, confronted with grim muzzle of cannon and
other evidence of ancient defence still preserved;
from its summit gaze around alike at the castle and
grounds below and the splendid panoramic view of
forest, glade, and park, with noble avenues of spread-
ing elms and oaks—nature’s patient work of cen-
turies—with the Thames tracing its sinuous course
like to a silver band amid its verdure. If the King
happen to be in residence, look upwards at the royal
standard afloat on the breeze, 70 feet or more over-
head, and if he be a true son of the Empire, and not
soulless, his heart will throb with pride in the might
and majesty of old England.


A FEW OF
John Bull’s Characteristics
Exclude the East-End, and the Australian in Lon-
don is surprised to find himself mingling in a vast
aggregation of humanity, differing, save as to num-
bers, in no marked degree from communities in Aus-
tralia. They are of about the same physique, and of
similar habits; nor is there any very noticeable dis-
siriiilarity in dress. One thing he is quick to per-
ceive and ponder over—that, despite the breaking
down of social barriers and class distinctions, said to
be very much in evidence in England of late years,
there is still, and probably always will be, a strict
drawing of the line of demarcation between the upper
and middle strata of society, an aloofness in the for-
mer and a proud content and self-sufficiency in the
latter—a sort of tacit understanding on both sides to
meet on a common footing in all things national,
philanthropic, and humanitarian; but so far, and no
further. The average sturdy Englishman, “ Too
proud to care from whence he came,” frankly accepts,
and is in’ great measure proud of, his parentage—
'“well content with his lot. He cheerfully yields all
that is due to the accident of birth to those on a higher
social plane without envy or uncharitableness. Fur-
thermore, John is satisfied to enjoy a sort of reflected
glory from the contemplation, at a respectful distance,
of his more exalted neighbors, and to regard their
pomp and circumstance as a national institution to
boast of.
The American is said to love a lord, but it may be
questioned if, in that harmless respect, good John
Bull does not out-do his American cousin. On the
remote chance of a passing glimpse of greatness, many
degrees below royal blood, John, his wife and family,


the latest and tyrannical member of it, mayhap, still
in arms, will take long and expensive, not to say fati-
guing, rides in London ’buses in the depth of winter.
Arriving hours too soon, they will line up, with thou-
sands of others with the same objective, in a freezing
atmosphere or pouring rain to see the Lord of this,
the Marquis of that, or the Earl of the other, flash
past in an enclosed carriage. The truth must out
that John, of both sexes and of all ages, is an inveterate
sight-seer and holiday-maker, and is never happier
than when indulging this passion under exceptionally
uncomfortable conditions. Never let it be said that
the Australian is more prone to make holiday than
dear old John. Over his rasher in the morning John
reads aloud from his newspaper the day’s intended
movements of personages in high places. It is
enough; the whole family, John included, are astir
and anxious, eagerly determined, often at the sacri-
fice of the more serious affairs of life, to go holiday-
making in hunting the great with the ardor of a hunts-
man following the hounds. Say that my Lord Some-
body, en route for some function of State or cere-
mony, is notified to pass such and such a corner at a
given hour, the whole family, including the ruling
junior-in-arms, may be seen, many hours before thev
need have started, dressed in their Sunday best, mak-
ing for the familiar nerve-shattering ’bus. It is
nothing that a ’bus goes every five minutes; that par-
ticular ’bus they must and will board if a frantic,
fierce struggle of John and his family can prevail over
their weaker neighbors. In that regard John is not
possessed of any fine sensibilities. He lowers his head,
and, using it as a sort of wedge, his burly shoulders
do the rest; he may push a woman and children into
the gutter in so doing, but he and Co. get there all
the same, quite oblivious apparently of any rudeness
or inconvenience to others. Of course, they arrive
hours too soon, but they are in a crowd on a freezing
pavement, with hands and feet in the chill grip of
Jack Frost, or standing in the rain testing the ability
of a leaky umbrella to shelter their numerous familv.
and they are, or fancy they are, enjoying themselves.
That they ultimately fail to get a glimpse of the august


personalit}', or even the veliicle conveying him, seems
in no degree to lessen their enjoyment; it is a show,
and they have been to it and that suffices. So do they
go to a matinee of a L<ondon theatre, to line up two
and two on the pavement many hundreds of yards
from the closed entrance doors, and wait patiently for
three or four hours in the most severely inclement
weather on the mere chance of getting into the pit.
As often as not, they fail to get in, or, if they do,
have ofttimes to content themselves with remote back
seats, to sit through the performance without a
glimpse of the stage or actors, unable to hear a single
word. Certainly they listen to the music, and have
had a fine, perspective view of the backs of the heads
of those in front more fortunate than themselves.
Yet, not a murmur of discontent is uttered—they have
been to the theatre.
A London crowd is remarkable in many respects,
and amusedly so. It is, of all things, good-humored
and absolutely submissive to discipline, personified in
that wonder of the age—a London policeman. His
finger upraised will sway thousands on foot and con-
trol dense vehicular crushes. He rarely has to resort
to even gentle force, or to use his voice; he seldom
speaks till spoken to, and then with such a beaming
smile and genuine civility as to disarm even the
roughest in the throng. The average Londoner looks
to the constable, not as an enemy, but a friend in need,
and as Desdemona regarded her lord, as the one “ to
whom they most do owe obedience.’’ He cheerfully,
and with great ability, constitutes himself the guardian
of women, children, the careless, nervous, and unwary
generally. The people look to him for guidance,
protection, and information, like children do to their
mothers, and never in vain. On duty he ever exer-
cises a cast-iron patience that never falters under most
irritating circumstances, and is certainly a past master
in tact. He can predict the coming of an anxiously-
looked-for event to a minute, or explain the reason
of its delay or postponement. Standing immovable
in dense vehicular traffic, often with his back towards
it, he takes in many diverse and, to an ordinary mor-
tal, puzzling inquiries simultaneously, and instantly


answers them seriatim, without hesitation, confusion,
or doubt, and with the clearness of brevity. The
whole time he is Argus-eyed, and ever alert in avert-
ing accident, therein ofttimes displaying quick pre-
sence of mind in rescuing women, children, or the
careless pedestrian from imminent peril, at great per-
sonal risk of his own life and limb. To-day he is on
street duty, to-morrow, say, at the British Museum,
National Gallery, or other place of public resort, dis-
playing the same tactful knowledge and proficiency
in the fulfilment of the showmanlike duties imposed
on him there as when in the street. In our free and
easy Australian way, the visitor at first adopts the
custom of his own land, and arrests a stranger to' seek
direction. John is wary and mistrustful of all
strangers, and by no means polite. He either passes
on with a stony stare, or, disdaining more than the
two words, “ ask policeman,” moves on. It will be
understood, then, when on departing from the world’s
greatest city one frankly acknowledges a feeling of
gratitude towards the London constable, and is ready,
figuratively speaking anyway, to lift his hat to him
in farewell, not as a tribute to the majesty of the law,
as personified in our blue-coated friend, but in grate-
ful admission of many obligations and service ren-
dered.
Another of Cousin John’s peculiarities—and by no
means the least diverting—is his expression of indig-
nant surprise at every phase of the English climate.
Should it rain in the depth of winter, John, viewing
the cheerless, tearful aspect of the weather without,
from his comfortably warm interior, declares that he
never saw anything so awful; that he is quite lost
in his estimate of what the English climate is capable
of inflicting on a God-fearing people, and altogether
leaves it to be understood by his resentful manner
that it is a sort of climatic liberty that should be resen-
ted. If the sun shines, however rarely, John grudg-
ingly admits that it is not altogether unpleasant, but
that he is doubtful that unseasonable weather can be
really beneficial to health. “ A London particular,”
happening, of course, every winter at intervals since he
was born, not only rouses John to sternly expressed


indignation, but even the newspapers write whole
columns about it, and its inconveniences. This keeps
John’s wrath warm and makes him realise what he
has gone through, like the* man suing for damages,
who wept when his counsel in court narrated his suf-
fering, and explained that, until he heard his eloquent
advocate, he had no idea that he had suffered so
severely. John, his wrongs brought home to him by
his newspaper, swears that he will emigrate to Tim-
buctoo or some remote corner of the earth rather than
stand it much longer. If it snows John grumbles,
and if it does not snow he growls, as did the man
who, when on the way home, declared that if it hap-
pened to be washing day when he got home he’d give
his wife a bit of his mind about it, adding, “ and if it
isn’t washing day, she shall hear from me; hang me
if she sha’n’t.” Solid John is not a humorous man
as a ntle; he has a sort of intuition that any attempt
at a joke is not quite in keeping with his dignity and
respectability. But John can be quite unconsciously
very funny indeed. It is the more amusing in that
all the family take their cue from paterfamilias, and
echo him. There is not a week in the whole year that
John does not find therein something to growl over
climatically. Tell him of what a beautiful climate we
enjoy under the Southern Cross, and he will laugh
in your face quite rudely, and exclaim, “ Get away,
man! Why, there’s no climate in the world to equal
that of old England.” In brief, John reserves to him-
self the right of abusing his own country, but instantly
resents any deprecatory remarks by the stranger.
There’s an ingrained, ineradicable pride and con-
ceit about John in everything that is English, agree-
able or disagreeable alike. Perhaps to that foible of
John may be traced his intensely irritating conser-
vatism and obstinate obstruction to all that is pro-
gressive. A clear, level-headed man in most things,
John will calmly tell you that he is quite satisfied with
the London ’bus bumping him along at two and a
half miles an hour, as his father and grandfather were
before him. As for electric trams, he trusts that,
while he is alive, they will never be introduced to his
village, to bring all the riff-raff of London to destroy


the peace and comfort of the place. In the same
spirit he takes a rasher of bacon for breakfast every
morning the year round, from youth to age, without
variation. John abroad in distant parts of the vast
Empire is a fairly tough sample of a man, strong in
endurance, and ever cheerful under hardship; on the
contrary, John at home is soft, and a coddler. If he
but have a cold in his head he inflicts sore complaints
on all his household, and is loud and fretful in
announcing the fact to all his neighbors. He gives
them a graphically exaggerated account of his aches
and pains, how the mustard plaster his wife had
insisted on applying had only added to his miseries
by scorching his sensitive skin. He either shuts him-
self up in his room and sits groaning over a blazing
fire, with closed windows and doors to the exclusion
of fresh air, or, venturing forth by stress of necessity,
coughs loudly and blows his nose like a trumpet in
his morning 'bus, with the wilful object of forcing his
fellow-passengers to share his self-magnified troubles,
and assures himself, with a sort of proud complaint,
that he is quite sure no one ever had such an infernal
cold, and it must ultimately get down to his lungs.
Should his anxious wife say something encouraging
as to his recovery, he tells her not to make a fool of
herself; that if she had a grain of sense she could sec
he was in a rapid decline, etc. Briefly, John out of
sorts is a nuisance to himself and everyone he comes in
contact with.
Your obstinate John is quite a big child in many
respects, easily moved to laughter or tears. As an
instance, an enterprising barber in a small way, in
equal diminutive premises in London, had the happy
inspiration to put in large letters on his small window
the equally small joke, “ Gentlemen shaved while they
wait.” This weak joke made all London laugh. He
was soon the proud and opulent proprietor of several
])alatial shops, each with a busy stafif of attendants.
Take the average play produced in London you will,
on analysing it, find the author has worked on similar
lines to the cute barber, either to make simple John
laugh or cry. It may be of poor mediocre quality,
of stale wit, or bathos in place of pathos. The critics


may thunder or applaud as it pleases them. The
judicious may grieve and go hang. In any case, John
determines to see it. The manager and playwright
laugh in their sleeves at John’s child-like simplicity,
and divide up the pecuniary spoils. Of all things,
John is a man of simple taste, and not too refined or
critical. A barrel organ, although it may be ashma-
tically gone in the lungs and have many teeth out of
its tunes, John and Co. delights to encourage, and
induces the grinder to come again by the liberal
bestowal of coppers into the dirty, lazy palm of the
Italian vendor of “ sweet sounds.” The truth is John
has a big heart, ever ready to beat in the unselfish
interest of all his fellow-beings obviously worse off
than himself. He persuades himself that it is his
liking for the music that he is paying for; as a matter
of fact, though John does not suspect it, it is a feeling
that the poor devil of a musician, if he can be so called,
is doing his best under adverse fortune and want of
repairs—-that is what really draws John’s pennies.
In brief, John is very irritating in many of his wavs
and ideas; intensely conceited over everything that is
English, to the exclusion of even his reasoning facul-
ties, but there is under it all a great, good nature and
large heartedness, nurtured by a liberal supply of the
milk of human kindness that makes one love and
respect John even for his faults. His love for, and
pride in, his country may be likened to that of tlie
love of a man for a woman, so all-embracing as to
blind him to her faults and imperfections. He is
intensely loyal to his King—as a King—and loves
him as a man after his own heart. In every instance
of pluck, daring, and ability in the service of Eng-
land, John gives his heart and his hand ungrudginglv.
You have only to see John when Lord Roberts or
Mr. Chamberlain appears in public, how he unbends
from his wonted studied respectability—throws up his
hat, cheers lustily and with tears in his eyes, to
understand that it is worth anyone’s while to “ seek
the bubble reputation even at the cannon’s mouth.”
or to spend one’s life and strength ungrudgingly in
the arena of politics in the service of England, if only
to win good, pig-headed John’s admiration and regard.


Coster Bill of London Town
Of the many curious and amusing types of humanity
to be met with in the East-End of London, by no
means the least interesting is Bill, the coster. He
is certainly well worth studying at close quarters,
although in the doing of it one’s hypersensitiveness
may be occasionaly shocked by certain of Bill’s pecu-
liarities. Much has been written and said of the
London coster, but always, I conclude, with a ten-
dency to hold him up to ridicule or opprobrium
rather than in a true sense of justice or fair play.
Rough, leather-lunged, and possessing little of
refinement in act, speech, or sentiment, as those
words are interpreted by his more refined brother,
there is yet about the fellow a sturdy manhood and
independence of spirit that, on acquaintance, go to
win one’s respect, even regard of a sort.
Of all things. Bill the coster is a toiler, never spar-
ing of himself, and ever willing, and cheerfully so,
to work at least i 6 hours out of the 24 to wring out
a precarious living for himself, and often others
depending on him, from a grudging world. The
coster is an opportunist and a born trader, ever
ready and alert to take on, at a moment’s notice,
anything in the way of a food substance, or some-
thing like saleable. His neat, little donkey cart,
including the patient little animal, may be seen loaded
and decked out with flowers, bent on a house to
house visitation, wherein coster Bill is loud in extol-
ling his fragrant wares, how essential it is to make
the “ ’ome ’appy ” with a few flowers, etc., etc. Anon
we meet the same turn-out piled up with veiretables
fresh from Covent Garden market, or with fish from
Billingsgate—anything, in fact, to turn an honest
penny. And so he toils from hours before daylight
till the set of sun. Compare the man with the don-
key, and the conclusion is forced on one that, how-
ever badly in the way of food poor, hard-working
Bill may have fared, the little donkey—afifectionately
dubbed the moke—has been well cared for. Surely


this rough sample of humanity cannot be at heart
very hard and callous when, with but rare exception,
he shows such kindly regard and consideration for the
dumb animal that helps him to make a living. He
certainly works the little beast unsparingly, as of
necessity, as he does himself, but not only feeds him
well, but takes a pride in doing so, and in many
instances lavishes affection upon him.
With few exceptions Bill is, after his crude fashion,
a good son, husband, and father. Like to the
heathen Chinee, his ways are strange and peculiar,
so that, to do him justice, he must be carefully aver-
aged. Sum him up on a debit and credit account
over a reasonable period of time, and if nought be
set down in malice or uncharitableness, the balance,
I venture to think, must come out fairly on the credit
side. Like all Englishmen, whatever their lot in life,
the coster is fond of holiday, and will have his
pleasures and relaxations, in the pursuit of which
Bill is demonstrative and noisy in a harmless sort
of way, frequently taking his pleasures, “ not wisely,
but too well.” In his working hours there is nothing
much in his outward appearance to distinguish him
from his neighbors of the toiling classes. But seen
on a Sunday morning in or about Petticoat-lane fair,
or on a bank holiday, and you see him as fairly well
represented on the music hall stage, or in the familiar
comic post-card. Bill, in full regalia, or, to quote
his own vernacular, “ got up dossy,” in all the glory
of his grotesque get up, standing, pipe in mouth, at
a gin-palace door, or ruffling it bravely with his fro-
licsome “ donah ” at his side, becomes quite a study.
To do justice to a coster in full rig needs the pencil
and colors of an artist. To depict Bill—“ 'appy
Bill!”—in words can convey but a faint idea of his
tout ensemble, but I will, however imperfectly, essay
the task: —Of cloth, take a noisy black and white
glaring pattern; divide it into three garments —first,
a cut-away short jacket, curving in closely to the
spine, with a broad, black velvet collar—this remark-
able vestment, with flap pockets, adorned with many
parallel rows of pearl buttons, varying in size from
a half-crown piece; a long vest, with more buttons


and flap pockets; pants skin tight on hips and thighs,
expanding from the knees downwards, provided with
side cuts flanked with buttons, the bottoms cover-
ing the toe tips; chub-toed boots, two sizes too small,
with exaggerated heels; the throat surrounded with
a lay-down collar and flaming colored necktie; the
hair well oiled and plastered down to “ Newgate
knockers”; surmount the whole with a perky billi-
cock boxer hat, and behold a coster in his war paint!
Take Bill so apparelled, with a shilling or two in his
flap pockets, out for a holiday, and I question if he
envies, or would willingly change places with, any
man in England, rich or poor. Bill, so presented,
may, to accustomed eyes, jar upon the nerves; but even
so, compare him, clean and tidily, if grotesquely, cos-
l?umed,with many of his neighbors, and one concludes that
his harmless personal vanity tends to his well-being.
Question these men, and you will find that nine-
tenths of them come from a race of costers. Say
the coster marries and becomes a father, he is proud
of his growing son, with “ his ikcy little ways” tend-
ing costerward, and spares no expense in rigging
the boy up as a pocket edition of himself, his simple
ambition being to make a good coster of him. So
does his heart beat with pride in that his daughter
“ ’Arriet ” is a reflex of her mother, pert and free of
tongue, ready to give and take in coster circles, hold-
ing her own as her mother did when Bill courted and
won her, and still does, content that she be educated
in their own rough school, and so qualify to become
a coster’s wife. Thus the race of costers is per-
petuated, and, “ to the manner born,” Mrs. Bill is
Bill in petticoats, not a whit more refined, a mere
echo of her lord and master, “ Though she leads him,
she obeys him, though she draws him, yet she fol-
lows.” Thanks to his heavy hand, Mrs. Bill is, in
her way, submissive, and yet can, on occasion, assert
herself. Over trivial disputes and domestic differ-
she is often handled roughly, but will pay it
back in kind. What she lacks in strength she makes
up in tongue, so that they are well matched, and go
through their rugged life together in their own wav
happily. A rough work-a-day code of honor and


brotherhood exist among the costers, wherein they
are charitable and helpful to each other. Should
Bill make a slip over his hardly earned recreations,
which they are wont to do, at the sacrifice of his few
household goods and his tools of trade —the donkey
and cart —it is treated as a misfortune that may over-
take any one of them, and an unsolicited subscrip-
tion is quietly instituted, and the result handed to
him sans reproche. Or, mayhap, he seeks and
obtains a temporary advance by way of loan at very
reasonable interest, repayable in easy instalments.
There is an aged Jewish woman . . . who lives
in their midst, reputed to be enormously wealthy,
who is the costers’ friend in need. She is revered
and valued by the costers generally as their never-
failing resource in hours of trouble, and that alone
is, and therein lies, her security. Woe betide Bill
should he fail to pay up his instalments duly: she
has but to make the fact known to his brother costers,
who promptly call him to book. If they conclude
it is through the defaulter’s ill-luck, they pay up
amongst them; if otherwise, the district is made quite
too uncomfortable for him, and he must clear out.
It is not always in the pursuit of pleasure that the
coster comes to financial grief. A funeral or mar-
riage in the family is equally ruinous. It is part of
the coster’s religion that either event must be done
with due pomp and ceremony, and on a scale quite
out of proportion as regards expense to Bill’s pecu-
niary resources. On such occasions as these, the
benevolent old lady in question never fails or refuses
the necessary advance. Such functions, especially a
coster’s funeral, is one of the sights of the East-End.
Perhaps 50 coster donkey carts, loaded with coster
families, follow the orthodox hearse, but more fre-
quently the coffin is borne on the bereaved family’s
little cart, covered with floral wreaths, the donkey
and vehicle draped in black. A wedding party is no
less picturesque, and very amusing to the explorer of
the slum world in London.
The saddening conviction forced home to the
inquirer on every hand is that a great portion of
Bill’s hardly-earned money goes into the pockets of


the keepers of the flaring gin-palaces—frequented,
one is fain to notice, by both sexes. They are impro-
vident also in the way of cheap, tawdry adornment
as regards the gentler sex. Generally, and this applies
to all the poor of London alike, they get very bad
value for their money, in that their purchasing
resources are so pinched as to oblige them to buy
of the cheapest—in itself an extravagance. In the
East-End there are fine, broad streets, with imposing-
looking establishments, but one has only to glance
at the quality of the goods displayed to see how badly
the poor fare in this respect. Nor can anything better
be said of their food supplies. Indeed, therein the
same evil conditions exist even to a greater extent.
It is well known, and admitted, that thousands of the
poor of London are driven by extreme necessity to
eat cats’ meat, otherwise the flesh of horses that fall
dead in the streets, or are killed out of mercy. Flesh
no more fit for human consumption than this is openly
displayed and vended in and about the mean streets
of London, the mere sight of which to the visitor is
alike shocking and nauseating. We have our poor
in Australia, but not, and let us hope never will be,
reduced as in cruel London to such stress as this.
Much has been done of late years to improve the
tastes of the struggling masses in the way of amuse-
ments and recreations, such as the People’s Palace,
without very much appreciation or encouragement.
Take the majority of the people, and you will find
them resorting to the low' penny gaff and penny hops,
and other like questionable places of amusement,
where they are free to enjoy themselves without
restraint in their own rough-spun way. Again, the
coster and others on his social plane resent being
educated and refined, however well meant and deli-
cately tendered. One wonders that amid these masses
there is a cheerfulness under adversity, and a love
of music of a kind, and that they are very easily pro-
voked to laughter and merriment. To return to our
subject, the coster. Bill is of a rough type of many
peculiar idiosyncracies, somewdiat shocking to his
more refined fellow; but, take him all in all, the con-
clusion is that, like Bill the burglar in the comic song,
“ ’e ain’t a bad feller, but you’ve got to know him fust.”


Mrs. John Bull and her
Daughter
Of England’s ladies of high degree the casual visitor
can but judge first from outward appearances noted
of his own personal observation, and secondly by
what is written about them. There are two classes
of writers who cater for newspapers and popular
journals on the subject of society’s doings, namely,
the fulsome, adulatory panderer to persons m high
places, and he—more frequently she—who from envy
or for profit love to sit in condemnatory judgment
of their aristocratic sisters. The middle-class goody
goody folk are numerous and rabid in England, and
it is to tickle the palate of and truckle to such as those
that much that is ungenerous, mainly untruthful,
always exaggerated, is written of Mayfair.
They are accused of spending their leisure frivo-
lously, even wickedly, in that they play naughty
“ bridge ” with his Satanic Majesty’s toys for money,
and heartlessly rook the young and innocent guest
enticed with fell intent to their sumptuous mansions
in town or country, characterised as little better than
refined but common gaming houses, run for profit
by the host and fair hostess. I had the distinguished
privilege of an introduction to one of these pi ess
scandalmongers, alas ! of the fair sex, but of a fluently
venomous pen nevertheless, whom, I ascertained,
sought inspiration for her articles through the
medium of the servants’ hall and out-of-place ladies’
maids. This I affirm, that the ladies of Mayfair, with
few exceptions, are fair to see, and worshipful of man-
kind, although of a statuesque, stately beauty, that
strikes the Australian somewhat coldly, but neverthe-
less impressively, and stirs in his breast a chivalrous


admiration and a conviction that, quite apart from
the glamor of birth and circumstance, they are too
intellectually refined and proudly, maybe uncon-
sciously disdainful to do aught that is vulgar, mean,
or sordid.
One may, and certainly does, feel the chill of pride
of birth when gazing at a respectful distance at these
classic masterpieces of nature sitting back in their
carriages, say, in Rotten-row. But render one of
them trivial service, the mere restoring of a fallen
handkerchief, as fell to my lot, and one wins such a
•gracious smile and murmur of thanks as satisfies one
that they can be sweet and fascinating in the true
womanly sense, and, of all things, they are gentle-
women.
But all said, it is to the womenkind of the middle
class one turns with relief in the contrast to a type
of beauty that warms one’s blood and sets one’s pulse
beating with admiration, as one may turn from some
chef d’oeuvre wrought in cold marble to the glow and
warmth of a picture rich in color. Walk down
Regent-street, Bond-street, or even Oxford-street, on
a fine afternoon, and one sees and admires with quite
-deep interest and glad surprises uniformly beautiful
girls, with rose pink cheeks, finely-featured, and with
laughing, blue eyes, tall, and well-formed, and of i
light and graceful carriage, and always becomingly
attired. Perhaps their chief charm, as compared
with the French girl or the Australian girl is the
absence apparently of all self-consciousness or desire
to attract notice, but they are no whit less attractive
in that regard. Another charm is a conscious free-
<lom of movement and self-reliance without boldness,
r s though to say, ‘‘ I am quite capable of taking care
of myself, in that I am trustful of my couiitrvmen
nd my own good sense.” This is in strange contrast
to the French girl, whose parents shudder at the
thought of one of their daughters, even in broad
daylight, walking in the street unattended. Perhaps
this self-dependence and objection to be fussed over
is due in great measure to nine-tenths of the middle
class English girls following some pursuit or occu-
pation—often as wage earners. Girls are so brought


up in England nowadays as to look with abhorrence
to an idle, listless life, such as their grandmother
lived in her maidenhood, or wasting time unprofit-
ably even when of parents in comparatvely indepen-
dent circumstances. Visit a home where there are,
say, three girls, the chances are that at least two of
them, the elders, are type and shorthand writers, or
clerks in the city, or employed in one of the many
post and telegraph offices, or perhaps earning money
by teaching in a school, learning dentistry, or paint-
ing on china, lace workers, or one or other of the
hundreds of occupations now open to women. Con-
verse with them, and, notwithstanding, you will find
them ladylike, well read, accomplished, and good
musicians, playing well either the piano or violin, or
perhaps the flute, and altogether charming, none the
less fitted, when their time comes to drop their daily
avocations, to make good wives, as they are certainly
good and affectionate daughters.
A fact that is forced to one’s notice is that the
average English girl seems far more self-reliant and
capable of shifting for herself than her brother. In
most instances a girl will, at quite an early age, deter-
mine to qualify for, and attain to, some pursuit, and
succeeds; her brother, on the contrary, is somewhat
of a shilly-shallerer, wasting valuable time in consi-
dering many things, and determining nothing, with
whom, like the boots of the Holly Tree Inn, it is
“ always to-morrow, and never to-day.” Indeed, m
a great many instances, if the young gentleman, so
hard to please, attains at last to an occupation in life,
it is due to the spurring on and effort of his fond
sister, rather than to his weakly affectionate parents.
As John Bull coddles himself, so will he encourage
young hopeful to do likewise. In the English youth
there is a lack of that self-reliance that characterises
the Australian lad. He would, for instance, never
dream, when even well advanced in his teens, to go
alone and independently tender his services in
response to an advertisement, his mother or father
must go with him; the girl, on the contrary, will
go, seek, and often obtain a situation, and quietly,
and with a fitting pride, impart the glad tidings


to mother and father ,when ‘ she has succeeded.
John Bull’s wife and a very admirable, self-
sacrificing- wife and mother in most instances
pampers and spoils her sons deplorably. From
the cradle upwards, in her fondness for the boy,
she paints him in her imagination as a born
genius, and is never tired of telling him so, so that
he either becomes an idle prig, or is persuaded by
dear mamma that in his particular case there is a
royal road to fortune, without study or effort, thus
unconsciously encouraging him to idleness, insta-
bility of purpose, and not infrequently total failure
or indifferent success in life, lamenting which, and
never even suspecting its real cause, she sheds many
bitter but unavailing tears.
As for the mother, she is, unlike many of the Aus-
tralian wives, a thorough housewife, far more patient
and less prone to complain under adversity than John
himself. In most instances, from the day she
marries she settles down to’ her home, and to
thoroughly spoiling the good man, humoring all his
whims and foibles with a blind and tolerant affection
quite surprising. If she can keep a servant or ser-
vants she will still do the major portion of the work
as of choice. John likes a certain pudding if she
makes it, and grumbles if she does not. She tods
from daylight to bedtime uncomplaining, and good
John takes it as a matter of course. If she takes a
cold, she still battles on and makes no fuss about it.
If John discovers it he grumbles at her, and tells her
that he knew she would catch cold if she would
persist in doing so and so, and altogether gives her
but that left-handed sympathy to be found in irritably-
expressed concern. Yet, if she fail to hide the tell-tale
tears evoked by his asperity, John assumes that the
bestowal of a kiss, and a rough but not unkindly order
to go off to bed, puts matters right, and so it does.
Her sons at quite an early age echo John the elder,
and hector over their but too devoted mother quite a
la papa. Yet in nine cases out of ten she will consider
the boys and bestow more lavish affection on them
than on the girls. Of many splendid characteristics,
with but few faults, possessed, by materfamilias, one


is, and note that, ye Australian housewife—she is
always kind and considerate to her servant or ser-
vants, looking to their comfort and concerning herself
as to their clothing, food and recreation, far more so
than to herself in that respect. The servant nuisance
is not unknown in English domesticity, but it is in the
English home the visitor finds servants devoted to
their mistresses and family, and the house they are
taken into, and remain often for years. Such
servants are respected, even esteemed, by the family,
of which they come to regard themselves as humble
members, and repay the kindness and consideration
shown them with grateful, untiring, and cheerful
service, tending much to the comfort and content
of all concerned, themselves included.
One marked advantage that English women seem
to possess over those of other nations and climes is
that they preserve their good looks. The English
matron is in most instances healthy-looking and
handsome, and remains so even to an advanced age;
many a son of two score years may yet gaze at his
mother in fond admiration of a pretty old lady. Mrs,
John and her daughter, met from home, do not strike
one as being very polite or appreciative of attention
shown them. One may rise up on, say, a rainy day, and
make his way to the roof of a ’bus, that she may ride
within, and she will take his seat without a murmur
of thanks or acknowledgment. It may be accounted
for, not from lack of politeness, but the reserve prac-
tised in England of never in any circumstances
addressing a stranger. Men and women are alike
in that respect. Riding in the smoking carriage of
the tube, a man sat beside me, and drew out his pipe.
He felt in all his pockets for a match. Seeing
his dilemma, I tendered him a box of matches.
He merely looked at me sternly. He was an old
gentleman, and, not answering or accepting my
matches, rose up resentfully and took another seat.
I give this as an instance of the absurd suspicion
and reserve John Bull indulges in towards a stranger.
Yet, visit John and his family at home, with an intro-
duction or voucher for one’s respectability, and there
are no kinder or more hospitable people in the


world. I have already remarked that with English
families there is not the same individual indepen-
dence of opinion as obtains in Australia. Here, for
instance, we not infrequently find father and son in
a quite friendly sense opposed in political opinion
and trend. The father, mayhap, a Conservative and
free-trader; the son, on the contrary, and actively,
a Liberal, with strong Socialistic tendencies, and a
protectionist. They not only agree to differ without
discord, but one may even detect something of pride
in the senior’s smiling admission of the son’s defec-
tion. In England, however, the visitor is often
amused to hear John junior, Mrs. John, and the fair
Miss John, echoing all papa’s views, even to the
adoption of his phraseology, arguments, and manner-
isms. Indeed, they repeat him so to the life that it
is hard for the listener to realise that they are not
caricaturing him. If in England a son ventured,
however respectfully and diffidently, to express views
on politics or any other subject contrary to those
held by his father, his irate parent, if not rendered
speechless with surprise, would put Sir Anthony
Absolute to the blush in emptying vials of wrath and
vituperation on his son’s devoted head, not to men-
tion copious and reproachful tears certain to be shed
by his dear, shocked mamma, and sarcastically
cutting witticisms, just as inevitable, of his devoted
sister. Such blind faith in the wisdom of one’s pro-
genitor, however admirable as a touching example
of filial affection and trust, yet impresses the indepen-
dent Australian as being altogether too docile and
sheeplike. It follows that, as night to day, a man
arrived at years of discretion so denied, or failing
to assert and exercise his undoubted right and duty
to think and reason for himself, is but too prone
to play the parental tyrant in his turn, blind to the
wisdom and necessity for encouraging in his children
a healthy exercise of these natural faculties.
This national trait may be, undoubtedly is, mainly
responsible for much that is narrow and egotistical
in the character, in so many other respects admirable,
of the typical Britisher.


Great Britain v. Germany
and America.
Of John Bull’s simple and inexpensive luxuries, not
the least enjoyed is his ha’penny evening paper.
Dinner over, pipe in mouth, he spreads it on his
knees, and figuratively partakes of his literary dish,
highly spiced, and served up hot and strong. John
derives a sort of grim enjoyment in reading therein
that the British Constitution, with which he regards
himself as personally identified, is sitting, figur-
atively, on a keg of gunpowder, at the momentary
peril of being blown to pieces.
He ponders reflectively over that scathingly, slashing
editorial, fiercely denunciatory of the vaunted efficiencjr
of the British Army, described as a “ hollow sham
and, as for its navy, of which it is so arrogantly boast-
ful, it is a “ mere husk,” ready to fall to pieces at a
cannon’s breath. The editor modestly leaves it to
be inferred that if he were, but for twenty-four hours,,
made Commander-in-Chief and Lord High Admiral,.
he would assuredly, with the weapon “ more mighty
than the sword,” lick the army into passable form,
and render our rotten men-of-war at least
and in so doing earn the encomiums of a grateful
public, and the undying gratitude of the British tar
by rendering his at present ill-starred lot, under an
effete Admiralty, a happy one.
Scarcely has the inflamed ink had time to dry ere
we have Mr. Editor on another tack, thundering forth
the “ humiliating fact,” as he expresses it, that Ger-
many and America have commercially sapped the
moribund British Constitution, and left it a mere
hulk stranded on the shores of a false estimate of its
own supremacy in trade and manufacture. As an


instance, he cites the startling fact that all our great
producing concerns are usurped and controlled either
by the German or American. He winds up by assur-
ing his readers, confidentially, of course, that he has
it on good authority that the British exchequer is
empty, and the vaunted Bank of England hopelessly
bankrupt.
One can picture him dropping his pen and retiring
into the bosom of his family, proudly conscious of
“ something attempted, something done,” in that he
has, to use his own vernacular, “ made Great Britain
sit up.”
Now, this works John up, so to speak. For a day
or so he is sorely tempted to stop every little Tommy
Atkins he meets, to prod him with his umbrella, that
he may be assured that he is alive, and not a mere
thing of straw and sawdust. So has John half a
mind to make his way to the docks, hammer in hand,
to test the soundness of Britain’s battleships. One
thing John will, and does do. He visits many large
manufactories in and around London in a vain search
for the intrusive German and American. He even
calls on that editor, who, finding he is not an adver-
tiser. and that he has merely called in the interest
of British commerce, damns British commerce and
John, too, and bangs the door in his face.
In the course of his patriotically self-imposed pere-
grinations, John makes a remarkable discovery,
which, to use his own words, is an eye-opener. But
it is evidently not an unpleasant discovery, judging
by his bland smile of content and reassurance.
Well, it is simply this—That all really large concerns,
such as railways, public companies, manufactories,
ship-building, engineering, and electrical and chemi-
cal works, public and private, and, in short, all going
concerns in Great Britain of any magnitude, are ruled
over and controlled, not by Germans and Americans,
but by big-framed, large-brained, level-headed Scots-
men—“ men frae the North.” John, quite content,
joins the guid mon in a wee drap o’ guid auld Scotch,
and, with a wink, retires, quite satisfied to leave Bri-
tain’s commercial laurels in the safe keeping of the
men as guid as the maist o’ them.


Confessions
of a
Nauglity Boy
of tlie
Fifties


: I'
62
'iV'.
f '•! v» 'I ■*


Old Melbourne Notabilities
One has but to indulge in reminiscences of the fifties
to be reminded that he stands almost alone, one of a
very few human survivals of a dead past. With but
rare exception his listeners, if they can be got to
hearken to stories of those bygone days, do so with
that lack of interest in ancient history that sadly
reminds the narrator that he has outlived his genera-
tion. Yet I would babble of the days when a greater
portion of, say, Collins and Russell streets knew no
artificial pavements, and we trod the native rock;
when bullock drays, heavily laden with stores for the
diggings, were to be seen bogged to the axles in
Elizabeth-street; when one’s youthful slumbers were
wont, in the dead of night, to be disturbed by the
alarming clang of the fire bell in the old Town Hall—
terrifying in that our only water supply depended on
the clumsy old water carts filled from a single pump
near Prince’s Bridge, and the fill of one’s cask through
a hole in the back fence cost eighteenpence. There
were no submarine cables annihilating space as now-
adays, and the arrival of an English and European
mail at wearisomely long intervals, with the news of
wars and rumors of wars, and horrors of the Indian
mutiny, stirred us to deep sorrow and indignation.
Crude times were those when “ The Age ” and
“Argus,” price sixpence, were lustily bawled in the
streets to a sort of tune: —“ ‘ The Age ’ ex-trordnery!
Arrival of the Marco Polo—Masseykree of Cawn-
pore!” We were a small and isolated community in
those days, so that, by any eccentricity of conduct,
it was easy to become notorious. I never enter upon


Collins-street east, then as now held sacred to the
medical profession, but I recall a once familiar figure
mounted on a rakish-looking thoroughbred. Physi-
cally and m features he was a fine, handsome, and
certainly a distinguished-looking man, every inch a
gentleman, despite his eccentricities, and they were
many and various. I speak of Doctor Hunter, the
somewhat vain-glorious but clever surgeon. Man
and horse were alike always perfectly groomed, and,
as to the former, faultlessly apparelled, but conspicu-
ously so for even those picturesque times, in a fashion
that had had its day; for instance, a silk hat of the
clerical shape, and Hessian boots with tassels pendent.
The Doctor was always attended by an equally well-
mounted groom in faultless livery. By the way, the
famous surgeon, like to the departed Mr Bardell so
touchingly referred to by the immortal Sergeant Buz-
fuz, had stamped his image in a son, then of tender
years, whom his proud father delighted to present
to the world on horseback, got up as a diminutive
edition of himself as regards attire. It need hardly
be said that the superior pretensions in appearance
of this young gentleman over other boys in the neigh-
borhood had to be sustained, vi et armis, against
heavy odds. If in those days the wonted peace and
serenity of decorous Collins-street were disturbed,
and such was of frequent occurrence, by rude sounds,
the gathering of a crowd, and the police, it was always
opposite the imposing-looking residence of the Doc-
tor. Poor, demented Doctor Plunter must in his
lime have been looked upon as a mine of wealth by
the pressmen on the daily papers, providing, die et
diem, sensational copy. It may not prove uninter-
esting to relate an incident of my small boy days that
brought me into close and terrifying personal relations
with the notorious medico.
I was the youngest, and certainly the smallest, of
a band of impishly mischievous boys of respectable
parentage residing in the neighborhood, who, being
cooped up in the city, found vent for their nervous


energy in perpetual warfare against the peace and
comfort of the professional residents of that aristo-
cratic quarter. I can hear ringing in my ears to-day
—can even reproduce—their weird cat-calls and
whistle to assemble in the evening. Our meeting
place was about where the Treasury building now
stands. The pranks we indulged in were as multi-
farious as they must have been distressing to our vic-
tims, one of the most popular being an organised and
concerted assault on the doctors’ bells. Our force
was generally formed into two divisions, each taking
a side of the street, from Spring to Swanston streets,
in a helter skelter, and with violent ringing of the door
bells. As happens to-day, when a policeman’s ser-
vices would have been opportune, he was always con-
spicuous by his absence, due in great measure to the
cutenes of the young scamjis implicated. On the
occasion I recall, my presence was resented as a
“ mere kid ” —a promising one maybe, but not one
sufficiently trained to be relied on on the warpath.
Anyway, despite my tearful pleadings, and the ten-
dering to our leader of all my worldly possessions—a
broken-bladed knife, a battered peg-top, and a piece
of string—l was left with injunctions to “ shepherd
the bobby,” and to signal if at any moment his move-
ments became dangerous. Now, this subordinate
duty did not appeal to my sense of dignity, and I
silently resolved to ignore discipline and “ go on my
own.’' That I paid very dearly for my infraction of
duty will be seen anon. Scarcely had my companions
bounded off down Collins-street, right and left, than,
head down, I was off after them as fast as my little
legs could carry me. As I flew along the pavement
quite harmlessly, I was conscious of the opening and
closing of many doors, but owing perhaps to my
being such a little mite, or to my fleetness of foot, I
escaped notice. All went well till, coming abreast
of the dreaded Dr. Hunter’s door, I paused. Impelled
by a terrifying temptation I had no power to resist, I
took a vigorous tug at the bell. At that moment the


door dew open, and, flagrante delicto, 1 was in the
clutches of no less formidable an enemy than the
infuriated Doctor. Now, he was a big man, I a very
small boy, so that he gathered me up by my clothes
in a grip of his hand and carried me, kicking and
into his surgery. Closing the door with
a kick of his foot, he flung me, a quivering little heap
of terror, more dead than alive with fright, on his
surgical couch. He uttered not a word, but I remem-
ber that I thought 1 detected a sound like the grind-
ing of teeth. Flinging open a drawer in his table,
he slowly and deliberately selected from a glittering
low a long, bright-bladed knife, doubtless, I now
conclude, one of his surgical instruments, coollv and
critically felt its edge, and laid it down on the talile.
He then threw ofif his coat, tucked up his shirt sleeves
with diabolical precision, took up the knife, strode up
to me, and pushed back my head. 1 lay trembling,
much as a bird might under the vicious paw of a cat,
while the Doctor made several passes with the glitter-
ing weapon round and about my throat. Many a time
since, and even now, I ask myself: Was I really in
imminent peril of my life, or was he merely frighten-
ing me? Prior to that he had certainly proved him-
self subject to blinding frenzies of passion on quite
trivial provocation. Anyway, I thought my last
moment had come, and I closed my eyes. However,
I was not destined to feel the murderous edge of that
keen blade. Flinging the knife on the table, he slipped
his fingers in my collar, and dragged me, crying pite-
ously, out into and along the passage, opened a door
under a staircase, flung me into darkness, and closed
the door. I lay on what I assumed to be coals, pant-
ing and prayerfully thankful that my life had been
spared. But, childlike, I soon began to people the
dark hole with all sorts of imaginary terrors, and I
sobbed my heart out, too fearful to stir hand or foot.
How long I remained there I know not, probably but
a few minutes, but seemingly a long time. Presently
my attention was arrested by the distant banging of


a door; then I heard a hurried footstep. The door
was flung open, and before me stood—not the dread
Doctor, knife in hand to flnish me, but a nice, kindly-
looking lady, in handsome evening dress. Holding a
lighted candle over her head, she smiled down on me
with a sort of amused pity. Taking me kindly by the
hand, she drew me out from captivity, stooped down,
kissed me on the forehead, and murmured, “ You
poor, dear little boy!” I flung a fearsome look around
in dread of the Doctor, but, to my intense relief, all
present beside the lady, whom I knew to be Mrs.
Doctor Hunter, were a man servant in livery and a
pretty maid, who had fallen into tears evidently on
my behalf. “ Come,” the lady said, and hurried me
along the passage. Coming to a pantry she left me
standing, and, entering the same alone, she soon reap-
peared with a huge slice of bread, liberally spread
with black currant jam. Thrusting this into my hand,
she led me, to the accompaniment of the pretty maid’s
sobs, out of a back door into a garden, opened a side
door, and with “ Now, my dear, run home to your
mother,” thrust me forth. I ran for a few yards,
when, overcome by the temptation of the bread and
jam, I paused. Before I had time to lift the dainty
gift to my mouth, I was pounced upon by the pretty
maid and rapturously kissed. To her anxious inquiry
if I was sure I knew my way home, I replied, some-
what scornfully—for I was so very juvenile as to be
resentful of her* kisses—that of course I did. Taking
my hand hurriedly, she pressed a coin into it, closed
my fingers, and, with a farewell kiss, she was gone.
The glare from the first street lamp revealed to my
delighted eyes a bright and new sixpence. Sitting
down in a friendly doorway, I gave myself up to the
enjoyment of the bread and jam, after which I leisurely
made my way home. Meantime, my people were in
great distress concerning me. Fortunately for me.
my father was out in an anxious, but vain, search for
me, and my dear, weeping mother hurried me off to
bed, and thus I escaped a whipping. Not being the


good little boy in the story book, I suppressed the
truth plausibly, feeling very thankful to find myself
tucked up safely and snugly in my little bed. That
night I awoke, with a cry on my lips, from a fearsome
vision of lying on the doctor\s coucli gazing at my
own gory little head, decapitated, on his table, 'Need
I explain that the next day at school I told the tragic
story of my adventures to my comrades in crime,
with so many embellishments and picturesquely fic-
tional touches as would have done credit to a Eouge-
mont. For a few days I was the hero of the hour;
indeed, I became so pufted up with a sense of my
importance and prowess that I had to fight three
battles with boys far too good for me, and get well
drubbed before the conceit was knocked out of me.
That kindly lady, Mrs, Doctor Hunter, was destined
to live through many trials and sad vicissitudes with
her eccentric lord. To confess what an incorrigibly
naughty boy I must have been in those degenerate
days of my youth, I may say that if I refrained from
reprisals on the doctor it was rather from a feeling
of gratitude towards my benefactress than from fear
of the tragic medico. What ultimately l)efell the
doctor I cannot recall, save as to a vague impression
that his end wa-s sensational. Unless my memorv is
at fault, the son of this ill-starred couple lost his life
in the London.
Of one other disciple of Esculapius I would remind
the oldMelbournite. In depictinghim as in those days
of the fifties, he may recognise his own portrait with
a regretful sigh that he cannot put back the clock
to those, days of his youth. Happily, he is still
with us, just as noisily and boisterously merrv of
speech, and light of foot. Picture, then, a spare,
nervously active man flying about Collins-street in
a light buggy, drawn by as good a bit of horseflesh


as game as his master. He, the master, wore not a
wreath of roses, but a white—once white—hat with
a tilt to the back of his head, and a narrow, sky blue
necktie. He was accompanied in his rounds by a
miniature “ tiger,” in bright buttons and rakish-look-
ing tile, altogether a promising-looking youth—a
sort of juvenile Sam Weller. On duty, although
small, he could, and indeed did, many a time, put up
a good fight against anything a stone or two over
his weight. 1 am fain to thus do justice to his
memory in that respect, having personally satisfied
myself as to his fistic capabilities at the cost of a
black eye and other blemishes. Where am that
“ tiger ” now ? Echo answers not; but I bear him
no ill-will; it was a fair fight. Aic markable trio,
that master, tiger, and horse, the Arab strain in the
latter triumphing over four legs gone in the back
sinews. To return to the master. “A man in his
time plays many parts.” The genial doctor is quite
a stock actor on lifers fitful stage. Doctor, legis-
lator, wine grower, and owner of racehorses ;
always a jester. His friends are wont to swear
that he doctored even his champagne, significantly
named creme de boozy,” a suggestive cogno-
men the facetious made much of. The story goes
that a patient to whom the doctor had adminis-
tered a magnum overnight called on him next
day sufifering from swollen head. Feeling his pulse
and looking at his tongue critically, the doctor
exclaimed, “ Why, d n it, man, I didn’t give you
enough,” whereupon he uncorked another bottle.
It is a remarkable fact that he survived; in fact, is
alive and hearty to this day, or so the doctor says.
“ Fact,” he assures me, with a chuckle; “ he’s some-
in the Walhalla district.” By the way, there
is yet another part the doctor then, and still, plays
to the manner born, namely, that of a light-hearted,
grown-up boy, ever with a keen sense of the humor
of the phantasmagoria wis call life! He is no less
a boy to-day than in those days gone. Some day,
let us hope a long time hence, he will die—a boy.


G. V. Brooke in Tragedy
and Comedy.
My confessions, so far as they have gone, show
what a hopelessly bad little boy I must have been.
Those of my gentle readers whose fingers tingle to
give me a sound thrashing, I would fain remind that
it all happened a very long time ago, and that, may-
hap, I am more deserving of punishment for much
that I have done since.
Recalling my sad doings, it would seem all as fresh
in my memory as of yesterday. Certainly I must
have been a very precocious, not to say adventurous,
little chap, due, perhaps, to the fact that I was not
alone a dreamer, but an omniverous little reader.
Nor were my incursions into literature confined to
boys’ books, but of the works of Charles Dickens,
then in the zenith of his fame, Thackeray, Scott,
Dumas, Captain Marryatt, and other noted writers
of fiction.
It was in or about 1856 when, coming from school,
in Collins-street—the Victoria Grammar School (not
long since demolished) —that a huge poster on a wall
inspired me, not alone with a mad yearning, but a
fixed determination, to go to the Theatre Royal and
see the great tragedian, G. V. Brooke. I was but
eight years of age, so that the announcement that
he was to appear in his great Shakespearian imper-
sonation of Othello had but little meaning for me,
beyond, perhaps, a ring about the word that capti-
vated my youthful imagination. I remember con-
sidering deeply what my chance would be if I asked
my father to take me. I shrewdly concluded with a
regretful sigh that I would be deemed too young to
understand anything but a pantomime. But go I
must, and would. How?—was the question that


gave me many hours of anxious thought. I knew
that, sleeping in a small back room on the ground
floor, with a window conveniently opening into a
right of way, I would have no insurmountable diffi-
culty in effecting an exit after my mother had kissed
me good-night. " How oft the sight of means to
do ill deeds makes ill deeds done!” So far, then, I
was resolved. My dilemma was thus reduced to the
mere question of means—the way was clear before
me.
Devouring that play bill, it was impressed on my
memory to the smallest detail. I knew that the fee
to the pit was then, as now, but one shilling. I well
recollect anxiously considering whether, being such
a very small mite, the management might not be
induced to admit me half price. But even so, I
reflected, sixpence to the impecunious was just as
difficult of attainment as a shilling. True, I might
easily have coaxed it from my mother, poor indulgent
soul! But I feared that any such request, without
explanation, would give rise to suspicion, so I was
fain to abandon that idea. How bitterly I regretted
the wanton extravagance of but a day or so gone,
when I had squandered sixpence pocket money in
a nerve-shattering electric shock on the corner of
Russell and Bourke streets, price threepence, and an
unwholesome indulgence in threepence worth of stale
pastry! Dame Fortune, who has ever befriended
me, came to the rescue in a very unexpected manner.
Fascinated bv that play bill on the wall in Russell-
street, I was reading it again and again for the hun-
dredth time, probably, when I heard at my elbow,
“ Here, boy; hold my horse for a few minutes, and
I’ll give you something to buy lollies.”
I turned around to find a man smilingly tendering
me the reins of a restive steed. Fear of the animal
made me shrink timidly back. The next instant,
however, I stepped forward, nerved with the thought
that, if I were but brave enough to comply, my visit
to the theatre was in all probability assured. Well,
I did hold that horse for probably ten anxious
minutes, in my nervous terror magnified into hours.
However, as the animal didn’t make a meal of me,


although he walked round me with what I regarded
suspicious intent, my task came to an end. I was
rewarded by a cheery assurance that I was “ quite
a man,” and what was more to the purpose, with a
bright half-crown. Picture, then, that evening a
neatly-dressed, nervous little boy of eight all alone,
in fear and trembling, diffidently tendering his shil-
ling, and, ticket in hand, making his way in the crush
for the Pit entrance. I was that little adventurer, sup-
posed at that moment by his but too fond and con-
fiding mother to be snugly and safely tucked away
in his little bed.
I was not unfamiliar with the interior of a
theatre, having been on more than one occasion to
the pantomime. Nevertheless, I was soon lost in
wonder and delight, especially when the orchestra
struck up and the lights were turned on, revealing
a full house, packed to the ceiling. Here was fairy-
land! To this day the perfume of an orange recalls
as vividly as though it were but yesterday that
momentous event of my life, in that I sat next to a
man and woman who ate of that fruit throughout
the great play, with an audible sucking noise that,
young as I was, greatly irritated my sense of the
fitness of things. I was, as I have explained before,
but a child, but no sooner had the curtain arisen on
the street scene in VTnice, and the dialogue between
lago and Roderigo begun, than my attention became
enthralled. Lost to my surroundings, my nerves at
a tension, I followed the masterful tragedy through-
out with, for my age, a wonderful understanding.
Nothing escaped me. It was not G. V. Brooke, but
the Moor himself, tortured by damning suspicion,
with his majestic, stately nobility played upon by the
devilish cunning of a plausible villain. I saw it all,
not as a play, but as a reality—l had no knowledge
of the plot and its tragic ending. Had I dared I
would have cried aloud in warning.
Coming to the scene wherein Othello kills Desde-
mona, the wonder is that my sobs of pity escaped
notice in the hush; but, like myself, I assume, those
around me were too intent on the scene presented
to notice my humble little self. This I know that


when the curtain fell on the last of it, I awoke with
a start to the reality of my surroundings. Weeping
bitterly over the wrongs and sorrows of the Moor
and his ill-fated bride, I made my way out of the
theatre and home, and, climbing in at the friendly
window, crept into bed, to sob myself to sleep over my
first insight into human wrong and injustice, and the
consequent pitiful fate of he who had “ loved not
wisely but too well.” How, with my fallow mind
and thoughts so heavily charged, I refrained from
bursting into my mother’s room that night, to unbur-
den myself of the sorrow of it all, I know not. Well
do 1 remember the day following, nigh to fifty years
ago, counting every minute feverishly for the time
to come when I might again steal forth in the dark-
ness to make my eager way once more to the theatre.
The comedy of O’Callaghan on His Last Legs was
billed for that evening, with G. Y. Brooke in the
leading role. In the rollicking, resourceful Irish-
man, and the fun and humor of it all, I lost all recol-
lection for the time of the tragic incidents of over-
night.
As I had wept childish tears over the woes and
sorrows of the noble but much-abused Moor and his
hapless bride, so did I laugh till my sides ached over
Brooke’s inimitable comedy. Alas! it came to an
end, and the curtain fell amid thunders of applause,
in which I clapped and screamed with the rest. I
have seen many in comedy and tragedy since, but I
am fain to believe that he was the greatest actor that
has ever trod the Melbourne boards. In magnifi-
cence of physique 1 certainly have never seen his
like. Of my many childish escapades, that at least
I can never bring myself to regret or repent. Some
years after, when the sad news of his death at sea
in the ill-fated London, with his pathetic farewell
to his Melbourne friends, drew tears of sorrow and
regret from all Australians; perhaps no one more
sincerely mourned his loss than the naughty little
boy who braved the terrors of a whipping that he
might in after years, and to this day, proudly boast
that he had seen the great G. A'. Brooke in tragedy
and comedy.


Braid’s Dancing Saloon
IN THE FIFTIES.
The caterers for amusements in the exciting days
of the fifties looked chiefly to the gay and festive
gold diggers, who paid periodical visits to the metro-
to “ knock down ” their easily-acquired surplus
gains. Many and seductive were the places of enter-
tainment other than theatres then rampant in Mel-
bourne. The enterprising runners of such had
assumedly a free hand as far as the police authori-
ties were concerned. I question if any licence was
required. Drinking and dancing saloons, glaring
places of assignation, gave bold advertisement by
flaring naphtha lamps, blare of brass music, bang of
big drum, and the congregation of many fair but
frail sirens, decked out in rich and gaily-colored silks
and satins to allure the but too willing gold-seeker.
Well-fitting moleskin trousers, stained a rich yellow
with auriferous soil, gaily-colored Crimean shirt,
Hessian boots of patent leather, a Imght scarlet silk
sash around the waist, with tassels pendent down the
thighs, and a new cabbage-tree hat, formed the pic-
turesque garb of the miner on holiday of those flush
times. These men in this somewhat theatrical
costume, in the close embrace of their partners of
the gentler sex, in multi-colored, shimmering, silken
attire, whirling in the giddy dance, presented all the
charm and glamor of a fancy-dress ball. Not the
least notorious and attractive of many such places
was “ Braid’s Dancing Saloon,” a flimsy erection
of canvas, with a frame and floor only of wood. It
was so designated by a large signboard surmounting


its front. It stood on a piece of ground otherwise
vacant on the corner of Little Collins and Russell
streets, to this day but a coal yard. As the shades
of evening fell, all the year round, Sundays excepted,
a band of, say, ten performers, took up their position
on roughly-made forms fronting the entrance to this
delectable establishment, and discoursed gay and
popular music to an ever gathering and appreciative
crowd. But brief intervals served to refresh the
band with free drinks, at the expense of a liberal
management, or more frequently, probably, at the
invitation of some open-handed holiday-seeker.
This nightly open-air concert would continue pro
boiio publico, and for the promotion of business, till
the saloon was well filled with dancers of both sexes.
The band, after levying a collection in the band-
master’s hat, for their own benefit, would then retire
within, when dancing would commence and continue
till midnight. It will be readily understood that, to
the adult residents in the neighborhood. Braid’s
saloon, with its continual and monotonous pom-pom
and bang of the big drum, was a sore infliction; whilst
not infrequent unseemly brawls and disturbances
were a source of scandal and abhorrence. To the
boys of all classes for miles around, on the contrary.
Braid’s proved a never failing attraction and a joy.
I would fain assure the reader that I was a shining
example to all my wicked school chums, and held
my pious, small personality far above and aloof from
such temptations; but the truth must out that Braid’s,
always attractive, had at this time an additional
fascination for me, in that my father had sternly
forbidden my going near the place under pain of a
whipping. True, there were several rival attractions
hard by, amongst others a wild beast show in
Bourke-street, where caged lions, tigers, and other
captivatingly fearsome animals nightly howled to the
accompaniment of brazen music, and the waxworks,
on its present site, with its blood-curdling chamber
of horrors, children half price; but Braid’s to me was


ever the most fascinatino-ly seductive. Thanks to
the friendly and convenient window before men-
tioned, 1 became ([uite a familiar fij^'ure—althong’h
a small one—at llraid’s door. As, unlike other bovs,
I neither g-ave vent to cat-calls nor threw stones on
the roof, I came under the favorable notice and pat-
ronage of the bandmaster. Indeed, Iso ingratiated
myself into the favor of that augitst personage as to
be graciously accorded a seat on the form bv his
side, and permission to serve as his music-stand,
the sight of which, while it filled my breast with pride,
made me the bitterly envied of my associates, for
which I had to give due account and take my gruel
the next day.
One evening when the band were refreshing them-
selves prior to retiring within, a superbly-dressed,
handsome girl, rich in perfume, sat down beside me,
and, to my dire confusion, fiung a bare, white arm
around my neck. Murmuring in my ear —“ You
dear little chap!” she imprinted on my blushing
cheek a loud-sounding kiss. Holding me at arm’s
length under the glare of the lamp overhead, she
laughed—certainly the sweetest rippling laugh I had
ever heard. “ You naughty boy. I’m sure your mother
doesn’t know you’re out.” Xow, this was a cant and
popular saying at the time, the refrain of a comic
music hall song, and the conceit of it made her laugh
the more. Pressed for an answer, I was fain to
admit in a whisper that my mother wasn’t aware of
the fact, which served but to increase her merriment.
Patting me on the cheek, she queried —“ Can you
dance?” I hung my head and blushingly admitted
that I could dance a polka. As fate would have it,
at that moment the band within struck up the open-
ing polka. Before I knew quite what had happened,
I found myself within, and, held by both hands, we
two were flying around to the strains of the inspiriting
music. Well I remember as I plied my little legs
vigorously in time with ni}' gaze rapturouslv
upturned to her pretty face. Surely she must have
been conscious of my innocent adoration as she


swung me round, often lifting me off my feet. At
length, out of breath, she sank upon a seat near the
entrance. Recovering from the giddiness, I glanced
proudly around and up at her with gratitude as she
drew me towards her. At that instant an iron grip
fastened upon my shoulder. l_,ooking fearsomely
around, judge of my horror and dismay to see my
father, stern, implacable, towering over me, his face
ablaze with indignation. With never a word he
hurried me without. Scarcely had we gone a yard
when a white hand, shimmering with diamonds, was
laid on his arm, and a sweet, tremulous voice mur-
mured, “ Oh, sir, pray do not punish him. My kiss
has done him no harm ;it was my fault. I have a little
brother so like him at home—my home, to which I
never dare return ! With that she turned aside, sobbing
piteously. With a deep-drawn sigh my father’s grip
relaxed, and, taking my hand with never a word, he
led me home, fearful and treml)ling with the thought
of the whipping in store for me. To my relief, he
quietly handed me over to my anxious mother.
With many despairing hugs and assurances that I
was such a naughty boy, she hurried me to bed, and
tucking me up, kissed me good-night. Well content,
and not a little surprised tliat I had escaped a whip-
ping, due, as I gratefully remembered, to the tearful
pleadings of my fair partner, I soon fell asleep. If
my slumbers were disturbed that night by bright
visions of that beauteous Niobe all tears, who had
laughed so merrily but a few moments before, it was
at least the dream of the innocent. This I know, tliat
in a burst of chidlish confidence next day on my
mother’s lap, I whispered to her a glowing and enrap-
tured account of my adventures and the lovely ladv
who had so graciously noticed her humble little son.
Her answer, that she was sure the lady was all that
I pictured her, but I must promise her never to go
near Braid’s saloon again, set my fallow little brain
puzzling for many a day. Shortly after my first ball
at Braid’s, a fire, more merciful to the long-suffering
ratepayers than the authorities, consumed the estab-
lishment out of existence.


Old Cremorne Gardens
Cremorne Gardens—dear old Cremorne, long
since gone into the limbo of forgotten glories of the
fifties! Yet there must survive many of the bad
boys of those days, with whom, like myself, there is
still something electrical and soul-stirring in the
mere mention of the name of that once famous and
popular holiday resort. Of Cremorne much has
been said and written by the censorious. The answer
of those who knew it and spent many a happy day
and evening there, is that probably, like to all places
of public entertainment, vice, thinly disguised,
stalked there. This I can assert, as in justice to
the dear old gardens—one of the playgrounds of my
boyhood days—and as a tribute to the able manage-
ment and control exercised and insisted upon by the
lessee and manager, Mr. George Coppin, of revered
memory, and whose recent death we now mourn,
paterfamilias of those days did not hesitate to take
his wife and family there. Doubtless he did so with
the same confidence that he would do now to our
miniature Cremorne of to-day. Prince’s Court, and
certainly with no more fear of shock to their sus-
ceptibilities. Picnic parties were wont to assemble
tliere quite early in the forenoon for a thoroughly
enjoyable day amidst botanic and other attractions,
taking their al fresco meals on the grass, and remain-
ing to spend a delightful evening. The area, many
acres, was so ample that there was no difficulty with
those so disposed of keeping exclusively to themselves.
Cremorne was possessed of a hundred and one side-
show attractions by night, enhanced by the charm of
space, botanical setting, brilliant lighting, and the
accompaniment of splendid music. At night it was cer-
tainly a wonderland, fairylike, and enchanting. Boom


of gong set the gay and laughing crowds scampering
from place to place through the grounds. A stam-
pede, trending westward, indicated that a beautiful
and realistic pyrotechnic display was toward counter-
feiting the siege of Sebastopol, the burning of Mos-
cow, Mount Vesuvius in eruption, or the like, with
scenic effects centred in an artificial lake, reflecting
the show in all its grandeur. Anon brilliant lime-
light called the people to an aerial exhibition of
clever, nerve-stirring, dangerous-looking tight rope
dancing, or wild acrobatic flight through space, or,
maybe, a Highland sword dance in costume. In the
central gravelled and brightly-lighted space a vast
rotunda, with ample floor space, rich in ornate
design, and of chaste white and gold, with its magni-
ficent brass and string band, ever invited and attracted
hundreds of richly and picturesquely - costumed
dancers, who indulged to their hearts’ content in the
giddy waltz and mad gallop to inspiriting strains of
music, presenting a sight to the thousands of spec-
tators never to be forgotten. Wearied of dancing,
couples hand in hand, old and young, would scamper
off merrily to lose themselves in the maze-like wind-
ings of intricately-involved paths, traced in the lurid
glow of countless rotations of multi-colored fairy
lamps along their borders. Many a cul de sac ter-
minated in a hoarv. gnarled old gum tree, with rustic
spiral steps festooned with starry lights, winding
aloft to a rustic seating amid the leaves, from which
a panoramic bird’s-eye view of the enchanting scene
below could be enjoyed. Those elevated bowers,
and there were many of them, must have been a
veritable boon to the timid lover. Doubtless many a
silver-haired couple of to-day, with grandchildren at
their knees, reading this and remembering, will smile
into each other’s eyes over their glasses in recollection
that it was in one of these leafy bowers the momen-
tous question was popped and answered to the sealing
of their matrimonial fate. This I will confess, that
I have still a grateful reverence for the dear old
gardens, for it was amid its inspiring, romantic ur-
roundings my juvenile heart first timidly awoke to


8o Confessions of a Naughty Boy of the Fifties.
the voice of love, io this day the odor of pepper-
mint drops recalls vividly the flavor of that first kiss.
iVlas! I was fated soon to assume that it was the
peppermints she loved, and not the man. If she
proved faithless on her tenth birthday party, she was
sorely tempted by a boy whose mother kept a lolly
shop. Of course we fought over it, but the deadly
feud was compromised by his generously bestowing
his sister on me, with the frank remark that I could
have her for a sweetheart if I liked, although he
couldn’t see how any fellow could fancy her.
The site of Cremorne was on the northern banks
of the Yarra at Richmond. Like to Rome, there
were many roads leading to it. From Melbourne,
however, the most favored way to Cremorne was by
the river. Small gondola-like steamboats plied to
and fro between Prince’s Bridge and the gardens.
These boats, by day decked out in gaily-colored bunt-
ing of all nations, by night brightly illumined with
colored lights, lent quite a Venetian-like holiday
aspect to that portion of the Yarra. The stream was
pure and sweet in those early days—it was our sole
source of domestic supply; so that this way of going
and returning, especially during the warm summer
evenings, must have added much to the enjoyment of
the outing. I must not omit to mention that, of
Cremorne’s many and varied attractions, its well-
appointed theatre was by no means the least,
therein nightly during the season good comedies
were produced. With such masters in their art as
the late Mr. George Coppin, Charley Young, and
other equally celebrated actors and actresses in the
leading roles, with their inimitable fun and drolleries,
the house was ever crowded from floor to ceiling.
Were it possible to-day to invoke a gathering together
of Melbourne schoolboys of the fifties, I venture to
think that not one of them but w’ould, with my humble
self, candidly admit a lasting debt of gratitude to good
old Cremorne, in that many a time and oft it had shel-
teied him aloof and secure from detection and punish-
ment when he “played the wag” from school. It
was a common occurrence in those days for a batch
of half a dozen or so of both sexes—as I remember,


the girls were generally the instigators—by a carefully
prearranged conspiracy to absent themselves without
leave. C)n such occasions about the time the matu-
tinal bell was summoning all good boys and girls to
school, fugitive scholars might have been seen guiltily
slipping off down unfrecpiented byways and lanes,
all going in one direction, making for the rendezvous
in the Richmond paddock. There a small cave in a
bank by the river, under an old gum tree, where we
used to meet, afforded excellent hiding-place for the
tell-tale school bags. Here the " satchel and shining
morning face” parted company for the day. Cre-
morne was the ultimate objective. With the whole
day before us, what wonder if we lingered for a time
in the paddock collecting and sucking sticky gum,
smoking a certain porous root abounding there a la
cigars; catching and cruelly storing in old I.N.E.
match boxes the illusive but prismatically-colored
cockshaver beetle; or, mayha]), in return for the
bestowal of a few hardly-collected coppers on some
0)1(1 King Billie aborigine, being initiated into the art
of throwing the boomerang, to the amusement of his
lubra squatting in her dirty blanket in the mi-mi.
Remember, the Richmond paddock in those days was
a bit of primitive bush, pure and simple, and thicklv
timbered, made resplendent in color by richly-plum-
aged parrots, and made musical with the chirp of
many birds and the hum of insects. No wonder, then,
that it vied with Cremorne in its seductions for the
truant schoolboy. As far as memory I am
under the impression Cremorne opened its ticket-
office and gates at ii a.m. lam not quite clear as to
that, for I blush to have to confess that it gave us but
slight concern. A friendly, convenient, and long-
undetected gap in the fence near the river relieved us
of the necessity of disbursement in the way of admis-
sion fees, the danger of detection lending, doubtless,
a much-enhanced spice of pleasure to the adventure.
By the same nefarious means we showed our annre-
ciation of the cultivative abilities of a certain fruit
grower in the neighborhood of Cremorne, looting his
orchard of his choicest fruits with a liberality to our-
selves that must have been ruinous to the ])oor man.


"W e were thus, with our school luncheons, liberally
provided with our al fresco meal, washed down by
water from the river when ginger beer was beyond
our means.
We may never hope to see another Cremorne as of
old, and a pity ’tis so. Now', however, that the Yarra
has been so vastly improved and cleansed, there is
no reason why, as an adjunct to our “ Henley on the
Yarra,” fancy steamboats—say motor boats—should
not ply for passengers throughout the day, or at least
in the evenings during our oppressive summer
months. Surely, an outing on the water with an
open-air concert, say, on the river frontage of the
Botanical Gardens, with tea houses for the public
refreshment, would be much appreciated and patro-
nised? One has but to go abroad to see what privi-
leges of the kind are enjoyed by all classes, and where
climatic advantages are not those with which we are
blessed in the sunny south. The amusements of the
people in continental countries are under legislative
control. No thought is given to it here apparently.
We have many excellent military bands. Yet the
public are rarely afforded opportunity to hear them,
except it be at a review, or as they march past in our
streets on some occasion of state. We have much
to learn and emulate from abroad. In Marseilles, for
instance, there on Sunday afternoon the authorities
furnish a splendid military band of fifty performers
on a beautifully tree-planted and grass-sown reserve,
in the heart of the city, where the people assemble
to listen and enjoy, free of charge, bright and hearten-
ing music. The Victorians are certainly a music-
loving people, yet little or no opportunity is afforded
them of cultivating their tastes in that respect, save
exclusive and expensive academic performances, so
severely classical as to appeal to and attract, not the
people generally, but a mere handful of musical
critics, and those wdio, by their presence there,
fain pose as such. We have the bands, and no lack
of superb public reserves, suitable for the purpose, yet
music is rarely to be heard outside of the four walls
of the Town Hall.


A Cranks’ Adventure with
an Elephant.
Someone has cynically remarked that one-half the
world does not know how the other half live. It
might be truly added, nor does it care. In the days
of the fifties, however, we were too young and small
a community to have outgrown the little
propensity of concerning ourselves in a good-natured
way with the affairs of our neighbors. Therefore,
as I have elsewhere remarked, any eccentricty of con-
duct or habit soon became common property and
topic of general comment.
Now, there are certain mild forms of dementia,
so harmless withal and diverting, especially when the
victim be one otherwise compos mentis, as to invoke
nothing but ridicule and laughter as the amusing
idiosyncrasy of the crank. Of one so possessed,
having, as the Scotsman hath it, “ a bee in his bon-
net,” I have a lively recollection. He was the father
of a school chum of mine, who, with his wife and
family, lived in our neighborhood. An exemplary
husband and father, he was also a shrewd and pros-
perous tradesman, so that he lacked not the means
to indulge his eccentricity. To come to the point,
then, he had an irresistible and insatiable mania for
buying at auction all that was quaint, unprofitable,
and generally useless.
His good and long-suffering spouse used to plead,
as she tearfully drew the attention of her intimate
and sympathetic friends, to yet another extraordinary
purchase, that it was John’s only vice. She was for


ever making excuses for his weakness; yet she would
wring her hands in despair, and express the convic-
tion that his folly must sooner or later bring them
to want and penury. There were those of his inti-
mate friends who averred that John had certain lucid
intervals of repentance. If so, he certainly never
voiced them, nor was he ever deterred of discouraged
in the relentless pursuit of his expensive hobby.
Earnest pleading and remonstrances of friends, wife,
and family were not wanting, to all of which he was
wont to turn a deaf ear.
I had a somewhat intimate knowledge of his
methods, in that I was frequently present when his
wife, in her sorrow, would seek the ever sympathetic
ear of my kind little mother, and unburden her fears
and troubles as a relief, probably, rather than with any
hope of assistance. My mother, at least, never even
smiled as others did. Well, then, friend John would
eagerly scan the columns of his morning paper
announcing coming auctions. Knowing that he
might expect anything but encouragement from the
family, on the contrary, bitterly expressed remon-
strance, he became silent and secretive. With some
plausible excuse on his lips, he would slip away. If
he returned not in a short period, the family would
resign themselves to the inevitable with commendal)le
resignation, and anxiously await his return with the
dull sense of conviction that nothing in the way of a
purchase, however absurd, could surprise them. In
the fulness of time, the genial John would come along
walking beside a cart —there were no furniture vans
in those early days with elastic steps, his head
thrown proudly back, with the light of achievement
in his eye. Smiling neighbors would gather around
and nudge each other, all eager to gratify their curi-
osity and sense of the humorous. Mayhap it would
be a huge pier-glass, fractured and starred in the
centre, with a section of the frame missing; or an
immense sideboard, minus a door or drawers. More
frequently than not it would be something so large


and unwieldy that, after much swearing' and supreme
and perspiring effort, it would be discovered that
neither door nor window was large enough to admit
it to the interior of the house. “ Never mind,” John
would say, with a sigh of resignation, “ we’ll put it
in the yard.” Now, it can be readily understood that
in time John’s house became quite an old curiosity
shop, which, for variety in the antique, grotesque,
and useless, was not to be outshone by anything'
of the kind in fact or fiction; while a glance over the
back fence revealed such an amazingly heterogene-
ous accumulation as might have suggested an
asylum for decayed and decrepit household gods,
who, like Lucifer, had fallen, never to rise again.
Now, had this remarkable man, sensible in all other
respects, fallen prey to this penchant for auction
buying, with the view of trading off the things pur-
chased at a profit, it might have been attributed to a
too sanguine disposition. Save, however, in the
single instance hereinafter narrated, he was never
known to sell or offer for sale any item of his
strangely assorted and acquired collection. During
those flush times mock auctions flourished in Mel-
bourne like to the green bay-tree, especially in Eliza-
beth-street. Needless to say, they were all run by
the chosen people, doubtless with great profit. Glit-
tering jewels and diamonds—spurious—were in these
seductive establishments, invitingly open to the public,
palmed off on the Simple Simon with more money
than sense. Such goods, I believe, are known to-day
to the chosen as “ shlenter,” a Hebrew expression for
sham. But by far and away the best and most pro-
fitable of many fake lines exploited in these delect-
able marts were sham emigrants’ boxes, ostensibly
the derelict property of the emigrant deceased, or
fallen on bad times. As a matter of fact, there was
a never-ending supply of these “ pigs in a poke,”
made up by the enterprising auctioneer in a back
room on the premises. Men made their living by
going about gathering up the trunks at trifling cost


and reselling them to the Knights of the Hammer.
Many and varied were the apocryphal narratives told
to the gaping, open-mouthed auditors of rich trea-
sure found in these odd lots, enriching the fortunate
purchaser to such tune that, without putting himself
to the trouble of going to the diggings to pick up
nuggets of gold, he had taken passage home again to
old England by the Marco Polo, and such like.
Now, Isaac,” to the attendant, “ ’old up that box.
That’s it. Now, my friends, there you have it, corded
and locked, just as it left the ship, with ‘ Not wanted
on the voyage ’ painted on it.” Whereupon the bid-
ding would be fast and furious.
Astonishing prices were given at times for these,
and as the purchaser generally was persuaded to open
it there and then, there was much chaff indulged in
at the expense of the crestfallen buyer.
It need hardly be said that our friend John was a
regular attendant at such sales, and doubtless a large
accumulation of empty boxes in his back premises
represented the expenditure of many pounds sterling.
Of many remarkable bargains knocked down to
John at auction, one was a broken-winded barrel
organ, with a real live monkey, in shabby but appro-
priate regalia. John had them brought home in
triumph, and delighted at least one member of the
family baby in arms—with the music. Encour-
aged by the evident approval of young hopeful, John
made overtures to the monkey in the hope that it
would perform. It bit him severely on the hand, flew
viciously at the baby, and ultimately bailed up the
whole family in their own dining-room, till the good
man had reluctantly, in defence of his home and those
dear to him, to discount the value of his deal
by braining the impish and pugnacious animal
with the poker. A week after that he specu-
lated in a crate of young nestling cockatoos, fresh
from Mount Macedon. Unable to bear the united
screams of perhaps fifty cockatoos, they were con-
signed to the yard. Here they screamed in such a
nerve-shattering chorus that after night fell- a boy
was feed by the exasperated neighbors to climb over


the fence. One may picture John’s dismay
next morning, the crate was empty. It was a sus-
picious fact that for a mile around nearly every house-
hold proudly vaunted the possession of a
learning good and bad English, in the shape of a
juvenile cockatoo.
But John’s crowning achievement in the auction
line remains to be told, and when told small wonder
will be expressed that it created such a sensation,
that amusing accounts of it got into the daily news-
papers, and doubtless furnished good reading and a
proportionate increase of circulation. Among many
street attractions of those enterprising days, one that
created no small amount of speculation as to how it
was conveyed from its native jungle to far Australia
was a tame elephant, in charge and under the control
of an Indian, suitably apparelled in many faded colors
and spangles, and imposing blood-red turban. The
elephant was also caparisoned with a pannier and
seat on its broad back. It was led about by the
Indian, who gave the boys and girls, and not infre-
quently sportive adults, rides on its back, at three-
pence a head. He was liberally patronised, and
seemed to thrive. Whether trade declined or he fell
into evil courses may be left to conjecture; suffice it
to say that the day came when the elephant and its
trappings came under the hammer of the sheriff’s
officer to satisfy judgment recovered in an action
for debt. Here was an opportunity for our friend
John to distinguish himself, and he certainly rose to
the occasion. Unfortunately for him, the notice
attracted to the sale several showmen and certain
Indians, all anxious to possess the unwieldy animal.
The bidding therefore became brisk. Our friend,
however, stuck manfully to his guns, and out-bid
them all. It cost him something approaching fifty
pounds.
An Indian attendant employed by the sheriff ten-
dered delivery to its new owner. John feed the man
to convey it home, and, at the smiling Oriental’s sug-
gestion. decided to ride the elephant to its destina-
tion. It fell to its knees submissive to the word of
command, and up John clambered. On the journey


it had to pass our school in Collins-street, which hap-
pened to be coming out. The delighted boys, his
own amongst the number, hailed him gleefully and
with many cheers, and, forming an escort, with the ele-
phant and its smiling rider in their midst, made up
quite an imposing procession. Thus he arrived and
drew up at the front door. His wife, anxiously await-
ing him, uttered a scream, and, snatching up the baby
to her breast, ran in and locked the door, assuming,
probably, that he would try and ride the cumber-
some beast into the passage. *Vn admiring crowd
soon gathered, and, amid much merriment, in which
the juvenile escort joined, free rides were indulged in
up and down the street, the owner beaming on one
and all with proud delight.
The time at length came when consideration had
to be given to the provision of food and shelter for
the elephant for the night. A truss of hay from a
corn store hard by satisfied the first requirement.
As to the question of accommodation, there was
obviously no chance of putting it out to livery.
Willing hands, however, soon piled into a heap many
of John’s curiosities in the yard, making space for
his lordship the elephant. With the united effort of
many hands and shoulders applied to the rear of the
patient beast, it was finally squeezed through the
gate. A tub of water Avas placed for its refreshment
—the gate securely barred, and it was left apparently
well content for the night to ruminate on the changes
and vicissitudes of life in the land of its adoption.
All remained quiet during the remainder of the even-
ing. Taking a last look at it peacefully chewdng its
food with philosophic content, its owner retired to
rest. Scarcely, ho\vever, had he entered upon his
first sleep when he was aroused by a vigorous shake
of the shoulder. He opened his eyes to meet those
of his affrighted spouse. Xo explanation on her
part was needed. There was an appalling sound of
the breaking and rending of wood. “ The elephant!”
his wife cried. John bounded out of bed, and in his
night apparel, candle in hand, made his way down-
stairs, and listened with his ear to the back door
he did not dare to open. Now. an elephant, tame nr


otherwise, in a restive, irritable, or sportive mood,
is apt to break things. I-t was soon apparent to onr
anxious listener that his recently-accpured treasure
was determined to prove no exception in this respect.
Judging by the awful noise of rending and shattering
going on, Mr. Elephant was making a night of it,
at the expense of John’s treasured possessions, and
anything else he could find handy. He bethought
him of a small window. This, he reflected, he might
safely venture to open, and, as it happened to be close
to where the elephant’s food and water had been
placed, his approach to the window with the lighted
candle evidently had attracted the notice of the spor-
tive animal. The instant the unfortunate man opened
the window a thick jet of water hit him fair in the
face, with such force as to throw him sprawling on
his back. Alarmed and shaken, and shivering with
his involuntary bath, he gathered himself together,
and, not without some trepidation, hastily closed and
secured the window.
By this time the whole neighborhood was aroused.
They talked to each other through their windows,
none daring to venture forth, so that the elephant
was left to pursue the even tenor of its way. Day-
light revealed the animal quietly breakfasting off the
remainder of the hay, its anger or playfulness, which-
ever it may have been, quite spent. Great must have
been the relief of our speculative friend on the arrival
of the Indian, due probably to an intuition that his
services would be required. A sportive offer of ten
pounds cash ended the trouble, and the elephant
changed hands. It but remained to reckon the
damage. In the first place, poor John’s motley
assortment of household oddments was reduced to
matchwood. The fences of four properties were
levelled with the ground, and two back verandahs
wholly demolished. Even this disaster failed to effect
a cure. His wife and family became, in a measure,
reconciled to the inevitable, accepting the mania of
their breadwinner as incurable. She, poor lady, was
wont to say, with a sigh of resignation, “ Ah, well,
so long as dear John does not buy any more ele-
phants, I don’t mind.”


Bourke Street’s Wild Beast
Show
Tell a Melbourne man of to-day that a wild beast
show, with fearsome lions, man-eating tigers, and
other ravening beasts of the forest and jungle, flour-
ished, and did—well, say a roaring business in the
heart of the city, and he would assume that a very
gross assault was being made on his credulity. Yet of
a verity such a menagerie did exist for at least a year
or two late in the fifties, and was accepted as quite
a matter of course. It will be seen anon why I have
very good reason to remember it.
Stanford’s building, on the corner of Bourke and
Russell streets, is something much more imposing
than in those days, but it was Stanford’s corner so
far back as I can remember. Some years after it
blossomed into the Emporium of the Stanford sewing
machine. Prior to that, however, if I mistake not,
Mr. Stanford ran and made the nucleus of his fortune
by the sale of a new hydro-carbon oil, purified, and
called kerosene, together with the lamps and other
fixings used with same. Doubtless then, as to-day,
it proved a serious rival to the newly-inducted and
expensive gas service. However, it is not of the
Stanford corner, but of the plot of ground in Bourke-
street immediately adjoining it, I have to relate. Old
identities will have no difficulty in recalling visually a
dilapidated wooden cottage, with a tumble-down
verandah, lying back some yards from the street.
This, then, was the unpretentious entrance to the
wild beast show, made apparent by the display of


pictorial advertisements of intrepid, single-handed
encounters of impossible men with equally impossible
tigers, lions, etc., wherein the man was always
depicted as triumphing over overwhelming odds.
The loud roarings of the animals within was always
accompanied by appropriate music without. May-
hap, the poor captives were goaded to incessant
expression of their anguish by the energetic and
frequent application of the business end of the lion
tamer’s rod; or it may have been due to their lack
of appreciation of that which is poetically assumed
to charm and soothe the savage breast, rendered from
10 a.m. till midnight by a blatant brass band and the
inevitable big drum, stationed in the front verandah.
Doubtless this cottage, back in the forties, had
served as the suburban residence of one of Port Phil-
lip’s pioneers and his family, and in its day, amid the
trees, probably was accounted an imposing edifice—
a cut above its neighbors of wattle and daub. It might
be interesting to-day to learn at what price that
half-acre allotment through to Little Collins-street
was knocked down to some unwilling and regret-
ful purchaser, spurred to speculative folly by the for-
ensic eloquence of the enterprising auctioneer during
Melbourne’s first land boom. Probably £2O, on the
easiest of terms, would be well within the mark. The
township of Melbourne, up to the fifties, be it remem-
bered, had made very little progress northward
beyond Flinders-lane, then, as “ Garryowen ” tells us,
the business centre of the embryo city. Time, how-
ever, had its revenges. With the advent of the gold
discoveries, and the flocking to our shores of thou-
sands, Bourke-street had, in the days I am recalling,
become, as it remains to this day, the busiest thor-
oughfare, with its Theatre Royal, music halls, and
other attractions. Yet between Spring and Spencer
streets there were many vacant allotments, and
quaintly curious, old-time structures, indicating, as in
the instance I speak of, the pressing into the service


of trade some strangely inappropriate residential sur-
vivals of the past. I have said that the cottage
adjoining Stanford’s corner served as the entrance to,
and ticket office of, the menagerie. The back yard,
abutting on a right-of-way at the rear, was jealously
enclosed and surmounted by a glass roof. Ranged
around the interior was a series of cages, in which the
animals were securely cribbed, cabined, and confined,
the central space serving as the auditorium.
Looking back, one may well imagine what a sore
affliction to the neighboring tradespeople must have
been the incessant roaring of the poor beasts within,
and the blare and bang of the band without. It had
a never-failing attraction, however, for hundreds of
passers-by, so that one is fain to conclude that the
incentive it gave to business served as a solatium for
shattered nerves.
My confessions so far have shown that my impul-
sive and unquenchable adventurous spirit was ever
prone to carry me into mischief. What wonder, then,
that this wild beast show, although I had visited it
times out of number, was destined ultimately to bring
about one of the most sensational episodes in mv
juvenile career. I recall that it was the picture of a
fierce and blood-spilling, pugilistic set-to with an awe-
some ourang-outang billed for that evening, with
other horribly taking items. Anyway, I was seized
with a great longing to gain admittance, and that, too,
at a time when my pockets were empty, save for
certain treasured possessions unconvertible into cash.
Now, it so happened that, with other boys, I had not
failed to make myself thoroughly familiar with the
show premises at the rear. A happy inspiration
occurred to me under the spur of necessity. I -made
my way all alone to the right-of-way. To mount the
wall, with the ease and agility of one of the monkeys
within, to the glass roof was the work of a moment.
Seated gingerly on a frail but sustaining rafter, I
cleared the dust off the glass with my sleeve, and
peered within. Finding the view I could command


unsatisfying, I attempted to improve my position.
Alas! my foot slipped, and, in a vain effort to regain
the rafter, I rolled over on to the glass. With a
tremendous erash and bang, through T fell, with a
shower of splintered glass, iiop on to the heads of
the audience. Pope hath it that—
The mouse that trusts to one poor hole
Is not a mouse of any son).
On that unhapp}" occasion I liad made my way into
the show in a very iDrecipitate manner, without the
chance of exercising selection in the manner of getting
there. !Now, it is not difficult to conceive that an
audience in a menagerie is very lialile on slight provo-
cation to yield to panic. Amid that crowd of specta-
tors, thrown into confusion by my sudden and violent
entry from above like a bolt from the blue, of course
there was some scared ass, unable to see the cause of
the sudden shock, who must needs cry in affrighted
voice that the tiger had broken loose! The cry was
taken up, and a wild stampede for the only exit was
the inevitable result. They got blocked in the narrow
passage of the cottage, and a sort of free fight for
liberty ensued, amid the screams of women and chil-
dren, all madly eager to escape the ravening jaws of
the tiger. Streaming out at last with the mad cry
still on their lips, the rumor was taken up in the street
by the excited crowds, and was soon spread from end
to end of Bourke-street, and, indeed, throughout the
city. How I got out of that place I know not. The
scare seized me with the rest. More than once I was
down underfoot in that awful passage. I got out at
last, more dead than alive, and, crying bitterly, I ran
all the way home, with many a fearsome glance over
my shoulder in dread of the tiger. I crept into my
friendly window, shudderingly secured it from pos-
sible pursuit of the dread man-eater, and crept sob-
bing into bed.
I smile now to think with what an innocent face I
listened intently to the stirring accounts of the over-
flight scare, read aloud from the morning paper to


the assembled family by my unsuspecting father at
the breakfast-table next morning. Not till I had
quite grown up did I divulge the startling fact that
■ I had been the innocent cause of throwing a whole
city full of people into panic and confusion. Reflect-
ing in after days on the momentous event, it set me
speculating on what would have happened that night
if the truth had but leaked out. 1 pictured to myseh'
enterprising pressmen, eager for copy, shouldering
each other in their efforts to be the first to interview
me; how the next day I should have awakened to
find my humble little self made famous in the daily
press, to the envy of all my schoolfellows. Many
a time and oft I have sighed to think of fame sacri-
ficed on the altar of my diffidence. I have even pic-
tured to myself an engagement to appear for a limited
number of nights at a princely screw at the Wild West
Show as the hero of the Bourke-street scare, with,
mayhap, a life-sized or gloriously exaggerated pre-
sentment of myself in the act of taking that flight
through space to the regions below. Ah, well, life
is made up of lost opportunities. It is by no means
the only instance in my youthful career of my having-
missed the flow to fame and fortune. Who shall say
that I might not to-day have been the proud possessor
of a wild beast show of my own? What ultimately-
became of the long-suffering live stock-in-trade and
their enterprising proprietor is shrouded in mystery.
I know that, thanks to the cheap advertisement
brought about by my involuntary assistance, there
was such a tremendous run for a week or so on the
wild beast show as must have resulted in vastly
increased profits to the proprietary.
Misfortunes never come singly; that week was
destined to land me in still another trouble. A gentle-
man, who subsequently became my brother-in-law,
rather addicted in his youth to ephemeral bouts of
religious craze, about that time yielded to a predilec-
tion for the Methodist faith. In his zeal he had taken
sittings —quite a family pew—in the old brick Metho-
dist Church in Collins-street, on the site of the present


Bank of Australasia. ]\ly people were of the Church
of England, but nothing would content our friend but
that he should take, not only iny sister, but also
myself and my two elder brothers, to his own newly-
adopted temple of worship. Now, my eldest brother’s
name was William, and, as a matter of course, was
always referred to by the family and friends as plain
“ Bill.” Unfortunately for his younger brothers.
Master Bill was gifted with a fine, sportive sense of
humor, which he invariably indulged at our expense,
in the way of practical jokes, so that loud and com-
plaining appeals to my father to correct him when
teasing us had become a sort of habit with us both.
That his protection was rarely invoked in vain, poor
Bill, were he alive, could testify from the lively recol-
lection in after years of many a stinging application
of a much dreaded slipper to his anatomy. To pro-
ceed :
Notwithstanding that it was a blazing hot wind
day on that particular Sabbath morn, a large congre-
gation had assembled at the quaint little church, our-
selves amongst the number. It so happened that I
had the comfortable corner seat, my brother-in-law
occupying the outer one at the other end of the pew.
The day, as I have said, being warm, and the sermon,
to me anyway, tediously long and somniferous, I
nestled down into my comfortable corner, and soon
fell into sleep. Judge of my pious relative’s horror
when, in the most impressive part of the clergyman’s
discourse, I began to snore loudly. Doubtless all
eyes, including those of the indignant minister, turned
in my direction and glared at the unconscious cause of
the unseemly disturbance. My distracted brother-in-
law, unable to get at me in any other way, passed his
umbrella at the back of the others, and began prodding
me viciously with its point in my small ribs.
Feeling the discomfort of it in my dreamy state,
I very naturally ascribed the annoyance to my elder
brother.


g 6 Confessions of a Naughty Boy of the Fifties. _ . -
The prods increasino- in severity as they failed to
awaken me, 1 began to remonstrate, l)ut (piite audibly,
“Drop it, can’t yer? What yer doing?” This, of
course, brought a still more vigorous dig, whereupon,
with an impatient shrug, still sleeping, I raised my
voice to its full pitch of complaint, and fairly yelled
out, “ Father, speak to Bill!” This was altogether
too much for the solemnity of the worshippers ; an
irresistible burst of laughter rang through the church ;
even the good, kindly old clergyman, fronra severe
frown, expanded into a broad smile. Meanwhile my
agonised brother-in-law had me by the collar, and,
cuffing me vigorously, dragged me out of church.
For this ofifence, for which I cannot to this day be
brought to admit myself in any respect reprehensible,
I was put to bed without my dinner, and there kept
on meagre bread and water fare for twenty-four
hours, as an example to my brothers. Strange to say,
the infliction of punishment was due in this single
instance to my erstwhile forgiving mother rather
than to my father, who treated the story, with all its
harrowing details, as a good joke, and laughed over
it till the tears ran down his cheeks. Tt is but due
to that dear old clergyman to say that he called that
same evening on my people, and, finding his prayers
for remission of my sentence unavailing, he surrepti-
tiously bestowed on me a packet of lollies and a
picture book.
Some years afterwards, when I was quite a big
boy, sitting on the beautiful green summit of Bat-
man’s Hill, where we had wandered, for he was ever
after my friend, he smilingly reminded me of the inci-
dent.


A Good Understanding
j ' r
EDINBURGH
BOOT PALACE
IK Iwanston Street, Melbourne
(OPPOSITE TOWN HALL)
w. M. Richards
IMPORTER OF
ENGLISH, AMERICAN & FOREIGN BOOTS & SHOES
Cycling and Tennis Shoes and
Golf and Skating Boots a Speciality.
Best Australian Boots and Shoes in Stock or Made
to Measure.
UP-TO-DATE FOOTWEAR
As to Style, Quality and Workmanship.


UP TO DATE FINE FOOTWEAR.
