

ppj
THE
(& Hroopship a KAROAI
>——MM ■


PREFACE.
♦
Most of us —perhaps all—have often wondered during
our years at the war when, if ever, we should return to our
own country.
At times our prospects did not seem at all bright. How-
ever, the war, like every other worldly thing, came to an
end; the long-wished-for time has come at last, and we will soon
be among our dear ones again.
In years to come we will look back with pride upon the
part we have taken in the Greatest War, and "Imshi" will be
a pleasant little "souvenir" of the happy close of the period
of our adventures abroad.
Our thanks are due to the Committee, and the Editor,
Corporal H. Mercer, for their very creditable little publication.
P. CURRIE, Lt.-Col.,
C.O. of Troops, Transport "Karoa."
29th April, 1919.




TRANSPORT "KAROA."
GROUP: FANCY DRESS BALL.
I M S H i 10th April 1919




No . 1_ I Oth APRIL. 1919.
HOMEWARD.
Southward our vessel's strong prow heads;
Song-like its singing engines throb;
As to a march the heart-beat treads,
While parted waters round us sob;
We see the last dim land fade past,
And we are going home at last!
For those who never may return,
And friends from whom we have to part,
Perchance a moment there may burn
A dim reluctance in the heart;
But we have learnt in other scenes
How sweet is home—and all it means.
In furnace fires have we been tried;
Some sorrows in our hearts must stay;
For we have brothers who have died
And friends from whom we turn away,
Who could not give us sunny skies,
But had warm kindness in their eyes.
Above such thoughts our joy, as foam
Bides ou the crest of breaking seas,
Exulting floats; oh, near is home;
Its greeting whispers in the breeze.
The days of exile now have fled;
Loved ones and homeland are ahead!
—Harold Mercer.
FOREWORD.
S.S. "KAROA."
The originators of this little sheet have no am-
bitions; no ambitions, that is, beyond that of pro-
viding something that will add a little interest,
however slight, to the voyage, and perhaps a per-
manent souvenir afterwards. They cordially in-
vite the co-operation of all who can give assistance
to make their effort as successful as possible.
Without a printing press, which it was impos-
sible to take any steps to provide in the limited
time between the publication of the boat roll of
the s.s. "Karoa," and the embarkation, it is im-
possible to publish a journal in the accepted form
for sale amongst the brother and sisterhood of the
"Karoa." As the next best thing, will
be produced weekly, in typed form, in a sufficient
number of copies for one to be posted in each Mess
deck. It is proposed, if such a souvenir is desired
amongst the members of our homing fraternity, that,
when Australia is reached, the issues of "lmshi"
will be printed in volume, with an illustrated cover,
and possibly some photographs, as a memorial of
our voyage. The price will be a nominal one, suf-
ficient'to cover the cost of production, and postage
to the addresses, which subscribers will hand in
with their names and money.
PRIZES.
Contributions are invited, and prizes for the
best Verse and the best Paragraph or Joke in each
issue, will be awarded. All matter must of neces-
sity be brief, and have reference to incidents of
the voyage. Contributions should be left at the
Education Office, "A" Deck, addressed to The
Editor, or handed to Corpl. H. Mercer, Mess 56,
"D" Deck.
The Editor.
THE VOYAGE.
March 29th. —Commenced to drop down the Mer-
sey at 6.30 a.m. Irish sea not as green as some
men expected. The land we saw to port on the
evening of this day was Lands End. It could
easily be recognised as part of England by the rain
hanging over it. The cork seen to starboard was
not a part of Ireland, which was much farther
north, and out of sight,
March 30th. —Passed Wolf Rock, 4 a.m. Bay of
Biscay in a quiet mood.


March 31st. —Sighted and passed Capo Finistere
at noon.
April Ist. —Passed Cape St. Vincent at 1 p.m.
Off this point in 1797 was fought one of those
naval fights which resulted in establishing Britain
as undisputed mistress of the seas. Admiral Jer-
vis was the Commander, and Nelson was at that
time second in command of the British Fleet. The
battle was an absolute victory against great odds.
April 2nd. —Dropped by Cape Trafalgar, which
edges the bay whose name commemorates the
most memorable of British sea victories, towards
midnight on the Ist. Entered the Straits of Gib-
raltar, passing Gibraltar itself at 2.10 a.m. The
high mountains seen on the port side were the
Sierra Nevada, portion of a district of Spain,
where for a long period the Moors still maintained
their grip after being driven from the rest of
Spain. It was the burning hope of all the young
manhood of the country to distinguish themselves
in the constant warfare against the Moors, which
sometimes took the form of knightly tourneys
amongst the champions of both races. The Moors
were driven out in the reign of Ferdinand and Isa-
bella. The lady swore that she would not change
her chemise until the deed was accomplished; and
although she had to save on her laundry bill for
some time, the idea that their Queen was going
dirty no doubt inspired the chivalry of the (Span-
iards to special effort. The Alhambra, which is a
palace that is a city in itself, and remains one of
the wonders of the world, is a reminder of the
occupancy of the Moors, who in those days, were
the leaders of the arts.
April 3rd. —Algerian coast off the starboard dur-
ing the day.
April 4th. —Passed Cape Blanc, 3 a.m., and Cape
Bon, 8 a.m. These are in the country of Tunis,
and, near the shore in the indentation between the
Capes, close to the city of Tunis, is what is left
of the old city of Carthage, ruins merely, a com-
peer of Home at the time of its greatness, which
at one time partially eclipsed it. The city was
sacked and destroyed by the Romans, 146 B.C.
The high bare-looking rock passed at 11.5 a.m., 46
miles from Cape Bon, is the Isle of Pa-ntellaria,
used as a prison for women. At one time a vessel
was wrecked on this Island, and the women who
assisted in rescuing the crew, wanted them for
keeps, and armed force had to be sent to secure
their release. At nightfall, travelled by the Island
of Gozo, which is beside Malta, and, in the dark-
ness, passed Malta itself, 8.27 p.m. The lights of
Valetta could be seen. Malta, before it became
British, was subject to i rench invasion, and late
in the 18th Century the excesses of the invaders
towards the women were so terrible that "the
hood of shame," which was to be worn for one
hundred years, was introduced as general. The
hundred years is up, but the hood, which is very
becoming, is still worn. It has become a fashion.
Malta, which is the meeting place of Europe, Africa,
and Asia, and has changed hands repeatedly, con-
tains probably the most mixed population on the
earth 's surface. In the days of chivalry, when
men went about in steel casings, and valorously
killed people who had none, it was the headquarters
of the Knights of St. John, a powerful semi-reli-
gious Order of Knighthood, which was at one time
a strong factor in history.
April sth. —Sicily very much too far to the
North to be visible. This is a country where the
changes of history have been almost as violent as
the lives of its citizens —and the peaceful citizen,
who himself usually carries a knife for anyone
who offends him, never knows what moment is
going to be his next, so to speak. The Malfia,
which, is a thing that had whiskers before Bolshe-
vism was born, is as rampant as prickly pear in
Queensland. One of Sicily's revolts against one
of its oppressors was amongst the most sudden
things in history. The excesses of the French
conquerors had raised a feeling of revolt; and one
day a French officer, who attempted a liberty with
a Sicilian tart, bit off more than he could chew.
The lady's escort happened to be a man, and lie
killed the offender with liis own sword, which he
had seized from Trim. His act set red revolution
loose, and in a few hours the swanking overlords
were beng chased all over the country, and being
put to the sword. The incident is known as the
Sicilian Vespers; and one of the regrets of history
is that the name of the man who set the mill going
is not known.
April 6th. —Nothing doing, but plenty of water
round about.
April 7th.—Reached Port Said, 4 p.m., passing
in the morning the "Sindora," and beating her
easily to port.
April Bth. —After the boys had got tired of
thinking that they were doing the merchants who
brought goods to the ship's side, got under way
at 6 p.m., after the "Sindora" had passed. The
Dunluee: Castle, which has troops transhipped from
the Czaritza (which developed internal trouble, and
had to lay up at Alexandria) also passed. We
went by Ismailia at midnight.
April 9th. —Early in the morning passed through
the Bitter Lakes, the second of which is the tra-
ditional place of crossing of the Israelites, whose
descendants call the odds at Randwick and Flem-
ington. What is now the Gulf of Suez is said to
have extended, at that time, further North; the
land lias been silted oyer by sand-drift. Reached
Suez shortly after 6 a.m., and left about 8 a.m.
Shortly passed the "Sindore" and "Dunluee
Castle," which had bo'th a good start. Mount
Sinai, where Moses received the Commandments
most of us disobey, was the tall distant mountain
seen off the port side. It approaches 9000 feet in
height.
Mileage.—To noon 29th March 67
30th „ 33s
31st „ 355
Ist April 345
2nd „ 352
3 I'd 347
10 April, 1919 I M S H 1


4th „ 360
sth „ 340
6th „ 350
To 4 p.m., 7th (Port Said) 386
Total 3240
Actual time to Port Said: 223 hours, !) mills.
(Time in Port Said is two hours twenty-one min-
utes ahead of Greenwich time, making the differ-
ence between the actual time and the time as
.•shown in above table.)
Average speed: .14.52 knots per hour.
Distance to Colombo: Port Said to Suez, 87
miles; Suez to Aden, 1310 miles; Aden to Colombo,
2105 miles; 3502 miles in all.
(To be continued next issue.)
* * «
WHAT ARE YOU GOING TO EE?
There is evidence of an awaking interest in the
Fancy Dress Ball, which is on the programme of
events to take place after leaving Colombo. A
weird something that looked like a blend of politi-
cal has-been and a demented poet, promenaded the
decks on Wednesday. The Digger who has adopted
this masquerade will probably be able to explain
what he is meant to be when called upon, and
will be congratulated upon looking it. it is up to
all Diggers to get ready for the show; although,
personally, the Editor intends to go as a soldier.
It is the best disguise he has ever worn. .Prizes
go to those who produce the best costume.
SPORTS MEETING.
Athletes are invited to gird up their loins and
prepare for the next sports meeting, which will
be on deck directly the Red Sea is finished with.
There will be a programme similar to the previous
ones, with any additional items, which may be de-
vised, and post entries. Diggers are invited to
get in for their cut of the prizes, which Lieut. At-
kins, the Sports Officer, is anxious to distribute.
And, by the bve, it is not necessary for a man to
be an athlete to compete. It is sufficient for him
"to be a sport, and to have a sense of good humour.
GAME TOURNAMENTS.
It is desired to get going a series of game tour-
naments, in addition to the sports, which will
•end before we arrive in Australia in team com-
petitions between decks. Dominoes are not avail-
able, but tournaments can be arranged in the
following games: —■
Chess, draughts, bridge, five hundred, cribbage.
Men who are interested in these games are
wanted to get together in order to arrange tourna-
ments on their decks. Bv arranging for the pay-
ment of a small entrance fee (say 6c1.), prizes for
the winners can be created. The names of win-
ners and runners-up in each tournament, should
pfe reported to Lieut. .Atkins, of the sports coni-
mittee, or lianded into Orderly -room; and arrange-
ments will then be made for inter-deck competi-
tions, for which prizes will be awarded by the
Sports Committee.
Aeh! Aeh! Ach!
The form of the tournaments in each deck is
left to the men themselves. Rules for the inter-
deck competition will be announced later.
* « #
THE FINAL FORM.
(By extra special Wireless to "Imshi.")
Syd-bourne, Ist April.
The Minister for Offence has issued the follow-
ing details of the final form which returning sol-
diers will have to fill in prior to their discharge.
" In the interests of the soldiers themselves it has
been found necessary to prepare a form which
must be completed prior to the finalisation of their
military papers and discharge. This will be known
as Army form Z. 1329467, and will be in the fol-
lowing detail: —No Rank (or
otherwise). Name (In
addition to military name, i orrect name should be
given). Unit
State whether married, and if so, how much?
State which of the following jams you prefer?
1. Marmalade. 2. Ship's issue. 3. 0.P.1). (In the
last case the particular Other Preserve denomina-
tion should be distinctly stated, either in Block
Letters, or in legible handwriting, so that . Pome-
granate cannot be mistaken for Melon. The same
position applies in regard to this question as in
regard to a religion. Every soldier must have
some preference.)
Replies to this question should., be supported by
a statutory declaration made before an M.P.
Do you desire (1) Flowers on your grave? (2)
Periodical returns to service for Guard duty? (3)
Any advice about your private behaviour after
discharge? (4) To fight in the next war? (5)
Anything else (to be particularly stated)? it is
not guaranteed that anything will be granted, but
to avoid delay in the event of future benefits be-
coming available, soldier should state: (a) Whe-
ther he would like them wrapped in brown paper
and delivered; or (b) wishes to call for them.
•State whether on your return you intend to (1)
•loin the Civil service. (2) Become a policeman;
or (3) Work for your living.
State whether it is desired that deferred pay
should be paid i:i a lump sum, or at the rate of 6cl.
per month.
State how you part your hair (if any).
The form will need to be signed by the soldier,
and endorsed (if married) by his mother-in-law,
and must be handed in to authority to be ap-
pointed three years prior to discharge.
The Minister for Offence points out that the
document will complete the means of identification
of the soldier, and will help in any future distri-
butions of awards and gifts. It is particularly
1 M S H I 10th April 1919


advisable for married men who have enlisted un-
der assumed names, to state their correct names.
This will enable papers to be issued which will
satisfy wives who may be suspicious as to where
they have been spending the last few years.
ON THE PROMENADE.
Two Diggers were discussing the question of
sending the news home, just before the boat left
Liverpool. "What's the use of sending a cable,"
remarked one of them, "it's only an expense—
and it would probably go back in the same boat
with us.''
Ach! Ach! Ach!
At Port Said the man who gives his inside
knowledge on many things, and, passing the coast
of Spain, invited us to look at the Himalayas, was
venting his remarks about the shipping. ' lhat
boat's sailing within twenty-four hours," he re-
marked fatuously. "Don't you see it's flying the
Salt Peter?"
Ach! Ach! Ach!
A Sergeant of the Piequet, who knows no more
about his men than most of the other sergeants
on that job, caught the arm of a man with a white
rag on his arm, in the forward well deck. "Are
you Oil piequet?" he asked. "Pick it?" returned
the man, disgustedly; "I've done all me last pay
on the heart, and it's never come up onee. Me
pick it!"
Ach! Ach! Ach!
Jt is rumoured in regard to two sergeants whose
appearance together on deck has occasioned com-
ment, that the long and short of their friendship
was an attachment for the same cliner. Her motto
apparently was; "Love me Little, love me Long!"
Ach! Ach! Ach!
We left England while great issues were on the
eve of decision. There were revolutions, massa-
cres, and other queer things all over Europe, in
England a big strike was threatening; and it was
thought that Mister Hughes was likely to break
his comparatively lengthy silence. And the ques-
tion that everybody asked when it was known that
wireless messages with the latest news were com-
iiig through, was: "Who won the Grand National.'
Ach! Ach! Ach!
In "D" deck they regard one 0. and A. mer-
chant as a beneficient philanthropist. He gives
away his crowns in spadesful, and doesn't anchor
his bank at all. But in spite of all, lie keeps a
good heart, and may have enough for the corner
pub when he gets home. Perhaps it is good busi-
ness to be considered a philanthropist—profiteers
have found it so.
Ach! Ach! Ach!
A lengthy and solemn brother was handed this
description of himself by a mate of his deck:
"You miserable-looking, long apology for a fore-
gone conclusion; the look of you would curdle the
milk in a green coeoanut!"
Ach! Ach! Ach!
"And what are you going to do with the new
war?" demanded the political Corporal, as he
spouted about industrial unrest in England. "A
new war?" exclaimed a half-listener, startled mo-
mentarily. Then he added calmly: "Do what you
like with it, Digger; it don't belong to me."
Ach! Ach! Ach!
There lias been a remarkable leaving about of
money and valuables in various decks, where losses
and finds have been reported quite frequently.
Tbis shows a simple faith. We shall get to know
one another better, later.
A eh! Ach! Ach!
Now, listen! People from New South Wales are
notoriously respectable, and they object to a man
who is naked when his hat is off, yet never wears
a hat. What about blowing the whistle that means
sausages a bit more often?
Ach! Ach! Ach!
It is always annoying to be held up in a port
without getting ashore, and the soldier who said:
"Dear Bill" at Port Said voiced the general sen-
timent. Still, the tedium was happily relieved by
the men who thought they were taking down the
merchants who brought their wares round the ves-
sel in boats. Men who believe that they beat the
bank in games like Crown and Anchor are apt to
think that sort of thing.
Ach! Ach! Ach!
Corpl. "Dark," of the 2nd Divvy, may become
a 500 player when lie learns that it is not possible
to go "nine" with the joker and two bowers
against him. Even in pontoon rashness is not
always profitable, is it, brother?
Why wait to go Home? Victorians may by vis-
iting "D" Deck, enjoy all the delights of smelling
their native Yarra. The trip per pontoon is inex-
pensive. (Advt.).
10th April, 1919. 1 M S H 1


No. 2. 17th APRIL, 1919.
THE " IMSHI " SOUVENIR.
A decision has been reached as to the manner
in which printed copies of the collected issues of
*< Imslii,'' with an illuminated cover, and some
topical sketches of the voyage, will be made avail-
able to those who desire to secure them.
A committee of Officers, who will all be in Syd-
110v, will look after the printing and circulation
of the souvenir. In order to secure a really decent
production, which will be a fitting memorial of
the voyage, a price of Is. 3d. per copy has been
decided upon. This is an outside price to cover
all the costs, including postage; and if there hap-
pens to be any balance in excess of expenses it will
be handed to the Beturned Soldiers' Association.
Those who desire to become subscribers will be
invited shortly after Colombo has been passed to
put in their applications, giving the postal ad-
dress to which they desire the souvenir to be sent,
and stating the number of copies they require. As
an order will be placed with the printer for the
exact number requisitioned by subscribers, it will
not be possible to secure copies at a subsequent
date, and all orders will need to be in well before
disembarkation.
The Education Officer has promised all possible
assistance to "Imshi," and has kindly consented
to allow the use of the Education Office, where,
when the subscription lists are open, subscriptions
will be received at certain stated hours. These
will be announced.
SOME BIBLICAL QUESTIONS.
We have been sailing in the vicinity of lands
of Bible history; and in order to encourage Bib-
lical research these questions are asked:
When was banking first mentioned in the Bible?
What Apostle was mentioned in regard to a later
banking .transaction, and how?
How did David refer to a domestic insect?
What is the first reference to cricket in the
Bible?
This is not an Education Department stunt! The
answers will be given in next issue; and the first
man who comes to light with a correct answer to
all four questions will be given at least honorable
mention in the same issue of "Imslii."
Ach! Ach! Ach!
Some people seem to secure the evidences with-
out beer. A Digger who was turning over ham-
mocks the other day, in search of his own, re-
marked disgustedly, "This bloke seems to have
his name on all the blooming nap on the ship!"
The '' bloke'' he referred to was '' Karoa.''
Ach! Ach! Ach!
During the sultry days in the Bed Sea, one sol-
dier said that he was afraid to have a bath for
fear of coming out boiled.
Ach! Ach! Ach!
Queer tastes some Diggers have! A little con-
troversy at the Canteen:
"Got anv bachelor buttons?"
"No."
"Got any bootlaces'?"
"No."
"Got any red ink?"
" No."
"Got any tiling else to eat?"
TEA FOB THE TIBED.
To the Eddytor:
Dere Sirr, —
Seen as youse ar getting a move on with a
sliipps papper, I arsk you to give a fare go for a
grevuns in ver ratable kolums, which I have been
a konstan reader thereof.
Wots the matter with giving the pore pickit
some tee in the morning, and at nite, as is usually
dun? The pore fellies who, wile others slepe, have
to keap the silent whatches of ther nite, to see
that the blokes who are in ther hammicks doent
fall overbored, disserve sum considei-ration to
manetane ther falin strength; and a cup of sum-
pbin hot at super time is the thing, falin beer. Al-
soe, after gardin youse wile slepe and nerely ded
with exorstion, aint it fare fer the pickit to have
a cup of sumphin hot oneth thing in the morning?


I doant mene mustard an water. It is dun in
ther best famblies, an Oftisers and most gards get
it. It would make pickit more poplar.
Then, anuther thing. My sagent sed to me:
"IT'd better slepe on your post." We all no wot
sargents is, but youse couldn't print it if I sed
it, so I woant. Qf course, I slepe on my post; I've
been on gard. be 4. It's jest Arrasing to tell a
man things like that.
Hoppin you will do ther best and that this fineds
you as. it leves me,
—FATHER OP TEN.
P. 5.., N.B. —On sakond thorts I will sine my
name to show I ain't fritend of no millitery.
Yours respektivellv,
—MR. SMITH.
(Sined).
THE DIGGER'S PARLEY.
During the last week the Diggers Parley fore-
gathered in " A" deck, to discuss the chances of
future usefulness of the Returned Soldiers' Asso-
ciation. It was an interesting discussion, inclined
to wander a little in its early stages, but finally
boiling down to a straight issue, whether the
R.S.A. should become a political body or not. The
argument that the chief usefulness of the associa-
tion was the maintainance of the comradeship of
the great war, and to insist that the promises made
to soldiers and their dependents were kept, and
that the introduction of general polities would only
lead to dissension, prevailed. The decision was
almost unanimous that the Association's policy
should be to be non-political.
On Tuesday last the question for discussion was
"The Best Means for Promoting Land Settle-
ment," the general tendency of the debate being
in favor of the leasehold system of land tenure
under Government ownership.
The next debate is upon the question whether
railways should be under State or private control.
The arguments are interesting and informative, and
many Diggers who have not attended would do
well to cut in and listen to the chin-wag.
Ach! Ach! Aeh!
A DIGGER SEES THINGS.
The orb of day, like a hot golden pudding, is
being lowered by an unseen hand into the steam-
ing cauldron of the western horizon, there to un-
dergo, as it were, a further boiling in readiness for
the infernal appetite of the morrow. The orb's
mistress, which, to my agonised vision, appears as
a huge globule of sweat on the forehead of the
East, takes possession of the night, so I depart to
the region of the shades, there to woo the elusive
Goddess Slumber.
In the gloom below, white limbs, as if shaped
in molten metal, glimmer ghost-like, while pungent
corporeal odours arise, like clouds of hot incense,
through the combing of the hatch. Bathed in a
sweaty exudation I gasp, but, worn out with the
labors of the day, I slowly disrobe, crawl to my
sleeping spot, immediately become unconscious
and dream that,, armed with a glowing branding
iron, 1 am chasing an asbestos colt through Hades.
(Note. —This is published to show to what length
the Red Sea drives some men.)
THE VOYAGE.
(Continued.)
April 9th. —On this afternoon, at 3.10 p.m., we
passed a lighthouse on the western shore of the Gulf
of Suez. There are two large shale deposits, some of
which have been worked, all along the coast from
here to Suez. At 4.30 p.m., a large range of moun-
tains to the East was visible. They were actually
forty miles away. Immediately to the left of the
highest peak (Jeb Katherina, 3630 feet) was a
smaller peak. This is Mount Sinai, 7450 feet. The
lighthouse, which showed red and white alter-
nately, passed at 8.28 p.m., was on the Island of
Shadwan. This is practically the entrance to the
Red Sea from the Gulf of Suez and Strait of Ju-
bal.
April 10th. —-9.45 a.m., abreast, and three miles
off the Daedalus Reef lighthouse—the lighthouse
that looked as if it had wandered out to sea and
forgotten the tide.
April 12th.—At 7.27 a.m. passed the island of
Jebel Zukur; and, later, towards 4 p.m., passed
Jebcl Teir, 54 miles off; at 9.55 a.m. passed three
miles off the island of Zebayir; at 3 p.m., small
island, Abu Ail, the large island behind it being
the Little Hannish and Great Hannish groups of
islands. At 6.50 p.m. were abreast of lighthouse,
the place being Mokha —reminiscent of coffee. On
this day the boat played merry-go-round with itself
for a while, and alarmists enjoyed themselves
spreading reports that the ship was going back
to Egypt, where we had to finish a new war; that
it was broken down and helpless, and couldn't help
going round in circles, and that the water was
full of sharks. The two basket-balls hoisted on
the yard-arm indicate that the vessel showing this
signal is not under command and cannot manoeuvre
as required by the rule of the road —or the sea-
tracks, and, therefore, other vessels should steer
clean. It is not a sign of distress; three balls in-
dicate distress, calling for assistance —usually finan-
cial.
At 9.58 passed Perim Island, in the straits of
Bab-el-Mandeb, which was the place where the
lights other than those of the lighthouses were
seen. The ship came through the large Strait, the
other being too small by six inches for the boat.
This will be believed by those who saw the man
measuring it.
April 13th. —Aden, due north, at 5.52 a.m. We
were now in the Gulf of Aden, and well away
from the Red Sea, where, all through, the weather
was intensely hot and close, with the sea almost
unruffled. A little more than lialf-way down near
the East shore of that sea stands Mecca, where
Mahomet was born in the year 570. Mecca was
17th April, 1919 1 M S H I


the headquarters of the Arabs who fought with
the British in recent operations, under the ixmg
of Hediaz. At Mecca is the Mohammedan sanc-
tuary, the Kaaba, which contains the famous black
stone, probably a meteorite. It is essential for a
true Mohammedan to make the pilgrimage to Mecca
at least once in his lifetime. When Mohammedan-
ism started, Christianity had exhausted its first
enthusiasm, and had split into many divisions, with
the result that the fanatic energy of the new
faith swept over the surrounding churches, and
the Mohammedan forces actually swept trium-
phantly through Europe. Islam was checked m
the west by the battle of Tours in France about
770. Tins was one of the most decisive battles in
the'world's history. If the Christian forces had
been beaten there, western civilisation would have
developed upon lines altogether different to those
which have led to its present development. In the
East the Mohammedan faith was a danger until
its forces were defeated at the battle of Kossovo
in Hungary in 1448.
Passing down the Red Sea, the country on our
right was Abyssinia, or colonies of European coun-
tries sliced off from that country. The Queen of
'Sheba, who came to visit Solomon, and who ap-
pears to have been, from contemporary reports, a
very remarkable woman, was ruler over this coun-
try. The gold of Opliir, referred to in the history
of Solomon, was probably worked by soldiers of
this Queen. Menelik, the King of Abyssinia, who
o-ained prominence by being an unusually stiong
man for a native ruler, claimed descent from Sol-
omon and the Queen of -Sheba— who was evidently
an addition to his large family of wives. A story
that has wide publicity is that of Queen Victoria s
-answer to Menelik, when he asked the secret of
England's greatness. The Queen indicated the
Bible. The sequel is not generally known. When
Menelik returned to Abyssinia he took back with
him a cargo of Bibles, and his soldiers were each
issued with one. They would not read them, but
they became an essential part of the equipment.
Menelik was determined to be great, if possible.
Aden, which includes Aden Peninsula and Perim,
came into British possession about 1859. Area:
Eighty square miles.
April 14th. —At 6 p.m. were abreast of Central
•Socotra, which was forty miles off. Earlier, a
portion of the coast-line, nearer to us, had been
visible. Socotra is 500 miles from Aden, and prior
-to eoming under the protection of the British in
1886 was misgoverned by the Sultan of Kishin (in-
ventor of Kiss in the Ring—you can believe that
If you like on the Arabian coast. It. is seventy
miles long and eighteen miles in breadth; its high-
est peak rising to 4656 feet. The natives are
mostly Bedouins, and are not very friendly to visi-
tors to the island, although always willing to take
their cash. It is believed that cases of cannibalism
have occurred in the island, although it is by no
means a regular habit.
April loth, 16th. —Still warm, calm weather,
though cooler than the Red Sea. The next land
to be seen will be Minnikoi, an island of coral
formation, seventy inilcs north of the Maldives,,
and 410 miles from Colombo. ~We will pass this
island 011 the morning of the 18th instant. We do
not sight Cape Comorin, which is the southernmost
cape of India. A large shark was seen at 6 p.m. on
the loth 011 the port side, but sharks have been
fairly numerous.
The average depth of water from Socotra to
Minnikoi is 2400 fathoms; our distance from the
nearest land —at the bottom —being, therefore,
14,400 feet, or nearly three miles.
The Southern Cross has been on view from the
saloon deck since the evening of the 11th instant.
The Officer of the Watch 011 the bridge thought he
saw it on the 9th instant, probably because of his
higher elevation. Lucky man, to be elevated on
a'' dry'' ship!
Mileage. —To noon, 9th 11l
10th 333
11th 282
12th 356
13th 320
14th 337
15th 336
I:6th 343
Total 2448
Mileage to Port Said, 3240.
Grand total: 5688 to noon, 16th instant, at which
time the vessel was 584 miles from Minnikoi. The
full distances, Liverpool to KTemantle, are as fol-
lows: —
Liverpool to Port Said 3240
Port Said to Aden 1397
Aden to Colombo 2130
Colombo to Fremantie 3120
Total »«87
On April 19th, at noon, the ship's time will be
four hours thirty-six minutes fast of Greenwich
time. At about 8 a.m. on April 14th, half the trip
to Australia had beeii accomplished. We shall
regard ourselves-as at home at the first Australian
port.
A eh! Ach! Acli!
TO CONTRIBUTORS.
We have heard a lot, during the last week, about
the contributions that are being sent to " Imslii,"
and would like to see more of them. What is
wanted from all decks is the little bits of spicy
personal narrative and humor that make up the real
historv of the voyage. A great many of the con-
tributions that have been received are unsuitable
because tliev deal with broad, general subjects,
and have 110 intimate connection with the voyage.
And some of them are too serious, "imslii" has
only space to deal with things that intimately con-
cern events 011 the "Karoa," or are immediately
concerned with its journey, and it hasn't time to
be reallv serious. But the right kind of contribu-
tions are badlv wanted.
Ach! Ach! Ach!
The Sergeants' Concert must have been hot stuff
to need the application of the hose!
1 M S H I 17th April, 1919


A STUDY OF SCHOOLS.
(By "E" Deck.)
This is the deck where the student swats, and the
fount of knowledge splashes;
Where they signify words with a lot of dots, and
numerous hooks and dashes;
Here, Euclid expounds the obstruse law, and chases
elusive exes,
While the book-keeper works at a desk next door,
where the problem of '' balance'' vexes.
In theory, the petrol motor motes, and the flywheel
spins and hums
Near the mathema't., who's making notes, and
working away at sums.
The student of history's back in the past with the
men of a bygone day,
And the infant cocky's learning fast the way
to make coekying pay.
We would, if we might, beguile our time with poker
or, say, with banker,
Or other games of a sportive kind; or, maybe,
with crown and anchor.
The study is good for us all, we know, when the
deck is breezy and cool,
But the games we know, are not so slow, and
we like that sort of school.
Ach! Ach! Ach!
ON THE PKOMENADE.
A Westralian settled an argument on the relative
values of Australian beers in quick time. '' West
Australian beer is best," he said; "wel'll get it
first,''
Ach! Ach! Ach!
"Washing," said the philosopher of "B" deck,
"is a dirty habit; it dirties the water."
Ach! Ach! Ach!
Everything was a t about the limit of warmth
while we were in the Keel Sea. Even the disap-
pearance of tinned fruits, save quinces, from the
goods list of the Canteen, was hot.
Ach! Ach! Ach!
The boozers' favorite phrase: "To be continued
in our necks."
Ach! Ach! Ach!
It is encouraging to reflect that the only inhabi-
tants of "clink" on board the "Karoa" are the
members of the Education staff.
Ach! Ach! Ach!
"E" deck is worried from time to time with
the disappearance of eating utensils, mess clishes,
etc., and is disturbed by suspicions. That is the
worst of having a Man With An Appetite as a
Messmate, had had better watch his chess men.
Ach! Ach! Ach!
Sports meeting results: —Potato race Pte. Or.
Brennan, A.M.C., Ist; Thread-needle race, Spr. G.
Eraser, Ist A.T.0., Ist; Crab race —Pte. S. Tran-
ston, (iOth Bn., Ist; Wheelbarrow race —Ptes. C.
Waldie, Clyelists, and C. Shand, 26th Bn., Ist;
Animal race, Spr. G. Eraser, Ist A.T.0., Ist; Cock-
fight, Spr. G. Eraser, Ist A.T.C.
Ach! Ach! Ach!
A self-help society exists at one of the tables in
the Sergeants' mess It encourages the principle
by a refusal to pass things to one another. The
other morning one of the mess heaved himself
above the festive board, and walked the length of
the table amongst the breakfast things to secure
the butter at the other end. As an example of
'self-help it was magnificent, but ten men helping
themselves in the same manner would lead to con-
fusion..
17th April, 1919 I M S H I


a i > Tin ii 1 ni n
jvj 0 3 24th APRIL, 1919.
THE COLOUR SCHEME.
When fair Colombo came to sight,
It made a splendid scene,
Of hues both various and bright;
But Fed Cross fruit is green.
We painted red the little town,
But left it quite serene
To count the cash we left behind;
Like Red Cross Fruit —we're green!
What matters it ! ? Each purple night,
Miles nearer home must mean,
Where wait us, peaches pink and white,
Though Red Cross Fruit is green.
Through rosy specks we view the world,
Such small space lies between,
Us and our home! Our hopes are gold;
But Red Cross Fruit is green.
Envoi.
Now, those who bought this fruit for us,
Were colour-blind I ween,
Or blind in other kind of way;
MUST Red Cross Fruit be green?
THE " IMSHI " SOUVENIR.
"Imshi," a combination of the issues, with a
decorative cover, will be printed after the arrival
of the "Karoa" in Australia, and copies ot the
Souvenir will be posted to the subscribers. A Com-
mittee of Officers who are residing in the neigh-
bourhood of Sydney will undertake the task ot
seeing that the work is properly carried out. By
the kindness of the Education Officer, the Educa-
tion Office has been made available for collecting
the names of subscribers. There, those who desire
copies can hand in their names, addresses to which
copies can be forwarded, and the necessary money.
The cost of the publication has been fixed at Is. 3d.,
at which price "it is estimated that an interesting
production can be assured. It is not desired to
make any profits, and any surplus that remains
after expenses have been met will be handed to
the Returned Soldiers' Association. There will be
no restriction on the number of copies ordered, but
all money and orders must be in hand before ar-
rival in Australia. An order for the bare number
requisitioned by subscribers will be placed with the
printers. Saloon passengers can place their orders
with Lieut. Morse. The time" for intending subscri-
bers to hand in their names to the Education Office,
"B" deck, will be between 2 and 3 p.m. daily,
from to-day onwards.
The next issue of "Imshi," which, if possible,
will anticipate its usual day of publication, and
be posted before our arrival at Fremaritle, will be
the last. Contributors, kindly note that contribu-
tions should be in early.
Ach! Ach! Ach!
The Nigger who came aboard at Colombo and
furtively offered a gold necklet for sale was a
source of amusement. He did not open up the
tiny package amongst the crowd, but took the
prospective customer into quiet corners and un-
rolled a glittering length of frail jewellery. His
prices varied from £1 to £1 10s.; but he finally
parted with the "verra good" brum for an old
shirt!
THE VOYAGE.
(Continued).
THE LAST LAP.
April 17th. —A recurrence of intense heat, and
the prevalence of calm weather that has marked
the voyage.
April 18th. —At about 3 a.m. we passed Minni-
koi. This Island is seventy miles off the Maldives,
which are a group of twelve good-sized Coral
Islands clothed with a rich vegetation of Cocoa-
nut Palms and other Tropical Plants. The people


are civilised and cultivated, and have a kind of
political independence, but pay tribute to the Gov-
ernment of Ceylon.
April 19th. —From a vague outline of coast land
■Colombo began to make itself visible at 7 a.m.,
its vivid colours making a pleasing picture. By
8.30 we had passed the breakwater, and were safely
moored. The authentic history of Ofeylon begins
in the stli Century, 8.C., when an invasion of
Hindus from Northern India established the Cinga-
lese Dynasty. The country was developed by Tamil
Colonists from Southern India. Buddhism was
introduced from India in the 3rd century, 8.C., and,
in comparative purity, is still the religion of most
of the inhabitants. In 1505 the Portugese formed
settlements on the West and South, these settle-
ments being taken from them about the middle of
the next century by the Dutch. In 1795-6 the
British Government annexed the foreign settle-
ments to the Presidency of Madras. In 1798 Ceylon
was created into a separate colony. In 1815, the
whole Island fell under British rule. Total popu-
lation in 1912 was over 4,000,000. The Singalese
is a superior kind of Nigger, with considerable
self-respect, and a higher standard of living than
most others. A great number of the low-grade
natives in Colombo are simply imports to do the
coolie work, which, as we know it, consists also of
a good deal of begging.
The catamarans, the outrigged canoes of the
Natives, engaged a good deal of curiosity. During
the day a rumour that shore leave might be granted
secured circulation, and before long a good half
of the troops were all dressed up and nowhere to
go. The news that leave was to be given on the
morrow from eight o'clock in the morning created
intense satisfaction. This was an excellent arrange-
ment, as, if leave had been granted on this day,
the Troops could not have proceeded to the shore
before three o 'clock, and their time must have
been limited to at most a couple of hours.
April 20th. —The Colombo hop-over commenced
with reveille at 5.30 a.m., and an early breakfast;
and at 7.30 the Troops moved from the vessel's
side into the barges waiting for them. They were
in bottle order, thirsts worn at the alert. The
incidents in Colombo were various, but the Troops
had a good day, and the casualties were slight.
The objectives were Good Time Farm, a Skinful
of Booze Estaminet, and Souvenir House; and
having attained all these, the Troops returned to
ship in good order; although at least one man,
who had discovered that it was good sport to chase
Niggers through the water, got slightly damp.
April 21st. —The anchor was up at 5.30 a.m., and
shortly afterwards the "Karoa" was outside the
breakwater, and cutting out the pace for the final
lap. The way it left the harbour was rather mag-
nificent. As it showed on the occasions when it
played merry-go-round, this ship can turn so speed-
ily that it can almost run into its own stern. The
steering gear trouble that caused some stoppages
previously, were adjusted at Colombo; and a straight
ahead course is before us. Travelling along a
pretty coast during most of the day, we said good
bye to it by nightfall. A small school of whales
was passed during the day.
April 22nd. —A swell was with us in the morning,
but subsided to a great extent during the day,
and the calm weather that has marked the whole
voyage returned. At about 7.30 p.m. we crossed
the line.
April 23rd. —Smooth weather still, but a heavy
swell again during the night. The announcement
that the vessel had achieved its greatest speed
for twenty-four hours—366 miles —was received
with loud cheers. The boys explain the increase
rate by the circumstance that the boat is travel-
ling down hill.
On Friday afternoon we wili pass Cocos Island,
which, however, will be forty miles off.
THE VOYAGE.
Mileage.—To noon, April 17th 358
18th 338
19th (Colombo) .. 301
21st 80
22nd 351
23rd 366
Total 1794
Total to noon, 16tli April 5688
Grand Total 7482
The difference between Greenwich and ship's
time on 24th instant is six hours ten minutes.
Ach! Ach! Ach!
THOSE BIBLICAL QUESTIONS.
The interpretation of the Biblical riddles set
out in the last issue of "Imshi," is as follows: —
'' When was banking first mentioned in the
Bible ?''
When Pharoah received a check on the Bank
of the Bed Sea, crossed by Moses Aaron and Com-
pany.
'' What Apostle was mentioned in regard to a
later banking transaction, and how?"—
Paul lodged with one Simon, a "tanner."
"How did David refer to a domestic insect?"—
The wicked flea, when no man pursueth."
"What is the first reference to cricket in the
Bible?'' —
Paul stood up before the eleven, and was
bowled.
The man who spread the malicious report that
the Editor wants a shave, lies. He may need it,
but he does not want it.
=& -/? #
They tell the yarn of a forward well deck hum,
that he entered a crowded Y.M.C.A. in France,
and called, portentiously, ' 1 Are there any Irishmen
here?" As about a dozen Irishmen, willing for
anything, sprang to their feet, he added: "Well,
who's going to give Kelly a cigarette?" His name,
by the way, isn't Kelly.
%
Regarding a little recent incident which certain
men considered a joke, there is a yarn of a simi-
lar joke that went astray. A platoon, ordered to
24th April, 1919 I M S H I


number, obeyed right enough until No. 10 was
reached, when the remaining three men continued:
"Jack-Queen-King." The Sergeant was unmoved.
"Fall out the Court Cards—Sanitary Fatigue," he
said, calmly.
Sergeant Pedlar ought to be handed out a job
as official booster of land settlement by one or
other of the Australian Governments. His picture
at the Diggers' Parley of how to turn out an
easy five hundred a year on a small farm was as
pretty as anything ever purchased by any art
gallery. A hundred bee hives were in his pro-
gramme. Well, the Editor has always intended
to keep a Bee, and if it needs a hundred hives it
won't matter. The Education people should open
some classes in Bee Milking; and some lessons in
Landscape Gardening, including the laying out of
Oyster Beds, which might prove useful.
% #
Ho v kind are they who exercise a parental care
towards the soldiers. At Colombo they laid on
board a nice stock of vaccine, and gave each one
of us a handy—or arm-y —present of some. But,
when the sisters took a hand, the Troops called it
* i fascinating," and each wanted to know if the
other had been '' fascinated.''
Did anybody notice any dogs in Colombo? Ap-
parently our kangaroo dog from "D" deck was
the only canine in the place. No wonder its sharp,
snappy bark surprised the inhabitants.
Ach! Ach! Acli!
INTER-DECK GAME COMPETITIONS.
Nominations of representatives from the various
■decks to compete in inter-deck game competitions
are wanted. The games to be played are chess,
draughts, cribbage, auction bridge and five hun-
dred. There will be no entrance fees, and prizes
will be given by the Sports Committee. In
draughts and chess two entrants are required from
each deck, and in the card games, two pairs. In
each game the best two out of three games will
decide, but three games will be played and com-
plete results kept.' Each deck representative, or
pair of representatives, will meet both represen-
tatives, or pail' of representatives, from each op-
posing deck. Prizes will be awarded to (1) the
individual player or pair in each game whose total
of wins is highest in each game; and a record will
be made of the deck which, in all the games, scores
the best total of wins. The competition will be
in the nature of an interstate one.
In decks where game competitions have not
already been held to decide the representation,
players will have to get together and decide upon
their representatives.
ALL ENTRIES SHOULD BE MADE BY 2 p.m.
ON FRIDAY, when the manner of playing-off will
be announced.
Entries, stating names, numbers, messes and
decks of competitors and the games for which they
are entering, should be addressed to Corpl. Harold
Mercer, Sports Committee, c/o Orderly Room.
Ach! Ach! Ach!
ANZAC DAY CELEBRATIONS.
To-morrow, which is the anniversary of the day
upon which Australians high niche in history was
assured by the landing at Gallipoli, will find us
in the vicinity of Cocos Island, where the Sydney
made a name for the Australian Navy. This is
rather a fortunate circumstance —especiallv as Co-
cos Island is getting near home. We are going to
have a day, and the decks will be decorated.
In the afternoon, at 2 p.m., there is to be a
sports meeting, with quite a fine programme; and
at 8 11.111., the long-projected fancy dress bail will
occur. Prizes will be awarded for the best cos-
tume. There will be a distribution of prizes at 10
p.m.
Ach! Ach! Ach!
HOW'S THIS FOR LUCK?
Some record card hands have come to light on
the 1 ' Karoa.'' Bro. Dodds, of the Orderly Room,
taking half-an-liour's relaxation from the rush of
business in a quiet game of poker—for matches,
of course—held the ace of clubs and called for
"four." He drew the ten, jack, queen, king of
the same suit—to his intense gratification and
profit—in matches —of course.
Playing off the cribbage competition on "D"
deck, Corpl. Mercer picked up a hand with four
fives and a six, discarding, of course, the six. The
Jack of Clubs turned up at the cut, giving him
twenty-eight in hand.
But that is not all. Sergeant Bromfield, playing
solo, secured two open meseres —one being enough
for any man to talk about for the rest of his life.
A remarkable record for one ship.
Ach! Ach! Ach!
A rude contributor suggests that the men who
are trying the education stunts are an ignorant
lot. Here's his argument: "A man only wants to
wash himself when he's dirty, and he only wants
to be taught when —!
Ach! Ach! Ach!
TABLE 44 AGAIN. —A proposal has been made
in the Sergeants' mess to start a class for the study
of table manners. One of their members, a farmer
sergeant, who has had considerable experience
with mules, has offered his services as an instruc-
tor. With a view of enlisting all the sergeants in
this class, the Chief Steward will be asked to ar-
range for extra meals in the morning and after-
noon for them to practice on.
Ach! Ach! Ach!
The most gorgeous thing that went ashore from
the "Karoa" at Colombo was the Pay Corps. It
well, here's the story! A couple of men were
enquiring for drinks, and being refused, pointed
to the Pay Corps enjoying Bass. '' Oh, but they
are Officers!" returned the discoloured steward.
1 M S H I 24th April, 1919


The P.C. had all the swank to justify his suspicion.
Not only had they the clothes to make them re-
semble officers; they wore colour-patches to make
them resemble soldiers.
Ach! Acli! Acli!
THE FORWARD WELL DECK STUNT.
Rumours of war drew a big crowd of neutrals
to the well deck stadium on Easter Monday, i or
once, the furphy was right. At 3 p.m. it was evi-
dent that a stunt was coming off; the presence ot
several "heads" proved it. Next came ammuni-
tions bearers, laden with water buckets, towels
and oranges. A barrage of padded gloves came
down, and the first two lads hopped over Fte.
Henrv, list. olbs. (Queensland), and Fte. Cragan,
lOst. lOlbs. (Victoria) opened up incivilities with
heavy long range stuff, and the unpleasantness
raged furiously for about thirty seconds when
the Yarra-sider had acquired a fair proportion ot
a hiding, and wisely avoided what would have
come in the next few minutes. He slipped down
after a heavy clout, and stopped thejn while Rer-
eree Lieut. "Paddy" Ryan counted him out.
Bugler France, Bst. 61bs. (N.S.W.j and Pte. Ellis,
Bst. 61bs. (Queensland) bogged into each other with
skill and enthusiasm. Each stopped a fair pro-
portion of the fast flying pads, and to the inexpert
spectator there was not much advantage either
way in the three fast rounds. The Bugler got the
CO's recommendation, and an ovation irom the
mob; while Ellis had a cheer up from the boys tor
his clever and plucky showing.
Pte. Charlie Pearce, 9st. 81bs. (N.S.W.) and Pte.
Waldie (S.A.) put plenty of ginger into their
stunt, and there was clean straight-hitting on both
sides. Waldie stopped a lot of stinging stuff in
the first clash, and though he evened things m the
second upheaval, the cornstalk scored a winning
lead in the next, and deserved the decision
Two welters then came out: Pte. bhelton
(NSW) and Sgt. Woods (Tassy), who put up the
most exciting scrap of the series, bhelton s dial
proclaimed that it had collided with gloves before
the Sergeant looked to be m tor a hiding, but
proved a snag. The thing never at any stage re-
sembled either a walk-over or a Sunday school les
son, and" Shelton soon found Woods straight left
was troublesome, for he got the sore end of it more
frequently than was good for him. lhe speck .
representative stopped some nasty body blows thai
Jtook some fight out of him, and each ducked anc
shifted away from many clouts that would havt
meant a knock-out if tliev had connected. -Both
parties to the dispute were dog-tired in the final
round, and one good punch would have done for
either'. Neither being able to supply the required
article, the verdict, "a draw," was correct and
popular.
Corp) Beer, 12st. 7lbs". (W.A.) and Pte. Dunlea,
12st. 51bs. (Queensland) went at it good and hard
from gong to gong, swapping punches with com-
mendable honesty right through the first round.
•Just after the second one started the Corporal got
in the road of a solar plexus hit that hurt a lot;
but he carried on gamely till he caught another
in the same place.
The final operations was between Pte. Henry
(Queensland), and Pte. Dimmick, lOst. _ lOlbs.
(Vic.). Henry's weighty punching wasn't in evi-
dence so much. The long Victorian kept bashing
him on the right ear, and scored in defence; he
was also aggressive, but, owing to the Banana-
lander's cleverness, much of the stuff arrived after
he had changed his address. The two opening
rounds were even and exciting. In the last one,
Henrv waded in to make his weight tell, and did
it to' such a tune, that the decision in his favour
was tlie only one possible.
Ach! Acli! Ach!
ADVERTISEMENTS.
Advertiser, intending to retire, is prepared to of-
fer his job as Mess Orderly to an Enthusiast
Bonus required. Nice, Orderly Mess, where all
members are bad shots. Apply, giving full par-
ticulars, and stating religion, to "Fed Hp, ' care
of Baldy "D" Beck.
Ach! Ach! Ach!
Strayed. —Anyone who ean give information con-
eerning the BED COW who took my hammock,
kindly do so. Smith, "D," "Deck.
Ach! Ach! Ach!
Baths. —The famous "Karoan" Turkish Baths
off Hot-as-Hell Avenue. Sweat and keep healthy.
Try these baths. We don't expect you to pay to
them.
Ach! Ach! Ach!
Several items, including comments on Colombo
incidents, are held over this week on account ed!
lack of space, but will appear m the last issue,
which will probably be published on Tuesday next.
24th April. 1919. 1 M S H 1


No. 4. 29th APRIL, 1919.
AUSTRALIA.
Oh, hand me down my old guitar that long has
rusted on the wall,
The light of Austral moon and star, and bushiand
odors round me fall;
And, far across the dimpling waves, sweet magic
voices to me flow,
And bid me wake again the strings war-muted m
the long ago.
The jewelled cross shines out on high, a welcoming,
a guiding light;
Great waratahs aflame with joy are beaconing
across the night;
The cordage and the swaying mast seem giant gums
in joyous rout;
The raucous shrieking of the blast, the kookabur-
ras ' friendly shout.
Grassed, waving plains that stretch to dim horizons
where the mystic reigns
Flood forth their golden timbered hymn m luring
welcoming refrains,
By leafv gums gay glad galahs in matutinal revelries
Shut out the funnel and the spars, and drown the
roaring of the seas.
Wild horses roaming grassy glades obscure the
white colts of the main;
The smoke of miners' morning fires is heavy m
the drifting rain;
The mullock-heaps beneath the sun gleam white
athwart the ancient fields,
And ev'ry shaft and ev'ry drive a roaring song of
welcome yields.
The little creeks that trickle where the dim, un-
trodden places are,
The pine scrub and the gidya clump, the mallee
and the bush belar,
And all the wastes and all the wilds, and city pond
and bush lagoon,
Blend lovingly across the foam m one deep-throated
welcome rune.
So hand me down my loved guitar that long has
rusted on the wall,
And as the songs of welcoming in cadence sweet
around me fall,
I'll touch again the rusty strings long muted by
the noise of strife,
And from the silence of the grave will tremble
home a song of life.
—DAVID H. RICHARDS.
(David H. Richards, one of the "Bully Bards,"
was born in his mother's room in the first year of
his life. He died —as a poet —in 1914, but has
come to light again with a verse which will prob-
ably express the sentiments which most of us feel
as we approach Australia. In the Sergeant's Mess
he is known as Shakespeare.)
THE COLOMBO STUNT.
A Brief Record of the Salient Points of the
Colombo Operations.
(By the "Imshi" Liaison Officer.)
As one of the Education chaps remarked, when
we stepped ashore at Colombo, it was nice being
on terra firma again after being such a long time
on aqua pura. He seems to have learned quite a
lot.
# #
Most of the early enquirers for drinks were in-
formed that they could only get lemon squashes and
similar stuff. The end of a perfect day showed
that Colombo lemon squash is a potent thing.
=3s= # %
The boys "had" the merchants of Colombo to
the usual extent —much to the merchants' satis-
faction. The men's purchasing partiality ran in


different directions. Some bought moon-stones,
some elephants, and some bought fights.
We are requested to state that the man who, be-
ing held up by a Tommy picket, offered to fight
the whole '' Tommy'' army, was not a well-known
sergeant. He says that he has forgotten all about
it, "and it wasn't him anyway; and he wasn't as
drunk as he might have been if he had had more
liquor. The correct way to spell fall, is, now, as
ever, F-a-1-1. _
A corpora) on "D" deck who had kept, of
course the vow he had made the morning of the
leave day, not to touch any intoxicating liquor,
declared on his return that lm had more elephants
in his pockets than there were in all India. His
pockets were certainly full; and he spilled elephants
everywhere he went. In the morning he was won-
dering what had become of them.
It is said that some of the Education staff was
keenly interested in the lacemakers at Mt. Lavinia.
Is this a new branch of study?
* #
After the fairness of their treatment, the boys un-
animously made up their minds to play the game.
The only trouble of the day was that one or two
were not quite sure of the game they were intend-
ing to play. Some of them thought it might be
Old Henry.
* * #
Green cocoanut milk was a new thing to most of
the boys, but they did not rush it. They were
afraid, of course, that it might be intoxicating.
One man who was bargaining with a jewel mer-
chant, got the shock of his life. £2/5/- the mer-
chant wanted for the goods. "Why, I wouldn't
give you 5/- for them!" said the soldier. "Right,
sahib," said the nigger, "they are yours!" And
clinched the bargain.
# ; X : #
A Digger, who is evidently a relative of the
Sentimental Bloke, was dissolved in tears on the
way back to the boat. He had been interviewing
the sensitive plant. "It's like a woman's 'eart,"
he moaned; "it curls up and dies beneath the
rough hand." When he gets back to Aussie he
wants to turn up at home in a similar condition,
and watch his wife's heart curl up and die.
* * *
One interesting kiddie started breathlessly on
his pica: "No Mom-ma! No Popp-pa; no break-
fas; no dinn-nah!'' And then his mother came out
and said: '' Please give my little boy a pen-ny.''
* ■» *
As we riekshawed along, a kid with a cocoanut
chased our 'shaws, entreating us to buy at the
price of " sixa-penee." Ignoring our constant
"gow," which is French or something for "lmshi,"
lie hung on, and by the time he was nearly run
out and broathlcss, had brought the price down to
fourpence. Then another boy rushed out, grabbed
the nut from him, and took up the running. '' Hixa-
pence," he panted, as he pursued us. We were
quite anxious to see the next relay, but lie did
not make an appearance.
-fc =X=
The man who chased niggers about the ferry
wharf at Colombo, declaring that he meant to eat
them, or something, need not worry about his non-
success in catching them. The roses are still bloom-
ing in Pieardy.
■Undoubtedly, some of the boys were taken down,
but the most concerned about it, is one who took
ashore with him, approximately, 10/-. In a few
hours he was accounting for his money shortage
by declaring that the niggers had got at him for
£2. By the time of the evacuation, this had risen
to £lO, and lias since grown up to £SO. He almost
convinced himself about it, too; and he will no
doubt tell his friends in Australia that the Colombo
niggers took him down for the German Emperor's
crown, which he had souvenired, £IOOO in money,
and the title deeds of the estate in England he
had purchased out of the profits he had made in
France by salving the pork from the tins of pork
and beans.
Ach! Ach! Ach!
One Bigger was explaining to another the use
to which nature puts everything, when the other,
who had been gazing over the sea, asked: "What's
the use of a school of porpoises?" "Well," re-
plied the other, "1 suppose it gets them exemption
from all duty."
. . . .Another porpoise story is that of the sol-
dier who was essaying the rather hopeless task of
trying to count a school of porpoises. "For
Heaven's sake," lie said at last, "get one of those
farmers along and see if he can count these blessed
sea jumbueks."
SHIP SPORTS RESULTS.
Tug-of-War. Winners: "D" deck (New South
Wales), Captain: Pte. Pearce. Potato race—lst,
Gnr. Shand; 2nd, Pte. Totterdell, 53rd Bn. Crab
raee —Ist, J. B. Miller, 3rd Bn. Wheelbarrow race—
Bunlea and Bolleski, Shand and Roots. Whistling
race —Wakefield, sth Bn.; 2nd, Ayres, 4th Bn. Sack
race—F. C. Grigg, 46th Bn.; 2nd, A. Bowleski,
A.A.M.C.
Ach! Ach! Ach!
"D" DECK GAME COMPETITIONS.
Winners; —Cribbage—Moir and Phail. Five-
hundred —Corporal Thackaray and Fittoek. Bridge
—Webb and Hemple. Draughts—Jeffrey. Chess —
Corporal Mercer.
29th April, 1919 I M S H 1


A. year ago you used to take my hand
.And whisper words of comfort, sweet to hear.
Then you were wondrous kind. The hours you
spent
Tending the wounded Diggers—shrapnel-wrent,
As rays of sunshine in a clouded land,
Lifted my thoughts above the common sphere.
Forgotten, then, the pain 1 was enduring,
If I could watch you (in a manner) curing.
Each morning now you take another's hand,
And sit out on the deck. My views I fear
Are changing; mine's not the sweet content
It used to be (those happy days last Lent);
The pleasant hopes 1 had, the things I planned,
Are lost for ever—all through Reggie dear.
Forgotten, now, that you were once al-
luring,
Because I hate to watch you manicuring.
—E. S. G. TILLEY.
CHANGED.
(To Sister G. .)
THE VOYAGE.
(Continued).
16th April, 1919.
(This narrative must of necessity remain incon-
clusive, as the last issue of "Imshi" appears prior
to our arrival at Fremantle. In the printed souve-
nir an addition to the chronicle will be included,
bringing the data right up to the time of the con-
clusion cf the voyage.)
April 24th. —With no land to sight until we reach
Australia, the voyage threatened to lack interest;
but it is by no means as dull as it might have been.
Preparations for Anzac Day celebrations tilled in
some time, and a ship load of men suffering from
recent vaccination found subject for conversation
in how the vaccine was '' taking.'' The men who
suffered most seemed to differ from the medical
opinion that it was '' taking nicely.'' The most
interesting happening of the day was the changing
of the wind. In the morning we left the south-
west trade winds, passed for a time a sort of wind-
no-man's-land, and then met the south-east trade
winds.
April 25th. —The new winds proved to be rough,
and the sea was worked up considerably. On ac-
count of the roughness —although not severe enough
to lead to casualties —the fancy dress ball which
was to take place on this night was postponed. The
wind reached a high velocity, and being dead
against us, its violence was accentuated by the
ship's speed. A special tea was provided for all
hands in celebration of Anzac Day.
April 25th.—Although the weather was still in-
clined to roughness, the sports, preliminary heats
of which had been run off, were concluded; and at
night the ship's company went gay at the Fancy
Dress Ball. The sound of revelry by night, con-
tinued, by special permission, until 11 p.m.
April 27th, 28th.—These days were marked by
eager preparations for arrival in Australia, and
the circulation of numberless ferphies about what
1 M S H 1 29th April, 1919


is to happen to us when we do arrive. Weather
continues rough.
Mileage.—To noon, 24th April, 341 miles.
25th „ 345 „
26th „ 313 „
27th „ 344 „
28th „ 330 „
Total . . 1673 miles.
Previous total to 23rd April.. 7482 „
Grand total 9155 miles.
Ach! Ach! Ach!
THAT FANCY DRESS BALL.
Quite the gayest circumstance of the voyage was
the Fancy Dress Ball, held on Saturday night.
Whispers had got about regarding the chief fea-
tures of the event, but these rumours failed to
bring expectations up to the reality. As the nu-
merous actors assembled on the port deek, every-
body crowded to have a look at them; but this
was impossible until a procession was formed, which
marched round both promenade decks. The popu-
lar nurses' costume was creditably sported by sev-
eral Diggers, but G. A. Walton, of "A" deck, who
appeared as a Y.A.D. nurse, looked the real thing,
and secured Ist prize. There were, besides three sun-
downers with swags, bowyangs, billies and ' 1 Bul-
letin" (bush-bibles) all complete—a black waiter
of exceptional length for a nigger; Australia's most
popular historical character, Ned Kelly; a couple
of masked burglars; "flu" with a tray of medi-
cine, a church-yard cough, and an imitation nurse;
a Bedouin, turned out in full regalia, a Hindenburg,
and one of his cannon fodder; a Gyppo; a lady of
the Harem, and others. The nurses and other lady
passengers entered into the joyous spirit of the
function, and besides appearing in fancy dress,
they kindly lent portions of their wardrobe to assist
in the scene of gaiety. Second prize for fancy
dress costume went to Gnr. Lorton, " E" deck,
who was effectually disguised as a Lady of the
Harem. In addition, five consolation prizes were
awarded to: —Sgt. Barton (Pierrot), Spr. Lannas
("Flu."), Ptes. Pearee (Sundowner), Ayres (Gyp-
po), and Dunlea (Sundowner).
Ach! Ach! Ach!
The Bread Deliverer: The deck corporal on "D"
deck arrived on those premises with the bread in a
rather sudden fashion recently. The ship, giving
a lurch, he went down the stairway in a heap, and
sat in a tangle of loaves at the bottom. For a
moment he ruminated, and then he remembered his
duties. "Come on, for your bread!" he shouted.
Ach! Ach! Ach!
GOOD BY-EE.
The voyage is now all but over, and "Imshi"
concludes its short existance. The journey which,
with a number of men all impatient to get home,
and finding the time long and tedious, might have
been full of irritations, has been really an enjoy-
able one, and instead of being tedious, the time has
passed pleasantly. We have been a happy com-
pany whilst together, and will remain friends when,
parted. There has really been no jar in the har-
mony of our sea sojourn.
Many thanks are due to the Ship's Officers for
assisting to make the voyage pleasant; and the
Editor feels personally thankful to the Chief Of-
ficer for very real assistance in supplying informa-
tion for '' Imshi,'' and assisting to make it as in-
teresting as possible.
There was a shortage in the first instance, but
in the end, a number of contributions have come
to light for this little journal. Unfortunately,,
merely because there was not room or time, their
contributions cannot be used (although it was in-
tended to use some in this issue); but these con-
tributors are also thanked.
It will be a bond of friendship between men in
the future when in chance meetings they can re-
mind one another of the days they spent on the
'' Karoa.''
—THE EDITOB.
Ach! Ach! Aeh!
Orders for the "Imshi" souvenir, price Is. 3d.,
can be booked at the Orderly Boom between 9 and
10 a.m., and 2 and 3 p.m. daily.
Ach! Ach! Ach!
Jerry Jerome, even in his wildest moments, never
executed such fantastic movements as did the box-
ing nigger boys, who gave an exhibition at the
ship's stadium, on the Saturday we spent at Co-
lombo. Loop-tlie-loop punches and whirlwind hay-
making swipes became too common to cause pro-
longed merriment; but the rooster fighting jumps-
never failed to provoke roars of laughter. Hits
were shown to us that Peter Jackson never knew.
One nigger, after bad punishment, came to life
again; disconcerting wallops rocked in from all
possible and impossible angles. The "bomb-drop-
per" was a new one on us; the ebony streak sprang
high to the air, and struck vertically at the top-
of his opponent's head, neck or shoulders. Some-
times the objective had shifted elsewhere, when
the double-barreled bomb arrived, and the attacker
on one occasion was violently attacked from behind
while in mid-air. This show, and the coons swallow-
like celerity in altering his location, proved a plea-
sant diversion in a dull day, and made small for-
tunes for the black pugs.
Ach! Aeh! Ach!
We are informed that after his return to Aus-
tralia a certain professor of the Education staff
will undergo an operation for the removal of his
blue hat.
Ach! Ach! Ach!
The black barber, who, armed with an enamel
cream jug containing water, which, by popular re-
port, is never changed, seeks whom he may shave,
is likely to be charged, we understand, with fraud.
The circumstances of the case are that '' Baldy''
of the Canteen, bitten by some delusion, sought a
hair cut on Saturday last, and the barber charged
him full price. Ali lovers of fairplay are highly
indignant.
29th April, 1919. 1 M S H I


Mileage to
110011,
29th April
. . 328
12.30,
30th April (Fremantle)
. . 335
110011,
1st May
23
110011,
2nd May
. . 322
noon,
3rd May
. . 321
11
noon,
4th May
. . 333
11
1 p.m
, 5th May (Adelaide) . .
. . 346
noon,
7th May
. . 337
2 p.m
, 8th May (Melbourne). .
. . 125
110011,
9th May
. . 279
11
10.30,
10th May (Sydney) ..
. . 300
3049
Total
to noon, 28th April
9155
Grand
Total
12,204
THE VOYAGE.
(Concluded.)
April 29th. —Weather roughening as we bear
southwards. At noon, 335 miles from Fremantle.
Mileage: 328.
April 30tli. —Australia at last, for at 12.30 we
reached Fremantle. And Australia had a sunny
smile for us, instead of the rough threat of the
sen that we had recently been encountering. Red
Cross goods were put aboard by Nationalist work-
ers, the wharf-labourers being on strike; and a lot
of the boys were not at all annoyed when they
heard subsequently that upon returning to shore
one of them had received a ducking at the hands
of the wharfies. and their friends. A fowl escaped
from one of the crates during the loading opera-
tions, and committed suicide by diving into the
water. We anchored in the roadstead, and there
was no leave. In the afternoon the Westralians
went ashore to kick their heels in quarantine for a
week. Mileage: 335.
May Ist. —Leaving Fremantle in the morning.
We had accounted for twenty-three miles by noon.
At (>.lB p.m. we passed Cape Naturalist, and at
10.27 Cape Leeuwin. We met long rolling seas.
May 2nd. —Rough weather, with rather choppy
seas. Mileage to noon: 322.
May 3rd. —Weather loss boisterous —it has not
been really rough—but breaking seas spraying on
board a little. Mileage: 321.
May 4th. —Bright day; seas moderate. Mileage:
533.
Alav stli. —Passed Neptune Island Light at 3.15
а.m.; Gambur Light House, 6.2 a.m.; Cape Borda,
б.12 a.m.; Althorpe Light House, 7.14 a.m.; Toil-
bridge Light House, 11.6 a.m.; and anchored in the
outer harbour at Adelaide at 1 p.m. Mileage: 346.
Good-bye here to the Croweaters and little Geof-
frey, the mascot of our voyage.
May 6th. —Once more on the move, at 1 p.m., and
passed, at 5.5 p.m. Cape Jervis; at 6 p.m., Page's
Island.
May 7th. —At 2.55 a.m. passed Cape Martin; at
5.5 p.m., Cape Banks; at 6.35 a.m., Cape North-
umberland. By noon we had covered 337 miles,
with 125 to go to Melbourne At 4.12 p.m., Cape
Ottway went by; at 6.44, Eagle Nest; at 7.5 p.m.,
Cape Scliank; and by 9 p.m. we were anchored off
the quarantine station in Port Phillip.
May Bth. —Various ferpliies have gained great
currency during our voyage around the Australian
coast; and they arc that we are going to call at
Hobart (for fruit for the troops, or something), are
now definitely settled. The Tasmanians went ashore
at Melbourne; and we had the glad knowledge that
our quarantine has expired at 10.30, having taken
aboard a number of munition workers and others
from the quarantine station (ex-Eastern), and
enough luggage to make the vessel top-heavy if
rough weather was encountered, we moved up to
wharf at Melbourne, where a brass band told us
we were conquering heroes; and the Governor-
General was waiting to tell us that Australia was
glad to se us again. Leaving the Victorians and
Tasmanians with some cheers, and in good hands,
we departed at 4.30 p.m., repassing Cape Schanek
at 9.8 pan.
Alav 9th.—Cape Liptrap, 1.5 p.m.; Citadel Island,
2.20 a.m.; South East Point, 3.10 a.m.; Cliffy Island,
4.20 a.m.; Gabe Island, 4.0 a.m. Mileage to noon:
279. Three hundred miles to Sydney.
.May 10th. —By breakfast time, Sydney, smiling
on its cliffs and beaches, was visible; and we were
picking out Maroubra and the other outer bays.
Sydney is still Sydney; and it gave us a louder
greeting than the other cities. The pilot tug "cock-
a-doodled" to us when it met us outside the Heads,
and the ferries, when we entered the harbour, gave
us greeting in cheers and whistles. While anch-
ored in Watson's Bay our Queensland brothers left
us for the "Kildonan Castle;" for the "Karoa's"
voyage is over —a voyage unmarred by any unto-
ward incidents; blessed by weather mostly beau-
tiful, calm, and never really rough. Our friends
arc waiting, and it is with impatience that we bear
the delays that await us as we move to our wharf
at Woolloomooloo, while the disembarkation of the
New South Wales quota takes place at 1.30 p.m.
Cheers for the Captain and Officers, and the C.O.
Troops mark the finish, and they are hearty ones.
EDITORIAL NOTE.
"Imshi" is sent out to subscribers just us it
was published on board the "Karoa," with only
the addition of the supplementary narrative of
"The Voyage" to make it complete, as promised.
SUPPLEMENT TO IMSHI.


Some matter might have been cut, and other mat-
ter added; but it stands better, as a souvenir, with-
out alterations.
The interest which the paper excited on board
the "Karoa" was the best possible payment for
the work the ambitious little paper involved; and
the hope is now felt that the printed edition will
satisfy as a souvenir.
It is regretted that, owing to the list provided
being incomplete in that respect, the exact rank
in some cases has been omitted from the list of
personnel attached to the "Imslii" souvenir.
A few extra copies of the souvenir, contrary to
expectations, are available. Those who desire them
should write to Harold Mercer, c/o "The Bulletin"
office, George-street, Sydney.
—THE EDITOR.
SHIP'S PASTIME COMPETITIONS.
RESULTS.
Chess (eight entries): Ist, Sergt. Campbell; 2nd,
Sergt. McMahon.
Draughts (seven entries): Ist, Pte. Jeffcry, Mess
64, "D" Deck; 2nd, Pte. O'Connor, Serg'ts' Mess.
Bridge (nineteen pairs): Ist, Lan.-Cpl. Haywood,
88 Mess';' and Gnr. Collins, .90, "E" Deck; 2nd,
Cpl. Tilley and Sergt. Hart (Orderly Room).
Five Hundred (thirteen pairs): Ist, Cpl. Thack-
eray and Pte. Fittoek, Mess 58, "D" Deck; 2nd,
Pte. H. A. Smith and F. Henry, Mess 67, "D"
Deck.
Cribbage (twenty-seven pairs): Ist, Pts. R. A.
Smith and M. Smith, Mess 78, "E" Deck; 2nd,
Cpl. Tilley and Sergt. Hart, Orderly Room.
I M S H I


PERSONNEL OF TROOPSHIP "KAROA."
OFFICERS:
Lt.-Col. P. Currie, D.5.0., 28th Bn.
Capt. A. B. Snodgras, 2nd Div. Art.
Capt. L. G. Allen, M.C., 28th Bn.
Lt.-Col. B. M. Sutherland, 0.8. E., A.M.C.
Map A. Goldstein, A.M.C.
Maj. W. J. Connolly, A.M.C.
Lieut. C. H.- Jones, 26th Bn.
Lieut. A. E. Woollard, M.S.M., Edue. Serv.
Lieut. R. S. Atkins, 2nd Div. Art.
Rev. H. Linton.
Lieut. L. Bolitho, 29th Bn .
Lieut. A- H. Stephens, 29tli Bn.
Ligllt: A: Coppin, sth M.G. Bn.
Capt. W. Clarke, R.S.L.
Lieut. R. G. Parkes, 10th F.A.B.
Lieut. N. L. Wilson, 55tli Bn.
Lieut. L. V. Reid, 13th L.H.
Lieut. A. Morton, M.C., Ist Div. Art.
Lieut. I. J. Whitty, 2nd Div. Art.
Lieut. J. C. Doyle, sth Div. Art.
Lieut. A. Messiter, A.C. Sig. Coy.
Lieut. R. Sly, 3rd Bn.
Lieut. F. N. Livingstone, loth Bn.
Lieut. M. Hayes, M.C., 17th Bn.
Lieut. C. E. Clarke, M.C., 20th Bn.
Lieut. J. H. Makeig, 20th Bn.
Lieut. H. W. Clough, M.C., M.M., 24th Bn.
Lieut. F. Holder, 55th Bn.
Lieut. J. M. kjaughn, P.S.L.
Lieut. J. H. Bate, Ist Tun. Coy.
Lieut. W. Winnall, A.F.C.
Lieut. H. N. Kerr, A.F.C
Lieut. D. K. Paine, 26th Bn.
Lieut. B. S. Morse, 33rd Bn.
Capt. T. V. Riley, 46th Bn.
Lieut. A. B. Grace, 50th Bn.
Lieut. S. J. McCullach, 2nd Pionrs.
Maj. C. B. Pym, A.A.M.C.
Maj. M. Lyons, 3rd A.M.T.C.
Capt. R. Glen, 3rd A.A.H.
Lieut. A. F. Murray, A.A.D.C.
PORT SAID.
Jjjppt. N, C. Brown, 10th A.L.H.
2nd-Lieut. W. Knowles, 10th A.L.H.
Lieut. A. E. O'Halloran, 10th A.L.H.
Lieut. C. W. Foulkes Taylor, 10th A.L.H.
Major A. E. Callow, A.A.V.C;
NURSING STAFF.
Sister S. L. Colless.
S/Sister D. M. Rodgers
S/Sister J. M. Stanbury.
S/Sister E. Walrer.
S/Sister A. M. Dodd.
S/Sister D. Johns.
S/Sister M. Carney.
S/Sister S. M. Graham.
S/Sister H. M. Mullins.
S/Sister L. Jurd.
PASSENGERS.
Mrs. L. Steere.
Miss H. Steere.
Miss A. Steere.
Mrs. A. L. Jenkins.
Mrs. Linton.
Mrs. O. A. Harper.
Lieut. A. J. Jenkins.
NOMINAL ROLL OF QUEENSLAND
PERSONNEL.
Reg.
256 Dvr. Andrews, N.; 42nd Bn.
3109 Pte. Applegreen, P.; 49tli Bn.
3685 C.Q.M.S. Ball, W.; 49th Bn.
5533 Pte. Birch, 11.; 25th Bn.
107 a. Sgt'. Boardman, R.A.; A.A.M.C.
3025 Sgt. Bromfield, A. J.; 7tli M.G.C.
3810 T/2Cpl. Brookes, J. S.;- 4tli Purs.
18 L'/Opl. Browne, R. J.; 1 ltli B. Hq.
52997 Pte. Caskey, F. T. J.; 15th Bn.
3174 Tpr. Cook, W. H.; 2nd L.H.
5663 Pte. Cooper, A. S.; 15tli Bn.
712 L/Cpl. Cousins, W. A.; 41st Bn.
15933 Dvr. Cox, G. 11.; A.S.C.
414 Pte. Crawford, J. K.; 2nd M.G.B.
5830 Pte. Cripps, W. N.; 42nd Bn.
19842 Dvr. Crompton, H. C.; Ist Field Sq.
409 Pte. llavies, O. M.; 15th Bn.
160 Cpl. Donaldson, J. P.; 41st Bn.
319 Pte. Drake, J.; 43rd Bn.
3292 Pte. Dunlea, J. E.; 25th Bn.
18527 Dvr. Easton, 11.; 13th F.C.E.
5079 Pte. Edwards, J. H. B.; 49th Bn.
5963 Pte. Edwards, T.; 26th Bn.
2356 Pte. Ellis, G.; 15th Bn.
6047 Pte. Fehring, J.; 11th Bn.
3641 Pte. Fitzgerald, J. P.; 56th Bn.
5080 Pte. Fitzgerald, C. J.; 3rd Bn.
2604 a Pte. France, A.; 12th Bn.
2592 Spr. Eraser, G. B.; Ist Tun. Coy.
57606 Pte. Gardiner, J. W.; 25th Bn.
6537 Pte. Gibbins, G. E. C.; 26th Bn.
2397 Dvr. Gliddon, G.; 47th Btv.
6538 Pte. Golden, E. J.; 26tli Bn.
19161 Pte. Goodfellow, J. B.; 41st Bn.
2057 Pte. Grey, G. E.; 11th M.G.C.
210 Dvr. Gowling, J.; 4th L.H.
1696 Pte. Halloran, G. E.; 15th Bn.
R4314 Pte. Hamilton, F. S.; 15th Bn.
20797 Sgt. Hancock, A. E.; 3rd Army BAG.
7703 Pte. Hansen, H. A.; 4tli Pnrs.
3055 Pte. Harvey, D.; A.E.C.
3268 Pte. Harris, E.; 46th Bn.
379 Pte. Hawkins, K. F.; 42nd Bn.
3860 Pte. Heath, R.; 4th Pnrs.
3411 Pte. Henery, N. G.; 52nd Bn.
36621 Gnr. Henry-McDonald, C.; 4th D.A.C.
655 Pte. Hill, R. T; 4th M.G. Bn.
1789 Dvr. Hunt, A. T.; Ist M.G. Bn.
2789 Dvr. Jamieson, R. L.; 2nd R.TJ.
1722 Pte. Jolliffe, A. E.; 4th F.C.E.
I M S H 1


Reg.
525 Sgt. Kirby, C.; 31st Bn.
20196 Spr. Lammas, R. W.; F.C.E.
3006 Dvr. Lawson, W.; 4th M.G.S.
835 Pte. Longford, E.; 9th M.G.C.
11321 W/O Lewis, E. J.; 3rd. Div. Train.
1910 Cpl. Malioney, J. J.; 26th Bn.
173 Spr. Maxwell, A.; 3rd A.L.R.F.C.
6120 Pte. Meldrum, G.; 25th Bn.
984 Pte. Middleditch, C. D.; 47th Bn.
2437 Tpr. Molloy, D.; 11th L.H.
7095 Pte. Moreom, J. H. N.; 49th Bn.
4853 Pte. Morris, 8. J.; A.A.F.S.
1366 2/Cpl. McDonald, J. J.; 4th A.B.C. Roc.
13984 Cpl. Mclnnes, D.; 10th F.G.E.
53060 Pte. McLean, C. W.; 42nd Bn.
3363 Pte. McPhec, A. A.; 49th Bn.
15250 Tpr. O'Brien, J. F.; A.S.C.
64086 Tpr. O'Rourke, S.D.; sth G.S.R.
724 Pte. O'Sullivan, R; 41st Bn.
2233 Pte. Palmer, F.; 42ud Bn.
788 Tpr. Price, B. H. E.; sth L.H.
3433 Pte. Rayner, P.; 4th Pnrs.
3897 Pte. Rasmussen, C. J.; A.F.C.
2480 Dvr. Rogers, F. A.; sth L.H.
21268 Pte. Rollo, R. N.; 6th A.B.A.C.
2195 ER/S/Sgt. Scott, P., 15th Bn.
770b Pte. Seery, A.; 9tli Bn.
4880 L/Cpl. Sexton, J. R.; 25th Bn.
2207 Sgt. Shepherd, J.; 9th Bn.
658 F/Sgt. Silurian, G. H.; A.V.H.
5466 Pte. Simpson, A. G.; 6th A.M.T. Coy.
4597 Pte. Sinclair, J. H.; 31st Bn.
4365 Pte. Smith, A. J.; 31st Bn.
7047 Pte. Spranklin, W. G.; 9th Bn.
2985 Spr. Stout, G. T.; 3rd Div. Sigs.
5335 Pte. Talbot, F. W.; 31st Bn.
4375 Pte. Taylor, W. N.; 41st Bn.
27136 Gnr. Taylor, W. 12th A.F.A.
691 Pte. Thompson, A.M.; A.E.C.
1917 Sgt, Trapp, J.; 13th Bn.
4224 Pte. Vaughan, K. H.; 26th Bn.
4295 Sgt. Yoght, L. J.; 15th Bn.
400 Pte. Ward, J.; 3.lst Bn.
1586 Pte Watkins, J. R.; 3rd A.A.H.
3430 Spr. Watson, H.; Ist A.T.C.
749 Cpl. Watts, S.; 49th Bn.
1194 Sgt. Williams, E.; 10th Bn.
5215 Pte. Woodlock, G.M.; 13th A.T.M.B.
7168 Pte. Zerk, C. A.; 25th Bn.
50740 Pte. Zornig, H. V.; 45th Bn.
NOMINAL ROLL OF NEW SOUTH WALES
PERSONNEL.
Hog.
7682 Anderson, H. G-.; 4th Be.
3104 a Anderson, E. A.; 49th Bn.
7193 Andrews, C. P.; 3rd Bn.
4430 Armstrong, J.; 54th Bn.
30201 Arnold, C. D.; Ist A.S.B.
3419 Atkinson, (J. C. E.; 35th Bn.
51058 Ayres, J. D.; 4th Bn.
5269 Balsdon, P. W.; 4th I'. Bakery.
2376 Barham, R. B.; 54th Bn.
59939 Barnett, E. C. R.; 53rd Bn.
18436 Barton, A. T.; 25th Bn.
4438 Bateman, A. J.; 13th Bn.
i 2735 Beckton, .1.; Igt Batty.
8717 Barnard, L. 0.; A.S.C.
6802 Biffin, 0. M.; Bth Bn.
887 Bleakley, W. J.; A.F.C.
J 5634 Blue, G. H.; 11th Bty.
17266 Bolewski, A.; A.M.O.
37380 Boyd, G. L.; sth A.M.T.M.B.
829 Boyle, J. N. L.; 21st M.G.O.
54395 Brewster, W. M.; 34th Bn.
476 Bridge, M. L.; A.I.F. Hq.
3353 Brindle, J. 1).; A.C.T.M.T. Co.
2570 Buckley, A. H.; 3rd Bn.
0530 Burgess, J. P.; 2nd Tun. Co.
827 Burnett, J.; 12th F. Amb.
0289 Cambridge, C.; 2nd I'. Amb.
1766 Cameron, A. R.; 12th L.H.
5353 Carnellor, N.; 56th Bn.
3055 Carr, G.; sth M.T. Co.
4748 Carter, H. M.; 54th Bn.
5988 Carolan, C. V.; 3rd "Bn.
19510 Chandler, T. A.; lltli F.C'.E.
3796 Chandler, L. S.; 2nd D. Gas. Ser.
6082 Chapman, G. W.; 13th, F.C.E.
7368 Chappell, W. R.; 14th Bty.
19691 Clowe, H. E.; 2nd F. Amb.
1395 , Clunne, G. J.; 18th Bn.
533 Cole, H. W.; 17th Bn.
5366 Coleman, W. A.; 15th Bn.
3731 Colless, X.; Ist Pnrs.
3755 Colley, E: A:; 43th §ll.
4004 Collinson, W. G.; 54th Bn.
37 63 Connery, R. F.; 56th Bn.
203 Connop, A. W.; Sge. Art.
"074 Cooke, G. J.; 4th F. Amb.
3148 Cometti, H. P.; 3rd Bn. C.C.
3083 Cooper, A. J.; Ist Bn.
54398 Cooper, C. A.; R.B.A.A.
HO5B Cox, R. W. L.; 9th F. Amb.
10875 Cox, 8. P.; A.M.C.
4757 Crawford, A. R.; 53rd Bn.
26472 Croft, F. J.; 26th Bty.
34726 Croker, C.; 11th Bty.
15098 Cresdee, J. F.; A.S.C.
412 Crowtlier, G.; sth M.C. Bn.
2887 Cunning, F. E. V.; I.4th L.H.
2387 Curley, W.; 56tl> Bn.
2314 Curtis, A.; Bth A.L.T.M.B.
2625 Curtois, L. R.; 56th Bn.
1 M S H I


Reg.
17190 Davidson, H. 104tli H. Bty.
2612 Dawes, A. E.; 3rd Bn.
32128 Deuahy, D.; Ist A.S.B.
5245 Devine, J.; 13tli Bn.
8333 Dixon, L. M.; Ist Pnrs.
1477 a Donnelly, J. N.; 34tli Bn.
2869 Dransfield, F. A.; 18th Bn.
336 Duncan, A..; 10th M.G.C.
66296 Duneombe, G. AV.; 20th Efcts.
87 Dromgoole, J. F.; 2nd F. Amb.
1709 Dwyer, V. A.; 12th L.H.
53719 Edwards, P.; 13th Bn.
2804 Ellis, E.; 3rd F.C.E.
3300 Empson, F. A.; 53rd Bn.
2814 English, L. F.; Ist M.G.C.
1594 Ennis, R. V. 2nd B.U.
70593 Everingham, H. G.; 34th Bn.
2896 Everingham, R.; 3rd Pnrs.
3068 Easy, A.; 12th F.C.E.
5502 Felton, R. C.; 15th F. Amb.
5567 Ferguson, A. B.; 19th Bn.
5333 Finnan, J. J.; 18th Bn.
3208 Fittock, V.; 54th Bn.
2896 Fitzgerald, M. .1. T.; 58th Bn.
2013 Fletcher, J. C.; 15th L.H.
7822 Gambrill, W. G.; 12th Bty.
20026 Goddard, E.; A.M.C.
2659 Goodchild, F. G.; 55th Bn.
10256 Goodliffe, R. J.; 105 th H. Bty.
892 Graham, A.; sth Pnrs.
2310 Greenup, J. H.; 12th L.H.
2826 Hadley, H.; 7th F.C.E.
2262 Halstead, T.; 56th Bn.
12478 Hancock, E. F.; 15th A.S.C.
1959 Hankinson, F.; Ist Bn.
4199 HanneHy, P. A.; 45th Bn.
3391 Hanson, F. E.; 54th Bn.
10050 Harber, AV.; 39th Bn.
590 Harper, J.; 24th M.G.C.
18675 Harrison, C. E.; 26tli Bty.
3311 Harrison, F. G.; 55th Bn.
7485 Harrop, H. C.; 4tli Bn.
430 Harvey, J. J.; 30th Bn.
2916 Hayes, C. A.; 54th Bn.
2335 Hedley, AV. l\; A.F.C.
34753 llely, F. A.; A.E.C.
•964 Hely, J. T.; sth A.H.T.
6912 Hempel, P.; 20th Bn.
474 Henery, F.; 34th Bn.
3131 Hibburd, M. E.; 15th L.H.
2337 Hickey, J.; 33rd Bn.
3315 Hill, «1 ; A.F.C.
250 Hodgen, J.; 14th M.G.C.
113 Hodson, J.; 35tli Bn.
1415 Hogg, C. T.; 34th Bn.
2108 Holihan, P.; 12tli L.H.
7390 Hoskins, R. J.; 13th Bty.
2383 Howes, E. H.; 20th Bn.
Reg.
13993 Hull, B. H.; 6th F. Ami).
49 Humphreys, A.; 18th Bn..
3737 Hunt, H.; Ist Bn.
1935 Hutchings, W. E.; 45th Bn.
26393 Hutchinson, A. 8.; 25th Bty.
54683 Hynson, D.; 35th Bn.
8420 James, K. C.; 14tli A.S.C.
521 Jamieson, F. W.; 20th Bn.
2929 J ebb, L. M.; 1.C.0.
22087 Jeffery, F. A.; F.C.E.
2154 Jenkins, W. T. IX; 2nd Pnrs.
4584 Jennings, C. (!.; 7th Bn.
2844 Johnston, C. 8.; sth F. Ainb.
2941 Jones, T. A.; Ist L.H.
8731 Jonscn, O. 0.; A.G.B.D.
11083 Kennedy, C. J.; 2nd F.A.B.
7514 Kennedy, H.; 12th M.G.C.
4321 Kercher, H. E.; 56tli Bn.
6338 Kidd, T.; 18th Bn.
19541 Kelly, E. W.; 45th Bn.
29304 King, R.; sth F.A.B.
2355 Kinsella, G.; 3rd Bn.
3323 Knight, 5.V.8.; Bth L.H.
3614 Lafferty, E.; Ist Sig Sq.
18120 Laughton, W. J.; G.B. Sigs.
32995 Lawrence, G. G.; 4th F.A.B.
288 Leacey, C. H.; A.P.C.
2407 . Linnegar, M. W.; 12th L.H.
14490 Lloyd, J. H.; Ist A.G.H.
2431 Lowrey, A.; 3rd Bn.
849 McCartney, S. J.; 34tli Bn.
9917 McClusky, C.; 9th F.C.E.
162 McConnell, J. G.; 4th D.A.C.
9432 McDonald, J.; A.S.C.
36645 Mcllonell, J. D.; 37th Bty.
1222 McGillieuddy, F.; 30th Bn.
35638 Mackay, E. G.; 49th Bty.
274 Makeig, J. H.; 19th Bn.
5135 Matthews, A. B.; 3rd Bn.
17837 May, D. E.; 7th F. Anil).
7531 Cpl. Mercer, H. St. A.; Ist Bn.
2949 Cpl. Miller, J. D. McK.; 3rd Bn.
3091 Cpl. Miller, W. G.; 35th Bn.
1690 Xisch, E. J.; I.C.C.
432 .Voir, F. E.; 54tli Bn.
4430 Nonk, A.; A.M.C.
13815 A orris, A. L.; Ist A.C.D.
2488 Sad/Sgt. Mitchell, C.; 27th Bty.
14921 Nesbitt, N. M.; A.A.P.C.
4744 Newcombe, J. E.; 25th Bn.
13900 Noble, J. 8.; A.S.C.
75 O'Connor, J. J.; 2nd M.T. Co.
4499 Ottway, L.; A.C. Sch.
4868 Osmond, N.; 56th Bn.
1208 Owen, J. E.; 35th Bn.
13950 Padman, C. A.; A.S.C.
I M S H 1


Beg.
2878 Page, W. 8.; 7th L.H.
3206 Palmer, G. A.; 4th Bn.
60080 Parkine, P. R,; 53rd Bn.
22.15 Pattison, IX A.; 6th L.H.
870 a Pearce, W. C.; A.E.C.
1642 Percy, N.; 4th D.H.Q.
20863 Petersen, L. L.: Ist P.C.E.
5103 Phillips, M.; 56tli Bn.
2766 Phillips, T. M.; 3rd Bn.
4216 Preo, J.;
3438 Pybus, .1. H,; 7th L.H.
6400 Quinsey, 11. T. 50th tin.
2050 Rankin, A.; Ist Cam. C'ps.
3669 Rees, A.; A.E.M.M.B. Co.
4230 Richardson, W.; 56th Bn.
2961 Robinson, .F; 14th L.H.
3308 Roots, A. L.; 6th L.H.
2235 Roots, A. G.; 53rd Bn.
2856 Richards, I). 11.; 52nd Bn.
7713 Ross, G. L.; sth F.A.B.
2229 Rowlands, A. W.; 13tli Bn.
17275 Saudcls, W. L.; A.M.G.
2198 Sanders, A. L.; Ist P.C.E.
723 Saunders, W. 50th Bty.
20783 Sanderson, .1. R.; 4th Bn.
3684 Savage, .1. P.; A.E.M.M.B. Coy.
7316 Scott, C. H.; 13th Bn.
6620 Scott, IX J. C.; 18th Bn.
3262 Scale, E.; 56th Bn.
404 Seaton, J. R.; 19th Bn.
13761 Shelton, W.; 16th A.D.U.S.
4301 Shippen, W. ,1.; 2nd Bn.
3111 Siblv, (X; 4th Bn.
3460 Silcoclt, C. H.; sth 1). Sigs.
58942 Smith, G. A.; 35th Bn.
5883 Smith, H. A.; A.M.T.S.
26398 Smith, .1. S.; 51st Btv.
12065 Smith, O.; 9th P. Amb.
5189 Smith, W. R.; 2nd Bn.
685 Solomons, M.; 13th Bn.
5200 Souter, L. W.; 2nd Bu.
3502 Stewart, V. A.; 23 M.G. Co.
6357 Stiles, R. B.; Ist P. Amb.
2987 Stollery, G.; 54th Bn.
57018 Sturgiss, R. B.; 3rd G.S.R.
3908 Sutton, A. A.; 18th Bu.
2082 Snowden, X. V.; 9tli T.M.B.
1670 Shearer, E. W.; 3rd I). Salv.
18739 Shand, C. M.; 7tli P.A.B.
992 Tamlyn, AY.; Bth M.G. Co.
2988 Taylor, C. R. J.; 57th Bn.
6155 Taylor, J.; 19tli Bn.
6155 Tavlor, J.; 19th Bn.
6400 Taylor, J.; 19th Bn.
3929 Taylor, W. J.; 4th Bn.
428 Thackeray, H. B.; 23rd H.G. Co.
6558 Thistlethwaite, P. H.; 4th Bn.
2453 Thomas, R. W.; sth San. Sec.
3848 Thompson, W. R.; A.M.T.S.
3766 Thorburn, M. T.; 7th L.H.
3774 Ticiak, S. L.; A.E. Co.
Retf.
50362 Tierney, A.; 12th L.H.
3458 a Totterdell, W.; 53rd Bn.
60298 Trotter, H. L.; Ist Bn.
2792 Tnrley, K.; 30th Bu.
2696 Vaskess, H. A.; 113tli Bty.
3892 Vickery, E. A.; 2ncl A.G.'H.
6599 Wakeford, C. J.; 2nd Bn.
22177 Wallace, B. T. M.; 2nd F.C.E.
3259 Want, E. R.; 45th Bn.
350.3 Ware, A. S.; 13th Bn.
2073 Wark, J. T. W.; I.C.C.
2403 Wathen, J.; T.M.C.
3268 Watkias, J. W.; 3rd Bn.
605 Watson, W.; 33rd Bn.
3546 Watson, W.; I.C.C.
6845 Way, J. R.; 35th Bn.
3324 Webb, E. C.; 13th Bn.
10012 Webster, E. J.; 9th P. Amb.
3918 Weekes, R. C.; 39th Bty.
797 Wetherell, P. R.; 2nd A.M.T. Co.
2749 Whale, W.; A.B.D.
.1779 White, T.; 19th Bn.
1425 Whitter, J.; 35th Bn.
3444 Whyms, R. 8. D.; 4th Bn.
4330 Wiekham, C'.; 13tli Bn.
2650 Wild, W.; Ist L.H.
15743 Willey, W. H.; 14th P.C.E.
2429 Williamson, A.; 34th Bn.
18556 Wynter, R.; 25th Bty.
901 Young, W. G.; 36th Bn.
NOMINAL ROLL OF VICTORIAN PERSONNEL.
6343 Acott, J. H.; 2nd P.C.E.
3678 Adamson, C. E.; stli Bn.
575 Aitken, G. P.; 31st Bn.
9781 Ball, G. G.; Ist A.G.H.
1362 Bailey, G. M.; stli Bn.
60642 Baker, H. E.; 7th Bn.
370 Baldwyn, T.; sth Bn.
16107 Beriman, A.; 114tli Bty.
5547 Bischoff, C. 8. E.; 22nd Bn.
1234 Black, G. C.; 39th Bn.
361 Bloomer, J. P.; 13th M.G.C.
2575 Boase, T. W.; 2nd P. Amb.
3773 Bond, J. H.; 24th Bn.
523 Bowler, M.; A.B.C.
557 Bragg, W. M.; 37th Bn.
2296 Burke, .1. V.; 3rd M.G. Bn.
8803 Caldwell, J. T.; 106 th How. Bty.
5064 Campbell, J. J.; 6th Bn.
891 Cloonan, J. A.; A.P.C.
3512 Cochrane, I). J.; 3rd Pnrs.
4140 Cook, J. A.; 13th M.G.C.
2793 Colee, R. G.; 38th Bn.
6485 Coleman, A.; Bth Bn.
55352 Collins, J. A.; 6th Bn.
734 Collins, J.; 46th Bty.
1925 Conquest, A. G.; sth Bn.
61377 Cooke, S.; 14th Bn.
I M S H I


Keg.
638 Cooper, L. E.; A.F.C.
2808 Coots, J. W.; 14th F. Amb.
X4B Cosgriffe, E.; 3rd Bcli.
1515 Cottrell, J. B.; 36th H.A.B.
6650 Cowling, F. G. B.; 6th Bn.
5062 Crammond, K. T.; 7th Bn.
1681 Cranston, F.; 60th Bn.
2955 Cregan, E. F.; A.A.V.G.
8638 Croll, J. G.; 3rd A.D.U.
1904 Cunningham, G. H.; 23rd Bn.
4381 Curley, J. A.; 24th Bn.
3025 Campbell, A. C. M.; 13th Bn.
3109 Davis, 1). A.; Bth L.H.
2999 Dean, J. 101 st Bty.
1666 Dean, W. H.; 6tli F.C.E.
3083 Devonshire, W.; 15th M.G.C.
1918 Dimmiek, F. E.; 21st Bn.
3384 Dingwall, E. G.; 60th Bn.
1879 Digby, W.; Bth L.H.
16215 Dinsdale, T. J.; A.A.B.C.
1536 Doyle, J. P.; 12ml Plus.
2811 Dunkley, C. J.; sth D.A.C.
6314 Durant, W. P.; 6th F. Art.
201 Eadie, J.; 7,tli F. Amb.
34949 Eddy, F. H. E.; 47th Bty.
6308 Edmonds, G. J.; sth A.B. Grog.
653 Edwards, H. N.; 31st Bn.
1669 Edwards, O. A.; 21st Bn.
7858 Edwards, K. W.; 7th F. Amb.
5727 Egan, J.; 23rd Bn.
4643 Ellis, D. G.; 102 nd H. Bty.
22020 Ellis, A. W.; 30th Bty.
6133 Ellis, B. G.; sth A.BG^R.O.C.
640 Spr. Fairweather, J.M.; Big. Service.
27760 Fitzpatrick, J. M.; 54th Bty.
5596 Fletcher, C.; 21st Bn.
6553 Flynn, S. J.; 14th F. Amb.
3045 a Freckleton, A. P.; 59th Bn.
5271 Froment, P.; 3rd Big Ser.
2460 Furmston, E. M.; 24th Bn.
3466 Gard, V. H.; A.F.C.
19138 Gevlo, Y. R.; A.M.C.
4044 Gorman, T. H.; 29th Bn.
7596 Gough, C. Y.; 6th Bn.
574 Gregory, W.; 2nd Tun.
1546 Griffiths, A.; 25th H. Bde.
39644 Griffiths, J. S.; 9th Bty.
3307 Grigg, F. G.; 46th Bn.
3402 Groves, A. J. G. S.; 59th Bn.
9570 Gwytlier, P. P.; 9th Bty.
15133 Hale, L. G.; 114 th Bty.
3790 Hall, M. M.; 14th Bn.
2802 Hall, R. T.; Rly.
5364 Harper, A. G.; 22nd Bn.
1762 Haydon, T. H.; sth Bn.
3644 Hayes, V.; 58th Bn.
2876 Hearnden, W. H.; stli F.C.E.
1097 Heaton, W. A.; A.F.C.
3646 Hick, A. L.; 58th Bn.
5342 Higgs, A. H.; 2nd Tun.
Keg.
4210 Hoare, J. H.; 14tli Bn.
1600 Hoare, W. B.; 3rd A.F.C.
10317 Hodges, H. G.; 12th F. Amb.
A 907 Hodgson, F. W.; 3rd Pnrs.
547 Hogan, E. B.; A.L.R.C.C.
14960 Hoskins, A. A.; 113 th H. Bty.
362 Howe, V. S.; 24th Bn.
11850 Humbert, C. H. P.; 105 th H. Bty.
7874 Hutchison, L. C.; 9th F. Amb.
4715 Hutchinson, A. H.; 23rd Bn.
3810 Hutton, D. A.; A.E.C.
2033 Hey ward, G. O.; Ist F.C.E.
2567 Hodges, R. K.; 10th M.G.C.
763 Hamilton, E. W.; 3rd Bn.
2272 Irwin, C. E.; 38th Bn.
4838 Isaacs, 8.; 7th Bn.
2771 Jardine, J. W.; Bth L.H.
607 Jensen, A. R.; 37th Bn.
2674 Jewell, G.; 7th Bn.
890 Jones, A.; 113 th H. Bty.
1560 Keast, P. V. E.; 3rd Pnr. Bn.
432 Kellow, W. J.; 38th Bn.
6521 Kendall, J. G.; sth Bn.
5134 Kennett, 8.; Bth Bn.
6710 Langan, A. T. ]).; 12th Bty.
5598 Langford, F. L.; 3rd Bty.
3837 LaWford, J. A.; 6th Bn.
50183 Leamey, R. J.; 22nd Bn.
597 Leeson, A. B.; 3rd I.C.C.
8212 Levy, C. M. K.; Ist Tun. Coy.
4075 Liddicutt, J. T.; 29th Bn.
4465 Lorkin, J. M.; 9th M.G.C.
3252 Macdermott, W. E.; 39th Bn.
2199 Maclean, G. L.; 38th Bn.
6374 Marchant, F. C.; 10th Bty.
34976 Matheson, K. G.; A.I.F.H.Q.
3657 McDonald, W. L.; A.E.C.
3451 McFadyen, C. J.; 59th Bn.
612 McFaull, F. P.; Ist A.L.R.O.C.
12964 Mcintosh, J. A.; A.A.S.C.
17087 McKenzie, C. J.; 14th F. Amb.
81 McKenzie, J. N.; Ist A.C.C.B.
2381 McKenzie, K. B.; 13th L.H.
61197 McLarty, A. J. C.; 10th G.S.R.
16.96 McLeish, C. S.; 24th Bn.
4171 McLeod, W. L.; 60th Bn.
451 McMahon, L.; 21st Bn.
26688 McNeill, L.; 16th Btv.
14517 McPherson, D. F.; 43rd Bty.
6310 Miles, 8. G.; sth Bn.
55187 Mille, L. R.; Bth Bn.
38521 Missen, A. S.; 6th B.A.C.
2300 Morrison, W. C.; 58th Bn.
2962 Murphy, A. J.; 15th F.C.E.
3760 MePhee, J.; 13th Bn.
51427 Nias, J. W.; Ist A.T.C.
61672 Nicholls, E. W.; 58th Bn.
2379 O'Connor, J. J.; 46th Bn.
1 M S H I


Reg.
4862 Osborne, V. R.; 58tli Bn.
2245 Owen, F. A. H.; 59th Bn.
1308 Oxlade, H. L.; A.V.C.
3584 Playle, F. R.; 14tli Bn.
3136 Price, G. F.; 38th Bn.
2884 . Price, H. G.;. 58th Bn.
482 Price, W. G.; 24th Bn.
432 Punton, R.; 23rd Bn.
36534 Purss, W. E.; 3rd D.A.G.
5449 Sgt, Randall, A.; 12th F.C.E.
8493 ER/S/Sgt. Renshaw, P. A.; 3rd A.L.H.
6381 Pte. Rhodes, J.; 6th F. Amb.
64507 Tpr. Reid, S. B. W.; Bth A.L.H.
651 Pte. Rivett, W. H.; 38th Bn.
2891 Pte. Robertson, A. J.; sth Bn.
3464 Pte. Ross, W. L.; 57th Bn.
61686 Pte. Rothque, A.M.; 12th G.S.R.
2246 Pte. Rowe, C. T.; 46th How. Bty.
28411 Gnr. Rowse, R.V.; 102 nd How. Bty.
7245 Spr. Ryan, R.; Ist A.T.A.E.
558 Pte. Ryan, W. J.; 10th M.G.
2770 Pte. Sandeman, C. A.; 58th Bn.
1401 Pte. Shalders, H.; 39th Bn.
1553 Pte. Smith, M.; 23rd Bn.
1301 Sgt. Smith, W. D.; 38th Bn.
341 Sgt. Smith, G. G. V.; 29th Bn.
3507 Tpr. Schier, H. A.; Bth L.H.
2451 S/Sgt. Snellin, J.M.; 56th Dental.
3922 Pte. Soutter, A. D.; 24th M.G.
537 Sgt. Spiers, G. F.; A.I.F. H'q.
641 Spr. Stanton, W. F.; Bth A.L.H.
10780 Sgt. Steel, G.; A.S.C.
29813 L/Cpl. Story, R. A.; 119 th How. Bty.
3470 Pte. Strachan, A. A.; 46th Bn.
2472 Pte. Stratford, E. C.; A.E.C.
5211 Pte. Strickland, A. J.; 60th Bn.
5687 Cpl. Summers, N.; 23rd Bn.
1949 ER/Sgt. Sutherland, A. B.; 22nd Bn.
3010 L/Sgt. Swaffield, J. B.; 29th Bn.
1085 Dvr. Smith, F. P.; 6th B.A.C.
1952 a Pte. Senior, G. W.; 46th Bn.
22134 Stott, L. C.; 7th F.A.B.
1909 Pte. Toohey, W. J.; 60th Bn.
6322 L/Cpl. Totton, A. J.; 6th F. Amb.
2647 Pte. Turton, H.; 42nd Bn.
7833 ER/Cpl. Tilley, S. G.; Aust. Corps H'q.
35886 L/Bdr. Usslier, O.; 46th F.A.B.
1674 G.S.M. Vearing, V.; sth Bn.
7915 L/Cpl. Ward, V.; A.A.M.C.
2225 Cpl. Watson, A. F.; 7tli Bn.
2158 Pte. Watson, A. V.; 38th Bn.
5428 Pte. Watson, C. H.; 22nd Bn.
6363 Pte. Watson, R.; Bth Bn.
6972 Pte. Waugh, R. F.; 23rd Bn.
4250 Cpl. Waxman, E.; 21st Bn.
2045 Pte. Wells, W. J.; 26th Bn.
Beg.
1026 Pte. Wilkinson, B. H.; 7th Bn.
428 Sgt. Wiilingham, A. W.; sth Bn.
1681 Pte. Yanner, G.; 71li Bn.
NOMINAL ROLL OF SOUTH AUSTRALIAN
PERSONNEL.
3004 Pte. Ahern, W.; 2nd Pnr. Bn.
6223 Pte. Amor, L. C.; 27th Bn.
1654 Pte. Allert, P. W.; 4th San. Sect.
771 Cpl. Bagley, C. L.; 32nd Bn.
2286 Bennett, E. H.; 10th Bn.
19a Pte. Bennett, P. H.; 6th A.8.0.K.
3797 Beythein, C. A. H.; 32nd Bn.
2387 Pte. Blum, A. j| 12th M.G.C.
3982 Pte. Bowering, V. H.; A.A.D.O.
5049 Pte. Boyee, W. A.; 10th Bn.
16963 Tpr. Broad, H. M.; C.C.P.A.
17683 Pte. Garden, E.; Ist A.G.H.
8692 Sgt. Charlton, N. N.; 2nd A.A.H.
448 T/Cpl. Christensen, E.; 43rd Bn.
1951 Dvr. Clifford, A. J,; 55th Bty.
63949 Pte. Davies, J.; A.A.M.G.
7223 Pte. Duke, A. A.; 10th Bn.
1082 Pte. Edwards, P. A.; 27th Bn.
3836 Pte. Ellis, B. N.; A.A.M.C.
3049 Tpr. Ferguson, S. A.; 9th A.L.H.
4711 Pte. Freeborn, E. H.; 27th Bn.
2616 Pte. Goldsworthy, W. II.; A.A.V.G.
2817 Pte. Gower, A.; 43rd Bn.
4721 Pte. Grundy, J.; A.A.Y.C.
18466 Spr. Haines, F. A.; Ist Sig. Co.
29951 Ftr. Hammond, H. G.; 104 th How. Bty.
13023 Dvr. Hand, C. P.; 2nd M.T.C.
20.596 Pte. Harrington, A. L.; A.A.M.G.
2232 Spr. Harris, E. C.; 4th A.8.G.R.0.C.
56032 Dvr. Harvey, W. A.; 3rd Bty.
4449 Pte. Hollang, R. P.; 27th Bn.
4307 Pte. Johns, J. F.; 32nd Bn.
1558 Pte. Johnson, J. T.; 15th F.A.
7233 Pte. Johnston, J.; 10th Bn.
5148 L/Cpl. Lowe, F.; 10th Bn.
5479 Tpr. Luxmore, W. G.; 9th A.L.H.
6292 L/Cpl. McArd-e, L. J.; 27th Bn.
12644 Pte. Magary, D. D.; 11th F. Amb.
2280 Pte. Matthews, C.; 48th Bn.
3869 Pte. Mohen, H. R. .J.; 50th Bn.
3223 Sgt. Moynagh, A. J.; 27th Bn.
20579 Pte. O'Donohue, P. J.; A.A.M.C.
1166 Pte. O'Leary, P. J.; 10th Bn.
I M S H 1


Reg.
354 Sgt. Pedlar, J.; 43rd Bn.
182 C.Q.M.S. Phillips, J. D.; 43rd Bn.
3342 Pte. Potts, H. L.; 27th Bn.
2715 Pte. Price, C. E.; 4th F.A.
4836 Pte. Prosser, P. T.; 43rd Bn.
3362 Tpr. Richards, J. H.; 9th A.L.H.
5861 Cpl. Ryan, J.; 50th Bn.
3555 Tpr. Scholz, J. P. A.; 9th A.L.H.
2719 Pte. Source, C.; A.E.C.
2616 T/Sgt. Simeoek, E. B.; Ist F. Amb.
2109 Spr. Simmons, W. G.; 15th F.C.E.
1983 Pte. Slater, W. M.; 27th Bn.
470 T/Sgt. Smallacombe, C. D.; 4th H.G.C.
2981 Pte. Smith, W. T.; 50th Bn.
2758 Tpr. Smyth, S. C.; 9th L.H.
1275 Pte. Spencer, T.H.A.; 32nd Bn.
138 L/Sgt. Stacey, N. A.. J.; 3rd F. Amb.
630 Pte. Sullivan, P.; 32nd Bn.
3619 Dvr. Teague, M. V.; 10th Bn.
6902 Pte. Treagus, P. J.; 27th Bn.
16772 Pte. Tunbridge, P. F.; 3rd A.A.H.
4897 Pte. Waldie, A. C.; A.C.C.B.
2931b Pte. Waterman, S. T.; 10th Bn.
3531 Pte. Watson, F. T.; 50th Bn.
3877 Dvr. Wehrmann, O. A.; Ist F. Amb.
3434 Tpr. Whitehead, F. F.; 9th A.L.H.
36086 Gnr. Whyte, R. L.; 7th Bty.
5298 Pte. Wil'son, J. R.; A.I.F. H'qrs.
18041 Spr. Young, J. W.; 2nd F.S.E.
NOMINAL ROLL OF WESTERN AUSTRALIAN
PERSONNEL.
4639 Cpl. Beer, W.; 11th Bn.
14676 Pte. Brennan, G. E.; Ist A.G.H.
917 2/C'pl. Brighton, C. A. C.; sth A.8.R.0.C
3319 Dvr. Bullock, F.; 10th L. H.
6061 Pte. Cole, R. T.; 28th Bn.
6008 Pte. Cowley, E.; 16th Bn.
4095 R.S.M. Colson, F. N.; 28th Bn.
3144 Pte. Denning, E.; 4th D.T.
2658 Tpr. Dodd, C.; 10th L.H.
6212 Pte. Dodds, J. A.; 16th Bn.
260 Cpl. Davies, E. O.; 10th L.H.
7728 Pte. Dower, H. J.; 16th Bn. ,
3418 Tpr. Drew, J. H.; 10th L.H.
14652 Pte. Edmondson, F. C.; 14th F. Amb
3499 Pte. Ellis, F. G.; 44th Bn.
416 Pte. Evans, G.; 28th Bn.
3652 Pte. Fox, M. G.; 51st Bn.
2662 Pte. Frapple, W. J.; 48th Bn.
2658 Pte. Frea, G. G.; 48th Bn.
Reg-.
6513 Pte. Flynn, J, A.; 16th Bn..
2355 L/Cpl. Gittos, A. W.; 10th L.H.
3265 Tpr. Green, G.; 9th L.H.
5451 Pte. . Jenkins, G.; A.G.8.1).
6533 Pte. Jenkin, W. T.; 51st Bn.
2841 Pte. Kinrade, S. D.; 51st Bn.
2277 Sgt. Murphy, M.; ]2th Co. Engrs.
324 W/O. Mahon, J. J.; 11th Bn.
18723 Pte. MeDougall, W. N.j A.M.C. Rfets.
8987 Dvr. Oliver, R.; 114 th Bty.
3489 Tpr. Robinson, D. P.; 10th L.H.
232 l)vr. Roney, C.; 16th Bn.
6480 L/Cpl. Rooke, C. H.; sth A.M.T. Coy.
7819 Sgt. Rodgers, R. R.; 11th Bn.
5655 Pte. Rogers, E.; 28th Bn.
7432 Pte. Rushton, J. C.; Ist San. See.
62 Dvr. Shaw, J.; Ist M.G. Sec.
72008 Tpr. Shineburg, S. A.; C.C.E.
596 Sgt. Smith, C.; 51st Bn.
155 Sgt. Seymour, H. L.; 28th Bn.
1422 C.Q.M.S. Thomas, C.; 3rd M.G.C.
3377 Dvr. Ward, L. G. C.; Bth S.S.
8035 Pte. Walton, G. A.; 16th Bn.
3605 Pte. Watson, J. H.; 44th Bn.
966 Cpl. Watts, W.; sth A.8.G.R.0.C.
6847 Spr. Wheatley, T.; 3rd Tun. Coy.
3454 Sgt. Williams, T.; 6th F.C'.E.
6171 T/Sgt. Worner, C. V.; A.A.P.C.
NOMINAL ROLL OF TASMANIAN PERSONNEL.
22400 Gnr. Barwick, D.; 110 th How. Bty.
51541 Pte. Bradshow, G.; 39th Bn.
15738 Pte. Butters, P. N.; A,A.S.C., 12th Bn.
6968 Pte. Butterworth, W. E.; 12th Bn.
11057 Pte. Cooley, E. P.; Ist A.G.H.
7966 Pte. Crossin, J.; 12th B.N.
3803 T/B.S.M. Eastman, H. C.; 9th Bty.
4913 Pte. Fogarty, R. H.; 13tli F. Amb.
63270 Pte. Ford, T. M.; 12th Bn.
2826 Pte. Haig, J. E.; 40th Bn.
3053 L/Cpl. Harris, F. W.; 40th Bn.
1752 Sgt. Hart, R. J.; A.F.C.
1751 Pte. Hawkins, H.N.; 51st Bn.
2575 Pte. Hean-, C. P.; 40th Bn.
8152 Sad/Sgt. Learoyd, R. E.; 17th Bty.
1001 Sgt. Lovett, L. F.; 26th Bn.
2118 T/Cpl. McElwee, G. E.; 9th M.G.C.
15131 Gnr. Moore, A. ,T.; 14th F.A.B.
I M S H I


Beg.
1960 Tpr. Oliver, R. J.; 3rd A.L.H.
2498 Spr. Roberts, J.; 6th R.O.D.
7700 Dvr. Robinson, R. J.; 6th M.T. Coy.
490 Pte. Rogers, G. J.; 40th Bn.
1083 Sgt. Rose, L. T.; 15th Bn.
7342 Pte. Stride, R. V.; 12th Bn.
Beg.
1567 Sgt. Stubbing®, W. J.; 51st Bn.
17817 Ilvr. Swinton, H. E.; 11th E.C.E.
56627 Pte. Wliisli-Wilson, T.Y.; 12tli Bn.
8167 Sgt. Wood, Gr. W.; 16th Bty.
1958 Cpl. Young, A. M.; 40th Bn.
I M S H I
H. Cook & Co., Print., 200 Castlereagh Street, Sydney.




