

EfVr
Bfo 1
ffitMcatcfc
TO THE
Jlcmorg
MRS. BUDDLE,
of tije 3Late tlfyomaa Bubble,
33g ijcr CtyltirctL
WILSONS AND HORTON, PRINTERS, AUCKLAND.




»membt 9nee
Jte* Bubbly
OUc/ a/
Cd/Aav-mjt Aei AAAam/ C cAA c AAtc/c/A,
■w//A w-Ao-m y dA& Aac/ AAec/ mu/ At/ouiec/ jAi luaiAt
6 0 jyeaid, one/ w-Ao c/'ec/ cm /Ae 2 6/A cAtm#, ///S.
©he following pages consist of an ©bituarg Notice, bmtten tig tfjc
3&eb. < S. i&eiti, anti a HHemorial Sermon preaefyeti fag tfje same frienti
of tije ticceascti, at pitt Street SJEeslcgan ©ijttrcfj, on Suntiag, tfae
7tfj September, anti form a fitting tribute to tije memorg of one of
tljc best of motljcv?.


2


©bitirarg Notice
OF THE DEATH OF THE LATE MBS. BUBBLE,
Extracted from “ The New Zealand Methodist .”
UCKLAND cemetery has, of late years, become rich in
graves of Wesleyan pioneer missionaries. The
liberal response given by Auckland Methodists
to Dr. Kelynack’s recent appeal on behalf of the Islands
mission might, we venture to think, be fairly accepted as
evidence of the wholesome influence exerted by these
veterans on the community among whom they spent their
later years.
On the 28th of August, the company that thronged
Grafton Eoad Church, and the large concourse assembled
in the cemetery, told of the decease of some one held
in special esteem by the early settlers. All classes were
represented, but the large proportion of old colonists was in
proof of the proverbial tenacity of friendship formed under
conditions by which true principle is tested. They had met
in “ God’s acre ” to place the mortal remains of their
beloved fellow pilgrim, Mrs. Buddie, in the same grave
where, fourteen months before, they had laid the body of
her honoured husband. “ Lovely and pleasant in their
lives, in death they are not divided.” The marble which
marks their last earthly resting place forms one of a group
of grave stones redolent of hallowed, honourable, and
inspiring reminiscences, which no student of the early
history of this colony can afford to disregard.
Mrs. Buddie was born at Barnard Castle, Durham, on
21st October, 1813. She was daughter to Mr. William
Dixon, whose name appears on the early Methodist records of
her native town as class leader and local preacher, and whose
obituary is published in the Methodist Magazine for April,
1832. We cull one suggestive sentence from this obituary:
3


“ The last time that Dr. Coke visited Barnard Castle, which
was only a short time prior to his sailing for Ceylon, Mr,
Dixon put five pounds into his hand, and from that time to
the day of his death he was one of the best friends of the
cause of missions.”
Our departed sister was converted in the tenth year of
her age. Her first class-ticket, with the text, “ The fear of
the Lord is the beginning of wisdom,” bears date June,
1821. As a young woman she seems to have been looked
up to by her brothers and sisters ; and her spare time was
fully and profitably occupied in the discharge of the duties
of tract distributor and class and prayer leader.
On arriving in New Zealand, by the mission brig
“ Triton,” in 1840, Mrs. Buddie gave herself heartily to the
duties of a missionary’s wife, at a time when mission work
in this country required no small measure of self-denial.
This she willingly rendered, and she won the love of the
Maoris by her earnest desire and constant effort to do them
good. To the end of her life our departed friend ever
evinced a warm interest in the welfare of the Natives ; and
there appears a fitness of things in the fact that she and Mr.
Buddie should both go home to glory from the near
neighbourhood of the old Native Institution, where Cod had
been pleased to bless their efforts for the salvation of the
Maoris by a gracious outpouring of His Spirit upon the
native students, resulting in many of them being brought to
a saving knowledge of Jesus Christ.
Of the forty-four years of our deceased sister’s New
Zealand career, four were spent at Waipa, ten in Southern
circuits, and the remaining thirty years in Auckland,
Onehunga, and at Three Kings Institution. As a pastor’s
wife among the, colonial population she ever manifested a
practical interest in all church work. As a class leader, in
visiting the people at their homes, either alone or in company
with her husband, watching by the sick bed, bidding
welcome to the new-comer, and taking her full share of work
in connection with the Ladies’ Benevolent Society, she
4


became indeed a “ succourer to manyand the memory of
her quiet Christian counsel and well-timed benevolence is
fragrant in all the circuits where she and Mr. Buddie
sojourned.
To young ministers the deceased was a judicious and
faithful counsellor, and to the wives of such of those as were
appointed to solitary circuits in this colony, or whose
destination was some one of the Island mission stations, her
friendship has often proved invaluable. Mrs. Buddie was
“ given to hospitality.” Her genuine generosity, and the
absence of all ostentatious display, rendered it easy for her
guests to feel perfectly at home while under her roof.
Occasionally it happened that the faith of friends in this
well-known virtue resulted in claims being made which
ingenuity was sorely taxed to meet.
By the members of her own family our departed sister
was deservedly revered and loved. The love seemed to
grow as years increased, and when bodily ailments and the
infirmities of age caused the mother to make larger demands
upon her children’s sympathy and presence, the claims were
answered with an affectionate promptitude and assiduity
which bore gratifying testimony to the efficiency of early
Christian nurture at home.
King Lemuel, in his portraiture of a good woman, says
“ Her husband is known in the gates when he sits among
the elders of the land.” The inference is plain, that to the
wife is due some measure of the excellence which causes the
husband to be held in esteem by his peers. No one will
question the leading place occupied by Father Buddie
among the elders of this land; and to those who knew him
most intimately his moral stature was only heightened by
the acknowledgment, which it delighted him to make, of his
indebtedness to her who had been his life-long, faithful, and
loving counsellor. Possibly some of the pastoral epistles
which, in his official capacity, our revered bishop found it
needful to address to some of the presbyters who were
occasionally tempted to be wilful, might have proved less
5


mellow in tone had they not passed under the eye of her
who ever pleaded that the “ unity of the Spirit might he
maintained in the hond of peace.” Our sister thus proved
herself to he, in the noblest sense, a true helpmate.
In her religious experience Mrs. Buddie was not
strongly demonstrative ; hut her piety was deep, consolatory,
and life-influencing. She delighted in the sanctuary
services, greatly enjoyed the social means of grace, and
prized family and private prayer. For God’s Word she
entertained a profound reverence. In her later years deafness
prevented her from enjoying the Word preached, and this
deprivation she felt to be a great loss, for which she sought
compensation in a more diligent use of the devotional
exercises of home life.
From the shock occasioned by the suddenness of Mr.
Buddie’s decease the heart-stricken widow never actually
recovered ; and from that hour she seemed to consider that
her earthly task was accomplished, and that the time of her
own departure was at hand. She was content to wait all
the days of her appointed time till her change should come,
but she evidently felt that to her death would be gain.
Gradually the insidious malady weakened her powers, and
loosened the cords of the earthly tabernacle. During the last
six weeks of her stay upon earth she suffered much, and
experienced only brief intervals of mental clearness. These,
however, were like gleams of heavenly sunshine, when her
testimony to the sufficiency of Christ as her Saviour was all
that her friends could desire. About ten days before her
death, as the members of her family were singing, at her
request, Mr. Buddie’s favourite hymn, beginning—
“ Thou Shepherd of Israel and mine,”
when they reached the line—
“ My spirit to Calvary bear,”
she interrupted them by saying, “ 0 yes, that’s it, ‘ To suffer
and triumph with Thee,’ my dear Jesus!” When asked,
“ Have you any fear of death ?” her face lighted up, and
she replied, ‘‘Fear! 0, no, what have I to fear? I know
6


whom I have believed.” “ What was that,” she enquired,
“ that Mr. Wesley said ?” “A sinner saved by grace,” was
suggested. “ No, I don’t mean that.” “Was it, ‘ln age
and feebleness extreme?’” inquired some one. “Aye,
that’s it,” she said; and then went on x’epeating the lines,
lingering with evident pleasure on the two last—
“ 0 might I catch a smile from Thee,
And drop into eternity.”
And now that Mr. and Mrs. Buddie are with the
“Spirits of the just made perfect,” heaven seems to us
nearer and more home-like. Say not that their interest in
us has abated, or that their influence over us has ceased.
From their past history and their present bliss memory and
faith will gather material which will serve as an inspiration
to well-doing; while the news of our proceedings, if we
prove true to our trust, shall serve to thrill with a deeper
joy the spirits of those who through faith and patience are
now inheriting the promises and walking in the light of the
Lamb.
“We shall meet again in peace
To sing the song of festal joy,
Where none shall bid our gladness cease,
And none our fellowship destroy.
There hand in hand firm-linked at last,
And heart to heart enfolded all,
We’ll smile upon the troubled past,
And wonder why we wept at all.”
A. R.
7


fEemmial Sermon
PREACHED AX PITT STREET WESLEYAN CHURCH, BY REV. A. REID,
ON SUNDAY EVENING, THE ?TH SEPTEMBER, 1884
Text.— “A woman that feareth the Lord, she shall be praised.”
—Proy., xxxi, 30.
''VT DISCOVERED the other day, in conversation with one
of our friends who has been a few years in the colony,
that on the part of many of the younger colonists—
that is those who have come recently to our shores —there
exists some confusion of ideas respecting the early days of
Christian work in these lands. Ido not mean this evening
to enter into any details respecting Mission work, hut just
to give one or two dates and two or three names, to serve as
land-marks, so as to render more clear our thoughts on the
subject of early Mission life in New Zealand.
The Wesleyan Mission to the Maoris was commenced
in the year 1822, by the Rev. Mr. Leigh. He had visited
this country in 1818, but he did not commence his Mission —
that is as authorized by our Conference —until the year
1822. This is one date that I wish our young friends to
note. The Church of England Mission had been commenced
by the Rev. Mr. Marsden in the year 1814. Mr. Marsden
and the Wesleyans over in the Sydney neighbourhood
were exceedingly friendly, and on the occasion of Mr.
Leigh falling into ill-health, Mr. Marsden recommended
him to pay a visit to New Zealand, that he might recruit
his health, and see whether there was not an opening
for a Mission to be undertaken by the Wesleyan Church.
The Church of England Mission, then, was commenced in
the year 1814—ours in the year 1822, Mr. Leigh only served
for a very brief time as a Missionary; his health failed, and
he was obliged to return to England. The Rev. Mr. Hobbs
8


entered this Mission in 1823—sixty-one years ago. He died,
as you know, last year, but his widow still lives in our midst.
The Rev. Mr. Wallis is the oldest Wesleyan Missionary
living in New Zealand. His ministry dates from 1833, just
ten years later than that of Mr. Hobbs, and he came to the
country at a time when the Gospel had commenced to tell
with wonderful effect upon the Maoris. They had glorious
times among the natives in those days. Missionaries now
have to toil without seeing very much fruit for their labour,
but then God gave them the joy of seeing the grand results
of their persevering endeavours, and about that time a large
in-gathering was made to the Church of Christ of those who
had believed unto righteousness.
The Rev. Mr. and Mrs. Buddie came to this land in the
year 1840. The date of their arrival was coincident with
the establishment of the colony. One of the actions of our
Wesleyan Body at home, in commemoration of the centenary
of the Methodist Church in 1839, was to purchase the
Missionary brig ‘ Triton,’ and her first voyage was to bring
out Missionaries to these islands, of which band of Mission-
aries Mr. and Mrs. Buddie were members. This was in the
year 1840, so you see our departed sister had spent in this
country very nearly forty-five years. It was my painful
privilege to deliver, fourteen months ago, a funeral sermon
from this pulpit on the occasion of the departure to heaven
of our two veteran Missionaries, Buddie and Hobbs, and now
a similar task devolves upon me, the occasion being the
ascension to glory of the then sorrowing widow, but the now
blessed partner of Father Buddie. All present know that
Mr. Buddie’s death was sudden—more like a translation than
death; —he literally “ ceased at once to work and live.” To
the loving wife whom it widowed the shock proved a not
distant death-knell. She never really rallied from the effect
of the sudden blow, and from that moment considered her
task as accomplished, and that now her departure was at
hand. From an outside standpoint it was easy to prove that
there was very much in our deceased sister’s circumstances,
9


and in connection with the branches into which her family
had divided, which was calculated to render life desirable,
and to representations of these facts she would listen respect-
fully, and her judgment appeared to concur ; hut her heart
felt otherwise, her affections were elsewhere, and while, in
the spirit of a true Christian woman, she was willing to wait
all the days of her appointed time until her change should
come, yet she evidently felt that to her death would he gain.
God has granted our sister her desire. She has gone up to
glory, and we are not here to-night to grieve. We are not
here to mourn and lament, but rather to rejoice. Solemn
joy ought to he the prevailing feeling.
“ With songs let ns follow her flight,
And mount with her spirit above;
Escaped to the mansions of light,
And lodged in the Eden of love.”
A memorial sermon is useful, in as far as it affords an
opportunity for tracing the operation of Divine grace in the
life which we venture to review, in order that we may see
how God works; and that we ourselves may he encouraged,
stimulated, and rendered more diligent than we have been
in prosecuting our pilgrimage, and in the discharge of
Christian duty.
In the paragraph read as the lesson, and from which
our text has been selected, we have a portrait in outline, of
a perfect woman drawn by an artist divinely inspired. To
some of the more salient features of this picture we propose
to draw attention, as finding practical illustration in the life
of our departed sister. The groundwork of the whole char-
acter here delineated is that which is noted in our text as the
source of her praiseworthiness, viz., the fact that she was a
woman who feared the Lord. The fear of the Lord, or God-
fearing, is one of those comprehensive terms employed by
writers, inspired and ordinary, as descriptive of the whole
range of religious creed and pious action; it includes the
whole of what a man believes religiously, and the whole of
his action consequent upon his creed. We find that this
10


term is very frequently employed to describe, just in a word,
the whole character. “The fear of the Lord,” says the
Psalmist, “is the beginning of wisdom.” “ God is greatly
to be feared in the assembly of His saints, and to be had
in reverence by all them that are about Him.” Job is
described as a man who “feared Cod and eschewed evil,”
and Cornelius, we are told, was “ a devout man who feared
Cod.” Now, in the minds of some, young people especially,
there is the idea connected with this term “'fear” that it
means to be afraid of consequences—a slavish, timid, dread
of punishment. This is not at all the idea conveyed by the
words employed here. This fear is the awe, the reverence,
the solemn feeling that is occasioned by the contemplation of
greatness, of holiness, of vast benevolence, of grandeur of
character. This is the fear which is expressed by the term
as here employed, and in many other parts of Holy Scrip-
ture, and this is the fear to which we make reference now as
constituting the basis of all sterling worth; a holy dread of
acting in contrariety to, or out of sympathy with, the Divine
will, the will of the Creat First Cause, our Father in
Heaven. This is the feeling which serves at the groundwork
of all genuine character possessed by moral agents. This
fear is consistent with the character of one who has never
known guilt, and who may be absolutely sinless. Aye,
and in such a character you will find this affection most
perfectly developed. The sense of guilt, the consciousness
of having offended, adds a new element to fear, but when
that sense of guilt on the part of the believer has
been eliminated through a conscious, loving, trust in the
Son of Cod, this fear which we are attempting to describe
remains in all its purity. They are those who have been
conducted from the terrors and blackness of Sinai, by way
of Calvary, to sing the songs of Zion, whose natures are most
perfectly brought under the influence of the fear that is
here spoken of.
“ Here the whole Deity is known.”
The unconverted man has only a partial acquaintance with
11


God; it is impossible for him to experience hallowed, loving
submission to the Omnipotent while he is in a state of
antagonism to truth, while his nature is out of harmony with
the nature Divine ; but when our spirit is brought into
perfect sympathy with the mind and will of God, in con-
sequence of what we discover to have been transacted on
our behalf by God’s Son on Calvary, it is then that we
experience and sing of
“ The guiltless shame, the sweet distress,
The unutterable tenderness,
The genuine meek humility,
The wonder, ‘ Why such love to me ?’
It is easy to understand how this fear of the Lord must serve
as the root-principle of all true character in created moral
agents. There may exist sections of morality, detached
fragments of goodness, in persons who are destitute of piety,
and occasionally these shine with rare beauty in the midst of
much that is morally diseased; but there can be no sound,
symmetrical, and complete human character of which
God-fearing serves not as root and stem. On the other
hand, let this be present, and growth in every spiritual and
moral virtue becomes necessary, possible, and delightful —
necessary, because such growth is the natural expression of
the indwelling piety which is at once a living and vitalizing
principle of moral beings; possible, because the agency
helping is Divine, and therefore adequate; delightful,
because happiness is the state of feeling experienced
when all the conditions of a true life are met, and, in the
case supposed, compliance with the will of the Lifegiver
being the normal condition of the agent, blessedness is
perfectly assured.
Our deceased sister served the Lord with the fear of a
loyal subject, the awe of a dutiful child, the reverential
gratitude of a sinner saved by grace through the atoning
sacrifice of Jesus Christ. This was the root-principle of
her character, and this must serve as the basis of all
true religion. Young women, you must possess this;
12


whatever else you lack, this is indispensable. It is ab-
solutely necessary that you fear God with a loving awe.
There must be the blending of fear with confidence and
sacred j oy,
“The speechless awe that dares not move,
With all the silent heaven of love.”
We utterly despair of securing true womanhood or
genuine manliness where reverence for Giod is absent and
sacred subjects are treated with levity. The prevailing
larrikinism and lawlessness are the appropriate outcome of
the absence of God-fearing, the penalty which society is
bound to pay for tolerating education from which religion is
eliminated. My young lady friends, you cannot be true
women unless you have the fear of God. TVbrdly-minded
men even are sometimes struck with dread when they meet
with an irreligious woman. Oh !it is dreadful to think that
any woman to whom is entrusted the moulding and forma-
tion, the development, of the character of the men who
are to be our rulers, legislators, and citizens, should
undertake the task apart from the help which she expe-
riences in consequence of her relationship, through Christ, to
God as her Father. My dear young friends, this piety is
indispensable; without it you cannot succeed, and I trust
that the majority, nay, all the young ladies here, will say,
“ Never will we attempt life’s solemn task save in the fear of
the Lord ; never will we endeavour, for our own gratification,
to enter upon life’s duty apart from this leaning upon God,
this constant desire to secure His approbation ; this lowly,
sanctified submission to His blessed will; and this acceptance
of all the help which He, in the munificence of His love,
proffers to every true heart.” Oh ! if our young women
would make their minds up to this, if mothers and fathers
would see that their girls are deeply possessed by this spirit
of God-fearing; we should have discovered the cure for
many of the ailments from which society is now suffering.
We now pass on from considering this root-principle of
all true womanly character, to inquire respecting some of its
13


modes of finding expression, some of the methods by which
it proves its existence ; and I confess—and I dare say you
will sympathize with me in this confession —to be almost
startled, when we come to look at the delineation of
character given here, after what we have been saying
respecting the necessity for all true womanly character to be
grounded in the fear of God, to find such a portraiture of
domestic economy, so much of purely secular activity. And
yet, my dear friends, is not this in perfect harmony with the
facts of every-day life ? Are not our days, and sometimes a
large portion of our nights, principally occupied with secular
pursuits ? Those worldly toils are necessary for the main-
tenance and promotion of our own and others’ welfare, and
in our present condition they are indispensable. We must
be secular to a very large extent, and with this fact the
teaching of the Old Testament and of the New is in perfect
accord. The teachings of the Bible are not one-sided; they
make distinct recognition of the fact that man is a worker,
that man is made for action, that there is no room for indo-
lence in this world if man means to hold his own and become
what God intends him to be; and hence we find, however
startling it may seem at first, that the emphasis laid on
domestic economy, on the industry of home-life, is in perfect
harmony with things as they exist. Some may, and often do,
complain of this arrangement. We think we are over-
burdened with toil, and we yearn for rest. Well, if our
longings be for legitimate rest in the intervals of work, or
deliverance from cruel, tyrannical drudgery by which our
energies are overtaxed, our plea is valid; but if the com-
plaint be entered as against industrial pursuits, against the
ordinary average work which is necessary in order that a
comfortable subsistence may be secured, it must be remem-
bered that immunity from these industrial tasks would
simply be a curse to us. God knows what is best for men.
He knows that men require such a measure of physical
exercise, and ordinarily we find that the men who are denied
this in consequence of the nature of their pursuits are
14


obliged to find it in some form or other; they are obliged to
take exercise which has no aim except to secure the healthful
development of the frame in which the spirit dwells.
Action is freedom; indolence is imprisonment, a bondage in
which the victim is self-immured. The man who has no
heart for work cannot be a healthy man; that man is
inflicting upon himself a dire castigation and denying
himself much of the purest enjoyment which Heaven has
decreed shall be possessed by God’s subjects. But, then,
some one interposes, “ Wasn’t toil appointed for punishment
because of man’s transgressions? ” No, not as toil. This
is the great mistake, to suppose that Adam had nothing to
do in Eden. He was put there for the purpose of taking care
of the realm over which God had made him ruler, and when
he disobeyed, when he failed to yield compliance to the
arrangements of the Almighty, God altered the conditions
of toil and imposed burdens in connection with that toil
as a punishment for disobedience. It is the object of
the Gospel to ameliorate those altered conditions; and
just as fast as men are brought by the control of self
and by the control of nature—when men rise to the
dignity of sons of God, and become princes, morally as
well as intellectually, when nature bows down to them and
they, as God’s representatives, employ nature’s powers in
God’s service—so are they delivered from the hard conditions
imposed upon man when he was excluded from Paradise.
On examination, my dear friends, you will find that there is
not the slightest necessity existing at the present time for
the conditions of Adam’s life when he came forth from
Paradise continuing to be the conditions of our lives; but
physically, intellectually, and spiritually there is emanci-
pation for man in proportion as he obtains the Paradise
spirit, the spirit of obedience, through prevalence of which
Paradise shall be restored all over the world. Christian
civilization, in carrying out what from female constitution
and character is evidently the law of nature, entrusts
woman with the indoor care of the family at home. Here
15


she finds most ample scope for the expenditure of all her
strength, the gratification of her love, the employment of
her knowledge, thrift, and forethought. The particular
duties of a wife and mother in modern times differ some-
what from those of ancient days, as in the case of the distaff
and spindle, now disused ; hut the principle for all eras and
every variety of civilization is this, that a God-fearing
woman will be industrious, painstaking, and provident in
the discharge of these domestic responsibilities as the
outcome of her piety, and indeed as part of her religion.
Our departed friend furnished a beautiful example of the
operation of the law to which I have directed your attention
both in her own person and in the case of those entrusted to
her care for training. No indolence, listlessness, or refined
self-indulgence, no fastidious ennui, no luxurious condition
of dissatisfaction with things as they are, and querulous
crying for things as they might be—according to the
estimate of those whose ideal of life has been mainly
derived from second-rate works of fiction—found any nook
of shelter in the home where our esteemed sister presided ;
but a diligent, cheerful, health-producing educational
activity everywhere prevailed in that home, and all con-
cerned are the better for it to-day. Because they were
taught to yield obedience to the law of activity in life at
home their own homes will be the brighter, the good
influence will go down as a family heirloom ; the influence
resulting from a hearty acceptance of God Almighty’s
arrangements, as taking the place of that miserable thought
that we are to sit down and lament because God gives us
work to do.
A Christian lady who has received a womanly culture
is, when in health, at the mercy of no servant. She is
thankful to God that she can procure the help of a good
domestic, and the servant ought to be thankful to secure
such a situation; but if Bridget chooses to be off there is
not the slightest necessity for everything coming to a stand-
still in consequence. The wife possesses such perfect
16


familiarity with, all the duties connected with domestic
economy that the husband, unless he be oyer-inquisitive,
scarcely knows what has occurred, especially if there be
daughters to help, because everything is carried on with the
same beautiful regularity as before. Girls, the first factor
in the constitution of a true woman, next to the fear of God,
is a perfect mastery of all the details of home life. Now,
bear this in mind—it needs to be spoken out in these days—
that, next to the fear of God, the first qualification for lady-
hood is a perfect mastery of the principles and practice of
housekeeping, and the ability to dispense with all help
whatever if the providence of God should necessitate such
self-denial. Never, my dear young friends, consider any
home duty as beneath you; never regard it as menial
if its discharge is to contribute to the comfort of home, but
rather rejoice in it as a Heaven-bestowed opportunity to
prove your loyalty to God, and your deep attachment to the
members of your family, where your agency will be prized
if you have true ladyhood in you—that ladyhood which
consists in determining to discharge all womanly duties
imposed upon you by Almighty God.
The complement of industry is a sufficiency of the good
things of this life. This is God’s law, this is nature’s law ;
the exceptions to which only prove the rule. Wherever
there is poverty at home, in the ordinary condition of
things, it is the result of some violation, in some
quarter, of nature’s laws. It may not be the head of the
house who has broken those laws ; society, government, or
some members of the family maj frustrate the Divine purpose,
but it is God’s will that, where the law of domestic industry
is observed, there shall be a competency of the good things
of this life to be enjoyed. The effect of the violation of this
law does not always first fall upon the evil-doer, the victim
is very frequently not the sinning party; and this only
reminds us that we exist as families, and we exist as com-
munities, and we have it in our power, not simply to hurt
ourselves, but to do evil to our fellow-men, and to the
17


members of our own households. God’s law, however, is
that there shall be co-operation in order to benefit to the
utmost every member of the household and every member
of the community, and thus we see that the law of loving
co-operation at home and in society is best adapted to secure
the competency which is the complement of industry. From
the description given in our chapter, I ought to have quoted
one or two verses in support of the position I have been
endeavouring to establish. We read that “ the heart of
this woman’s husband doth safely trust in her, so that he
shall have no need of spoil.” No need to be like the ancient
borderers of Scotland and England when barns were bare
and stalls empty, when they had to visit their neighbours’
estates in quest of booty. There shall be no need, on the
part of the chieftain or any member of the clan to which
this family belongs, to adopt violent methods, no need to
look for any windfall, there is sufficient forethought, thrift,
and good management on the part of the mother and wife
in this home to render unnecessary anything of this kind.
And then, again, we read that “ She is not afraid of the snow
for her household,” not afraid of anything that may occur,
“ for all her household are clothed with scarlet.” Not only
has she the necessaries, but she is able also to secure the
elegancies of life. “ She maketh herself coverings of
tapestry ; her clothing is silk and purple.” And who has a
better right to wear these ? It is the law of nature and
the law of God that women who manage well shall be
rewarded. The quality of this woman is such that “ the heart
of her husband doth safely trust in her.” The man who has
a wife like this can go about his business affairs hopeful
and encouraged; he feels that he can employ the imple-
ments of his craft with double diligence because all he earns
will be well spent. The idea of our chapter is this, that
the prosperity of the household depends as much on the
good management of the housekeeper as it does on the
powers of acquisition possessed by the bread-winner. And so
it is. Experience tells every man who knows anything of
18


the world that it is so. Oh lit is delightful for the husband to
earn for the sake of such a spender, and it is delightful for
the wife to spend on behalf of such an earner. It is a
sacred trust. She feels that she possesses the confidence of
her husband. He places perfect reliance in the stewardess
whom Grod has blessed him with. The law of home rule is,
Each for the other, both for the children, all for Grod ; and
thus domestic economy is almost exalted to the position of a
sacrament, under the benign and munificent arrangements
of our loving Father. The blessedness of promoting each
other’s comfort and happiness to such an extent as this
constitutes a veritable heaven upon earth. This law, which
makes competence the complement of family industry under
Christian control, found most gratifying illustration in the
life of our esteemed sister, who, having proved faithful in
the things of the mammon of this life, is now in possession
of the heavenly riches.
We now pass for a moment from action to speech. We
will just select one or two thoughts. We find that the
speech exactly harmonizes with the action. “ She openeth
her mouth with wisdom, and in her tongue is the law of
kindness.” There is a harmony here, as those will see who
are curious to study the poem. It is a beautiful poem. I
advise my young lady friends to commit this chapter to
memory, and bring their conduct to its test once a month.
You will discover, looking at it from an intellectual stand-
point, that there is a beautiful harmony as between industry
and its complement of competency, and between well-
directed studiousness and the consequent ability to gratify
the promptings of kindness. My dear friends, you know
how pleasant it is to listen to words of wisdom from our
wives, mothers, and sisters; aye, and sometimes we may be
ashamed of ourselves that we have been so careless of their
advice, often so soon forgotten. There seems to be a special
insight given to them—to our sisters, mothers, and wives—
by which they can at once gather up the whole argument and
give advice off-hand. As a rule they can do this better than
19


we can. There is, or has been, sometimes a disposition
among some of our lady friends to deal in small talk and
tattle, and to talk about matters which are not profitable.
What a beautiful contrast is presented to us in the fulness
of knowledge possessed by multitudes of Christian women in
the present day. The kindly disposition, the sanctified love,
which leads them to utilize their knowledge for the best
purposes, not at home only, but in the neighbourhood
everywhere, is one of the most hopeful signs of our times.
Our sister counselled well, counselled wisely —we have
had experience of it —and she counselled lovingly; and when
consulted as to how proceedings should be taken in difficult
cases, invariably advised on the side of mercy, in favour of
the gentler methods, and against having recourse to the
severe. This is so grateful to women that I do not require
to emphasize it in the presence of the ladies here. You
know, I believe, most of you, if not all, the sweet satis-
faction which God gives you to enjoy when you have
restrained your husband or brother from proceeding to
severe measures, when, perhaps, in justice they might have
done so. Permit a word to my young lady friends again
here, because their benefit is the object of our speaking
to-night. I would remind you that the acquisition of
knowledge is well. Get all the knowledge, all the education,
you possibly can ; not for the purpose of display, that is
weak ; not simply for the love of knowledge itself, although
this is commendable ; but that you may have the supreme
satisfaction of not simply, when in a difficulty—when placed
in circumstances that demand action—screaming and washing
that you could do something ; but that you may, deftly,
lovingly, and satisfactorily, utilize your knowledge to the
diminution of pain, to the averting of evil, to the healing
the spirit that has been wounded, and contributing generally
to the comfort of others. You, my dear lady friends, are
the Divinely-ordained comforters of the race. Do not be
ambitious to acquire legislative power. Do not listen to
that pseudo-liberalism which wants women to go and do the
20


work of men. Leave the legislation to the men, and see
that you make and train men who shall be competent
legislators. Do your own work. “ She who rocks the
cradle rules the world.” Be satisfied to educate the men,
and send them forth such specimens of true Christian man-
hood as shall render it unnecessary for the voice of the
country to select our leading legislators from the ranks of
Freethinkers. If the mothers of New Zealand would be
true to their trust, and properly educate the men who
are to frame and administer the laws, we should not be
compelled to submit to the degraded position—l speak
it fearlessly—in which we stand to-night as a Christian
community. We ought to have Christian men to take
the foremost places. Mothers, see to this, instead of
clamouring for the rights of men, for the opportunity to
legislate. It is a confession of weakness. It is a declara-
tion on your part that your sons have been so insufficiently
educated that you cannot expect fair play from them, so
you must go yourselves and make the laws. Make the men,
then the laws will come all right. You, mothers, wives, and
daughters, wield supreme power in the education of the
race —wield it well.
The last jewel in the coronet of this queenly woman
to which we direct attention, is charity—charity to the poor.
“ She stretcheth out her hand to the poor.” Then, as if to
emphasize it, as if the one hand was not expressive enough,
“ She reacheth forth her hands to the needy.” Just
like a woman. She sees that there is some suffering, and
she is ready to help it; on closer inspection she discovers a
more severe case than she had anticipated, and both hands
come to the rescue. All religions and all religious teachers
have ever spoken in favour of charity to the poor. In the
Old Testament it is presented as a foremost virtue, and the
Lord Jesus Christ enthrones it above all the other virtues by
declaring that charity done to the poor He regards as a
personal favour. Oh! what exaltation is here. Why it puts
the ladies of the present day on exactly the same level which
21


those ladies enjoyed who lived in the days of Jesus, and who
went about with Him and ministered to Him and His
disciples. At the present time there is a large sisterhood
who are giving themselves wholly to the task of alleviating
the sufferings of the poor, the afflicted, and the distressed;
and a still larger sisterhood who are devoting a large portion
of their time and means to this needful work. My dear
sisters, in this direction very much remains to be done. She
whose removal to Heaven is the immediate occasion of this
address, was one of the ladies who laid the foundation of the
Benevolent Society in Auckland, which for so many years
did such excellent work in this direction. The work has so
extended that the constitution of that society has been
modified, and I understand that the difficulty is now, not so
much to get ladies to administer the supplies as to secure
funds which are needed. Let me say one word to you.
Every household ought to have some private outlet for its
benevolence in this direction, and if such were the case in
all our congregations, if the girls were trained by the
mothers just to do a little, I think that we should take in
all the cases in this needy class. Our girls should be
educated as young deaconesses. There is some old lady
invalid who needs to be visited, and some kindly contri-
bution by the family could be made, some reading could
be done. There is some overtaxed mother who needs an
hour’s help nursing the little one or the sick one, and our
girls would feel it so sweet to be thus engaged, just to have
an hour spent in this way, and they would be educating
these womanly, charitable, and Christian qualities on which
the weal of the community so much depends; doing much
to bring back those who have strayed from the Church;
something to bridge over the chasms by which society is cut
up into sections; much to restore to the Church of God those
who have wandered because of what they deemed the
hardness of Christianity. Mothers, women, think of this;
girls think of this, pray about it; see whether you cannot fill
the Sunday-schools with those street waifs, and see whether
22


you cannot, with the help of your brothers, arrest the tide of
lawlessness in connection with the youths of this city, I re-
member well, in the early days, when our Benevolent Society
first came into operation, how painstaking Mrs, Buddie
was in investigating the cases, and in making provision for
them, in her district, and how many applications there were
made for contributions which could be spared; and this leads
me to say it does not need so much money as some may
think. Kind words, loving actions, articles that are no
longer wanted in the house, but yet have a good deal of wear
in them, are all valuable. I remember how we used to be
applied to for these ; and I remember, too, how the junior
members of the household had an opportunity of cultivating
their benevolence by being made the collectors and dis-
tributors of those contributions towards the alleviation of
the suffering around. If our young people will avail them-
selves of such opportunities, we shall all be blessed.
We have said a few words about our departed friend’s
life. How did she die ? Just as might be expected,
peaceful and happy. Not trusting in her own works, but
resting fully upon the atoning sacrifice; and experiencing a
calm, confident, trust in the Lord Jesus Christ, and an
unfaltering expectation of Heaven, which she blessedly felt
was her home, through the mercy of God. The last prayer
we heard her utter was, that Jesus might give her patience
so that she might glorify Him to the end. That prayer was
heard.
“ They who die in Christ are blest,
Ours be then no thought of grieving;
Sweetly with their G-od they rest,
All their toils and troubles leaving.
So be ours the faith that saveth,
Hope that every trial braveth,
Love that to the end endureth,
And through Christ the crown secureth.”
Faith, hope, charity, were all beautifully illustrated in
our beloved sister’s life. My dear sisters, my dear friends,
all of us, let us live so that when we shall be spoken of
23


hereafter there shall he much that is good, much that shall
be to the glory of God, to be said respecting us, as there is
much to be said creating thankfulness, hopefulness, and
satisfaction of soul in the presence of God respecting her
whose spirit is now with Christ. Amen.
Dark before dawn—the darkness of death ;
Dawn after darkness—crown of thy faith.
Darkness shall break before the grey dawn ;
The sun’s golden hues bring in the full morn,
Morn everlasting, day without night,
Reflex eternal of Heaven’s pure light;
Light in the darkness chasing the gloom,
Light from God’s throne gilding the tomb,
Light from the star that ushered Christ’s day,
Light from the Cross shines on thy way.
Fear not the valley tho’ death surround thee:
The shadows must fly ; light is all round thee.
Dread not the stream tho’ deep, dark, and chill,
The Arm you have loved encircles you still;
The Star of your Faith still rules o’er the night,
The Star that was ever your guiding light;
The Light that has led thee o’er life’s rough way,
The Light that has cheered thy life’s darkest day,
The Light that has guided and nourished and blest thee
Will follow thee still—thy Father says, “ Rest thee.”
Then “Rest thee,” dear mother, thou’st earned thy rest;
Lay thy wearied head on dear father’s breast;
Range with him the fields on the banks of the river,
And traverse the golden streets together;
Sail with him over the crystal sea,
Drink of the fountain, pluck fruit from the tree,
List to the service of praise and song,
Find friends of old in the heavenly throng,
Breathe the pure air of the heavenly clime;
Rest for eternity—thou’st outlived time.
24




