

IN DEFENCE
OF FREEDOM!
THIS ITEM BELONGS TO THE
FREE THOUGHT
AND
RADICAL COLLECTION
BEQUEATHED TO THE
NATIONAL LIBRARY
BY
HARRY HASTINGS PEARCE
MELBOURNE CITIZENS'
PROTEST AGAINST
REPRESSION


Free thought and
radical collection
bequeathed to the
National Library of Australia
by
Harry Hastings Pearce


On February 23, the night after the Federal Government had
aimuuncea its proposal to oan the Communist Party and to take
repressive action against the people’s liberties, a pubhc
conference in the Kelvin Hall, Melbourne, unanimously con-
demned the proposal.
Called by the Democratic Rights Council at 10 days’ notice,
this Conference reflected the broad and growing support among
the Australian people for action to strengthen our democratic
way of life.
The Conference endorsed plans for an early deputation to the
Attorney-General (Senator Spicer), and to Victorian A.L.P.
Senators. It also decided to co-operate with similar bodies in
other States in organising a deputation to Canberra to wait on
the Prime Minister and Mr. Chifley.
A resolution was carried unanimously, condemning the pro-
posed legislation and affirming that, if passed, it would lead
inevitably to further acts of repression. The Conference said it
would carry on the struggle “until the menace of intolerant
suppression had been removed for all time.”
The Democratic Bights Council issues this pamphlet in the
hone that its message will help convince you of the present
strength of democracy in Australia and of the justice of its
cause.
STAND UNITED IN DEFENCE OF FREEDOM!
RESOLUTION
Carried unanimously by the Conference
This Conference, convened by the Democratic Rights Council,
strongly condemns the proposal of the present Federal Govern-
ment to introduce legislation banning the Communist Party and
authorising interference with the right of trade unionists and
members of other organisations to choose their own officers in
accordance with their own wishes;
We affirm our belief that such legislation does not have the
support of the Australian people, and that attempts to introduce
it will provoke great antagonism and distress in the community
and inevitably give rise to further acts of repression;
We declare our determination to defend the traditional Aus-
tralian liberties of free organisation and free speech, and to
resist any intimidation or victimisation of people for their poli-
tical views;
And we avow that we will do all in our power to rouse public
opinion against such legislation and carry on the struggle for
democratic rights until the menace of intolerant repression is
removed for all time.


WHO SUPPORTED THE CONFERENCE?
Although it was called at only ten days’ notice, a wide cross-
section of the community was represented, either personally
or in the numerous messages sent.
Support came from trade unions and workshops, ministers of
religion and Christian organisations, ex-servicemen and women,
University and cultural bodies; peace organisations, women’s
and youth organisations, writers and artists, scientists, doctors,
teachers and other professional people.
THESE ORGANISATIONS SENT DELEGATES
Amalgamated Engineering Union
Arts Council of Australia (Victorian Division)
Australian Communist Party
Australian Meat Industry Employees’ Union
Australia-Soviet House
Australian Student Labour Federation
Blackburn and Mutton Labour Party
Boilermakers’ Union
Builders’ Labourers’ Union
Building Workers’ Industrial Union (City Branch)
Building Workers’ Industrial Union (Victorian Branch)
Council for Civil Liberties
Democratic Rights Council
Democritus League
Dudley Street Railway Workshops
Eureka Youth League
Federated Clerks’ Union
Federated Engine-Drivers’ and Firemen’s Association
Federated Ironworkers’ Association
Federation of Resistance to War
Good Companions
Holmesglen Housing Factory Employees
Jewellers’ Union
Jewish Council (Youth Section)
Jolimont Railway Workshops
K.M. Steel Employees
Liquor Trades Union
Melbourne University Labour Club
Miners’ Union
New Housewives’ Association (State Council)
New Housewives’ Association (Carlton Branch)
New Housewives’ Association (Fitzroy Branch)
Newport Railway Workshops


New Theatre ' 11 ' • ‘' * ■
North Melbourne Railway Workshops
Peace Council (Youth Division)
Peace Council (Carlton Auxiliary)
Peace Council (Carnegie Auxiliary)
Peace Council (Prahran and South Yarra Auxiliary)
Rationale Society
Realist Writers’ Group
Seamen’s Union
Tramways and M.O. Employees’ Association
University Free Thought Society
Westclox Factory Employees (Hawthorn)
Yarraville S.E.C. Employees
THESE ORGANISATIONS SENT OBSERVERS
Actors’ and Announcers’ Equity
Australian Student Christian Movement
Legion of Ex-Servicemen and Women (Melbourne Women’s
Sub-Branch)
International Union of Students
Jewish Council
Women’s Christian Temperance Union
AMONG THOSE ATTENDING AS INDIVIDUALS WERE:
Mrs. Maurice Blackburn (former M.H.R.)
Mr. B. Bryning
Rev. L. L Elliott
Mr. B. Fitzpatrick (Council for Civil Liberties)
Rev. R. Green (Christian Pacifist Movement)
Mr. Kevin Healy (W.A. State President of Communist Party)
Miss Edith Hedger (League of Women Voters)
Mrs. E. B. Heffernan
Rev. H. Horsfall (Past President, Baptist Union)
Dr. T. R. Kaiser and two other scientists
Several teachers
Mr. Percy Laidler
Mr. M. Nunan (State Councillor, Legion of. Ex-Servicemen)
Dr. G. P. O’Day
Rev. A. Pidd (Church of England)
Mr, K. Tolhurst (International Union of Students)


APOLOGIES AND MESSAGES OF SUPPORT WERE
RECEIVED FROM:
Mrs. R. Bell (New Housewives’ Association)
Rev. F. Byatt (Methodist Church)
Rev. Burgoyne Chapman
J. F. Chappie (General Secretary, Aust. Railways Union)
C. B. Christesen (Editor, Meanjin)
Professor C. Manning Clark (University College, Canberra)
Mr. W. Clay (Secretary, Social Services Dept., Churches of
Christ)
Dr. E. P. Dark
Eleanor Dark (well-known Australian Author)
Reverend J. Andrew Garson (The Manse, Murtoa, Vic.)
A. R. Goodman (President, Bendigo Trades Hall Council)
E. J. Hanson (Secretary, Queensland Branch, Painters’ Union)
William Hatfield (well-known Author, N.S.W.)
Rev. Victor James (Unitarian Church)
Senator. Charles A. Lamp (Launceston, Tasmania)
Monica Laurie
Rev. P. S. Lawrence
Councillor A. Macdonald, Footscray
Alan Marshall (well-known Australian Author)
Rev. Rex Matthias (Methodist Church)
John Morrison (well-known Australian Author)
Rev. D. Munro (Presbyterian Church)
Dr. M. D. Oeser
Katherine Susannah Prichard (well-known Australian
Author)
D. N. Pritt, K.C. (former Labour Member of House of
Commons)
Dr. Guy Reynolds
Patrick L. Troy (Secretary, Coastal, Dock, Rivers and Harbor
Works’ Union of Workers, Fremantle, W.A.)
Napier Waller (famous Australian Mural Artist)
E. L. Williams (Principal, College of the Bible, Melbourne)
Rev. Clifford Wright (Methodist Church)
EXTRACTS FROM MESSAGES READ TO CONFERENCE:
D. N. PKITT (Cable): “Much distressed to learn that legisla-
tion is threatened to proscribe a political party and remove
union officials. This is surely contrary to all Australian and
British traditions and can only defeat its own ends. It would be
one more unhappy step on the road to intolerant and semi-
fascist overriding of all democratic liberties in the interests of


reaction. Wish you all success in the long and hopeful struggle
against such tendencies. —D. N. Pritt.
K. S. PRICHARD (Telegram): “Never was tnere greater need
for all who love Australia to unite for defence of their democrat c
rights. Yours for peace and progress.— Katherine gussanan
Prichard.”
PATRICK L. TROY: “ Our country has a rich and inspiring
history of struggle for the freedoms which are consistent with
the full dignity of a human being living in an enlightened Bge.
These struggles have hitherto been successful. I have no doubt,
under the inspiration of the historic achievements of those
fighters of the generations gone before us, that we too shad
develop and extend our democratic freedom in the manner wmch
is worthy of the name Australia.”
SENATOR LAMP: “Will you please convey to the Conference
my sincere appreciation of the great work you are doing to pro-
tect the civil rights of the people?” . ,
WILLIAM HATFIELD: “Now, not a minute later, is the time to
raise the cry: Not one foot backward from here!”
REV. F. BYATT: “I am in total agreement with the purpose
of the meeting, and am deeply concerned at the abuse of free-
dom in our country. . .”
PROFESSOR C. MANNING CLARK: “One thing I am certain
of —truth and justice are on your side.”
REV. VICTOR JAMES: “ Why should we be afraid of the
other man’s point of view? What has truth to fear from the
expression of that point of view? John Milton once summed
up the whole matter in these words: ‘Between truth and false-
hood grapple; whoever knew truth put to the worse in a free
and open encounter?’ ”
ALAN MARSHALL: “Ideas cannot be banned; you can’t sup-
press the thoughts of a people.”
OPENING OF CONFERENCE
Owing to the unavoidable absence of Mr. A. Cregan, President
of the Australian Railways Union, Mr. J. C. Chandler (State
Secretary of the Building Workers’ Industrial Union), presided
at the Conference. He said:—
“The Democratic Rights Council is a non-party body which
was formed last year to defend the liberties of the people.
“It arose from a conference which enquired into attempts to
break up meetings which were being addressed by Mr. John
Rodgers and other speakers, and helped to arrest these
attempts.
“But there is a new threat to us now, because the new.


Government of the country has openly stated its intention to
impose a ban on a political organisation and on other people.
“It is a threat to the liberties of all people, and because of
this the Committee of the Democratic Rights Council has
invited you to attend here and make decisions.
“This is a conference comprised of all sections of the com-
munity. By our common action,” said Mr. Chandler, “this
threatened ban and repressive legislation can be defeated.
“Many Trade Unions have expressed hostility to the proposal.
The A.C.T.U, has sent a deputation to the Prime Minister
making representations against the proposals to ban the Com-
munist Party and to interfere in the internal affairs of the
Trade Unions. So, too, have dozens of Unions, which have
passed similar resolutions and sent them to the Government,
proving their determination to fight any further attempts to
bring fascism to Australia.
“As for the 8.W.1.U., I may say that on a national scale we
have expressed disapproval of all attacks upon people’s political
beliefs and on Trade Unions, and our building workers on the
jobs have unanimously carried resolutions condemning the
Government’s proposals.
“Unionists do not want to have their organisations broken
up in order that those who sponsor such legislation and who
represent the employers could be in a position to deal out their
will on living standards and working conditions.”
Mr. Chandler then introduced the Secretary of the Demo-
cratic Rights Council, the Rev. Frank Hartley.
THE REV. F. HARTLEY
I have come into this struggle because of my Christian con-
victions, and never at any stage have I been in a position where
I have felt that I have had to compromise those convictions,
which I hold very dear.
I have been on the platform with men who differ greatly
from my own opinions, but I believe it is only when people of
all opinions get together in an amicable way that their differ-
ences can be ironed out, and they can become real friends, even
though they have different philosophies. I am very proud to
call Joe Chandler here and many others like him, my friends.
I would be very disappointed if this meeting was made up of
people who were all Communists. I ould think it would be
a very poor show for the democracy of our country if, on such
a threat to something that was vital, only those people pro-
tested who were directly threatened.
I know there are people here to-night of all shades of opinion,


alive to the fact that it is Communists to-day, and after
they are suppressed, to-morrow it is the Jews, and then the
Trade Unions will be split in two, and then it will be the Church
—and then war.
Anyone can see what is going on in our community—that Is.
if they care to look. We have the history of Germany behind
us, and of how Hitler rose to power. . . We have seen how the
force° Ut f ° r impossible s y stem is suppression of people by
Au T e u e st W l94B CO rZL°i ? lUrches ’ met at Amsterdam la
August, 1948, resolved to oppose discrimination and nerse-
nu^fvJ 1 ° n reli S ion > politics or colour, and to defend
all those rights which the freedom of man requires.
**f. re * n Melbourne, only last night, the Reverend Palmer
Phillips in his Presidential Address to the Victorian Methodist
Conference, quoted the ruling given by the General Conference
riAff’ U f St^ a i aSIa ‘ T his declare ? Communism will not be
defeated by negation, nor will it be overcome by repressive
legislation. So you see, there is a vast body of opinion, many
who are violently opposed to the philosophy of Communism,
who are prepared, nevertheless, to say, “Well, we have got to
fight this out by argument, and by throwing the whole thing to
history and experience.” 5
There are people who would say that the only answer to
Communism is war. As one person said to me recently, “I
would rather have war than Communism.” But if you did have
war, you still would not stop Communism, because history
proved that after every war, Communism grows stronger.
if f Wa + n j d- efeat it, and if it has to be defeated,
it must be defeated in the realm of the mind, and the evils which
it attacks have to be rooted out of the community.
. Tl } e al an swer of course, I believe, is the law of love work-
ingin life, and that cannot be brought about by force, cannot
be brought about by banning people. It can only be brought
about by getting into the stream of life and bearing in your
own body the strain and tension of life, and winning people by
the quality of your life and the quality of your cause. And if
there is anything in this religion that I believe in, it will win
its way by rubbing shoulders with Joe Chandler and all others
—supporting them when they are right, telling them when they
are wrong, and accepting such advice in return—and by going
forward together to a better life whicn I believe will be estab-
lished on this earth.


SPEAKERS FROM THE FLOOR
MR. J. BIRT (Miners’ Union): I represent a body of people
who have felt the weight of repressive legislation during the last
year. The history of that year will be in the minds of everybody
here, because we saw the spectacle of a Labour Government, in
more than one State, bringing down repressive legislation
against the workers, and even freezing funds and putting
leaders in gaol. We claimed we had the right to strike, a demo-
cratic right in the Trade Union Movement which has been
exercised for years to improve conditions.
The Miners’ Union is in support of this Council. I can
remember when it was inaugurated—when we were talking
about Mr. John Rodgers. We found right in the midst of a
“labour” town people who were fascist-minded, disrupting the
right of assembly. We feel, along with other workers, that the
time has come when we have to be right behind a movement
of this nature.
Members in our organisation have elected leaders irrespective
of what political philosophy they followed, and any attempt by
any Government to remove those leaders because they may be
Communists (or to ban any political party) will result in
trouble, as far as the mining industry is concerned.
REV. ROBERT GREEN (Christian Pacifist Movement): As a
member of the Christian Pacifist Movement I am perhaps more
fundamentally opposed to Communism than the Liberal Party.
Nevertheless I beg of you not to stoop to the method of the
ban.
Suppression is wrong in principle and bad in its effects on
both parties. The only way to conquer an idea is by dissemin-
ating a better one.
To say that democracy must protect itself against its enemies
is begging the question. It must —but not by undemocratic
methods which deal a death blow at the thing we are trying to
save.
MR. M. NUNAN (Leading Member of Ex-Servicemen’s
Legion): Ido not represent any branch officially, but I am con-
fident that I speak for the great majority of ex-servicemen in
my organisation.
A proposal to ban Communists from the Legion has twice
been brought up at special meetings, and each time this repres-
sive motion has been defeated.
I consider that conscription is another attempt to take
democracy from the Australian people and train them for a
further war.


Although the State body of the Legion supports conscription,
it was not carried by a very large majjority at the Legion Con-
ference and many branches oppose it.
MR KEVIN HEALY: I deeply appreciate the opportunity of
sneaking here to-night—in the first place, because it is only
possible through my being able to defeat the Crimes Act in
November last, and secondly, because I can raise before the
Conference the case of Lance Sharkey.
Sharkey was gaoled for saying that Australian workers would
welcome Soviet troops if they came to Australia in pursuit of
an aggressor. The Soviet Union is a leading power in the
United Nations and a partner in the Anglo-Soviet Treaty.
I claim that these words were seditious only to those who
want to exclude the Soviet Union from friendship, and to those
who have been duped by war propaganda.
So long as the Crimes Act remains, there will be no effective
peace movement in this country. Sharkey was sent to gaol for
what was a peace statement, and we see the beginning of a
movement to make peace seditious.
All the history of fascism ( shows that what will be attacked
here is everything that is decent, democratic, progressive. We
are confident that this will not be allowed to happen, if the
unity expressed here to-night is expressed throughout Aus-
tralia —to defend democracy and peace.
MR. ROGER WILSON (Seamen’s Union): Speaking as a
member of the Seamen’s Union, we will support any resolution
in support of this Council.
MR. RALPH GIBSON (Australian Communist Party): I
asked to speak briefly because I want this Conference (which
is called to deal with the threatened ban of the Communist
Party) to hear the Communist Party’s attitude on it.
We are not simply concerned with the liberty of the Com-
munist Party. What concerns us most is that time and time
again in the last 30 years, in one land after another, an attack
of this kind upon the Communists has been the first step m a
general attack upon the liberty of the whole people.
The Governor-General’s Speech mentions not only the Com-
munist Party, but mentions “subversive activities of organisa-
tions and individuals.” That includes people outside _ the
Communist Party. As some people interpret “subversive
activities, they include activities for Peace and Union activities
to win higher wages. . ..
If the Government succeeds, no one knows how far it wm


go. It can be stopped only by the united will and action of the
people. The time for action is now, before our freedom of
speech and organisation has been further whittled away.
Seeing this especially fine and representative gathering, I
feel that this is a really big movement and I feel that it will win.
The power to charge people with “contempt of Court” has
been used lately to silence political criticism made by trade
unions and working-class newspapers. Those charged can be
denied trial by jury, and in fact, in the most recent Guardian
case, this right has been refused by the Crown Solicitor. The
right of appeal is in fact narrowly restricted, and there is no
limit to the penalty which the judge may impose. Thus, it is a
particularly dangerous threat to the people, and its extended
use should be fought by this Council.
J. O’CONNOR (Democratic Rights Council): We have heard
a lot of very good speeches, and I think that out of them arises
the necessity for setting tip some sort of permanent Council of
this nature with all organisations represented on it.
Secondly; we need to take back the decisions we make to-night
to the organisations from which we have come.
Thirdly, I would like to suggest the possibility and, indeed,
the need of co-operating with other interstate bodies of a like
nature. I understand that a Council similar to this has been
set up in Sydney and others are in process of formation in the
other States. I feel sure that in every capital city there must
be many citizens and organisations prepared to defend their
democratic way of life, and prepared also to defend it in com-
mon with people with whom, perhaps, they do not always agree.
Fourthly, I think we should enlist the support of all inter-
ested people here to-night, and ask them to join in deputations
to wait on the Attorney-General and the Labour Senators.
Senator Spicer stated that he Vfould consider meeting a depu-
tation when time permitted, and many expressions of view from
members of this Council have already been put before him.
Similarly with other Senators.
Finally, there is a great chance of bringing in many new
members of the Council from other organisations.
MISS EDITH HEDGER (a leading member of the League of
Women Voters) : While I support the objects of the Conference,
I should like to ask if trade unionists present could answer the
charge that the Unions are undemocratic and are dominated
by minorities, y


MR. A. CULLEN (President, Tramways’ Union): I would like
the opportunity of replying to our friend in relation to the
question of democracy in the Trade Union Movement.
At a meeting last night, our men decided to cease work. The
hall was packed out with 2,000 men (all who were off duty) and
there were only 20 who voted against the resolution. The deci-
sion of the men was passed on a show of hands. Ido not know
of any more democratic form of organisation than this, the
usual form of democracy as carried out and administered by
the Trade Union Movement. It is far more democratic than
many political parties in existence. The men themselves made
made the decision and not the officers. \
MRS. C. WILLIAMS (Federated Liquor Trades Union): I
have here a list of statements made against this threatened
legislation—they are being added to daily and hourly and are
being heard from this Conference to-night.
I can assure you that the evidence here is of the widest
possible opposition, and it does not come only from the militant
workers and their leaders, but from every section of the Labour
Movement—from churches, political and cultural organisations,
and from prominent individuals who represent a substantial
cross-section of the community.
Even the daily press, which has indulged in a barrage against
the Communist Party and against the Trade Unions, has itself
been subjected to the pressure of public opinion, and has had,
through its editorials, to cast doubts on the wisdom of the pro-
posed legislation, and has asked the Government to step warily.
There is no doubt that the pressure of the rank and file is
reflected in the attitude of the A.C.T.U. and A.W.U. officials
who have declared their opposition to this legislation. The
official attitude of the A.L.P. is against the ban, and so also
are those Senators who have been approached. Mr.
Broadby, in the Melbourne Herald of January sth, stated that
90 per cent, of the workers opposed the legislation.
The statement in to-night’s Herald that the Government may
drop the action against union rights is proof in itself of the
weight of public opposition.
DR. T. R. KAISER (Nuclear Physicist, formerly in C.5.1.R.0.):
I want to speak as one who has suffered from coming into con-
flict with authority in Australia, and being sacked from my
job because of political accusations. I was dismissed because I
expressed my opposition to certain actions of the Government


during the recent coal strike. I always thought I had a right
as a citizen to express my opinions even if they were in dis-
agreement with the Government.
I want to speak, on behalf of the scientists. It has been made
clear to-night that scientists hold a key position. They cannot
prevent current trends on their own. but they are being called
upon to develop new methods of mass destruction.
The spy scare has had the effect of sealing the lips of scien-
tists. The people I knew in the C.S.I.R. three years ago have
not changed their opinions—but they are no longer prepared
to state them.
The only thing that can persuade scientists to fight alongside
the trade unions for their freedom is your mass support.
The more resolutions we can show the scientific workers, the
more support the progressive movement is going to get from
them. I call on everyone here to-night to take up this matter
with their organisations—to assure the scientists and intellec-
tuals that they need have no fear to speak, and no fear of
having to work in the future under conditions outlined in the
Age the other day. The Age said blockhouses, barbed wire and
floodlights were giving Harwell the look of a concentration
camp. Blockhouses and barbed wire will give Harwell more
than the look of a concentration camp!
Our scientists do not want to work in this atmosphere,
because without a free science, there won’t be any science at
all. We do not want to use atomic science to make bombs.
MR. E. JOHNS (Federated Ironworkers’ Association): 1 want
to convey to this Council the sincere support of our organisa-
tion. We have a representative elected from our Executive <.o
watch the work of this Council and bring it back to us'so that
we can be crusaders among the rank and file of our union.
W e hear much about repressive legislation on union elections.
Our elections have just taken place, and were the most demo-
cratic you could wish for.
MRS. McKENZIE (New Housewives’ Association): We wouM
like all present to know that we are 100 per cent, behind this
organisation.
MR. B. WITTNER (Rationalist Association); We afe deter-
mined to do all we can to „ppose this far-reaching ban. We
will oppose the banning of any party. We have always sup-
ported freedom and we alwavs shall.


We have got quite a large contact with the community both
in Victoria and inter-State. We have our own Press and we
have a means of getting a message out to the public.
| MR. CLENDINNEN (Student Labor Federation) then moved!
“This meeting of 250 Melbourne citizens considers that the
dismissal of Dr, Thomas Kaiser from the C.5.1.R.0. on account
of his support of the coalminers during their recent dispute is
completely unwarranted.
It represents a violation of our traditional rights of freedom
> of speech and menaces the application of free science to Aus-
tralian problems.
“We demand the unconditional reinstatement of this out-
standing scientist so that he can pursue his researches into
nuclear physics.”
The resolution was carried unanimously.
REV. F. HARTLEY (in conclusion): I would suggest that all
the proposals made by Mr. O’Connor should be adopted.
I believe we have struck a very effective blow for liberty
to-night. J
As Joint Secretary of the Peace Council I appeal to you to
come behind the Peace Movement and to work for the success
of the peace ballot and the peace buttons, and thus organise
public opinion against the idea that war is inevitable.
The forces moving to war are strong, but the forces of the
people declaring themselves for peace are stronger.
We must organise. Time is not on our side if we loaf.


Federal Press Fty. Ltd., 16 Corr’s Lane, Melbourne, 0.1.
ISSUED BY DEMOCRATIC RIGHTS COUNCIL
