

GEORGE BLACK
W. DYMOCK,
BOOK ARCADE.
1901
428 GEORGE ST.,
SYDNEY.
BURNS
ROBERT




f
*S .
* 4


ROBERT BURNS.
From Skirving’S Portrait.


DEFENCE OF ROBERT
BURNS.
THE
CHARGE OF PLAGIARISM
CONFUTED.
GEORGE BLACK.
I had a wish —I mind its power,
A wish that to my latest hour
Shall strongly heave my breist—
That I, for puir auld Scotia’s sake,
Some useful plan or buke could make,
Or sing a song at least.
From rough hurr-thistle, spreading wide
Among the bearded hear,
I turned the weeder-clips aside,
An’ spared the symbol dear.
— Burns.
W. DYMOCK,
Book Arcade,
George Street,
Sydney,




PREFACE.
HE contents of this pamphlet appeared in the Bulletin on
sth and 19th February, 1898, in reply to two articles
purporting to be reviews of Henley & Henderson’s edition
of Burns’ works, which had appeared in that journal on 23rd
October and 4th December, 1897. The Bulletin's replies to
my trenchant criticism were not in my opinion, nor in that
of any others qualified to decide, so far as I can learn, equal
to the occasion. One, dated March 12th, amounted to this:
It is true that we have maligned Burns but then he is dead
and reply from him is impossible. But the living ought to
be complimentary to one another, especially where literary
matters are concerned. If that be impossible, let us talk
about the weather and the beauty of moonlight among the
peaks and gorges of the Blue Mountains.
This volume only contains as much of the original
articles as is now necessary for my purpose, and these have
been extended and amplified in several directions.
With those who say the works of Burns are his best de-
fence, tam in perfect agreement. At the same time, one
may be pardoned for defending the mighty monument he
has raised, to the lasting perpetuation of his own memory
and the literature of his country, from the defilements of the
nought-respecting pariah dogs of journalism.
GEORGE BLACK,
Sydney, 1901.




CONTENTS.
Frontispiece —Robert Burns, from Skirving’s Portrait.
Chapter I. —On Plagiarism and some Plagiarists .
Chapter II. — The Conveyings of Shakespeare
Chapter lll.—Some Bulletin Blunders . , . .25
Chapter IV.—Burns Compared with His Alleged
Sources of Inspiration 37
Chapter V.—The Hodman on the Wall . . ,67
Chapter Vl.—The Dead Speak . . , . .73
Chapter Vll.—What Say the Living? . . ,82




CHAPTER I.
On Plagiarism and some Plagiarists.
Burns, a Scotch peasant, “ with a soul like an
leolian harp, in whose strings the vulgar wind as it
passed through]changed itself into articulate melody,”
may with justice, as a singer, be said to need no
defence. Nor does he —from those who know him.
With most Australians, however, he is little more
than a tradition, while the Bulletin is a living force
whose most reckless assertions are usually accepted
as gospel truths. It was necessary, therefore, that
the sludge should be removed which was locally de-
posited on his name and fame by the overflow of
that journal. No one intervening, I felt impelled to
see what personally could be done. Loath to engage
in controversy, it could not longer be evaded.
Condensed, the Bulletin s arguments were these:
(1) That Burns, for his own uses, stole the ideas,
and even words, of preceding writers ; (2) That his
countrymen, or the bulk of them, are wholly unaware
of this alleged fact. Quotation will prove the verity


of this synopsis. They said : ‘ Nearly all that is best
in the songs of Burns never belonged to Burns at all.
Burns, the songster, was an inspired vam-
per, mender, tinker, and little more.’ The idea pre-
sented in the second statement permeated both
Bulletin articles, and is most forcibly stated in the
following sentence; ‘ The average Scotchman does
not know how good or how bad Burns’ verses are,
and he does not know how much Burns plagiarised.’
All this in conjunction with much vulgar railing at
Scotchmen in the aggregate—their lofty notions of
Burns, their meanness, their lack of humour, their
love of whisky, and so on.
For the charge that Burns’ countrymen were
and are misled as to his sources of inspiration—the
Scots of his day could not be so misguided. The
songs, 184 in number, which he collected, and made
printable for Johnson’s Musical Museum (of which
he was practically the editor), and those, in number
90, which he similarly furnished to Thomson’s Col-
lection of Original Scottish Airs, were in common
use at the time. He distinguished between his own
compositions and the works he repaired by append-
ing his initials to the former and Z to the latter.
Had he claimed aught not rightfully his, it is one of
the curiosities of literature that he was not exposed
by his contemporaries. Had there been grounds for
charges, these would have then been made. As half
6
ON PLAGIARISM AND SOME PLAGIARISTS.


of Burns’ work was published posthumously and one-
third of it without his commands, it is not surprising
that some verses, mostly inferior, have been im-
properly issued behind his name by catch-penny pub-
lishers of little-regarded and now almost obsolete
editions. This is true of almost every voluminous
bygone poet. But the ancients had no misconcep-
tions regarding Burns. It is a fact, historically re-
corded, that the plough-boys and maid-servants of
his day went without clothing they needed badly in
order to procure his works. As for the alleged ignor-
ance of the moderns —I know personally that the
average Scotch man and lad, of from 25 to 35 years
ago, knew just exactly what was Burns and what was
not. The Kilmarnock, McCreery and Creech, Currie,
Cunningham, Stewart, Chambers, Aldine, and Nim-
mo editions, with explanatory notes, and 150 others
almost as reliable, with the letters to Johnson and
Thomson, were open to them. Many hundred editions
of Burns have been published in Great Britain, be-
sides those of American issue, and at least two-thirds
of these contain copious notes. I refuse to believe
that the Scot of to-day, with his wider education, is
more ignorant of his country’s literature than was
his father 30 years back.
As for the plagiarism : If “ the average Scotch
man does not know how much Burns plagiarised,”
it is simply because Burns was not a plagiarist. The
Scots’ song, like the Scots’ ballad, was the product
7
ON PLAGIARISM AND SOME PLAGIARISTS.


of no one man’s hand ; nay, of no one generation ;
nay, of no one century. It travelled from mouth to
mouth, from heart to heart, from age to age ; losing
somewhat at times, but on the whole gaining flavor
with years and much journeying. Its users had no
fear of being dubbed plagiarists, and they culled the
fittest ideas and images as they traversed the
hedgerows of poesy, caring not whence the root.
Burns, by his genius, this mass of folk lore,
drifting idly to and fro, from the oblivion which at
length would have overtaken it. He took the rude
or impure songs of his day—the namelessness of
whose authors he bewailed— and the fragmentary
snatches which floated from mouth to mouth at fair
and market, and made them a part of literature,
saved them from certain annihilation. Many hun-
dreds of songs, some by his contemporaries, put
into print by his endeavors, owe little or nothing to
his hand, and have rarely been published with his
works, or credited to him, save by the ignorant—
among whom may be classed the Bulletin. Let the
fair-minded read his correspondence and doubt, if
they can, that his desire was to enrich Scots litera-
ture by saving many fine songs from oblivion and
by developing or polishing the many floating frag-
ments which lived chiefly in the memory of a passing
generation, rather than to augment his reputation
by association with these musical collections. This
is made the more evident if it be remembered that the
poet indignantly refused remuneration for his priceless
8
ON PLAGIARISM AND SOME PLAGIARISTS.


work. He also rescued from certain destruction
many of the tunes without words composed or
circulated by the wandering ministrels of his time,
and immortalised them by wedding thereto appro-
priate language. Of intent, he hid nought. He
acknowledged the sources of a phrase, a line, a title, a
chorus, a stanza, a tune, on which he had built up a
complete structure of song. To me, the finest trait
in his character is the unselfish enthusiasm he gave
to this work. His countrymen know what he did—
without fee or reward, at the cost of health and
prosperity for Scottish song literature, and are
grateful. In moments of exhilaration, some may
have styled him the greatest poet thac ever lived—l
have heard similar Australian estimates of Gordon—
but that provides no excuse for the persistence of the
Bulletin s attempts to depose him wholly from their
hearts. Burns is not so easily to be set aside : those
who best know him can most easily despise and dis-
regard the littleness which joys to think that Henley
is the promulgator of a damaging doctrine concern-
ing the dead poet. But Henley has no illusions on
the subject. He declares that Burns has made “ a
notable and lasting contribution to literature.”
Let me recapitulate: Burns’ reputation, accord-
ing to acknowledged authorities, is mainly based on
his Poems and his Satires. They assert, nevertheless,
that he lifts his head, high as the tuneful morning
stars, among the world’s song-writers, on the footing
9
ON PLAGIARISM AND SOME PLAGIARISTS,


of lyrics indisputably his. Here the worm that
bores into reputations gets a chance. Burns, purely
for love of country, allied to love of song, and never
for love of lucre, endeavored to enrich her min-
strelsy by collecting for publication the old ballads
that ran like fire along the country-side at merry-
making times. Some, wedded to beautiful airs, were
unprintable; these he re-wrote. Others, word-per-
fect, were twined with poor melodies; for these he
found fresh music. In other cases, a felicitous
phrase, line, or verse was embedded in a mass of
vulgar verbiage. Burns liberated the gem, polished
it, and set it in a circlet of equally-rare jewels. He
did more —in every case he forwarded copies of the
originals with his versions to the publishers. Since
his day, unscrupulous men have traded on his name,
and published editions which contained songs he
never wrote and never claimed. This caused a con-
fusion which was increased by the fact that Hogg,
Cunningham, Stenhouse, Buchan, Hamilton, and
others were so regardless of Burns’ reputation as
to forge ‘ originals ’ to songs that were undeniably
his. By the way, instead of taking away from
Burns, Henley has actually restored to him songs
which were wrested from him by these forgeries.
For instance, It was a’for our Rightful King—
written by Burns for the Musical Museum . It was
unsigned, and Sir Walter Scott gave it a Jacobite
parentage, which it enjoyed until Henley made clear
Burns’ claim to its fatherhood. How many more


of these so-called Burns’ ‘ originals ’ are forged ?
Had Australia possessed an unwritten song-literature r
how highly would the poet have been extolled who
played towards it the part of a Burns, and rescued
it from extinction. But how does the Bulletin re-
ward Burns for this great mass of laborious and
gratuitous service to Scots’, nay, to universal litera-
ture ? He is treated like a detected tHief; he is
denied originality; he has done little, says Red
Page, but milk other men’s cows into his own
bucket. But the reviewer’s bucket contained no milk;
it was full, to overflowing, with gall. Otherwise, a
dead man would not be styled a thief, because he
posthumously had an occasional rogue for publisher.
So far as I know, Shakespeare has not been accused
of theft because Marlowe’s beautiful Come live with
me and be my Love is at times bound with his
works,
* £ * *
The narrowness of vision, which views Burns
through the spectacles of to-day rather than through
the media of his own time, is surprising. His in-
fluence on succeeding literature is forgotten ; the fact
that millions have re-echoed his sentiments is not
recognised. He is ‘ very commonplace,’ says the
Bulletin —attempting to evade the commonplace by
being inaccurate, eccentric, and grotesque. But was
he commonplace in his day and generation? Would
many of his opinions be commonplace, had he never
lived ? Was he not, so far from being commonplace,
11
ON PLAGIARISM AND SOME PLAGIARISTS.


on the contrary, in Britain the pioneer of outspoken
thought and simplicity of style ? As a matter of
most notorious fact did he not revolutionise English
literature, and banish the artificial in thought and
language into the limbo of forgetfulness ? A hun-
dred years or more ahead of his time, when the
Bulletin catches him up, he becomes ‘commonplace!’
That journal then babbles out ; ‘ His homely verse
suits homely minds.’ His subjects were certainly
homely; Domestic Joys and Sorrows; the Beauties
of Nature; the Wrongs of Mankind; Peace
and War; Politics and Religion; Love and
Hate; Life and Death. What else, good Monsieur
Frangipani, is there to write about? He is homely
in the company of those who have always had first
place in the hearts of the people. To them, it mat-
ters little how they may be regarded by cold-blooded
cynics of the nil admirari school! Let these things
be remembered : Robert Burns, for love, put new
words to many blackguard Scotch, Highland, and
Irish songs, or scraps of songs, in order to preserve
what was loveable in them, and made full acknow-
ledgement of indebtedness, where it existed. William
Shakespeare, for personal profit, in order to fill his
own coffers, without thought of service to letters,
took the o’er-long rambling plays of his day and
pruned them into proportion, and made no acknow-
ledgment of his obligation to those who went before.
Not one Englishman in 10,000 is aware of it, but no
one heaves bricks at Shakespeare’s tomb and calls
12
2 ON PL A GIA RISM AND SOME PLA GIA RISTS.


him ‘ filcher’ in order to disabuse the ‘ average’ En-
glishman of the idea that Shakespeare is the greatest
poet that ever breathed. Shakespeare kept his own
counsel as to his founts of inspiration—he is a god;
Burns, who owned up, and whose so-called plagiarism
is not a circumstance to that of the Bard of Avon, is
a common literary thief! Further—Shakespeare is
not accused of plagiarism because of acts done by his
publishers; nor because of alterations, sometimes
for the better, made by his many editors; nor
because of emendations read into him by various
actors, and afterwards generally adopted—such for
instance as Colley Cibber’s “ Off with his head ! So
much for Buckingham!” Nor because six inferior
plays have been fathered on him—to wit: The
Arraignment of Paris ; The Birth of Merlin ; Edward
III.; The Fair Emma ; The Merry Devil of Edmon-
ton ; and Macedorus—which were written by George
Peek and others. Nor is he accused of theft because
Titus Andronicus—written by Marlowe almost for a
certainty—is usually bound up with his works.
Let me strengthen my disproof of the assertion
that Burns was commonplace by placing in contrast
to the peevish maunderings of the literary homun-
culus, who has attacked him, the weighty opinions
of the great French critic Taine. He hailed
Burns as the founder of a new literary spirit; the
foremost banner-bearer in the modern revolution of
13
ON PL A GIA RISM AND SOME FLAG IA RISES.


letters. In his History of English Literature, he
says:—
“ At last there started up an unfortunate plough-
man (Burns) rebelling against the world, and in
love ; with all the yearnings, lusts, greatness, and
irrationality of modern genius. Now and then,
driving his plough, he lighted on genuine verses—
verses such as Heine and Alfred de Musset have
made in our own days. In those few words , combined
after a new fashion, there was a revolution. Two hun-
dred new verses sufficed. The human mind turned on
its hinges, and so did civil society. . . . With Burns
rises a new ideal; old narrow moralities are to give
place to the wide sympathy of the modern man who
loves the beautiful whenever it meets him. . . . This
originality and divining instinct exist in his style as in his
ideas. The speciality of the age in which we live, and
which he inaugurated, is to blot out rigid distinctions of
class, catechism, and style; academic, moral, or social
conventions are falling away, and we claim, in society
dominion for individual merit, in morality for inborn
generosity, in literature for genuine feeling. Burns
was the first to enter on this track, aud he often pursues
it to the end. ... For the first time man spoke as
men speak, or rather as they think, without pre-
meditation ; indifferent to rules, content to exhibit
his feeling as it came to him, and as he felt it. At
last, after so many years, we escape from measured
declamation, we hear a man’s voice! better, we for-
get the voice in the emotion which it expresses, we
14
ON PL A GIARISM A ND SOME PL A GIA RISTS-


feel this emotion reflected in ourselves, we enter
into relations with a soul. Then form seems to fade
away and disappear—this is the great feature of
modern poetry. Burns has reached it seven or
eight times. ... A sad life is most often the life of
men in advance of their age; it is not wholesome to go too
quick. Burns was so much in advance that it took
fortg gears to catch him. ”
15
ON PL A GIA RISM A ND SOME PL A GIA RISTS.


CHAPTER 11,
The Conveyings of Shakespeaee.
The Bulletin has made many very reckless asser-
tions, but none to exceed one that occurred in an
attempt at reply to me. Its slap-dash audacity is
remarkable, even when its source is remembered
Red Page—the plush-breeched flunkey of letters—
then said : ‘ So far as their borrowings are con-
■cerned, Burns, for the most part, gilded refined gold;
Shakespeare made gold out of lead.’
Such ravings might convince the credulous or
delude the ignorant; they cannot impose upon those
accustomed to weigh words. In Burns, the use of
‘ a lyrical idea, that is a rhythm, a burden, a drift,’
already utilised, constitutes ravishing, filching, clean-
stealing, and a gilding of refined gold. Shakespeare
gets different treatment. When he lifts, as he does
almost without exception, his Plot, Situations, Char-
acters, Colors, and Atmosphere, from the Gone-
Before, he does not filch ! Oh, no ; he only turns lead
into gold. The unprejudiced, those qualified to


judge, will agree with me that such plentiful machi-
nery is at least as valuable as “a lyric idea,” and
that the plays of a dramatist thus equipped by his
predecessors, are more than half-written. But the
alchemy which enabled Shakespeare to turn lead into
gold, did not end with his borrowing of crucibles
for the melting, and moulds for the shaping of his
precious ores. What shall be said of Sir Know-All
with his prate about Shakespeare’s transmutation of
the base into the royal metal, if it be shown that the
dramatist not only stole his apparatus, but also two-
thirds of the golden coins he professedly minted.
Unfortunately for me, Boswell’s Shakespeare, with
Edmund Malone’s notes, is not accessible; nor yet
the appendix to the Shakespeare Society’s reprint of
the 1802 edition, wherein the Sources of Shakes-
peare are very fully set out. But let me quote
Emerson :
Shakespeare esteemed the mass of old plays waste stock,
in which any experiment might be freely tried. . . . He
owed debts in all directions, and was able to use whatever
he found. The amount of his indebtedness may be inferred
from Malone’s laborious computations in regard to the First,
Second and Third parts of Henry VI., in which, says he,
‘ out of 6043 lines, 1771 were written by some author pre-
ceding Shakespeare; 2373 by him, on the foundations laid
by his predecessors, and 1889 were entirely his own,’ Ma-
lone’s preceding investigations hardly leave a single drama
of Shakespeare’s absolute invention.
What of the lead now ? Aye, and what of the
gold ? Go to, thou vain man, and learn, again from
Emerson, that:—
Great men are more distinguished by range and extent
than by originality. If we require in them the originality
17
THE CONVEYINGS OF SHAKESPEARE.


which consists in weaving, like a spider, their web from their
own bowels; or in finding clay and making bricks, and
bnilding the house; no great men are original. The greatest
genius is the most indebted man. . . . Thought is the
property of him who can entertain it.
Or from E. J. Benson, who, recently writing in
the Nineteenth Century , said :
The truth seems to be that unintelligent theft is plagi-
arism; critical theft is not inconsistent with the truest
originality.
That was Emerson’s apology for Shakespeare.
It may serve in a lesser degree for Ben Jonson, who
paraphrased To Celia and Drink to Me from the
Epistles of Philostratus ; for Herrick, who also bor-
rowed from that Ancient; for Chaucer, whose obli-
gations to Ovid, to Petrarch, to Boccaccio and to the
French are obvious; also for Milton, whose Comus
is largely indebted to The Faithful Shepherdess of
Beaumont and Fletcher, whose II Penseroso owed
much to the Address to Melancholy in Francis Beau-
mont’s Passionate Madman, whose conception of
Satan is apparently derived from Marino’s Sospetto
d’ Herode, and who also borrowed from Browne ;it
may also serve as an apology for every other English
writer of eminence—including Tennyson, whose ob-
ligations to the classics are obvious. For who shall
estimate what any modern owes to the past ? Litera-
ture is a mass of stored impressions. The man
whose impressions are all self-gathered is half
informed. The wise glean experience side by side
18
THE CONVEYINGS OF SHAKESPEARE


with their study of the stores of the sages. Your
hermit is the only original—when he can’t read.
Concerning this matter of Shakespeare’s plagiar-
ism, Taine, after pointing out that at the age of 33
he bought a house, two barns, and two gardens,
and went on accumulating, very pointedly says :
“ A man attains only to easy circumstances by his
own labour ; if he gains wealth it is by making others
labor for him.” In another place he writes:
“ Shakespeare set his wits to the touchinc/-up of plays
with so much activity that Greene called him ‘an
upstart crow beautified with our feathers.’ ”
Hazlitt remarked that Homer appears the most
original of writers, probably for the reason that we
can trace literature no further, and yet it is said that
in the Iliad he employed all the folk legends of his
day. The sources of Shakespeare’s borrowings are,
however, well-known. He was so far from trans-
muting lead into gold that some of his literary
commandeering is so clumsily done that his plays
teem with absurdities of the most glowing character.
Lions roar in French forests ; English rustics dis-
port themselves in Norman and Italian fields;
Bohemia boasts of a sea coast; and Southern Italy
has acquired an English winter—all because he
stole widely and often used ignorantly. Here let it
be remembered that Shakespeare (1564-1616) took
the plot and incidents of The Taming of The Shrew
19
THE CONVEYINGS OF SHAKESPEARE.


(1596) from The Taming of a Shrew (1594), and
some of the circumstances from George Gascoigne’s
translation of Ariosto’s comedy The Supposes,
published in 1566. Romeo and Juliet (1596) is
more original, but, copied by one Italian writer from
another, and thence transplanted into a French tale
by Pierre Boisteau, it found its way into English in
1562 by means of Arthur Brooke’s lengthy poem,
The Tragical History of Romeus and Juliet.
King John (1596-8) was founded on a drama called
The Troublesome Raigne of King John, and this
is said to have been founded on a much older play.
All’s Well That Ends Well (1598) came to
Shakespeare from Boccaccio through a novel in
Painter’s Palace of Pleasure, named Giletta of
Narbona (1566), and partly from an anonymous
drama (1590). The plot of As You Like It
(1599) and some incidents were taken from Lodge’s
Rosalynd. The central incident of Much Ado
About Nothing (1600) appears to have travelled to
Shakespeare from Ariosto’s Ginevra and Orlando
Furioso, through the novels of Bandello, thence to
Belleforest’s Cent Histoires Tragiques (1583), of
which an English translation gave the Swan of Avon
his cue. Hamlet sprang originally from a Scandi-
navian tradition into the chronicles of Saxo Gram-
maticus (1204), thence it was drawn for the plot of
a novel by Belleforest in the latter half of the six-
teenth century, thence it was translated into English
under the title of the Historie of Hamblett, and was
20
THE CONVEYINGS OF SHAKESPEARE.


at a later date dramatised by one whom Malone
styles Thomas Kyd.
On this deeply-laid, ancient foundation, Shakes-
peare built up his -wonderful tragedy. Henry Y.
was also based by Shakespeare on the plot and
incidents of an older play. Twelfth Night resembles
the thirtieth story in the second part of Bandello’s
novels, but Shakespeare apparently took the plot
and some of the incidents from the Historie of
Apolonius and Sylla in Rich’s Farewell to Military
Profession. The materials for Troilus and Cressida
were drawn from Caxton’s Recuyel of the Histories
of Troy, and from Chaucer’s Troilus and Cresseide,
and much of his classic lore, where correct, has been
gleaned from Chapman’s translation of the Iliad.
The plot and principal characters in Measure for
Measure were lifted holus-bolus from George Whet-
stone’s Promos and Cassandra. For Othello,
Shakespeare took the plot and incidents from the 7th
novel of the 3rd decade of Cinthio’s Hecatommithi,
whence, it is said by Dunlop, the *characters of Des-
demona, lago, and Cassio were taken with scarcely a
shade of difference —which act of appropriation does
not seem to be precisely described by the Bulletin's
phrase concerning the turning of borrowed lead into
gold. Shakespeare’s King Lear (1605) was con-
structed mainly of materials found in a play styled
The True Chronicle of King Leare and his Three
Daughters—entered at Stationer’s Hall in 1594
and in an old ballad written on the same subject,
21
THE CONVEYINGS OF SHAKESPEARE.


while Augustine Skottowe asserts that the characters
of Gloster- and Edgar were taken from the tale of the
Paphlagonian King in Sir Philip Sidney’s Arcadia.
The song of the witches around the cauldron in
Macbeth was transplanted bodily from the incan-
tations of Thos. Middleton’s (1570-1627) Witch, from
which play Shakespeare is said to have borrowed the
supernatural machinery, some incidents, and even
speeches. Doubtless he used them more effectively
than did his talented contemporary, but he
appears to have filched largely all the same.
The plot, incidents, and some of the principal
speeches in Coriolanus were cribbed by Shakespeare
from Sir Thomas North’s translation of Plutarch,
which supplied the two principal incidents for Julius
Cassar, and several situations for Henry Y., Henry
VI., and Henry YIIL, also for the latter the charac-
ter of Wolsey. In other respects these historical
plays, like King John, are very largely furbishments
of much older plays current in Shakespeare’s day, as
the variations of Style go to prove. Timon of Athens
(1610) was a mosaic from Painter’s Palace of Plea-
sures (1566), an anonymous drama (1590), North’s
translation of Plutarch, and a translation of Lucian.
Pericles, Prince of Tyre—originally named after
Pyrocles, the hero of Sir Philip Sidney’s Arcadia—
was dug out of Gower’s romance. The Comedy of
Errors borrowed its plot from a translation of Plautus’
Manaschmi—Shakespeare went frequently to Plautus
for ideas! In Antony and Cleopatra, Shakespeare
22
THE CONVEYINGS OF SHAKESPEARE


was indebted to Plutarch. The Winter’s Tale is
taken, with some alterations, from Robert Greene’s
Dorastus and Fa\vnia. The style and method of
Shakespeare’s historical plays, especially Richard 111.,
according to Swinburne, are modelled without doubt
on the Edward 11. of Christopher Marlowe, but fail
to reach “ the highest height of the earlier master.”
Swinburne evidently does not believe that Shakes-
peare invariably “ made gold out of lead ! ” And so
on through the Shakesperean gallery. Can it be
wondered that Nathan Dole, a contemporary of his,
spake concerning “ Such high-handed rapine as
Shakespeare displayed toward the predecessors whom
he robbed to glorify.” If a concrete example of
Shakespeare’s filching be asked for, contrast the fol-
lowing lines from Marlowe’s Lust’s Dominion :
The cold hand of death hath thrust his icy fingers
in my breast, with those from Shakespeare’s King
John “ And none of you will bid the winter come
to thrust his icy fingers in my maw.” This is what
the Bulletin's half-read reviewer styles “ turning lead
into gold.” None but he, dishonestly intent on
finding exoneration somehow from the false position
in which his ignorance, bigotry, and lack of fairness
placed him, will be likely to imagine that Shakespeare
mined for lead only in the writings of Boccaccio,
Plutarch, Sidney, Marlowe, Middleton, Greene,
Chaucer, Ariosto, Bandello, Cinthio, and others—his
predecessors or contemporaries. But the man, who,
fiying in his thirty-seventh year, had ere then revived
23
THE CONVEYINGS OF SHAKESPEARE.


a literature already moribund and resurrected a lan-
guage which considered as literature was practically
entombed, is his own best defender. It can never be
forgotten that Burns, the precursor of Cowper,
Crabbe, and Wordsworth, and the avowed inspirer of
the latter, burst the bonds of his time by abandoning
the false and artificial and returning to the natural
and the true. And it might also be remembered that tho’
Shakespeare, ere entering on his thirty-seventh year,
had written some remarkable plays, that nevertheless
the bulk of his work up to that time had been weak,
vulgar, crude, hasty —and “ in the jigging veins of
rhyming mother wits”—as compared with the even
excellence of his later years, and that had he then
died his greater glories would have perished, as do
frost-nipped buds ere opening. But let it also be
remembered that what Henley said of Burns is also
true of Shakespeare—“ Being a great artist, he de-
rived from a numerous ancestry.”
""HP
M
24
THE CONVEY INGS OF SHAKESPEARE.


CHAPTER 111.
Some Bulletin Blunders,
Someone has wisely said: “Every writer,
great or small, unless he can clearly or definitely
remember, or absolutely and entirely forget, all that
he has ever read, must sometimes use the phrases
and ideas of other people.” Feeling that this is
true, and believing in addition that literature, written
and unwritten, is a common possession, I make no
attack on those who have borrowed to better and
owned up. I simply expose some noted appropria-
tes who made no acknowledgement, in order to
show how unjustly Burns, who did acknowledge,
has been treated by the bigoted, half-read, and im-
perfectly understanding. I think it is Hazlitt who
speaks with enthusiasm of the art which is quick in
admiration and ready in imitation, and yet so
strong in its own instincts that it reconstructs and
rearranges into harmony with its own thoughts every
fragment which it borrows. Herein the song-writ-
ing methods of Burns are closely described, and


surely he was the most honest and open avower of
literary obligation who ever lived. Continuing this
line of thought, I might quote what Sir Frederick
Bridge said recently of Handel, “ who freely adopted
and borrowed the music of other composers and held
his tongue as to whence it came.” For instance,
the middle movement of The Hallelujah Chorus is
taken from an Italian love song. For Israel in
Egypt he lifted nine numbers, including some of the
principal choruses, from a Magnificat by Erba—a
Milanese composer—it is supposed, and found other
materials elsewhere. The Conductor of the Royal
Choral Society of London sees nothing discreditable
in these and kindred circumstances, for Handel
touched nought which was not thereby adorned.
At the same time it was also said by Mr. A. J. Balfour
that if Handel borrowed without acknowledge-
ment, the act was not one of plagiarism —“on the
contrary, Handel discovered the possibilities of a
distinctly inferior work, and out of inferior material
he made a star. Out of poor matter he produces-
what is of the first order; out of decaying matter he
produces new, and by virtue of this he is a crea-
tor.” How much less than Handel is Burns to
be considered a plagiarist ? How equally a creator ?
Acknowledging frankly his obligations, he re-created
that which was on the verge of extinction, and turned
base coin into medals of genius, fresh from his own
mint, clear cut by his handiwork. He was inspired
by the work of his predecessors, enthused by them —
26
SOME BULLETIN BLUNDERS.


does that make him a robber ? Said Dean Swift :
“ I humbly conceive that though I light my candle
at my neighbour’s fire, that does not make the wick,
the wax, or the flame less my own.” Let me drive
that home by a quotation from Mark Twain : —“ No
man produces an idea out of his own head. You
cannot grow an idea—it first comes from the outside.
Why Adam could not even invent the idea of modesty »
he went naked until he learned from the outside that
to be naked was immodest. I have a sense of mo-
desty, altho’ Adam haan’t. But I inherited it; I
did not invent it.” The Bulletin s reviewer appears to
have been heir to nobody, to have inherited nothing—
and most certainly neither sense, modesty, nor charity.
He read into Burns all that he desired to see there,
and then proceeded to slander him with all the
malignance of a crabbed and contracted soul, worm-
eaten with conceit of self. Before I proceed to wipe
away his fly-specks from the pages of Burns by cate-
gorical disproof, let me deal with some incidental
slanders.
The Bulletin critic’s knowledge of Burns, outside
of what he cribbed from Hazlitt, appears to have
been derived solely from Henley, who is usually but
not always accurate. But his knowledge of Henley
was superficial; there is nothing in literature and
little in Henley to warrant this malignant accusa-
tion ; —“Burns’ friends and relations, with intent to
heighten his reputation, deliberately destroyed many
of the old ballads from which he borrowed.”
These evil suspicionings of a jaundiced mind
27
SOME BULLETIN BLUNDERS.


could be used to tarnish the fame of any poet who
ever breathed. Mrs. Burns actually disclaimed for
her husband the authorship of many songs ; his
brother, Gilbert, disowned the following :As I
was a Wandering; The Winter it is Past; A
Bottle and a Friend ; The Battle of Sheriff-Muir,
and other poems. But it is not for me to disprove
such calumnious charges—the onus of proof rests
with the slanderer. If idly made, we know how to
estimate the circulator. Thus I challenged on two
occasions, the Red Page, who, having first shut me
out from further reply, then produced his authority :
“ In our Notes to individual songs, we have done our best
to trace his—Burns’s—connexion with the past. This is now
the more difficult because (1) much of the material he collected
(including the origins of the publication known las The Merry
Muses and a good deal else) has been destroyed—by his rela-
tions, or by Currie, or by later owners—in the interests partly
of Scottish morals, partly of that cheap decorous chromo-
lithograph (as it were) which bids fair to supplant the true
Burns—ardent, impulsive, generous; but hypochondriacal,
passionate, imperfect—in the minds of his countrymen. . .
. .”—Henley and Henderson's ‘ Burns ,’ vol. hi., page 296.
This, an indefinite statement, was garbled by
the Bulletin into a direct charge. Henley did not
know for certain, had no reason to suspect that any
MS. verses which ever came into Burns’ hands, or
ever met his eye, had ever been destroyed by any one
before or after his death. But he was cursed with
the disease he diagnoses in others —a desire to account
for everything somehow. Therefore, if Burns’ rela-
tions did not destroy certain MS., Dr. Currie did,
and if Currie did not, some unknown persons must
have performed the horrid act of destruction. And
28
SOME BULLETIN BLUNDERS.


yet, I daresay in some quarters Henley is considered
a man, and this is looked on as criticism. The
poison-germs from Henley’s slander-laden breath
found congenial soil in the Bulletin s critic. There
they developed largely ; there were no “ ors” or
■“ huts” about him—“Burns’ friends and relations,
with intent to heighten his reputation, deliberately
•destroyed many of the old ballads from which he
borrowed.” And this person then complains that
Henley did not go far enough in his denunciation of
Burns, and goes himself so far beyond Henley that
he need fear no one making that complaint of him.
But these high-minded gentlemen—whose con-
cern for their own skins induces them to libel the
dead rather than the living—know little of Burns.
The Merry Muses of Caledonia, as Henley knows
and avers, was a collection of bawdy Scotch songs
made by Burns. It included several of his own com-
positions, among these latter being possibly a parody
of John Anderson My Jo. Indeed it is stated that
its second edition was wholly an effort of Burns’
imagination. And so it may well be that many of
his songs were written in two veins, and that the
purer versions were not mere paraphases of the im-
pure but coeval with them. Holograph copies of The
Merry Muses were sent by the poet to several friends,
one of them, after his death, came into the hands
of a printer, who secretly circulated it. This is a
matter of common literary notoriety. Copies were
seen and commented on, by Dr. George Gilfillan,
29
SOME BULLETIN BLUNDERS


Robert White, of Newcastle, J. G. Lockhart, and
others. An MS. copy, whether complete or not Ido
not know, passed from the hands of Robert Cleghorn,
a farmer, and Burns’ friend, into the possession of
John Allen, of Holland House, who, in 1813, lent it
to Byron. On the authority of Lockhart, the songs,
or some of them, were circulating in the London
manuscript market in 1828. Therefore, if The Merry
Muses, whether in print or manuscript, has utterly
disappeared, one need not be very charitable to sup-
pose that it was rather through the common misad-
ventures to which the flimsiness and combustibility
of paper render it subject, than by the agency of the
long-dead Burns’ jealous friends. But then there
are creatures which, like maggots, can only exist in a
corruption of their own creation. Addison has
mildly styled them “ the lice which lurk in the locks
of literature.”
It is too late in the day to attempt the destruc-
tion of Burns’ reputation. His strength, his direct-
ness, his vividness, his easy certainty, his divination,
passion, wit, pathos, and lightness of touch have not
only made him the greatest poet and satirist of his
country; they have also raised him to a place of
high honor among the few great song-writers of the
world. Even Henley styles him : ‘ The most exqui-
site artist in folk-song the world has ever seen,’—
and again; ‘No such artist in folk-song has ever
30
SOME BULLETIN BLUNDERS.


worked in literature. . . Under his hand a patch-
work of catch-words became a living song.’ Of his
laurels, the carping of an obscure unknown cannot
rob him—here or elsewhere. ‘He is secure,’ says
Henlej, ‘ even outside the Vernacular, of the fame of
an unique artist.’ But Henley is not always so fair.
We have just seen that he is not above the manu-
facture of statements ; he is more than hypercritical
when he attempts to prove Burns’ indebtedness in
twenty instances to the Herd MS. collection—a
collection which possibly the poet never saw, and
probably never heard of; and of which his mode of
life made a close study impossible. But despite these
injustices—perhaps merely the ebullitions of a not
wholly-controlled eccentricity— Henley genuinely ad-
mires Burns. His charge is that at times: “ Burns
did but pass the folk-song of his country through the
mint of his mind, and reproduced it stamped with
his image, and lettered with his superscription.” In
short, that Burns originated even when he remem-
bered.
But the Bulletin people show no such com-
punction about rough-handling the artist who,
according to Taine, revolutionised the world’s poetic
thought. No half-measures for them. They only ap-
plaud Henley when he is hypercritical or unjust.
For instance, w r hen they imagine that Henley accused
Burns of borrowing a measure from Fergusson.
This, the poet is usually supposed to have done when
first launching forth on callow pinions into the high
31
SOME BULLETIN BLUNDERS.


atmosphere of poesy. But to his prototype—cut off
before he fully flowered —the Ayrshire peasant is as
the sun to a farthing rushlight. Henley’s strongest
indictment is that Burns lacked the power to origi-
nate a new T vein of thought (vide Taine) a new rhythm.
Has Tennyson done either? Wordsworth ? Byron ?
—who borrowed his ottava rima from Italy, and the
verse of Ariosto. Milton ? Can it be said that there
is one poet of the Victorian era, except, perhaps,
Browning and Whitman, against whom the same
charges could not be more forcibly laid ? Most mea-
sures, if not all, are in common use ; they are no
man’s copyright. Is there a poet, alive or dead,
whose measures were all original ? Burns borrowed
his measures ! So—and who did the man that he
borrowed from, borrow from ? The reply is easy :
In the Athenaeum , some years ago, Ferdinand Freili-
grath, as does Henley, traced Burns’ six-line-stave,
built on two rhymes, from Fergusson to Ramsay, to
whom it came through the black-letter broadsides
from Alexander Scott and Sir Richard Maitland.
Thence it was traced, past Montgomerie (of vjuator-
zain note), to the low Latin of the monkish hymnal.
But its first out-babbling spring, so far as the auth-
orities know, was in the rima couee of the Eleventh
Century troubadour. And the Omniscience of the
Red Page, who so kindly assists struggling authors
for a cash consideration, snaps its inky fingers and
joys to think that Burns stole the self-same-strain
from Fergusson—Seven Centuries Later ! As a matter
32
SOME BULLETIN BLUNDERS.


of fact Burns’ very earliest verses were written in
this stanza ere he had met Fergusson’s poems, and
it is said that his first model was King James’ -
Christis Kirke on the Grene.
I have been much awed by the keen moral sus-
ceptibility which causes the Bulletin to shed inky
tears over the ethical bluntness which permits a Scotch
poet to use in combination any two words similarly
conjoined—before or since. Should this become the
vogue, the Scot who wishes to remark that the sun
rose will be compelled to find a new language to do
it in, or he will be nailed as a plagiarist, and damned
in a chorus of inconsequential snarls from the Bulle-
tin—while its cover keeps on. Its struggle to convict
Burns of plagiarism —a satire on its own methods—
reminds me of another critic—that pillar of the kirk,
Bowie Haggart in Auld Licht Idylls. Said he,
without hesitation : “ I am of opeenion that the works
of Burns is of an immoral tendency. I have not
read them mysel’, but such is my opeenion.”
Sir Walter Scott declared that “ the opening
lines of Ae Fond Kiss were worth a thousand rom-
ances.” Of them, Mrs. Johnstone said : “ These four
lines form in themselves a complete romance—the
very alpha and omega of feeling, and contain the
essence of an existence of pain and pleasure distilled
33
SOME BULLETIN BLUNDERS.


into one burning drop.” It is not wonderful there-
fore that the Purple Flunkey should be found quoting
with glee this extraordinary statement from Henley’s
pen : —“ The germ of ‘ Ae Fond Kiss’ is found in
* The Parting Kiss’ of Robert Dodsley (1708-1764),
which was set by Oswald.” I am not content to
take this on trust; let us see. Here is Dodsley :
One fond kiss before we part,
Drop a tear, and bid adieu ;
Though we sever, my fond heart
Till me meet shall pant for you.
Turn from this miserable doggerel to “Burns’ im-
mortal lines” —the phrase is Henley’s —and we will
see what Matthew Arnold has to say of them later
on; —
Ae fond kiss, and then we sever !
Ae fareweel, and that forever !
Deep in heart-wrung tears I’ll pledge thee,
Warring sighs and groans I’ll wage thee.
Had we never loved sae kindly,
Had we never loved sae blindly
Never met, or never parted—
We had ne’er been broken-hearted
Red Page has been prejudiced enough, silly
onough to say that Burns had rarely power to elevate
or inspire any but the Scotch, and them chiefly in
their drunken moods, but I venture to assert that
SOME BULLETIN BLUNDERS.


there is not an unshaven scribe with an inky fore-
finger in a dingy backroom anywhere, who would
not, moved by this passionate lament, rather be able
to append his signature to it than to anything the
Bulletin ever printed. But no doubt this crimson
authority has classed Ae Fond Kiss either as a
“ Neat Vamp” or as a “ Clean-Steal.” It would not
be hard to fitly describe him by one lurid but appro
priate epithet in familiar use.
Take the following as another example of
Henley’s at times haggling method of handling
Burns. He asserts that My Nannie, 0 was
perhaps suggested by Ramsay’s formal lines ;
While some for pleasure pawn their health
’Twixt Lais and the bagnio.
I’ll save myself, and without stealth
Kiss and caress my Nannie, O !
Listen to three verses out of Burns’ ten :
Behind yon hills where Lugar flows,
Mang woods and mosses many, O,
The winter sun the day has closed,
And I’ll awa to Nanny, O.
Her face is fair, her heart is true ;
As spotless as she’s bonnie’ O,
The opening gowan, wat wi dew,
Nae purer is than Nannie, O.
35
SOME BULLETIN BLUNDERS.


Oor auld gnidman delights to view
His sheep and kye thrive bonnie, O,
But I’m as blithe that hands his plengh,
And hae nae care bnt Nannie, O.
Is there any resemblance, in quality or kind,
between the two sets of verses, other than in the use
of three words —My Nannie, 0 ? And these, as
Cunningham points out, were used in association
long before Ramsay’s day.
36
SOME BULLETIN BLUNDERS.


CHAPTER IV.
Burns compared with His Alleged Sources of
Inspiration.
It seems absurd that charges of literary larceny
should be made against one who was, as Charles
Whibley says : So prodigal of his gifts that he would
send a poem to a friend and forget its existence.”
Can it be imagined that a cold-blooded plagiarist,
would write, as did Burns to Thomson, in these
terms : —“ Are you not vexed to think that the men
of genius who composed our fine Scottish lyrics
should be unknown. It has given me many a heart-
ache !” This is scarcely the language of a filcher.
But the sins of the publishers have been placed on
his shoulders ; the use of a mere over-word or chorus
has been deemed literary burglary, and the formation
of centos from widely scattered fragments—brought
together to enrich Scottish literature and not for
personal gain or honor—has been denounced as if it


were an infamous crime. Even if all were true that
has been said about Burns by the Bulletin , it might
have been considered as a circumstance of extenuation
that death snatched him away in his thirty-seventh
year ere he had time to weed out or revise his weaker
works, to label more definitely his borrowings, to
brand more indelibly his own creations. Yet without
any definite evidence, on mere suspicions founded on
prejudice and never verified, the Bulletin s reviewer
has asserted, with all the dogmatic downrightness of
an infallible oracle, that; —
“ In the clean-steal category are 1 The Primrose’
{ravished from Thomas Carew—Burns himself calls
it ‘ an old English song which I daresay is but little
known’—wherefore he ravished); Bonnie Dundee ;
Whistle and I’ll come to You, My Lad; Landlady
•count the Lawin ; Laddie, Lie Near Me; We’re a’
Noddin’ ; and some two score more. In these cases,
if Burns has not annexed the whole of his originals,
he has annexed so much of idea, phrase and rhyth-
mus that the song would be nothing without them.”
It is interesting to observe the lengths to which
unscrupulous prejudice will go. The Primrose was
collected for Thomson —who just then wanted words
set to certain old tunes —by Burns. He wrote thus
to him : “For Todlin’ Hame (a Scots tune of ancient
origin); take the following old English song, which
38
BURNS COMPARED WITH HIS


I daresay is but little known. N. B.—l have altered
it a little. (He did not even Scotticise it.) I know
no better proof of the malignity of the Bulletin's
bludgeoner. Reviewing Henley’s book ; basing his
attacks presumably on evidence therein, he accuses
the poet of ‘ clean-stealing’ Carew’s poem. Let me
hoist him with a quotation from Henley ! On page
104 of volume iv. this editor says Burns did but
ply his trade with a view to filling a page in Thom-
son s book; and as he claimed not the maker’s
honors but was content with the vamper’s, there is
no more to be said about the matter, so far as he is
concerned. But one can’t help wishing that he had
lived to curb the enthusiasm of certain of his com-
mentators.” It is never safe to review a book after
merely smelling the paper-knife ! I have read many
editions of Burns and have never yet met The Prim-
rose in any. The commentator alluded to by Hen-
ley is Scott Douglas—a very incompetent literary
authority, who published a very heterogeneous edition
of the poet; a menace, from the rubbish included, to
his reputation. The manner by which songs came to
be attributed to Burns which he never wrote and
never claimed, is easily traced. Creech, Currie,
Cunningham, and others, printed his collections for
music together with his accompanying letters, which
gave full information concerniug them. Some later
publishers retained some of the songs, and condensed
the letters into foot-notes. Two or three still later
publishers, either ignorant or careless, kept one or
39
ALLEGED SOURCES OF INSPIRATION.


two songs and dropped their foot-notes. But to blame
the poet for what took place fifty or a hundred years
after his death, is cruel, cowardly, and contemptible.
The so-called ‘ clean-steal ’ of Whistle and
I’ll come to you, my Lad, lies chiefly in an adapta-
tion of its chorus from that of an old Scotch song.
Cunningham somewhere says—“Burns’ version of
this lyric is founded on an old fragment, but he
poured his own feeling and fancy so happily through
the whole, that not a single line remains entire, nor
can the new be pronounced free of the language of
the older ministrel.” Burns acknowledged his debt,,
and Cunningham proclaimed the acknowledgment.
Yet Burns is styled a thief, and the Scotch are
accused of ignorantly participating in the robbery —
of reset after the theft. But let us make comparison
of the evidence, supplied by Henley, on which the
charge of theft is founded.
BEFORE BURNS.
Peggy’s a maid both kind and fair,
And Peggy is dear to Johnny,
And none in all Scotland here and there,
None is so blithe and bonnie.
And Peggy has vow’d their love to own.
O whistle my love and I’ll come down
And gang to the kirk wi’ Johnnie.
—From Whistle and I'll come down.
40
BURNS COMPARED WITH HIS


Whistle and I’ll cum to ye, my lad !
Whistle and I’ll cum to ye, my lad !
Gin father and mither and a’ should gae mad.
Whistle and I’ll come to ye, my lad !
—From song in Herd MS.
AFTER BURNS.
O whistle, and I’ll come to you, my lad ;
O whistle, and I’ll come to you, my lad;
Tho’ faither and mither and a’ should gae mad
O whistle, and I’ll come to you, my lad.
But warily tent, when ye come to court me,
And comena unless the back-yett be a-jee;
Syne up the back-stile, and let naebody see,
And come as ye werena comin to me.
At kirk, or at market, whene’er ye meet me.
Gang by me as tho’ that ye carena’ a flee;
But steal me a blink o’ your bonnie black e’e
Yet look as ye werena iookin at me.
Aye vow and protest that ye carena for me,
And whiles ye may lichtly my beauty a wee;
But court na anither, tho’ jokin’ ye be.
For fear that she wile your fancy frae me.
Burns laid no claim to Bonnie Dundee. The
version now most popular—it begins ‘ To the Lords
of Convention, ’twas Claverhouse spoke ’ —is by Sir
Walter Scott. In a letter to Cleghorn, Burns says
—‘ You will see by the above that I have added a
stanza to Bonnie Dundee.” This was the one
41
ALLEGED SOURCES OF INSPIRATION.


beginning — 1 My blessin’s on thy sweet wee lippie/
He used infinitely less of the various editions in
circulation than did Scott, who has taken the whole
chorus—holus-bolus. But Burns, who died before
his sun had attained its meridian, leaving his-
poetical affairs in confusion, is styled a thief, though
his borrowings were less and his acknowledgments
no less ample than were those of the later poet, who
goes scot-free of abuse.
With the MS. of Landlady, count the Lawin r
Burns acknowledged his indebtedness to some old
songs. Let me quote for the purpose of comparison.
BEFOEE BUENS.
Here’s to the King,
Ye ken wha I mean,
And to ilka honest boy,
That will do it again.
—Jacobite Song,
When you hear the pipe soun’s
Tuittie tattie to the drums,
Up your swords and down your guns.
And at the louns again.
—Old Ballad,
Every day my wife tells me
That ale and brandy will ruin me ;
But if gude liquor be my dead,
This shall be written on my head.
Landlady, count the lawin’.
—From Burns' MS.
42
BURNS COMPARED WITH HIS


AFTER BURNS.
Landlady, count the Tawin’
The day is near the dawin ;
Ye’re a blin’ drunk, boys.
And I’m but jolly fou.
Hey tutti, taiti,
How tutti, taiti —
Hey tutti, taiti,
Wha’s fu noo ?
Cog, an’ ye were aye fou,
Cog, an’ ye were aye fou,
I wad sit and sing to you
If ye were aye fou.
Weel may ye a’ be !
11l may ye never see !
God bless the king, boys,
And the companie !
It is positively astounding that Henley should
call Burns’ third verse a variation of the Jacobite
song; only a violent mental squint enables the
Bulletin to style the song a clean-steal.
It will surprise no one who has followed me thus
far to learn that Burns laid no claim to Laddie, lie
Near Me. He was asked to set words to the air of a
song so named, and refused on the grounds that he
43
ALLEGED SOURCES OF INSPIRATION.


did not know the tune. Henley, however, is of
opinion that Burns amended and condensed the
original for Thomson. But in his Remarks on Scot-
tish Song—appended first to Cromek’s edition of his
verses, and included in many modern editions of
Burns’ works—Burns says : ‘ This song is by Black-
lock.’ (Dr. Thos. Blacklock was the blind poet men-
tioned by Dr. Samuel Johnson in a letter to Mrs.
Thrale, dated from Edinburgh, Aug. 1773.) Is this
the conduct of a ‘ Clean-Stealer’? It is a safe thing
to libel a man dead for over 100 years! By the way,
for the information of ignorant and malicious critics,
I may further say that Burns’ Remarks on Scottish
Song were written by him in an interleaved copy of
the first four volumes of Johnson’s Musical Museum.
Thence they were transcribed by Cromek, and pub-
lished in his Reliques of Burns. They are now to be
found in the Chandos and other modern editions of
the Scottish poet’s works.
As for We’re a’ Noddin’, Burns supplied it to
Johnson’s Musical Museum, and the note therein
says “ corrected by Burns.” As Burns never claimed
the song—the bulk is his, nevertheless—the Bulletin's
Red Page has no reason for saying that he stole it.
Concerning all those songs which the Bulletin
vulgarly and incorrectly styles “ Clean-steals,”
Henley’s description is that Burns had a lead.
The contrast between the fairly-instructed editor and
his biased quite ignorant reviewer is marked.
44
BURNS COMPARED WITH HIS


But my readers may now compare the song as
was when Burns found it with its after condition:—
BEFORE BURNS.
Cats like milk, and dogs like broo,
Lads like lassies, and lassies lads too;
And they’re a’ nodding, nidding, nidding, nodding.
They’re a nodding at oor house at hame.
Kate sits i’ the neuk supping hen-broo,
Deil take Kate if she does not know it too;
And they’re a’ nodding, nidding, &c.
AFTER BURNS.
Chorus.
We’re a’ noddin,
Nid, nid, noddin,
We’re a’ noddin
At oor hoose at hame.
‘ Gruid e’en to ye Kimmer,
And how do ye do ? ’
‘ Hicup’, quo Kimmer,
’The better that I’m fou ! ’
We’re a noddin, Ac,
Kate sits i’ the neuk,
Suppin’ hen-broo.
Deil tak Kate
An she be na uoddin too !
An we’re a’, &c.
45
ALLEGED SOURCES OF INSPIRATION.


‘ Hoo’s a’ wi ye, Kimmer ?
And how do you fare ? ’
‘ A pint o’ the best o’t.
An’ twa pints mair ’!
An we’re a&c.
‘ Hoo’s a’ wi ye, Kimmer ?
And ho w div ye thrive ?
How many bairns hae ye ? ’
Quo Kimmer, ‘ I hae five.’
An we’re a’, &c.
‘ Are they a’ Johnnie’s ?
* She : ‘ Atweel na ;
Twa o’ them were gotten
When Johnnie was awa ! ’
An we’re a’, &c.
Cats like milk
And dogs like broo ;
Lads like lassies weel,
And lassies lads too.
We’re a’ noddin.
Nid, nid, noddin.
We’re a’ noddin
At oor hoose at hame.
Continuing his tortuous course the Bulletin's
red-handed murderer of reputation ingeniously said
that: “ Burns never claimed credit for many of the
verses which his eulogists attribute to him. If he
did, he might have claimed credit for a Clean-Steal
like the ‘ Dusty Miller.’ ”
46
BURNS COMPARED WITH HIS


If this slip-shod stuff has any meaning, it is that
Burns did not use The Dusty Miller as his own.
Nevertheless, it is styled a ‘ Clean-Steal.’ What
next ? The facts are that Burns remodelled the
first stanza of the ‘ Miller,’ and added thereon an
entirely new verse. He did not sign it, and, in the
notes to his poems, this information was given.
Consequently, only the most superficial of Burns’
admirers could view the Dusty Miller as ‘an egg
of genius that only Burns’ mind could lay,’ and only
the most malevolent of his critics could dub it a
‘ Clean-Steal.’ There are minds which lay other
varieties of egg—the egg of innuendo, of misrepre-
sentation, of suppression, of absolute untruth !
BEFOEE BUENS.
O, the Dusty Miller, O the Dusty Miller,
Dusty was his coat. Dusty was his cullour;
Dusty was the kiss I got frae the Miller !
Oh, the Dusty Miller wi’ the dusty coat,
He will spend a shilling ere he win a groat.
O’ the Dusty Miller,
—Herd, MS~
AFTEE BUENS
Hey the dusty miller
And his dusty coat!
He will spend a shilling
Or he win a groat.
Dusty was the coat.
Dusty was the colour,
Dusty was the kiss
That I got frae the miller !
47
ALLEGED SOURCES OF INSPIRATION.


Hey the dusty miller
And his dusty sack !
Leeze me on the calling
Fills the dusty peck !
Fills the dusty peck,
Brings the dusty siller !
I wad gie my coatie
For the dusty miller.
Still further urging on his wild career, the
Bulletin s Red Page asserted that:—“ The two best
lines in Scots Wha Hae are not Burns’ ; Auld Lang
Syne is not Burns’; Cornin’ Thro’ the Rye is not
Burns’ ; My Love is Like the Red, Red Rose is not
Burns’.”
Concerning this magnificent war-song, which,
says Carlyle, “ Should be sung with the throat of
the whirlwind,” Burns makes this statement: —“I
have borrowed the last stanza from the common-
stall edition of Wallace—
A false usurper sinks in every foe.
And Liberty returns with every blow.
And no one has been able to show his further
indebtedness. But here is the chant, as Burns
left it:—
Scots, wha hae wi’ Wallace bled,
Scots, wham Bruce has aften led;
Welcome to your gory bed,
Or to Yictorie!
48
BURNS COMPARED WITH HIS


Now’s the day, and now’s the hour;
See the front of battle lower;
See approach proud Edward’s power—
Chains and Slaverie !
Wha will be a traitor knave ?
Wha wad fill a coward’s grave ?
Wha sae base as be a slave ?
Let him turn and flee?
Wha for Scotland’s King and Law,
Freedom’s sword will strongly draw ?
Freeman stand, or Freeman fa’
Let him on wi’ me !
By oppression’s woes and pains !
By your Sons in servile chains !
We will drain our dearest veins.
But they shall be free !
Lay the proud usurpers low!
Tyrants fall in every foe !
Liberty’s in every blow !
Let us do, or dee!
The Bulletin fully quoted My Luve is Like in
order to prove that Burns had no fire of his own,,
and filched the poetic flame. In Cunningham’s and
many other editions it is stated that this was a
paraphrase of an old Nithsdale song. The first verse
was little improved by Burns; the two next quoted
first appeared, it is said, in a chap-book (1792). If
the poet had no hand in putting them there ; if they
were not “ cribbed” from him, as were many other
49
ALLEGED SOURCES OF INSPIRATION.


•songs by the chapmen of his generation and the
next; if they were not of the bogus Burns’
■“ originals ” then so numerously in process of
manufacture; then only the verse beginning As
fair art Thou, My Bonnie Lass, can be fairly
attributed to him. The ideas, however, of the
■quoted verses were like shifting sands—always
changing in form, quantity and place, but Burns’
patchwork lives as he left it always, never as he
found it, and Henley is forced to style My Luve is
Like, a “ mosaic of rather beggarly scraps of verse,
exquisitely done, of course.” That can
be no clean-steal which Burns never claimed ; at
most, it is a vamp. Even so, is there to be no
admiration, nothing but abuse, for the man who,
from some “ beggarly scraps ” blown hither and
thither by the four winds of heaven, wove an
-exquisite song—perfect in pattern and full of
harmony ? Let us compare :
BEFORE BURNS.
Her cheeks are like the roses
That blossom fresh in June,
O, she’s like a new-strung instrument
That’s newly put in tune.
■From a black letter ballad, “ The Wanton Wife of Castle
Urate
The seas they shall run dry,
And rocks melt into sands ;
Then I’ll love you still, my dear,
When all those things are done.
BURNS COMPARED WITH HIS


Fare you well, my own true love.
And fare you well for a while,
And I will be sure to return back again.
If I go ten thousand mile.
—Chapbook of 1792.
The Day shall turn to Night, dear Love,
And the Rocks melt with the Sun,
Before that I prove false to thee,
Before my life be gone, dear Love,
Before my Life be gone.
—From the Loyal Lover's Promise.
BURNS.
0, my luve is like a red, red rose,
That’s newly sprung in June.
O, my luve is like the melodie,
That’s sweetly play’d in tune.
As fair art thou, my bonnie lass,
So deep in luve am I,
And I will luve thee still, my dear.
Till a’ the seas gang dry.
Till a’ the seas gang dry, my dear,
And the rocks melt wi’ the sun.
And I will luve thee still, my dear,
While the sands o’ life shall run.
Now fare thee weel, my only luve,
And fare thee weel a while !
And I will come again, my luve.
Tho’ it were ten thousand mile !
51
ALLEGED SOURCES OF INSPIRATION.


Henley does not quote anything which remotely
resembles Cornin’ thro’ the Rye as a probable source
of inspiration. The words “ And I led her into the
Rye,” which occur in a filthy English ballad, are all
he brings forward. Cunningham says ; “ Burns
took the old strain . . . thrashed some of the
loose chaff from about it, and sent it to the Museum
He quotes a verse of the ‘ old strain,’ whose style,
and particularly its use of the word ‘ gloom,’ leads
me to think it post-dates Burns. No evidence exists
to justify the assertion that Cornin’ thro’ the Rye
is not Burns’. Nevertheless it is rarely attributed to
him and as seldom published with his works.
BURNS.
0, Jenny’s a’ weet, pnir body,
Jenny’s seldom dry;
She draigl’t a’ her petticoatie,
Cornin’ thro’ the rye !
Comm’ thro’ the rye, pnir body.
Cornin’ thro’ the rye.
She draigl’t a’ her petticoatie.
Comin thro’ the rye !
Gin a body meet a body
Cornin’ thro’ the rye,
Gin a body kiss a body,
Need a body cry P
Gin a body meet a body
Cornin’ thro’ the glen.
Gin a body kiss a body
Need the warld ken P
52
BURNS COMPARED WITH HIS


Grin a body meet a body
Coinin’ frae the well,
Gin a body court a body,
Need a body tell ?
Ilka lassie has her laddie,
Nane they sae hae I,
But a’ the lads they lo’e me weel
An’ nane the wanr am I.
Henley’s notes on Auld Lang Syne are but
little more complete than those of Cunningham,
Creech, or Currie. In styling this a “ derived song ”
the Bulletin was right. When the Bulletin said it
was not Burns’ song, then, however, it spoke in error
and contradicted its prior assertion. Four of the
five verses are wholly his ; the first verse and chorus
—inspired, without doubt, by the lines now quoted
—are immeasurably superior to the originals. In
fact, only an enthusiast, competent to see latent
possibilities, could write, as did Burns to Mrs,
Dunlop :—“ Light lie the turf on the breast of the
heaven-inspired poet who composed this glorious
fragment.” Of course, it may be that Burns, like
many of his predecessors and contemporaries, in this
case as in others manufactured originals in order to
get a better hearing for his own verses.


BEFORE BURNS.
Should old acquaintance be forgot,
And never thought upon,
The Flames of Love extinguished
And freely past and gone ?
Is thy kind Heart now grown so cold
In that Loving Breast of thine,
That thou can’st never once reflect
On Old-long-syne ?
Chorus.
On old long syne,
()n old long syne, my jo,
On old long syne :
That thou can’st never once reflect
On old long syne.
A nonymous Jacobite Fragment
BURNS.
Should auld acquaintance be forgot
An’ never brought to min’ ?
Should auld acquaintance be forgot
An’ days o’ auld lang syne ?
We twa hae run aboot the braes,
And pu’d the gowans fine ;
But we’ve wandered mony a weary fit
Since days o’ auld lang syne.
We twa hae paidl’t in the burn,
From morning sun till dine ;
But seas between us braid hae roared
Since days o’ auld lang syne,


Sae here’s a hand, my trusty frien’,
And gie’s a hand o’ thine ;
And we’ll tak a richt guid wiilie-waught
For days o’ auld lang syne.
And surely you’ll be your pint-stoup ?
As surely I’ll be mine ;
And we’ll tak a cup o’ kindness yet
For days o’ auld lang syne.
Chorus.
For auld lang syne, my dear,
For auld lang syne,
We’ll tak a cup o’ kindness yet,
For auld lang syne.
One pities the unfortunate bigot whose prejudice
drives him to censure Burns for turning out work of
this class. What an immeasurable quantity of good
feeling it has promoted throughout the world !
Following up his trail of discontent and disap-
proval, the bilious critic is found quoting Aye Waukin
as an example of the old Ballad diamond. Reference
will show that his case is insupportable. Of its six-
teen lines at least twelve—according to Henley (who
styles it a ‘ masterpiece by Burns ’) and by general
consent—are Burns’ own. The lines juxtaposed by
the Bulletin to Aye Waukin—When Braving Angry
Winter’s Storms —as an example of the Burns’ paste,
55
ALLEGED SOURCES OF INSPIRATION


are in his very worst style. It is palpably untrue
that it is his ‘ typical Very Own.’ He says himself:
‘ These English songs gravel me to death. I have
not the command of the language that I have of my
native tongue. In fact, I think that my ideas are
more barren in English than Scottish.’ The Bulle-
tin s devices for the discrediting of Burns are certainly
ingenious. Are they honest ? Here is the -original
stone in the rough and the diamond of Burns’
polishing.
BEFORE BURNS.
O wat, wat,
0 wat and weary !
Sleep I can get nane
For thinkin’ on my Deary !
A’ the nicht I wake,
A’ the day I weary,
Sleep I can get nane
For thinkin’ on my Deary !
-Herd, M. S.
BURNS.
Ay waukin, 0,
Waukin still and weary ;
Sleep I can get nane
For thinking on ray dearie
Simmer’s a pleasant time :
Flowers of every colour,
The water runs ower the heugh,
And I long for my lover,
56
BURNS COMPARED WITH HIS


When I sleep I dream,
When I wauk I’m eerie,
Sleep I can get nane
For thinkin’ on my dearie.
Lanely night comes on,
A’ the lave are sleepin,
I think on my bonnie lad,
And bleer my een wi’ greetin.
Aye vvaukin’, 0,
Waukin still an’ weary ;
Sleep I can get nane
For thinkin’ o' my dearie.
The Bulletin's Red Page also stated that: —‘ The
clean-steal class slides imperceptibly into the neat
vamp, in which Burns contributes so much to the
construction that the product is practically a new
song.’ Nevertheless, a little further on it insinuated
that the public, and especially ‘ the average Scotch-
man,’ have been deceived too long by a reputation
which is ‘ legendary and Scottish and throughout
the pervading idea is that Burns should be expur-
gated of the Neat-Vamps (the practically new
songs) as well as the Clean-Steals.
Another contradiction : In one place the Bulle-
tin said that Burns is credited with 108 songs which
are neat-vamps ; further down it credited him with
108 Neat-Vamps and Derivatives when bunched to-
gether. Starting out to take away a man’s reputa-
tion, some appearance of accuracy should have been


preserved. The Bulletin also asserted that among
the vamps must be included The Birks of Aberfeldie,
Macpherson’s Farewell, For our Rightful King, The
Siller Tassie, John Anderson, My Jo, and O were
My Love. The man who would call The Birks of
Aberfeldy a vamp is either cursed with literary op-
thalmia or is guilty of deliberate false testimony. It
has five verses —all Burns’ very own, and he only
vamped the chorus from that of an old song. There-
in it ran thus—
‘ 0 bonnie lassie, wilt thou go
To the birks of Abergeldy V
Therefore, the extent of Burns’ indebtedness is two
lines of very matter-of -fact entreaty. Further, the
chorus has had so little influence on Burns’ song as
not to qualify it for the derivative class.
Of the 24 lines that make up Macpherson’s
Lament, three are borrowed, but none of the others,
in spirit or in language, owe anything to the old
ballad. My readers can draw their own conclusions
from comparison.
BEFORE BURNS.
I spent my time in rioting,
Debauched my health and strength ;
I pillaged, plundered, murdered,
But now, alas ! at length
I’m brought to punishment condign ;
Bale death draws near to me ;


The end I ever did project,
To hang upon a tree.
Then wantonly and rantingly
I am resolved to die ;
And with undaunted courage 1
Shall mount this fatal tree.
- Captain ■Johnston's Farewell
BURNS.
Farewell, ye dungeons dark and strong
The wretch’s destinie ;
Macpherson’s time will not be long
On yonder gallows tree.
Chorus.
Sae rantingly, sae rantingly,
Sae dauntingly gaed he ;
He played a spring and danced it round,
Beneath the gallows-tree
Oh ! what is death but parting breath ?
On many a bloody plain
I’ve dared his face, and in this place
I scorn him yet again !
Untie these bands from oft my hands
And bring to me my sword !
And there’s no a man in all Scotland
But I’ll have him at a word.
I’ve lived a life of sturt and strife ;
I die by treachery :
It burns my heart I must depart
And not avenged be.
59
ALLEGED SOURCES OF INSPIRATION.


Now farewell light, thou sunshine bright,
And all beneath the sky !
May coward shame disdain his name,
The wretch that dare not die !
Henley says of A ’ for our Rightful King, that
Buchan, who attributed it to Captain Ogilvie, was
‘ still bent on fathering everything on somebody’—a
line the Bulletin might commit to memory.
The first and last verses of Molly Stewart —an alleged
blackletter ballad of which the earliest copy extant
bears as date 1807 —are the only verses that in any
way resemble Burns’ song, which dates in publica-
tion from 1796. The Demon Lover has two lines
which resemble those now quoted. Of Burns’ 80 lines,
none owe anything to Mally Stewart, except his
third verse, which has been taken almost verbatim,
and, says Henley, ‘set in a jewel of Burnsian gold.’
Of the whole song, Henley goes on to say that
< Burns touched his borrowing to issues as fine as
the Romantic Lyre has to show.’
BEFORE BURNS.
Mally Stewart,
The cold winter is past and gone, and now comes in the Spring,
And I am one of the King’s Life-Guards, and must go fight
for my King,
My dear,
I must go fight for my King.


The trooper turned himself about all on the Irish shore,
He has given the bridle reins a shake, saying adieu for
more
My dear,
Adieu for evermore!
AFTER BURNS.
It was a’ for our rightfu’ King
We left fair Scotland’s strand .
It was a’ for our rightfu’ King,
We e’er saw Irish land,
My dear
We e’er saw Irish land.
Now a’ is done that men can do,
And a’ is done in vain,
My Love and Native Land farewell,
For I maun cross the main,
My dear—
For I maun cross the main,
He turned him right and round about
Upon the Irish shore
And gave his bridle-reins a shake,
With adieu for evermore,
My dear—
And adieu for evermore.
The sodger frae the war returns,
The sailor frae the main,
But I hae parted frae my love
Never to meet again,
My dear—
Never to meet again.


When day is gone and uicht is come,
ind a’ folk bound to sleep,
I think on him that’s far awa
The lee-lang nicht and weep,
My dear—
The lee-tang nicht and weep.
It is my opinion that Molly Stewart was partly
stolen from Burns rather than that Burns borrowed from
Malty Stewart.
Usually known as My Bonnie Mary, The
Siller Tassie owes 14 or 15 of its 16 lines to Burns.
The poet told the publisher that he took the first
half-stanza from an old ballad. The borrowed lines
or line hardly contain the motive of the song—which
never can be honestly called a vamp.
BEFORE BURNS,
Go fetch to me a pint of wine,
Go fill it to the Brim ;
That I may drink my gude Lord’s health,
Tho’ Errol be his name.
BURNS.
Gae bring to me a pint o’ wine,
An’ fill it in a siller tassie ;
That I may drink before I go,
A service to my bonnie lassie.
My boat rocks at the pier of Leith;
Fu’ loud the wind blaws frae the ferry ;
The ship rides by North Berwick law,
An’ I maun leave my bonnie Mary.


The trumpets sound, the banners fly,
The glittering spears are ranked and ready
The shouts o’ war are heard afar,
The battle closes thick and bloody.
But it’s no the roar o’ sea or shore
Wad make me langer wish to tarry ;
Nor shout o’ war that’s heard afar,
It’s leavin’ thee, my bonnie Mary.
Burns never claimed 0 were my Love; which
the Bulletin placed in its list of his vamps. Nor
is it a vamp. In the Creech edition it has been set
forth for over one hundred years, over Burns’ signa-
ture, that only a portion of this lovely song was his;
1 the average Scotchman’ has been supplied for about
105 years with reliable information as to what is
Burns’ and what is not. In a letter to Thomson, it
is stated by Burns that, in order to eke out a song to
the air Hughie Graham, he had added eight lines
to an ‘ inexpressibly beautiful fragment’ taken from
Witherspoon’s Scottish Collection. The eight lines
beginning ‘ Oh, were my Love yon Lilac Fair’ are
wholly Bums’; the eight lines which commence ‘ Oh,
gin my Love were yon Red Rose,’ belong to some
gifted Unknown whose muse Burns has slightly
assisted.


IMPROVED BY BURNS.
O gin my love were yon red rose
That grows upon the castle-wa’,
And I mysel’ a drap o’ dew,
Into her bonnie breast to fa’!
Oh, there, beyond expression blest,
I’d feast on beauty a’ the night;
Seal’d on her silk saft faulds to rest
Till fley’d awa’ by Phoebus’ light.
BURNS VERY OWN.
O were my love yon lilac fair,
Wi’ purple blossoms to the spring ;
And I, a bird to shelter there,
When weared on my little wing ;
How I wad mourn, when it was torn
By Autumn wild and Winter rude !
But I wad sing on wanton wing,
When youthfu’ May its bloom renewed
Of John Anderson, My Jo, 16 lines are printed
in the ordinary editions, but there are eight others
in existence which Burns left out because they had
not the delicate pathos of the lines retained. As a
matter of fact, Burns borrowed nothing from the
gone-before but the refrain of five words —‘ John An-
derson, My Jo, John,’ and if the verses in the Merry
Muses, as some most shrewdly suspect, were his own
64
BURNS COMPARED WITH HIS


parody of his own song, then he borrowed nothing.
So, where the vamp theory has a rightful footing
none but a Red Page may say. Is the Page too Bed
to raise a blush?
John Anderson, my Jo, John,
I wonder what you mean,
To rise so soon in the morning,
And sit up so late at e’en ;
You’ll blear out your eyn, John,
And why will you do so ?
Come sooner to your bed at e’en
John Anderson, my Jo.
From the Merry Muses of Caledonia
John Anderson, my Jo
Cum in as ye gae by,
And ye sail get a sheip’s head
Weel baken in a pye ;
Weel baken in a pye,
And a haggis in a pat,
John Anderson, my Jo,
Cum in and ye’se get that.
-By John Anderson, Town-piper, Kelso
BURNS.
John Anderson, my Jo, John,
When we were first acquent.
Your locks were like the raven,
Your bonnie brow was brent;
But now your brow is held, John,
Your locks are like the snaw ;
But blessings on your frosty pow,
John Anderson, my Jo.


John Anderson my Jo, John,
We clamb the hill thegither ;
And mony a canty day, John,
We’ve had wi’ ane anither ;
Now we maun totter doun, John,
But hand in hand we’ll go,
And sleep thegither at the foot,
John Anderson, my Jo.
So much for the direct charges !
BURNS COMPARED WITH HIS


CHAPTER V.
The Hodman on the Wall.
The Bulletin's alleged review of the Centenary
Hums teemed with contradictions. In several places
the Scotch were damned as an nnpoetical and un-
imaginative race ; —this, in order to discredit the
Burns of whom they think so much. In another
place, again for the purpose of discrediting Burns,
the ancient Scotch-song writers were thus lauded :
The sincerity, the ring, the intensity (either of humour or
pathos), the charm and the power, these are always the pro-
perty of the rough, so-joyous, so-sad old rhymers (Scotch) from
whom the song Burns borrowed. Often his sympathy gave
their work a better form, but theirs was the living tire. . . .
The divine fire that those earlier Titans (Scotch) stole from
Heaven.
These are peculiar terms to use in describing an
nnpoetical race! But there are other contradictions.
In several instances, Henley is congratulated on his


production of a book whose revelations unmask the
impostor who has been so long masquerading as a
poet. But in another place it is calmly stated that
“ It has always been known or guessed that Burns
was scarcely ever a completely original writer.” One
statement negatives the other ; neither is correct.
Henley’s so-called revelations have been common
property for over a century. In classic Bulletin
phrase, he ‘filched them from current literature.’
I had made a random guess that probably but
one-third of the published editions of Burns con-
tained copious notes. The Bulletin's reviewer
quibbled therefrom that the alleged ignorance of the
average Scot of Burns’ alleged plagiarisms is due to
the noteless two thirds. This is lovely, coming from
one who throughout eight columns revelled in the
idea that Henley’s edition—published at two guineas
net —would constitute a revelation to the Scottish
nation and would obliterate ‘ The conception of
Burns which is legendary and Scottish.’ The Page
gloated over the disillusionment this fatuous race
was about to experience, and said, ‘ One can con-
ceive the horror of the foolish people who have trans-
formed Burns into a sort of Scottish Mumbo-Jumbo.’
Therein, he betrayed his belief that the ‘ foolish
people’— foolish because they admire Burns —who
were inaccessible to former numberless annotated
editions were suddenly to be shown the error of their


ways by Henley at forty-two shillings per shock!
This the sort of thing you get from the critic (?) who
starts with a preconceived idea and endeavours to
suppress or distort every fact that does not agree
with it.
Let me parallel a few more Red Page contra-
dictions ;
By dint of his versatile
energy Burns summed up and
excelled the achievements of a
dozen poets, on a dozen lines.
Other poets show dif-
ferent sides of the Scottish
nation ; Burns is like Shakes-
peare—he comprehends all
sides. His universal vitality
dings his poems into the uni-
versal mind. The early Burns
survives as proverbs survive—
because his language is a pithy,
vigorous concentration of what
every Scotsman thinks and
feels, and continually needs
and wishes to express. . . .
No Scotch poet approaches
Burns as a satirist. . . Burns’
Doric stirs the Scotchman’s
soul—or brain rather.
Burns fits his unimaginative
countrymen and they fit him
He inspires a Scotchman less
because he is a poet than be-
cause he is Scotch. .
Burns is a mere tinker, vara-
per and mender, and little
more. . . . Burns’ lack
of imagination kept him from
soaring far from his facts—he
is always a tethered goat
grazing in an objective circle.
The later Burns survives in
virtue of the ability with which
he milked other people’s cows
into his own bucket. . . .
The average Scot is not im-
pressed by poetry.
Certainly no one will ever accuse the Bulletin's
reviewer of inability to soar far from his facts ; or,
indeed, out of sight of them. Albeit not tethered,
in this matter he assumes somewhat the complexion
of a goat.
69
THE HODMAN ON THE WALL.


Loath to begin, my case is so strong that I am
loath to leave off, but let me say of the New Cult in
Criticism that it is unhealthy ; it reeks of miserable
conceits, and savors of cant and trickery. It pre-
sents to us the statement that Burns had too healthy
a body to be a first-class poet—his health was ruined
by overwork as a growing boy—and that good writing
is the product of a diseased brain and a disordered
liver. I will admit that this hypothesis may account
for most of the remarkably good writing seen on
the Red Page, but it is not borne out by general
results. This brings me to an extraordinary state-
ment, attributed to Henley by the Bulletin , but
which I have not encountered myself, and which
that journal loudly applauds:—
A lyrical idea—by which I mean a rhythm, a burden, and
a drift—once found, the song writes itself. It writes itself
easily or with difficulty, it writes itself well or ill, but in the
end it writes itself.
Either Mr. Henley is misquoted or else he easily
writes himself down an ass. The difference between
the ‘ lyrical idea’ which writes songs easily and well,
and the ‘ lyrical idea’ which writes songs with diffi-
culty and ill, is to be found in the difference between
the brains at the end of the respective pens. If the
lyrical idea alone did the work, then the completed
song founded on a lyrical idea could never, by any
mischance, be ill. One thing is certain : Take the
lyrical idea of any song that Burns ever wrote of
any value and place it in the hands of Henley, and


all the Bulletin bards that ever spoiled clean paper,
and I will engage that in everything which goes to
make a lyric, Burns is easily first and the rest no-
where. The Bulletin's review of Henley’s Burns was
simply a peg on which to hang an attack on the poet
and his countrymen. It was almost as unfair to Hen-
ley as it was to Burns; for there is nothing in Henley’s
criticisms, or notes, or alleged discoveries which
warranted the unreasoning savagery of the Bulletin's
onslaught.
The obscure unknown who parades his little
hour as Sir Oracle on the Bulletin's Red Page, hard-
pressed for a mouse-hole of escape, driven to cover
an undignified retreat from an untenable position by
the dust kicked-up over non-essentials, attempted to
mitigate the severity of his chastisement by quoting
against me the fact that I am Scotch. While he
fails to answer my arguments that can not reduce
his discomfiture by one iota. But no Scot was ever
less clannish than I. No Burns-worshipper, I had
originally assessed him in a much lower place than
had Byron, Scott, Wordsworth, Cowper, Keats,
Charles Lamb, Wra. Hazlitt, Delta Moir, Campbell,
Prof. Wilson, J. G. Lockhart, William Pitt, Carlyle,
Matthew Arnold, Taine, Gosse, Whittier, Whitman,
Ingersoll, Beecher, Auguste Angellier, Andrew Lang,
Masson, Henley, Whibley, Francis Thompson, and
many others, of all climes, and all creeds, superior
individually—as the Himalayas to a mole-hill—in


weight and authority to my opponent. And so little
thought of clan or clique have I in this matter that,
had Burns not been in hand, I would have dulled a
nib in defence of Tennyson. Nor is this second-hand
tinker in criticism liberated by his idiotic inuendo
that an inferior versifier can be no judge of poetry.
If true, it is time that he, an even more miserable
failure than I, ceased to sit in judgment on poets
and poetry. On his own showing, a hodman, by ac-
cident on the wall, is posing as a builder. But the
jibe has not only a boomerang flight, it is also un-
true. Taine wisely says: “It is dangerous for an
artist to be excellent in theory ; the creative spirit is
not consonant with the criticising spirit; he who,
quietly seated on the shore, discusses and compares
the waves, is hardly capable of plunging straight and
boldly into the stormy sea of invention.”
My task is ended. I have, in accordance with
my promise, categorically dealt with and disproved
all the calumnies of Bulletin manufacture. To make
the victory more apparent, however, the defeat more
disastrous, the chain of argument more irrefragable,
I will quote an opinion from every one of the great
authorities above-mentioned and some others.
72
THE HODMAN ON THE WALL


CHAPTER VI.
The Dead Speak.
Said Byron in his letter on Pope :
Of what order according to the poetical aristocracy are
Burns’ poems ? There are his opus magnum, Tam O’Shanter
—a tale; The Cotter’s Saturday Night—a descriptive
sketch; some others in the same style; the rest are songs.
So much for the rank of his productions; the rank of Burns is
the very first in his art.
Said Sir Walter Scott
Notwithstanding the spirit of many of his lyrics, and
the exquisite sweetness and simplicity of others, we cannot
but regret that so much of Bums’ time and talents were
frittered away in compiling and composing for musical col-


lections. . . No poet of our tongue has displayed higher skill
in marrying melody to immortal verse. . . No poet with the ex-
ception of Shakespeare ever possessed the power of exciting the
most varied and discordant emotions with such swift transitions.
. . Deeply must we regret the avocations which diverted
a fancy so varied and vigorous, joined with language and
expressions suited to all its changes, from leaving a more
substantial monument to his oivn fame and the honor of his
country.
Said J. G. Lockhart:—
The Jolly Beggars, that extraordinary sketch, coupled
with his later lyrics in a higher vein, is enough to show that
in him we had a master capable of placing the musical drama on a
evel with the loftiest of our classical poems. The Beggar’s Bush
and Beggar’s Opera sink into tameness in the comparison. . ,
Had Burns pursued that walk and poured out his stores of
traditional lore, embellished with his extraordinary powers
of description of all kinds, we might have had from his hand
a series of national tales, uniting the quaint simplicity, sly
humor, and irresistible pathos of another Chaucer, with the
strong and graceful versification, and masculine wit and
sense of another Dry den.
Said Professor John Wilson Christopher
North :
Burns is by far the greatest poet that ever sprang from
tne bosom of the people.
Said William Pitt: —
I can think of no verse since Shakespeare’s, which comes
so sweetly and at once from Nature as does Burns’.
74
THE DEAD SPEAK.


Said William Wordsworth :
Burns erected a monument to Fergusson, . . because
he felt he had been prematurely cut off, and that his fate
bore no proportion to his deserts. . Burns has raised for
himself a monument so conspicuous and of such imperishable mater-
ials, as to vender a local fabric of stone superfluous.
Said William Cowper :
I think Burns’ poems on the whole a very extraordinary
production. He is, I believe, the only poet these kingdoms
have produced in the lower ranks of life, since Shakespeare,
who need not be indebted for any part of his praise to a
charitable consideration of his origin, and the disadvantages
under which he has laboured.
Said Charles Lamb :
A predominant feature of independence impresses every
page of our glorious Burns. . . In early life I had a pas-
sionate fondness for the poetry of Burns. He was the god
of my idolatry.
Said John Keats, who made a pilgrimage to his
tomb:—
Burns ! with honor due,
I oft have honored thee !
Said Thomas Moore :
Scots Wha Hae, in a great national crisis, would be of
more avail than the eloquence of a Demosthenes. The ex-
ample of Burns, in his higher inspirations, should materially
elevate the character of English song-writing.
Said William Hazlitt :
Burns’ pictures of good fellowship, of social glee, of
quaint humour, are equal to anything; they come up to
75
THE DEAD SPEAK


nature, and they cannot go beyond it. Burns’ poetry is a
very highly sublimated essence of animal existence.
Said Dugald Stewart :
All the faculties of Burns’ mind were equally vigorous.
The idea which his conversation conveyed of the powers of his
mind exceeded, if possible, that which was suggested by his
writings.
* *
Said Thomas Campbell:—
Viewing Burns merely as a poet, there is scarcely ano.
ther regret, connected with his name, than that his produc-
tions, with all their merit, fall short of the talents which he
possessed. . . Burns has given elixir vitae to his dialect.
. . He stamped the little treasure he possessed in the
mintage of sovereign genius.
Said Alexander Moir, the Delta of Blackwood’s
Magazine :
The crown that Burns won can never he removed from his head.
Much is yet left for other poets, even among that life where
his spirit delighted to work ; but he has built monuments on
all the high places and they who follow can only hope to leave
behind them humbler memorials.
Said Thomas Carlyle:—
Burns has in his songs a tone and words for every mood
of man’s heart. It will seem a small praise if we rank him as the
first of all our song-writers, for we know not where to find one
worthy of being second to him. The songs of Burns are by far the
best that the world has seen. We recollect no poet of
Burns’ susceptibility who comes before us from the first and
remains with us to the last with such a total want of affecta-
tion. He is an honest man and an honest writer. In his sue*
76
THE DEAD SPEAK


cesses and his failures, in his greatness and his littleness, he
is ever deny , simple, and true, and glitters with no lustre but his
Said Matthew Arnold :
As we draw towards the end of the 18th century, we are
met by the great name of Burns. . . At moments he
touches high seriousness in a profound and passionate melan-
choly, as in those four immortal lines taken by Byron as a
motto for The Bride op Abydos , but which have in them a depth
of poetic quality such as resides in no verse of Byron’s own.
. . When the largeness and freedom of Burns get full
sweep, as in Tam O' Shunter , or still more in that puissant
and splendid production, The Jolly Beggars , his world may be
what it will, his poetic genius triumphs over it. The piece is a
superb poetic success: it has a breadth , truth, and power which
make the famous scene in A uerbach’s cellar of Goethe's Faust, seem
artificial and tame beside it, and which are only matched by Shake-
speare and Aristophanes. Here, where his largeness and free-
dom serve him so admirably, and also in those songs and poems
where to shrewdness he adds infinite archness and wit, and to
benignity infinite pathos, where his manner is flawless, and a
perfect poetic whole is the result —here we have the genuine
Burns of whom the real estimate must be high indeed. Not a
classic, but a poet with thorough truth of substance and an
answering truth of style, giving us a poetry sound to the core.
Said Taine—previously quoted :
Burns wrote his masterpiece, The Jolly Beggars, like the
Gucnx of Beranger ; but how much more picturesque, varied,
and powerful.
Said Ebenezer Elliott :
The lion-hearted Burns —a Niagara from Heaven!


Sang Oliver Wendell Holmes :
Brave singer of the coming time,
Sweet minstrel of the joyous present,
Crowned with the modest wreath of rhyme.
The holly leaf of Ayrshire’s peasant.
* *
Sang Elizabeth Barrett Browning :
Burns, with pungent passionings
Set in his eyes. Deep lyric springs
Are of the fire-mount’s issuings.
Said Green, the historian ;
At the time of Burns’ birth England was mad with
hatred of the Scots. When Burns died there was not a
Scotchman who was not proud of being a Scotchman.
* # #
Said John G. Whittier :
I began to read Burns and was lost in wonder. It seemed
as if the sky had lifted and the world widened. . . The
great Burns has made all the world his debtor. . . His
genius is so great and noble that if it has blots they are so
little that I don’t see them.
Said Henry Ward Beecher :
There was more put into the making of Burns than any
man of his day. His letters are as wonderful as his poems,
and his conversation is regarded as richer than either. I
would that some dainty Ariel could have waited on the in-
spired ploughman, and stamped into record the inexhaustible
flow of his wonderful and rapturous conversation. . . To-
day, he has made the world rich; alive he could not earn food
and raiment, nor control his livelihood. . . No finer genius
has ever delineated the eternal forms of Nature. His poems are a
torch that never goes out to all in dark places. The nation
78
THE DEAD SPEAK ,


which reads Burns in the nursery could never have tyrants
in the Parliament.
Said Col. Robert G. Ingersoll
If I should give Burns the pl.»ee which he is entitled to,
taking into consideration what he has done for me, I should
place him second, one above him and only one—Shakespeare.
. . The name of Robert Burns can never die. He is en-
rolled among the immortals and will live for ever. . . He
left a legacy of riches to the whole world. Scotland has produced
the greatest and noblest of our singers—the one who gave us
the sweetest and tenderest song, the best drinking song, the
most beautiful love poem, a song which is the apotheosis of
independence, and the grandest and noblest song of all the
world.
Said Professor Masson :
It may be doubted whether any poet of any nation since
the world began ever sank so deeply and fondly as did Burns
into the memories of the people. Burns, apart from his
poetry, impressed enormously by the general strength and
versatility of his intellect.
Said Robert Louis Stevenson :
Burns is Scotland’s most essentially national production.
. . In a time when English versification was particularly
stiff, lame, and feeble, and words were used with ultra-acade-
mical timidity, he wrote verses that were easy, racy, graphic,
and forcible, and used language with absolute tact and
courage as it seemed most fit to give a clear impression. . .
When we remember Burns’ obligations to his predecessors,
we must never forget his immense advances on them. .
On his appearance, a coarse and laughing literature was
touched to finer issuer and learned gravity of thought and
79
THE DEAD SPEAK.


natural pathos. . . There never was a man of letters with
more absolute command of his means; we may say of him,
without excess, that his style was his slave. Hence the un-
broken literary quality of his pieces, which keeps him from
any slip into the weariful trade of word-painting, and pre-
sents everything in a clear, continuous medium of thought-
. . The man who had written a volume of master-pieces
in six months, helped to change the course of literary history.
. His humour comes from him in a stream so deep and
easy that I will venture to call him the best of humorous
poets. He has a rugged compression, a brutal vivacity of
epithet, a homely vigour, a delight in local personalities, and
an interest in many sides of life that are often despised and
passed over by more effete and cultured poets.
Said Auguste Angellier —who wrote a memoir
of Burns, and translated him into the French: —
Weigh his defects, his faults, as heavily as you like, the
scale where lies the pure gold easily turns the balance. . .
The clay of which he was created was full of diamonds; and his
life was the proudest and one of the most valiant that any
poet ever lived. . . So like was his soul to a great furnace
where precious metals were molten, that it might be said he
was one of Nature’s noblemen.
80
THE ■ DEAD SPEAK


CHAPTER VII.
What Say the Living ?
Says George Saintsbury :
Bums is a great poet, and one of the greatest of poets.
Says George W. Curtis :
His genius flashed and blazed Like a torch among
tapers.
Says James Hannay
Bums was not only a great poet but one ot the greatos
men that the race has produced.
Says the Athenaeum :
We delight in the untrammelled soarings in his native
air of Burns—one of the choicest singers of all time,


Says Walt, Whitman ;
Burns remains to my heart and brain almost the tender-
est, manliest, and dearest flesh-and-blood figure in all the
streams and clusters of bygone poets.
Says Andrew Lang
In one, Nature combined much of the music of the
future, in the generous, the tender, the kindly, the homely,
the impassioned Burns ; the brightest of our lyrists , the most
human of our satirists, the most perfervid of the perfervid
Scots. , . Burns almost always climbs by a trodden way,
but his genius, like a forest fire, obliterates the traces of
other and earlier footsteps.
Says Edmund Gosse :
Burns, one of the four great poets of the Eighteenth
Century, is the incarnation of natural song, the embodiment
of that which is most spontaneous, most ebullient in the
lyrical poet of nature. , . His mode of writing is unparalleled
in its easy buoyant emotion since the days oj Elizabeth. . . The
absolute supremacy of Burns is a very remarkable phenome-
non. In Scottish poetry, he seems not one in a chain, but
the supreme artist to whom all the others are subsidiary.
. Scotch Doric verse appears to us like a single growth,
starting from the rich foliage of Dunbar and his compeers'
. only to break into the single aloe-blossom of the per-
fect Burns.
* * *
Says Charles Whibley
Burns wrote a dozen of the best songs that the world has
heard, he brought back-humour and gaiety, and freedom to
an age that had forgotten them in the foolish manufacture
of odes and fantasies. . . An immortal masterpiece of
melody and observation, the squalor of The Jolly Beggars is
82
WHAT SAY THE LIVING ?


glorified by a style so little rustic that every word and every
rhythm is fitted to its purpose. . . Buryis expressed in per-
fect verse the vague experiments of the chap-books and ballads. To
say that he was a plagiarist is to misunderstand his methods.
He did but seize what may be called the folk-lore of poetry,
and convert it to nobler uses. The tunes, mayhap, were old,
but he played them upon his richer ampler lyre, until their
origin was obscured by a fresh beauty. . . Burns, who
rescued half-a-dozen measures from undeserved obscurity, is
one of the few singers that the world has known. . . He
laid his hand upon whatever mateiial he found suitable, but
he himself was the first to declare his indebtedness, and the
genius which transformed a hasty sketch into a marvel of
music was all his own. In undertaking therefore to dis-
cover the origins of Burns, Messrs. Henley and Henderson
have but completed the task indicated by himself.
Says Francis Thompson :
Henley has not taken from Burns, he has added to him.
He has shown that many supposed “ originals” were later
rifacimentos from Burns; and, in particular that Buchan and
the Ettrick Shepherd are responsible between them for num-
her less fabrications. As St. John gave rise to a brisk industry
in forged apocalypses, so of the making of originals to Burns
there was presently no end. Most of them were taken down
from the lips of an old woman. Buchan, and Stenhouse,
and Allan Cunningham, and Hogg—we can trust none of
them; the trail of the old woman is over them all. . . To
the question whether Burns could write fine songs without
another man’s motif to hang them on, I think the charming-
songs which are pure Burns furnish an undoubted affirma-
tive answer. . , John Anderson has a homely pathos
which stands by itself. The early Mary Morrison, together
with the opening stanzas of the Siller Tussie, show poasibili-
83
WHAT SAY THE LIVING?


ties of a finer and more romantic sentiment which might
have placed him highei as a purely original writer had he
lived in another atmosphere. . . Taking him, borrowings
and all, the merit of his songs lies in the partly dramatic
kind ; they display vividly and pictorially, the life of a whole
peasantry as it has not been displayed in English literature. . .
Burns, like Homer, is not merely a poet, but a literature. . .
I believe that Burns had genius, in another age and com-
munity, to be a very great poet indeed. As it is, he was the
greatest poet he saw his way to be.
Says R. H. Stoddard —the American poet—in
The Century :
The lyric survived. . still a voice in English verse. An
immortal Voice, for when, slumbering and murmuring in its
dreams, it awoke. . . it was a start and a cry—a sweet
wild cry, a deep, loud shout —the long triumphant song of
the Master Singer—Burns.
Says the New York Herald :
The rich have built a monument to Burns, have given a
stone to the man who cried for bread, but the people have
erected his monument in their hearts, and there will live for
ever, the memory
Of him who walked, in glory and in joy,
Behind his plough upon the mountain side.
Says Lord Rosebery :
A peasant, born in a cottage that no sanitary inspector in
these days would tolerate for a moment; struggling with des-
perate effort against pauperism, almost in vain; snatching
at scraps of learning in the intervals of toil, as it were with
84
WHAT SAY THE LIVING?


his teeth; a heavy silent lad, proud of his ploughing. All of
a sudden without preface or warning, he breaks out into ex-
quisite song, like a nightingale from the brushwood, and con-
tinues singing as sweetly—with nightingale pauses—till he
dies. A nightingale sings because he cannot help it; he can
only sing exquisitely because he knows no other. So it was
with Burns. . . I would claim that he is not only Scotland’s
greatest poet, but is worthy to rank among the greatest poets
of the world.
Henley’s Burns was the medium by which it
was sought to degrade the poet to the level of a
a dealer in stolen goods, or a mere mender of dam-
aged pots, therefore this Defence may most fitly be
closed by a quotation from that volume. Says Hen-
ley
Burns is an amazing compound of style and sentiment
with gaiety and sympathy, of wit and tenderness with radiant
humor and an admirable sense of art. . . He had more
genius, and genius of a finer, a rarer, and more generous
quality than all his immediate predecessors put together He
wrote viasterpiece after masterpiece with a rapidity, an assurance , a
command of means, a brilliancy of effect, which makes his achievement
one of the most remarkable in English letters. . . The poet of a
parish, he is the least parochial, the most broadly and genu-
inely human amongst the lyrists of his race. . . He is
national as no poet has ever been, and as no poet ever will be, or
ever can be, again. . . The Scotland he loved so well and
took such pride in honoring, could scarce have been the Scot-
land she is, had he not been. . . Burns, among the general
at least, is better sung than read. But if his songs be the
more national, the Poems are the greater, and it is chiefly to
the Poems that Burns is indebted for his place in literature. .
85
WHAT SAY THE LIVING ?


Of a high courage, a proudj heart, a daring mind, a matchless
gift of speech, an abundance of humor, and wit and fire, he
was a poet in whom were quintessential the effects and tradi-
tions of the Vernacular School. . . In the sequel. Burns is
found to have a place of his own in the first flight of English poets
after Milton, Chaucer, and Shakespeare. . . Burns, the amazing
peasant of genius, the inspired faun, whose voice has gone
ringing through the courts of Time these hundred years or
more, and is far louder, far clearer now than when it first
broke on the ear of man.
And here I leave the final decision with my
readers.
85
WHAT SAY THE LIVING ?




