

in Iflcmoriam.
The Rev. JAMES HILL, M.A.








In rncmoriam.
The Rev* JAMES HILL, M.A*,
SEVENTEEN YEARS
MINISTER OF BOURKE STREET CONGREGATIONAL
CHURCH, SYDNEY.
Died \ 3th May, 1900.


* •


The Late Rev. James Hill, M.A.




Death of the Rev. James Rill, m.fl.
Extract from Sydney Morning Herald , Monday, May 14, 1900.
We have to record the death of the Rev. James
Hill, M.A., minister of the Bourke-street (Surry
Hills) Congregational Church, which took place
at his residence, Bourke-street, Surry Hills, early
on Sunday morning, after a brief illness, at the
age of years. The deceased, who was one of
the best-known ministers in the city and suburbs,
where he had laboured for the past 17 years, was
born at Annan, Dumfries, in the South ot Scot-
land, He was educated at the Grammar School
in that town, and entered into commercial pursuits
in the city of Glasgow at an early age, and subse-
quently acted for some time as agent for the
Glasgow Mission. He afterwards entered upon
his studies at the Glasgow University, where he
had the advantage of the tuition of Principal
Caird and other well-known professors. The
deceased had a distinguished course during the
four years of his studies, taking his M.A. degree
with honours. The subjects in which he excelled
were logic and philosophy. The late Mr. Hill
pursued his theological studies at the Divinity
Hall of the Established Church of Scotland (in
consequence of there being no theological semi-
nary in connection with the Congregational deno-
mination). At the close of his theological course,
in the year 1872, Mr. Hill received and accepted a


call to the Congregational Church at Fraser-
burgh, Scotland, a large and important church
in the north-east of Aberdeenshire. Here he
carried on the work with vigour and success for
several years. The claims of the colonies were,
however, borne upon his mind for a long time*.
The Rev. Robert Dey having a short time pre-
viously settled at Marrickville, correspondence
was opened up between the two ministers con-
cerning the possibility of work in New South
Wales. Mr. Hill resigned his charge at Fraser-
burgh for the purpose of visiting Australia to
enter upon ministerial work. At that time the
church at Bourke-street was vacant, owing to the
retirement of the Rev. T. Johnson (now deceased).
A unanimous call was given to Mr. Hill. Mr.
Hill accepted the call, and sailed immediately to
take up the duties of the pastorate. He arrived
in Sydney on the first Sunday morning in Novem-
ber, 1883, and was met by the Rev. R. Dey and
Mr. W. S. Buzacott (one of the deacons of the
church). The party proceeded at once to the
church, where the Rev. Dr. Fraser was conduct-
ing service. Mr. Hill assisted at the celebration
of the communion which followed. The new
pastor began his ministry to the congregation
on November 11, 1883, and was accorded a hearty
welcome by a large meeting of the representa-
tives of the city and suburban churches. The
Rev. T. Johnson (his predecessor) presided upon


the occasion. In his first address to his new con-
gregation, Mr. Hill assured them that he would
combine study with work, and that he would also
take pleasure in pastoral visitations. During the
17 years that have passed, Mr. Hill, by his un-
tiring energy and devotion to his work, earned the
respect and esteem of the ministers and laymen of
all denominations, and by his timely interest in all
subjects that have for their aim the benefiting of
the people he was enabled to do much lasting
good. As a preacher, the deceased was both
thoughtful and lucid ; his pulpit ministrations
were at all times sought and appreciated by those
outside of the Congregational body to which he
belonged. As an active worker in connection
with the affairs of the New South Wales Congre-
gational Union, Mr, Hill’s presence and work on
the committee were at times highly appreciated
by his ministerial brethren, who in the year 1886
elected him to the office of chairman—a position
which he filled with dignity and marked ability.
His annual chairman’s address to the union was,
at the time of its delivery, described as a master-
piece of thought and logic, in the course of which
address he specially referred to “ our attitude to
society, our attitude to the thought of the time, our
attitude to freethinkers, our relations to the
scientific method, and our relations to theology.”
As a debater, the late pastor took a high place in
the esteem of all who had the privilege to listen to


him. He was considered and accepted as the
first Hegelian scholar in the colony. Notwith-
standing his devotion to church work, the late
Mr. Hill was the friend of young men, who have
long fully recognised in him a true friend and
pastor. During last year Mr. Hill’s health some-
what failed him. He proceeded to Europe, and
upon his return after an absence of several months
he was apparently benefited by the change and
rest. His welcome back to the church and the
colony was made the occasion for special demon-
strations, which took place at the Bourke-street
Church. [He took up his work again, but evi-
dently not with the old vigour. As the months
went by it became apparent to his friends that he
would never again be the man he had been, the
burden was proving too heavy for his failing
strength ; another and more severe attack of the
malady seized him, and after lingering for a few
weeks he passed peacefully away as the Sabbath
bells were striking on Sunday Morning, May 13th.]
funeral Service.
Extracted from The Australian Christian World.
The funeral took place at the Waverley Ceme-
tery on Monday afternoon, and was preceded by a
service in Bourke-street Church, which was very
largely attended not only by the members and


adherents of the Church, but by leading- ministers
and laymen of all denominations. The pulpit was
appropriately draped in black. As the coffin was
borne into the church, covered with beautiful
wreaths and placed upon tressles near the choir
gallery, the organist, Mr. A. G. Addison Flower,
played, “ Oh, Rest in the Lord.” The Rev. Dr.
Fordyce conducted the service, which began by
the congregation, led by the church choir, singing
the hymn, “ Hear What the Voice from Heaven
Proclaims.” The Rev. N. J. Cocks, M.A. (Chair-
man of the Congregational Union of New South
Wales), read the lesson, Rev. vii., 9, which was
followed by prayer offered by the Rev. E.
Tremayne Dunstan. The Rev. F. Binns (Secre-
tary of the Congregational Union) then delivered
the following address:—
“We have brought into this sanctuary, which
has often resounded with the tones of the voice
now silent in death, the mortal remains of our
dear deceased brother—a brother greatly beloved
and honoured, both for his character and his
work’s sake. We are gathered together to observe
the rites of Christian burial, and, while our hearts
are bleeding and sore because of the sudden and
unexpected snapping of the ties that bound us to our
brother (for we hoped that his sickness was not unto
death); still deep down beneath the pain dwells
divine peace, suffusing the gloom like golden sun-


shine in the Christian hope of immortality and
glory. We sorrow not as others who have no
hope ; we have a hope that maketh not ashamed ;
we are confident through the grace of God and the
redemption that is in Jesus Christ that we shall
meet our brother again on that bright to-morrow,
when the day has dawned and the shadows have
fled away. Our brother is not dead—he is only
“fallen asleep” —and he sleeps well after a day of
hard and honest toil, for he was a workman that
needed not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the
words of truth. He was a good shepherd, caring
with great tenderness and solicitude for the flock
committed to him by the Chief Shepherd. He had
his wish he died in harness—and it is well. God
doeth all things well. We had hoped that he
would have been restored to some measure of
health again, and that he would be spared to us
for some years, but our Heavenly Father, who
never makes any mistakes, ordered it otherwise,
and it is well. For our brother to have lingered
on like a bird with broken wing, with shattered
nerve, enfeebled brain, and weary body would
have been trying indeed to his earnest, active
spirit. To go, as it were, by one happy bound
from the battlefield into the Palace of the King ;
to step out of the workshop into the home—the
Heavenly Home where awaited him sweetest
rest, divinest peace, and holiest fellowship, and the
beatific vision, was it not well ?


“ There was a singular and beautiful series of
coincidences in the life of our dear brother in this
country. His life here seemed peculiarly associated
with the Sabbath Day. He arrived here on the
first Sabbath morning of November, 1883, and
on that day you sat down together at the Lord’s
Table as Pastor and People. On the Sabbath
Day, in the midst of abundant labours, a few
weeks ago, he was stricken with that illness
which has terminated his busy and fruitful life.
And -last Sabbath morning, at a quarter past
twelve, just after the city clocks had struck the
hour which closes the days of secular toil and
ushers in the Day of Holy Rest and
Worship and Fellowship, his happy spirit was
released from its weary body and he entered on
the Eternal Sabbath. To my mind there was
something very beautiful in his home-going.
“ It is scarcely necessary that I should say any-
thing as to his character. You who knew him in
the sacred and intimate relations of pastor and
friend need no analysis of his character; the
marks of his Apostleship and seals of his ministry
ye are. We who knew him in the free and
blessed relations of ministerial brotherhood and
associated service of the church and denomination
knew him well and loved him much. To myself
he was as a born brother. Indeed, one could not
help loving him—there was such an openness,
simplicity, honesty, manliness of character. He


was honest as the light, true as steel, warm and
genial as the sunshine. And to these fine qualities
of heart what noble intellectual qualities were
wedded, and what rich stores of learning and ripe
experience. And all were suffused and transfigured
with such a’ deep, unaffected, sincere piety. At
the street corner you might hear him plead with men
with the fervour and simplicity of an Evangelist ; in
the study among scholars as Philosopher and
Theologian ; in the social circle as a genial, warm-
hearted friend and always the Christian gentleman.
We magnify the Grace of God in him. Let us
thank God that He has given to us for so long a
time a man who could truly say in the words
of his favourite Christian poet —
Twilight and evening bell,
And after that the dark !
And may there be no sadness of farewell when I embark ;
For tho’ from out the bourne of time and place
The flood may bear me far,
I hope to see my Pilot face to face
When I have crossed the bar.”
The service concluded with the hymn “ Captain
and Saviour of the Mighty Host,” the benediction
being pronounced by the Rev. Dr. Fordyce. As
the coffin was borne out of the church, the con-
gregation remained standing, the organist playing
the Dead March in “ Saul.” The funeral proces-
sion was then re-formed, and was witnessed by a
crowd of sympathetic onlookers, numbering several
hundreds. The ministers present preceded the


hearse, and were followed by the teachers and
scholars of the Sunday-school.
The chief mourners present were Mr. Goodwin
Hill and Mr. Douglas Hill (sons) ; Mr. J. H. F.
Hill, B.A. (eldest son), being unable to be present,
having gone to Melbourne ; and Mr. J. Maxwell
(cousin). The service at the grave was conducted
by the Rev. Dr. Fordyce, Rev, F. Binns and Rev.
G. Littlemore. The deacons of the church acted
as pall-bearers. The choir sang the hymns, “ For
Ever with the Lord” and “Good-night, Beloved,”
around the open grave. The service was most
impressive, and very many of those present were
deeply affected.
A number of University students, including
the Executive of the Christian Union, attended
the funeral as a mark of sympathy for their
fellow-student, Mr. Goodwin Hill, who is attend-
ing the Arts classes. The Congregational Union
of New South Wales, in session at West Mait-
land, held a memorial service, ere they separated,
and many were the sympathetic references to
Mrs. Hill, who, since she came to Australia, has
lost a beloved mother and now her noble husband.
The remains of both lie side by side in the
beautiful cemetery at Waverley in the sure and
certain hope of the resurrection to Eternal life.
Seldom has the death of a citizen so moved the
city of Sydney. Men of all classes have come
forward to proffer their profound appreciation of


the worth of Mr. Hill and his work. In many of the
churches reference was made to the deceased on
Sunday, May 13, and special sermons were
preached in Bourke-street Church on Sunday, May
20, by Revs. Dr. Fraser and Dr. Fordyce.
In the New South Wales Presbyterian As-
sembly, at the evening’s sederunt, on Monday,
May 21, the Rev. John Walker said he desired to
call the attention of the Assembly to the lamented
death of a minister of another church—the Rev.
James Hill, M.A., of the Congregational Church,
Surry Hills. The deceased gentleman possessed
great ability, and had taken a deep interest in the
advancement of Christ’s kingdom, and also in the
social and moral welfare of the people of Sydney.
Mr. Walker moved: “That the assembly had
heard with great regret of the death of the Rev.
James Hill, M.A., of Surry Hills, and desired to
convey to the ministers and members of that
church, and especially the congregation and
family of the departed minister, sympathy in their
bereavement.”
The Rev. W. M. Dill-Macky seconded the
motion, which he said was a right and proper
resolution to pass.
The motion was unanimously carried


Bourke Street Congregational Church, Sydney.




Sermon
Preached by Rev. Dr, Fraser in Bourke Street
Congregational Church, Morning, 20th May,
1900.




Cext— epistle to Hebrews, chapter 13, verse 7.
“ Remember them which have the rule over you, who
have spoken unto you the word of God : whose faith follow,
considering the end of their conversation.”
It is about 17 years ago since, when I was
occupying this pulpit, your pastor arrived, and came
to the church during the time of service. Many of
those who welcomed him then are gone. Ithad been
my privilege to preside at the meeting of the church
here when the call to your late pastor was under
consideration, and at that time in the absence of a
settled pastor, I had been preaching here. It
happened to be on one of these occasions that
your pastor arrived. And it is owing no doubt to
the fact—at least in part—that the sad honour has
been conferred on me of conducting the service
here this morning, in memory of him who is
gone. The first conversation that I had with him
—if I remember rightly —was on the subject on
which I had been speaking the morning he arrived.
The Lord’s Supper was to be observed, and I spoke
of the institution of that Supper, and of our Lord’s
view of His impending death. The first conver-
sation that we had together was in reference to
that subject. The last time I met him alone was


when it happened that we were returning from a
meeting that we had attended. We were fellow-
passengers in the same train, and the subject on
which we spoke, I remember it well, was the
23rd Psalm. As you know, the Psalms had a
special influence, I almost might say, fascination,
over him. We spoke on many questions connected
with the Psalms, and I remember a remark he
made about this one, that, after all the criticism
with regard to it, how little there was that
interfered with the spiritual impulse and . consola-
tion that the Psalm itself gives. Now, as we
trust, the Good Shepherd has been with him as he
was passing through the valley of the shadow of
death, so that he needed not to be afraid. And he
has gone, with goodness and mercy following him,
to be in the house of the Lord forever. May God
grant that he who now speaks, and that you who
are assembled this morning, may be able to say in
spirit and in truth—
“Yea though I walk through the valley of the Shadow
of Death, I will fear no evil, for Thou art with me, Thy rod
and Thy staff, they comfort me.”
Your late pastor was a man who had
many sides to his character. His sympathies,
intellectual, moral, spiritual, were very wide.
This morning I am addressing especially the
bereaved Church. Our friend and brother, who knew
your pastor so well, will this evening speak more
generally than I shall attempt to do this morning.


I speak especially to the bereaved Church, and
therefore, if I seem to pass by some points which
you might expect to be noticed, you will under-
stand the reason. I leave these in more competent
hands, and I will speak this morning of our
beloved friend who is gone as a minister ; and I
address the Church which has lost one who was
faithful and true in his service.
We are taught in the words we have read
that we should remember those who have been
leaders ot others. “ Remember them which have
rule over you”: Your leaders, your guides who
spoke to you in times past the word of God. We
are told that their remembrance is to continue
amongst those who have the privilege of listening
to the words spoken by them. It is to abide as a
power, A true man cares very little to ascertain
what are the exact limits of authority. There is
something far higher in the Church of God than
ecclesiastical authority, and one great error people
make in searching the New Testament is to look
for a thing of which they will find hardly anything.
The main thing is a system of service. One
authority you will find there plainly upheld: “ One
is your Master, even Christ, and all ye are
brethren. Wherefore, let no man call you Master
upon the earth.” There is a higher thing than
authority. It is the power of leading men to
Christ; the power of winning their souls and lead-
ing their hearts, and of helping them to fashion


their lives. No mere authority can do this. Cattle
can be driven by authority ; but heroes are led by
the man who is a hero, because they are heroes
themselves. And that is the highest influence,
and those that have exercised it are to be held in
remembrance. “ They spoke the Word of God.”
This leads me to say something of him who is
gone as a preacher of the Word, Now I need
not tell you (for I am speaking to the bereaved
Church) that your late pastor was a man of
massive, powerful intellect. No one could meet
with him and converse with him without feeling
that he was in contact with a richly-stored and
powerful mind. Sometimes the Church and its
work are derided by men whose whole intellectual
power and equipment your late pastor could have
put in one small corner of his mind and never
known of it. He was a man of singularly strong,
clear, and acute intellects And yet this is not his
highest praise. In the work of a minister, of a
preacher for Christ, more is required than bril-
liancy of intellect. He was a man who faithfully
gave the message which he believed he had re-
ceived from God. He gave it faithfully, for he
was a man of high conviction. He spoke the
Word of God. He spoke it in this building ;he
spoke it in the street. And, whether addressing
the street crowd, or the Christian congregation,
he was equally faithful and true to his conviction.
He was faithful because he believed himself to be


a messenger, not more than a messenger, tor
who could ask to be more ? He believed in the
Gospel himself, and he believed in it as the power
of God unto salvation. And in these days,
amongst all the voices which are calling from
every side, a man if he is to do good, must have
a definite message to carry. He must not be in
doubt as to what he has to say. He must, to use
the words of my text, “ Speak the Word of God,”
and speak it as “ God’s Word.” And so your
pastor spoke with power, and with fervent, strong
conviction, because he had experienced the power
of that word in his own heart, and in'his own
mind. He was a true man. Even to look upon
him was to assure oneself of that. When he came
amongst us, about 17 years ago, in the full ripe-
ness of strength, not to give us a mere remnant
of his years but the best of the most precious
period of his life, anyone looking in his face could
see it was strong and manly. And that character-
istic which impressed itself upon those who knew
him during the first years of his ministry, proved
to be that which remained with him to the end.
It is required that a steward of God shall be found
faithful, and certainly he was so found. What he
believed to be true, that he spoke.
The Word of God is spoken not only publicly by
the Christian minister, but also in the difficult and
arduous work which falls to him as a pastor in
dealing with the souls of men one by one ; and


the best part of such work and the most arduous
part of it is never known. It is often said that
one half of the world does not know how the other
half lives. One thing I know (and I speak without
that reserve, which, were I in charge of a church,
would doubtless hinder me), and that is that few
are aware of the weight of responsibility and care
which rests upon the heart of the faithful minister.
Few, few know it, and indeed few ought to know
it. Often, I am sure, great as must have been
the strain upon mental power in speaking pub-
licly as your pastor did, it was to him light
when compared with the task of pastoral work
which lay heavily on him as it does on every
minister who is faithful to his work. For the
cares of others come upon him, sometimes are
forced upon him. People speak to him as they
would speak to no other, and the longer a man
has exercised a faithful ministry, the more such
cares increase. Not only is this the case in the
congregation, but many come to him in times of
sorrow, who do not trouble him much when all
is going well. Many, of other convictions, and
many of no convictions at all, many who never
enter into a place of worship, come to him
in their time of trouble. The anxiety, the great
strain and depression ; what it is to be bowed
down with such sympathy with human sorrow ;
few know these things, and few can understand
them. I know there are some who pass through


their work, without this strain, and they are useful
men, too. Perhaps they say, and there is a sort
of worldly wisdom in it, “ Let us not fret our
lives out in doing- the work of God.” They look
upon the winning of souls as a doctor or lawyer
looks upon cases, and deal with them as such,
and as much as possible shake off the memory,
and go about something else. God uses his in-
struments in different services, and some may do
good work, and do it in this comparatively cold
fashion. I need not tell you that your late pastor
was not one of this mind. And what is our
pattern in that work ? Was it one who could
shake off the sorrows of men from his own heart ?
Was it one who could simply look on and stretch
out a helping hand here and there in order that
he might heal and deliver ? No ! It was a Man
of sorrows ; one who made all the sorrows of man
His own. His love took up our miseries and
cares, and gathered them together in Himself.
The reproaches of those who reproached fell upon
Him ; the wretchedness of man entered His soul
and filled it with the bitterness of death. Such is
our pattern. We read of that battle in which it
is said the Austrian spearmen presented a solid
front, and there seemed to be no hope of breaking
their serried ranks, till one brave man stretched
forward, and spreading out his arms gathered as
many spears as he could reach, and turned them
into his own breast, and so opened the way for


his comrades to follow. Such is the highest form
of Christian service.
The words that we read speak to us of two
things. They speak to us of a changing ministry,
and they speak of the unchanging Christ. Those
who have been leaders have delivered their mes-
sage, and are gone. To some came the martyr s
death : the lives that were spent in the service of
others have been sacrificed. Sacrificed, not wasted!
True sacrifice is not waste. Sacrifice for others —
for the Life that was least wasted was the greatest
Sacrifice. And so we turn our thoughts to Him,
who changes not, though His servants pass away.
The work still remains to you, brethren, to be
carried on, though he, who was your shepherd on
earth, has gone. The Great Shepherd remains,
and now you are cast specially on His care. The
service is of “Jesus Christ, the same yesterday, to-
day, and for ever.” And His work has to be done.
The testimony for Christ has been maintained, and
it now rests with you to maintain it with the more
ardour because one who was your leader has gone.
As when in a battle, the front rank has gaps made
in it, those who have been in the rear must
press forward to fill them, so when a servant of
God is called away, it is a call to others, not only
to lament his death, but to take his place—to go
forward and serve where he served, and to carry
on the work that he was doing. The testimony
must be maintained, though those that bear it


must pass away. There are lights along our
coast that light up the sea for the mariner, in
which the lamps that burn are fed with oil. Each
drop of oil in the lamp climbs up to the wick,
comes into the flame, adds its contribution to the
light, and then and thus is dispersed. But the
light shines on.
Ever since this continent had existence,
round about its shores there has been raised a
solemn anthem of the sea. It has never ceased.
Sometimes its voice sinks very soft and low into a
mere murmur ; sometimes its voice is loud as the
thunder as the waves dash in and break on
the shore. But never once has that anthem
entirely ceased. Wave after wave has rolled
in and been broken, and has disappeared ;
but still the murmur or roar has kept on,
and knows no cessation. Now, if we may so
speak, another drop of Holy oil has ascended and
fed the lamp of Faith, and its own light is seen no
more. Another wave, and it was a great and
mighty wave, has rolled in upon the shore, and
now is no more seen and heard. It has run its
course and fulfilled its mission. But the light must
not cease to shine : the song of praise must not
cease to rise. God so ordains it that when one of
his servants goes, another must come forward to
take his place. And surely there is a special call to
those who have listened in this place to the Word
of God that has been spoken by your beloved


pastor. Being dead, he yet speaks. To some of
you he has spoken in words and works, entreating
you to become reconciled unto God, and perhaps
these words have not been heeded by you, when he
himself seemed in health and strength. Now he
has gone that way which all of us have to follow.
The time will surely come, be it soon or far away as
yet, when we too shall have to pass from this
world to the unseen. He has invited you to put
your trust in the Good Shepherd, so that you too
may fear no evil. If you have not obeyed his voice
when he was alive, just think what he would say-
to-day. It would be the same message ; perhaps,
if it were possible, told with more ardour, with
more consuming earnestness than before. To look
to Him, to trust in Him, who alone can give
strength to face the battle of life, and to face
undaunted the mystery of eternity.
In these days we talk too much about the
plague ; but in these lands we know little by
experience of its terrible power. Painters have
attempted to draw pictures of a city in plague
time. There is one painting that has always
impressed me as singularly powerful in conception.
Some painters have represented streets and rows
of houses desolate, just as in the Plague of London.
But this painter confined himself to but few figures,
but each of them, as far as one could judge, was one
of singular power. The central fig-ure is that of a
woman. She has been seized with the plague in


the street. A physician has been called to see her,
and help her if he could. He has brought his
instruments of his surgery, and there he is. But
even while he has been attempting to minister, the
deadly venom has entered into him. Another figure
in the background is that of a man lifting up his
hands in terror as he flies from the awful sight.
And in the midst there is one strong figure, one,
if we may say so, like unto the Son of Man, with
a strong, manly face, such as I have spoken of
this morning ; and He has put one arm round the
sinking woman, and the other is holding up the
physician who had been attempting to hejd. And
there He is, the one strong Man in the midst of
weakness.
We may take it as a picture of Christ, the
strong, loving Saviour, the same yesterday, to-day,
and for ever, in the midst of mortal weakness—
the help of the plague-stricken, and the support of
those who seek to heal them. Brethren, it is on
that strength that you, the stricken and bereaved
Church must lean, the strength of Him who is
mighty to save ; and as faithful servants one after
another pass away from the scene of labour upon
earth, may you be found among the faithful and
true. Now, not as in the presence of your late
pastor, but much more in his absence, be faithful
in the work that is given you to do, and think of
the word of God that he spoke ; and remember
that though the servant is gone, and the ministry
is always changing, Jesus Christ is the same,
yesterday, and to-day, and for ever.




Sermon
Preached by Rev. Dr. Fordyce in Bourke Street
Congregational Church, Evening, 20th May,
1900.




Tsalab, 32itd Chapter, 2nd Uerse.
“ And a man shall be as a hiding place from the wind,
and a covert from the tempest, as rivers of water
in a dry place, as the shadows of a great rock
in a weary land. ”
A good many are afraid to apply these words
to a human being, and so they are generaHy taken
as applying to the coming of the Messiah. And,
truly, all ideals find their fulfilment in Jesus Christ.
Every human aspiration, every human longing,
and every human conception of greatness will
find their fulfilment in the earthly life of the Divine
Saviour. But lam sure the prophet was thinking
of the ordinary man. He was thinking of the
blessings of good government, when Kings reign
in righteousness, and princes rule justly; then the
good man, the public man, any strong ruler would
be all this that is spoken of in the text. And I take
it that we have here a beautiful picture of what
a true man or woman will be to others. He will
be a protector. You know how dearly the weak
love to lean upon the strong, how the little child
is not frightened when the big brother is near;
so we who are all weak, more or less, in going


through life, love to lean upon the strong brother
man, and feel when he is near a sense of being
protected and safe. And a good man will be an
inspiration to his fellow-men. Goodness will be
easier to us in his presence. When we hear his
ringing voice, when we understand what goodness
is to him, how it inspires and strengthens him, it
inspires us to love and practise goodness. There
is one thing to note here, viz., that when good
men rule, and when noble men are looked up to
and reverenced and followed, there is in the com-
munity a standard of judgment. The true man is
like a public clock, and men set their watches by
him.
I think, brethren, that we may all say truth-
fully of the late minister of this church, that he
was a good man. 1 do not believe there is a
single man or woman in this city of ours whoever
came within range of his influence, but believed
that Mr. Hill was a thoroughly good man. We
may use of him an ancient utterance and say that
he was “God’s man.” He was always found
taking God’s side in every question, in so far as
he understood it. He was a great deal more than
this : he was a very able man. In any community
Mr. Hill would have been regarded as a prince
amongst men. He had a splendid intellect, and a
well-disciplined mind ; he had also a large heart.
He had a powerful imagination, and he lived
with a high moral purpose that fused all these


into unity, and made them all work together to
carry out the purposes of his manhood. I am
sure that when he was at his best, and when he
was under the inspiration of some great theme,
very few men could be more eloquent than he;
and very few men could make the hard and knotty
problems of philosophy and theology simpler to
his fellow-men.
But far better than this, he was a good man,
a man of God, who tried to walk with God, and
who worked righteousness with earnestness of
purpose, and with sincerity of heart. And the
charm, I think, of our dear brother was very
largely this moral goodness, wedded as it was to
massive intellect and vivid imagination, suffusing
them, and leading them to one unity of purpose.
Now, brethren, moral goodness will last when all
other gifts have passed away. I hope the time is
coming in this old world of ours when the soldier’s
strategy will no longer be needed ; certainly in
the world to come it will find no place. Medical
skill will not there be needed, for there is no
disease in the heavenly life. The great engineer
will find his gifts of little value, and the profound
linguist will find his gift valueless, when all speak
one tongue, and know each other perfectly.
The man who knows mysteries, and who has the
power to expound them to his fellow-men, will
find his occupation gone when we all know, even
as we are known. But the good man will live on,


and on ; and so moral goodness is that which is
really permanent; —here, there, anywhere, moral
goodness will be the same. We think of our
departed friend as a truly good and noble, manly
man. And it was this manly character, I think,
this moral goodness, that gave him his influence
in this community. Of course, his intellectual
gifts could not possibly fail to have their sphere,
and to appeal to the minds of men. His ability
was everywhere recognised. You have only to
read what has been said about him, or listen to
the talk of all who knew him, to know that every-
body recognised his intellectual power. But he
had something better than this. Men felt that
our brother had a message ; that he had some-
thing to tell ; and that he could tell it from the
heart ; and telling it from the heart, he could
send it to the hearts of others. Men felt
that he was not simply a great theologian, a
subtle thinker (the poet’s vision coming to him at
times), and one with a wonderful memory that
enabled him to pour out some of the richest
poetical treasures ; but they felt also that he was
something better—that he was a man who loved
men and women, and had sympathy with them in
their struggles and aspirations. His goodness
was an attractive goodness. There are good
men that are really not attractive ; they are too
austere, and a little child would be afraid of them.
No child went to play with John the Baptist. He


was a majestic speaker, but he lived in the desert.
He retired from the ways of men, holding- com-
munion with nature, preparing his message in
solitude. Another came after John. He came
eating and drinking, and the little children went
to him, and they knew that He loved them. Our
departed brother had a large and childlike heart,
and little children knew at once that this was a
big brother. And it was this that attracted so
many to our dear departed friend. I suppose,
sometimes, when he got into the Hegelian mood,
and began to reason with thesis, antithesis, and
synthesis, some of you wondered where he was
going ; but you knew that there was before you
a man of loving heart, whose mind never out-
stripped his heart. He was always ready to enter
into the sorrows of others, and he could weep
with the sorrowing. He had the hand-grip of
sympathy for a brother looking for work and
finding life hard. The fallen man or the fallen
woman, they would all find true sympathy, and
loving, kindly aid from one who knew human
nature, and loved it, and tried to do it good. I
daresay, like the rest of us, he was sometimes
deceived. I wonder if there are among you any
clever people, any “cute” people, who are never
“ taken in.” lam sorry for such. As a rule the
man who makes no mistakes usually makes
nothing at all. Perhaps Mr. Hill was not “ taken
in ” so much as people may have thought, A


man who knows God, and knows his own weak
heart, and who has sometimes to mourn over his
own sins, gets very tender when he is in the
presence of another sinner. And so we sometimes
trust men that we know are utterly unworthy,
because, perchance, by trusting them we may
make them more worthy. That is God s way,
and it will also be man’s way when a man loves
God, and knows the way of God. And if this
man was sometimes deceived, was it not because
he refused to give up hope for his brother man ?
It was this powerful, attractive goodness that
drew many a man to him j their hearts felt that
God was there in his life. And God drew near to
many through the goodness ot His servant, and
touched many a heart to high issues by the good-
ness of James Hill. Your late minister read
Robert Browning. When Robert Browning’s
wife died, the poet addressed a very beautiful
passage to her, and in it he says that he never
begins a song without lifting up his heart to God
in thanks for her ; and then he wonders whether
there is not still some blessing from her to him.
“God’s benedictions” came, I am quite sure,
to many a tempted man and woman through the
friendly sympathy of His servant here, whose
goodness was of the attractive order.
His work as a public man was thoroughly
constructive. He never loved to pull down.
Destruction, I suppose, is necessary in a commu-


nity, and the destroyer has his place. Sometimes
we must pull down before we can build up. But
many have no reverence for ancient thing's, and
everything that pleases them not, they would
destroy at once.
Your late pastor always worked for unity—to
unite all creeds and classes, and all sorts and
conditions of men. He believed that God drew
men together, and revealed himself through them,
in order that they may work together for common
ends. And so he never cared much for mere
controversy. He would gather it up in a kind of
epigram, or pass it over with some amusing jest,
or some short description ; but his heart never
loved mere controversy. He was always looking,
to use his own language, beyond the “low and
limited,” for some high position where he could
see the whole, and not merely a part, or parts.
He was ever looking for some great principle to
reconcile divergent opinions, so that people might
see that they were looking at the same thing from
different sides. And so his work was always of
the constructive order. He loved liberty, no man
more so, but he also loved order and authority ; he
loved continuity, and he delighted in the slow pro-
cesses of evolution, and had little sympathy with
the man who believed only in revolution. I
remember, soon after he returned from his recent
visit to England, he gave us ministers a brilliant
talk about the Ecclesiastical situation. What an


opportunity for sarcasm ! What scope for denun-
ciation ! But after telling- us much that he had
seen, he seemed to rejoice most of all that John
Bull was large enough, and illogical enough, to
find room for, and even to honour, systems and
methods that seemed so opposed. He drew special
attention to the fact that in Oxford, and under the
very shadow of the ancient University, he had seen
Roman Catholics and the Salvation Army, etc.,
etc., all living and thriving, and doing good, each
after their kind. And this wide sympathy of our
friend enabled him to see the good in divergent
systems, and in some way to see their unity, and
he did this not by the logical understanding, but
by the breadth of his affections. He loved God
with a large sincerity, and, therefore, he would
give room to any man, to any order of men, who
would try to work for God and to lift up man.
A wise German poet gives a couple of lines that
are full of suggestiveness—
Divide and rule, the politician cries ;
Unite and lead is the watchword of the wise.
Mr. Hill was always trying to unite, so that he
might lead men to the Great Master. And so he
would work with anyone who worked for God.
He would not lay lawless hands upon anything in
the past that had come down to us, even if it were
a little out of date. Let us understand it, and
modify it, he would say, rather than pluck it out
and take it away. You know how dearly he loved


the Day of Rest, He was not a mere Sabbatarian ;
but he loved the Day of Rest, and spoke up for it
as a blessing- to men and women. He wanted the
universal acceptance of it as a great privilege, not
as something imposed by the hands of the police-
man. He wanted all to love it as he loved it, and
to find in it true refreshment. You remember how
dearly he loved Evangelical work. I remember
him telling us ministers once that he thought at
one time of throwing away the heavy tomes of
philosophy, and becoming a roving Evangelist.
He found his sphere in this city, where men and
women are all around us, where children are spilt
like blots upon the street —to use Mrs. Browning’s
words. He found his work here ; but he was still
an Evangelist. He would work, too, with any-
body, Mr. Varley, or anybody else, who sought to
save men for God. He had a deep interest in all
social work. lam sure from this pulpit he has
often spoken of the need of a social religion—not
a narrow individualism that cares only for its
own soul, but a religion that applies to the home
and to the city. A religion that cares for the
nation and national relationships, and that per-
vades, to use again his own words, like a subtle
aroma the whole of human life and its activities.
He had high ideals of public life. He wanted
public men to love God and hate iniquity; he
wanted to see leaders of men, not intellectually
able merely, but men with a high moral purpose.


I know how he mourned over some brilliant men
amongst us who seem to have no moral purpose,
nothing to focus their intellect, or lead them to
live for moral ends. Mr. Hill believed in the
future of this land. He lived here 17 years, and
toiled and gave his best strength to build it up in
righteousness. He loved old Scotland ; he de-
lighted in some quaint story of the Scottish people,
and would often set the table in a roar with the
recital of some amusing incident ; but he also
loved this city well. He loved the Blue Mountains,
with their pure, invigorating breezes. He could
almost look upon the birds and trees as brothers
and sisters.
I have said very little of what I might say
about our brother as a minister and as a fellow-
man. Surely no one can doubt that it is well with
our brother. Some of you remember how Lowell
sings over his departed daughter :
“ Immortal, I feel it, and know it,
Who doubts it of such as she ?”
But then he has to say, and this is the sting
“ Immortal, away from me.”
We know that it is well with Mr. Hill. He
loved the Saviour; he believed in the forgiveness
of sins ;he trusted the Redeemer. He committed
his own heart, and his eternal interests to the
Redeemer long ago, and I am sure it is well with
him. But he is “immortal —away from us.” It
is the “ sound of a voice that is still.” It is the
thought that we can never more greet that strong


brother man, and hear his cheering- words ; that
we can never more join him in song and praise;
never more see him marching before us on to
victory, cheering- everybody, and leading the way.
It is this that makes us sorrowful —never more to
see his face, hear his voice, and grasp his hand.
Some young men and maidens may hardly under-
stand this. My friends, if you have to stand by
the grave of some who are dearer than life to you,
you will understand what a terrible blank there
is, and what a wonderful thing death is. We try
to make light of it, but death is terrible.,. When
you bury your very heart in the grave, and when
afterwards you tread the rough path of life without
some dear companionship, then you know what
death means; and that is why we mourn. Our
brother is well ; he has passed through and
beyond tribulation. Once when we were talking
of death, I remember him repeating the familiar
words —“Sorrow vanquished, labour ended,
Jordan past.” This is true of him. Now we
must think of ourselves. May I earnestly and
lovingly appeal to young men here ? You know
how James Hill loved you —how he thought for
you—prayed for you —read and studied that he
might help you ; he often prayed that he might
be honoured of God to touch your hearts. Will
you not now stand up for Christ? Will you
not accept His ideals of life ? His ideals of
righteousness are the grandest things in the


universe. Will you not try to make up some-
what for the great sorrow, the great blank
caused here by the removal of that noble, brother
man ? God calls you by the silence of his voice,
and by the memory of his prayers and his tears.
The city is poorer to-day because he has gone. To
some of us life can never be quite so rich, just be-
cause he has passed out of it. But we know he
has passed into fuller life ; we remain for a little
to carry on the work. God has called him to the
rest that remains for the people of God ; we desire
to go on with his work. I pray that from this
place young men may rise to take deeper interest
in righteousness than ever before, and to supply
somewhat the lack caused by his departure.
Now I have spoken only a little of what I
should like to say. My heart seems too full. My
voice refuses to answer to my will. I should like,
before closing, to express deep sympathy with
sorrowing ones, with the widow and the three
sons - sympathy also with many hearts that are
very sad when they think of Mr. Hill. I should
like to plead with everyone to let this solemn hour
be the beginning of a richer life. We put death
from us ; we try to forget it. My friends, when
death comes, let us listen, and hear God’s voice ;
let us look into our own lives, and reorganise all
that is defective. Above all, let us commit our
souls to Jesus Christ in life and for death. May
God grant that even by his death our dear brother
may win many hearts to Christ and righteousness.


Sermon
Preached by Rev. F. Binns, Sunday, May 20th,
1900, and re-delivered before the Bourke
Street Christian Union, and published
by request of the members.




4 Cbc translation of €Hjab/
“ And it came to pass, as they still went on, and talked,
that, behold, there appeared a chariot of fire, which parted
them both asunder ; and Elijah went up by a whirlwind into
heaven ” — II. Kings, it., 11.
“ Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death
of His saints.” God cares with a holy care for
His children during their life-time, guiding- their
steps, supplying their wants, comforting their
sorrows, protecting and blessing them in ten
thousand ways ; but He cares for them with a
special care in death. The hour, place, and
manner of their departure are all known and
arranged by Him, and we may be quite sure that
He takes them home by the best and easiest
way: for “ Precious in the sight of the Lord is the
death of His saints it is a matter of special in-
terest and importance and care to Him.
The passing of Elijah out of this world in
which he had played so conspicuous a part was
remarkable in every way. His life had been
unique, and it was fitting that his end should
be exceptional ; it was not a death, it was a
translation. The mysterious suddenness of his go-
ing was in harmony with the tragic suddenness of


his appearing - . He came among-st the people of
Israel with his fiery denunciations of their idolatry
as an actor upon the stage, as a bolt out of the
blue, as a thunder cloud rises upon the ocean and
discharges its lightning flashes and thunder peals
before the mariner has time to trim his ship.
It seemed fitting that the departure of one to
whom had been given such dominion over Nature
should be accompanied by a glorious, natural
manifestation. The departure was miraculous, and
the language in which it is described is figurative
—the horses and chariot are symbols of swiftness
and safety. Probably God sent His angel bands to
bear His servant home, and the glorious scene in
its swiftness, suddenness, and grandeur had all
the appearance to Elisha of a grand triumphal
march into the palace of the King of kings.
Elisha knew where his master had gone, and
that it was well with him, and the manner of his
going was doubtless intended as a mark of signal
honour and Divine favour and approval.
i. Elijah was pre-eminently a man of God
He was not perfect, he had his infirmities and
failings—a man of like passions with ourselves —
but he was a good, brave, courageous man of God.
He was true to God in a time of national
degeneracy and apostasy. When the majority
went with the Court and the King in their head-
long course of idolatry and wickedness, Elijah
withstood them to the face. He feared neither


numbers, nor fashion, nor social influence, but
stood like a rock in mid ocean with the waves of
idolatry and ungodliness fiercely breaking over
him. And God put his mark of approval on him
in the signal way in which He withdrew him from
the scene of his noble warfare, according to the
Divine promise, “Them that honour Me, I will
honour.”
2. Learn that God honours Fidelity, not
Success—that is, success as the world
estimates success.
As I read my Bible, in the realm of ethics
fidelity is true success. But Elijah was 'not a
success as the world judges success. He was not
a popular man. He did not draw great crowds.
He was too plain, too outspoken, too fearless for
that. He was a great, good man, who loved God
and his country, and he wore his heart out because
he saw his God insulted and dishonoured and his
country being dragged down to idolatry, apostasy
and ruin by a corrupt Court and a weak and
wicked King and still more wicked Queen. But
Elijah was faithful unto death ; and God honoured
his fidelity.
3. Further, see how God honours religious
Friendship.
There is something to my mind very beautiful
in the tender friendship between these two great
and good men. How they keep together ! How
they love each other ! And how they supplement


each other! They were different from each other,
each does a distinct work, and the work of each
fits into and completes the other’s.
And so it is in the building-up of God’s
Kingdom. As John Wesley truly said, “God
buries His workmen, but carries on His work.”
4. See, too, how the translation of this
good man sheds light on a Future
State.
There is a future state of happiness and glory
reserved for the servants of God. This is not
made known to us by any elaborate process of
reasoning. No; facts strike the mind more power-
fully than abstract reasonings. Elijah’s ascension
showed that there was another state of being
after this life, another place of residence besides
this world, that it was to be obtained by leaving
this world, and that even the body was to
share it.
It is important for us to know this. This Old
Testament anticipation of this truth is deeply
interesting and significant, but it is to the New
Testament that we turn for fuller information on
this subject, to Christ “ who hath brought life
and immortality to light through the gospel.”
Probably in some such way as this of Elijah
would all men have passed from earth to Heaven if
they had never sinned. And perhaps, in some such
way will those who are alive at Christ’s coming be
qualified for glory. As Paul says, “ We shall be


changed." “Flesh and blood cannot inherit the
kingdom, neither doth corruption inherit incorrup-
tion.” Elijah died not, but he was changed
This change involves no loss of personal identity.
Christ and His disciples recognised Elijah when
he appeared with Moses on the Mount of Trans-
figuration. Yes, we shall know our friends in
heaven, and they will know us ; indeed, I am not
sure that we shall not “ know each other better ”
(as the hymn says) “ when the clouds have rolled
away.”
Let us thank God for all the intimations He
has given us of a future state, and speci illy for
His dear Son, who spoke so clearly and fully of
the Heavenly life and the Heavenly home, who
said, “ In my Father’s house are many mansions ;
if it were not so, I would have told you.”
“ Because I live, ye shall live also.” “I am the
Resurrection and the Life : he that believeth on
Me, though he die, yet shall he live ; and whoso-
ever liveth and believeth on Me shall never die.”
And now let me say a few words to you
regarding my dear deceased friend and neigh-
bour in the Gospel, Rev. James Hill, M.A.
I want to speak of him more particu-
larly as an Example for Young Men , for he
was that in a very special sense. He loved young
men, had great sympathy with them and influence
over them. He had always the young man’s
heart —eager, strenuous, hopeful, buoyant. He


was young- in years, as well as spirit, when I
first knew him in Scot'and ; we were both
young then. We were residing in the same
house—a Sanatorium in the beautiful health resort
of Bridge of Allan. What fine walks we had
on those Scotch mountains, and by the banks
of those Scotch rivers—the Allan, the Teith,
the Forth, and the Clyde ! What delightful and
inspiring talks we had about men, and books,
and theology, and great movements! At times
the conversation would drop into a more per-
sonal strain, and we would speak of things
that lay nearest to our hearts—the Saviour we
loved, the Gospel we preached, and the Kingdom
we were seeking to advance. Aye, and we
bent the knee together in prayer. Thus began,
in 1883, our friendship, and you will not
wonder that a friendship which began in that way
should have grown stronger and deeper as the
years went by.
When 1 came to this country 10 years ago the
friendship was renewed ; the first day after our
arrival our brother and his good wife called upon
us to bid us welcome and cheer. During these
10 years the friendship has been unbroken very
sweet and pleasant was his society to me.
He was, indeed, a brother beloved ; I could
open my heart to him, and I never found his
sympathy and kindness to fail. He was a
chivalrous friend. How he would stand by a


comrade! How generous and open-handed he
was ! He was often imposed upon, but when he
made the discovery, he was not soured thereby*
but would pass it off with a good-natured joke ;
he still had faith in God, and the Gospel and
humanity. He did not button up his pocket and
steel his heart because many proved unworthy of
his kindness; no, he would go forth again in the
spirit of his Master to rescue others, if by any
means he might save some. But in later years we?
who knew him most intimately saw at what cost
to himself this work was being done. The warm,
tender Christian heart, which made others’ sorrows
so completely its own, made such heavy drains on
the physical, and, more particularly, the nervous
system of our friend that we noticed signs of
approaching failing health. He seemed to have
lost something of his old boyish playfulness of
spirit; he was less hopeful, often sorrowful. The
care of the Church—its disappointments, its
anxieties ; the sins and sorrows of the city—
all these things seemed to be pressing with
increasing weight upon him. An occasional
remark which was almost startling would let
you see for a moment into his heart and then you
would discover how he shared that Saviour’s
sufferings Who wept over Jerusalem.
I remember how on one occasion, speaking of
the sins and crimes of this great city he said:
“ I die daily.”


Then his faith would rise up and he would
adopt a more cheerful tone and say, “ Let us keep
our heart right, brother.”
My friend told me on one occasion, with
evident pleasure, the story of his conversion. Some
Mission services were being conducted in the
little Congregational Church of Dumfries (of which
years afterwards I became Pastor) by Dr. Ruther-
ford, of Newcastle-on-Tyne. James Hill came up
from the neighbouring town of Annan to attend
them. His heart was won by the story of Christ’s
love. He set himself to win others to the Saviour;
he and his friends, youths about the same age,
banded themselves together to pray for the conver-
sion of their companions and acquaintances ; they
used to meet together on the banks of the silvery
Nith ; afterwards they were wont to foregather in
a room kindly lent for the occasion, and quite a
number of the youths of the town were truly
converted to the Saviour, and attained positions
of great usefulness, and, in some cases, of great
eminence in after life.
With a view of preparing himself for the Chris-
tian ministry, he went to the Glasgow University,
where he rose to distinction, taking his degree of
M.A. with high honours ; then he passed on to his
Theological course, and, after some experience in
mission work in connection with the Glasgow
City Mission, his Theological course being com-
pleted, he became Minister of the Congregational


Church at Fraserburgh, Aberdeenshire, in the year
1872. There he laboured with great vigour and
success until the year 1883, when the claims of
these Colonies were borne in upon him very
strongly, and, to the surprise of his people, he
resolved to emigrate to Australia. The rest of
the story you know—how, as the beloved and
honoured Pastor of this Church, he went in and
out among you for 17 years, labouring with
splendid self-sacrificing devotion of heart and brain
until that bright, peaceful Sabbath morning when
he heard the Heavenly voice saying, “ Come up
hither ! ”
It seems to me that the spirit of your late
Pastor’s life may be summed up in the lines —
0 Lord, that I could waste m3' life for others,
With no ends of my own ;
That I could pour myself into my brothers,
And live for them alone.
“ Let the same mind be in you.”
“ Remember them that had the rule over you,
which spake unto you the Word of God ; and,
considering the issue of their life, imitate their
faith.”
“ May every soul that touches mine—
Be it the slightest contact—get therefrom some good,
Some little grace, one kindly thought,
One inspiration yet-unfelt, one bit of courage
For the darkening sky, one gleam of faith
To brave the thickening ills of life,
One glimpse of brighter skies beyond the gathering mists
To make this life worth while,
And heaven a surer heritage.”








memorial Service ana Unveiling of taviet.
(Extracted from The Australian Christian World.)
A service full of pathetic interest was held in
Bourke-street Congregational Church, Sydney,
on Thursday, 22nd November, when a memorial
tablet erected to the memory of the late Rev. James
Hill, M.A., was unveiled. The Rev. Dr. Fordyce
(Moderator of the Church) presided at the service,
and was accompanied to the rostrum by the Rev.
J. H. Mullens (Anglican)—one of the late Mr.
Hill’s nearest neighbours—and the Rev. George
Campbell, Burwood. A large and representative
congregation filled the body of the church,
amongst whom were : Rev. A. J. Griffith, M.A.,
Robert Dey, and James Buchan, M.A. (Congre-
gationalists), Rev. J. Southby (Anglican), Rev. J.
Fulton (Presbyterian), Rev. J. ■K, Turner (Wes-
leyan), and Rev. J. W. Holden (Primitive
Methodist). Apologies for unavoidable absence
were received from ReVs. E. T. Dunstan, F.
Binns, H. Gainford, and Warlow Davies, M.A.
The service began with the hymn “The Eternal
Gates Lift up their Heads,” which was followed
by prayer led by Rev. J. H. Mullens. Dr.
Fordyce having read suitable portions of Scripture,


the choir rendered the anthem “Send out Thy
Light,” under the direction of Mr. A. G. Addison
Flower, who presided at the organ.
The Rev. George Campbell (Burwood) ad-
dressed the congregation very tenderly and
sympathetically. We are assembled, he said,
to do honour to the memory of our dear brother,
the Rev. James Hill. We honoured him in his
earthly life, and we honour him still, although
he is no longer present in his bodily form. He
lives in the life he lived and the work he did.
Many of you here need no memorial tablet to
remind you of one so highly esteemed and so
dearly loved. Yet it is right and proper and very
natural that you should wish to erect some
sensible sign, some symbol of your affection for
one who was so much to you while he was with
you in the flesh. There were some things very
prominent in Mr. Hill which we do well to.
mention to each other to-night. He was, first of
all, a man of great faith in the Lord Jesus Christ.
He saw the unseen. The burden of life often lay
heavily upon him as he looked into the profound
problems of human life and destiny. As a thinker
he saw difficulties rising up before him, for he
looked to the heart of things, but he never stood
up here to air his doubts. He could see over the
things he could not see through. His faith
triumphed, for he had a profound child-like trust
in the living Saviour. Christ to him was the


All and in All. Then he was extremely con-
scientious in his work. There was not a lazy bone
in his body. He was a man of incessant activity,
mentally and physically. His extreme conscien-
tiousness led him often to take upon himself bur-
dens which were too heavy to be borne. But love
to Christ was the great ruling motive Power. He
loved Christ, and he felt he never could do too
much for One who had done so much for him.
“ If ye love me,” said the Master, “ keep my
commandments,” and His servant kept them—
kept them until he fell in life’s battle and passed
within the veil to hear the Master say, “ well
done.”
Another hymn followed after which Mr.
Armstrong, the Hon. Treasurer of the Memorial
Fund, made a statement as to the cost of the
tablet which had been fully provided for.
Rev. Dr. Fordyce, after performing the
unveiling ceremony (during which the congregation
stood) said that the late Mr. Hill had combined
with his strong faith the heart of a little child, and
the simplicity of his nature had endeared him to
them all. They missed both his presence, his
intelligence, and his ready wit at the recent
meeting of the Congregational Union, where his
presence and speech h?d been so helpful to his
brother ministers, many of whom felt that life was
less rich for his absence. There was joy in a life
nobly lived, and Mr. Hill was one of the noblest of


men who toiled and suffered and still lived in their*
hearts.
The tablet, which is almost square in shape,
measures 4ft. by 4ft. 6in., and is of Gothic design
richly worked in best Sicilian marble on a black
marble back. It is supported on carved trusses
with heavy base moulding, upon which stands the
die cut in quatrefoil, with carved spandrils and
moulded panel. On either side are fluted columns
with carved capitals in relief, surmounting which
is a highly polished moulding carrying a richly
carved pediment upon the scroll of which is the
deceased pastor’s monogram. The inscription
upon the tablet is as follows : —“ Erected to the
memory of the Rev. James Hill, M.A., who died
31st May, 1900. Pastor of this church for 17
years, from November, 1883, to May 1900.
Honoured as a minister and beloved as a man.
He was a guide and comforter to many, who in
grateful remembrance have erected this tablet.
Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord ; they
rest from their labours and their works do follow
them.”
Dr. Fordyce, having returned to the pulpit, the
hymn “ Lead Kindly Light ” was sung very softly
by the audience. Prayer and the benediction
concluded the service. Nearly the whole of the
congregation remained to inspect the tablet and to
read for themselves the words engraved on it.
This done the last tribute of affection was paid,
and in many cases with tears.


WILLIAM BROOKS & CO.,
Printers
17 Castlkreagh Street,
Sydnet.


5 16U
(O /




