

U o
"SS7
Jtt (TtUmomm
Rev. Thomas Gordon Molyneux,
M.A., LLB.




Jn QUemomtn
THE REVEREND
Thomas Gordon Molyneux,
M.A., LL.B.,
Died at 19 Welfield Place, Liverpool,
9th October, 1916.
Ordained, Workington - - 1879.
Inducted, Manly (N.S.W.) - 1885.
Inducted, Liverpool - 1898.




THE FOLLOWING ADDRESS,
written by the Rev. Alex. Alexander, M.A., D.D.,
and delivered by him at the funeral of the late
Rev. T. G. Molyneux, has, with the consent of
the writer and at the request of one of Mr. Moly-
neux’s first friends in Liverpool, been printed for
private circulation among the members of Vauxhall
Road congregation and other friends.




IN MEMORIAM
THE REVEREND
THOMAS GORDON MOLYNEUX,
M.A., LL.B,,
Died 9th October, 1916.
/~\UR feelings to-day are strangely mingled, as
we gather to bury our beloved dead—sorrow
for the loss of a very dear friend, admiration for a
life of great self-sacrifice and a character of singular
sweetness and goodness, resignation to the will of
God Who has given His faithful servant release
from many hard tasks and heavy burdens. But
above all we mourn for a brother whose meek and
gentle spirit has won all our hearts. I believe
that none of us ever heard a harsh word from his
lips or experienced an unkind or un-Christian act
at his hands. For nearly fifteen years he was my
friend, and frequently opened his mind to me in
free and intimate conversation, on many subjects,
involving many persons. He had not a few things
in his life to ruffle his spirit, such as would have
raised most of us to angry thought, perhaps to
bitter speech. But I cannot charge my memory
with a single occasion on which our brother fell
short of the bearing and the utterance of a perfect
Christian gentleman. His friends, and especially
his co-presbyters know how gentle and lovable he
was, and how true a bereavement his death is.


Though so gentle and kind, Mr. Molyneux was
anything but a weakling. He was on the con-
trary a highly-gifted, clear-headed, thoughtful man.
All intellectual exercises and studies seemed to be
easy to him. In two great Universities he won
high distinction, and proved himself equally at
home in the faculties of arts, of law, and of divinity.
All his days he was a voracious reader in many
departments of literature, a fact which revealed
itself alike in his conversation and in his preaching.
As a practical man, in the management of his
various congregations, he shewed keen knowledge
of men, fine tactfulness, great skill in organization
and leadership. His early ministry at Workington
was crowned with visible as well as spiritual
success, and his brilliant Australian career was no
surprise to his friends at home. Long ago, I
heard at first hand from another beloved friend of
my own who was his co-presbyter in Sydney, what
a distinguished place he earned for himself and his
congregation in that city, and how deep was the
regret of the whole community when in God’s
providence it became necessary for him to return
to England.
But to us in Liverpool, Mr. Molyneux’s eighteen
years’ ministry in Vauxhall Road is necessarily the
outstanding part of his life. There our brother
passed through the ordeal of work in what is per-
haps the most trying sphere within our borders,
meeting with nearly every possible difficulty, under
conditions that must have been peculiarly trying


from his experiences of the ministry in places so
different; they were conditions, as we all know,
which made what men call success plainly im-
possible, and that to a man with powers intellectual,
moral and spiritual, which were well fitted to adorn
a shining career. Our friend must have known
and felt these things, known them clearly and felt
them keenly. But who ever heard him rebel or
utter a repining word? He believed in God and in
God’s ordering of our ways. He accepted his
vocation and bent himself faithfully to his task.
He loved his people with a great love, and spent
himself for them with a great devotion. And those
of us who were of his flock know that his labour
was not in vain. For many a fainting soul, the
aroma of his sacrifice has sweetened and strength-
ened life. The quiet, consistent, patient, loving
life he lived among us will remain for us all, and
especially for his brethren in the ministry, a
stimulus and a rebuke all our days. Our souls
ought to be richer, our motives purer, and our
labours more intense because one has lived and
died in our midst who laboured and did not faint,
but ever set Christ on high, loving Him and the
souls that He redeemed above all else, and proved
that in humble, unobserved and unpraised work, a
Christian Minister can greatly glorify his God.
Two great joys our beloved brother had in his
life. One of these was the people who so trusted
and loved and reverenced him. I have said that he
greatly loved them. I will add that he gloried in


them, and rejoiced over them, gave God thanks for
them and for all that they were in love and loyalty
towards their Minister and their Church. If the
Vauxhall Road people are at all what he thought
them, and if they gave him all that he in his
generous heart believed of them, then they are
indeed a happy and a blessed people even in this
day of their sorrow. In loyalty, in considerateness,
in their appreciation of their Minister’s character
and talents, and divinely-given message, they were
his joy and crown. May God for ever bless them !
His other great joy in life I scarce dare touch
upon—it is so sacred, so intimate, so tender. In
all his labours and trials our brother enjoyed the
support and comfort, and inmost sympathy and
utmost helpfulness of his gifted and gracious wife,
with whose great grief we all sympathise so truly
and so entirely to-day. What she has been to her
husband, to Vauxhall Road, to our Presbytery and
to the Church at large it is not possible for me to
put into words. May our gracious God be with
her as she faces the lonely days that stretch so
bleak and cheerless before her ! True yoke-fellows
in the work of God, they are parted for a little
while, till the day break and the shadows flee away.
But that day comes, when each shall see the other
crowned.
Dare I say that our brother had also the joy of
knowing that the hearts of his brethren—Ministers
and Elders alike—were his, that we looked with
admiring sympathy on his life and labour, that we


shared by brotherly feeling and helpfulness in his
strenuous toils and heartbreaking endeavours ?
Perhaps. I trust he knew. But one of them at
least is sad at heart to-day that all his friendship
was so poor and barren. Thus our days pass, and
with them our opportunities of kindness and mutual
helpfulness pass too —so largely unimproved. Alas!
my brethren.
But for thee, dear brother, now released from
the yoke, thus faithfully and patiently borne, now
welcomed with thy Lord’s “Well done,” and
crowned with everlasting peace, for thee to live
was Christ, and to die is gain. For thou art with
Christ, which is far, far better.


BRIEF MEMOIR.
REPRINTED FROM THE
“ LIVERPOOL POST AND MERCURY,”
Dated 12th October, 1916.
THE name of the late Mr. Molyneux hardly ever
came before the public. He took little part
in Church courts, was of a quiet and reserved dis-
position but had strong convictions, and whilst
meek and gentle in nature was never weak. For
eighteen years he gave of his best to the devoted
people of Vauxhall Road Presbyterian Church.
His was the scholarly mind, but his sermons were
clear and condensed preaching of evangelical truth.
The neighbourhood, for many years past, has held
very few Protestant residents, but his personality
drew the congregation from a wide circle.
Although brought up in the Church of England,
Mr. Molyneux chose the Presbyterian ministry as
his life work. He studied at the London University
and at Queen’s Square Presbyterian College,
London. He obtained an Honours degree and a
valuable scholarship at Trinity College, Dublin.
There his views became unsettled and he studied
law for some years and gained the LL. B. degree,
writing some years afterwards a thesis on “The
Land Laws of New South Wales.” The strain of
both theological and law studies caused a break-


down in health, and he spent a holiday year in
Normandy. He was always fond of travel, and
tramped over a great part of Switzerland and
visited the battlefields of the Franco-Prussian war.
Of late years, he was in Switzerland more than
once, and in Belgium as delegate from the English
Presbyterian Church to the Evangelical Churches
there.
His theological doubts cleared away, Mr. Moly-
neux was ordained to the ministry of the English
Presbyterian Church, and his first charge was at
Workington, in Cumberland, where he greatly
strengthened the cause over a period of four-and-
a-half years. His father’s health, about this time,
having failed in Australia, he felt it his duty to go
out to Sydney. There, in Australia, he founded
the charge of Bourke, and later, that of Manly,
near Sydney. He began at Manly with nine
people in a hall, and when he left, eight years
after, there was a handsome white-stone church
and a manse, and a much-loved and attached
congregation. Among the members of this Manly
congregation were many interesting and noted
people, for at that time Manly was one of the best
residential suburbs of Sydney. Mr. Molyneux’s
sermons to children, which were striking, were
published weekly in the “Sydney Presbyterian.”
Professor Henry Drummond visited this church
during his tour in Australia, and Dr. Marshall
Lang was another visitor, and when Mr. Molyneux
held the office of Moderator of the Sydney Pres-


bytery he had the honour of receiving Principal
Rainy. Mr. Molyneux took an active part in the
affairs of the Presbyterian Church of New South
Wales, and he was Examiner of the students in
Church History.
When his father died, and on the climate’s
proving detrimental to his wife’s health, Mr.
Molyneux returned to this country. After begin-
ning two new charges in England his lot was cast
in Vauxhall Road, Liverpool. The church at
Vauxhall Road was an expiring cause when he
was called to it, but it revived in spite of the fact
that the neighbourhood was becoming less and
less residential.
Although never of robust appearance, few
ministers were less out of their pulpit for reasons
of health. For many years, four Sundays a year
holiday in summer time were all that he required.
A year ago his first heart attack came on when
visiting wounded soldiers in the Southern Hospital.
He was laid aside for a few weeks then, and again
in the spring of this year, but preached up till the
month of June last. Two months were then spent
in Scotland, but his strength gradually failed, and,
on 9th October, without pain and calmly as a child
falling asleep, he passed away.
The work at Vauxhall Road was often trying
and depressing, but no one ever heard Mr.
Molyneux complain. Of him it could truthfully
be said that he faithfully did the work given him
to do.


EXTRACTED
FROM THE
“LIVERPOOL POST AND MERCURY” etc.
THE funeral of the Rev. T. G. Molyneux,
M.A., LL.B., the minister of Vauxhall Road
Presbyterian Church, took place from his residence,
19 Welfield Place, to Anfield Cemetery, on Thurs-
day, 12th October, and was attended by a large
gathering of his friends and congregation.
Before the cortege left the house, a Service was
conducted by the Revs. C. C. Lundie, J. B. Munro,
and N. Grieve, and at the Cemetery Chapel and
graveside the officiating ministers were the Rev.
Dr. A. Alexander and the Revs. J. McMurchy
and J. Mellis.
(In the course of the Service held in the
Cemetery Chapel, Dr. Alexander gave the address
which is printed herein.)
Besides Mrs. Molyneux, the mourners included
Mr. John Crum (father-in-law), Miss E. Crum
(sister-in-law), Miss Henderson, Mr. J. H. Spring-
man, Mr. and Mrs. R. Macdonald, Miss Graham,
Mrs. L. Cappel, Mr. J. Forrester, Miss A. Sinclair,
Mrs. T. S. Hannay, Miss Glass, Mr. Robert Glass,
Mr. G. J. Lyell, Mr. J. Mackenzie, the Misses
Carstairs, Miss Job, Mr. and Mrs. W. M. Reed,


Mr. and Mrs. C. Brodersen, Miss Horton, Miss
Young, Miss Cameron, and Messrs. G. Downie,
J. Lyon, T. W. Shannon, W. B. Gillespie, J.
Gordon, G. E. Fairbairn, and B. Mutch.
The clergy present included also the Rev. N.
Fraser (Moderator of Presbytery), and the Revs.
A. Connell, J. Pringle, J. A. Mcllvride, B. Bell,
J. L. Ainslie, J. Tudhope, J. Waddell, P. M.
Kirkland, H. J. Craig, T. W. Macpherson, and
J. H. Colligan.
The following elders and deacons of Vauxhall
Road congregation were present:—Messrs. W. E.
Last (Session Clerk), T. Young, J. W. Hogg, R.
Carmichael, T. R. Tickle, and H. King. There
was also a large attendance of the congregation,
including Mrs. Last, Mrs. Young, Mrs. Bridge,
Mrs. Beattie, Mrs. Dickinson, Mrs. Graham, Mrs.
Gregory, Mrs. Tickle, Mrs King, Mrs. Hawthorn,
Mr. and Mrs. Mclver, Mr. and Mrs. McKay, Mr.
and Mrs. Shaw, Mr. and Mrs. Birchall, Mr. and
Miss McColl, Mrs. and Miss Carmichael, Mrs. and
Miss Johnson, Miss Perry, Miss Magee, Miss
M. G. Roberts, Miss L. Shaw, Miss M. Shaw,
Miss Caudrey, and Messrs. McLaren, Wythe,
Beattie, Dickinson, and Griffiths.
Tributes of flowers (crosses, anchors, harps, and
wreaths) were sent by :—Members of the Vauxhall
Road Mothers’ Meeting ; the Workers at Vauxhall
Road Mothers’ Meeting ; Members of Vauxhall
Road Bible Class ; the Executive of the Women’s


Missionary Association ; Members of the Girls’
Auxiliary; Mr. and Mrs. John Crum and the
Misses Crum, Trentham ; Dr. H. M. Henderson
and Miss Henderson, Aigburth Road ; Mr. J. H.
Springman and the Misses Springman, Mossley
Hill ; Mr. and Mrs. R. Macdonald and Family,
Belvidere Road ; Mrs. L. Cappel, Ullet Road ;
Mr. and Mrs. J. Forrester, Blundellsands ; Mrs.
W. P. Sinclair, Prince’s Park; the Misses Sinclair,
Sunnyside ; Mr. and Mrs. T. S. Hannay, Upton ;
Mrs. J. D. Glass, Craigmore ; Miss Glass, Craig-
more ; the Misses Carstairs, Fairfield ; Mr. and
Mrs. G. J. Lyell, Heswall ; Mr. and Mrs. J.
Mackenzie, Belvidere Road ; Mrs. and Miss Reed,
Welfield Place; Mr. and Mrs. W. M. Reed,
Welfield Place ; Mr. and Mrs. J. McLaren,
Walton, Mr. and Mrs. Last; Mr. and Mrs. Young
and Miss Young ; Mr. and Mrs. Carmichael ; Mr.
and Mrs. Richard Carmichael ; Mr. and Mrs.
King; Mrs. Johnson and Family ; Mrs. Hawthorn;
Miss Perry and Miss Magee ; Mrs. Simpson and
Family ; Mrs. Crowe ; Miss Caudrey ; Christine ;
Mr. and Mrs. Widdenham.


EXTRACT FROM MINUTE
VAUXHALL ROAD SESSION.
IV/T R. MOLYNEUX came to Vauxhall Road in
1898. At that time the situation of this
congregation was already full of difficulty, both
because of the sparsity of the Protestant population
in the vicinity of the Church, and because those
who were members lived at such great distances.
With a zeal that was chivalrous, and a devotion
that was Christ-like, Mr. Molyneux together with
his wife maintained the work of the congregation
at a very high level of efficiency which was admired
by his brethren in the Presbytery of Liverpool.
He gathered around him a body of young people
who were devoted to him, many of whom are now
leaders of the Church, both men and women.
Faithful as a minister, diligent as a teacher, sym-
pathetic as a friend, bringing to his work intellectual
ability that was great, and ever wearing the flower
of a humble and blameless Christian character, his
death has caused deep sorrow among the congrega-
tion, and his memory will long be cherished by
them, and they thank God for His good gift to
them in their minister.


THE PRESBYTERY OF LIVERPOOL
prepared a Minute In Memoriam of the Rev. T. G.
Molyneux. At the November meeting of the
Presbytery, it was adopted by a solemn standing
vote, which silently told of the brethren’s sense
of loss. The Minute is full of appreciation of Mr.
Molyneux’s character and work.
EXTRACT FROM LETTER
OF THE
Present Minister and Office-Bearers of
Workington Presbyterian Church.
"TV/T R. MOLYNEUX’S faithful ministry, in this
his first charge, his scholarly attainments,
earnest proclamation of the Evangel, and sterling
qualities of mind and heart, are still cherished
memories with those among us who knew him and
benefited by his ministry in the years now long
past. To be thus gratefully remembered after so
many years is a striking tribute both to his ministry
and his personal character. By his death the
Church has lost a faithful and honoured servant.


MEMORIAL SERVICES
were conducted in Vauxhall Road Church, Morning
and Evening, on Sunday, 15th October, by the
Rev. John Vaughan, M.A., of Blundellsands, and
by the Rev. Alex. Alexander, M.A., D.D., of
Waterloo. At the Evening Service, Dr. Alexander
preached from Philippians 1,21 —“ For to me to
live is Christ, and to die is gain,” and there was a
beautiful rendering, by the Choir, of Tennyson’s
“ Crossing the Bar.” The concluding part of
Dr. Alexander’s sermon referred directly to Mr.
Molyneux. Dr. Alexander said :
And so it is that we say farewell to your dear
minister, with sorrowful hearts indeed, but with a
solemn sense of triumph and of joy. He laid noble
gifts upon the altar when in his young manhood he
gave himself to the Ministry of Christ. A strong
and well-trained intellect, a heart rich in its power
of loving, a character firm and steadfast and true —
and all these growing in strength and purity to the
end —that was what your minister gave to Christ
and to the Church. He felt the unutterable debt
which he owed to his Redeemer, and he laid him-
self on the altar with a glad will to spend and be
spent for Christ and His people. He gladly took
and thankfully used his opportunities of service in
those wider and pleasanter places where his earlier
ministry was spent. Both in Cumberland and in


far-off Australia, there are men and churches that
bless his memory. When it pleased God to recall
him to his native land and to set him down to
strenuous labour in this place, he was still the
willing and laborious servant of God, the genial,
kindly and faithful pastor of his people, the gentle
and brotherly fellow-worker of his brethren in the
ministry. He exercised his gifts as faithfully, he
entered the homes of the poor as cheerfully, he
fulfilled all parts of his sacred office with as much
meek dignity as he could have done in the midst
of wealth and culture and fashion. You, my friends,
were dear to him as the apple of his eye. How often
have I heard him praise your thoughtfulness and
considerateness, your faithfulness to the Church and
and to himself, your large-hearted liberality, your
eagerness to give and to serve even beyond your
ability, yet he never seemed to think that for these
excellent graces in you there was a human cause,
and that, his own gracious personality, spreading
all unconsciously the savour of Christ among you.
He was indeed a humble-minded man, modest to a
fault, but keen to discern the smallest signs of good-
ness in the rest of us. As I said on Thursday, he
had two great joys in life. One was his beloved
flock, small in the eyes of others, but precious to
him and to his Lord, poor in this world’s goods,
but rich in hope and faith and love, endowed with
rarest loyalty, able to appreciate the ample gifts
and the generous heart that held them all so dear.
The other was the perfect partnership in all the


highest things and in self-sacrificing zeal for the
Kingdom and tender love to the souls of men which
he enjoyed in his gifted and gracious wife. To
her and to you, I would say—Lift up your heads.
Here there is no cause for ignoble sorrow, but the
challenge of a holy man of God to follow the Lord
he loved. Around the memory of my brother there
is nothing but a sweet and gracious savour of Jesus
Christ. For him, death is gain, seeing that he is
with Christ, which is far better. The brow that
often ached with the pain of anxious thought
and exhausting labour is now crowned with the
victor’s wreath, bestowed by pierced hands. The
robes of earthly ministry are exchanged for the
robes, washed and made white in the blood of the
Lamb. The sweet societies of the earthly sanctuary
and the earthly home have given place to the
General Assembly and Church of the first-born
sons of God. May it be granted unto us, through
our Redeemer’s great grace, to come where my
beloved friend and your beloved pastor now enjoys
the unclouded presence of the Lord! Then for us,
as for him, to die will be unutterable gain, because
for us to live has been Christ. Amen.


21




HUXNOR COTTAGE,
KING SKERS WELL,
SOUTH DEVON.


