

yJ-A
131 o
l S~Y
Jin iimorjj
ifrimetlf EiUuari
1881= 1941


. II


Jilt Utemnrg
Professor leniicll) (fiinmrii
».3Ui.pijil. (Cfiitn.)
HUNTER-BAILLIE PROFESSOR
IN ST. ANDREWS COLLEGE,
WITHIN THE UNIVERSITY OF
SYDNEY
AND
PROFESSOR OF SYSTEMATIC
THEOLOGY IN ST. ANDREW’S
THEOLOGICAL HALL.




Jffmteral ©ratiim
J)rofcooor 3, 3Utfliio, ft) J., IJ.
IN the solemnising presence of death and in the environing
presence of the Ancient of Days, before whom our genera-
tions come and pass away, we meet to-day to pay our tribute
of homage to a worthy man who, having served his day and
generation faithfully, has now outsoared the shadow of our
night.
We meet, conscious of a great loss, with deep sorrow in
our hearts, to name with reverence and with gratitude the
name of Kenneth Edward, and to bid a loving and sad
farewell. Having been acquainted with grief ourselves, we
express our heartfelt sympathy with those near and dear to
him in their heavy bereavement; we would in a measure enter
into the fellowship of their sufferings, and in this dark hour
commend them to the God of all comfort.
We commemorate one snatched away, so far as the range
of our human vision can see, by premature death in the zenith
of his powers, taken from his tasks in the midst of his days.
In the mystery surrounding our mortal lot his sun has set while
it was yet day, but according to our Christian faith, to arise
elsewhere with renewed splendour.
Like the Divine Master whom he faithfully served, like
others who have loved us and borne us in their hearts, Pro-
fessor Kenneth Edward has gone to prepare a place for us in
that world of eternal realities, the bounds of which are not
delimited by time or death. He has left us not to enter upon
eternal life as something quite other from the experience of
communion with God here, or as something which begins only
beyond the grave; he has left us to continue with fuller
knowledge that eternal life which is a present experience of
the knowledge of God and of Him whom God has sent.
“God gave unto us eternal life, and this life is in his Son.’
A colleague of Dr. Edward’s truthfully remarked to me
that Dr. Edward always impressed him as the typical anima
naturaliter Christiana, the “soul naturally Christian,’’ and
richly endowed with the requisite Christian graces. Such a


naturally Christian soul truly had Dr. Edward, Christian in
the sincerity of his humility. Without affectation or acting,
Kenneth Edward always humbled himself in the midst of his
brethren, for which they highly exalted him. Like his Master,
he emptied himself and thereby enriched others. Richly
endowed as he was, his place was ever with the meek. He
never advertised himself; never spoiled any service by self-
seeking; never thought of himself more highly than he ought.
Out of an intimate personal knowledge I used to tell him that
he did not think of himself as highly as he ought: such in-
formation one has not often to convey to a friend.
Beside this natural—or supernatural—humility there was
in his makeup a marvellous gentleness, not that of senti-
mentality and weakness, but the gentleness of virile manhood.
One could not know Dr. Edward long or intimately without
being captivated by the quiet power of his affection-producing
personality. His slow smile, his ready, penetrating humour,
his appropriate word for the ordinary or the rare occasion,
his abounding charity which threw a mantle over sinners who
attracted castigation from others, his refusal to think evil of
any man, these and like expressions of his vital self will remain
with us. He loved much; he served greatly; he lived what he
taught.
Dr. Edward was endowed with one of the most lucid
philosophical intellects it has been my privilege to know and
learn from. His analytical powers were unsurpassed. Any
system of thought in philosophy or religion had to be deeply
and solidly based to withstand his trenchant criticisms. No
window-dressing, no show of authority, no rhetoric, could
deceive him. With profound admiration I have on several
occasions witnessed Dr. Edward, like another Socrates, say
“let us follow the argument whithersoever it leads,’’ and follow
it with the unshakable conviction that whatever is shaken, it
is not truth.
I first met Dr. Edward impersonally in his book, “Religious
Experience; its Nature and Truth.” The late Professor H. R.
Mackintosh of Edinburgh before I had met the author—
remarked to me that he was so impressed with Dr. Edward’s
book that he had read it twice, and added, “few books will
stand reading a second time.” When I met the author I was
prepared to meet a philosopher and a scholar, and in this


I was not disappointed; but I met a man who was greater than
his excellent book. Into that book he has put but part of his
rich self. At least two other books he had planned and
worked upon, which I confidently anticipated to equal in style
and matter his first. Through the tragedy of his health over
years, these remain for ever unfinished, to the great loss of
students of the philosophy of religion. The Taskmaster has
taken the writer before his able pen had recorded his thoughts
and visions and inspirations for others, before he had reaped
the harvest of his labours.
For the impenetrable mystery which surrounds our mortal
affairs, I know no final resolving word. I have no adequate
explanation of pain and sorrow, of frustration and premature
death. But believing in God, I believe there is a scheme
of things, though it is presently beyond my ken; and that
somehow in that scheme—that divine scheme of the Father
of our spirits there is written some profound immortal mean-
ing to our mortal strivings and sufferings on this ambiguous
earth, and in this scheme death and pain are no afterthoughts,
but the very ministers of a high purpose. And in this scheme,
which faith offers in our baffling experiences, I believe that
the broken and unfulfilled life of my friend and colleague is
somehow taken up and filled with all the fullness of God.
I need not dwell upon Dr. Edward as a teacher of first
rank scholarship, with breadth and accuracy. That scholar-
ship was combined with a rare spiritual insight which conse-
crated it and made it blessed and fruitful. With a mind at
once alert and well balanced, he proved a reliable and
inspiring guide to the young men in his classroom. Specialist
though he was in philosophy, he never assumed the merely
academic attitude of marshalling arguments to overthrow an
opponent. He always aimed at making his knowledge sub-
servient to the practical needs of his students, and, out of a
wonderful sympathy with the student mind and its problems,
at equipping men to be true ministers of the Gospel. With
his passing the Church has lost a wise and able teacher, whose
work will not perish with his years.
A Roman poet lamented the death in 24 B.C. of his friend
Quintilius Varus of Cremona, in the memorable words multis
ille bonis flebilis occidit (he fell lamented by many good men).
Realising the greatness of our loss, we may apply these words
of an ancient sorrow to our brother.


Our blessed dead come back to us transfigured like their
Master in a spiritual presence which death cannot dissipate.
They go away to return to our love and our hearts. God
hath given to love to keep its own eternally.” And it is in God
only we find our loved again. They leave their mantle of
power to us as they return, trailing clouds of glory to God
their home.
We now bid adieu to Kenneth Edward in physical presence
from these scenes of time and change, confident that his work
as Christian teacher will abide because done in sincerity and
devotion, and that his Christlike personality will continue to
radiate its influence in other personalities blessed through
contact with him. We all are richer for having known him.
We leave him in the abiding peace of God and commit
him with ourselves to the Love which cannot and will not
let us go in life or in death. His “God will be our God for
ever and ever; he will be our guide even unto death, yea,
and beyond death, when we too sail beyond the last sunset.


icprcscntatiticfli of (Hljurcl) ani» inbemtij
at the Funeral Service in Scots Church, 13th September, 1941
The Interim Moderator of Scots Church
Rev. A. S. McCook, B.A
The Interim Minister of Scots Church
Rev. W. L. Marsh, M.A
The Clerk of Sydney Presbytery
Rev. G. W. McAlpine
The Moderator of Sydney Presbytery
Rev. J. H. G. Auld, B.A.
The Vice-Chancellor of Sydney University
Sir Robert Wallace, LL.D.
Members of Theological Faculty
Rev. A. C. Grieve, B.A
Rev. J. A. Hunter, B.D.
Principal of Leigh Methodist College
Rev. W. E. Bennett, M.A., B.D.
Principal of Camden Congregational College
Rev. R. B. Reynolds, M.A., B.D.
President of Theological Faculty
Rev. S. Angus, Ph.D., D.Lit., D.D.
Principal of St. Andrew’s College
Rev. W. Gumming Thom, Ph.D., B.D.
The Very Rev. The Moderator-General
Rev. J. Flynn, 0.8. E., D.D.


JMrcso at tljc memorial Semite
By Principal W. Gumming Thom, 8.D., Ph.D.,
Scots Church, Sunday, 21st September
'"THERE is a very significant scene in one of Laurence
J- H ousman’s Little Plays of St. Francis, where the saint
picks up and lovingly unfolds a beggar’s cloak which had been
flung aside. “Look!” he said, “Is it not beautiful?”
“Beautiful,” said his friend Rinaldo. “Why, surely,” said
Francis, for this is life. See here, how it hath worn thin;
and here into holes and tatters; and how softly time hath
faded it ... is not this the true tale of a man’s life? But a
new cloak tells nothing; therefore is this the more beautiful.”
One line in that scene came irresistibly to one’s mind some
three years ago, when Dr. Edward, with characteristic cour-
tesy and kindliness, found his way on board an incoming liner
to greet his new junior colleague, and one noted with instant
concern the tell-tale marks of a grave illness. The cloak of
his physical frame had indeed “worn thin”; he was weary with
an infinite weariness; but throughout the succeeding months
and years the flame of his courage only burned the more
brightly in the gathering night. Pain and suffering etched
deeper lines on his face and time softly faded his hair to a
snowy white; with another philosopher he might well have
sighed, “Ah, how difficult it is to live, O my tired heart,” but
without a murmur he did his duty, and even on his death-bed
he spent many hours reading theses and tabulating results
so that his task for the session might be rounded and
complete. Now that the cloak has been laid aside, and his
brave spirit has returned to God who gave it, we do well
to gather to honour his memory and to give thanks that he
companied with us and that we knew and loved him well;
and our further purpose we may sum up in the words of
Fanny Mercier concerning Amiel, “My only desire is that
everything we are to say about him may be such as will do
good, render the soul loftier, and initiate others into a higher,
purer life.”


The story of his life is a familiar story, in Scotland as
elsewhere, of a clever boy, born in a religious home and reared
by pious parents, who early was dedicated to the ministry
of the Church of his fathers and moved steadily and without
deviation towards his chosen life of service.
Born in Dundee on 16th June, 1881, he was Moncur Dux
of Morgan Academy at the age of eighteen. With the aid of
a scholarship he entered Edinburgh University, passed on
with an Honours degree in Philosophy to New College, gained
distinction in all his classes and a final Honours diploma, and
was licensed by the United Free Church in 1908. After
experience as an assistant in the charges of Rosehall, Edin-
burgh and Queen Street, Dunfermline, he was ordained and
inducted in 1 9 1 0 to the quiet Moray Firth charge of Moyness,
whence he was called in due course to the even lovelier Border
town of Peebles. Meanwhile he was reading widely in English
and German philosophy, moving from adolescent promise to
adult fulfilment in scholarship, until he was recognised in his
church as one of the small company of first-rate thinkers and
theologians. His Alma Mater awarded him a Doctorate in
Philosophy for an original contribution on “Schleiermacher’s
Theory of the Nature of Religion,” and appointed him
External Examiner for the B.D. degree. Trinity College,
Glasgow, appointed him Kerr Lecturer (1921-3) and the
publication of these lectures on “Religious Experience; its
Nature and Truth attracted most favourable comment, the
work being now prescribed as a text-book in colleges all over
the world.
The step from a Kerr Lectureship to a full Professorship
is generally a short one, and in 1928 St. Andrew’s College
nominated him as Hunter-Baillie Professor, and the Pres-
byterian Church in New South Wales inducted him to the
Chair of Systematic Theology in its Theological Hall; in which
capacity he has, during the past thirteen years, won the affec-
tion and esteem of the whole Church.
“The only useful viaticum in making the voyage of life,”
it has been said, “is a great duty and a few serious affections.”
Dr. Edward recognised as his one great duty that of making
known the gospel of Jesus Christ, and this he did through
study, preaching, and teaching. As a student he knew the
ancient schools of Athens and the modern groves of learning;


but he walked also the rocky steeps of Sinai and the green
fields of Galilee, and he meditated on law, prophecy, and
gospel with a heart at leisure from itself and at home with
Him whom he regarded as the fulfilment of all three. As a
preacher he kept close to the definition of preaching as “ani-
mated elevated conversation.” He could, and did, receive
letters of thanks from distinguished men in the community, but
he always held that his chief business was with ordinary folk
who best understood a plain direct approach, so with simple
truths on his lips he “sang his way into the human soul.”
But it was as a teacher that he came most fully into his
own. Like a good gardener, he thought both of the quality
of the seed, and of the straightness of the row. The seed was
garnered from the best products of the human mind in all
centuries, but was sowed with discernment. In his development
of his theme he was lucid as only a great master is lucid with
an occasional lift of his head and a flash of humour to cheer
the toiling student entering with ease and assurance into the
heart of one after another of the Christian doctrines and
setting young feet on the way that leads to the Incarnate
Truth. Yet he could be deeply emotional in his utterance;
and one remembers meeting his students as they rose from his
closing lecture on the Person of Jesus Christ. They walked
with heads up, eyes shining, and hearts thrilled by the grandeur
of the presentation of their glorious Master; and there are many
ministers throughout this Commonwealth who claim with pride
and thankfulness that they are “Edward’s men.”
Along with that one great duty he had several serious
affections, apart from his interest in music and in photo-
graphy. To the forgotten folk in our poorer areas he
laboured to bring the Church through Social Service, and
that department of our Church’s work is largely the child
of his consecrated imagination. Through the Australian Inland
Mission he sought also to bring a waft of Christian goodness
into lonely and somewhat loveless lives. And finally, and
above all, he served Scots Church with a fidelity and an
expenditure of time and effort which some of his friends
grudged that he should divert from the writing of books.
In June, 1931, he became Interim Moderator; in July,
1931, an elder, and throughout the years he remained a wise
counsellor, an ardent supporter in the Church Courts, and a


gracious host to the ministers gathered from Scotland and
Ireland and other lands to occupy this pulpit. Those who
passed through critical years in the history of this church speak
with deep gratitude of a debt they owe to him that can never
be repaid. And Dr. Edward was ever the last to expect
reward and would have been embarrassed had it been offered.
His only ambition was what has been described as moral am-
bition, which is entirely without self-pride, and desires only
to be in its place, to sing its note well in the universal concert
of the God of Love; and that ambition he most fully achieved.
If a demand be made for some word, some thought that
will most adequately express the significance of the life of Dr.
Edward, one may be permitted to borrow it from that wise
woman of Tekoah, who spoke to King David regarding his
child Absalom, banished from his father’s presence. 'For we
must needs die, and are as water spilt on the ground . , .
yet he will not destroy, but doth devise means that his
banished be not expelled from him.’’ There surely is a most
worthy definition of our Christian doctrine of Atonement. Dr.
Edward lived and wrote and spoke to devise means for the
bringing together of God and His children, banished by their
own misdeeds. Now before his time was fully come, as we
may feel, he must needs die; but we know more of the loving
heart of God than that wise woman; and if we listen, we may
catch the echo of a Voice calling to our friend, “Because I live,
thou shalt live also . . . enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.”


iFounb among 2Dr. CEdtoatti’sS papers
God, who hast never left Thy word un-
spoken or Thyself without a witness, grant us
that clarity of inward vision and that sincerity
of soul, in which we may be enabled to discern
every spirit whether it be of Thee, to recognise
Thy message whencesoever it may come, and
to give glad heed to Thy authentic word, to
whatsoever enterprise of thought or will it may
challenge us. Thou who hast made Thyself
known to man by prophetic voices in every
age, deliver us from all slowness of heart to
believe what the prophets have spoken, from
all narrowing prejudice, and from all such
self-seeking and self-will as should disable us
from receiving and understanding the Divine
revelation. And may He who is the Light of
every man be the light upon all our way.
Through Jesus Christ our Lord.


U. ft- h.
c 1'Lo
rcj)uj


