

£M V *i /h
|li) ItU'imirinnt
ARTHUR WELLESLEY OAKES, M.A.,
F.C.P.A
Trooper No. 18, B, Squadron, Light Horse
Australian Imperial Expeditionary Force.
Brigade,
Killed in Action at Gallipoli, 7th August, 1915,
Aged 29 Ye;vrs.
/-rom d(is proud and 3rateful Relatives.


If others that
for your son,
difficulties, by
lal distinction
dory was won,
his prospects
:gle. Without
ng. He left a
beloved wife,
glorious death
nust all be of
he must have
iw urgent was
n any human
I us.”
his manhood
o have fallen
ve the nation
Speaking at Kelso on Sunday, the 12th September, the Rev. David
J. Davies, Principal of Moore College, said : —“ They thanked God for
those lives of sacrifice which had helped to break through the crust of
selfishness, and had called them to the larger life of service. The
example of those lives had helped to draw people away from the
cynical, iceberg atmosphere of the world. The men, who had died for
us, had taught us that mere worldly ambition was a poor thing, and
they would receive the greatest of all rewards, even the Master’s,
“ Well done, thou good and faithful servant.”
Principal Davies most kindly came from Sydney to take the place
of the Bishop, who was prevented by illness from being present at the
Special Services held at the Cathedral and Kelso.
H prophetic XHtterance.
“The Australians will never be beaten. They may be wiped out,
but they will never run. When our time comes, may we line up to
the example of those who landed amidst that murderous fire of
shrapnel. Our pride in their courage almost compensates us for the
price we had to pay.”—A.W.O.


The following testimony is taken from hundreds of others that
have been received :
‘ We have always felt a great respect and admiration for your son,
knowing, as we did, how, through innumerable difficulties, by
sheer ability and grit, he had fought his way to final distinction
at the University and elsewhere, and when the victory was won,
when he had obtained a fine position in life, and all his prospects
were bright, he was called to a yet harder struggle. Without
pressure, from pure patriotism, he gave up everything. He left a
good position, excellent prospects, and, above all, a beloved wife,
to fight for his country, and he has died the most glorious death
of all. In the midst of you* - grief how proud you must all be of
him. With his intelligence and wide knowledge he must have
realised from the first, more clearly than most, how urgent was
the need of men, how critical the situation. Can any human
action have been finer than his? Finis Coronat Opus.”
The dominant notes of the letters received are :
1. Words cannot express what the writers feel.
2. It was better to die a hero’s death than have his manhood
shamed.
3. Will the example and self-sacrifice of those who have fallen
inspire in others high ideals, and thus save the nation
ultimately from permanent loss ?
'Gbe fniemorial Service.
Speaking at Kelso on Sunday, the 12th September, the Rev. David
J. Davies, Principal of Moore College, said : —“ They thanked God for
those lives of sacrifice which had helped to break through the crust of
selfishness, and had called them to the larger life of service. The
example of those lives had helped to draw people away from the
cynical, iceberg atmosphere of the world. The men, who had died for
us, had taught us that mere worldly ambition was a poor thing, and
they would receive the greatest of all rewards, even the Master’s,
“ Well done, thou good and faithful servant.”
Principal Davies most kindly came from Sydney to take the place
of the Bishop, who was prevented by illness from being present at the
Special Services held at the Cathedral and Kelso.
B prophetic ‘Utterance.
“The Australians will never be beaten. They may be wiped out,
but they will never run. When our time comes, may we line up to
the example of those who landed amidst that murderous fire of
shrapnel. Our pride in their courage almost compensates us for the
price we had to pay.”—A.W.O.


A Jtetxaspect ax jt> axy Appreciation
the BISHOP OF BATHURST.
“w~ N the same day there came to us in Bathurst the sad news of
£0 the death of Arthur Oakes and Guy Kendall, two soldiers of
the King. There are many striking points of similarity
between them.
They both laid down their lives willingly in the service of their
country.
They are both only sons, sorrowfully and proudly yielded, as the
supreme offering of their parents to their nation’s cause.
They are both “Old Boys” of our Church Public School, All
Saints’ College, and both nobly upheld the ideals they had learnt to
honor.
They are both descended from the very first generation of Aus-
tralian settlers, and spring from those who have helped to make
Australian history.
It is significant also that the first Australian ancestors of both
lads came to Australia at the call of duty as missionaries to the
neglected white oi black heathen of those first rough days. The
strong sense of service and sacrifice lived on in their blood, and these
lads of the fourth generation were swift to respond in their own way
to the call of sacrifice when it came to them.
Arthur Wellesley Oakes was of pioneer missionary stock, and to
those who knew him well he gave many proofs of his ancestry. His
great-grandmother, Rebecca Small, daughter of Sergeant Small, was
the first white girl born in Australia. His great grandfather, Francis
Oakes, was a companion missionary of Messrs. Hassall and Shelley,
who came here soon after the foundation of the colony, in the mis-
sionary ship “ Duff,” and subsequently these three families became
related through marriages. Arthur’s great grandmother was a
Hassall, and the Reverend Thomas Hassall was a son-in-law of
Samuel Marsden. so that there was another strand binding the lives
of these two Bathurst families together. Long before this war broke
out did Arthur show the quality of his blood and the mettle of his
pasture. Some who knew him in his care-free schoolboy days have
expressed to me their surprise at the brilliant career he subsequently
carved out for himself. I was not so surprised, for I have come in
touch with several other instances of men who have waited until a
man’s strong purpose has controlled their lives before revealing the
brilliance of mind that hitherto lay concealed. I think of a brilliant
Australian General now wounded at the front, and a High Court
Judge, as instances among many of such development in character.
Arthur began his life’s work in banking service, and instead of
being concent with a mere routine knowledge of .his duties, he was
fired with the ambition to become a master of his subject. It was
then he displayed his latent strength of will and brain power. He
entered the Sydney University for the new course just then instituted
in economics, accountancy, and kindred subjects. He speedily proved


L(9U3
$Ci
himself without a rival in breadth of view and logical acumen, moving
without a break to his degree of Bachelor of Arts, and a few years
later, whilst engrossed in heavy professional work, he took his M.A.
degree—the only man in his year “cum laude.” Throughout his
course he paid his own way and maintained himself. And more than
that, sent his sister to a Sydney Boarding School at his own charges.
A man of such promise was eagerly sought for, and immediately upon
the completion of his University course he was offered a splendid
position and partnership with a leading firm of public accountants in
Brisbane. Two years ago when I was in Brisbane I learned from
many leading men of the high regard in which he was held in business
circles, and of the great expectations they had formed of a big career
for him in the life of the Northern Capital. Though but a young man,
his commercial “value” was in easy command of a position at £lOOO
a year, and yet he left it all without hesitation to serve his country as
a trooper-private at ss. a day. An act of that sort is a sufficient index
of a man’s character, but there are many other ways by which one
could measure the worth of character of Arthur Oakes. A man is
often best, known in his home relationships. A better son and brother
than Arthur Oakes it has not been my lot to meet. Loyal to every
relationship, generous to the last fibre of his being, thoughtful, con-
siderate, loving, he has indeed left behind him a blessed memory in
his family.
AN ANSWERED CALL If I were to choose the preponderating
quality in his character I should select a
certain noble “gravity” of thought and conscience, or what the
Greeks with subtler distinction than the Latins used to call “ sem-
notes.” There was a sober, refined, dignified sense of large responsi-
bility that always impressed me greatly. He took life not gloomily,
but with a sane seriousness. Like all men of strong intellect, there
came to him a period when he had to test and question the traditional
faith in which he had been reared. To such a mind the cheap, pert,
shallow scepticism that likes to pose as “ modern doubt” was impos-
sible. As one whose little area of specialised study has lain in this
direction, I was amazed to find how quickly he had made his way to
the works of that small group of men who are doing the real thinking
of the world. In his straight honest way he met his difficulties face
to face, determined to “ prove all things and hold fast that which is
good.” When the call came for him to take up arms for his country,
one who knew him intimately and his difficulties could say that “ he
had gone far to their solution in the happiest way.” He did a great
work in the helping to establish St. John’s College in the University
of Brisbane, and the Warden of that college, a man of ripe experience
in the older Universities of England, writes, “ I have lost the best pal
I ever had.”
ARCHBISHOP’S The Archbit hop of Brisbane, who knew him well,
TRIBUTE writes: “He was a young man of uncommon
promise. His life thus culminating in a noble
death is indeed not a thing to mourn about; it is a thing to thank
God for. ... a life so clean, so honest, so strong and so noble in
its aims and principles.” His old schoolmaster says it is difficult to
think of his life as other than “ absolutely blameless, finely lived and


finely ended.” One of his greatest friends says, “I can but console
with myself the memoiy of him ; his ideals will always be an inspira-
tion to me.” One could multiply almost indefinitely the tributes to
the wide influence exerted by this quiet young man with the stead-
fast outlook upon life.
THE BEREAVED And what of those who have given these their
sons? Of them one can but say that they have
been worthy of their sons as their sons have been worthy of them.
Never by word nor deed have they for a moment shown that they
begrudge the priceless offering to their conntry’s cause.
Arthur Oakes leaves a mother; he leaves a young wife, to whom
he was wedded but a few days before his departure. The wives and
mothers of heroes are heroic past all calculation and beyond belief.
Such is the mother and such is the wife of Arthur Oakes.
1 have seen it recently suggested in England that when the war
is at last ended and memorials of the sacrificed are being erected in
our Churches, one not to be forgotten is a “pieta” of the Divine
Motherhood with the slain Son across her knees. What indeed does the
nation not owe to its glorious mothers and wives in these dark days !
After Major Birchall fell rallying the Canadians to their mar-
vellous charge at Ypres, the sad news had to be broken to his nearest
relative. The question was asked her, “ Shall we toll the Church
beli?” But that great woman, with a true sense of values, made
answer : —“ Toll the bell for Percy Birchall! If I ring it at all it will
be a peal!’ ’
There spoke the heroine ; fit fellow in soul to the hero. If we are
to toll the beil in these days it should be for those who are spiritually
dead to honor and duty; not for those who, like Arthur Oakes and
Guy Kendall, are alive for evermore.
“Your gallant son! How keen he was! It is one .of God’s
mysteries why such a brave young life should be taken. We could
not be reconciled to it did we not know of the fuller service in the life
beyond.”— The Primate.
Jesus Said , “ Whosoever will save his life shall lose it; but whosoever
will lose his life for My sake, the same shall save it,” if
— St. Luke ix. 24.


©tber
One who knew him well says:—
“ I deem it a great privilege to have been present at the beautiful
service, held in memory of one of the best men it has ever been my lot
to know.”
“ Only those who are paying the price know what it is costing to
save the future of the world .... Ido not doubt that God, who
has accepted the sacrifice, will grant you consolations.”
The Bishop of North Queensland.
A very old and valued frit nd writes :
“ We know that nothing happens without God’s holy will, and the
best and bravest thing we can all do is to bow to it in patient resigna-
tion.”
I find myself repeating Faber’s beautiful lines —■
“ A.ll that He blesses is our good,
And unblest good is ill;
And all is right, that seems most wrong,
If it be His sweet will.”
XT be Mere.
The painter may picture, the poet may sing,
The author his story indite.
He shoulders his rifle and fights for his King,
For Liberty, .Justice and Right.
We talk about glory and honour and fame,
And cheer fox the red, white and blue.
He hears the clear call, and sends in his name —
A man to his manhood is true.
We live, and he falls, as he lived, without blame,
And the old flag still floats as of yore.
But he leaves behind the best record —the name
Of a hero —and what would you more ?
The Rectory,
Kelso , N.S. W.
G.S.O.
“primes” \9rtm., Hathurst
