

Transvaal War
1899-1900
In Memoriam
Our Brave Boys..
who have Died..
for the Empire..




PUBLISHED AT 1/6
EDITION DE LUXE, 10/6
In Memory
OF THE GALLANT
Officers and Men of Victoria
Who Died in Defence of our Empire
IN
Transvaal War, 1899-1900.
IN placing before the public of Victoria this little album of Photos of our brave
boys who have died on active service in South Africa, the Publisher’s
aim has been to reach the highest standard of excellence possible in this
class of production, and believes it will be appreciated as such. As a small
memento of the first of our soldiers to fall in battle in defence of our Empire,
it will, he trusts, be considered not unworthy to till a place in the home of every
loyal subject of Her Gracious Majesty Queen Victoria.
The Publisher desires to acknowledge the courtesy and assistance received
from The Argus, The Australasian, The Age, The Leader, The Herald, and
The Weekly Times, and also the Provincial Press.
tldbolesale agents:
GORDON & GOTCH Ltd., QUEEN STREET, MELBOURNE.
ROBERT JOLLEY, CARSON PLACE, LIT. COLLINS STREET, MELBOURNE.
COPYRIGHTED for the Proprietor throughout the British Empire, European , and other
countries in the Berne Convention, by G. G. TURRI & CO., Patent Agents,
Salisbury Buildings, Queen St., Melbourne, Aust.


Lieut. Colonel
Charles Edward Ernest Umpbelby
Special Service Officer.
For a time attached to the Censor's Department in
Cape Town, then to the Howitzer Division of
Lord Methuen’s force at Modder River.
Born at Richmond, 13th June, 1853.
Wounded during the fight at Driefontein, on the 10th
March, and died 12th March, 1900.
I lEUT.-COL. UMPHELBY joined the Militia Garrison
Artillery at Warrnambool, 20th June, 1884, and in March,
1885. was appointed Lieutenant in the Victorian Permanent
Artillery; was promoted to Captain, 26th April, 1889; Major
Ist March, 1891. In 1890 he succeeded Major Daniel in
command of Queenscliff Fort, and in July, 1899, rose to the
rank of Lieut.-Col. He was commanding officer of the
Permanent Artillery, also of the Western District Garrison
Artillery. He was sent to England by the Government,
in 1889, to undergo a course of instruction at Woolwich
and Shoeburyness, and while there was attached to the
staff of Major-General Clarke, and obtained the following
certificates:—•
First-Class Certificate, with honours. —Woolwich and
Shoeburyness.
Certificate. —Position Finding.
Certificate.—Military Law. Tactics and Military Topo-
graphy, Artillery College, Woolwich.
Certificate.—Coast Defence, Golden Hill.
He leaves a widow (a daughter of the late Thos. Austin,
Esq., Barwon Park) and two daughters.


Photo kindly supplied by
LIEUT.-COL. C. E. E. UMPHELBY. -The Australasian."


Major G eorge Albert Eďdy
Senior Officer of the First Contingent, commanding the
Infantry Unit.
Born at Castlemaine, 11th May, 1860.
Killed at Rensburg, 12th February, 1900.
[V/lAJOR G. A. EDDY joined the Third Battalion of Militia at
‘ * Ballarat in July, 1885, as Lieutenant, was made Captain in
1887, and in 1890 gained a position on the permanent staff of the
Victorian Rangers. He attained his rank as Major in 1897,
becoming second in command to Colonel Otter. While in
England, in 1898-9, was attached to the Devonshire Regiment
during the Autumn manoeuvres, and secured the following :
Certificate.—Efficiency in Small Arms and Ammunition,
Woolwich, Enfield, and Birmingham.
Extra Certificate. — Musketry, Hythe.
Certificate.—Military School Engineering, Chatham.
Certificate. —Sword Exercise and Gymnasium, Aldershot.
Infantry Officer’s Certificate.—Equitation Course, Aider-
shot.
The following is an extract from a letter from Colonel H.
Molyneux Carter, of the Second Battalion Wiltshire Regiment,
to Mrs. Eddy, published in the Argus of 4th April, 1900:
“ He most pluckily maintained a position against the enemy,
who had been reinforced and greatly outnumbered him. . . .
But from all accounts the heroism and gallantry of the Australians
were beyond praise. They accounted for a great number of the
enemy before they ultimately retired ; and the great feature of
the action was that Major Eddy, who was retiring with his
men, again brought them forward to cover the retreat of the
Wiltshire Regiment, and thus met his death. ... I brought the
gallant conduct of your husband and his command under the notice
of the General. ... He was a genial comrade and a gallant
soldier, and he is, I fear, an irreparable loss to the Australian
Contingent.” He leaves a widow and four children.


Photo by Talma.
Major G. A. Eddy.


Captain Robert Westrup Salmon
First Contingent—Mounted Infantry Unit.
Bom at Daisy Hill, 12th July, 1862.
Died of Enteric Fever, at Naauwpoort,
16th March, 1900.
pAPTAIN SALMON joined the ranks of the Mounted
Rifles in 1883; obtained his Commission as Lieutenant
on the 15th January, 1892, and was appointed Adjutant
(Volunteer) of the 2nd Batt., V.M.R., 18th May, 1894.
He was appointed Captain of the first Contingent since his
departure for South Africa. Colonel Hoad, commanding the
Australian Regiment in South Africa, reports that he has done
splendid work, and in every way has been of great assistance
to him.
At the battle of Jasfontein he had command of a division of
Mounted Infantry, and was highly complimented by the
London Times and other English papers for the skilful
manner in which he handled his men. His position in the
camp at the time of his death was Stafl-Captain of the
Australian Regiment.
Captain Salmon was a brother of the Hon. Dr. C. Carty
Salmon, Minister of Education and Customs, and as a
civilian he was deservedly popular, and was chosen by his
townsmen to fulfil a number of public duties. He was a
Councillor of the Borough of Talbot; Trustee of the Racing
Club, and Cemetery; Member of the Board of Directors of
the M.U.1.0.0.F.; a Past-Master of the Masonic Lodge;
Church-Warden of St. Michael’s, Talbot, and Secretary of
the Fire Brigade.


Photo by Fraser, Ballarat.
Capt. R. W. Salmon.


Surgeon Capt. Mm. Fleming Ibopfuns
Medical Officer to the First Contingent.
Born in the Maryborough District, Victoria,
13th October, 1864.
Died of Enteric Fever, at Naauwpoort, 27th March, 1900.
QAPTAIN WILLIAM FLEMING HOPKINS was educated in
South Australia, and had a brilliant career, both in the classes
and in the playground. He entered the Adelaide University with
the University Scholarship, and graduated B.A. in 1884 in the first
class. He then came to Victoria, and as he had to rely on his own
exertions he did three years’ schoolmastering at Portland and Scotch
Colleges, where he was senior classical master. He was the first
Adelaide graduate to be admitted ad eundem by the Melbourne
University. He studied at Melbourne, graduating M.B. and B.S. in
1891, and secured the appointment of Medical Officer and Manager
of the Stawell Hospital on taking his degree. This position he held
at the time of his death. By force of his genius, backed up by a
magnificent physique and indomitable will power, Dr. Hopkins must
have ultimately won a high place in his profession. He joined the
Victorian Rangers Medical Staff on 20th May, 1892, with the rank of
Captain, and served with them until his appointment as Medical
Officer to the First Victorian Contingent, under the command of
Captain McLeish. Captain Hopkins was extremely popular in all
ranks, and exhibited splendid courage and coolness under heavy
fire, in attending to the wounded at Rensburg. Lieut. Staughton,
in a letter to his father, Mr. Staughton, M.L.A., published in the
Argus , of the 20th March, 1900, said:—
“ Nothing could have been better than the way our fellows behaved
throughout, and the individual bravery was splendid. Dr. Hopkins
was in the thick of it the whole time dressing the wounded. Under
very heavy fire he carried out a lot of poor fellows on his own horse,
and if any man should get a V.C. it is he.”
He was a son of the late Rev. William Hopkins, and leaves a
widow (daughter of Mrs. Lamond, of Kew) and one son, aged 3 years.


Photo by T. Humphrey & Co.
Surgeon-Capt. W. F. Hopkins.


Lieutenant James Charles Roberts
First Contingent—Mounted Infantry Unit.
Born at Rushworth, 7th May, 1872.
Killed at Rensburg, 12th February, 1900.
I lEUTENANT J. C. ROBERTS was a lieutenant of the
University Corps of Officers from 28th February, 1896,
to 7th July, 1898, when he obtained his commission in the
Victorian Mounted Rifles. He matriculated from the
Carlton College, where he was Dux of the school. From
the Ormond College he graduated at the Melbourne
University in Civil Engineering. He had recently re-
entered the University as a medical student, but on the
outbreak of the war immediately volunteered for service
in South Africa. He was frequently mentioned by Major
Reay as doing exceptionally good work, and held the con-
fidence and esteem of his superior officers. An extract
from a letter from Enselin Camp says: —“Our lieutenants
are all good, especially Lieutenant Roberts. He is a real
little trump; his men would follow him anywhere.” He
was a son of the late Mr. J. H. Roberts, of Rushworth.


Photo by T. Humphrey & Co.
Lieutenant J. C. Roberts.


Mr W. F. Lambie
War Correspondent of the Melbourne “Age” and
“The Leader.”
Killed at Rensburg, 7th February, 1900.
IY\R. W. J. LAMBIE was barely 40 years of age. He was born in
Argyleshire, and was a son of the iate Rev. James Lambie,
a well-known Presbyterian minister. He had practical training
as a soldier, having belonged to the Metropolitan Field Artillery
Brigade some years ago as a non-commissioned officer, and had
made himself quite an authority on military affairs.
He first saw active service with the Australian Contingent in
Lower Egypt, as War Correspondent of the Sydney Morning
Herald. He was at the battle of Tamai, and after the fighting
was over was, with Mr. Bennett Burleigh, of the London Daily
Telegraph, the first to reach the telegraph wire, and his message
was the first account of the fight to reach Australia. Mr.
Lambie and Mr. Melvin (another Australian correspondent) were
the heroes of an incident in the campaign which attracted
considerable notice at the time. They were carrying despatches,
and had pushed on ahead of the troops, which is a very plucky
thing to do. They fell into an ambush, and the Arabs fired upon
them; but they bravely waited for each other, rode back into
camp, and informed the general. During this escapade, Mr.
Lambie was shot through the leg, and was for some time
invalided at Suakin. The conduct of Mr. Lambie and his
companion was universally praised, and Colonel Richardson, in
command of the Australian Contingent, strongly recommended
the two correspondents for medals, but the rigid rules of the
War Office would not recognise the services of a non-combatant.
The first action in which he participated in South Africa
unfortunately proved to be the last in which he was to engage.
Mr. Lambie was married, but leaves no children.


Photo by T. Humphrey & Co.
Mr. W. J. Lambie.


Sergeant Neil Grant
First Contingent—Mounted Infantry Unit.
Killed at Rensburg, 10th February, 1900.
NEIL GRANT was a prominent member
of the Victorian Mounted Rifles (K Company), and was
well known in Ballarat, not only as a soldier, but also in
connection with his business as an auctioneer. He was
one of the best built and most efficient members of his
company, which he joined in December, 1888. Before
leaving Ballarat Sergeant Grant remarked to several that
he would either get shot or come back with the Victoria
Cross. He was 45 years of age, and leaves a widow and
family of eight children.


Photo by Richards & Co., Ballarat.
Sergeant Neil Grant.


Corporal Alexander Ro ss
First Contingent—Mounted Infantry Unit.
Born 25th August, 1879.
Killed at Rensburg on 12th February, 1900.
ALEX. ROSS joined the Militia as a member of
the 4th Battalion Infantry Brigade on 31st January, 1898,
and was promoted to Corporal on 21st July, 1899. The officers
of the Company speak in high terms of his soldierly qualities,
and looked on him as a man likely to rise rapidly in the military
profession. He was 5 feet 9 inches in height, and of splendid
physique, a good rifle shot, and as quiet and unassuming as he
was brave and generous, and was a general favourite with
officers and men of the Battalion. Corporal Ross was a born
soldier, and his whole heart was in military matters.
When volunteers were called for the First Contingent he was
one of the first to offer his services, and so bent was he on going
that no inducement could prevent him. In the battle at Rens-
burg, on the 12th February, 1900, he was killed whilst gallantly
defending a position against overwhelming numbers. He was
shot through the chest, and died shortly after. Major Eddy and
Lieutenant Roberts also fell in the same action. When the
news of his death reached Castlemaine a general gloom was over
the town; flags were flying half-mast, and the stern realities of
war were brought home for the first time to Castlemaine people.
A letter received by his father from his comrades shows that he
was deeply mourned by the whole Contingent, and goes on to say:
“Our boys defended the position bravely, and by their resolute
stand under a perfect hail of shells and bullets, succeeded in
saving the Wiltshire Regiment from being cut to pieces.’’
Colonel Hoad also sent his father a kind letter of appreciation
and sympathy.
He was a son of Mr. Donald Ross, farmer, near Winter’s
Flat, Castlemaine.


Photo by T. Humphrey & Co,
Corporal Alex. Ross.


Private Arthur Edwin Coulson
First Contingent—Mounted Infantry Unit.
Born 16th January, 1877.
Died of Enteric Fever, at Naauwpoort,
24th February, 1900.
pRIVATE A. E. COULSON had served two years with
the A. Company Victorian Mounted Rifles when he
volunteered for active service.
He was for some weeks engaged in scouting duties around
Enselin, and acquitted himself well. Was afterwards trans-
ferred to the Colesberg district. He fell a victim to enteric
fever, and died in the hospital at De Aar after an illness of
nine days, and his was the first death from disease in the
Regiment. He was a valued member of Capt. McLeish’s
Company.
Colonel Hoad, in a letter to his father, speaks highly of
his good qualities as a soldier, and greatly regretted his
death, and all his comrades in the V.M.R. felt his loss
keenly. He was accorded a military funeral—volleys being
fired over his grave—thus receiving the last tribute of a
brave soldier.
He was the eldest son of Mr. Coulson, of the firm of
Coulson, Hay & Co., Merchants, Flinders Street, Melbourne.


Photo by A. Marks & CoCarlton.
Private A. E. Coulson.


Private Tbomas Stock
First Contingent—Mounted Infantry Unit.
Killed at Rensburg,
10th February, 1900.
pRIVATE T. STOCK was a member of the Casterton
Detachment, Victorian Mounted Rifles (H Company),
and had served two and a half years when he, with his
brother, Private Duncan Stock, volunteered for active
service in South Africa. He was 23 years of age, a
splendid specimen of manhood, and an expert horseman.
He had nothing to gain by going to the war, but with a
natural enthusiasm and patriotic fervour he offered his
services for Queen and Empire, in whose cause he
fought and fell.
The Old Boys of the Caulfield Grammar School, where
he was educated, are erecting a tablet to his memory in
the dining-hall. His fellow-townsmen are also taking
steps to erect a memorial of him.


Photo by Falk.
Private T. Stock.


Private Charles Edwin Williams
First Contingent—Mounted Infantry Unit.
Born at Nalinga, 2nd March, 1879.
Killed at Rensburg, 12th February, 1900.
PRIVATE CHAS. E. WILLIAMS joined the Victorian
Mounted Rifles in 1895. On the outbreak of the war
he was one of the first in h's district to offer his services
for Queen and Country.
He was a general favourite among his many comrades of
the Victorian Mounted Rifles (E Company), who have since
presented his mother with an enlarged photograph of him.
His sterling qualities were also highly appreciated by the
public of his district, who have responded liberally to place
a memorial to his memory in Violet Town.
That he was esteemed by his officers in South Africa, the
following extract from a letter to his mother from Captain
McLeish will show: —“ ... It will no doubt be some
small consolation to jou to know that he conducted himself
with the greatest bravery and died with his face to the foe.
Personally, I regret his death, as he was smart and zealous
in the execution of his duty.” A similar letter was also
received from Colonel Hoad.


Photo by Vanderwyde.
Private C. E. Williams.


Private Albert Herbert Willson
First Contingent—Mounted Infantry Unit.
Killed at Rensburg, 10th February, 1900.
pRIVATE A. H. WILLSON joined the Victorian
Mounted Rifles only a few weeks prior to his departure
for South Africa, and was one of the first to volunteer for
active service. He was 23 years of age.
Captain Borthwick, Officer Commanding C Company First
Battalion Victorian Mounted Rifles, states he was a smart,
cheerful, gentlemanly lad, a good horseman and rifle shot.
Letters received from his Commanding Officers show that
he fell as a brave man and a good soldier, with his face to
to the foe, worthy of the best traditions of our race, during
an attack in force by the Boers, at Hobkirk’s Farm, near
Rensburg. He was struck by a ball in the eye, and died
instantaneously, without pain. His death was deplored by
everyone in the regiment.


Photo by Talma
Private A. H. Willson.


T’hZ ETCHINCiJ U.SED IN THIS PRODUCTION
EXECUTED BY PaTTER-SON, vSHUCiCi YM CO-
-2>56 Elizabeth street, Melbourne. . .
Reduced Facsimile of THE QUEEN'S CHOCOLATE BOX,
received by the Late Private A. H. Willson.




