

In Memento
OF
THE LATE LIEUTENANT FRANK M. COFFEE




MEMO.
The letters of my late son, Lieut. Frank M.
Coffee, written en route and in the firing line at
the Dardanelles, were so interesting that I forwarded
typewritten copies to many friends in Australia,
America and Canada, the replies received being so
appreciative and eulogistic that it occurred to me
it would be a fitting and graceful act to perpetuate
his memory by their reproduction. It was also
pointed out to me that the deeds of a soldier will
ever live, and that death in action is a noble and
glorious one.
Consequently I decided, <n modesty, to issue
this little memento, a copy of which I forward for
your acceptance.
Yours sincerely,
FRANK COFFEE.
Sydney, Australia,
April J2th, 1916.




In Alcmcnto.


' . •
, | * /
;./*" "■>'
:
- - ■ BEBB M
Late Lieutenant Frank M. Coffee.


In Memento
OF
THE LATE LIEUTENANT FRANK M. COFFEE,
OF THE 24TH BATTALION. AUSTRALIAN IMPERIAL FORCES.
WHO WAS KILLED IN ACTION AT ANZAC. IN THE DARDANELLES.
NOVEMBER 18TH, 1915
Being a Series of Letters, written to his Relatives and others,
depicting the life of a Soldier in the firing line,
TOGETHER WITH
Tributes to his Soldierly career, his popularity amongst his men, and his conduct under
fire, by his Commanding and brother Officers; also Eulogies from his former
Teachers and Comrades on the Press.
BATSON & CO. LTD.. PRINTERS, SYDNEY, AUSTRALIA.


Yet —think of this! —
Yea, rather think on this! —
He died as few men get the chance to die —
Fighting to save a world's morality,
He died the noblest death a man may die,
Fighting for God, and Right, and Liberty—
And such a death is immortality.


In Memento.
/ | HE late FRANK M. COFFEE was born at
"Carmen," Mowbray Road, Willoughby (now
Chatswood), on April 11th, 1887. His first
tuition was received at the hands of a governess, In
1895 the family removed to Wahroonga, where he
attended the private school of Miss Matthews. Later
on he was a pupil of St. Stanilaus' College, Bathurst
(from 1897 to 1899). From 1899 to 1902 he was a
pupil at St. Ignatius' College. Rivermew, Sydney,
from which institution at the age of 15 he passed his
Matriculation Examination at the Sydney University
in 1902, obtaining honors in English, French, Latin,
and Greek. Referring to his career at St. Ignatius'
College, the Rector (Rev. Thos, Gartlan, S.J.), states
that Frank was very successful right through his col-
lege course, gaining first prizes in Latin, French, and
Algebra, and further mentions that he was distin-
guished for his unvarying cheerfulness and gentleman-
ly conduct, and was a prime favorite with his masters
and schoolfellows.
In 1902 he left Australia for Lexington, Kentucky,
to study engineering, where he remained for a couple
of years. Later on he returned to Australia, via Ire-
land, England, and the Continent, through which
countries he travelled for some months, reaching Aus-
tralia by the Orient steamer.
Returning to America in 1906 he entered Stanford
University, California, for a time, and then selected
Journalism as a profession in Vancouver, B.C. His
sojourn there is best described by an extract from the
Vancouver "World," appearing in this Memento.
Upon returning to Australia in 1914 he obtained a
position on the Melbourne staff of the Sydney " Sun,"
and later was connected with the Melbourne "Age."
He enlisted in Melbourne as a private in January,
1915, went into camp at Broadmeadows, Victoria, and
by study and close application to his duty he was suc-
cessfully promoted to the ranks of Corporal, Sergeant,
and subsequently to that of 2nd Lieutenant, which
rank he held when he gave up his life for his country
on the heights of Gallipoli on November 18th, 1915,
Tributes to his soldierly career, to his popularity
amongst his men, and his conduct under fire, are
given in the accompanying letters from his Command-
ing and brother officers ; also eulogies from his former
teachers, and his comrades on the Press.


" : r - Aged 12
"
Aged 7
Aged 15.
Student at St. Ignatius' College, Riverview.


LETTERS FROM LIEUT. FRANK M. COFFEE,
WHILE ON ACTIVE SERVICE, TO HIS RELATIVES AND OTHERS.
T.S.S. Demosthenes
Near Fremantle, Indian Ocean,
July 22nd, 19 15.
Dear Pater, —
I hope this finds everyone at home in better condi-
tion than myself. Me, I am weak; having neither
stomach nor anything left after a terrible siege of
mal de mer. We struck a heavy gale one day out
from Melbourne, and until that time I had been con-
gratulating myself that this would be one trip when
seasickness and I would be strangers. But alas! head
winds, big seas and too much confidence; and
now !
Well, we're 48 hours late and still bucking a gale.
The second night out from Melbourne one of the
men died of meningitis —a young chap named Hunt.
He was buried at sea at 8 p.m., Sunday night. Only
a howling gale, the body wrapped in a Union Jack, a
firing party of 13, Capt. Devine, the R.C. ship s chap-
lain, read the Burial Service, then a volley followed,
and overboard with the remains. He had a brother
in the same unit, and besides his officer, firing party
and chaplain, the brother was the only spectator. He
cried his heart out. It was a bad omen, but so far
nothing further has happened. One of my men is
down with pneumonia and will have to be left at Fre-
mantle.
It has been too rough for holding any parades yet,
but we shall commence them after leaving Fremantle.
Father Tighe, S.J., introduced himself the first dav
out. Pie appears to be a genial Irishman, but seasick-
ness has claimed him, also Fathers Devine, Close and
Campbell.
Father Devine is ship's chaplain and censor of
onr mail. He has been seasick too.
Colonel Howland, the commanding- officer, comes
from Mount Gambier. He served through the Boer
War; but whether he goes to the front with us I can-
not say. He is very nice to us all and puts on no side.
I hope my wireless message was received alright.
There was some trouble in getting it away, but finally
it went.
I am enclosing some snapshots I took in camp be-
fore we left. You will observe that the Kodak Leo
and Jack gave me works well.
Owing to our lateness we shall only remain in port
to-morrow half a day; so I won t get ashore. As
ever,
FRANK.
Heliopolis Base Camp,
Cairo, Egypt, Aug. 25, 1915.
Dear Pater, —
I cabled you, on arrival at Suez, a week-end mes-
sage which I trust you received within two days at
latest. Since then we have been kept pretty busy get-
ting down to business, and at present we are engaged
in trying to instil into the minds of the men as much
military knowledge as possible; and, I might add, in-
cidentally, that Mr. Finlay and myself are trying to
3l u iHeuumtn <s==^


f"* - '
r,- : }
A '
:
As a Cadet in Kentucky State University. Aged 17


assimilate some knowledge for ourselves. But details
I am, of course, unable to discuss.
Suez, the native town, is curious to strange eyes,
but on the whole it is very interesting. W hat the
population is I don t know. So far as I could learn
the natives live so gregariously that anything ap-
proaching an accurate census is impossible.
Cairo is a multiple of Suez, if I may use the term,
and a brief description of this city will suffice for both.
In this letter, however, I must on account of time limit
myself to a description of later incidents of the trip
here.
When we disembarked at I had charge of the
disinfection squad. All men on arriving in Egypt are
stripped, and then their entire kits are passed through
a sulphur saturated air at great heat, thus killing any
parasites that may have lodged in them. It is done
with remarkable speed, and delays disembarkation very
little.
On the train to Cairo the men were besieged by
natives—a degenerate mob —for "baksheesh," which
in many cases they gave. At every stop they bought
melons, soft drinks —anything at all. One made the
mistake of buying a native liquor, two mouthfuls of
which sent him off his head, and he had to be watched.
On the whole, they are a fine lot, but they seemed
to think warnings against having anything to do with
drink peddlars are "rot." They find, however, that
active service discipline is severe.
By God! but it makes one proud to see the wounded.
Game? "Game" is inadequate to convey a correct
impression of their conduct. In one hospital ward are
three men, blinded for life. One afternoon two got
on the third's bed, and the trio sang "Three Blind
Mice," then yelled "Are we down-hearted? No!"
We are kept waiting, and almost we are ashamed
to be here in comfort while such men are fighting.
However, our turn must come soon.
Archdeacon Collick, of West Australia, who came
over in the boat with us, is visiting wounded in hos-
pitals. He is working himself to death almost, and
is now sick. Father Tighe, S.J., is also ill, in the same
hospital —No. I General Hospital, Heliopolis. Poor
old chap! He is a saint, but I don't think he is very
strong at all.
1 am enclosing some snapshots taken on the voyage
and*' just before we left. For the present good-bye
and' good luck. Love to all.
b FRANK.
T.S.S. Demosthenes,
Red Sea, Aug. n, I9 X -
Dear Pater, —
As expected, Mr. McNulty met me on arrival at
Fremantle, despite a light drizzle, which proved the
final flurry of eight days' bad weather ; and when the
boat left the harbour was again in evidence. From
that day until now we have had clear skies; but the
trade winds for the most part gave us a steady, un-
compromising gale to buck. In all my experience I
have never felt worse than on this trip. I have been
either sea-sick, bilious, or feeling as limp as a rag
all the way; but now at last am feeling fit again.
The transport went alongside the dock at Fremantle,
and I was placed in charge of the guard to prevent
men getting ashore. It was a most unlovely job.
Women, men, and boys crowded down the wharf to
give fruit, cigarettes, etc., to the men. These were
passed aboard in buckets attached to ropes; and it
was not for some time I suddenly dropped to the fact
that a laver of oranges on top concealed bottles of
beer and whisky. I had just stopped one woman to
examine a bucket and found three bottles of beer in
it. I sent it back. The manner in which she cursed
me, and was assisted by other she-males, was a reve-
lation. Their tricks to get whisky were a revelation,


4gg*
• ' h, '
Group of Officers of the Seventh Reinforcements, A.1.F., on S.S. Demosthenes. Photo, by H. Balcliin, Purser.
Lieut. Coffee, standing, extreme right, second row.
-3Jrt JHeumtio


and the day culminated in one drunken man jumping
overboard to swim ashore. He was rescued by one
of the guard, Pte. Carroll, who jumped in after him
with all his clothes on, and who handed him out more
dead than alive. Carroll was promoted to corporal
for his work.
Mr. McNulty, when I was relieved for an hour, took
myself and Captain Montgomery and his brother to
the Travellers' Club. The Captain and myself had
great times with Father Devine, ship s chaplain,
who is a fine Irishman. Father Tighe, S.J., is the
saint among eleven chaplains, while Archdeacon Col-
lick, Anglican, of Perth, is the most popular with
officers and men. He is a man in a million, and
practically lives with the men, who swear by him.
Formerly he was on the goldfields at Coolgardie, Kal-
goorlie, and Boulder, West Australia.
The "Orsova" arrived at Fremantle a day before
us, and stayed on two hours. We stayed four hours.
One of our men died a week out from Australia,
Private Boulton. He was buried at sea. Another is
very bad in hospital —one of my best—but he will
pull through O.K.
As the boat left Fremantle I took a "snap of
Mr. McNulty and Dr. Montgomery, which I shall
have developed in Cairo and sent on. I am mailing a
group taken by the purser of the officers and the men
at church parade about at the equator. He could only
give us one each, but will send more from England.
For three weeks we have had no news of any kind.
The war might be going against us for all we know.
We passed a Holland steamer in the Gulf of Aden.
She was about 8,000 tons, and on both sides had a
huge Holland flag painted and her nationality printed
as a protection against German submarines. It was
queer looking. One night we passed the P. and O.
"Moldavia," just as we were going down to mess.
She was a beautiful sight with all her lights lit. her
black hull silhouetted against the purple fading haze
of dusk. Those binoculars are proving invaluable.
In three days we arrive at Suez, and already deck-
lights are being darkened, because the wily I urk may
take some pot shots, although I fancy the danger is
almost nil.
I have applied to be put in charge of the guard as
we go through the canal.
For the present I must close, with love to all.
As ever,
FRANK.
Allan Line, R.M.S. lonian,
Off Cyprus, Sept. n, 1915*
Dear Pater, —
Four nights since we got orders to be ready to
mov<i I neglected cabling you when I was off for
the front, because | thought it would only give you
all an opportunity to worry whether 1 would get bit;
while, if I merely write, you will receive the letter a
month hence, and by that time we will either have
forced the Dardanelles' or still be going strong, and
I may be 0.K., wounded, or dead. And somehow I
don't expect to be on the "killed ' list. The fighting
has been very severe lately, the Australians and New
Zealanders never failing to do the "impossible."
We have aboard this transport an officer who is
returning to the front after escorting some Turkish
officer prisoners to Egypt. He says they are very
bitter against the Germans. These Turks are fine men,
cave in within a month; but first they will be re-
venged on the Germans. These Turks are fine men,
brave as lions. Recently 300 were quite completely
surrounded, and called on to surrender, but they
fought on until only twelve were left, all wounded.


They commit no atrocities except where there are Ger-
man N.C.O.'s in charge of them.
I am keeping a sort of diary, of which I shall here
copy as much as I have entered up to now. When
each book is complete I shall mail it back to you;
but as we don't know when a mail may go I shall, as
I write, include transcriptions from time to time. I
might mention that I started to keep a diary the day
I left Alexandria, to which point we had come by
special train from Cairo. Well, here's for the diary:
Sept. 9 —6.30 p.m. —Dusk is falling as we pass to
the Alexandria breakwater. In the transport and
hospital ship-crowded harbours we felt only a strong
breeze; but here, turning north, we saw white-capped
swells and know we are in for a bad blow. All ports
are darkened and no lights shown. To port a small
warship wallows badly, evidently a picket boat. We
have 1,600 men on board, including Australians, New
Zealanders, and Englishmen. At the last moment two
Australians tried to sneak aboard to get to the front.
They are very keen, these Australians, and physically
very greatly superior to the Imperials. A swell yacht
packed with naval officers and girls—pretty girls! —-
keeps pace to this point, but now they feel the swell
and are turning back to harbour. The girls have just
yelled "Are we downhearted?" It came so clearly
down the breeze and sounded very cheery. The echo-
ing roared "No!" of the men must have jarred the
breakwater. It was a pretty picture. They were still
waving when the dusk swallowed them. Wonder
when we will see pretty girls again!
Mr. Finley and myself are proceeding "unat-
tached." We join the Sixth Brigade at Suvla or
Anafarta.
8.45 p.m.—Up at 5 a.m. to-day, so will turn in.
Forty officers at mess, including naval padres, aviators
and Kitchener's army men. The saloon felt very hot
with all ports closed to-night and shrouded. We have
been ordered to have all lifebelts with us at all times
011 the trip. Well, mine's ready.
Sept. 10 —11.30 a.m. —Cool sleep last night. At 9
a.m. had parade of men with lifebelts. Very few OJ
them sea-sick, although badly crowded. Half an houi
ago we passed over the spot where the Royal Edward
was submarined. One officer aboard, aS. Wales Bor-
derer, was saved from the Royal Edward. He was
five hours in the water, being picked up by a French
destroyer. The French officers did everything tor
him—brandy, rubbing, and everything. He was just
beginning to feel O.K. again when a British cruiser
sent an officer to see him.
The Naval Johnny wore a monocle, and this was
his greeting to a man just rescued: "Haw! Have
you a roll of those who were saved? Bai Jove!
What! You haven't? How extraordinary! Good-
day, sir!" Not a word of sympathy, but the patient
nearly laughed himself sick. Picture a man clothed
in a lifebelt calling the roll of those afloat!
Sept. 11 — 10 a.m. —Perfect day, clear sky, and cool,
northerly breeze. Five miles to starboard the peaks
of Crete rise in a purple haze —some to i,s°° feet,
with cloud-rings girdling their middles. Submarine
guard posted. Looking around on this beautiful sea
the idea of danger seems a joke.
Just heard of the death of Col. Linton, brigadier
of the Sixth Infantry Brigade. He was on one of
the transports which took the brigade to Lemnos.
Ten miles from shore an Austrian submarine torpe-
doed her. Seventy men jumped overboard and were
drowned. There were 2,000 aboard altogether. The
captain succeeded in beaching the transport, but Col.
Linton died of exposure. Col. Watson, of Sydney,
C.O. of our Battalion, 24th, has now been given the
brigade. He will probably be made a brigadier-
general. Poor old Linton recommended me for my
commission. He was very proud of the Sixth, which


aKttkmm'
S~ '*: P ' >
- -VM
As a Student at Stanford University, California.


is considered the best yet sent from the Antipodes,
and died without seeing action. "Sudden death and
quick promotion" with a vengeance.
An Egyptian army officer throws a new light on the
rioting of the Australians in Cairo. "We should have
been certain." he says, "to have had trouble with the
natives but for these riots, but just when they were
working their courage up your men got loose and put
the fear of God into them permanently. It is the best
thing that has yet happened to secure our control of
Egypt." I can well understand it. A more disgust-
ingly degenerate race than the Egyptians I have never
vet seen. Chinamen are now gentlemen!
So much for the diary up to date.
I was very sorry not to have received any mails
since leaving Australia, but I hope my letters went out
there all right. Give the whole family my best love,
and let them know I will do my duty.
FRANK.
Allan Line, R.M.S. "lonian,"
Lemnos Island, Sept. 13. 1915.
Dear Mill and Dan, —
This belated letter is written twelve hours after ar-
rival in Mudros Bay, Island of Lemnos, 40 miles
(about) from the peninsula. The campaign here, by
the way, has developed into the largest in history, of
such a nature; and until this war of Armageddon the
Empire never in history has had such a large overseas
force engaged. Approximately how many British and
French troops are fighting I can not divulge, owing
to the censorship; but when we finally get through
to the sea of Marmora I suppose the world will be
allowed to learn a little of the magnitude of our op-
erations.
And it is great to think that the Australians and one
English division —composed of the flower of the Bri-
tish army, men who fought from Mons to Marne and
back to Ypres—will be entitled to the lion's share of
the credit at the end. The New Zealanders have
fought steadily and bravely; but the dash, snap and
tenacity of our boys has placed them in a class by
themselves. Time and again they have been ordered
to do the impossible; never yet have they failed; and
I doubt if there is a British officer who would not be
proud to wear "Australia at the bottom of his stars
of rank. All hell could not shift our men from their
positions. For months they hung on by their teeth
against odds of 5 to 1, and gained ground bit by bit.
The Eighth Light Horse were put in the trenches
soon after their arrival. The order came to charge.
With a yell they started; but not a man got beyond
twenty-five yards from his trench. Machine guns cut
them down like a scythe; and forty-five out of the
whole regiment answered the next roll call, but those
forty-five held their line against all counter attacks.
That is the worst we have had yet; but it is typical
of what they will do.
An officer of the Fourth L. H. tells this story of
a fight of a few weeks ago: Our trench was nine feet
deep, with a high sand-bag parapet. When the Turks
charged they came on in eight or ten lines. One of
my men in order to fire more freely, climbed to a
seat on top of the parapet, and as they came on he
blazed away like a machine gun. All the time he kept
talking to himself along these lines, 'Come on, you
niggers ! Here's another ! Get yer ! Got 'im ! an'
'im ! Oh, you ——- —!" As they neared the trench
the Turks yelled, "Allah ! Allah ! Allah ! ' ' That s
right!" yelled the bird on the parapet, "bring him along
too, to 'ave a taste of us!" (Slightly expurgated).
At Quinn's Post a shell landed on a parapet just
after the morning rum ration had been issued. It took
twenty minutes to dig one man out of the mess ; but


when they did get him out all right the first thing he
said was: "Who the h —l stole my ration? Damn
them, they upset my bottle!" But not a word about
the shell! All he cared was that it had spilt his rum
for him. Can you beat men like that.' It is quite true
that they lack in discipline; but it is a question whe-
ther or not their pure audacity has not more than com-
pensated for that disadvantage.
Our brigade, the Sixth, has already earned credit,
although but a short time here. . . On our arrival
yesterday the first steamer we saw looming up in the
rapidly-growing dusk was the "Aquitania." She has
been turned into a hospital ship, and will carry 4,000
wounded, making the trip to England in six days.
Painted white, with a broad green band and three Ge-
neva crosses in red on her hull, and four light yellow
funnels, she is a thing of wonderful grace and beauty.
One wouldn't, unless one saw it, credit that naval archi-
tecture could have evolved such grace. In fact, her
very gracefulness creates a false impression of her
height and length.
Submarines are active here, as you know, but the
navy people are taking care of them. You have prob-
ably heard that the transport that brought our bat-
talion, the Twenty-fourth, from Alexandria, was tor-
pedoed twelve miles from here, but reached Mudros
with a slight list in safety. We saw her as she lay
near us when we arrived.
This navy of ours is hard to beat! They built a
dummy battleship, on which they put a few men for
appearance sake. The Germans bit like hayseeds and
sent five torpedoes into her before she sank, when her
"turrets," "funnels" and "big guns" floated away!
The enemy are very short of torpedoes, so no doubt
they failed to enjoy the joke. Their submarines can
get out of the Dardanelles, but they never get back
in again.
Out in Australia you know more of the situation on
the peninsula than we do. All one may know of is
his own immediate front, while you have the advan-
tage of perspective.
I hear that doctors are needed in France, but so far
as I could see they have too many in Egypt. What
they need here is nurses.
Well, this has been a rather spasmodic and uninter-
esting note, but the best I can do —there is so little
news.
Expect to be properly in action before many hours
now. I go in cpiite sure I'll come out O.K. But, in
case mv luck doesn't hold out, good-bye, good luck and
bless you all.
As ever,
FRANK.
In a Dug-Out, "White's Gully,"
Gallipoli Peninsula, Sept. 17, 19 : 5-
Dear Pater and All, —
fust as I started writing this an Indian battery close
by opened up for the usual noonday exchange of cour-
tesies with our friends, the enemy. Now and again
the deeper whizzing boom of a big howitzer breaks
into the field guns, cracking monologue and jars the
ground. Occasionally the staccato chatter of a maxim
in the trenches informs us that in the firing-line some
Turk grew too bold, but the chances are he is still
alive. And constantly, so steadily that one barely no-
tices it, so used to it are we, one hears the "spat-spat
of rifles: occasionally breaking into a sharp fusilade,
to inform the Turks our men are awake. At odd mo-
ments there is a small, sharp, high whine of a stray
bullet; possibly fired at random. These strays some-
times explode with a "crack' as the heated bullet
strikes a strata of cold air and scatters filaments of
hot lead. Verv rarelv one lands among the dug-outs.


But in the heart of the gully, where we, officers
and men alike, live, move and have our being", men go
about their petty duties quite safely. Only in the early
morning or late evening—just before dusk —do we
hear the whine, screech and crash of shrapnel-shell,
searching alternately for us and any one on the beach
ioo yards below us.
Only last night a shrapnel shell fired from the Gaba
Tepe—all those which reach us are fired from that
point —caught an Indian transport worker. The
stretcher-bearers were out like a shot, and got him
away before the next one came. The Sikhs are smart.
It is curious for us to see these shells bursting al-
ternately above and below our position and always
missing us. They know we are here, but somehow
they don't seem to be able to get the correct angle.
It gives one an odd detached attitude towards it all;
and somehow, although we have been here only 48
hours, I feel as though it were the most ordinary thing
in the world, this fighting.
It is now 12.20 p.m. and at 4 p.m. I am going up to
the machine guns to observe. To-morrow at 8 a.m. I
take my platoon into action.
To our right and front also the Turks are also ly-
ing—mining, sapping, firing, bombing all the time.
How long will it last? Very early, we think, we shall
make them give up. We "have their nerves," and
they know it. They won't face the steel when the
Australians wield it; but to Kitchener's men they stand
adamant. Verily we are proud, with good reason, of
the Australian Imperial Forces.
Yesterday morning a man came down the track from
the trenches. He was going to the beach because his
thumb was shot away, but he smoked quite uncon-
cernedly. ''Been in action?" one man asked as he
passed. "No; I was in the trenches and a sniper got
me!" So, grinning cheerfully, he passed.
September 18, 1915. —The beginning of this letter
was interrupted yesterday by my being summoned be-
fore the officer commanding my company. Later m
the afternoon I went all long the firing line with tire
officer in charge of the machine guns; it was an in-
teresting tour —but save for occasional grenades and
some rifle sniping everything was quiet. Now and them
in the trenches you may see protruding the feet of
some long-dead and decaying Turk; the odor thereof
strongly reminding one of bone-dust manure.
Machine guns are placed to command all points at
which the enemy are likely to concentrate to attack
us. They only fire when it is absolutely necessary.
I was going to tell you of what occurred since I
wrote Mil. and D. from Lemnos Island on September
14. On the evening of the 15th we were transferred
from the transport to a small fast packet steamer which
conveyed us 57 miles to close in-shore at Anzac Bay,
just north of Gaba Tepe.
The four-day old moon had just sunk below the
horizon when the packet stopped. Not a light showed
from us on the packet as we went aboard a naval tujg
and lighter and were towed ashore.
The land looming up black against the clear, starry
sky, was dotted here and there with lights from dug-
out on the hills, and looked for all the world like
Kirribilli Point (Sydney). There was only the steady
patter of rifles to remind us that we were at last in the
war zone. Now and then a stray bullet whipped the
water and ricocheted off, or sank with a sharp hiss.
We landed at a small pier built by our men and them
had a long mile to climb to Shrapnel Gullv, our packs
(which weighed 60 pounds when filled) feeling like 100
pounds, when we finally reached our destination!.
Shrapnel Gully is so named because the Turks are ablle
to search it from their positions.
On the morning of the 16th we were up at 5.30 a.mi.
Mr. Elsbury, of the Eighth Battalion, who had his dugy
out well fixed up, gave me a rum egg-nog the fir sit


thing. It tasted like nectar. We had real bacon and
eggs for breakfast, which was just finished when two
German aeroplanes came flying over our position at an
altitude of about 5,000 feet. One of ours rose soon
after theirs and they made oft", heading back east. All
three had just disappeared when a third German in a
monoplane, which was not a Taube, came flying over.
With my glasses I clearly saw two black iron crosses
painted 011 the wings of his machine. He dropped
four bombs on the side of the Gully, but did no harm.
Then he made off, while our guns opened on him
with shrapnel. The fleecy clouds in his wake from
bursting shells and he going for all his engine could
do, made a pretty picture.
After that entertainment I reported at brigade head-
quarters and was sent 011 to the Twenty-fourth Batta-
lion to which Mr. Finlay and myself are now attached.
The remainder of the day was spent in getting ac-
quainted with our surroundings. We watched the re-
gular evening shelling of the beach with great inter-
est. The gun which does this work is believed to
have accounted for nearly a battalion in odd daily lots
of from one to forty casualties. It is a "75." believed
to have been captured from the Servians by the Aus-
trians and lent to the Turks. It has been nicknamed
"Beachy Bill" by the men and cannot yet be located,
though probably it will be. destroyed ere you receive
this. "Beachy Bill" fires morning and night with dev-
ilish accuracy and regularity, and the bursts of his
shells are beautifully timed.
The Turks have several "75" guns, and they do
more or less shooting with them ; but never at night
when their flashes could be seen and their positions
located. Two shells burst here this morning, one do-
ing no damage, and the other burying a trio of officers,
who. however, were dug out unharmed, though some-
what shaken. Save for those two shells our sector
has very quiet so far to-dav; but in about an hour
the enemy's guns are expected to speak again, and to-
night will be made lively with bombs.
Most of the real fighting occurs at night, about 7
to 9 p.m. or 4.30 to 6 a.m. Were that not so I would
not be lying on a shelf in a fire trench writing this
letter.
We had a treat for lunch to-day—"stewed beef and
onions!" Our usual three meals are: Sliced bacon,
tea and "dog biscuits;" boiled rice, tea dog biscuits;
dog biscuits, jam, bully beef and tea. So that real
meat is a luxury ; so are onions."
When you all fare well at Sunday dinner, thank the
Lord you are not in Gallipoli, where dog biscuits are
a "piece de resistance."
I have received since my arrival here a letter from
pater dated July 16 and one date July 31, a short
note. Mrs. Gourlay wrote a second letter on July 31.
It is strange no letters come; but possibly I'll get them
yet.
How are you all? I am quite fit and hope to re-
main so. It is pleasant to be here and hear the "boom,
whirr-rr-crash !" of our trench mortars and listen to
the popping of our rifles or the spat of the Turk bul-
lets on the sand-bags; but not so nice when it is the
"whizz-crash !" of "75" shells that sends us flying to
cover.
If you like, mail me some Virginia cigarettes, well
wrapped up. Reading matter is as hard to get as to-
bacco. Socks would be appreciated, also well wrapped
U P-
By the way, this position is known as "Piccadilly
Circus." To the left is the "Chess Board. ' To the
right "Lone Pine," "Brown's Drift," "Scott's Post,
etc.
Give my love to Mater, Auntie and all. For the
present, with love,
1 FRANK,
August 25.


In a Dug-out, Gallipoli.
September 21, 1915.
Dear Pater, —
Since I penned the last letter, which was written
under a bombardment of our position, we have been
drawn back into our resting gully; and I might add
that while this place seemed lively enough after we
arrived here, in comparison with the real firing line
it is Paradise. To be sure, we are not entirely safe
anywhere on the Peninsula, and one never knows when
one's turn will come.
For example: Yesterday morning our battalion was
relieved after forty-eight hours' continuous work, and
myself and another officer (a Lieutenant McElroy, of
Melbourne) were for twenty-four hours in charge of
the Reserves. We spent a quiet day and night and
had a fine sleep. When we were relieved this morning
and started marching our men here the Turks must
have observed us, or guessed that something was be-
ing done, and opened a hellish burst of "75" explosive
shells. They hit all round us and never touched a man
for half an hour; and, just as we were properly started,
a man named McCarthy, a private, ten or twenty feet
ahead of me, got a chunk of shrapnel shell about an
inch square in the fleshy part of his thigh. He was a
strapping six-footer, but that brought him down as
would a sledge-hammer. You have no idea how the
concussion of an explosion shakes one up; but, given a
cigarette, he joked like a gentleman. It was the last
shot of their bombardment; but it shows how suddenly
these things happen.
I haven't changed my clothes for five days, and, as
for washing —well, we spare enough of precious wa-
ter to shave with. Still, I have so far escaped the
bete noir of the army —dysentery.
To-night I received a letter from yourself, Auntie
and Dorothy, dated July 14. That was before we left
Seymour, and only makes the mail service more ex-
asperating.
We have no candles here, so 1 am afraid I shall be
unable to reply to Dorothy and Auntie to-night, as the
sun is going down.
I was surprised to-day to find that young George
Gibbs, cousin of Herbert Byrne, is one of the men in
the platoon I command, No. 1 Platoon.
Captain Parkcs interrupted me to say he wanted to
be remembered to you. He is a keen soldier and an
efficient commander who shares all the danger with
his men. He is about 40 now.
Speaking about danger, the man who has been in
action and says he does not fear anything is either a
d liar or a d —— fool. Mr. Tulloch, a Scotch
officer in "C" Company, who always headed our bomb-
ing parties from the "trench —a brave man —has been
sent to hospital to-day because his nerves are shat-
tered. The only saving grace of shell fire is that you
know when you hear an explosion the danger is past.
As platoon commander I have to remain right in
the first line to keep an eye on the men while the shells
are falling; but, believe me, there wasn't a second of
those times I wasn't scared. Every honest officer will
tell you the same. But the curious thing is, you get
the feeling that you've a job to do and if you are to be
put out of action it might just as easily happen there
as anywhere else —so you get, not frightened exactly,
but rather what I might call "indifferent.'
I had to laugh yesterday when we were being
shelled. Our men are quite irrepressible. At the
height of the bombardment a piece of shell flew with
a chirp like a bird —exactly —close to tbe head of one
man. "Catch that bird and cage it! was all he said.
These men are wonderfully keen. God help the
Turks if we get to close quarters soon! Nothing will
stop them, once they start. They are such genuine
sportsmen when they're hit, that no matter how badly


B — ' *«*mm>m m
C% si
ifck *^BHlHi
i
■■HHT .^■§§§1
'. . •' ■ . ' ' V ■■■•'
' ' ' '' ■' " V: ." ",' ■ " { ■
: :
'■ .1-
j| jj
*" ■
JHHHHHB »HHc< MMHf
Ik IB ■ '■•>.
■ K ,
On S.S. Niagara, Victoria, B.C.
1914
On Troopship Demosthenes in Indian Ocean
TWO SNAP,SHOTS.


injured they'll never murmur. I must say it again
I love these Australians; they are the pick of the whole
Dardanelles forces and our worry is not whether they 11
charge, but whether we can stop them when they ve
gained enough ground and further advance might be
unwise.
The night before last the Turks attacked on our
left. They were beaten back, and when we counter-
attacked and took their own trench their casualties
were estimated at 500, while ours totalled five! We
gained fortv yards.
"Forty yards!" I have often heard people sneer at
papers describing it as something fine to advance that
much. Well, if these people had been in the firing-
line three days, with thousands of Turks within 800
yards radius of the loophole, and heaid the smacks
of hundreds of bullets on the sandbags constantly, and
often felt the concussion of bursting shells, and all
that time saw exactly two lurks i,s°° y ar< is aVia )
well, they'd change their tune, I'll wager. Men have
been fighting weeks and then wounded, and say when
they get to hospital that they've, never seen a Turk ex-
cept as prisoners.
We are expecting to be ordered on a general chaige
of the whole line at any time now. In fact, 1 was told
to-day that some of the headquarters staff are offering
50 to 1 that we will be through with this pait of the
enemy in six weeks. There is no doubt that if we had
40,000 Australians here wed have the Narrows in jig
time.
Well, this hasn't been much of a letter, I'll admit;
but real news here is absolutely non-existent. If ten
miles north of us our line advanced 10,000 }aids, we d
not know here for days after you did in Australia.
I suppose Mater is back in Australia. Possibly you
may be in U.S.A. Remember me to Aunt Sarah. 111
write them if I get the chance soon.
I hope your health is better. How are the Kcllys.
Hughes' and everyone?
Love to all, with the best for yourself.
FRANK.
In a Dug-Out,
Gallipoli Peninsula,
September 22, 1915*
Dear Auntie, —
These letters of mine at this stage are necessarily
devoid of interest because of the laws of censorship,
and, what may appear strange, the utter lack of news.
In Australia you have the advantage of perspective,
while here we are at such close quarters and our vision
is naturally concentrated on our immediate front, that
we have little time to devote to consideration of mat-
ters on either flank. It is only when we are out of
the trenches that we have time to try and ascertain
any news of the whole army.
And this "news" consists of 99.95 per cent, rumor.
Occasionally genuine news filters through —such as the
loss of E3—but we only hear it some time after the
outside world has absorbed it from the morning papers.
Generally we hear that at such and such a point our
men have surrounded many thousands of J urks, who
surrendered. In the end it generally is a canard. If,
however, there has been a concerted action on the
whole line, headquarters issues a printed statement of
results and casualties about a week later.
There are many thousands of Turks who are our
prisoners in Egypt; but they have all been captured
in batches of from three up to as many as 2,000; but
generally speaking they come in in small units.
Yesterday afternoon I saw a pretty and inspiring
sight. One of our aeroplanes started to reconnoitre


the Turks' position on Gaba Tepe, south of us here,
where they have guns which cause us a .great deal of
trouble. When I first saw him in the clear blue sky,
he seemed a dragon-fly, about 3' o0 ° f ee f U P- You
could distinctly hear the drone of the engine when he
was still some miles away.
After circling our lines he started off for Gaba
Tepe at about 50 miles an hour. As he headed south
the Turks opened fire on him with shrapnel, which
burst with a white fleecy ball of smoke a good deal
above or below him. Instead of sheering off, he vol-
planed low over their lines and circled the position
twice at 1,000 feet. All the time they rained in shrap-
nel, and on his second tour he actually passed through
the smoke of previous burst. He then rose again and
flew back to report. Apparently he obtained some
good information, because soon after our guns opened
on Gaba Tepe; and last night the enemy refrained
from their usual sunset serenade.
We have a R.C. Padre here, who, despite his name,
is very Irish —Father Rinnebach (?) is the name,
though no one seems to be certain how it is spelled.
We are going into the firing line for another forty-
eight hours' spell in an hour and a half; but, looking
from this dug-out across the indigo water to the Isle
of Imbros, wrapped in an opalescent haze, the sky
clear as crystal —oh, yes, it's war all right. A Taube
just dropped a bomb at the foot of the gully. Don't
think it did any damage, though. But it's gone now
and all is peace again. It's a typical Indian summer
day, such as they have in Kentucky—perfect. Ra-
ther funny, my just waxing eloquent over the quiet
and interrupted by a bomb, though, isn't it? But un-
less a plane is very low, the damage it does it almost
nil. It's only luck if they hit anything; just as we
may —if we were fools like the 1 urks are —waste hun-
dreds of shells and never hit a plane.
Well, the men are getting their kits together for the
firing line, so I must do the same. D. V., I shall be
able to write many more letters, bor the present, with
lots of love for yourself, Dorothy and all.
FRANK.
In a Dug-Out,
September 25, 1915.
Dear Auntie, —
By a curious coincidence your letter of August Bth,
the first so far received from home, was brought to
me in the firing line during a lull 011 the afternoon
of the very day I gave my letter to you to our pastor-
censor, Fr. Deidinich (the correct spelling of the
name) and just when I was wondering whether any
home mail would ever arrive. I had gone off pop at
our quartermaster-sergeant the day before when a bag
of mail arrived with none for me in it; so as soon as
yours came he hurried up to the firing line with it. I
enjoyed it immensely.
From the tone of your letter I gather that Mgr. Cer-
retii (Papal Delegate) enjoyed his dinner at our home
"Iroquois."
I had intended writing to Holly and Dorothy to-
night, but your letter demands first turn in letters.
Thanks for the note paper; it is awfully hard to get
here, and before we left Cairo we were told we could
get anvthing we wanted in the ways of papers and
cigarettes here!
The snapshots of the old-fashioned bush-picnic 1
shall cherish as a reminder of old times.
By the courtesy of Captain Cole, M.D., our regi-
mental doctor, I am writing by about two inches of
candle. It's as rare as note paper here. It burns ter-
ribly quickly too!
Well, we came out of the trenches yesterday after-
noon. About noon the day before the Turks gave us


a terrific two hours' bombardment, but did little harm
for all their shell-fire. _ , „
(New pencil.). Most of their shells were 75 s.
The din was constant, and we all had to hug the
trench walls closely. After they finished that burst,
however, their artillery let us alone for the rest of the
time except for a spasmodic shell every now and then.
Sniping continued all dav, quickening up with the ar-
rival of night. We were glad to get back to our dug-
out and have been sleeping most of the time since.
September 26, Sunday, 6.30 a.m. (The candle went
out). During the day it is too much of a glare to
write letters in my dug-out, as it has no head cover.
We leave for the firing-line in 40 minutes and shad
try and write from there, as from what we can hear
there is a lull. The morning is clear but bitterly cold,
and I can't keep my fingers from shivering. But to
continue. In order to hold as many Turks as possible
in our sector our warships and some land guns opened
a heavy fire 011 their trenches the night before last,
simultaneously with a burst of rifle and machine-gun
fire It took the Turks by surprise at first and it was
some time before their batteries responded. Evidently
thev thought we really intended to attack, because all
their guns opened, and the noise was terrific. \V hat
it will' be like when our warships fire their biggest,
guns in our support I can now imagine. C ur wai
ship shells play havoc with their trenches, and one
cannot help pitving them. This war here is said by
regulars to be just as heavy as in h C)ne gam
of the demonstration was that as the links guns rec
after nightfall their positions—always very hard to lo-
cate —were revealed and have since been htavi >
pounded. . , , . , ~ ,
The weather continues gloriously clear, but cold at
night —bitterly cold—with a strong breeze from the
' How are Lee and Jack doing on the farm? It's too
bad they have so much rain, but I suppose thait by
now they have their crops in all right.
By the way, I've started that Hail Mary! War
works wonder in regeneration ! What! The} aie call-
ing for us to fall in, so I must close. \\ ith lots of
love to all, and hoping you're as well as I am,
FRANK.
From Frank to his little Sister.
In the Firing Line, 5.50 p.m.
September 26, 19 15.
Hello Dorothy, —• .
How are you; and all at home? I have just had a
o-reat surprise here, in the form of a cable from home.
I am enclosing it for you all to have a look at it
because, although it is evidently a reply to my cable
from Suez, from the date on the Greek cable-form it
has been sent from Australia on the 16th of this
month. . , 1
So far the cable and letter from Auntie are the only
two communications I've had from home, which were
written since I left Australia. . ~
Well Dorothy, here we are in Turkey. Cannon
are going off all the time almost, or, if not canmons,
bombs. And you would think all the birds would be
frightened to come here. But no; habit is the stnong-
est^thing in the world. Everywhere, even where oui
firing line is only a few yards from the Turks,, one
sees little birds flying; and in the gullies, where we
have our dug-outs one sees many, many pretty swal
lows flying, looking for a winter testing place / 1
parently these swallows have been in the habit of com-
iim- here to spend the winter; and now that we have
arrived and shell-fire, trenches, and our dug-outs, have
changed the landscape, the poor little things a IPP ea
to be & quite mystified and flv in and out of the tremches


and dug-outs all the time. Only yesterday I saw a
little green and vellow bird, like a canary, hopping
about and pecking for food right between us and the
Turks —a place where we are no more than fifteen
yards from the enemy, and bombing and rifle-fire are
making a staccato racket one would think enough to
scare away every living thing.
We had a great treat for breakfast to-day—boiled
eggs —one each ! But you never realise how good
eggs can taste until you've had to live on bully beef
and hard tack. Sometimes all we have for a meal is
boiled rice and sugar ; but that is very filling.
1 never ate onions before 1 came here, save escha-
lots ; but here we get them every third or fourth day,
and they taste excellently.
Well, Dot, you'd hardly know me if you saw me
now. In spite of cold nights the days are very hot,
and everyone is burnt as brown as a berry. Vou are
lucky to" have lots of water to bathe in in Sydney;
over here we have a canteen which holds id quaits
of water, and that much has to last us for two days.
Yes, girls should be very proud of the Austialian
This part of the world is all steep hills and
gullies, and one soon begins to feel that he could imi-
tate a goat! But when one thinks that about half the
Turkish armv has been trying to drive into the sea fen
the past 4\ months about a quarter, or less than halt
their number in Australians, and have been so severely
handled they seem now afraid to attack, and this is a
land everv foot of which they know intimately, it
seems that "the best soldier in Europe" has met a long
wav more than his match. English regular officers
who fought in Flanders, and have seen the Canadian
troops, about which so much was heard last March,
sav that our men are much better fighters 111 neai 4
everv wav. I met a Church of England chaplain last
night, Capt. Dexter, D.C.M., who has fought here
since April. He says that some of the fighting here
has been more savage than what they had in Flanders.
He is a very brave man, and while he has been in the
thick of the fighting at all times has never yet been
wounded; he is a great friend of Father Doidinich,
chaplain of the 24th Battalion. Some of the things
our men have done here cannot yet be told ; but when
it is allowed to tell of it the world will be amazed.
It staggers the imagination, and only when one sees
the drawn, haggard faces of the men who did these
things, does it seem credible that heroism could achieve
so much.
Well, Dot, paper is scarce, so I must close. Study
hard, be good, and give my love to all.
FRANK.
In the Trenches,
September 28, 1915.
Dear Pater, —
Although I received a letter from Auntie in which
she informed me that you had left for America, I am
presuming that anv of my letters to you will be read
111 Sydney before being forwarded.
One never knows when one may be wounded or
killed out here, so I have taken every opportunity of
writing. Escapes, narrow escapes, are so frequent
that unless actually hit one barely notices danger.
And everything comes so unexpectedly. For instance,
down in the gully where we rest in the habit of con-
sidering ourselves quite safe from shell-fire; but yes-
terday'morning, just as I left the quartermaster's
store to return to my dug-out, a shrapnel shell burst
just above me. I was spattered with about five or ten
bullets and a jagged piece of the shall-case struck
between my feet. The shell burst a shade too high,
and consequently the bullets had lost most of theii
force, so I was quite unharmed. And so it goes.


When my turn comes I shall get it; but Abdul as we
call the Turk —will have to use better aim and time his
shells better. Hope 1 never get it!
So far we have not been attacked in our position,
and I am inclined to think that Enver Pasha will have
to get fresh troops all along the line before the Turks
will face us. They have had a terrible lesson, and
their best —the original troops —simply will not face us,
though they fight quite desperately when we attack.
But already there are signs that fresh troops are
here, and we know this in this way that their old
troops were very careful not to expose themselves,
while during the past few days the lurks opposite us
have now and then stood up to see what our trenches
look like. In nearly every case those who stood up
will never answer another roll-call —our men are
deadly shots.
On the 26th and 27th I had my first practice m
bomb-fighting. On those days I was sent in charge
of my platoon on another section of the firing-line,
where in spots one could almost touch their parapet
with a rifle and bayonet; and actually, in one spot,
both sides are separated only by a line of sandbags !
There is little rifle-fire on this section; we are a bit
too close for that. So bombs are used, thrown by
hand.
These bombs are of various kinds, generally weigh-
ing about two pounds, and are mostly cast-iron globes
filled with a powerful explosive. There is a short fuse
attached which you light from a "slow match or a
cigarette (the latter is surer) just before you throw
it." If they land among close lines of troops they do
terrible havoc. In one case which came under my
notice a bomb killed three men and wounded, seri-
ously, four others.
Most of Abdul's bombs are gun-cotton charged.
Before they land over the parapet one can hear the
hiss of the fuse, though sometimes they deaden that
sound by putting them in small cloth bags. We have
a fairly effective way of localising the explosion, and
as a general rule they do very little damage in pro-
portion to the charge. Alertness is our safeguard,
and where there is a possibility of a bombing duel our
men can not be caught napping.
It is darkening rapidly, so I will close for the pre-
sent.
FRANK.
October i, 1915. To continue: I had just finished
writing the forepart of this and laid down to snatch
an hour's rest when another officer arrived to relieve
me and bringing a hurry-up order for me to return
to headquarters. On my arrival there I found that
I had to make my way through the communication
trenches —which are really a "maze"—down to the bat-
talion. On arrival there I found that I had to pro-
ceed to the beach to take charge of our battalion
fatigue, whose duty it is to unload stores. It involves
night work, but it is much better than the trenches,
in that one may obtain a proper sleep at night, be-
cause here we have none of the steady, weary tension
of the firing line.
The Turks, whether because they are afraid of re-
vealing gun positions or not —I don't quite know —
only use their artillery during daylight, unless, of
course, to repel an attack. So once darkness sets in
we are safe, except for occasional stray bullets. Dur-
ing daylight, however, Abdul sends periodical bursts
of shrapnel along the beach. He has only a few guns
that reach here, and they seldom fire on us unless they
are properly shielded bv bright sunlight —if their gun
positions were shadowed it would mean that the flash
would be readily observed —and their shooting is really
remarkably good. Their high explosives are useless
here; but the beach is always crowded with men,
either going for a swim, or else engaged in some work
or other, and among them shrapnel is effective; hence


1 think this is really more dangerous than the trenches.
From my own dug-out J have a very fine view of
the shores running north and south; and as dawn
breaks and the morning mists slowly lift it is a daily
picture worth remembering.
It is curious how after a short time fighting affects
one's sense of proportion. To sit in an armchair and
read of a destroyer shelling enemy positions .with
enemy shells sending up small water-spouts all round
her, the while the boat is twisting, turning, describing
figure B's and s's and constantly firing, makes ex-
citing news. But just before sundown yesterday,
while I was sitting in my dug-out, I witnessed that
incident just beneath me, about 300 yards off shore,
and it seemed the most natural scene in the world.
How are all my friends? Please remember me to
them all. I suppose Burr Price finds that the war
makes work for him.
I hear Colonel Cox-Taylor is coming to the front
in charge of a divisional ammunition column. He is
a cracking good fellow.
We hear practically nothing of war or other news
here, Dame Rumour proving our constant and un-
reliable attendant.
lam so far quite fit and well. The hill climbing
proves a very severe test every day. Love to all.
FRANK.
P.S.—Field glasses invaluable. Piece of shell
smashed one of the eve-pieces, but they are still very
useful. Thanks for them.
Gallipoli, Oct. 17th, 1915.
Dear Auntie, —
Many thanks for your letter of Aug. 30th, and the
enclosed notepaper, the last being so scarce that I
believe we would pay £lO for a full packet of paper
and envelopes—but can't get it at any price. Letters
are the sole relaxation we may indulge in here, so I
have been saving my precious materials in order to
have some news to write. And news is scarce.
Really it is curious how scarce news can be in a
place like this. The whine of shells and whistling of
stray bullets overhead becomes monotonous; and, even
in the firing line, unless your particular position should
be subject to a bombardment, one takes little interest
in war beyond, of course, keeping a watchful eye on
one's immediate front. And war, WAR (spelt with
capitals) is not nice.
I was reading on the Red Page some extracts from
Perceval Gibbons' book on the war. Read it. It is
wonderfully realistic, a really marvellous pen-picture.
No; war is not nice. Not at least in the trench-
fighting —bombing, sniping, bombing, sniping, bomb-
ing, sniping. Keep under cover, and try and sneak
a shot at another man who is trying to sneak a shot
at you —that is sniping; and there is no glory in it.
"Crack ! —pause —Crack ! Crack ! Crack ! —long pause
—Crack! long pause Crack! Crack! pause —
Cracks! almost simultaneously from possibly 10 rifles
—pause —Crack! —and so it goes. Possibly 16,000
rounds of bullets will cross the only neutral ground
in the world —the space between opposing trenches —
and no one be even scratched. That is "sniping."
Perhaps the Turks or we shall start a rippling volley
as though to attack, our guns will send in a brief
hurricane of shells. The Turks possibly respond with
machine guns —they are very "jumpy," and "75' s ''l
and Bedlam breaks loose for perhaps 30 minutes; but
neither side attacks —that is a "demonstration." Then
the dull round of sniping is resumed, and "peace"
settles down.
Where the trenches are close together we have
"bombing" in addition to "sniping." All along the
trenches are recesses cut into the sides, which hold


from 3 to 12 little black, cast-iron cricket balls,
each containing gelignite, a fulminate cap, and an inch
or so of fuse. These are bombs, and when one bur sts
tinned 1 lell is let loose for those whom it _ falls
amongst. They weigh about 2 lbs. T. he fuse is lit,
and then they are thrown, 5, 10, 20 yards, as the case
may he, but 'into an enemy trench. The depth of the
trenches dulls the roar of the explosion, and on both
sides the wounded are stoically silent of their pain.
But the effects on those hit are not nice to look upon.
It is all so curiously impersonal. Yet about two
weeks ago, about 1 a.m., when 1 heard the agonised
shrieks of some poor Turk which followed a bomb 1
had ordered a man to throw, I felt a most curious
exultation, mingled with a feeling of acute pity, for
the good aim of the thrower and the poor fellow who
may never see his native village again—poor devil, he
probably never heard of Australia before in his life.
Perhaps the shoe is on the other foot, and one of
our boys is blinded for life. Well, it's stretcher-
bearers!" He is gently lifted to the canvas. "Poor
Bill's got it!" "Where? How?" "Both eyes out;
a bomb!" "Poor devil!" And the corporal puts an-
other man in Bill's place, and the work goes on. And
for perhaps half or quarter of an hour the men rain
in bombs for vengeance; but probably that was ex-
pected, and these anger-driven bombs fall into a de-
serted section of trench. For possibly an hour the
men step lively, and the incident is forgotten until
another man is hit.
October 4th. however, saw a slight variation. After
an hour's bombardment along the whole front the
Turks decided to make a rush for us at Lone Pine,
where our trenches stick into their line of defence
like a peninsular. We saw bayonets above their para-
pets and their machine gun fire The noise
made you think a cash register had got janrbed in a
mangle. The order came to man the parapets; but
our men were too quick, and as we got up the Turks
were scrambling over their own. 1 hey saw us ready,
and ducked to cover, while our men cursed themselves
for being too ready. As it was, we killed 01 wounded
about thirty, I think, before they dropped back again.
Next time we'll let them get 'into the open before
we show ourselves.
If they only dared, I think most of the Turks would
surrender. Day after day one or two come in, some-
times three. They are terribly scared of then officeis,
though, and more than sick of the war. 1 hey look
clean-minded, simple, courteous peasants, and arc
quite absurdly grateful if our men give them cigar-
ettes. Just three days since we caught three of them
about 3 a.m. Early the previous day one of them
had tried to come and surrender, and when seen be-
tween the lines was shot, fortunately in the thigh, by
one of our men. As he lay there, by signs he made
it understood he wanted us to take him. Tate that
night we sent out a party to bring him in. The Turks
also sent a party —to "finish" him. When the two
patrols met there was a slight exchange of bullets, and
two of the Turks' patrol took advantage of the chance
to surrender. I saw the three at the beach hospital
next day, and they seemed as happy as Larry now
that their troubles'were over. One of the ambulance
men gave the wounded prisoner a cigarette. The look
of wondering, inarticulate gratitude was amazing. He
spluttered something about "Allah," and there was
no mistaking a blessing. The other two seemed to
enjov his pleasure as much as he. They are stubborn
fighters; but they don't know what they're fighting
for.
T enclose a bit of Turkish found in a trench we
captured at Lone Pine. It may be a bit of the Koran
or a patent medicine advertisement; but keep it —it
is a souvenir.
So August 30th was Dorothy's birthday? Many


happy returns, Dot. I'll try and send some kind of
present.
How are everyone? I hope Mill and Dan got my
letter from Lemnos.
It is getting terribly cold here now, with a wind
from the Caucasus like a breath of ice. Fortunately
we have had little rain so far, however, and hope to
be through here before many months have passed.
If you could send some chocolates, zvell wrapped up.
I am trying to send you all a cable letting you know
I'm well, so far. Lord only knows whether you'll get
it or not, though.
Well, for the present, with lots of love to all, and
my kindest to any friends,
As ever,
FRANK.
In the Firing Line,
November 14th, 1915.
Dear Pater and all, —
"A Merry Xmas and a Bright and Prosperous New
Year!" For by the time you receive this the jubila-
tion of Christmas will be on, and Pater (whose letter
from Guelph, Canada, I received last week) will once
more be at "Iroquois." I hope you all have a good
time, and I only regret my inability to send to Dorothy
and the third generation —-the youthful Hughes and
Kellys —some little curio as a souvenir. Where or
how I shall spend my time on that eventful day is a
matter for Providence and the General who sits in his
dug-out directing operations to decide. But I shall
have no difficulty in conjuring up a picture of a family
re-union 011 that occasion.
As I write I have been now nine weeks under fire,
and so far, beyond the usual dysentery and influenza,
have escaped the attentions of our friends the enemy,
although I have given them enough chances. But,
on the whole, while luck or fate directs shells or stray
pellets to miss me, this is not too bad a life; although,
were I allowed a choice before I died, I should say:
"Give me a dinner, nicely served; white linen, cut-
glass and silver; a roast of beef as Auntie only can
roast, green beans —nicely sliced —browned potatoes,
cauliflower; the entree followed by her fruit salad,
trifle, preserved peaches; a glass of cool lager, fol-
lowed by a nice cup of coffee; and then—then the
drawing-room or library, an open fire, a chat for two
or three hours with that travelled company one meets
at "Iroquois" ; then a hot bath, and to bed —between
white sheets, soft pillows, clean linen! Eight hours'
sleep; then a shower-bath , with lots of soap; and then
breakfast. And breakfast would consist of nice thin
bacon, and eggs, nicely cooked, soft toast, and tea.
And filled, replenished, fit, I am ready for death, sick-
ness, anything!"
That is my dream!
This is reality:—A slow sun rising, perchance hid-
den by clouds, and a cold north wind blowing dust,
grit, and the stench of Turkish corpses —possibly dead
Australians, too! —into one's face. Breakfast, when
a rough sea permits landing, of bread and bacon —
half broiled, half stewed, and tasting like a bad smell
—or biscuits—or an -— — and bacon. Lunch of a
stew of bully beef and rice, and preserved potatoes;
or possibly fresh beef. Tea of jam (possibly tinned
meats) and dry bread; and tea —provided we are not
on a half ration of water, and water is precious.
Sometimes it's beautiful, though. Plenty fresh beef,
and glorious warm days.
But we have an orchestra, the music of "strafe";
but even at meal-time Abdul sometimes disturbs us
with some shells or "broomstick" bombs. These lat-
ter bombs are a new device of Abdul to trv our
patience. Empty 4.2 m. shells or brass cartridge-cases
are filled with sticks of dynamite, or gelignite, or gun


cotton ; also pieces of bayonets, empty cartridge-cases,
scrap iron-whatnot. Into the middle of the whole
is fixed an octagonal stick of iron wood, , ca PP ed 1
steel, about four feet long. Ihe whole is fired from
a mortar, sometimes at 400 yards range, and on land-
ing the detonator affixed to the nose sets oft the
charge If it lands into a dugout the resultant wounds
are horrible, but death to those killed outright, though
coming in equally mutilating form, is instant, there-
fore merciful. . ,
At night one can see them coming, and they sound
like bombs from an aeroplane—"shwish—sh wish
shwish!" as though they zig-zagged through the air
They roar like a howitzer shell when they land and
explode, which they •sometimes fail to do
Well, so much for gloom, conjured up by thoughts
of Xmas! On the whole, lam glad I came—the only
real objection I have being the utter lack of news
from the rest of the world. We literally devour
papers; and as for American magazines, they re price-
We are praving for a general offensive 111 place of
isolated scraps. You may be sure that the 24th will
do its best. So far, while our strength has been re-
duced, our reinforcements have been sufficient to keep
us up. Twelve officers have so far left us, mostly
suffering from shock.
Kitchener was here the other day. but he didn t
come up to Lonesome Pine, where we are, although
we were expecting a visit ,and were disappointed when
he did not show up.
November 16th (continued) : _
Tbis life has many humorous sides to it. 1 had
charge of a party on the beach for three weeks, get-
ting stores ashore. It was a great change from these
cramped trenches; still, I was glad to get back into
the firing-line a week ago. Ihe d urks alwa\ s, morn-
ing and afternoon, open with a battery on the beach,
sweeping it with shrapnel and high explosives. At
such times we exceed all speed limits getting under
cover, if we can! . „ , n „ f
In my party I had a little chap named Crime, about
eft. 4 in„ and a very tall, thin Englishman, named
Tierney. One afternoon, about 2 o'clock the Tur s
ripped in two Hotchkiss shrapnel They burs
without us hearing them coming. Curne was stand-
ing next in line to Tierney, waiting his turn to unloac
the barge, and when the shells burst overhead he
grabbed Tierney and hid behind him. Most of the
men dashed for cover, but Tierney was held back.
He turned, his eves starting from his head.
"W-w-wot's vour caper?" he stuttered. Curne then
looked up. "Beg pardon, Tierney," he said; I didn t
realise what I was doing." "That s n-no blanky
cr-cr-good to me!" yelled Tierney, and rushed for shel-
ter. Three of us saw it, and the expressions of the
two, one expostulating, the other apologising, were
so ludicrous that we stood almost doubled with laugh-
ter, when another shell arrived, and everyone had the
laugh on us.
A curious thing about shrapnel is that the sight of
the puff of smoke in the air fails to quickly arouse
one to a realisation of danger. High explosives, on
the other hand, bursting on impact, leave an instant
tangible evidence of their power. Shrapnel seems un-
real, as it were; this is the only explanation I have for
the carelessness of newly-arrived men when under
shrapnel fire for the first time; when, however, thev
have once seen big men knocked over like ninepins
by the bullets which follow the beautiful little puff of
blue-white smoke which marks the break of this kind
of shell, they have less hesitation in seeking cover. It
is generally a recently arrived soldier who is afraid
to duck for fear he'll be laughed at, who is most likely
to be wounded by shrapnel. Once he has been here
a few weeks he doesn't let dignity interfere with com-


.... it
■ iii : 1; V\;
Hi , | T
...■/•* ;: ..y ■" ; , ......... i? : '. /, : . .
jSfcp
..
;; : ;' .*M "i; • , \ ;r f--- ; .
i - y \TZL -~+—
j>|HK9pnp
-rfr
1
x
. i: 4
111 Camp, at Seymour, Victoria.
Frank and his favorite dog.
TWO SNAPSHOTS.


monsense when shelling commences!
It is curious, though, how callous one becorr .
few days ago a big 8-inch shell—probably from a gun
on the' Asia side of the Dardanelles—landed a little
to the rear and atop of my dugout. I happened to
be talking to another officer, Mr. Williams former y
of Booligal, N.S.W.—at his dugout, across the gully
from mine, when it burst. Ihe first thing he said
was, "It's hit the Colonel's dugout I think it did.
If it has he'll have a nice mess to clean up. I said
"No •it got mine, I think." What struck us was not
that 'it was a lucky escape for the 150 men who had
been attending church parade on that spot less thani ten
minutes earlier, but that someone s dugout would be
spoiled. Luckily it only landed in the cook s fire, and
had penetrated too deeply to explode effective!}.
Our chaplain, Fr. Goidanich, went away from us
about a week since, hit in the head and legs by frag-
ments of a Turkish "75-" 1 went §! ve him , s ° me
cigarettes before he was taken to the hospital ship
and found him very cheerful, and joked about it He
asked me to look up his Altar-wine for him which 1
did, he allowing me one bottle for my trouble a rare
and highly appreciated favour; he is a fine old Irish
gentleman. Another R.C. padre, who was with him
when the shell arrived—Fr. Murphy, I believe it was
-—was in the hospital, hit at the same time. He was
suffering from shock. _
This week, for the first time, I received four let-
ters —a copy of yours from Honolulu, one from Mil-
dred, Holly and Auntie. I also received a very much
appreciated scarf from Flolly. Your letters from
Guelph enclosing one from Mater proved very inter-
esting.
I am making up Christmas cards of my own, and
sending one each to you and Mater, Auntie, Dorothy,
Leo and Jack, Mill, Hollv, Woolf, Pratt and Malion.
(See facsimile on opposite page).
Give my best to Arthur and Miss Shaw, also Ber-
nard and any friends who may inquire. Paper is
precious So! again wishing you all the : very- best
time at Xmas, and trusting you have greatly
by your trip, with lots of love and good. wastes to
all.
November 17th, i9 x -
Dear Arthur and Miss Shaw, .
You will, I know, forgive me for using the on
sheet of paper to write to you both; but notepapei is
as scarce as jewellery on the peninsula
Miss Shaw's letter coming when it did, with its .
tralian twang, when we were cooped up trying
dodge a north wind like ice, which seemed to try its
best to get into anv loose cracks in ones clothing,
was doubly welcome, and appreciated.
We get' spells of glorious weather here, followed
bv blasts of icv winds; so there is influenza m a vei>
severe form. 'I had it a short time ago so badlv 1
couldn't go into the firing-line; but it's all over again.
The sun setting behind the Island of Imbros, at dus
makes such pictures that even Blinky Bill from Boo-
ligal is awed. ,
I cannot express to you how calm and cool un
fire our men are. Of course, there is a small percent-
age of wasters, but 99-9 per cent, are pure gold, bor
example: yesterday a heavy bomb landed right into one
of our firing posts. It cut one man s legs clean off
just about the thighs, lacerated another s abdomen,
and cut his arm and hand off, and badly wounded two
others. The second died instantly, but an effort was
made to save the first. As they were taking im
awav on the stretcher he looked back with a grin.
"Don't look so bad about it," he said; Im
3tt


r ~~~~ ~~~~ : 7
i ' -
■*, . i'/e TYi/ CHhin'sf />,&$ /"••>)</
1 (
_ f $
Dt -r&f / f?€2s/>ct&us Z/V-w 6>
J for-)
";tivA % ■ fS
• . i dJJ,
Zt, /:id'..
ft. /. T:
/'}'.. •
' //f -m-
/<{ / 6
'• ( { 7 , fM - ' /; i fj
O'iM { ka»*£>. Cw&sA®- Op-< v
/
Improvised Christmas Card.
Posted by Frank two days before his death.


worth two live Turks yet." He died ten minutes later
Some of them are up to all sorts ot tricks. About
a month ago one of our men got 13 shrapnel bullets
all over him. He was busy helping another wounded
man, and didn't notice it at first; but when the other
was removed to hospital he turned to the rest. b
h —l! I believe I'm hit, he said. So he was, 13
times, flesh wounds. Well, they put first-aid dressing
on him. "You're a plucky devil, said the Colonel,
"do you think a little rum would help you to get down
to the beach?" "1 think a little nip would do me
good," he answered. (He was an American.) So
he got his nip and started for the beach on his own.
On the way he passed a gun crew. "Wounded bad.
one asked'him. "Thirteen holes, 1 think," he said.
"Think a drink would help you?" "Oh, yes; I think
a little nip would do me good. A little further on
he passed another dressing station, where everyone
was solicitous; and "another little nip did him much
better. Passing through our rest camp he paused
long enough to suggest "a little nip would do him
good." Finally he reached the beach casualty clear-
ing station, where a better dressing was put on. No
"little nip" was offered, so he suggested one. "No,"
said the dresser, "you've had all you want! "Hm!
he grunted, "wot's the use of being wounded if you
can't get a little nip ? And he lay on a stretcher to
await removal to a hospital ship.
When I'm patrolling the firing-line at night I hear
some funny ideas expressed. I walk quietly and
listen to two on a post talking. The Turks are only
a few yards away, but although they whisper their
confidences Abdul is far from their thoughts. Now
and then one will bang away through the loophole,
then the yarn will be resumed. The other night I
overheard this: "There's one on the right front," one
whispered. "Bang" went the other s rifle. Get
him?" asked the rifleman. "No; 'e ducked too quick.
I think your sights must be set wrong. "Watcher-
givin' us! I ain't usin' no sights this time o day.
See if he bobs up again." Silence for a while, ihen:
•'Sid. I wonder when we're gom to charge?
"Charge? 'Charge,' you call it!! We ain't gom to
charge! We ain't soldiers! We're just pri-
soners, and the Turks is our jailers!!" He snorted
his disgust with the powers that be.
After a pause he continued: "Turkey! D tur-
key ! When I get 'ome I'm going to kill every duck
on the place. You can 'ave your blanky turkey. Give
me duck!" With that he seemed relieved, and settled
down again to sniping. .
A little further on I heard this: 11 "
hoarselv. "Yes"—the whisper like a hiss. "Hear the
latest?" "No; what?" "They're goin' to take us 2nd
Division away from 'ere." "What?" "Yes; they pe
goin' to send us to Palestine." "Palestine? Talk
commonsense!" "Palestine I tell yer! It's the dm-
kmn oil." "Yes; maybe. But why Palestine of all
places? Not many Turks in Palestine." "Know
why?" The bearer of glad tidings bent closer and
lowered his voice to a small whisper. "They're gom
to give us some of that fightin' in Bagdad. Oh . .
seed' It was somewhat mystifying; but Tom didn t
feel sure enough of his geography to probe the matter
further.
Rumors are nearly the only news we get, with the
exception of a small sheet issued every day or so, con-
taining from one to five small items, and newspapers
which are generally from 3 to 5 weeks old.
Men grasp at any rumor, and in course of time a re-
port of what may have been an isolated scrap between
small parties has grown to a pitched battle.
The country here is very rugged and irregular, cov-
ered generally with hollyoak scrub. It is ancient
ground, and half way down in cutting a tiench "we
sometimes cut through the red tiles of the olden time


J'egislatibe §tss*mblg of dfoluinbia.
-+
ADMIT /
Mr.
TO PRESS GALLERY.
during , 191.$:..
By order of...
Byzantines. Once recently a coin with the head of
Constantine the Great was dug from the bottom of a
trench nine feet deep.
Among the islands we can see from here, Imbros,
Samothrace and Tenedos ( ??). St. Paul used to travel
on missionary tours. Now where galleys plied battle-
ships, destroyers, cruisers and aeroplanes perform evo-
lutions.
We brought down a Turkish aeroplane, inside their
lines, a few weeks ago.
Well, Arthur and Miss Shaw, I must now close.
Wishing you both a merry Xmas, and bright and pros-
perous New Year, I remain,
Nov. 17th, 19 15. Yours sincerely,
FRANK M. COFFEE.
FACSIMILE OF PRESS TICKET ISSUED TO THE LATE FRANK COFFEE.


Tributes to the late Lieutenant Frank M. Coffee.
From Lieut.-Colonel W. Russel Watson, Commanding
Officer, 24th Australian Battalion.
Anzac, Gallipoli.
18th Nov., 1915.
F. Coffee, Esq., Chatswood, Sydney.
Dear Mr. Coffee, —
It is with extreme regret that I have to confirm the
sad news of your gallant son s death in action at Lone
Pine this morning.
Since his arrival on the Peninsula, your boy has been
under my command, and proved himself a most zeal-
ous and promising officer.
At the moment that Frank fell the enemy were shell-
ing our position very heavily, and he was on duty in
the firing line; the "75" shell which struck him fell
right into our trenches.
He was buried by Capt. Chaplain Bladen in a valley
known as Brown's Dip, where so many of our brave
lads have their last resting place.
In conclusion, sir, besides by personal sympathy, let
me convey to you and his family the sincere sympathy
of the officers, non-commissioned officers, and men of
the 24th Battalion.
Believe me, dear Mr. Coffee,
Yours sincerely,
(Sgd.) W. RUSSEL-WATSON, Lieut.-Col.,
Commanding 24th Battalion.
Galliooli, 18th Nov., 1915.
From a Brother Officer, Lieut. Harold Cox.
Dear Mr. Coffee, — .
I have just come away from your son s burial, and
know you would like to hear the sad particulars of his
death. He was killed, as you may have been informed
bv Company-Commander, whilst in the trenches, he
was struck by a piece of shrapnel on the right side and
probably died instantly—he certainly was not conscious
to suffer pain.
If any consolation can be obtained from such a fact,
you will be glad to know that his grave is in an ex-
tremely charming situation in Brown's Dip; though we
are strictly forbidden to give names of places, I am
sure this information cannot do any harm. The Dip
(a valley) is about 400 feet above the sea, which it
over looks; the island of Imbros is in the distance some
7 or 8 miles away. He is buried within a mile of the
famous beach where the landing took place, so it is
close to many fallen heroes.
A cross bearing his name, rank, and date of death
will be erected.
We are all extremely pained at losing such a happy
comrade, and I, who until the last week or two have
been closely associated with him, desire to offer to you
my very deepest sympathy for your great loss.
Sincerelv yours,
(Sgd.) HAROLD "COX, Lieut.
c/o Miss Cox,
"Manoah,"
Wellington-street, Brighton, Victoria,
3Jn 4sUmertitf


From Professor A. S. McKenzie (one of Frank's tutors in the University of Kentucky), published
in the " Lexington Herald," Kentucky, also in the College journal.
When the shadow of war, like a heavy mist, crept
over more than half of the civilised globe, it caught
Frank Coffee, one of the most attractive lads who
ever matriculated at the State University of Kentucky.
Looking over the register of the Department of Eng-
lish, I find that in September, 1902, he entered the
department as a freshman, his average for the year
being 13 out of a possible 15 units. This clearly in-
dicates that Frank was more intelligent than most of
his classmates, and his achievements after he left Ken-
tucky bore out the promise of his youth.
His father encouraged his eldest son to take a trip
around the world. After a home stay in the beautiful
seaport of Sydney, the young Australian went to Van-
couver, British Columbia, as a journalist. Soon he
became secretary of the Royal British Agricultural
Commission. At the outbreak of the war Frank was
in newspaper work at Melbourne. He enlisted as a
private and upon passing his examination he was pro-
moted on his merits to rank of Lieutenant, and his
regiment finally was in the Anzac firing line, over-
looking the Dardanelles.
Frank Coffee, as he leaned his rifle on the parapet,
could almost hit the site of ancient Troy, whose siege
gave rise to Homer's Iliad, the earliest of all European
poems. Less than three weeks ago, on November 18,
the heroic young Australian went out like a candle
quenched in the wind, leaving his blood relations, Aus-
tralian and Kentuckian, in sorrow.
In fancy, his numerous friends see Frank Coffee
as they saw him when he was a unit of the college
battalion marching over the campus. Graceful, step-
ping like a comely fawn, this youth possessed the look
and the figure of a gentleman. Descendant of one
of the proudest and most valorous races in the world,
he has perished in the beauty of his young manhood,
in the wonder of his promise, in the fulness of his
strength, where the gallant are falling in a real man's
fight above the Dardanelles.
Forget not him ana his like, oh, ye for whom they
fall! 'lis not alone the British Empire that is founded
upon unswerving honour and chivalry, but upon these
also the democracy of the United States is ultimately
dependent. Little do we think of the craggv forts
bv the terrible Dardanelles, or of the deeds, incredible
in difficulty and unparalleled in heroism.
He who was like a bit of sunshine is now resting
where the winding dark-blue water heave and ripple
in the Eastern sun. Without him the world seems
empty to his father and to all who loved him, and yet
we rejoice that he played the game of life and met
the great adventure cheerfully like a red-blooded man.
The God of his fathers will remember, through sun-
shine and rain, through seed-time and harvest, that
Frank Coffee of his own free will took his share in the
splendour of sacrifice for the healing of the nations.
Frank chose wisely, and he now enjoys the divine
benediction.
A. S. MACKENZIE.
December 4, 1915.


From Frank Molony (Mrs. Coffee's nephew), who is
on duty at Cairo, Egypt.
No. 2, A.G.H., Ghezireh, Egypt,
Jany. 26th, 1916.
My dear Aunt, —About December 2nd, one evening
just after the arrival of a large convoy of wounded
and frostbitten from the Peninsula, I heard two of
the men discussing the condition of things there, when
they had left; later I heard the name Coffee, and later
I heard one of them refer to a Lieut. Coffee, of A ic-
toria. I got into conversation with the chaps, and all
they could tell me was that Lieut. Coffee had been
killed early in November. Lrom these chaps I worked
over most of the men from that particular convoy,
finally coming across a Lieut. Beith. Lieut. Beith
had evidently known him well while on the Peninsula,
and I am enclosing his letter.
Lrom those men I spoke to, men of his own Com-
pany, and those that had worked under him while
O.C. of the Beach Party, I got such replies as "He
was a good chap," or 'He wasn t a bad chap at all
the highest appreciation, dear Aunt, the Australian
ever bestows on his superior officer —and praise rarer
where the officer is a lieutenant and so more in touch
with his men, than in the case of an officer of higher
rank.
Your loving nephew,
FRANK.
From Lieut. Beith (referred to in previous letter),
a brother Officer.
No. 2 Australian General Hospital,
Ghezireh, Cairo, Egypt.
Dear Mrs. Coffee, —Your nephew (Frank Moloney)
came in to see us about a week ago, and hearing that
I knew Frank well he requested me to write you and
let you have a few particulars. Frank was attaches
to "C" Company of our Battalion, and prior to taking
up duty with the Company was in charge of a fatigue
party on Anzac Beach, where he earned the name of
being a "real good sport." He was not with our
Companv long before the men recognised in him a
gentleman. His death was a great shock to me, as
the two of us, had been laughing and joking over a
yarn Frank was telling, only three minutes before he
met his death. He was known amongst officers and
men as the most fearless officer in the Battalion.
Frank was killed in the "Lone Pine" trenches, and
buried in "Brown's Dip" Cemetery, Anzac.
I am at present in the above hospital, having lost
my left leg in a heavy bombardment in November last
vear.
Please accept my deepest sympathy in your sore
trial.
Yours sincerely,
(Sgd.) GORDON BEITH.


From Mr. Keith M. Murdoch (condensed), Chief of Sydney " Sun " staff in Melboarne, Victoria,
with whom Frank worked.
I he United Cable Service (Australasia),
London Office,
162 Queen Victoria St.,
Feby. 3rd, 1916.
Dear Mr. Coffee, —Your letter about Frank came
to me yesterday, and I was very glad to get it, though
it made me sad. I met the boy in Cairo just before
he went to the front. He was fane and fit, and looking
healthy and good, and I was very glad indeed to have
a few hours with him. He left soon after for the
front. He knew to what he was going, but went
gladly and bravely.
When I got to London I heard about his death in
action. It must have been fine to go that way. God
knows most of us would have been glad enough to
die for our country there. Frank died for us, and I
am sure he went with a cool smile on his lips, for
he had great-heartedness in him.
He was always generous. He and I got on very
well. He had good newspaper ability, and could work
well. I ana sure we liked each other, though of such
different temperaments. To have got through Anzac
safely would have made him a fane character, for he
would have learnt poise and determination.
But nothing will bring him back to you. You can
only be consoled by the thought of lais fine youth,
which had always a grand dash of true manly instincts
in it, and of his splendid death. Yet, of course, you
write sadly. You will go there some day. It will be
a sepulchre of many of our very best young men, men
Australia could ill-afford to lose.
Frank enjoyed Egypt, and struck me as being very
happy with his work, his men, and his few spare
hours.
Remember me to my friends, and will you please tell
his Mother that I am very sad.
Yours very sincerely,
KEITH A. MURDOCH.


IN BRITISH COLUMBIA.
Vritten by Mr. R. Sonierville, a Canadian journalist, who
was intimately associated with Frank
Telegraphic advices received by "The World ' yes-
terday from his father, Mr. Frank Coffee, of Sydney,
tells of the death in action in the Dardanelles of Lieut.
Frank Coffee, of the Australian Expeditionary loice.
The telegram, which is from New York, is brief, ant
simply to the effect that Mr. Coffee was killed 011
November 18. No details as to the action the young
lieutenant was in are given.
The news of the death of Lieut. Coffee will be re-
ceived with particular sorrow by a number of inti-
mate friends in Vancouver. Mr. Coffee lived 011 the
coast for several years, and made a host ot warm
friends, which include practically every' newspapei
man in Vancouver and \ ictoria. In 1908 he became
associated with "The World,' and in 1910 became the
first mayoral secretary to be appointed in \ ancouver.
After holding this position for some six months he
returned to newspaper work, and was at different
times with both the "\ ictoria Colonist and Times.
Subsequently he was appointed secretary to the 1 10-
vincial Agricultural Commission. Some* two years
ago he returned to Australia, and, when the war broke
out, immediately took up a course of training to fit
him for the serious work to which the Empire w as
calling all its able-bodied young men.
Lieut. Coffee had the genial temperament and the
sunny disposition, which are heritages of the Irish
race. He was generous to a fault, and always ready
to divide his last penny with another. Those who
knew him will readily deduce that he must have been
a dashing leader and just the man to head a gallant
charge against a difficult position.
In Gallipoli the proportion of killed among the
troops from the sister Dominion has been greater per-
haps than on any other front on which the war is
being- waged. Very many have gone down to sol-
diers' graves in the full vigour of manhood. Yet
there is something of the majestic and of the sublime
in giving one's best self, as it were, foi one s country
and for one's ideal. And, were the soldier who falls
in battle granted a fleeting moment before conscious-
ness finally passed, one feels that that moment would
be filled with an infinite satisfaction which would have
power even over the last pains of dissolution.
Lieut. Coffee lived and died a brave and gallant
gentleman, and in the supreme test he was not found
wanting.
From Mr. M. J. Gillespie, Grand Knight of the Knights
of Columbus, Victoria, B.C.
Vancouver, 8.C,, Jan. 15, 1916.
"The Knights of Columbus Council, Number 1081,
Vancouver, 8.C., in regular meeting assembled Janu
ary 13th, 1916, unanimously adopted the following
resolution: 'This Council places on record its condo-
lence and sympathy with Mr. Frank Coffee and
family, of Sydney, Australia, at the sad loss sustained
in the death of "his beloved son, Frank M. Coffee,
killed in action at the Dardanelles, November 18th,
1915. During his residence in A ancouver, and whilst
a member of the Vancouver Council Knights of Col-
umbus, he earned and retained the respect and esteem
of all those who knew him. His chivalrous and
patriotic spirit was evidenced by his volunteering for
overseas service. His heroic death fighting at the
front will be a cherished remembrance to all who
knew him, as well as to the members of our Order.
We pray God may grant him eternal rest, and to his
family all consolation in their great sorrow.' Re-
solved that a copy of the above resolution be for-
warded to his father, Mr. Frank Coffee.


Although many letters off sympathy were received
by his parents, from friends,, public bodies, and others
in prominent positions, only letters from those inti-
mately acquainted with Frank have been reproduced.


Just as this Memento was going to press Frank's personal effects were received from Egypt, consisting of his watch, his
pocket book, containing snapshots of his home, family, and friends, cards of his old companions, together with a
little golden miniature, also several diaries, from which the following extracts have been culled.
Sept. 12th, 1915 (2 p.m,) We are nearing Lem-
nos, and the zone of war, Torpedo boats and armed
trawlers are everywhere, A heavily loaded tramp to
port is closely guarded by French destroyers. No
troops are visible from her decks, so she must have
ammunition on her. Lemtios looms ahead while we
work through the lonian Islands, some of which are
very big and hilly, with here and there villages dotted,
well up from the shores,
4 p.m. We are rounding into the fine harbour of
Mudros, in a squall. Ahead we seethe "Aquitania,"
now all white, red and green. She has just been
turned into a hospital ship, and will carry 4000
wounded. Her beautiful lines conceal her huge bulk,
To the right from the entrance the harbour sweeps
broadly. What a sight! French and British battle-
ships, cruisers, destroyers snbmarines! Hundreds
of transports, hospital ships and trawlers. Round
the 8-mile-wide bay is one huge "rest camp" for
wounded, A former English river ferry-boat is trying
to fill a hospital ship with wounded, A transport
passes with Indian troops, outward bound. There is
not much cheering, but a little R,A.M,C, cockney on
this boat yelled, "Are we down 'earted ?" The war-
ships roared " NO 1 " The harbour is jammed with
shipping, more than one would see in a quiet day in
Sydney. And all to enable some hundreds of thou-
sands of Allied troops to cross a strip of land five to
thirteen miles wide ! It's a thrilling sight and order-
ly —no lost energy, no confusion, but a clockwork
precision,
Sept. 13th (11.30 a.m.) —Do we tranship for Gallip-
oli to-day? No one knows. Last night we thought
we'd leave the ship at daylight. It looks now as
though we may not disembark until tomorrow.
Sept, 24th (10,20 a.m.) —Word comes that we can-
not yet land at Gabe Tepe because the Turks have
put a curtain of shrapnel over the water front for the
past two mornings, Like Wolfe's army we are to
land in darkness. Three hospital ships, " Gloucestor
Castle," " Malta," and " Gascon," stole out last
night loaded with wounded, about 4500 men, Two
battleships came back this morning after shelling the
Narrows, As I write one of the French Atlantic
liners is passing us loaded with troops. She is a
graceful liner like a P. & O, boat, and at first glance
we took her for one, and had a heated argument,
We have two Sydney officers of the 17th Battalion
with us —Lieut. E. Doone, of Stanmore, and Lieut.
Mendelssohn, of Mosman Bay.
October 4tli (8 p.m,)—ln Lone Pine after half
hour's bombardment with 75's. About 11 o'clock to-
day Abdul summed up enough courage to try and
attack in No. 2 subsection of No 1 section. As soon
as they were seen coming over the parapets the order
"man the parapets" w 7 as given. But damn! Our
men were too eager and it was less than a second or
two before they were up. The Turks saw we were
ready and tried to clamber back. Our rifles and ma-
chine guns opened on them and dropped about thirty.
Four of the poor devils got to just under our para-
pets badly wounded. Two of our men, among them,
Lance-Corporal Sole (a character), were slightly
wounded pulling them in. First aid given in the
trench revived them a short time, but beyond one,
shot through the groin, saying something about his
"poor old mother" and "Allah," they died before
we could do anything else.
A glancing bullet, on the right shoulder, which
spattered the side of the face of Lance-Corporal Sole,
of " D " Company, and he clung like a drunkard to
the parapet. He refused the stretcher, and when he
staggered towards the dressing station someone said
"Are you hit badly, Sole?" "Dunno," he grum-
bled, "but I think it'll hold me for awhile."


From Lieutenant J. R. Elsbury.
Melbourne, May 2nd, 1916.
Dear Mr. Coffee,
Knowing well the deep anguish you have suffered
consequent upon the death of your son Frank, who
was killed in action at Gallipoli on 18th November
last, it may be some consolation to you and his
relatives to hear from one of his brother officers.
I first met Frank in the Seymour Camp, but we did
not become closely acquainted until we embarked on
the troopship "Demosthenes," where our acquaint-
ance ripened into intimate friendship. He was always
punctilious in his duties, courteous to his men, but
firm, most obliging and genial to all; it is no wonder
that he very soon endeared himself to all with whom
he came in contact. He was what we Australians
term a " true sport " in the real sense of the word.
Frank and I spent some time in Cairo prior to my
departure for the Peninsula. I saw a great deal of
him, and his linguistic abilities were my salvation
in speaking to and comprehending the many French
people there.
Later on, at Anzac, he was practically a daily
visitor at my dugout. He was always keen on his
work, and often indulged in little liberties with the
Turks that his brother officers did not approve of,
and we often predicted that he would lose his life if
he did not display less rashness, Latterly, however,
he was more cautious and did not take these risks.
It was just pure chance that he should have been
where he was when he met his death. Fifteen
minutes before he was chatting in my dugout and
9 o'clock was approaching. When he was leaving I
wished to detain him, but he remarked that he was
due for duty at 9 o'clock. I left my dugout about
five minutes after and was proceeding along the
trench when I met the stretcher bearers returning
with a figure, and upon enquiring I was told that it
was Lieut. Coffee.
I assure you I deeply regret his death, as I lost a
real good pal, and the army has lost one who was
essentially an officer and a gentleman.
Your very truly,
J. R. ELSBURY.
£n Elementci


BROWN'S DIP, GALLIPOLI.
GRAVE OF LIEUTENANT FRANK M, COFFEE, AUSTRALIAN IMPERIAL FORCES, MARKED TO RIGHT OF CENTRE.
Photo, by Lieut. J. R. Elsbury.
" Only the grave of a hero —only a mound of earth,
Far from the land of the wattle—the land that gave him birth."


From Lexington (Kentucky) "Herald."
Unusual news of the great European conflict, by
;an officer in the army, written day by day at his post
<of duty, has been received by relatives in this State
<of Frank Coffee, a former State University student,
who was killed November 18 in the Gallipoli campaign
•■while-he was engaged with the Australian contingent
cof the British army.
Though Mr. Coffee was the third generation of
1 his family on his mother's side to be born in Australia,
Ihis father is an American, born in Warsaw, N.Y.
His grandmother, Mrs. Charles Coffee, died in Lex-
iington and is buried in the Lexington cemetery.
The series of letters, some of which were received
Iby his aunt, Mrs. Sarah Clarke, 117 Woodland Avenue,
tthis city, and others by other members of his family,
igive the story of the Gallipoli campaign in its sad and,
;at times, more humorous phases, and show the un-
daunted and care-free spirit of the soldiers under fire.
Numerous incidents illustrating the light-heartedness
(of the men in the trenches are given. Among them
tthe remark of the soldier who was buried so far under
tthe resulting debris when a shell exploded that twenty
iminutes were required to dig him out. When he was
finally dug out, his first remark was, "Who the h—l
stole my rations? Damn them, they upset my bottle!"
But not a word about the shell that caused the havoc.
A trick which cost the Germans five torpedoes before
they found that the "boat" they were firing at was
only a shell, is described.
The Australians are the pick of the whole Dar-
danelles force, Mr. Coffee wrote, and told of the
feeling of the men under fire in this way:
"You've got a job to do, and if you are to be put
out of action it might just as easily happen there as
anywhere else, so you get, not frightened exactly, but
rather what I might call 'indifferent.' "
Mr. Coffee, who was a lieutenant in charge of a
platoon of his regiment, was compelled to stay in front
of his company and continually expose himself to dan-
ger, but in spite of this he remained cheerful and
optimistic, as shown by the tone of his letters, although
at times he seemed to have a premonition of death.
At the age of 15 he entered the Kentucky University
in the College of Mechanical and Electrical Engineer-
ing. That was in 1902. He made many friends both
in school and on the outside, and was regarded as un-
usually bright, being considered a genius by some 011
account of his remarkable talents. Upon leaving
school he became a newspaperman in Canada, and
later in Australia, where he was given a lieutenancv
in the army, and the chronicles set forth in his letters
are the stories of his daily experiences on the firing
line. Because of the unusually vivid descriptions and
characterisations revealed, "The Herald," through the
courtesy of Mrs. Clark, reproduces some of the letters.
31 u JHeraento ■r^= = ?>


