

CENTENARY EDITION
1,815-1915.
In
3irtjtn ©mmlSrson,




/
o v
I i+L
Ci'itttnarii (Titian
isio-inis.




jl n
xkA / I*'
>\u'. f. I- )•»' “* ■
e tUmAtev4 & feWi.
Mb.
IN MEMORIAM.
JOHN DONALDSON.


to tbc ntctnonr of
loljn lonalftson.
who was taken from amongst us
on Saturday, 17th. Rowember, 190 b,
And was Interred in the Ballarat Hew Cemetery
on IRonday, 19th. Rooember, 190 b,
Aged 90 years, 11 months, 5 days.
“Them also which sleep in Jesus will God
bring with him.” —x Thess. iv., verse 14.


“ How bright these glorious spirits shine! ”
Par. Ixvi.




IN MEMORIAM.
JOHN DONALDSON.
The Rev. M. G. HART,
Minister of
St. John’s Presbyterian Church,
Peel Street, Ballarat East.
W. B. MACDONALD, PRINTER AND PUBLISHER,
BALLARAT, VIC., AUSTRALIA.
1907.


DEDICATED
THE MEMBERS AND ADHERENTS
St. John’s Presbyterian Church,
Peel Street, Ballarat East:
AND OF THE BALLARAT TOWN MISSION.


Prefatory Pole.
The origin of this brochure is easily told. A
few weeks ago the author was spending an
evening with Mr. James Boyd Donaldson when
the conversation naturally turned to the subject
of these memoirs. The writer happened to
say, “You ought to write a booklet on the life
and character of your revered father ; I believe
it would achieve much good.” My friend
replied, “ It would not become me, perhaps,
to do this work, much as I should desire it;
but if you will undertake it, I shall supply the
necessary data.” I readily consented. It was
in this simple way that the little work now in
the reader’s hands was ushered into existence.
It is sent forth with much prayer that the
blessing of God may rest upon the reader, and
that many of God’s children may be stimulated
to follow in the footsteps of this devoted man
of God.
M. G. H.






twice married, first to a McPherson, and after-
ward to a Jane Stewart. He died on 2nd.
April, 1838, aged 64. Mary, David, and James,
were the names of the children of the former
marriage; George, William (died in the Alfred
Hospital, Melbourne, 21st. 1876, aged
65), Grace, Ann, and John, the names of the
children of the latter. This is the order ac-
cording to seniority (John was the youngest).
Details of each and all are extant and in writ-
ing from John himself, the whole forming an
exceedingly interesting story. Perhaps the
most pathetic feature of the case lies in the
death of his mother (Jane Stewart) on Mid-
summer’s day, 1820, from scarlet fever, when
he was only four and a half years of age. She
was a most Godly lady, and was sadly missed.
Her memory was blessed, even at that early
age, to her son John. Her religious teaching,
he often reflected, gave a bent to his whole long
life. How very great is the influence of a holy
mother !
10
JOHN DONALDSON.




him), were married in Glasgow by the Rev. Dr.
Norman McLeod, senr., on 19th. January, 1844.
His wife and family (two sons) followed him to
Victoria later on.
The following Poem, expressive of Mr.
Donaldson’s feelings when leaving the Home-
land, is in his own hand-writing.
Fare thee well, Old Scotland, the land of my birth,
The home of my childhood, and boyhood’s bright days;
That spot the most favour’d of all upon earth,
May never, oh, never more meet this fond gaze.
The haunts of my childhood ! I leave them for ever,
To seek a new home on a far distant strand ;
These eyes may ne’er gaze on those lov’d scenes, and never
May my feet tread the shores of my own native land.
Then fare thee well, Scotland, dear home of my childhood!
In a far distant country I hasten to dwell!
The sea-breeze is blowing—the vessel steers onward ;
Oh, land of my fathers, old Scotland, FAREWELL !
Mr. John Donaldson’s long life may be di-
vided into two nearly equal parts. Half was
spent in the United Kingdom ; nearly the
whole of the latter half was spent in Ballarat
East. For years he lived on Clayton Hill; the
last 28 years or so he resided at Barkly Street.
12
JOHN DONALDSON.


We now proceed to treat more minutely the
life of Mr. John Donaldson himself.
During all those years in Ballarat East he
was a member and communicant of St. John’s,
—just as he had been a member and commu-
nicant of the Established Church at Newton-
on-Ayr, —just as he had been a member and
communicant of St. Mark’s Established
Church, Anderston, Glasgow. In the case of
St. Mark’s he was for many years connected
with the Board of Management. Owing to his
partial defect in hearing in later years, and the
great size of the Presbyterian building, he
found it essential to attend the Town Mission
services, but he ever remained a member of
St. John’s. All his life he belonged to the
Church, and took a delight in regularly attend-
ing its services, and in performing his religious
duties in the home. Family-worship was a
standing institution all through.
In St. John’s he enjoyed the ministry and
friendship of the Revs. Duncan Fraser, J. W.
13
JOHN DONALDSON.


Inglis, W. S.Macqueen, and James H. Mackay.
And during my own ministry of nearly nine
years, it has fallen to me to see him in the last
stages of his best health, as also to follow him
through his varied illnesses of age; yes, and to
follow him to the grave itself.
After he ceased, from failing health, to attend
the regular services of the church, I waited
on him at his home, and am therefore in the
position to say that I knew him most inti-
mately, and can place before the people with
certainty a statement of his sterling Christian
character.
The Rev. Mr. Macqueen writes very feeling-
ly and sympathizingly in regard to the “going
home” of “the venerable pilgrim.” The Rev.
Duncan Fraser, alluding to Mr. and Mrs.
Donaldson, says, “ He had always a kind cheery
word for them (Mr. Fraser’s children). He
and Mrs. Donaldson were parents to be proud
of for their sterling merits and simple
Christian character.” The Rev. James H.
14
JOHN DONALDSON.


Mackay says of him, “‘He was a shock of
corn fully ripe.’ He was gathered to his fathers
in a good and honoured old age. I remember
well ‘the hoary head that was as a crown of
righteousness.’ I remember well his noble
character, his vigorous mind, his wonderful
knowledge of Scripture, and his power in
prayer. ‘Let me die the death of the right-
eous ; and let my last end be like his.’ ’.’ The
Rev. James Chue speaks of him as a “grand
man and a true Christian;” says “He was a
very kind man to me as well as to others,”
and so on. Mrs, Kenny of the Orphanage
writes of him : “ Esteemed by all who knew him
—one of the good men whom it pleased the
Lord to honour by prolonging his life to the
great age of fourscore years and ten. He is
now at rest.” “For so He giveth His beloved
sleep.”
Mr, Samuel Trend writes : “ He has gone
to receive the ‘Well done, good and faithful
servant’ that I know he so richly deserved.
15
JOHN DONALDSON,


His life remains for a standing memorial as the
example of what an exemplary father ought to
be.”
Further extracts need hardly be made from a
very extensive correspondence, all the writers
agreeing as to the inestimable character of Mr.
John Donaldson.
I am able to re-echo these references to my
departed friend and brother ; and, as the term-
inating years crept on and I must have had
even closer relationship with the patient of the
last few years, it is one of the pleasures of my
life to bear testimony to the transparent gen-
uineness and intensity of his simple, honest,
Scottish character, and to his clear and
intelligent grasp of his fathers’ faith.
Mr. Donaldson’s constitution must have
been, humanly speaking, faultless. Yet, with
advancing years, failure, insidious though ever
so gradual, works along its weary, its relentless
way. No matter what care and consideration
may be given the physical mechanism, no
16
JOHN DONALDSON.


means are permanently preservative, and
weaknesses will intrude themselves unexpect-
edly and seriously enough even though there
may be no real disease to cope with.
Thus it was with our friend and brother.
On 25th. Ma)7, 1905, the general health of Mr.
Donaldson, which up to that date had been
what might be termed fairly satisfactory on
the whole for his time of life, took a sudden
and most decided change for the worse. Walk-
ing round his garden alone that evening, as
was his wont just before tea-time, he took a
slight fainting-turn and sat or slipped himself
down in a not uncomfortable spot at the foot
of the garden under a tree. Here he was ob-
served by his surprised son shortly after, who
with assistance took him into the house, and
into his own room, in a semi-helpless condition,
and had medical aid summoned at once. The
patient was exceedingly ill for several months,
but recovered considerably, and was able for
nearly a year to enjoy life in 'moderate comfort
17
JOHN DONALDSON.


till nth. October, 1906, when the end rapidly
followed, happening on 17th, November. It is
not considered probable that he was conscious
of much, if of anything, in his time of sorest
trial—“ in the furnace of afflction ” to use an
apt and ordinary phrase of his own. On this
point I may enlarge a little presently ; suffice
it to say just here that at the close of about
five such weeks, Death, “ the messenger of
peace,” called him to his reward in Glory.
While meditating on the many sterling
qualities of my departed friend, a text in the
book of Proverbs is suggested to my mind,
chapter x., 7. —“The memory of the just is
blessed ; but the name of the wicked shall
rot ”. How true these words are of God’s
people! We think of Bramwell, of Joseph
Alleine, of Payson, of Chalmers, of Guthrie,
of Wesley, of Spurgeon, of Muller, of Moody,
and a host of others whom we cannot now
mention. The memory of these sainted ones
will never die. In our own town of Ballarat
18
JOHN DONALDSON.


East, we have had men, not of great genius,
perhaps, like those whom we have mentioned, —
men like the late Mr. Hosking, and the Rev.
John McNeil, who by the way I may remind
the reader was brought up in Victoria Street,
and who was converted in the Mission Church,
We shall never forget these saintly and sainted
men. Mr. Hosking spent his all too short life
in ministering to the spiritual and physical
needs of the people of Ballarat East. His
name is fragrant to-day. We shall never for-
get dear John McNeil, whose abundant labours
throughout Australasia will be recorded by
unborn historians.
The subject of this sketch was not a preach-
er. His voice was neither heard in the pulpit,
nor in the street. Nevertheless in his own
house and neighbourhood, he put forth an
influence which eternity alone will reveal.
Not until the books are opened, and the great
white throne is set up, will it be known all the
good that he achieved for the Master Whom
19
JOHN DONALDSON.


he so ardently loved. God places His people
in widely different stations, but it may be said
without fear of contradiction, that wherever
they are found, they are a blessing for good.
We find Joseph in the Egyptian Court, and
David following the sheep ; Amos, a gatherer
of sycamore fruit, and Peter a fisherman;
Paul, a man of culture and refinement, and
John the Baptist clothed in camels’ hair, with
a leathern girdle around his loins; Josiah on
the throne, and Dorcas with her needle, making
garments for the poor; Elijah behind the
plough, and Gideon threshing wheat; Paul
preaching on Mars’ Hill to the cultured Athen-
ians, and Philip preaching Christ to an Ethio-
pian in the desert of Gaza.
Let us not, however, fall into the common
error of measuring men and women intellect-
ually and spiritually by their stations in life.
It will be found, I doubt not, that many,
whose names were never heard of beyond their
own little village, were rare jewels that will
20
JOHN DONALDSON.


shine in the diadem of Emmanuel’s crown;
and in my humble opinion, to this class of
quiet and unobtrusive men and women belong-
ed our sainted friend. In reflecting upon his
beautiful character, I observe first, that he
was a strong man physically and mentally.
There was nothing small about him, nothing
mean; broad of shoulders, and broad of brow.
In limb, in soul, and in mind, he gave one
the impression of being a sterling man. His
voice was quite in keeping with his outward
frame ; it was a deep chest voice, and in prayer
one might have easily heard it a considerable
distance from his house. As we have already
pointed out, he came from the farmer class
of Scotland, what might be termed the
backbone of the nation —true vertebrates,
whether we view them physically, intellectually,
or morally. We might sing, changing two
words in Burnsspoem, “The Cotter’s Saturday
Night,”
21
JOHN DONALDSON.


“From men like these, old Scotia’s greatness springs,
That makes her loved at home, revered abroad.
Princes and lords are but the breath of kings ;
An honest man’s the noblest work of God.”
Mr. John Donaldson was essentially a holy
man. By that term I mean holiness from the
New Testament point of view. But, it may
be asked, what is holiness ? It is not some-
thing that one may put on and off like one’s
Sabbath clothes, and it does not consist in a
certain phraseology, or in a peculiar tone of
voice. There is nothing mawkish about it. It
may be affirmed that holiness of the right
stamp always attracts the good, although it
may repel the bad. Truly holy men, like the
subject of this sketch, are the most beautiful
and lovable of men. Holiness does not make
men unnatural or awkward in manners. It
may be said that holiness is likeness to God.
It includes all other moral attributes. A man
may be honest and yet not be holy, but he who
is holy, is honest, truthful, just, righteous in all
his dealings, benevolent and pure. If he be
22
JOHN DONALDSON.


not found to come up to this standard, then
his holiness is evidently not the holiness
preached by Jesus and His Apostles ; it is a
spurious holiness. A holy man, like our late
beloved brother, is a benediction wherever he
may be placed ; in the pulpit, or in the pew
in the busy mart, or in the field ; behind the
counter, or behind the plough. Holiness does
not make us unmanly. Was there anything
unmanly about Jesus? Was Paul unmanly?
Look at him before Agrippa. What a magni-
ficent man he appears to have been! Listen to
the closing words of his speech, “ I would to
God, that not only thou, but also all who hear
me this day, were both almost and altogether
such as I am, except these bonds.” Was there
anything unmanly about Luther ? Look at
him at the Diet of Worms. “Here I stand, I
can do naught else; God help me.” The
most powerful men in history have been holy
men. Asa thoughtful writer has said, “Moses,
Paul, and Luther were more than units; only
2 3
JOHN DONALDSON.


in a very narrow and familiar sense were they
units. There are personalities that are com-
pendiums; there are individualities that are
full of nations and empires”. It may be asked,
how is holiness to be obtained ? It cannot be
obtained apart from contact with Jesus. You
cannot successfully imitate holiness. All imi-
tations are like waxen flowers ; two things they
lack, namely, life and fragrance. There was
an attractiveness, a winsomeness, about our
friend who sleeps in Jesus that one cannot
easily define. It was an inspiration to hear
him pray and speak concerning Christ, and the
Book of books. He possessed in a very mark-
ed degree what St. Paul calls “theenlightened
eye.” Ephesians ist. chap., 18th. verse. “ The
eyes of your understanding being enlightened
that ye may know what is the hope of His
calling.” But, it may be asked, what is the
enlightened eye of which St. Paul speaks ?
We know that there is the poet’s “ enlightened
eye.” Burns possessed it. What beauty there
2 4
JOHN DONALDSON.


is in the poem on the mouse, whose little house
was in a moment destroyed by the plough-
share ! What marvellous beauty there is in
his poem on the daisy! Tennyson possessed
it. Has he not pointed out the beauty of the
Pleiades, “ glittering like fire-flies in a silver
braid,” and “the five beaded baby soles?”
These men could read God’s autographs of
beauty and of blessing where most men see
little or no beauty.
In like manner St. Paul could see a Divine
plan and purpose in the Word of God which
ordinary readers failed to apprehend. In other
words he had “ the enlightened eye,” and that
makes a tremendous difference. To the man
who is in possession of this rare gift the Bible
is an illuminated book. “It is not a plainer
Bible that we need; but it is a clearer insight,
a power of sharper discernment” as Dr. James
Hamilton used to say. Now our late friend
possessed this precious gift. The Bible was
his vade rnecum, his constant companion. He
25
JOHN DONALDSON.


could sincerely say with David, “O how I love
Thy law, it is my meditation all the day!” He
beheld wonderful things in it, and brought out of
its infinite treasures things new and old. The
Bible he was accustomed to use bears many
traces of close study. It is marked, thumbed,
discoloured, and broken through sheer hard
work. He preferred this old and faded volume
to a new one which his devoted son had
bought him ; for this reason no doubt, that he
was more familiar with it, and could readily
find any passage he wished. The Psalm book,
Patterson’s Shorter Catechism, and a work
entitled “The Spiritual Garland” are in the
same well-worn state. He had a profound
love for Dr. Joseph Parker, C. H. Spurgeon,
Dr. Me Duff, and other evangelical writers;
nevertheless the Bible was to him the Book
of books, and all other books occupied a
secondary place. Like David who said of
Goliath’s sword, “ Give me that, there is none
like it,” so in our brother’s estimation there
26
JOHN DONALDSON.


was no book to be compared with the Bible.
Like the plaintive Jeremiah he could honestly
exclaim, “Thy words were found, and I did
eat them, and Thy word was unto me the joy,
and the rejoicing of mine heart.”
Another thing I should like to notice in our
brother; he felt that in himself he was nothing.
He ascribed all he possessed to the grace of
God. No man knew better than he the
meaning of those pregnant words, “ I can of
mine own self do nothing,” and “ Without Me
ye can do nothing.” He knew well the spirit-
ual meaning of the word “ Grace.” He made
much of the grace of God. It was grace that
found him in the wilderness. It was grace
that revealed Christ to his soul. It was grace
that taught him how to pray, and how to live.
It was grace that enabled him to speak to this
one and that one concerning the great salva-
tion. It was grace that kept him steadfast to
the end. Like good old Honest in the Pilgrim's
Progress , he was always ready to say, “Grace
2 7
JOHN DONALDSON.


reigns.” It should be noticed also that Mr,
Donaldson was a profound believer in “ the
three R’s of Revelation” —namely, Ruin by
the Fall, Redemption through the atoning
blood of Jesus, Regeneration through the
Holy Spirit. He was well grounded in that
splendid compendium of theology, the Shorter
Catechism. He knew it from cover to cover.
If you had asked him concerning the Fall of
Man, he would have given you the answer in
the words of the Catechism, “ All mankind by
their fall lost communion with God, are under
His wrath and curse, and so made liable to all
the miseries in this life, to death itself, and to
the pains of hell for ever.”
If you had asked him, “What have we to do
in order to be saved ? ” you would have received
this answer, “To escape the wrath and curse
of God due to us for sin, God requireth of us
faith in Jesus Christ, repentance unto life, with
the diligent use of all the outward means
28
JOHN DONALDSON.


whereby Christ communicateth to us the
benefits of redemption.”
If you had asked him, “ What is repentance?”
you would have received this answer, “ Re-
pentance unto life is a saving grace, whereby
a sinner, out of a true sense of his sin, and
apprehension of the mercy of God in Christ,
doth with grief and hatred of his sin, turn
from it unto God with full purpose of, and
endeavour after new obedience.”
He had a remarkable memory. On several
occasions I have heard him repeat long
passages from the New Testament. He was
particularly fond of the Gospel of St. John.
I do not wonder at this predilection for John’s
Gospel. It may be said that it is the simplest
in speech, while at the same time it is the
profoundest in thought of any book extant. It
is so full of Jesus that we shall not get more
until we pass within the gates of pearl. The
little children love this book, and the aged
ones find in it satisfying pabulum for the soul.
29
JOHN DONALDSON.


It will be seen therefore that the Catechism
and the Word of God were more precious to
him than rubies. I have met with compara-
tively few—indeed I may say none—who poss-
essed a clearer grip of divine truth. He was
remarkably clear on all the fundamental doc-
trines of the Christian religion. Let us briefly
review some of these grand doctrines which
were preached by Chalmers, Guthrie, and
Spurgeon. Take for instance the first “ R,”
Ruin by the Fall. What say the Scriptures?
“ The whole head is sick, and the whole heart
faint, from the sole of the foot, even unto the
head, there is no soundness in it but wounds
and bruises.” Here is another photograph ;
“ Ye walked in times past according to the
course of this world, according to the prince
of the power of the air, the spirit that now
worketh in the children of disobedience.”
“ And were by nature the children of wrath,
even as others.” And in the same Epistle we
read, “ Ye were aliens, strangers, without God>
30
JOHN DONALDSON.


without Christ, without hope, afar off.” Here
is another photograph taken by the Holy Spirit;
“ There is none righteous, no, not one, none
that understandeth : there is none that seeketh
after God. They are all gone out of the way,
they are together become unprofitable!” Mr.
Donaldson knew perfectly well that there is
much that is beautiful in many persons, al-
though they do not believe in the ruin of our
nature by the Fall. He would have been the
first to admit that they might be amiable,
honest, truthful, gentle and loving, and would
admire those traits, but he held that something
more was required. He believed that love to
God, with all the heart, soul, and mind, was
a sine qua non in those who professed religion.
He would have asked these questions :—ls
Christ precious to your soul ? Do you know
Him as your Friend ? Saviour ? and Brother ?
Are you walking in daily communion with
Jesus ? Have you received the Holy Spirit ?
And we believe that he was right. We hold
3 1
JOHN DONALDSON.


that no amount of culture, or learning, or re-
finement can possibly take the place of regen-
eration. The next “R” is Redemption through
the blood of Jesus. The Scriptures speak
with no uncertain sound here. “ Without
shedding of blood there is no remission.” There
is a magnificent passage in the Epistle to the
Romans, “ Whom God hath set forth to be
a propitiation through faith in His blood.”
“Propitiation” in this text is equivalent to “A
propitiatory sacrifice.” We read, “Ye are
made nigh by the blood of Christ”, “We have
peace through His blood ”, “By His own blood
He entered in once into the holy place having
obtained eternal redemption for us.” We are
said to be “ washed in His blood.” “Unto Him
that loved us, and washed us from our sins in
His own blood.” The late Mr. Donaldson
held very clear views concerning the atone-
ment. He knew the truth however, not only
by the intellect, but also experimentally. It
was not merely head knowledge with him but
32
JOHN DONALDSON.


heart experience to which he could appeal.
The third “R” is Regeneration by the Spirit.
Turn with me to the “Born again chapter of
St. John’s Gospel.” “Except a man be born
anew he cannot see the kingdom of God ”
“ Except a man be born of water, and of the
Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of
God.” Notice also it is imperative, “ Marvel
not that I said unto thee, Ye must be born
again.” Our late beloved brother accentuated
these doctrines in his conversation and prayers.
He knew by a blessed experience that he had
passed from death unto life. Mr. Donaldson
was deeply taught of the Spirit of God. He
knew from a gracious experience the deeply
spiritual meaning of such words as these, “ I
will pray the Father, and He will give you
another Comforter, that He may abide with
you for ever,” “ I will not leave you orphans, I
will come unto you,” “ When He, the Spirit
of truth is come, He will guide you into all
truth, for He shall take of mine and shall
shew it unto you.”
33
JOHN DONALDSON.


JOHN DONALDSON.
Another feature in his character was the
consciousness he had of the presence of God.
To many I fear in our day, God is as one who
is “afar off.” Some have voted God out of
the universe; but we know who it is that
says, “ There is no God ” ; it is the fool. Our
father who has passed hence could say from a
blessed experience, “ God is at my right hand,
I shall not be moved”; “Whom have I in
heaven but Thee, and there is none on the
earth that I desire besides Thee?” He prac-
tised like Lawrence, the saintly monk, the
presence of God. He was an Enoch-like man.
“ He walked with God.”
He was an intensely earnest man. Life in
his estimation was a serious business, and not
a merry-go-round. And, after all, is it not
true that the earnest men of history have
done most for God ?
Not the laughers and scoffers at divine
things, like Voltaire ; but the serious men, like
Paul, Luther, and Knox : these are the men
34


whom God has honoured and used in His
service. It almost seems that the doctrine that
is popular to-day is, “Man’s chief end is to
glorify and enjoy himself. ’ The doctrine of
the Westminster divines, and we may add also
the Bible, is, “Man’s chief end is to glorify
God and enjoy him for ever.”
He was also a mighty man in prayer, as
may be seen from the few specimens which
are given in this little book. Often, during
the night watches, his strong voice, to which
I have already alluded, might have been heard
in praise and prayer. His prayers were very
comprehensive, and had a wide range. There
was nothing small about them, nothing selfish.
He looked beyond his own immediate needs.
He prayed for all classes, for the poor and
needy, the sick, and those in places of power
and influence. He prayed for ministers of the
Word and missionaries. He prayed for St.
John’s Church and its Minister; for the elders,
and deacons, and Sabbath School teachers.
35
JOHN DONALDSON.


Like John Welsh, and Rutherford, he had a
great grip of God—and a great passion for
God’s house, the habitation where His honour
dwelleth.
And now I come to the close of this beautiful
life. For the last two years of his earthly
career, one could easily see that the earthly
tabernacle, although strongly framed, was grad-
ually, but surely being dissolved, n. Cor. v. i.
The Master was gently taking up pin after pin
of that tent which had withstood the rain and
storm and wind for nearly ninety-one winters.
During the last two or three months, before
the great change came, he passed through
what his ain Scotch folk would call a sair
time”. His two devoted sons, Mr. James
Boyd, and Charles Donaldson, watched and
waited upon him day and night. And at this
juncture I should like to say, that the sympathy
and love, the tenderness and devotion, which
these two sons manifested, were such that I do
not know where to look for a parallel case,
3 6
JOHN DONALDSON.




est” showed he was emphasizing the necessity
that the “interest” should be a “saving” one.
On another occasion he was heard to exclaim,
in beseeching tones, “ Blessed Saviour, come
and help me.” These words were uttered
with marked unction and emphasis. Through-
out his illness, even when his mind seemed to
be clouded, his faith in Jesus Christ never
wavered. Like the patriarch Abraham, “He
staggered not’at the promises of God through
unbelief, but was strong in faith giving glory to
God.” It appeared to me that he never lost the
sweet consciousness of the presence of God. His
two sons watched him cross over the Jordan.
Here let me say the crossing was by no means
a smooth one ; the water was very rough, and
at times the banks of the river were submerged.
Methought I heard him say, if you will permit
me to use the words that John Bunyan makes
use of in the Pilgrim's Progress in describing
how Mr. Stand-fast got over, “ This river has
been a terror to many : yea, the thoughts of it
38
JOHN DONALDSON.


also have frightened me. Now, methinks, I
stand easy ; my foot is fixed upon that on
which the feet of the priests that bare the ark
of the covenant stood, while Israel went over
this Jordan. (See Joshua in., 17.) The waters,
indeed, are bitter to the palate, and to the
stomach cold: yet the thought of what I am
going to, and of the glory that waits for me on
the other side, doth lie as a glowing coal at
my heart. I see myself now at the end of my
journey; my toilsome days are ended. I am go-
ing now to see that head that was crowned with
thorns, and that face that was spit upon for me.
I have formerly lived by hearsay and faith :
but now I go where I shall live by sight, and
shall be with Him in whose company I delight
myself. I have loved to hear my Lord spoken
of; and, wherever 1 have seen the print of His
shoe in the earth, there have I coveted to set
my foot too. His name has been to me as a
civet-box; yea, sweeter than all perfumes.
His voice to me has been most sweet; and His
39
JOHN DONALDSON.


countenance I have more desired than they
that have most desired the light of the sun.
His words I did use to gather for my food,
and for antidotes against my faintings. He
has held me and has kept me from mine
iniquities. Yea, my steps have been strength-
ened in His way.”
And now, dear reader, he has passed over to
the other side, to the land where the sun never
sets, and the moon wanes not. Methinks I
see him there amongst the glorified—there
where the leaves are always green, and the
flowers fade not —there, where the water of life
flows, so clear that one may see the bottom,
with its shells and pearls, and so deep that the
great Leviathan may sport itself therein
there, where the trees bear fruit, twelve times
in the year, and twelve kinds of fruit—there,
where the rainbow encircles the throne, speak-
ing of peace, pardon, mercy, and reconciliation
to the highly-favoured inhabitants—there
where the light is as the light of seven days,
40
JOHN DONALDSON.


for the Lamb of God illumines the city—there,
where the Good Shepherd leads the blood-
washed flock to perennial springs of water —
there, where the tear-drop is wiped away by
His hands that still bear the insignia of
Calvary. Yes, and truly, he has entered that
beautiful land, concerning which the prophet
Isaiah saith, “ The inhabitant shall no more
say, I am sick, for the people that dwell therein
shall be forgiven their iniquity.” The seer of
Patmos tells us that sorrow is unknown there ;
that no cry of anguish ever breaks upon the
ear ; that it is a holy land, and that nothing of
a defiling character can enter there; that it is
a supremely happy land ; that the voice of
melody is continuously heard there ; that no
discordant note is ever struck there to mar the
harmony. They sing the song of Moses, the
servant of God, which was sung millenniums
ago, and yet it seems as if it had been compos-
ed but yesterday. They sing the song of the
Lamb, which is two millenniums old, and yet
4 1
JOHN DONALDSON.


it is called the “New Song”. lam of opinion
that no speech of mine can more beautifully
close this all-too-short biographical sketch
than the words of dear old John Bunyan,
“ Now just as the gates were opened to let in
this aged saint of God, I looked in after him,
and behold, the city shone like the sun : the
streets also were paved with gold, and in them
walked many men with crowns on their heads,
palms in their hands, and golden harps to sing
praises withal. There were also amongst
them, those that had wings, and they answered
one another without intermission, saying,
‘ Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord ’. And after that,
they shut up the gates : which, when I had
seen, I wished myself among them.”
42
JOHN DONALDSON.


|3ocm Jltr. gonaiitaon tnas fonii of renting
oeeasionaUji at Ijomc.
i Beyond this gloomy vale of Night
There smiles a land where all is peace,
Where reigns unclouded endless Light,
Where pain, and death, and parting cease,
And ev’ry trickling tear is dry,
And Joy beams bright from every eye.
2 And there around the shining Throne
Innumerous hosts of angels move,
And bless the Ever-loving One,
His grace adore, His goodness prove.
And there the Saviour’s Face is seen
Without a cloud or veil between.
3 And there in robes of radiant white
They walk who once were mourners here.
And, hark ! our spirits they invite
To join them in that happier sphere.
We come, we come ! not Jordan’s wave
Affrights us, —nor the gloomy grave.
4 Soon, soon, these spirits will remove,
And these frail tenements decay ;
And soon before the Throne of Love
We’ll share your joys through endless day.
Departed friends ! we come, we come !
We fly from earth ! we’re hast’ning home.
43
JOHN DONALDSON.


Mr. J. WEST LAU, of the Ballarat Town Mission,
writes
ANE of the features of my first Sunday
evening congregation at the Mission
which impressed me very deeply was the large
number of venerable looking old men and
women who occupied the front seats of the
building, varying in their ages from seventy to
upwards of ninety years. Some were bowed
as if with the weight of years, and enfeebled
by the infirmities which often attend an ad-
vanced age ; whilst others, and among them
some of the oldest, were still erect and strong.
The deep interest manifested in every part of
the service was touching and beautiful as with
upturned faces they took part in the songs of
praise, or with bowed heads reverently mur-
mured their responses to the preacher’s peti-
44
JOHN DONALDSON.


tions, or with fixed and earnest gaze they
drank in the message from the living Word.
Among this noble band, almost the last of
whom has passed away to rest, was our belov-
ed brother, John Donaldson. Long before the
writer’s connexion with the Mission, he had
been identified with the congregation and took
a deep interest in its services. He also enjoy-
ed the warm friendship of the late missionary,
the revered Martin Hosking; and, until the
affliction from which he suffered became so
severe as to deprive him of the sense of hear-
ing, he was regularly in his place.
As one who had the privilege of knowing
him intimately, I am delighted to call to mind
his very simple, yet clear and steadfast faith
in his Redeemer. A passage of Scripture he
frequently quoted was, “ Other foundation can
no man lay than that is laid, which is Jesus
Christ.” (i. Cor. in., verse n.) When he
could no longer be present at Divine worship,
and conversation could only be carried on with
45
JOHN DONALDSON.


difficulty because of his severe deafness, he
was just as clear in his faith’s vision, just as
firm in his confidence and trust, and as bright
in his anticipations for the future as ever before.
“ One by one the heavy laden
Sinks beneath the setting sun ;
And the aged pilgrim welcomes
Evening shadows as they come.”
Naturally enough, we fondly cherish in our
memories the closing testimony of our departed
ones ; but in its worth to the world, so full of
perplexities and doubts and difficulties, the
most valued testimony is that of the Christian
who, like him of whom we write, in daily life
and conduct gives evidence of the reality and
power of the living Christ, and the fulfilment
of the Divine promise, “ And even to your old
age 1 am he ; and even to hoar hairs will I
carry you : I have made, and I will bear;
even I will carry, and will deliver you.”
(Isaiah xlvi., verse 4.)
4 6
JOHN DONALDSON.


SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE BY HIS SON.
HE story of my father’s life, so long and so
' ’ closely interwoven with my own, and of
the exalted Christian character that marked it all
from first to last is so full of interest to me that
to fill a little volume with it would be quite an
easy, pleasant task ; as this is but a limited little
brochure, however, it becomes essential to say the
most in as few words as possible.
The very memory of him is so blest that to me
it is a delight to think and speak of all his win-
ning ways, his “ taking ” style and manner of
expression, his keenness of eye and intellect, his
continuous and persistent study of, first and fore-
most, the Word of God itself, and then of notable
authors clustering themselves around the great
concerns of Life and Immortality, and of his
47
JOHN DONALDSON.


unswerving loyalty to Christ and His cause.
Such a man as this, though living in comparative
obscurity, must of necessity have been a powerful
influence for good among his very many friends
and acquaintances, by whom he is most certainly
remembered with every feeling of respect and
regard, while by those who knew him most inti-
mately he was beloved and revered.
The foregoing admirably written work bearing
on the life, illness, and departure of my beloved
father is one of pure good-will on the part of the
Rev. M. G. Hart. From his well-worded pages
it will be seen how saintly a man my father was,
how patient in time of trouble, how fully prepar-
ed he ever was to go hence to be “for ever with
the Lord,” how upright, and kind, and consider-
ate he was to everyone about him—and to myself,
his constant companion in health and in sickness,
by day, and, when necessary, by night.
The Rev. Mr. Hart was assiduous in his minis-
trations to my father; and the unmixed friendship,
nay, love that existed between them was as mu-
48
JOHN DONALDSON.


tual as it was sterling. My father longed for his
visits, and never a prayer did he offer—frequently
through the night as well as in the day—in which
each member of the Manse household was un-
named. My father’s petitions (curtailed speci-
mens appended) were always comprehensive ; in
every instance his minister was the subject of
special intercession at the throne of the Heavenly
Grace.
And here, from among much that might be re-
lated, one matter at least may find a place in
passing: it is this. The metrical Psalms and
Paraphrases were peculiarly sweet to his taste ;
when awake (and this was not seldom) in the
“ wee sma’ ’oors ” he could be heard singing,
say, a whole paraphrase through to himself. The
35th. he “crooned” thus many a time. “Songs
in the night! ”
The attention, thought, care Mr. Hart always
exhibited towards the head of our home remain
as a memorial of true devotion to the great work
in which he is engaged ; while to us, bereft of a
49
JOHN DONALDSON.


presence so affectionately strong as to be remem-
bered for ever, feelings of appreciation and thank-
fulness can find no words with which to give
adequate expression. That he may long be spar-
ed in the church and to St. John’s is the heart-
felt prayer of the writer.
By some sort of prescience, father, as early as
7th. May of last year (1906) directed the words
that should be accepted as his last. They are
these: “Fare thee well, all my kind friends.
Lord Jesus, receive my spirit into Thy gentle
hands,-—which will give Rest to the weary pil-
grim.” He was exceedingly particular about
this ; the words had to be taken in writing before
him, —and again next day. “ Things must not
be left to the last when perhaps one won’t be able
to speak; and it is best to have a few words to
say to comfort those who are left behind,” he
explained.
It only remains for me to add that my brother
Charles, to whom credit is due for the excellent
photograph, is desirous of stating that he is en-
50
JOHN DONALDSON.


tirely at one with me in the course of these re-
marks regarding our beloved father and the Rev.
M. G. Hart.
J. B. Donaldson.
51
JOHN DONALDSON.


labourite $ saint.
Psalm cxxi
1 Ito the hills will lift mine eyes,
from whence doth come mine aid.
2 My safety cometh from the Lord,
who heav’n and earth hath made.
3 Thy foot he’ll not let slide, nor will
he slumber that thee keeps.
4 Behold, he that keeps Israel,
he slumbers not, nor sleeps.
5 The Lord thee keeps, the Lord Thy shade
on thy right hand doth stay;
6 The moon by night thee shall not smite,
nor yet the sun by day.
7 The Lord shall keep thy soul ; he shall
preserve thee from all ill.
8 Henceforth thy going out and in
God keep for ever will.
52
JOHN DONALDSON.


JV. JTabountE paraphrase.
Paraphrase liii.
1 Take comfort, Christians, when your friends
in Jesus fall asleep;
Their better being never ends ;
why then dejected weep ?
2 Why inconsolable as those
to whom no hope is giv’n ?
Death is the messenger of peace,
and calls the soul to heav’n.
3 As Jesus died, and rose again
victorious from the dead ;
So His disciples rise, and reign
with their triumphant Head.
4 The time draws nigh, when from the clouds
Christ shall with shouts descend,
And the last trumpet’s awful voice
the heav’ns and earth shall rend.
5 Then they who live shall changed be,
and they who sleep shall wake ; •
The graves shall yield their ancient charge,
and earth’s foundations shake.
6 The saints of God, from death set free,
with joy shall mount on high;
The heav’nly hosts with praises loud
shall meet them in the sky.
53
JOHN DONALDSON.


7 Together to their Father’s house
with joyful hearts they go ;
And dwell for ever with the Lord,
beyond the reach of woe.
8 A few short years of evil past,
we reach the happy shore,
Where death-divided friends at last
shall meet to part no more.
54
JOHN DONALDSON.


<k 3Fttbouritc IJjjimtt.
Hymn 21.
1 God moves in a mysterious way
His wonders to perform ;
He plants His footsteps in the sea,
And rides upon the storm.
2 Deep in unfathomable mines
Of never-failing skill,
He treasures up His bright designs,
And works His sovereign will.
3 Ye fearful saints, fresh courage take;
The clouds ye so much dread
Are big with mercy, and shall break
In blessings on your head.
4 Judge not the Lord by feeble sense,
But trust Him for His grace ;
Behind a frowning providence
He hides a smiling face.
5 His purposes will ripen fast,
Unfolding every hour;
The bud may have a bitter taste,
But sweet will be the flower.
6 Blind unbelief is sure to err,
And scan His work in vain;
God is His own interpreter.
And He will make it plain.
55
JOHN DONALDSON.


|3 assays.
(texts, pithy sayings, etc.)
From Mr. JOHN DONALDSON’S Compilation.
Mj?E that rejecteth me, and receiveth not my words,
hath one that judgeth him; the word that I
have spoken, the same shall judge him in the last day.
John xii., verse 48.
Let not your heart be troubled : ye believe in God,
believe also in me. In my Father’s house are many
mansions: if it were not so, I would have told you. I
go to prepare a place for you. John xiv., verses 1-2.
If a man love me, he will keep my words : and my
Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and
make our abode with him. John xiv., verse 23.
With all lowliness and meekness, with long-suffering,
forbearing one another in love. Eph. iv., verse 2.
56
JOHN DONALDSON.


Teach us what we shall say unto him; for we cannot
order our speech by reason of darkness.
Job xxxvii., verse 19.
He that covereth his sins shall not prosper: but
whoso confesseth and forsaketh them shall have mercy.
Prov. xxviii., verse 13.
But I said, How shall I put thee among the children,
and give thee a pleasant land, a goodly heritage of the
hosts of nations ? and I said, Thou shalt call me, My
father; and shalt not turn away from me.
Jer. iii., verse ig.
If my people, which are called by my name, shall
humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn
from their wicked ways; then will I hear from heaven,
and will forgive their sin, and will heal their land.
2 Chron. vii., verse 14.
He removed the high places, and brake the images,
and cut down the groves, and brake in pieces the brasen
serpent that Moses had made: for unto those days the
children of Israel did burn incense to it: and he called
it Nehushtan. 2 Kings, xviii., verse 4.
57
JOHN DONALDSON.


Let us make those our friends who are friends of
Jesus
Who follows Pleasure, follows Pain. Who follows
God, finds Pleasure following him.
O for grace to see the hand of Jesus in every favour.
Fight the good fight of Faith: hold fast till He come.
If none but Jesus is thy Delight, take heart
This life is but a scene of probation through which
we pass to the real life above.
Only those who openly identify themselves with the
cause of God will be victorious and triumphant.
Blessed Jesus, be with us in the furnace of affliction;
purify us there, and bring us forth as gold refined.
A stranger passing through a churchyard saw these
words written on a tombstone : “ Here lies an old man—
seven years old.” (He had been a true Christian only
for that length of time).
58
JOHN DONALDSON.




O false ungrateful world ! to call the grave
Man’s long last home :
’Tis but a lodging held from week to week,
Till Christ shall come !
Soon the whole like a parched scroll
Shall before my amazed sight upraise ;
And without a screen,
At one burst be seen
The Presence wherein I have ever been.
And now within the silent tomb his mortal body lies;
The higher faculty has gone to dwell beyond the skies.
But in that happy household where he was wont to dwell,
The memory shall aye remain of him they love so well.
We ought to have a competent knowledge of the
principles of the Christian faith, and give a steady
adherence to it under all trials and temptations.
Be not ashamed to confess that you have been in the
wrong. It is but owning what you need not be ashamed
of, —that you now have more sense than before to see
your error, more humanity to acknowledge it, and more
grace to correct it.
60
JOHN DONALDSON.


Do pray the Lord to reveal Himself to you. Ask
that it may not be a dead form to you, but that now in
very deed you may give to Christ your heart, —while He
shall show you His hands and His side, and make known
to you His agonies and death wherewith He redeemed
you from the wrath to come.
Lord, we have given ourselves up to Thee, and
chosen Thee for our eternal Portion and our highest good.
We have seen the insufficiency of creatures to make us
happy, and we have betaken ourselves to a higher hope.
We have beheld Jesus Christ the Saviour in his perfect
righteousness; and in His all-sufficient grace we have
put our trust in Him, and we have made our covenant
with the Father, by the sacrifice of the Son. We have
often drawn near to Thee in Thine Ordinances ; we have
ratified and confirmed the holy covenant at Thy table—
as well as been devoted to Thee by the initial ordinance
of baptism. We have given up our name to God in His
house; and we have, as it were, subscribed with our
hands to be the Lord’s.
61
JOHN DONALDSON.


jk iEorning srayi>r.
(J.D.)
If LMIGHTY GOD, we desire to present
ourselves at the footstool of Thy
throne, to call upon Thy Great Name, and to
worship Thee, thanking Thee that we are all
here before Thee, the living monuments of Thy
mercy. When we come into Thy presence to
seek Thee the Lord, and to renew our vows
with Thee, we ought to be mindful that Thou
art great, and greatly to be feared, the King
eternal, immortal, and invisible. We come
unto Thee, looking up unto Jesus who loved us
and gave Himself for us, and who is at Thy
right hand making intercession for us. Enable
us to call in our wandering thoughts from the
vanities of this world. Pour out upon us Thy
62
JOHN DONALDSON.


Spirit of grace as a spirit of grace and of
supplications, and give us a saving interest in
the blood of the Lamb that was slain for our
sins.
We have sinned against Thee, our God and
Heavenly Father. We have sinned against
light and liberty, and against our own con-
science. We have defiled ourselves : we have
set at nought all Thy counsels, and would none
of Thy reproofs. O Lord, we confess that we
are guilty before Thee, for we are wholly inclined
to that which is evil. Blot out all our sins
from the book of Thy remembrance, for Christ’s
sake, so that we may be renewed in the spirit
of our minds and created anew in Christ Jesus.
May we be born again, not of corruptible seed,
but of incorruptible—of Thy Word that liveth
for ever. If we turn unto Thee and keep Thy
commandments, Thou wilt in no wise cast us
out. If we return unto Thee, Thou hast promised
to return unto us. With Thee there is forgive-
ness that Thou mayest be feared, for Thou hast
63
JOHN DONALDSON.


no pleasure in the death of the wicked. Thou
art waiting to be gracious to us. Forgive us all
our iniquities, and cleanse us from all our sins.
We thank and adore Thy Holy Name, O
God, for Thy returning kindness to us this
morning, for our health and strength, and for
all our enjoyments; for Thy Holy Word which
we have read at this time, and that we live in
the days of the Son of Man. Thou art good
unto all, and Thy goodness is over all Thy
works : it is new to us every morning, and Thy
faithfulness every evening. We desire to bless
Thy Name for revealing unto us Jesus Christ
and Him crucified for our sins. Above all
things we rejoice to know that Thou hast
remembered us in our low and lost estate; that
Thou, O Father, hast provided for us a Saviour,
who is able to save to the very uttermost.
Adored be Thy Holy Name for Thy great and
unspeakable Gift towards us. He took upon
Him our sins, and became man, and died when
we should have died. He died for our sins,
6 4
JOHN DONALDSON.


and rose again for our justification. Thou art
indeed a God of love, not willing that the sinner
should perish; and we are only the sinful creat-
ures of a day, and our foundation is in the dust.
Enable us to believe on Jesus Christ and the
finished work that He has accomplished.
This is the day in remembrance of the resur-
rection of our Lord and Saviour, Jesus Christ,
from the grave. O may we be enabled to
remember the Sabbath, and that Christ rose a
mighty Conqueror over death and the grave.
May we not be ashamed of Him, but may we
be enabled to love Him above all things in the
world, and to confess His Name. May we
remember our latter end and be preparing for
death, for we know not how soon we may be
called away. Do Thou give us strength to
resist evil, to flee from the wrath to come, and
to lay hold on eternal life. Revive and quicken
us according to Thy Word.
Let Thy blessing rest on those whom we
ought to remember at a throne of grace. Be
65
JOHN DONALDSON.


with us, for we commit our way unto Thee.
Leave us not to ourselves, for we are poor and
miserable, and blind and naked,
THE LORD’S PRAYER.
66
JOHN DONALDSON.


JEonting gratin'.
(J.D.)
(RfIOST Holy and ever-blessed God, we
’ believe that Thou art near us, and that
Thou hearest us. We are unworthy to come
into Thy presence, or take Thy Great Name
into our polluted lips. Wherewithal shall we
come before Thee, or bow before the Most
High God ? We come into Thy presence not
in our own name, but in the-Name of Jesus
Christ, Thine Only-Begotten Son, that we may
find mercy to pardon and grace to help in
time of need. O may we be enabled to humble
ourselves before Thee as we come unto Thee
this morning as guilty sinners, in His Great
Name Whom Thou hearest always, and in
Whom Thou art ever well-pleased. Do Thou
67
JOHN DONALDSON.


meet with us now, and bless us, and do us good.
Look down upon us from Thy holy habita-
tion with great compassion as we confess that
we are sinful before Thee. Thou knowest our
down-sitting and uprising, and art acquainted
with all our ways. Thine eye is to-and-fro
over all the earth, beholding the evil and the
good. We come unto Thee therefore as the
All-seeing God—merciful and gracious to every
one that calls upon Thee, If we say we have
no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is
not in us; but if we confess our sins, Thou art
faithful and just to forgive us our sins. May
they be forgiven us. Though we have sinned
against Thee and come short of Thy glory,
seeing we have rebelled against Thy laws, and
though our sins are multiplied against us, —yet
Thou art not willing that the wicked should
perish, but that all should turn unto Thee and
have life, and that more abundantly; and hast
sent Jesus Christ to save sinners, of whom we
are the chief. Thou so lovedst the world that
68
JOHN DONALDSON.


Thou gayest Thine only Son, that whosoever
believeth on Him should not perish, but have
everlasting life. For His sake have mercy
upon us, that our sins may not stand a witness
against us at the great day. O that we might
be enabled to die unto sin and live unto right-
eousness, having our hearts sprinkled from an
evil conscience, and our bodies washed as with
pure water. While we are putting off our
time and neglecting our duty, our day of grace
is fast passing away, and ere long the night of
death will overtake us; it is therefore time for
us to be up and doing, while it is to-day, for
the night cometh when no man can work : and
there is no work, nor wisdom, nor device in
the grave, whither we are all fast hastening
unto.
We believe in Thy superintending provi-
dence over us, for “In Thee we live, and move,
and have our being.” We would therefore
offer up our united thanks for the privileges
we enjoy. We are still the living monuments
69
JOHN DONALDSON.


of Thy mercy. Thou art still sparing us and
giving us time for repentance. Thou hast
never forgotten us for a moment ; every breath
that we draw cometh from Thee. We thank
Thee for all our temporal mercies, hut especial-
ly for our spiritual blessings. Thy goodness
and mercy have followed us all the days of our
lives. Thou openest Thy hand liberally, and
suppliest the wants of every living thing. Do
Thou give us food for our souls, and may we
be strengthened with Thy strength.
We bless Thy Holy Name for the return of
the Christian Sabbath, which brings to our
remembrance the resurrection of our Lord and
Saviour, Jesus Christ, from the grave. Thou
hast sanctified the Sabbath to Thyself, and
blessed it. May we be in the Spirit on this
Thy holy day. To-day may we set ourselves
to seek Thee with all our hearts, attending
upon Thee in prayer and supplication, striving
to enter in at the strait gate, for many
will seek to enter in and shall not be able. We
70
JOHN DONALDSON.


are strangers on the earth and sojourners as
all our fathers were, and our opportunities of
coming unto Thee may soon be taken away
from us. O enable us to know Thee this day,
Whom to know is life eternal: to press toward
the mark of the prize of the high calling of
God in Christ Jesus.
Pardon wherein we have sinned against
Thee, Most gracious God, and as we have
done iniquity, may we get grace to do so no
more.
O Lord, we cast ourselves upon Thee this
day. Keep us under Thy care and protection.
Do Thou uphold us and direct our thoughts
towards Thee. Surround us with Thy favour
as with a shield, and may we be kept by the
Mighty power of God through faith unto
salvation.
THE LORD’S PRAYER.
71
JOHN DONALDSON.


Sabbatb Aligning
(J.D.)
11LMIGHTY and Everlasting God, the
Creator of heaven and earth! Thou
hadst no beginning of days, and Thou canst
know no end of years. Amid all the vicissitudes
of a changing world, Thou changest not. Be-
stow on us, we beseech Thee, Thy Holy Spirit,
as a spirit of grace and of supplications.
“ Thy way is in the sea, and Thy path in
the great waters : and Thy footsteps are not
known.” Ps. Ixxvii., verse ig. Thou art God (
and, besides Thee, there is none else—the
High and the Lofty One that inhabitest Eter-
nity and the praises thereof: whose name is
Holy ! “ I dwell in the high and holy place ;
with him also that is of a contrite and humble
7 2
JOHN DONALDSON.


spirit: to revive the spirit of the humble and
to revive the heart of the contrite ones.” Isa.
Ivii., 15.
We thank Thee for this privilege of wor-
shipping Thee. We would draw near unto
Thee this night in the name of Jesus, Thy
Blessed Son, our Lord and Saviour. And as
the shadows of night have fallen around us, do
Thou, the Sun of our souls, disperse the dark-
ness of sin, giving us the inner sunshine of Thy
Presence and Love.
Thou hast been very gracious to us this day.
We have seen many a Sabbath day : yet Thou
art still lengthening out our day of grace and
giving us time for repentance. May a Sabbath
spirit follow us all throughout the week, and
may this day, the memorial of a Saviour’s
resurrection, be to us the earnest of that Rest
that remains for the people of God.
Do Thou bless all the congregations that
have assembled in Thy Name this day. May
Thy Word not return to Thee void, but may
73
JOHN DONALDSON.


every impression thereof be rendered perma-
nent and saving.
We thank Thee for the Bible that informs us
of the Way of Life through Thy Beloved Son.
May we be found reading Thy Word daily,
storing it up in our hearts, and walking accord-
ing to Thy commandments.
We are daily sinning against Thee, and
coming short of Thy glory. But blessed be
the Lord who hath redeemed us, not with
corruptible things, as silver and gold, but by
the precious blood of Christ as a Lamb with-
out blemish.
Fit and prepare us for our great change,
that when the hour of our earthly departure
arrives, it may be to us the birth-hour of a
new life in glory everlasting.
Let Thy suffering people everywhere remem-
ber that their affliction is but the chastisement
of a Father, that the furnace is lighted to purge
away the dross, and to refine and purify for
glory. Let them know Him that hath promis-
74
JOHN DONALDSON.


ed, “ I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee.”
Be with all our beloved friends and relatives,
neighbours and acquaintances, to keep them,
and to sustain them, and to bless them. May
they be glad in the Lord, and walk in His
ways.
Do Thou be with us now, gracious God, to
keep and to bless us. Continue to us the bliss
of unbroken communion with Thee.
Watch over us throughout the darkness of
the night. Spread Thy covering wings around
us, and, if Thou seest fit, may we rise refresh-
ed, ready for duty, calling upon Thy Holy
Name and looking up to Thee for Thy bless-
ing.
And now, may the peace of God, which
passeth all understanding, keep our hearts and
minds in the knowledge and love of God, and
of His Son, Jesus Christ our Lord : and the
blessing of God Almighty, the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Ghost, be amongst us, and
remain with us, now and for ever. Amem.
75
JOHN DONALDSON.




77


w'f
