







The In Memoriam Sketch of Mr. Benvie's Life was written hy
Dr. Fraser at the request of a Congregational Committee,
and The Sermon was preached by the Rev. James
Crookston, of Newcastle , on the Sabbath after
the Funeral.


THE
IN MEMORIAM.
James Benvie was a Scotsman—a native of the Carse
of Gowrie, Perthshire. In early life he went to London
and there got his education. Later on, he studied for the
ministry at the Presbyterian College, Queen’s Square, and
was at the same time engaged in Mission work in connec-
tion with Regent’s Square congregation. Its minister then
was the well-known Rev. James Hamilton, D.D., who had
originally been an assistant at Abernyte, a parish which
looks down on the Carse from the heights which flank it.
Mr. Benvie took a prominent part in the business of the
Young Men’s Society while he was yet only a member of
Dr. Hamilton’s Church ; afterwards, as its Missionary, he
laboured chiefly in the district of Somers Town,—a region
of great squalor and ungodliness. A friendly notice of his
work there is given in Hare’s History of the Regent's Square
Congregation. In 1858 he was licensed as a preacher, and
in 1862 was called to be pastor of the Presbyterian Con-
gregation of Warrenford, near Alnwick, Northumberland.
He then married Harriot Mary Coleman, daughter of G.
Coleman, Esq., who had been an officer in the Royal Navy.
A brother of hers still survives in London, after a long
term of public service as head of one of the Departments
of H.M’s. Custom House.


Warrenford is a rural parish, occupied mainly by sturdy
farmers and their hinds, of the same race and speech as the
Scots of the Border Counties on the other side of the
Cheviot Hills. Both the men and the women of them are
of tall and muscular make ; Mr. Benvie had many stories
to tell of their shrewdness, humour, and capacity for work.
In the seventh and eighth centuries, Northumberland had
been evangelized by missionary monks —not of the modern
sort —sent by the Culdees of lona. Of these workers those
best known to history are Aidan, Adamnan, and Cuthbert.
The remains of their church-abbey are still to be seen on
Holy Island, off the coast, opposite Bamborough Castle.
The religious thought of the Northumbrians feels to this day
the influence of the teaching of those early Gospellers ; for
they are a church-loving and a church-going people, and
strong Presbyterians. In fact, Presbyterianism in England
nearly three centuries ago had no more faithful supporters
than the Northumbrian Classes. At an earlier period, when
Edward VI. was king, John Knox himself was one of the
King’s Chaplains, and ministered a few years at Newcastle
and Berwick-on-Tweed ; his first wife was Marjory Bowes,
who was a grand-daughter of Sir Ralph Bowes of Streatlam,
Knight, in the County of Durham. He might have been
Bishop of Newcastle if he had consented to take office in the
Church of England. Amid this peace of country life, Mr.
Benvie’s talent for preaching grew and began to develop, and
a prosperous career seemed open to him in the Presbyterian
Church of England, But his wife died in January, 1866,
leaving him alone with a little daughter, and that inclined
his mind to a change of scene. He was thus induced to
come to this colony by our Rev. Dr. Cameron, of Richmond,
who was at that time in the home country in quest of
ministers for the Church of New South Wales. He and
his child arrived in Sydney in September, 1867. The pulpit


of West Maitland was then vacant by the removal of the
Rev. 8. F. Mackenzie to Ashfield. Some friends who heard
him preach in Sydney said of Mr. Benvie, “ That’s the man
for Maitland,” and so it was; for, after conducting the
services here for two or three Sabbaths, he was unanimously
chosen by the Congregation and inducted to the charge
by the Presbytery of the Hunter on December 23, 1867.
Here he laboured continuously for well-nigh 85 years, and,
although his faithful preaching was known and valued in
Sydney and elsewhere, he preferred to remain in his coun-
try charge all these years.
In the early portion of his ministry, his reputation as a
successful cleric so steadily increased that in 1878 the Pres-
byteries chose him as Moderator of the General Assembly,
and I have heard ministers of the Church say that up to that
time they had seldom had so pleasant and orderly an
Assembly ; for the man in the chair was thoroughly fami-
liar with the law of the Presbyterian Church, and had the
firmness to check irrelevancy in speech and any tendency
to disorder. An incident that occurred at one of the
Assembly dinners that year is well worth recording. It
has long been the custom to invite to these dinners eminent
clergyman and members of other denominations, and to
ask them to say a few r words on the occasion. On one of
these days, a reverend Dr. of the Congregational Church
was present, who had made himself conspicuous before this
by denouncing the folly of churches that upheld creeds and
dogmas. He was invited to speak, and, with a singular want
of courtesy, he said, among other things, that the Presby-
terian Church in England in the past had lapsed into
Unitarianism because it too strictly enforced the creed of
its Confession. When he was done, Mr. Benvie, being in
the chair, rose and begged leave to set the speaker right as
to a few facts, to this effect: —The Presbyterian Church in


England of the 17th century was vigorous and pure in doc-
trine till the Acts of Parliament deprived it of its Assem-
blies and consequently of the power of discipline for errors
of belief; in some of its pulpits men began then to preach
heresy, and could not be hindered ; the genuine and sound
Presbyterians withdrew from these congregations, and so
the property of the church was left in the hands of the
heretical residue ; hence to this day in some parts of Eng-
land, if you ask where the Presbyterian Church is, the boy
in the streets will point you to a Unitarian Church ; Mr.
Benvie added that, in side-streets of Manchester, Brad-
ford and other towns, he had seen buildings with the
words “ Presbyterian Church ” carved in the stone over the
portals, but, on going in, he found the minister and wor-
shippers to be Congregationalists, who kept up this inscrip-
tion over the door in order that they might continue to
hold the endowments which had been given to these
churches long ago by Presbyterians. At which reply the
Assembly cheered heartily, and one reverend Dr. of ours
was heard to say, “ Well, if ever a man got his mouth
shut up and his nose cut off neatly, it has been done
now.”
In 1885, Mr. Benvie married Jessie M. Dickson, young-
est daughter of David Dickson, Esq., of Bolwarra, West
Maitland, who had been one of the early Elders of the
congregation, but died in 1867. Mrs. Benvie survives him,
and his daughter, who is now Mrs. John McDonald, of Ben
lan, Pokolbin, near West Maitland. The circumstances
of his death were somewhat pathetic. Some weeks before
it, tidings reached Maitland about the good work that had
been done in Wollongong and Kiama by the revival meet-
ings there; in his own pulpit he spoke of the number of
members that had been added to the roll of the Presby-
terian churches in that district, and hoped that similar


results would follow when the revivalists came here.
When they did come, he was often at their meetings. But,
on one of the last nights, the tent was very cold and he went
home feeling chilled. For two days he kept to the house,
but on Friday morning he went out to do some business in
the town ; I was with him for a short time that evening ;
we talked about the revival meetings, and, although it was
evident that he had a severe cold, yet I thought it to be
only one of those colds which he often had in the winter
season ; in two hours or so after I left the Manse, he was dead
—of acute bronchitis—before the doctors that were sum-
moned could give relief —June 6, 1902 —in the eightieth
year of his age. He died, as he wished, in the midst of
his work, for he had been talking with me about the services
of the coming Sabbath, and had for some time been pre-
paring a course of sermons on the Incarnation.
This sketch would not be complete, if we do not add an
appreciation of his character as a minister and as a man in
several aspects, as they showed themselves to his congrega-
tion.
(i). As a Pastor. —His daughter, when she was a little
child, sometimes said to him, as he was going out at the front
door, “ Where are you going, Pa ?” “I am going to look
after my sheep,” was the reply. And truly that is the chief
duty of a Pastor —to care for the sheep and guide them as a
shepherd. In this duty Mr. Benvie was not found want-
ing, and, if any case of distress or sickness was made known
to him, the sufferer soon came to feel that the sympathy
and the prayers of a good man availed much. “ I like his
house prayers,” said one, “ better than his preaching.”
“I remember to this hour,” said another, “although it is
twenty years ago, how feelingly he read the one hundred
and third Psalm, and the very tones of his voice as he
prayed at my husband’s deathbed.” His was a sympathetic


nature —one which always took a share in the sufferings
of others.
(2). As a Preacher. —If the old adage is true that the
preacher who is skilled in texts is a good theologian, then
Mr. Benvie was a theologian, and a ripe one ; for when the
text was announced, the hearers might be assured that the
subject would be thoroughly expounded and applied. The
easy fashion of selecting a text, and then preaching a
wordy address about things in general, was not his; hence
it was that people of superficial minds were not attracted
by his preaching, but the old and the experienced enjoyed
it. His mind and his heart were so full of spiritual matter
that he has often preached a series of sermons on one or
two verses of Sacred Writ. Soon after his induction, he
preached quite a number of sweet and able sermons from
the evangelical passages of the prophet Hosea, and in his
sermon-chest lie many a similar bundle of discourses. Nor
was he afraid to tackle knotty subjects, for he had a lot of
sermons on the Kenosis (Philippians ii, 6.), and the Spirits
in Prison (1 Peter iii, 19), and the like. He seldom spoke of
hell and the sufferings of the lost—a subject too painful;
his favorite themes were the invitations of the Gospel and
its warnings to the impenitent. Of late years, he did not
care to preach except about Christ; “ none but Christ.” He
said he would rather be preaching than be silent, and so he
continued preaching to the end. And he took no holiday,
and was seldom away from his pulpit all these years.
His public prayers were impressive, being remarkable
for their spirituality of tone. There was in them nothing
of the conventional expressions to be found in many pulpit
prayers, nor did he bring into them verses of Scripture;
but they were the utterance of an earnest heart, longing
for the manifestation of God in the individual and in the
congregation,—clothed in appropriate and spiritual lang-


uage, and mingled with supplications suited to all the con-
ditions of life. They were “effectual, fervent prayers.”
(8). As a Friend. —Mr. Benvie was a good friend to those
he could trust, specially to those in distress. I daresay there
are many who can testify to his kindly help in trouble.
A friend in need is a friend indeed. These things he did
without hope of recompense, and his goodness was some-
times abused. Tramps even who came to his door got
money to help them on their way, and, in some instances
that he told me of, the money after a while was faithfully
sent to him from a distance ; the men had prospered. But
in purely business matters he was cautious and circum-
spect, although he would stretch a point to oblige a friend.
And his friendship was shown in deeds, not in words; for
he was not a talker, and disliked what he used to call
gabble. His chosen companions were himself, his own
thoughts, his books, and silence.
(4). As a Man of Letters. —Mr, Benvie did not publish
anything in the shape of books or pamphlets, but, if all the
letters and articles that appeared in newspapers and
periodicals from his pen were re-printed, they would fill a
goodly volume. Soon after his arrival here, he wrote for
our church newspaper, the Presbyterian, a series of articles
called “ From Anchor to Anchor,” describing his voyage
in the Walter Hood from London to Sydney, the behaviour
of the ship, and the incidents of the voyage, and especially
the sayings and doings of his little three-year-old daughter
on board. A country reader said to the publisher, “ Send
me your paper as long as these stories about little Hettie
are continued.” At another time he wrote for the same
paper a number of articles on some pathetic Scotch songs.
But the bulk of his printed efforts was given to our local
newspaper the Maitland Mercury, and, whether the signa-
ture was Alpha, or Observer, or J. 8., or James Benvie, it


was always easy to know his style, for the matter was good,
solid sense, expressed in concise and forcible language.
Occasionally he was led into controversy in the columns of
the Maitland Mercury and the Sydney Morning Herald by
statements made by others either about the Presbyterian
Church or about theological questions, and in these direc-
tions his superior knowlege and equipment soon settled the
strife. Social questions and local civic questions, such as
Flood Prevention, also engaged his attention and his pen.
The contents of his book shelves are also an evidence of
the clerical tastes of their owner; for Ido not think there
is another Manse Library in this country equal to his in its
collection of choice and valuable books of ancient, modern
and recent literature to illustrate and explain the Holy
Scriptures. It contains also many standard works on
science, philosophy, and general knowledge. It has the best
of the English classics, but no novels, not even Ben Hur.
And his library was continually growing, up to the last
moment; for a bookseller in Edinburgh had a general
order from him to send by post the best of new books on
certain lines of study.
In all these aspects of his character and in others, Mr.
Benvie was well worthy of respect and grateful remem-
brance, and it is hoped that his memory will long be
cherished as a faithful Minister of this Congregation.
THE MEMORY OF THE JUST IS BLESSED.
12


THE SERMON.
“ For I am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart and to
be with Christ, which is far better.” Phil. i. 23.
CHIS letter was written, in a prison, to that little church
at Philippi which was, as most of the Christian
churches then were, exposed to insult and assault. Yet
there is a note of victory in it, Paul, as he wrote, was
resting and moving in the peace of God which passes
understanding, and in the love of Christ which passes
knowledge, and what he felt in his soul he put into his
letter.
I feel sure you will not misunderstand me when I say that
this service should ring with a note of victory. We have
not come here to weep and wail. Through Christ Jesus,
Death has lost its sting and the Grave its victory, and
the victory has been handed to us by the Conqueror. A
sense of loss, of great loss, we cannot but have ; our hearts
are but the hearts of men ; yet our faith is rooted in Jesus
Christ, who has given us such vision of the hereafter that,
when a good man dies, we cannot but recognise that our
loss is his great gain. Paul considered Death as a ser-
vant, the opener of a door to higher and nobler being.
The Man on the Cross, the Christ of the then recent
history, is also the Lord on the Throne, and Paul felt
himself so related to Him that he spoke of himself as
being “in Christ,” in Him with a proximity and union
which enter into all things, into life and into death, into
“ things present ’’ and “things to come.” The Christ of the


Cross was the Christ of the soul—the “same Jesus ” then,
the “same Jesus” now, at once his peace and his power,
the “ same Jesus ” in life, the “ same Jesus ”in death and
through that eternal day in which he would need him in
the experiences of heaven.
When you and I look at death and life we hardly know
which to dread most—the afflictions of life from which death
would release us, or the terrors of death from which life
would protect us. Both look to us like two evils of which
we know not which is less. Paul, with perfect composure,
balanced, as it were, the one against the other ; each was
a blessing—an immense blessing ; he scarcely knew which
was the greater. For himself he preferred death, because it
meant only departure to be with Christ—an exodus from
this world to another better world. On the other hand, he
prefers life in order to serve Jesus Christ and His Church,
and he the means of winning souls for the Kingdom. Surely
this is a splendid view of life and death. Both good. Life
is good, and death is good—the one because it enables us
to serve, the other because it means to be “ for ever with
the Lord,” Life is good, because with it we can glorify
Him and give a vision of Him to our fellow-men, and death
is good, because, even were life full for us of all the joys
of earth, which it is not, death will bid us enter into a
joy and a glory of which we can form no idea. As I
told you on the day of your late beloved minister’s burial,
in this life drops of the heavenly joy enter into us, but
through death we enter into the fulness of joy; the
great invitation from the Throne is “ Come, ye blessed,
. . . , enter into the joy.” . . . Let us not,
therefore, shun what seems to remind us of our departing ;
rather, whether the summons be at midnight or at daybreak,
let us be ready. But life is also good because in life we can
serve, and by service glorify Jesus Christ. Brethren, Ido


not think life is worth living for any other aim than that.
Yes ; we may love life, may desire to live, that we may fill
it to the full with Jesus Christ.
Life is full of value, but it is the revealed certainties of
the future which give it value. Your minister fainted not
in his path of toil because he looked away into the unseen.
On earth’s side of the veil, Jesus was all to him, and so
both the earthly and the heavenly were divinely good.
Both were good, and, after his day’s work was done, “ to
depart and be with Christ was better,” not better than
this life at its worst, but better than this life at its best.
Such is the flower I pluck for you this morning. If there
are tears upon your cheek, surely a rainbow arches in them,
for there is hope, aye, assurance for those that die in the
Lord. What a victorious life is that which sees value in
both life and death ! If this service does not ring with the
note of victory, then to my mind it comes short. Let not
your thought be low-winged to-day. Cultivate the/«? - look ;
be not of those who “see only things that are near.” Rise
above the morbid. Paul was a conqueror, though in a
prison when he wrote these words ; there was not a freer soul
in all Rome. This thought of St. Paul’s has helped the old;
that is natural; it has also helped the young who have some
right to expect many days. I have found that, in young
and old, a robust belief in Jesus Christ shows itself in
neither a passionate clinging to life nor in a morbid
contemplation of death. I had a young friend. He died
four years ago. He had early found peace in Jesus
Christ, and died at about the age of thirty-two years. Life
was to him full of strong interests and hopes. Life had
poured out before him a rich store of blessings and a large
wealth of surrounding love. He became very ill. I w T ent
to Queensland to see him. We talked of things that are
not seen. I said how much I hoped for his recovery. He


said “ Yes, I hope so too,” looking at bis wife and two little
children ; “ I hope so too, but to depart and be with Christ is
far better.” I said “ Yes, far, far better, if your day’s work is
done,” You see, life was sweet, but death, because of the life
behind it, was sweeter. My friend was young, but your
friend was old ; be bad grown old in the service of God.
We are glad to be known as soldiers of the King; this man
was a veteran, but if ever a man enjoyed life with a
vigorous, conscious joy, it was Janies Ben vie. Although
eighty years of age, thirty-five of which were devoted to
you, his life was full of affections, interests and enterprises,
and all for Christ and the Church. I have spoken to him
of his work for the Master. I felt that he had earned rest,
but he did not. He felt that he must work while the day
lasted, and, because he was so near the goal, that he must
run with all his might. He, too, loved life and knew its
value ; but he also, although loving life, said “ to depart and
be with Christ was far better.”
I cannot but speak of him with affection. When I hesi-
tated to accept a call to my present sphere, I received two
letters, so full of promptings to duty, that I laid them
before the Lord and said, “ Lord, if this man whom I do
not know has been led to write these things to me, do Thou
now show me what is Thy will.” And so, leaving a devoted,
loyal people, I came to Newcastle. I need not tell you that
the author of those letters was your late minister.
The first thing I learned to appreciate in him was his
warmth of heart for his brethren. His interest in me
and in my work was natural in the circumstances, but this
I found to be true of all his brethren in the ministry. He
loved his brethren, and was ever ready to give of the choicest
of his ripe life’s experiences in the service of Jesus Christ.
He was especially tender with young men in the ministry.
He was one to whom we could repair in the day of


perplexity. Another thing one soon saw was his strong
sense of duty. The staunchest friend, he was also the
most fearless opponent. If he felt duty prompt him to
hold a position, he would hold it against all comers, but he
would cherish no ill-will. There was no sacrifice too great
in the path of duty. He felt that faithfulness was life’s
success ; he would never for the sake of success yield up his
fidelity. The responsibility of his office as a minister of
Jesus Christ weighed heavily upon him, and, as he aged, the
responsibility seemed all the more. He believed God’s
reward at the last was the reward of the faithful rather
than the successful. “Well done, thou good and faithful
servant,” was fraught with much meaning to him. It was
this high sense of duty, as he conceived it, that kept him in
this ministry so many years, when others thought he had
earned rest. He wished to die with the harness on his
back, and God gave him his heart’s desire. If the choice
of the manner of his death had been left with himself, I
do not think he would have chosen other than the way in
which God took him. It was surely fitting that he who
had been identified with this city for so many years should
deliver his last message to a gathering in which so many
denominations were represented, and then die with a
message ready for you, to be given on the Sabbath which
did not dawn for him on this earth, but, what is far better,
dawned in that other world where he has now heard
a voice that is sweeter than the voice of mother-love, and
felt the touch of a hand that is gentler than the fall of the
dew.
He was the open-hearted friend, the helpful neighbour,
the wise citizen, the aitentive and intelligent worker; he
was all this and more ; but he has gone to be with Christ,
which is far better.
Another phase of his life, which was always an inspiration


to me, was his studious habit. Few men of his age were so
up-to-date in the theological literature of the day. Most
men of his years live in the past. Not so he. He kept an
open account with a well-known Edinburgh bookseller, and
all the latest and best works found their way into the West
Maitland manse. He had followed the different steps of
recent criticism, and ever brought a clear, keen, judicial
mind to bear upon it. He had early fixed his centre, and
no attack could unsettle his faith, but like a wise workman
he kept himself informed of every new attitude in the
theological world. Few manses can boast a library more
up-to-date than that which he has left. He was a student
till the last, and, although so many years had passed over
him, his intellect was clear as in the day of his youth. As
a student he was an inspiration to me, and I believe to all
his co-presbyters. He never allowed himself to grow old
in mind and heart. It was the body only that gave in.
There was no decay about him but that of the body, I
wondered at his wide range of study, and the lightning-like
rapidity with which he searched the very marrow of a
matter. And yet, withal, he was the humblest of men.
He did not esteem himself above others. He treated the
youngest of his brethren as his peer, studying only to be a
workman not needing to be ashamed but thoroughly
furnished unto every good work.
If you will miss him in this place, believe me when I
tell you we, his co-presbyters, will miss him in that court
of our beloved Church where his judgment was always well
considered, and always weighty. In difficulties, we younger
men instinctively turned to him. He was our Nestor.
Time and again have we seen the wisdom of the man,
even although at the time some of us may have doubted.
He had, what I think every true minister should desire, the
esteem and confidence of his brethren, and I believe that,


through all the years of his ministry in this great State,
he was worthy of it.
But what is most to you is the work he did among you.
I cannot speak of the influence of these thirty-five years.
No one but God can weigh them. Our highest estimate
might come far short. I can only speak of him as “my
fellow-labourer whose name is in the Book of Life.” I
like to think of two Books of Life, the Heavenly and the
Earthly. The Heavenly is the Earthly, and the Earthly
is the Heavenly. The Heavenly came from Heaven and is
with us, and the Earthly is in Heaven and is with God.
The Book of Life on Earth is filled with Heavenly things,
and the Book of Life in Heaven is filled with Earthly
things. The Book of Life on Earth we can read ; the
Book of Life in Heaven no man can read save only the Son
of Man, who came from Heaven, and, because we cannot
read it, we cannot estimate those thirty-five years of service.
We cannot read that Book, because, when we see the act, we
cannot tell the motive, but the Son of Man can read it,
because he knows what is in the heart of man. Oh ! that
Book of Life is full of strange surprises. Prom it He
makes His judgments and says, “ The first shall be last
and the last first.” From it he reads out things which
have been long forgotten by us—things we thought not
worth remembering. When he came to earth, he brought
a page of that Book of Life with him, and before he went
away he read it to us. Would you like to hear that page
from the Book of Life which no man can read ? I will
read the page, the only page which Jesus read, and then
you will know why none but God can fully weigh those
years. What years they must have been in God’s opinion !
Listen, this is the page :
“ Then shall the King say: Come, ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the


foundation of the world. For I was an hungered and ye
gave me meat; I was thirsty and ye gave me drink ; I was
a stranger and ye took me in ; naked and ye clothed me ;
I was sick and ye visited me ; I was in prison and ye came
unto me.” And they said, “When, Lord?" They had
forgotten ; but he remembered. And he answered, “ Inasmuch
as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren
ye have done it unto me.”
There is something else very terrible in this page from
the Book of Life which Jesus read before he went away,
but it is not for us at this time, speaking as we are of a
faithful servant. With this page from the Book of Life
before us, how utterly impossible it must ever be for us to
estimate even the life that seems a failure, how much more
so the years of faithful labour in the King’s vineyard !
But we feel to-day that those years must be of great value
in the opinion of God. It may be that your minister has
also with surprise said, “ When, Lord?" as his page from the
Book of Life has been read to him. Perhaps he too has
been reminded of kindnesses, sweet encouragements, and
helpful words given to fainting or imprisoned souls; he
perchance had forgotten, but the Lord remembered, and
remembering has said, “ Enter, thou blessed of my Father.”
And now, but one thought more. You and I have each
our page in that Book of Life, and the Master will one day
read it—your page and mine. Oh! what shall the reading
of it mean to me ? what to you ? Oh ! you who have
listened so often through those years to a voice that is now
silent, what shall the reading of that page mean to you ?
Men and women, thirty and five years of clean life and
faithful service are putting that question to you now, and
at the same time summoning you to high deeds and
unselfish effort for Jesus Christ. May they not call to you
in vain ! Amen. J.C.
June 15th, 1902.




