

In Memoriam.
David Livingstone.
A SERMON.




IN MEMORIAM.
DAVID LIVINGSTONE:
A SERMON
DELIVERED AT THE
UNITARIAN CHRISTIAN CHURCH, ADELAIDE,
ON
SUNDAY MORNING, JULY 5, 1874,
BY
CHARLES L. WHITHAM.
“ Alas, alas! how many sighs
Are breathed for his sad fate, who dies
With triumph dawning on his eyes.”— Cary.
PUBLISHED BY REQUEST.
ADELAIDE:
WILLIAM KYFFIN THOMAS, PRINTER, GRENFELL STREET.
1874.


PREFACE.
This humble tribute to the memory of a good ana great
man is published at the request of many of those to •whom
it was spoken. Poor and imperfect as it is, I gladly allow
it to be printed because I trust it will help others to
appreciate the work of Livingstone"'s life, and to cherish
his memory now he is dead.
David Livingstone was born at Blantyre, Lanarkshire,
Scotland, March 19, 1817 ; he died at Llala, Central
Africa, ALay 4, 1873, and was interred in Westminster
Abbey, April 18, 1874.
C. L. w.
Adelaide,
July Sth, 1874.


SERMON.
“ How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of bim
that bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace; that
bringeth good tidings of good, that publisheth salvation.”—
Isaiah lii. 7.
“The people that walked in darkness have seen a great
light : they that dwell in the land of the shadow of death,
upon them hath the light shined.”— lsaiah ix. 2.
The first of these passages of Scripture is a beautiful
description of one of God’s messengers in ancient
times, who was to bring cheering news and a redemp-
tive message to His people. I ask you to accept it
this morning as a fair representation of the man about
whom I am here to speak to you. The second of
these passages of Scripture is a brief but graphic
account of the re-awakening and uprising of a people
that had long lived under the shadow of calamity or
oppression—physical, mental, or moral—and may fairly
be given as a description of the people among whom
Livingstone has lived and worked for over thirty
years.


A little more than forty-five years ago, David
Livingstone was an unknown youth working for his
daily bread, as a common hand, in a Scottish village
manufactory. He was then only remarkable for being
a steady, honest, and industrious youth, pious and
wise enough to take seriously to heart the Scripture
which saith, “ Man shall not live on bread alone, but
by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of
God”—an injunction which he acted on ever afterward,
not only in nourishing his own eventful life, but in all
his dealings with others. A few weeks ago, after a
mournful journey of eleven months, the earthly
remains of the once unknown Scottish youth were laid
with national honours in a great nation’s holy of holies
for the dead. In olden times the journey from Egypt,
Israel’s house of bondage, to Canaan, Israel’s promised
land, took forty years, and disobedience, rebellion, and
many a curse and slaughter marked the way. The
journey from the manufacturing village of Blantyre to
Westminster Abbey occupied a little more, but it led
across wider seas, over more untrodden areas, through
far more insurmountable difficulties and dangers, and
imparted peace, scattered blessings, and proclaimed
earthly good tidings and heavenly salvation all the
way.
It is well that we should not part with such a man


without a solemn pause; without some allusion to his
life work ; without a passing word of tribute to a
memory alike enshrined in the hearts of the dusky
children of a long-oppressed and neglected continent,
and the wisest and noblest of a country whose flag is
the symbol of freedom and right wherever unfurled.
Emerson once wrote —“ 0, friend, never strike sail
to a fear; come into port bravely, or sail with God the
seas.” David Livingstone might have been that
“ friend,” for it was his firm resolve to finish the work
he believed God had given him to do, to come into port
triumphantly as the solver of the physical problem
which had troubled the sages of thirty centuries —as
the explorer of a goodly and a fruitful land hitherto
unknown; to “come into port bravely,” as became the
friend of a wronged and down-trodden race; but “ man
proposes and God disposes,” and so it was not to be;
and who shall say it was not well that he should be
thus kept from the long looked-for haven, to sail with
God the eternal seas 1 So David Livingstone is gone,
gone for evermore from these chequered scenes of earth
and time, wherein failures and successes, victories and
defeats, cross and recross each other in so many
various ways; but another David Livingstone lives on
in the heart of humanity. An uncivilized continent
paid him the best tribute it knew by tending him


peacefully in his last earthly hours, by reverently
hearing his remains a thousand miles through many
dangers that they might be sent to his native shore;
and if in the distant future, when commerce and Chris-
tianity have accomplished their civilizing task, Africa
should ever have a calendar of Saints, David Living-
stone will justly head the list.
I do not dwell here on the many interesting details
of Livingstone’s life. You are familiar with them, and
it would be little to my purpose to do so. There was
one remarkable feature in it, however, which shoidd
not be overlooked. Most men love knowledge for the
brilliancy it gives them in the society in which they
are accustomed to move; there are others who are
wiser, and love knowledge for its own sake. He was a
great lover of knowledge for its own sake and the sub-
stantial power it bestows, but he loved it far more as
one of the chief means in his great human redemptive
work.
“ Universal history,” says Carlyle, “ the history of
what man has accomplished in this world, is at the
bottom the history of the great men who have worked
here. They were the leaders of men, these great ones;
the modellers, patterns, and in a wide sense creators
of whatsoever the general mass of men contrived to


do or attain. All things that we see standing accom-
plished in the world are properly the outer material
result, the practical realization and embodiment of
thoughts that dwelt in the great men sent into the
world; the soul of the whole world’s history, it may
justly be considered were the history of these.” What-
ever of truth there may be in this somewhat sweeping-
assertion of Carlyle will apply to Livingstone when
the history of African exploration and civilization shall
have been impartially and faithfully written. With
his name will be associated the thorough exploration of
Southern Africa, from the Cape of Good Hope to the
Western coast of St. Paul de Loanda, and the opening
of the whole country North of the River Zambesi—a
country of lakes, and rivers, and fruitful lands, so rich
and extensive as to be almost equal to the discovery of
a new continent. But not only on the vastness and
importance of his explorations and discoveries does
Livingstone’s claim to fame rest, for wherever he
wandered through the unknown recesses and fastnesses
of Africa he carried good tidings of peace and salva-
tion in an unorthodox as well as in an orthodox sense.
It may fairly be said of him and his work as it was of
one of old : —“ How beautiful upon the mountains are
the feet of him that bringeth good tidings.” “ The
people that walked in darkness have seen a great light:


they that dwell in the land of the shadow of death,
upon them hath the light shined.”
David Livingstone has added abundantly to the
world’s geographical knowledge, but he has added much
more abundantly to humanity’s sense of its solemn
duty to the weak and wronged. His was that
“ enthusiasm of humanity” which considers no sacrifice
too great, no trial too severe, that are required for
human improvement. Entire devotion to the work he
had undertaken, strengthening commmunion with the
peaceful scenes he wandered through, conscious of the
guiding presence of God at all times and in all places,
unconquerable love of humanity, and a strong assurance
that civilization would in the approaching future
triumph over oppression, ignorance, and barbarism,
were the supports which with his native indomitable
courage enabled him to rise victoriously above the
severe trials that often beset him, and leave, in
unapproached pre-eminence in the annals of African
explorers, a blameless example of heroism and humane
nobility. In all the lone passages and humanly
unaccompanied hours of his life in Africa he nourished
his soul and renewed his failing strength with the
sense of duty performed, love for his kind exercised,
and future victory for the oppressed and unenlightened
assured. So true is all this of Livingstone, that he


addressed the University which he honoured by
accepting its gift of a degree in these simple, but firm
and prophetic words—“ I know that in a few years I
shall be cut off in that country which is now open; do
not let it be shut again. Igo back to Africa to make
an open path for commerce and Christianity, do you
carry out the work that I have begun : I leave it for
you.”
David Livingstone was almost all his life a Missionary,
but he was more than this —he was the explorer and
pioneer of this century, the liberator of the enslaved,
and the friend of the oppressed. By his invincible
courage and indomitable perseverance he has not only
laid the axe to the root of the accursed tree which has
for centuries borne fruit for the Asiatic, European, and
later for the American slave markets, but he has
finally solved the mystery which has so long surrounded
the most bountiful river in the world, and proclaimed
the existence of a beautiful and fruitful land, ready to
return rich harvests to commerce and civilization where
the world believed there was nought but a barren
desert.
It has been well said of him in the words of the
poet, that
“ After life’s fitful fever, he sleeps well.”
But who that meditates for a moment what human


life in its best state really is—who that looks on the
grave of this man, whose years have been so unselfishly
given and whose advancing hours were steadily and
faithfully devoted to the last to the service of God
and his fellowmen —who can contemplate such a
career, without taking into his heart the lessons and
admonitions which may minister to the piety, virtue’
and energy of his future years 1
Oft when on the blue waters of the Mediterranean,
with the snow-capped mountains of Spain in the
distance, at the close of a day that had been glorious,
have I sat and watched the sun leave the sky and dip
down into the western sea ; and as he sunk “ so grandly
to his rest,” the darkness did not immediately take
possession of the waters and the distant mountain
peaks; the sky still pulsed with pale light and long
crimson streaks; then, as I watched the colours change
and flicker, thin spikes of almost impalpable radiance
shot upwards through the afterglow and with celestial
alchemy turned many a grey cloud to rose and gold.
The rising mists on the fair plains of Granada were
caught and capriciously changed into violet and ruby
flame, and as the eye, still dazzled with the sun,
traversed the deserted heavens, the prospect seemed
more peaceful than when the fiery orb was there—more
peaceful, for the cold twilight grew apace, and the eye


was gradually cooled as it gazed toward the fading fire
of nature, until at last the gathering shades of
evening had toned all down into calm repose. The
conclusion of the life of David Livingstone was like the
splendour and peace of such a sunset. The day-star
is indeed gone, but all around are impregnated with
his glory. The life so grand, the end so peaceful.
What is the best and noblest tribute of love and
esteem we can pay to the memory of such a man 1 Is
it not this : that we should cherish all noble and pious
memories of him, and in his spirit continue the good
work for which he lived and died. The treatment which
Africa has experienced from nations the most advanced
in civilization is faithfully recorded in the pages of
their history, and its consequences are but too visible
in the moral aspects of the great continent itself. The
slave trade has been the gigantic wrong of Africa. By
a just retribution, the evil which civilized countries
committed has eaten like a cancer into their own moral
and political life. Spain presents at the present
moment a humiliating spectacle of anarchy, if not
decay. Portugal, whose flag once floated proudly on
every ocean, has dwindled to the insignificance of a
second-rate principality. The United States of America,
the mightiest confederacy of free states the world has
yet known, were not long since nearly shattered by


dissensions originating in the abominable institution to
which one section of the community passionately clung
as its greatest good. England, once deeply stained
with the same guilt, now stands the foremost protector
of the negro race, and her commerce and moral
ascendancy especially qualify her for redressing the
injustice of centuries, by raising the people of Africa
from their present helpless state, and giving them, in
due course, a just position in the world. This is the
fast that the God of nations requires of us, this is the
work that David Livingstone has bequeathed to our
Anglo-Saxon race, this is the tribute all true and noble
souls will pay to the memory of a true and noble man,
“ That we loose the bands of wickedness, and let the
oppressed go free.”
“ Life may change, but it may fly not;
Hope may vanish, but can die not;
Truth be veiled, but still it burneth ;
Love repulsed—but it returneth ;
Yet were life a charnel, where
Hope lay coffined with Despair ;
Yet were truth a sacred lie,
Love were lust
If Liberty
Lent not life its soul of light,
Hope its iris of delight,
Truth its prophet’s robe to wear,


Love its power to give and bear.
In the great morning of the world,
The Spirit of God with might unfurled
The flag of Freedom over chaos,
And all its banded anarchs fled,
Like vultures frighted from Imaus,
Before an earthquake’s tread.
So from time’s tempestuous dawn
Freedom’s splendour burst and shone.
*******
Let Freedom leave, where’er she flies,
A Desert, or a Paradise ;
Let the beautiful and the brave
Share her glory, or her grave.” *
W. K. Thomas, Printer, Adelaide.
* “ Hellas”— Shelley.




