

; orPvF P
6(0
3n fcmorg
Angus
1881 -1943


■
.
'
■
-


In ilemnnj
Of
Professor Sniuitcl 3Uips
M.A., D.Lit., D.D. (Queen’s Univ., Belfast),
Ph.D. (Princeton), D.D. (Glasgow)
PROFESSOR OF EXEGETICAL
THEOLOGY OF THE HEW
TESTAMENT AND HISTORICAL
THEOLOGY IN THE PRESBY
TERIAN THEOLOGICAL HALL
WITHIN ST. ANDREW’S
COLLEGE, SYDNEY.




by the
Men. JUtljur (tfiimunte
SOMEONE has written that a great man is like a great
mountain—you cannot see the whole of him from any point
of view x and different points of view will yield different and some-
times contradictory aspects of his character. Dr. Angus was a
veritable mountain of a man. For over a quarter of a century
he loomed large in the life of our Church and in the public eye.
To attempt anything like an adequate estimate of him one would
need to consider him as the scholar of international repute, the
inspiring teacher, the man of broad culture and the adventurous
and fearless thinker. I have no vantage point from which I can
survey even one of these aspects of this many-sided servant of
life and religion. But, as one of the most precious privileges of
the whole of my life, I was permitted to view at close range the
man himself. For over two and a half years I was his minister,
and for most of that period I was also his amanuensis. The
period that covered that dual relationship was the most self-
revealing in all his outspoken career, for within it, he bared his
soul as to the verities on which his faith was unshakeably fixed
and dictated to me, in the felicitous language, of which he was
such a master, his final thoughts on his proposed book on Jesus.
The impression of his personality that was stamped upon my
mind through that intimate fellowship I shall attempt to describe
with that candour which he set amongst the highest of the
virtues.
It may surprise many who thought of him first of all as a
man of strong, even stubborn, convictions and as a doughty
controversialist who went more than half way to engage himself
in battle, to learn that I set down as his chief trait his utter
loveableness. Hitherto I had thought that I had known him
pretty thoroughly through a pretty close acquaintance with most
of what he had written and through correspondence, but I had
never been able to understand the fierce affection in which he
had been held by successive relays of his students throughout
the long years of his teaching ministry. I think now that I
understand one of the sources of his capacity for winning some-
thing more than admiration —it was his unadorned frankness. He


was frank even in his antipathies. It never seemed to occur to
him that he should cloak them with an insincere pose of tolerance
or express his loyalties in diplomatic moderation.
Anything that savoured of insincerity or dissembling was
anathema to him. He once declared to me that having dis-
covered a certain eminent writer in a very unworthy bit of special
pleading, he would never read him again. This was a typical
illustration of those reactions of his that were so quick, direct
and vehement that they involved him in difficulties that more
calculating natures escaped. But when the victims of them were
those honestly seeking the truth, they eventually learned that
"faithful are the wounds of a friend.” One of the Professor’s
early students, since become an eminent scholar of the Methodist
Church, writes, "As a third year student I was reading to the
class an essay which had received a good mark from him. I
can still recall the jolt of his sharp interruption at one point,
'What are your grounds for saying that?’ and my futile fumbling
after support for a facile generalisation.” And the devotion to
his teacher evoked by such honest dealing is expressed in the
student’s claim, "I am prouder to remember marks of seventy per
cent, from Angus than marks of ninety per cent, in other classes.”
And it was this quality of his that also captivated others,
beside his students. Some of us, in the intimacy of his friendship,
but altogether too lightly armoured for such a formidable fray,
would sometimes fiercely assail some of the positions he main-
tained. And the inevitable defeat that followed was never chiefly
on the field of dialectics. While we might still cling stubbornly
to our tattered standards, we found we had been made captive
by a candour even more formidable than the Doctor’s vast
erudition. Making due allowance for the natural combativeness
of the Ulsterman, we were quick to recognise that here was no
soldier of fortune ready to sell his keen blade where the fight
was fiercest, but a sworn liegeman of a truth so sovereign that
it demanded the complete integrity of its subjects. And so we
licked our wounds and loved the victor all the more. And when
the Doctor had to engage in struggles far more worthy of his
steel, we are persuaded that before the spectacle of his reckless
honesty,
"Even the ranks of Tuscany
Could scarce forbear to cheer.”
Another discovery I made concerning Dr. Angus was that
he was so companionable. He was that in social relationships, and


even in the days when he was never free from extreme physical
pain I have known him to be the life of an evening party. But
it was in regard to the deeper things of life that this side of
his nature was revealed in its full strength, and especially to
those who found the way of faith difficult. Such discovered
that the brilliant scholar and penetrating thinker was just "a
comrade of our way.” And he was that because his own faith
had had its day of testing. He described that period to me as
"then came the Greeks.” It was the time when he too was called
upon to relate his religious beliefs to new and unexpected factors.
Out of that experience he had come to a rare understanding of
the condition of those who are challenged "to lay the spectres of
the mind.” And his ministry to these troubled ones was of the
nature of a fellowship in which he frankly confessed that for
himself also the going was hard. Upon this ministry waited at
different times men from various churches who gladly confess
that it saved them for the ministry of the Gospel.
No sketch of Dr. Angus would be complete without refer-
ence to his courage. This characteristic was all the more arresting
because he was no stoic. He was almost abnormally sensitive to
pain of all kinds, and he was called upon to suffer in more
forms and for a longer period than is the lot of most men. The
long illness of his invalid wife, the gradual loss of nearly all
those who were his most intimate friends and helpers, the fierce
contention concerning his teaching, the physical affliction and
intense agony of the later years —all these had taken toll of him.
Added to all this was the fact that he was struck down when he
was at the height of his powers, and that the call to cease work
came to him when he seemed best able to do it—his spirit was
never more creative and his mind was set on new literary projects.
To us who lived close to him that seemed the supreme tragedy.
But by the sheer inflexibility of his will he made those sorrowful
days the time of his greatest triumph. As the shadows were
deepening around him he turned to his lecturing and his writing
with a ruthless determination to make the best of the short span
of life that remained to him. He could get to the Theological
Hall only with assistance, but the students bore witness that
never had his lectures been more inspiring. Between spasms of
the most excruciating agony he dictated to me sections of the
book that now remains unfinished, and I vow that I have never
witnessed so gallant an enterprise. It is in the splendour of that
heroic struggle that I find the explanation of his strenuous and
often storm-tossed life. He passed on struggling to make
articulate to his fellows his thoughts about Jesus. I had often


argued much with him about some aspects of his theology, but
I am finally persuaded that to follow on to know the Lord was
the controlling passion of his hard fought day.
I think it is fitting that I should close this attempted estimate
of Samuel Angus the Man with the witness to this faith of the
eminent ex-pupil of Dr. Angus to whom I have already referred.
It comes with all the greater force since it immediately follows
the ex-pupil’s criticism of some aspects of Dr. Angus’ teaching.
"Yet the dominant impression he left on many of us whom
he greatly influenced, was that of a passionately religious soul,
one of the most transparently and intensely religious men I have
known. And the centre of his religion was "Jesus, our only
Lord.” As I write the phrase with which he loved to close so
often his moving little prayers of invocation in the lecture-room,
the memory of his tone instinct with faith and love, comes vividly
to my mind across the gap of a dozen years. Jesus, the Lord,
bringing us the good news of the Father, who loves men simply
and directly as the shepherd sought the sheep and the father
welcomed the prodigal, and Who calls us to the high self-giving
life of the sons of God, these were the great truths which had
strong possession of the mind and heart of Samuel Angus. They
were spoken by him with living power in lecture room and pulpit,
so that we thank God greatly in our remembrance of him.”


Meprcocnttttinco of (ffljiucl) onii iarultt)
taking part in the Funeral Service in St. Stephen’s Church,
18th November, 1943
Ex-Moderator of State Assembly (representing the Moderator)
Rev. A. C. Grieve, B.A.
Moderator of Sydney Presbytery
Rev. W. Kinmont
Minister of Turramurra Church
Rev. A. Edmunds
Minister of Fullerton Church
Rev. G. Cowie, B.A.
Principal of St. Andrew’s College
Rev. W. Gumming Thom, Ph.D., B.D.


3Uiiircoo at tl)c Crematorium
By A. H. McDonald, Esq., M.A., Ph.D.,
Reader in Ancient History, University of Sydney.
I AM deeply moved that I should have been chosen to pay
the last tribute to our friend, our teacher and colleague, a
gentleman and a scholar, Dr. Samuel Angus. A young man
speaking of his elder, a recent friend and colleague among men
who have known him a generation, a scholar entering the field
which he has left with so much lustre —I can do scant justice to
his memory.
Yet perhaps it is fitting that a young man should speak of
one who, above all else, retained the inspiration and fervour of
his youth. I believe that he would himself have been glad to
feel that we thought of him, and did him honour, in this way.
You all know, much better than I, the quality of his life
and teaching in this country. I would speak briefly, from what
he told me himself and from what I know through the accidents
of study, about the profound scholarship that united his efforts
of body and spirit in single-minded achievement.
The measure of scholarship in the last analysis is moral. A
man does what his ability allows, his imagination grasps, and his
character supports. Greatness in scholarship, as in any other
branch of human life, arises from integrity. Dr. Angus’s achieve-
ments give the measure of the whole man.
I need not enlarge on this in the presence of those who knew
him personally. But I would point to it in a field of scholarship
in which he led the way, the field of Hellenistic and Early
Christian studies.
As a good Scot, Dr. Angus had the pioneering spirit. His
travels prove it. From Ulster to America, Germany and the
Mediterranean, and then to Australia, he went where opportunity
opened the way and he felt the call. Even after settling here he
found fresh inspiration in keeping in touch by travel with men
and events in the places of his interest. In his last visit to
Mesopotamia he was moved by the same eagerness as in his first


stay in Algiers. This interest in his fellowmen and their life on
the earth never lost its youthful enthusiasm.
But, if he was a traveller by land and sea, he was even more
an explorer and pioneer in the realm of thought. His great
scholarly ability and capacity for hard mental work were led by
a brilliant imaginative grasp of opportunity, by remarkable intel-
lectual initiative, ever onwards from one sphere of scholarly con-
quest to another. His eyes were always on the horizon of
the spirit, where the hills beckon man to look beyond their sum-
mits or the waves draw him on to fresh views of human endeavour.
Let us think for a moment on the career of an Ulster lad who
worked his way to Queen’s College, Galway. In his latest book
Dr. Angus showed us what this struggle meant to him. The
stern training of his Scottish home fitted him for the discipline
of his Classical studies. To the character-building influences of
his youth he added the intellectual endowment of the Greek
thinkers, above all, of Plato. Thus far he did what many men
of similar strength had done, and can do; but then, with that
piercing vision which was his highest gift, he saw a new way
opening out before him.
Fortune, as the Greeks would have said, Providence, as our
fathers claimed and we ourselves believe, brought before the
young scholar two lines of study usually regarded as separate,
ancient history and theology. He aimed at going into the
Church, but he could not resist his instincts of an historian. His
intellectual power let him unite what was divided, and from what
might have broken up his scholarly career he made a triumphant
achievement.
Dr. Angus was a worthy student of Augustine’s "City of
God,” that immense work which brought together in one
mighty conception the heritage of the Roman world and the
doctrines of the early Christian faith. He has himself described
the inspiration he found in his study of African Christianity in
Augustine. From his work on the sources of the "City of God”
he was led to the manifold cultural influences which had come
to bear upon Augustine and the Church Fathers; so with one
step, a significant step, he moved into the Hellenistic world.
He was right. The Hellenistic world took the thought of
the great Greek and fitted it to the Mediterranean civilization
from which our intellectual traditions and our Christian faith
have sprung. We realise that now. But it is through the work
of men like Dr. Angus that we do so. When he went into that


fruitful field he was the explorer, the pioneer, and we and
the world of thinking men are the richer for his work.
He brought history and Christian studies together in a book
on "The Environment of Early Christianity,” a book which has
held pride of place for nearly thirty years as an introduction to
the subject. This is no mean feat in Hellenistic studies, which
have advanced so far in recent years; it is a mark of its quality.
The work of general interpretation was based upon strict
examination of the primary material. Foremost among the mani-
festations of ancient religious thought, and important for the
cultural atmosphere in which Christianity emerged, the mystery
religions, with their attempts to give men comfort in the face of
sin and death, called for study. It has been my lot to learn
something of these cults in the life of their day. In studying
them I did what any student in that field has to do: I went to
the works of Reitzenstein of Germany, Cumont of France —and
Angus of Australia. These men were the world figures in that
branch of scholarship.
I, like others, went to Angus to learn about the cults them-
selves. But he saw even further. Whatever final views we may
hold, no one with any knowledge of early Christianity can now
deny the need for studying its cultural setting in the Hellenistic
world. That is why "The Mystery-Religions and Christianity” is
a great and important book. It is a synthesis which no one but
Dr. Angus could have attempted. It represents the whole man
and his thought.
From this position he advanced on two sides. For the
historian he wrote on "The Religious Quests of the Graeco-Roman
World,” in sympathy with the struggles of the past. For the
Christian disciple he wrote on "Jesus in the Fives of Men,” in
sympathy with the struggles of the present. With him past and
present were united in one vision of the world.
I have spoken of his travel through the realm of thought in
search of truth, and he retained his youthful eagerness to the
end. But I should do him less than justice if I said no more
than this. A scholar must take his stand among his fellowmen.
The knowledge he has sained, the capacity he has developed,
involve responsibility to God and duty towards man. Dr. Angus
accepted his obligations and did not flinch in fulfilling them.
He has described how he felt called to come to Australia:
you know how he played his part in the religious life of this


country. His scholarly position is clear in "Truth and Tradition”;
his personal faith is made vivid in "Essential Christianity”; his
honour, as all the world knows, he maintained at heavy cost;
his influence we can appreciate in the loyalty of his pupils and
friends. A man’s integrity is tested in times of crisis in doctrine.
In character, in learning, and in faith Dr. Angus showed himself
single-minded and whole-hearted.
The world in its present chaos appalled and challenged
him. He brought to modern problems the deep feeling and
experience of his study of the most tragic collapse of civilization
in the past; and as he looked for a path out of the trouble over-
whelming us all, he defined the new problem in old terms, terms
of morality and Christian faith. In a spate of works on the
"new order” it was characteristic that he should write on "Man
and the New Order”. His last pages in "Alms for Oblivion”
repeat the message of man’s responsibility for his brother-man.
Dr. Angus was a great humanist; but we must use the word
with care. Although he always stressed his debt to the Greeks,
his Christian thinking had taken him further on than Greek
humanism. The Greeks set man in the centre, solitary in the
midst of light. Christian humanism places him in the universe,
surrounded by the works of the Almighty. Dr. Angus was a
Christian humanist, inspired not only by knowledge of man but
by faith in God.
Of his personal qualities I shall not speak: his comfort
for those in distress, his kindness to the young who sought his
advice, his unselfish vigour in supporting and gaining support
for all good causes; his unfailing gentleness and courtesy; his
simple pleasure in the small things that help to make life civilized:
you know him too well to need any words of mine to remind
you. We all have these memories deep in our hearts.
I would only say that our friend, our teacher and colleague,
was a whole man who maintained his integrity in everything he
did. He was a world figure in his sphere of study; and we have
been happy in feeling his influence directly on ourselves. We
are the poorer for his passing from amongst us: but we are already
rich in the gifts of his mind and spirit, the gifts of a great
scholar and a true Christian gentleman.


JMrcss at tljc memorial Sendee
in Turramurra Church on Sunday, 28th November, 1943,
By the Rev. G. Cowie, B.A.
IN this beautiful Church which meant so much to him, and in
which he had such a great interest, we seek to lay our tribute
on the altar of our memory to a brilliant scholar, an inspiring
teacher, a far seeing prophet, a famous writer and a Saint of God
in the best sense of that term —Dr. Samuel Angus. To me the
greatest influences in life are home and religion, whatever that
religion may be. That this is so is seen in many happenings,
not only in our own City, but throughout the World at this time.
Born and reared in a home which was a true home, and brought
up in a religious atmosphere, Dr. Angus determined to be a
student and to eventually enter the Ministry of the Church, which
had proved such a potent influence in the lives of his forefathers.
By dint of hard toil and oft-times burning the midnight oil, he
found his way to the University of his Homeland, where he
distinguished himself in many directions. Having achieved his
desire of graduating, he looked around, scanned the horizon and
decided to go and seek adventures new, there to widen his scholar-
ship, advance his knowledge of men and things and prepare him-
self for the search of truth, which was ever uppermost in his
mind. "Ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you
free” was ever before him and in his thoughts. America, across
that wide great space of ocean called him, and in that vast country
he continued his studies and laid the foundation of the future
which was to hold out so much for him.
He gained his Degree of Doctor of Philosophy, Summa Cum
Laude, the highest distinction that had been conferred by Prince-
ton up to that time, and so filled with knowledge and with a
strong desire to pursue his studies to the utmost of his ability,
he returned to Scotland covered with glory and crowned with
scholastic success but still humble and modest, pursuing his ideals
and persisting at the subject in which he was to become a World-
renowned figure—the Graeco-Roman World.
Twenty-eight years ago he arrived in Australia and began to
teach students in the Theological Hall, and up to the present
time he has the longest record of service of any teacher in St.
Andrew’s College. Immediately on his arrival his students realised
that a great soul and an enthusiastic scholar had arrived in their
midst, and that he would bring honour and fame not only to his


adopted land but to the world of scholarship at large. He was
no seeker after limelight or of publicity. He wanted quietly to
carry on his work, teach his students, see the Church he loved
progress, and continue his writing, which played such an import-
ant part in his life. Not many years after his arrival in Australia
the storm of controversy broke over his head regarding his writ-
ings and teachings, and for the last quarter of a century he was
never free from harsh judgments and unfair criticism and from
accusations of heresy. Amidst all these arguments and contro-
versies he stood brave and courageous, realising that he was only
trying to do his duty and that as a pioneer in his own field he
was to suffer, if happily he could find the truth and bring people
to the feet of the Master he loved.
It has been said that these controversies brought much harm
to the Church, and that many folks drifted away to other com-
munions. I do not subscribe and have never subscribed to that
Doctrine, for I believe that Dr. Angus strengthened the Church
and brought many people within its fold and caused many others
to think and ponder deeply regarding the things that matter, the
things of the Spirit. The Church every now and again needs to
be wakened out of her torpor and made to face the problems of
life and of truth and of faith, and nation and people need the
same strong measures applied to them; and Dr. Angus, by his
writings and his teachings, did this not only for the Presbyterian
Church but for men and women throughout the world. We live
too close to Dr. Angus to assess his great value as a teacher and
his wonderful scholarship and to estimate what he has done, not
only for our Church in New South Wales, but for the Church
at large. We in New South Wales who were his intimate friends
know what he did for the Church, against which he was always
supposed to be hurling invectives. Dr. Angus was most unselfish
in regard to his labours for the Church, and no man within the
last fifty years has done more for our Theological Hall. He
asked his friends for money to add to the library and to make
the Theological Hall more up to date and the finest of its type
in Australia. His friends, realising his unselfish efforts, gladly
gave him money and to him we owe the Gillespie Hall and many
other assets of the College which he loved and in which he taught,
and with which his name will ever be associated.
For many years he had been ill, and yet he carried on his
work of building for the future, knowing what he owed to the
past and foreseeing what the future held out for this fair land
and for our Church with its long-range vision—a vision which the
Church should always have. Feeling that his days were not to be


long upon the land, he was most anxious that a successor should
be appointed to follow his colleague, the late Dr. Kenneth Edward,
and also one to take up his own chair, that of New Testament.
He was ready to carry on until such time as a successor could
be appointed. Up to the very last he was working towards this
end, and we frequently discussed this question and from many
points of view, but he was not to see his dream realised, and so
he has handed on to us the torch of truth which he has brightly
lit and the joys of building upon the foundations he has so
strongly laid.
Dr. Angus was an inspiring teacher. The Presbyterian Min-
istry is a teaching one. We have, however, fallen in these days away
from that high standard, and the sooner we get back to that type
of Ministry the better it will be for us as a Church. Dr. Angus
taught us, his students, to think, and he never compelled us to
accept his teachings or his views. The more originality we showed,
and the greater difference from his views which we promulgated,
the more pleased was our teacher and the more ready he was
to help us. He was not a mere dogmatist, he was a teacher who
caused us to think as he himself had always done and was ever
doing. The result is that scattered through every theatre of War
and in every State of this Commonwealth, are his students doing
great work for the Kingdom of God and opening up the revelation
of Him as found in Jesus Christ our Lord.
Dr. Angus has left behind him some manuscripts which I
hope will be published. He was working on his greatest book,
his Magnum Opus, "The Historic Approach to Jesus,” but owing
to his illness it was never completed, to the great loss of the world
at large and to the sorrow of those who knew what an epic-
making book it would be. One of the chapters which I had the
pleasure of reading, "The Night on which He was Betrayed,” is
an impressive portrait of Jesus in His last passion.
Now what sort of man was this Seer, Prophet, Writer, Scholar
and Teacher? He was a sensitive and sympathetic soul. Dr.
Angus had suffered much because of unjust criticism, and yet he
never became bitter nor did he in reality denounce those opposed
to him. He also had much sickness, and hospitals were often his
place of abode for months at a time. Through this suffering in
body and mind he was able to enter into the sufferings and
sorrows of others, and there are many people to-day who behold
the sunshine, feel the wind on their faces and look to the future
with a smile because of the comfort, help and guidance given to


them by Dr. Angus in times of sorrow, bereavement and strain.
I think of one now, a leading business man in this City, who told
me he could never have carried on, nor looked to the future
without the help and friendship that Dr. Angus had given to
him during a very trying period in his life. That was the friend-
ship we received from Dr. Angus; that friendship showed us the
humble, kindly, unselfish, thoughtful heart behind the Seer, the
Teacher, the Scholar and the Prophet. He was a wise man who
did not underestimate the influences of evil, whether spiritual or
material, but with the vision of a prophet and believing in the
ultimate good and ever working onward, and for it there was
no one of my acquaintance who had such liberal and such large
views of humanity, despite the fact that he had often been dis-
illusioned or who gave expression to his beliefs in such unmistak-
able fashion. It must have been, I think, because of his youth-
fulness. Have you ever noticed how the child will give you almost
anything? Though the child clutches it is wonderful how it gives.
It is the big heart of the little child. Christ struck the right note
when he said: "Except ye become as little children, ye shall not
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.” We thank God for Dr.
Angus and for his life of service for others and for the privilege
of associating with the true follower of Jesus Christ. Dr. Angus
was a humanitarian and was interested in all that made for the
welfare of humanity. No student of his ever sought his help
in vain, whether that help was financial, intellectual or spiritual.
Many to-day owe their position in life to him and his thoughtful-
ness. He had the power given to few of inspiring and receiving
confidences from all classes and conditions of people. He had a
genius for friendship. We sometimes forget that fellowship with
one another is essential to the building up of character and the
balancing of life. We are often so carried away by the changing
movements local and world wide, and so taken up with the passing
enthusiasms that we are apt to lose sight of the things which
count most in spiritual progress —which is the only true progress.
Work and sport and the many social duties of the present bring
us into contact with others, but it is seldom that friendship is
based on such a foundation, i.e., a real abiding friendship, helpful
in sorrow and in joy, in failure and success, and valuable for
self revelation. Without friendship of that nature, however rich
we may be in other directions, we are poor indeed. It was a
pleasure and a privilege to have the friendship of Dr. Angus, a
man with none of those angularities and pretensions of self-
termed perfect people, with a beauty of character and a cleanness
of soul which commended the Gospel of Christ to man. His
reward is great, and his works do and will follow after him.


O God, Who in Jesus Christ hast given gifts unto
men, we thank Thee for the gitt of Samuel Angus,
prophet, teacher, evangelist. We thank Thee for his
pious parents, his early love of Thy Church and of
learning, his life of incessant toil and study, his courage
in adversity, his fortitude in face of death.
We thank Thee for the children of his mind and
pen, his books. Be pleased to forgive what in them
may be in error, and bless all that is wise and true
and good to the extension of Thy Kingdom and the
glory of Thy Name.
We thank Thee for his laughter and love of
friends, his modesty and humility, and the radiance
of his friendship; for his sound learning, his true piety,
and his enlightened experience of Thee.
We thank Thee for the memories in the minds of
his students, memories of a man of light and leading,
of vision and power. Bless Thy Church, and grant
that after him there may be raised up many consecrated
men who will also seek and find —happy seekers, happy
finders.
O God of comfort, have pity upon all who mourn;
the relatives in distant places, the troops of friends
here, the many who have never seen his face but hold
him in affection.
We mourn not as those who have no hope, for
we know that Thou hast brought life and immortality
to light in the Gospel; so we do not cry a long farewell
to Thy servant, but rejoice that he is near to Thee
and to the Christ whom he loved to serve.


■ - w ~ , ■■ . X. • ; : X- ■>
■
■
■
■


