









5n flfoemodam
G. W. L. MARSHALL-HALL
O Friend! this body is his lyre;
He tightens its strings, and draws
from it the melody of Brahma.
If the strings snap and the keys
Slacken, then to dust must this
instrument of dust return :
Kabir says: “None but Brahma can
evoke its melodies.”
Kabir (1440-1518)




AT THE GRAVE-SIDE.
Glory of architect, glory of painter, and
sculptor, and bard,
Living forever in temple and picture and
statue and song,—
Look how the world with the lights that
they lit is illumined and starred.
Brief was the flame of their life, but the
lamps of their art burns long!
Where is the Master of Music, and how
has he vanished away?
Where is the work that he wrought
with his wonderful art in the air?
Gone, —it is gone like the glow on
the cloud at the close of the day!
The Master has finished his work,
and the glory of music is—
where?
A common hedge-sparrow has been chosen this
day to give voice to an elegy beside the dead body
of a lordly Theban eagle, winged and fallen in his
sunward-sailing flight.
3


Little else do I bring but my affection to this
supreme task and gracious privilege generously
afforded me, 1 know not why, by the friends of
the dead Master.
Behold the least among his disciples!
Neither scholar nor artist am I, —only a simple
friend upon whom, as upon yourselves this great
good soul bestowed his rich and stimulating friend-
ship.
He had my reverence and my love, and this I
confess without disguise. Long have I pondered and
much striven to make it possible for even the tiniest
phase of his towering personality to find utterance
through my most imperfect self this day. But in
vain! His great spirit beats within the prison
bars of myself, and there is no outlet and no
escape.
Let therefore my feeble, few, and faltering words
reach each one of you, his friends, and serve as
mere outlines and vague suggestions around and
about which you yourselves shall evoke a vision
which shall be cherished forever by you as one of
earth’s most priceless treasures.
Instead of this piping scrannel reed of mine, the
richest orchestra that earth can boast with the
world’s most skilled conductor should be pulsing
out in glorious rhythms the “Overture to Tann-
hauser,” to which immortal strain the great deeds
of time and of the spirit seem most aptly to
4


marshall themselves and to companion the great
men as they move with majesty into the Valhalla
of their Desire.
“In a great land, a new land, a land
full of labour and riches and confusion,
Where there were many running to and fro,
and shouting and striving together,
In the midst of the hurry and the troubled
noise.
We heard the voice of one singing”.
joyously.
Yes! ’twas that consummate artist.
Generous and unconscious as the sunshine.
Vital and vigorous was he.
Every inch a man.
Robust and buoyant and profoundly humourous
Shall we not still hear his hearty peal of manly
laughter echo and re-echo down the corridors of
our years!
A being red-running with
withal a mystic.
good human blood, and
How he has brimmed our
lives with joy!
Most loyal of friends.
Most chivalrous of foes.
5


In his mien the very soul of candour shone.
Rebellious ever against convention, but to Truth
and Beauty a most willing bondservant.
By temperament a magnificent optimist, when
justified “easily elated and with difficulty de-
pressed.”
“His life was one long challenge—
not a truce.
This was his homage to the mightier
powers,
To ask his boldest question, un-
dismayed
By muttered threats that some hysteric
sense
Of wrong or insult will convulse the
throne
Where wisdom reigns supreme;
and if he erred,
They all must err who have to feel
their way
And needs must stumble, and with
stammering steps
Spell out their paths in syllables
of pain.”
To him the call of Music was a spiritual
necessity.
“To him as a child in his cradle music was given;
the heavenly gift to feel and express himself in
6


tones. His human nature was like an enchanted
instrument, a magic-flute, or the lyre of Apollo,
needing but a breath or a touch to send its beauty
out into the world.”
Rhythm, tone, melody, and harmony both in words
and in sounds were to him the incarnation of
Beauty and of Truth. This was the angle at which
he approached and communed with his Maker. At
times the atonement reached a state of placid
ecstasy and silent adoration.
Into this heaven of Art he sought to induct our
souls and make us sharers with him in this
rapturous Friendship.
‘‘Knight-Errant of the Never-Ending Quest,
And Minstrel of the Unfulfilled Desire;
For ever tuning his frail earthly lyre
To some unearthly music, and possessed
With painful passionate longing to invest
The golden dream of Love’s immortal fire
In mortal robes of beautiful attire,
And fold perfection to his throbbing breast.”
His art transcended Art.
Art was his Religion, and his Religion Art
Shall we ever forget him?
How he does flash upon our inner vision—erect
and tall, his eagle-glance and baton drawing
forth from his orchestral band some of the music
he was made to make!
7


“Ah I who shall wield again that
wand of magic power,
And the lost clue regain,
The unfinished window in Ailadin’s
tower
Unfinished must remain.”
He dreamed dreams for us and had visions—visions
of rearing in this city a palace of music not built
with hands, and of transforming this native state
of ours into the Mecca of his Art.
And now! without his stupendous personality
behind the movement, without his holy zeal for his
Art our hopes of realising his beautiful dreams
are frail—very, very frail indeed.
But we must hope.
We must not fail him now.
We must struggle to materialize however im-
perfectly the visions he cherished for us and for
our people.
"For, save in those who refuse, through inglorious
ease, to strive any more with danger and towards
unknown lands, the ideal does not die. No age
can wither the love of the perfect, no experience
of failure dash its effort; it looks upward with a
youthful face, even in the arms of death.”
So let it be with us.
8


So would our Master have it-
The memory of his glory passed away lingers in
every heart.
Let it be an inspiration to us as well as a memory.
Now that he has vanished from our sight, it is
fast beginning to dawn upon us that he was simply
loaned to us for a brief season by Almighty God,
in order that we might catch as well as our dull
ears would permit somewhat of the music of the
spheres and that supreme rhythm to which the
Universe swings and sings in its appointed course
and to its appointed end.
Snatched from us after fierce buffetings and con-
tinuous bludgeonings, at a time when, having
grown to the stature of a veteran navigator upon
this tumultuous sea—called life, —understanding his
fellow=men better, and being better understood by
them, he had succeeded with some little friendly
help in steering his storm=tossed barque into the
calm quiet of a peaceful haven, where we hoped
that he would be able to unload the rich cargo with
which he was freighted, richer than carrack ever
bore to Thames or Tiber.
When lo! out of the shining splendour of a clear
blue sky a bomb fell and he disappeared from
amongst us in a sudden flash.
He was wont to dwell of late in his lectures and
with his intimates—can it have been a sub-conscious
premonition?—upon the dominant motive of the
9


tragedy of Tristan and Isolde as wrought out by
that master=musician and magic=craftsman Wagner.
The awful beauty of that tragedy, to him, was
typical of Life itself, wherein the golden goblet of
joy is forever dashed from the lips at the
instant of most perfect realisation. Whatever the
universal law may be, such has been his own
individual fate. He has been reft from his spiritual
bridal-muse at love’s loveliest moment, when a
respite was assured him untroubled by material
concerns.
And torn too from his bride—his wife—who for
years has been to him a secret and silent inspira-
tion and a guardian-angel.
May Qod comfort her and bless her!
Here in this grave, the onetime living temple—the
magnificent frame of Marshall-Hall is now con-
signed to the dust from which it came vibrant in
each minutest molecule with music. As it dissipates,
did we have ears attuned to finest atomic har-
monies, we should hear them singing and ringing
out in the last scherzo movement of his life-
symphony.
“O sublime and consoling thought!”—he himself
has written years ago, ‘‘man too is part and parcel
of the ever-changing Universe, in no essential
different from the splendid manifestations around
him, the innate unity of which becomes perceptible
to his grade of consciousness; that the earth, the
sun, the air, everything that is, are in fact akin to
10


him, nay! portions of his own identity; that he
himself but awaits the touch of the enchanter
Death, to become once more resolved into those
primary elements of whose manifold combinations
he is but one.
“There is no joy more voluptuous, more profound,
more enkindling, than that afforded by the sense
that the individual is one indivisibly with the
teeming activity of the eternal life around him,
that he is a life-drop in the immense heart of the
Universe.”
To Nature then he gives his body back—to Nature
whose most mystical worshipper and most constant
lover he was.
But his Spirit,—
The imperial Soul of Marshall-Hall goes back to
God, —
whose angel-artists await him with outstretched
arms.
On what empurpled hills does he now stand, with
Beethoven’s kiss upon his brow, and compassed
round about by the Immortals in whose service
he was so devoted and in whose cause he sometimes
almost sweated blood!
The world is poorer for his overthrow, but this
State and this City more especially have suffered
an irreparable loss.
11


God does not bestow such gifts more than once
in any, nay, in many generations.
May his Sou! not rest in peace, but move on and
ever onward, as he would wish, unencumbered and
upborne upon the wings of his soaring aspiration,
to deeper insight and to higher conquest in his Art
—Music—The Pentecostal Speech. Amen!
12


N Elegy, spoken at the grave side of the late ‘Professor
G. W. L. Marshall-Hall, and printed at the request of,
and for a few of his intimate friends. The portrait in colours
is taken from the picture painted by Mr. E. Phillips Fox only a
fortnight before the Professor passed away.
Herbert Brookes.


