

WILLIAM LYTTLE MOORE, M.A.,
BORN 24th MAY, 1857. DIED 19th FEBRUARY, 1894.
==sa =BSS 1811====
EEV.. HEUBY MACEEAEY,
Jclibercb in the {Jrcsbntcrian Church, Campbclltolnn.
Second Son of the Rev. David Moore, B.A.
meet here on a very solemn occasion. Death is always
>•<-5 associated with sorrow, and mourning, and woe. It may come
cJk' slowly by long lingering illness, and the relatives and the
A dying one may be watching and expecting Jit, and the earthly
i life may close as gently shuts the eye of day. Even thus, there
will be the clouds of sorrow and the pains of bereavement. But
when death comes suddenly as the lightning flash, it gives a shock
like a clap of thunder in the cloudless sky. It was thus with the
death of our beloved brother, Captain William Lyttle Moore.
He left his home on Monday morning, in health and high spirits, and
went to his office in Sydney, and shortly after his arrival there,
by a stroke of apoplexy, he died. The announcement of his death
has produced wide-spread mourning and lamentation. The effect
of it in the inner circle of the family I dare not attempt to describe.
When I think of the aged father, I am led to think of David of
old, exclaiming—“ Omy son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom !
would God I had died for thee, O Absalom, my son, my son! ”
William Lyttle Moore was worthy of all the admiration and
love his family and wide circle of friends could bestow. In childhood,
and youth, and manhood, he manifested the graces and virtues of a
beautiful character, growing up to perfection. In the School he was
eminent and beloved among his schoolfellows. In the University
his name is recorded among those who received the honours that are
there conferred. Having entered the legal profession, he commanded
respect and esteem by his extensive and accurate knowledge, his
sound judgment, his uprightness and integrity. He showed his


patriotism and zeal as a citizen by joining the Defence Force of
the country, and in the flower of his youth he held the rank of
Captain. In the paper in which appears the announcement of his
death, appears also the intimation of his election as Mayor of this
Borough. The death of such a man, and in such circumstances, is
indeed mysterious; and were we constrained to stop here, and beside
the open grave, to say—“ Death ends all; the dead know not anything,
neither have they any more a reward, for the memory of them is
forgotten.” Ah ! that would be terrible. But, blessed be God, for the
glorious Gospel of our Lord and Saviour, Jesus Christ, by whom life
and immortality have been brought to light. In burying that body, we
do not bury the man. The spirit is the real man. He has withdrawn
himself from that material body, and stepped out into the spirit world.
We say—
“ Life is real, life is earnest,
And the grave is not its goal.
Dust thou art, to dust returnest,
Was not spoken of the soul.”
We Christians believe that God the Father Almighty, Maker of
heaven and earth, is Lord: that Jesus Christ, His only Son, our Lord,
died for our sins : that He rose again from the dead and ascended into
heaven, from thence He shall come to judge the quick and the dead.
Those who really believe in that, find the darkness and gloom of death
abolished, and. thl|y live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present
world ; looking for that blessed hope, and glorious appearing of the
great God and our Saviour, Jesus Christ. Whilst I have referred to
the literary attainments and the professional and social success of our
departed brother, it is not on these alone that I wish to dwell. I find
ground for comfort and joy, and hope and triumph over death and the
grave, in my belief that he had that precious faith in Christ which
purifies the heart and works by love. It is when I think of him
reverently joining in the public worship of God, meeting with his class
in the Sabbath-school, leading in the family devotions in the father’s
absence, and in all his intercourse with his family and society,
characterized by love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness, goodness,
faith, meekness, and temperance, which are the marks of a child of
God. Therefore, it is that I can say—“ Farewell, beloved brother !
You were suddenly called away from a happy home and a loving
family on earth, but you are now at home with the Lord, the everlasting
Father.”
One family we dwell in Him,
One church above, beneath —
Though now divided by the stream,
The narrow stream of death.
A few short years of evil passed,
We’ll reach the happy shore,
Where death divided friends at last,
Will meet to part no more.


Son of the Rev. D. Moore, Campbelltown
WILLIAM LYTTLE MOORE,
A gentle, manly man was this who took
His lone way hence from us so suddenly ; *
Yet not too gentle for a wrong’s rebuke,
Nor yet too manly to be womanly.
Right earnest, too, both friend and foe confess,
Not pausing much for rock, or mist, or chasm,
Upborne by what too few of us possess —
Those shining wings of effort, called
The aroma of a well-spent life is sweet;
And time who takes so much we fain would grasp,
Spares it ; yea, tendeth to his own defeat,
By making it eternity enclasp ;
Sowing it broadcast into the hearts of men,
Like to the good seed by the sower sown,
Thence turning it to flowers and fruits again—
To fruits of righteousness and flowers of white love’s own.
Ah me, seems this an ill-timed eulogy?
Sorrow is sacred ! Speech is sacrilege !
Yet, as a man after calamity
Rescues the remnants of frail fortune’s pledge,
In hope they still suffice for sustenance,
With aching love’s unsolaced urgency
Wrap me in words —if haply by such chance
To garner all thou leavest—thy fragrant memory.
M. A. R.


Hhtt's/ f&Wh
