

in Jtlemonam
iHrs.ftopret iUatliicson
<§unn
late of
gneitpum anb Jfutuna
iSteto Hebribesi
Porn I6tf) iHarcf), 1854
®ieb IStf) January, 1932
at 3&osetriUe,
FOR PRIVATE CIRCULATION.




3n iWemonam
iflrsi. ilarpret Jflatfneson
#unn
late of
anb Jfutuna
iseto Hcbribes
Porn I6tt) iWard), 1854
j®ieb I8tf) January, 1932
at ftotfefculle,
FOR PRIVATE CIRCULATION.




Miss MARGARET MATHIESON.


•
'


piograpfncal Sketch of JilrsL JWargaret #unn
of Sneitpum anb Jfutiina, Jgeto
jJYARGARET MATHIESON, wife of the Rev. Dr. Gunn, of
JjVl Futuna and Aneityum, was born near Kirkcowan, in the
county of Wigtownshire, Scotland. Her father died when she
was little more than three years old. He was a lineal descen-
dant of John Mathieson, one of the Covenanters, banished for
his faith to the Island of New Jersey. At the Revolution of
1688 he was liberated, and returned home during harvest. His
wife, not recognising him, placed food before him, thinking he
was only a wayfaring man who would take his leave when his
wants were satisfied. But his son, gazing intently at his face,
said, “Mother, if father is alive, this is certainly he.” She wist-
fully turned her eyes towards him, and recognising him, said,
“My husband!” and ran to his embrace. The reapers then left
the field, and eagerly listened to Mathieson’s story of his adven-
tures and sufferings. Margaret, his descendant, has often said
that she was divinely guided to become a missionary’s wife,
because her ancestor had been faithful, and suffered for his faith.
James Hislop, the youthful author of “The Cameronian s
Dream,” a poem well known in Scotland, and highly praised by
Sir Walter Scott, was a relative of her father.
Miss Mathieson was brought up in the strict religious faith
of her covenanting ancestors, and belonged to the Reformed
Presbyterian Church of Scotland. Family worship was regularly
held in the home, and, from girlhood, she devoutly read the
Scriptures, and prayed in private. One day, as she prayed, say-
ing, “Help me to give myself to Jesus,” an inward voice seemed
to whisper, “Why not give yourself to Him now?” She did


so, and thus was laid in her heart the foundation indispensable
for a winner of souls.
She was educated in the local school, and afterwards at the
Ewart Institute, in Newton Stewart, a school to which pupils
were sent from great distances. She often referred with plea-
sure and gratitude to the teaching imparted in this school.
Miss Mathieson then returned to the home of her widowed
mother, in the farm near Kirkcowan. To this town the Rev.
Dr. Inglis retired with his wife, after having laboured 25 years
in Aneityum, New Hebrides. And thus Miss Mathieson, who
had been nurtured in the Mission Literature of her Church, and,
as a girl, had assisted in collecting for the support of the Mis-
sion Ship “Dayspring,” now became personally acquainted with
one of her Church’s earliest Missionaries, and his wife.
She had frequent opportunities of visiting relatives and
friends in the south and midlands of Scotland, and her natural
charm won her many friends.
Her interest in literature was awakened and fostered by
her cousin, the late Sir Wm. McCormick, Professor of English
Literature, and Secretary of the Carnegie Trust for Scottish
Students. Her home was frequently visited by ministers and
others interested in the family, and especially in her aged grand-
mother, who died at the, remarkable age of 97. Among the
visitors introduced by Dr. Inglis was Dr. Gunn, just appointed
Medical Missionary to the New Hebrides, by the Free Church
of Scotland. The acquaintance with Miss Mathieson quickly
ripened, and they were married 14th December, 1882. A few
weeks later the couple bade farewell to Scotland, and arrived
in Sydney in March of the following year, and landed in Futuna
in April.
Mrs. Gunn took the native women and children to her heart
at once. She taught the boys and girls to read, write and sing-
some of them in English, as well as in their own language—
and introduced them to the simple rules of Arithmetic. In private
conversation with the women and their husbands, she explained
the Gospel Message, deepening their knowledge of it, and their
interest in it. This ultimately led them to become helpers and


teachers in their own island, or go abroad as servants or teachers
for missionaries, in other islands.
The story of Mrs. Gunn’s work is told in the two books,
“The Gospel in Futuna,’’ and “Heralds of Dawn,” written by her
husband and herself. The chapter describing- the introduction
of a terrible epidemic by a Queensland labour vessel, in 1893,
details the death of two of their children, in one week. When
the recovery of their youngest child seemed hopeless, the
mother, in deepest distress, besought God, saying, “Spare my
child, and I will speak publicly about the work of Christ in the
Islands.” Her earnest prayer was answered. The child was
almost miraculously snatched from death, and completely
recovered.
When Dr. Lindsay, the Convener of Foreign Missions in
the Free Church of Scotland, intimated, during the sittings of
Assembly, the heavy loss sustained by the Missionaries of
Futuna, the Assembly was deeply moved, and all stood in a
vote of sympathy.
Their furlough being overdue, they returned to Scotland in
1894, via New Zealand; but, before their departure, they were
bereaved of a little boy by drowning. They stayed for three
months in Dunedin, with their only surviving child, in order to
avoid reaching Scotland in mid-winter. There an opportunity
was afforded for Mrs. Gunn fulfilling her vow, and she wel-
comed an invitation to address a Women’s Missionary Meeting.
She began, without notes, to relate the story of the epidemic in
Futuna, and how one after another of the family was seized by
the dread disease, and said, “All my children lay dying.” Her
heart was too full, and she burst into tears. She could go no
further. The meeting was closed by one of the ladies, who
prayed “that they might be led to understand how much the
Missionaries suffered in carrying the Gospel to the heathen.”'
From this time Mrs. Gunn wrote her addresses in full, and
first read them in private until she became thoroughly familiar
with them. She read in a clear, distinct voice, audible to alb
looking directly at her hearers, and their attention was rivetted
to the end.


When Mrs. Gunn and her husband returned to Scotland,
Dr. Wilson, of the Barclay Church, Edinburgh, and others, in
sympathising with them in their bereavement, said, I suppose
you will not be returning to Futuna again.” “We are not
brought down to that yet,” replied Mrs. Gunn, “we are going
hack again.”
Her first address in Scotland was delivered at a Womens
Missionary Meeting in Glasgow. The ladies, about 30 in number,
opened the meeting with a discussion to decide upon the lady
speaker for the Generel Meeting, shortly to be held in the city.
Mrs. Gunn must have felt embarrassed as she heard them
appraise the merits and demerits of the various speakers sug-
gested. But the ladies failed to come to a decision. It was
evident that Mrs. Gunn was regarded as merely a stop-gap.
Hut when she rose to speak, with her MS. in her hand, she
immediately caught and held their attention. As soon as she
finished, the whole of the ladies almost simultaneously cried,
“Mrs. Gunn will give the address at the General Meeting.” This
-was agreed to unanimously.
From that time her services as a speaker at Missionary
Meetings were sought everywhere. She was asked to speak in
pulpits, in church halls, not only to women, but to large mixed
audiences, as well as to boys and girls. Her manner attracted
at once, and a quiet humour, introduced here and there,
enlivened interest.
One minister, after introducing her, turned to leave, and
stood for a moment at the door, but, on hearing the first sen-
tence, waited to the end, and cordially thanked her • for her
informing and entrancing address.
At the close of a Presbytery meeting which she addressed,
as the chief speaker, at Falkirk, a minister came to her husband
and said, “That was the best missionary address I have ever
heard.” After another address, given in Broughton Place
Church, Edinburgh, Dr. John Smith, the minister of the con-
gregation, quietly said to her, “Mrs. Gunn, that was brilliant;
you must write a book.”
But she was disturbed by praise, and when she told the


above to her husband, she said, trembling and agitated, “I wish
the people would not praise me.”
Though repetition at times was unavoidable, she strove to
give as much variety in the addresses as possible. She objected,
in answer to repeated requests, to publish them, preferring to
deliver them in person.
Mrs. GUNN—IB94.
During furloughs in 1894 and 1906 she addressed meetings
in Edinburgh, Leith, Portobello, Glasgow, Paisley, Dumbarton,
Kilsyth, Galashiels, Bathgate, and her native town of Kirk-
cowan. Then, away in the N.E. of Scotland —in Aberdeen,
Peterhead, Fraserburgh, Braemar, Aberdour, Wick, and
other towns. Her last addresses, after retiring from the


Islands, were given in New South Wales —one only three weeks
before her illness.
Her lantern lectures, occasionally delivered in town and
country, in her usual vivacious manner, aroused an interest not
far behind that of her ordinary addresses.
Reference has been made to her natural charm. That this
was very real, examples proved. An elderly lady, the mother
of one of the Members of Parliament for Edinburgh, met her
at tea. She obtained her address, and posted to her a richly-
bound copy of Sankey’s Hymns. This gift was acknowledged by
letter. Then the lady sent a present of beautiful books. Mrs.
Gunn felt she must acknowledge these in person. The lady
most warmly welcomed her, lovingly kissed her, and placed
five pounds in her hand for her personal use.
A ship-builder, in whose beautiful home she had lunch
before speaking one afternoon, said afterwards to her husband,
“Mrs. Gunn has left a deep impression on the hearts of my
wife and myself,” and he handed him a bundle of five-pound
notes for his wife’s personal expenses. A similar gift was
repeated at next furlough.
In the Islands Mrs. Gunn was at the beck and call of men
and women, no matter how trifling the reason. One day she
ran quickly into the Mission House to supply a man with needle
and thread, and accidentally twisted her knee. Her husband
found her, on his return from another district, almost helpless,
with the knee swollen and painful. The usual treatment was
only partially successful. After a visit to Sydney, a temporary
cure was effected. But, from this apparently simple accident
originated rheumatism, which, in later years, crippled and
pained her so much that she was seldom able to walk any dis-
tance without support. Until then she often accompanied her
husband in his itinerating on sea and land, both in Aneityum
and Futuna, on the rough and dangerous paths. She was agile
and sure-footed, and clambered over tracks in Futuna never
trodden by any white woman before then, and by no white
woman since.
She had inherited a strong and healthy constitution. She


was seldom ill. The disease which carried her away was sudden
and severe in its onset. Skilful operation removed immediate
danger. But complications poisoned both body and brain, and
six days later she became unconscious. She rallied through
skilful medical treatment, and progress continued until com-
plete recovery seemed assured. Her husband and friends were
convinced that this was also due to the prayers of friends near
and far.
But the complication, supposed to have been overcome,
suddenly and unexpectedly returned, and a day and a half later
she departed this life peacefully and painlessly, January 18th,
1932, leaving her husband and two daughters to mourn the
loss of a loving wife and mother.
A beautiful and impressive Memorial Service was conducted
by the Rev. A. Fleming, Convener-Superintendent of Foreign
Missions, in the Roseville Presbyterian Church, Sunday, 24th
January.
She rests from her labours, having been privileged to see
the Island of Futuna transformed from heathen darkness to the
light of Christianity, through the teaching of the pure and
simple Gospel of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.


®t)e ILa&t ®eltoereb hy ilfS. #unn
“Forty-eight years ago, my husband and myself were sent
out as Missionaries from the Free Church of Scotland to Futuna,
one of the southern islands of the New Hebrides. We left
Mrs. GUNN—I9O3.
Sydney in the little Mission Ship ‘Dayspring.’ ihe sea was
rough, and the vessel pitched and rolled all the way.
“When we were about to go on deck the Captain threw a
rope round another Missionary’s wife and myself, and lashed
us to the mast, so as to keep us in one place.
“We sighted Futuna just at dawn. We and our belongings
were dumped into the boats, and as the tide was going out, we
saw the beautiful corals, and the gay coloured fish swimming


about in the little pools. When we touched the shore a crowd
of savages hauled up the boats on the slushy sand.
“We had rather curious feelings amid all the strange sights
and sounds of savagedom. The babies and children set up cries
of terror on seeing the white faces.
“Futuna is a huge terraced mountain showing that at four
different times it had been pushed out of the sea by submarine
volcanic action. The island is surrounded by a coral reef, the
home of many beautiful shells. On nearing the island one would
think it was uninhabited, save for a little blue smoke curling
up here and there, showing where the huts and villages are
hidden among the tropical vegetation.
“The island is 1,500 miles from Sydney, and 500 miles from
Fiji. There are two different races of people in the New Heb-
rides —Melanesians and Polynesians. Our Futunese are semi-
Polynesians, and many have fair hair, and light skins.
“The Melanesians are very dark. The Futunese language
resembles the Samoan and Maori languages, as both these races
are Polynesians. Every island in the New Hebrides has a dif-
ferent language, different customs, and different styles of dress,
and undress. There had been a missionary settled on Futuna
before our arrival. He bore the rage and threats of the heathen.
They burned down the Church, held a club threateningly above
his head, and stole his goods. They were the ‘thieves of the
Pacific.’ The Missionary’s health failed, and he returned to
Sydney, leaving the graves of wife and child. The Futunese
were now left for seven years alone, and many had fallen back
into their old heathen practices.
“We were settled for five years among them before anyone
was interested in the Gospel message. We visited their homes,
trying to make friends with them. As soon as they saw our
approach they jumped fences and fled, and we were left stand-
ing with their children, their dogs, pigs and fowls.
“They had many curious heathen practices. They would not
touch water when planting their gardens, thinking the fruits
would not grow. They would not take a biscuit from us in their
own hands, but held out a leaf for it, or asked a friend to take
it, and place it on a tree for them, lest all their teeth should
fall out.


“We humoured them for a time, and then said, ‘You must
take the biscuit in your own hand, or go without.’ They soon
became too fond of the biscuits to leave them. Much of their
heathenism had to be met in the same way.
“When a labour ship called at Futuna the natives caught
fowls, cut down bunches of bananas, dug up yams and taro,
gathered together their shells and curios, and made off to the
boats to sell their produce. As they ran along the paths they
seized on a sulphur butterfly and touched their cheeks with its
wings, which left a yellow down.
“They picked a nut from a tree containing a red pigment.
This they rubbed on each cheek, and when they reached the
Mission Station, if they could find the blue bag, another daub
was added, and after admiring themselves in our windows, they
rushed on to the beach. If they received good prices for their
produce they returned to their homes quite pleased; if not, they
put out their anger on us. There was a dangerous precipice on
the path, and we got a fence put up to hide it. Several of the
men put their backs to the fence, and sent it over the precipice.
We got a stone wall built instead, and this shared the same fate.
“The wrestling with heathenism was long and trying. One
can only go through the experience once in a lifetime. A friend
in Edinburgh asked all her praying friends to pray for the work
and workers on Futuna. We believe those prayers were
answered in a great hurricane which swept over the island,
leaving us homeless. The natives crowded around us, helping
in every way possible. Their hard hearts were softened, and
their love and sympathy came out to us in a wonderful way.
All that was best in them came at once to the surface. Their
prayers were different, ‘O Lord, keep us,’ they said, ‘from doing
hard things to these two. They are far from home and friends.
They are out in the open, having been struck by a hurricane.
We, O Lord, have only been playing with the Worship. We
have not yet touched the Centre. O Lord, help us to lay hold
of the Centre.’
“This Centre meant Jesus Christ. We slept in one of their
huts until they patched up a house for us. They now began
to attend church and school in earnest. A Candidates’ Class
was formed. Later a few were baptised, and at last a little


Christian Party was spreading their feeble light on Futuna.
The good work went on slowly but surely, and a new church
was built. The natives prepared arrowroot, which was sold in
Edinburgh, and the money realised paid part of the church and
the printing and binding of their books. The missionary trans-
lated and printed 100 hymns for them, and taught them to sing.
“He was working with chemicals when the fumes affected
his throat, and he was not able to sing for over a year. I then
took up the singing. The women told me my voice was
pakihkisi, which, in Futunese, means the rustling of withered
leaves in the wind, and I suppose in English means cracked!
However, I got the people interested in the singing.
“Then I began to teach the young people English hymns,
and they became good singers. They liked tunes with a swing
in them. They were at last able to sing hymns in five different
native languages.
“In the Futunese language there is no word for “wife.”
When the men began to pray in church they prayed for the
Missionary and then prayed for the children and myself as the
‘belongings’ of the Missionary. I objected to this, and asked
them to name us in their prayers.
“The worship had never been so far advanced when a
Queensland labour ship introduced an epidemic of dysentery. It
spread round the island, and carried away a third of the
Futunese, and a third of ourselves. All around us were the dead
and dying. The island was ‘full of farewells to the dying, and
mournings for the dead.’ The worship had now a good hold on
Futuna, and the people bore their great sorrows calmly. No
one left the church, and the heathen did not lay the blame of
the sickness on the Missionary, or on the Worship. A few years
earlier they might have done so, and we would have to suffer.
“We were the only white people on the island. When most
of the natives had become Christians, a trader came, and stayed
for a year. When the steamer came he always got helpless.
The natives carried him from his boat, and put him to bed.
They gathered up his money, sugar, rice, biscuits, and meat tins,
placing them beside him. The natives who had once been the
thieves of the Pacific were now so transformed by the power
of the Gospel of Jesus Christ that they had no desire to steal.


“In the early years we often got no sleep till near the morn-
ing with the wild heathen singing, and beating of native drums.
The soft moonlight nights became enjoyable. The only sound
to break the stillness was the hum of voices from the villages
Mrs. GUNN—I92I.
over the evening meal, or the clatter of a big land-crab dragging
its shell along the coral path. Then the sound of hymns came
wafted to us, and the voice of prayer was heard: the natives
were having their evening worship.


“The Missionary now got charge of Aneityum, an island
40 miles from Futuna. It had been a Christian island for over
30 years. They have the whole Bible translated into their own
language, and are more advanced than the Futunese. We had
now three homes, two on Aneityum and one on Futuna, and
for 12 years we were never more than a few weeks in the one
place.
“The Aneityumese are Melanesians, and are different in
many ways from the Futunese. We had to attack a new
language, and learn to pack and repack our belongings. If we
forgot anything we had just to do without it.
“We now procured a governess for our girls. If we had
done so in earlier years the heathen would have said, ‘The
Missionary has two wives!’
“Let me tell you something about the native converts. An
old Aneityum man lay dying. His wife sat beside him with her
Bible in her lap. He said, ‘Give me a pillow for a dying man.’
She read John 14: ‘Let not your heart be troubled.’ Then he
asked for another pillow. And she read Heb. 4: 9: ‘There
remaineth a rest to the people of God.’ Becoming weaker, he
asked for more, and she read Psalm 116: 15: ‘Precious in the
sight of the Lord is the death of His Saints.’ ‘That will do,’ he
said, and feebly commended himself in prayer to God, and passed
away a redeemed soul.
“It was strange to meet with the word ‘pillow’ in the
Aneityumese language. The late Frances Ridley Havergal
wrote a booklet called ‘Little Pillows,’ containing texts for
children to repeat before going to bed.
“Some people do not like missionaries. A woman once
said to me, ‘You Missionaries are just buying and selling land in
the New Hebrides.’
“I told her how much land we had —‘just the freehold property
of three little graves.’
“A heathen village on Futuna held out against Christianity
for many years. We invited the whole island to spend the day
at the Mission Station. The Christians thought the heathen
would not come, but down they came. They went all round
the food we had prepared for the feast. They smelled the rice,


biscuits, bread and tea, and brown sugar, and pronounced them
Very good.’ They sought out the largest dishes for their tea,
took the shadiest seats, and enjoyed huge helpings of food.
What they could not eat it is native etiquette to take home with
them.
“The bell rang for a service, and they all entered church
for the first time. After the service was over, each one on the
island received a present. It was a really happy day on Futuna,
and we thanked God that He had spared us to see the great
change among the people.
“The Missionary secured a Christian teacher from Aneityum
to take up the work among the heathen. When they were told
about the coming of the teacher, named ‘Natuthi,’ the heathen
said: ‘Natuthi! We have never heard of any great thing he
has done, nor any great deed of his father or grandfather. He
can only be a bit of driftwood. We won’t listen to him ; we will
beg things from him.’ This was just what they did.
“Then a Futunese teacher offered to settle in the heathen
village. The Christians were asked by the Missionary, each one,
to choose a heathen for whom they would pray that they might
be led to give up their heathen ways, and accept the Gospel.
The teacher himself was a man of prayer and of faith. Little
by little he was the means of weaning them away from their
heathen customs, and they regularly attended church and school.
“Through the influence of the Gospel their faces have be-
come quite different. When the Missionary left Futuna there
was a church and school in each village. Those natives who
were once leaders in heathen ceremonies are now church
members, teachers and helpers in the church services. Many of
the crying babies on our arrival are the preachers, teachers, and
their wives.
“Since coming into civilisation, the Missionary translated
the Psalms into the language of Futuna. The people wrote,
saying, ‘The Psalms are sweet in our mouths.’
“Last year the Missionary finished the translation of the
New Testament, and sent the books to the islands. A mail came
from the Futunese a few weeks ago, and they are very pleased
with their books. One of them writes, ‘The words are exceed-


ingly good: some of them are very sharp. They are not par-
ables, but are spirit and truth.’
“A deacon writes, T£ you would also translate the “Pilgrim’s
Progress” into Futunese before you die it would be very good
indeed!’
“It is such a privilege that Missionaries have translating the
Scriptures into the different languages. A New Hebridean
Missionary, when on furlough in Glasgow, took some of his
translations to his old professor, to ask his advice. Professor
Denny reverently took the books into his hand, and handed
them back with tears in his eyes, saying, T would give my whole
life work, both as Minister and Professor, to have done that.’
“I have just touched on our work here and there. I would
ask your prayers and your sympathy for your own missionaries
in the New Hebrides.”


ittrs. <£umt’£ JHis&ionarp &bbres£ to Cjnlbren
m
“My dear young friends, I do wish we could have you all
for a picnic in Futuna. We would give you bananas, oranges —
such big juicy ones —coconuts, mangoes, pineapples, custard
apples, sugar-cane, passion-fruit, granadillas, and other fruits
you have never heard of.
“Then you would bathe and swim in those lovely sapphire
and greenish-blue seas. You would gather shells on the white,
sandy beach. You would fish, catching gay-coloured fish, pea-
cock-blue salmon-pink, black and white, and the most lovely
and beautiful of all is striped over with five or six different
colours, and you would pick a big bunch of pale lilac orchids.
Oh, how you would enjoy it all!
“But that cannot be, unless some of you young people be-
come missionaries, and pay us a visit on Futuna, or Aneityum.
Why not? I hope you all have an aim in life, a worthy aim to
become good and great. If you love God, and trust in Flim every
day, He will open your way, and give you what you wish, and
what He sees good for you, often something far better than you
ever thought to have.
“It is just 23 years since we landed on Futuna. I could
never forget the first sight of the people—naked heathen,
painted savages. One man, with long hair, his cheeks painted
red, and such wild eyes, would keep looking at me, and I
thought, Tf we are to be killed, he will be the man who will
do it.’ But, really, I now think that he was simply admiring
me!! However, God kept us in perfect safety, and I do not
know that they ever thought of doing us much harm.


“I remember an old man wanted heaps of things, and, when
we refused to supply all his wants, he said he would burn down
our house. He went into the cook-house, and sat down before
the fire. We looked at him now and again, but after a time
he rose up, and went home. A few days after he came holding
up a small fowl, asking for medicine. Dr. Gunn gave him the
medicine, and took the fowl, which was a kind of peace-
offering.
“This old man attended church, but never gave up his eight
or nine wives, and his heathenism. Before he died he asked the
teacher to dress his body in clean white clothing, and to bury
him in a grave. The heathen (except chiefs) were always
thrown into the sea when they died. We thought he may have
believed that the clean clothing, and being buried in a grave,
would take him to heaven. Now, you all know that it is only
by knowing, trusting, and loving Jesus, that we can get to
Heaven.
“I’ll tell you how we got our first school. A boy called
Varetto came to our window sometimes. We had asked him
the names of different things—trees, plants, shells, etc., and
then wrote them down, and in this way we began to learn the
language.
“After some time we asked him to come and stay with us,
which he did. I made him a pair of trousers out of an old
dress. He was smart, and soon able to set the table, wash the
dishes, and sweep out the rooms. We told him Bible stories
and he became quite interested in hearing that God made all
things, and about the Flood, but his favourite story was about
Cain and Abel.
“We told him we would like all the children to gather, and
be taught to read. He said they were lazy and afraid. But
one Sunday morning we missed him, and when he returned he
was quite heated and said, T have gathered the children together.
You two go out and teach them.’ He had run round the villages,
and by threats, and chasing them, he had driven boys, girls and
young people to school. We found them huddled together in
great fear, not knowing what was going to happen. We
soothed them, and gave each of them a present. So this was
the beginning of the school.


“We have school for two or three hours each day. It is
hot inside, and their minds cannot take in much teaching at a
time. They have also to gather their food, and go shell-fishing
each day when the tide is low. They boil the fish, and make a
savoury soup.
“The second generation of Futunese —that is, the second
generation after Christianity was brought to the island—are
bright and clever. They learn chapter after chapter, and book
after book, of Scripture. One time 12 girls in my class repeated
the book of Jonah, with scarcely a mistake. They have no
other lesson books but their hymn books.
“It is amusing to notice a heathen coming to church for
the first time. He would dart inside, and sit with his back to the
Missionary. As a mark of respect he would pull the feathers
out of his hair, which really meant taking his hat off, but, of
course, he had no hat. Most of the time he would keep his face
hidden.
“Next Sunday he would not be quite so frightened, and
glance at the white children in the church. The following Sun-
day he would turn his side to the Missionary, and, after some
time, his full face. By and by he would have courage to stand
up at the singing, and, oh, what joy it was when we saw, for
the first time, his lips moving in trying to sing.
“I am glad to tell you Futuna is quite a transformed island.
Lots of young men who were babies when we first arrived have
come out as teachers and preachers.
“The week-day Prayer Meeting is often as large as the
Sunday service. The traders may go fishing on Sunday, but no
Christian native on Futuna or Aneityum would do so.
“I will tell you a story to show how they learned to keep the
Sabbath on Futuna.
“In the early years, teachers from Samoa were placed on
the island. They told the people about God, and that one day
in the week was to be kept holy. Some of the people listened
to the words of the teachers, and went to church, but one
heathen said, ‘What’s about the Holy Day! I’ll go to fish.’ He
was standing on a rock out in the sea, and saw a big fish com-
ing near. He poised his spear, threw it, and speared the fish.


He was so proud and pleased, and said to those near him, ‘This
is better than going- to church.’ But just behind the fish came
a big shark, which seized the man, dragged him off the rock,
and disappeared into the deep sea. This was a terrible lesson
which the Futunese did not forget, and they kept the Sabbath
after that.
“They reverence the name of God, and Jesus, and are in
earnest in trying to live good lives. The last time the magic
lantern pictures were to be exhibited on Futuna before we left,
a teacher brought a message from the people to the Missionary,
saying, ‘Leave that picture of Jesus on the Cross in the lantern
for a long time, we could look at it for days.’ While this picture
was being shown a deep silence fell over the audience.
“I wonder do the sufferings of Jesus touch you, dear young
friends. I hope so, and that you all fully realise that He died
to save you from your sins.”


Wholly set up and
printed in Australia by
John Andrew & Co.
21 Phillip Street
Sydney.




