





In rcctnorlam.
George Howat,
Born 12th July, 1844
Died 22nd July, 1919
Aged 75 Years
A Sermon Preached at Parkville Presbyterian
Church by the Rev. F. MILNE, M.A , 8.D., on
Sunday, 27th July, 1919.
And Appreciations.








Co tbe roemorp of
George howat.
By the sudden and rather unexpected death of Mr.
George Howat, while on a visit to his Gulpha Station,
on the 22nd July, at the age of 75, of heart failure,
the commercial community of Melbourne has lost one
of its oldest, best-known, and honourable business
men; the State one of its choice and noble citizens;
and the Church a worthy elder, a loving, loyal mem-
ber, and one of its pillars.
He served the Church at South Melbourne,
Carlton, North Melbourne, and Parkville. He arrived
in Melbourne with his father, so well known in Pres-
byterian circles, in 1855, and was educated at South
Melbourne. He entered the office of Dalmahoy,
Campbell & Co., Stock Agents, where he remained 15
years, and then joined the firm of R. Gibson & Co.,
and in 1876 commenced business as a stock and
station agent. With such a business training, sup-
ported by great aptitude and character, he soon
inspired confidence, and none stood on a higher


pedestal at the saleyards for conscientious upright-
ness and transparent honesty. Men there who spoke
in the fiery language depicted in “ The Sentimental
Bloke ” characters trusted him, because he made little
profession of his religion, but was always naturally
practising it. Ruskin tells he discovered in Venice, at
St. James’, an inscription which ran: “Around the
Temple let the merchant’s weights be true, his mea-
sures just, and his contracts without guile.” Mr.
Howat conducted the whole of his large and increas-
ing business on these practical religious lines. Clients
in their financial difficulties consulted him, and they
were helped, advised, and guided by his shrewdness
and business ability. The 15th Psalm expresses many
of his aspirations, and for 43 years he wore the white
flower of commercial integrity.
While he was a keen and methodical business
man, he tried to be fervent in spirit, ever serving the
Lord, and to walk in what has been called “ the royal
pathwav of a holy life.” He was of a retiring disposi-
tion, and clothed with humility, and you could not
associate with him long' without feeling that he was
one of the “ still strong men ” Gladstone admired,
and had “ a life hid with God.” He loved the Church
of his fathers, clung to “ the old paths ” (Jer. 6 : 16),
was regular in worship and ordinances of the Church;
a generous and cheerful benefactor, a “ succourer of
many,” and made widows, children, and needy


hearts rejoice, and in many gifts tried to carry out
the spirit of Tennyson’s “ Golden Year
“ When wealth no more shall rest in mounded heaps,
But smit with freer light shall slowly melt,
In many streams to fatten lower lands,
And light shall spread, and man be liker man,
Thro’ all the season of the Golden Year.”
Mr. Howat would shrink from such a memorial
notice as this, for his inner life is expressed in the
hymn:—
O Saviour, I have nought to plead
In earth or heaven above;
But just my own exceeding need
And Thy exceeding love.”
The community should be grateful to the saintly
parents who gave such a gift to the commercial life
of the city and the Church, and be thankful for its
fertilising influences. “ The memory of the just is
blessed,” and Whittier’s lines summarise the life of
such a good man: —
“ The dear Lord’s best interpreters
Are humble human souls;
The gospel of a life like His
Is more than books or scrolls.
From scheme and creed the light goes out,
The blessed Master none can doubt,
Revealed in holy lives.”
(From The Messenger , August 8, 1919).


In lllcmoriam Service.
Sermon preached at Parkville Presbyterian Church
By the Rev. F. Milne, M.A., 8.D.,
On Sunday, the 27th July, 1919.
“ But now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the first-
fruits of them that have fallen asleep” (1 Cor. 15 : 20).
The resurrection doctrine has been doubted and
disputed more than any other doctrine in the Chris-
tian faith. No teaching so offended the learned
Sadducees as that of the resurrection from the dead.
The doctrine was received with mockery at Athens.
At Corinth they asked, “ How are the dead raised up,
and with what manner of body do come?”
Brethren, the difficulty has not decreased or in any
way lessened with the lapse of time. Centuries have
passed, and other doctrines have become clearer and
easier to understand, but not so that of the resurrec-
tion of the dead. As ever-increasing multitudes die,
and swell the procession into the abode of silence,
leaving little mark to show that they have been, and
none whatever to indicate that they still are, the
mind becomes bewildered in its attempt to under-
stand what this resurrection from the dead can mean.
All through the centuries this doctrine has been
doubted and disputed until now.


Now, it is interesting- to note in the first place, as
we read this chapter, that St. Paul, the great Apostle,
does not for a moment seek to excommunicate any
one who has difficulties in accepting this great doc-
trine. At the Church at Corinth there were many
who denied the resurrection of the dead; they could
not fathom, could not understand the doctrine. Now,
St. Paul never- for a moment proposed to deal with
these infidel members of his congregation; he does
not imply that they have forfeited membership. In
the same congregation, if a man became guilty of a
fleshly offence, St. Paul immediately commanded the
rest of the church to have no further fellowship with
him: the man was summarily ejected. So it is evident
that St. Paul thinks that there is a world of difference
between wrong living and intellectual doubt, between
moral wrong doing and intellectual error. While he
will not excommunicate those who cannot and will
not accept the doctrine, he seeks to put them right;
he reasons with them ; and his endeavour to put away
the doubt and unbelief that prevailed in the Church at
Corinth has given us this “ Fifteenth chapter of First
Corinthians." Now, brethren, this is the greatest
treatise ever penned by man on this all-important
subject. It is the reasoned statement of a great
master mind, and nowhere is the wondrous intellec-
tual endowment of this man St. Paul so much in
evidence as in this chapter ; nowhere does it loom so
large; it is really the most masterly piece of reason-
ing to be found in any literature. So cogent is it, that
as you read, and ponder, and examine, the difficul-
ties melt away, and it becomes more easy, more
reasonable, to accept the teaching than to reject it.


Note these arguments as they come marshalled
in order; (1) St. Paul first appeals to the testimony
of prophecy. Christ died “ according to the Scrip-
tures.” He was buried and rose again, according to
the Scriptures. (2) Secondly, Paul bases his argu-
ment on fact —historical fact. The risen Christ, he
says, was seen. He was seen of Cephas, seen of the
twelve, seen of more than five hundred, most of whom
were still alive. He was seen by James, His brother,
was seen of the Apostles, and, “ last of all,” he says,
“ He was seen by me.” Eye witnesses. “ I speak that
I know;” “ He rose again from the dead.” (3) In the
third place, there is the argument of veracity. “If
Christ be not risen from the dead, then we are all false
witnesses.” Not mistaken witnesses, but false ones.
Peter and James and Paul have formed themselves
into a grand missionary link to proclaim the great
evangel of Christ, Who rose again from the dead, and
is alive for evermore; and, he says, “If He be not
risen, then are we found false witnesses.” Then he
answers their question, “ How are the dead raised?”
by an appeal to the world of nature: “Thou fool,
that which thou sowest is not quickened except it
die ?” Then there is an appeal to the moral righteous-
ness with which the world is governed. If Christ be
not raised, then all those who have fallen asleep in
Jesus are perished. I say perished, as the brutes
perish. The good, the pure, the holy, have all
perished like the beasts of the field. Does Death
annihilate us all? Is there no difference in death
between the good and the bad, the pure and the


impure, the man who goes down into death with
blasphemy on his lips and the man who says, “ Lord,
into Thy hands I commend my spirit ” ? If there is
no difference between them, then there can be no
moral righteousness at all.
So, going over his cogent arguments and mar-
shalling all his forces, Paul comes to this conclusion:
Now, i.e., since these things are so, “ Christ has
arisen from the dead, and become the firstfruits of
them that have fallen asleep.” Brethren, you can
leave following out these arguments, grand and glori-
ous as they are, and concentrate your attention on the
triumphant note, the ring* of certainty with which
St. Paul proclaims the fact —“ Christ is risen from the
dead, and is alive for evermore.” The grandest of
all doctrines proclaimed to man is proclaimed with
triumphant certainty.
Now, St. Paul made no claim to infallibility; he
confesses that there are secret things, things hidden,
things vastly beyond his power to know or under-
stand; he insists that we know only in part, that now
we see through a glass darkly; that we walk by faith.
But there are some things which, with St. Paul, were
certainties; there are some things on which he took
his stand as on solid rock. And he stood erect, and
he said to all who would gainsay him, “ But I know.”
And one of these certainties is that Christ Who died
rose again from the dead, and is now alive for ever-
more. That was not a passing feeling, a mere
transient emotion arising out of a heated disquisition;


it was a firm conviction that stood the test of time.
For long - years St. Paul went to and fro, living a hard
life, his mission that of proclaiming this wondrous
evangel of man’s victory over sin and death by Christ
rising from the dead. And that conviction stood the
test of all opposition. Learned Greece and Rome were
against him, but they could not shake his belief. It
actually stood the test of martyrdom. When he was
finally thrown into the Roman dungeon to face death
at the hand of Nero, that brute emperor, that pro-
found conviction made him more than conqueror, and
he said, “I know Whom I have believed, and am per-
suaded that He is able to keep that which I have com-
mitted to Him against that day.”
“The firstfruits of them which have fallen asleep.”
The firstfruits: the figure of speech is Jewish, and its
meaning is perfectly clear when we remember the
Jewish custom of dedicating the firstfruits of the year
to God. The firstfruits were holy to God, indicating,
of course, that all the rest belonged to God; so in
Paul’s figure of speech is indicated the fact that the
great harvest is yet to come in; all mankind who are
joined to Christ in the bonds of humanity shall yet
rise from the dead. God is not the God of the dead,
but of the living.
The resurrection of Christ is the pledge to us of
our own resurrection, and so, to the Christian be-
liever, Death is vanquished; he can look Death in the
face with the eye of Hope; life for him is something
beyond the brief span of threescore and ten. It’s goal


is not the grave, and it has more in it than the dull
sound we heard last week, “ Earth to earth, ashes to
ashes, dust to dust." Soon our summons must come,
when we shall lie down for the last time upon our
bed; then will come the rush of darkness to our soul,
but the eye of faith can look beyond it and through
it, and say triumphantly, “ For since by man came
death, by man came also the resurrection from the
dead. For as in Adam all died, even so in Christ shall
all be made alive again. As we have borne the image
of the earthly, so also we shall bear the image of the
heavenA.” . . .
Brethren, we are met this morning under the
shadow of a great bereavement. Our friend and
fellow-worshipper, Mr. George Howat, was suddenly
called away, suddenly called away by the hand of
Death, and his accustomed place to-day is vacant.
Now, lam not going to praise the dead : it is not a
minister’s business to praise the dead; it would be
unfitting for me to praise him; his loved ones who
are here would resent such praise as unfitting and
impertinent. Who are we, to praise one who has now
heard the “ Well done ” of God Himself? Yet there
are qualities of character which our departed friend
and fellow-worshipper has exhibited, which we would
do well to mention, if only in the hope that they may
impress themselves upon us as something worth
cultivating*, worth imitating. We know that Mr.
Howat was a successful man of business, a successful
man of the world. The Bible injunction was carried
out by him, "Not slothful in business, fervent in


spirit, serving the Lord.” God prospered him, but he
never, as so many others weakly do, he never forgot
God in the sunshine of prosperity. He was, through
it all, a good, sincere man; and honesty, integrity and
truth characterised all his dealings in the world.
My friend was really and deeply a religious man,
and his religion was neither a veneer nor a conven-
tion. He did not come here regularly to church
because it was a fashion in Melbourne. His religion,
I say, was neither veneer nor convention; it was the
kind which I most honour —quiet, marked by no show
or demonstration, and disfigured by no narrowness.
I honour him for the way he was so true to the faith
of his fathers. How many have left the old land, and
made men of themselves in this new land, but have
forgotten the faith of their fathers? But my friend
—and your friend —was true to the faith of his
fathers. He has been connected with this church ever
since it was a church, and I believe he had the name
of being the largest contributor in the whole
congregation.
He was a regular, attentive and tireless wor-
shipper. The last time he was here was an inclement,
wintry Sunday morning, and as he went out, someone
remarked: “Mr. Howat, you should be getting a
medal for coming out on a day like this.” In his
own pleasant way he answered: “ Oh, the weather!
that is nothing.” No weather could keep him from
the house of God; he was faithful in his attendance
as a worshipper here.


We honour him as a congregation, for he was one
of Ihe first elders of this church, and always assisted
at the Communion service. For the last eleven years,
since I have come here, I have never known my friend
Mr. Howat absent from his place at the Communion
table if it were at all possible for him to be here. This
loyalty is none too common; this loyalty is indeed
rare, and becoming rarer, and we appreciate it when
we see it. And we saw it in our departed friend, and
so the Church is indeed poorer to-day for the loss of
him whom we mourn.
I will not do more than glance at the home life of
our dear friend. After all, it is what a man is in his
home that is the true test of his character —not what
he is in the world, nor in the Church, but what he is
in the home. Mr. Howat was all that a man could be
in the home. Never was there a more true and
devoted husband to a wife; never was there a more
loving and affectionate father; never was there a
truer brother; and so, to the members of his family,
we here this morning offer our heartfelt sympathy,
and we say “ That they sorrow not even as others
who have no hope, for if we believe that Jesus died
and rose again from the dead, so them also which
sleep in Jesus God will bring with Him.”
Brethren, what has overtaken our friend and
fellow-worshipper awaits you and me. The time is
short. It is but the tick of the clock, the turning of
the hand, and the hour is up, and we must go. May
the grave that has been opened, so suddenly opened
at our feet, whisper to our hearts, “ Watch ye and


pray. Ye know not the day nor the hour when the
Son of Man cometh. Watch, therefore, lest, coming
suddenly, the Master of the house shall find you
sleeping.”
SESSION’S RESOLUTION.
“ The members of College Church Session, called
together specially to deal with the matter, desire to
place on record their sense of the loss sustained by
the congregation through the sudden death of Mr.
George Howat.
“An elder elsewhere at an earlier date, the late Mr.
Howat had been on the Session of College Church
since its foundation in 1891. He was regular in his
attendance on Divine ordinances, and always showed
himself generously sympathetic, not only towards the
activities of his own congregation, but towards the
work of the Presbyterian Church as a whole.
“A life of genuine pi-ety and of quiet practical help-
fulness has had a peaceful ending, and while we would
not wish our friend and fellow-member back, we miss
and shall miss him sorely.
“ In placing this brief tribute on the minutes, the
members of Session direct that copies shall be sent,
with an expression of their heartfelt sympathy, to
Mr. David Howat, as representing the members of
our deceased friend’s sorrowing family, and to his
brother, Mr. William Howat, of West Melbourne.”
JOHN ANDERSON,
Session Clerk.


APPRECIATIONS.
(From Stock and Land, August 6, 3919.)
A man of strong personality, sterling integrity, keen busi-
ness acumen —one of those who have built up the commercial
fabric of Victoria —passed with the death of Mr. George
Howat, of Queen Street, which took place on 22nd inst. He
was the last of the original Stock and Station Agents of
Melbourne—the founders of that important branch of busi-
ness which has been a big factor in the development of the
primary production of this and the adjoining States. His
active association with it extended over nearly 60 years. He
was born in Cumnock, Scotland, 75 years ago, and arrived in
Victoria at an early age. Shortly afterwards he secured an
appointment with Messrs. Dalmahoy, Campbell & Co., the
noted old firm of Stock and Station Agents, and soon advanced
to the position of stock salesman, for which he displayed
particular aptitude. He continued to sell at Newmarket until
about ten years ago, and throughout his long career he held
the confidence of buyers and sellers doing business at the
yards. In 1876 he commenced business on his own account,
and the reputation he had won ensured his success. The
business established then has had his personal supervision
right up to the time of his death, although, during the past
ten years, his place as salesman has been filled by his son
(Mr. David Howat). The late Mr. Howat specialised in pure
stock, chiefly Shorthorns, and the breed which takes its name
from his native county —Ayrshire. Some of the most notable
pure stock sales in Victoria were conducted by him, and his
keen judgment has had no small amount of influence in
improving the herds in Victoria and New South Wales.
The late Mr. Howat was a sound judge of land values as
well as stock. He acquired extensive pastoral interests, being
owner of Gulpha Creek Station, Mathoura, N.S.W., the
Quamby Estate, Loch, and Bunker Hill Estate, Donnybrook.
As a valuer of real estate, he possessed ability which was
much in request. He also mastered finance, and in this was


recognised as one of the soundest advisers in the city. He
was one of those who kept their heads in the great boom in
1888, and was instrumental in helping to repair the financial
disaster which overtook the country as the result of the wild
speculation of that fevered period.
Another side of a man of many parts was his abounding
charity. No call upon him for assistance failed to elicit a
liberal response. Without ostentation, and prompted by
genuine kindliness of heart, his benefactions were the means
of providing a silver lining to the dark cloud of adversity for
many. This desire to help those less happily circumstanced
led also to his taking an active part in connection with many
leading charitable institutions. As a member of Boards of
Management, and as Governor of some of these, he did much
good work.
The late Mr. Howat was engaged in his business pursuits
in Melbourne up to a fortnight ago, when he left, in accord-
ance with an annual custom, to spend the midwinter months in
the more genial climate at his Gulpha Creek Station, N.S.W.
He attended to several matters on the morning of the 22nd,
but later suffered the heart seizure, which caused his death
the same day.
The family of the late Mr. Howat are Mrs. F. B. S.
Faulkiner, of Haddon Rigg, N.S.W.; Messrs. David and
George and Miss Sarah' Howat, of Melbourne. Mr. William
Howat, who has charge of the Clarke estates, is a brother
of deceased.
(From The Southern Cross, August 1, 1919.)
Widespread and sincere were the expressions of regret at
the announcement of the sudden death of Mr. George Howat,
on July 22, at the age of seventy-five years. His removal,
indeed, marks the passing of one of the most highly respected
and fully trusted business men of the State, of which he was a
resident for 62 years, 43 of them being devoted to business.
His lofty and uncompromising ideals of business morality
and his transparent goodness of character were enriching


to the individual and uplifting to the community. He was
the type of man whose influence always makes itself felt,
the type that the poet Tennyson had in mind when he deliv-
ered his message that “ our hope for England is in God and
good men.”
Mr. Howat was nurtured in a godly home. The influence
of his saintly parents dominated his whole life, and in his
person he enshrined their memory. His father could be taken
as the original of “ The Cotter’s Saturday Night ”; and from
such potent environment and heredity we can understand how
the Bible, prayer and Church were such mighty influences in
a life that always gave God His right place. His business
and religious life were not in watertight compartments. He
was not “ slothful in business,” but was ever “ fervent in
spirit, serving the Lord.” He was dowered with great busi-
ness abilities and methodical habits, and his high character
inspired confidence, so that his business prospered. His
disposition was modest and retiring, and his chief joys were
in his home life, which was sweet and fragrant. He cared
little for the mere praise of men, but was eager for the praise
of his Master.
He delighted in distributing quietly, never desiring to let
his right hand know what his left did, and believed, with
Andrew Bonar, that the best part of a man’s work is the
unseen. Giving, with him, was not a kind of tooth extraction,
nor a painful duty, but a joy. Hilarious and cheerful, always
he maintained a running stream of helpfulness to the poor, the
struggling and the unfortunate. The blessing of Job (29 :
11-15) must often have been his. Realising the blessing and
influence of a church, he contributed generously to the
erection of one near his station, and endowed it liberally, and
started a proposal also to build a Mechanics’ Institute, in
which he would be the main contributor, for he rejoiced in
scattering good literature. He realised fully in his life Job
36 : 11, and has now entered into the joys of Psalm 16 : 11.
His whole nature abhorred anything that savoured of
flattery, and he ever shrank from anything like public praise ;


but he is now beyond human praise, fus work has been ‘‘ tried
by fire/’ and he has now received his Saviour’s “ Well done!”
The funeral services in the house were conducted by the
Rev. J. Milne and Professor Adam, and at the grave by the
Rev. J. Milne and Professor Rentoul. Mr. Milne also preached
a memorial sermon on July 26, from 1 Cor. 15 : 20. Deep
sympathy is felt for the bereaved family, and for his brother
William, who is the only survivor of the old family. The
love and devotion of the two brothers was a touching domestic
idyll, almost too sacred to be mentioned, and only the Elder
Brother can comfort the one who is left.
(From The Presbyterian, August 14, 1919.)
The late Mr. George Howat was in his 76th year. As a
boy of eleven he was brought to Victoria, and the house at
Parkville, in which he had resided for many years, bore the
name of his native place, Cumnock, in Ayrshire. A business
which he established in the city in 1876 is still carried on
under his name. Subsequently he acquired various station
properties, and it was on one of these in the Riverina that he
died suddenly from heart failure. The body was brought back
to Melbourne, and interred with that of his wife, who died
some years ago.
For many years Mr. Howat had been an elder of the
church. When in 1891 the College Church congregation was
founded, he became a member of its Session, and so remained
until the end. A man of genuine piety and generous instincts,
he was a tower of strength in his own congregation, and the
College Church people will miss him sorely. The news of his
death came as a great shock to them, for he had been in
their midst apparently quite well only a short time before.
From the pulpit the minister (Rev. F. Milne) spoke briefly
of his consistent conduct, his quiet helpfulness, and his
beautiful home life.
A family of four-—two sons and two daughters—who
mourn his loss, have the sympathy of all who knew their
father, and that sympathy is extended to his brother, Mr.
William Howat, of West Melbourne. J.A.


1508
00074074


Arbucklev Waddell. PTy;
PRINTERS. . ■;
20-22 MCKILLOP ST. MELB.
r" ‘ ' f *£ ' :
V ; X
'■/ \ ■ , V*. -'f ' V, ' ' '
" f . i ‘ ' . * ■ ' s ■ v ■ ■:. '
