







IN MEMORIAM
THE VENERABLE
JOHN POTTER, M.A.,
VICAR OF CHRIST CHURCH PRO-CATHEDRAL,
AND ARCHDEACON OF BALLAARAT.
WITH A PORTRAIT.
’Tis but farewell for one brief Night
’Twixt kindred spirits said,
To meet again in Morning Light
When night’s chill mists are fled.
DEAN RUSSELL.
ONE SHILLING AND SIXPENCE.
PROFITS TO THE MEMORIAL FUND.
BALLAARAT:
CHARLES BOYD, PRINTER, 35 STURT STREET.
1881.




THE LATE ARCHDEACON POTTER, M.A.
MEMORIAL NOTICES
FROM “THE BALLAARAT COURIER,” and “THE BALLAARAT
STAR,” AUGUST, 1881 (SLIGHTLY AMENDED).
TITHE death of the Venerable Archdeacon Potter
will cause a deep feeling 1 of sorrow amongst
all who knew him as an earnest Churchman and
affectionate friend. The deceased has so long been
stricken down by disease, that his name has of late
been as a shadow in comparison with the potency it
possessed when the reverend gentleman was in the
full vigour of life, and occupied the position of one
of the leading Churchmen of Ballaarat.
The late Venerable Archdeacon Potter, M.A.,
was the eldest son of the Rev. Robert Potter, of
Louisburg, West Mayo, Ireland. He was born May
16, 1827, and graduated at Trinity College, Dublin,
in 1851, He came to the Colony of Victoria in that
year, and three months after arriving was ordained
deacon, and afterwards priest, by the Right Rev.


Dr, Perry, the first Bishop of Melbourne, After
officiating for short periods at Williamstown, Gee-
long, and Ballan, he was appointed to Christ Church,
Ballaarat —temporarily on July 20, 1855, and per-
manently October 18, 1856.
At the time he commenced his duties there,
twenty-six years ago, Ballaarat was in its infancy,
and Church matters in an embryo state. A Church
of England District, however, had been formed, and
Mr. Potter succeeded the Rev. W. Thackeray, of
Tasmania, in the cure. The congregation assembled,
at first in a Tent, on the site of the Pro-Cathedral,
but afterwards in a weatherboard building in Arm-
strong Street, adjoining the site of the present Town
Hall Hotel, and which, during the week, was used
as a Coffee Room. Subsequently, a wooden building
was erected near where the Church is now, and after a
time, as the congregation became stronger, the centre
portion of the present Church was erected (in 1857),
and then the gallery and organ. Finally, by the
addition of the Chancel and Transepts, the Church
was extended to its present dimensions. Through
all its vicissitudes the Rev. J. Potter, from the time
he took charge of Christ Church down to his death,
was its minister, and to within a year or two since
officiated regularly in it. The formation of the parish,
its gradual subdivision and proper administration,
with the difficulties of meeting the requirements of an


increasing congregation, furnished full employment
for the young clergyman’s powers; but he was emi-
nently successful in fulfilling the numerous onerous
duties devolving upon him. In the parochial work,
and that of Church erection, he had the hearty and
continued support of some of the leading gentlemen
of the district, including the present mayor (Mr. R.
Lewis), Mr. H. R, Caselli, Mr. F. M. Claxton, and
others, who have spent the major part of a busy life
in Ballaarat; and the unwavering adherence to him
which some of his oldest coadjutors in the admi-
nistration of the Church have displayed, is one of
the highest tributes that could be paid to anyone
in the position he occupied. Christ Church parish,
by virtue of its position and able administration,
became, and has continued to be, the most important
one in this part of the colony. Up to the time of
his decease, the Vicar of Christ Church was the
minister (of any denomination) who had been longest
in the city; the Rev. W. Henderson, if we remember
rightly, coming next in seniority.
Shortly after Ballaarat and the western portion of
the Colony had been declared a separate Diocese,
Christ Church was selected by Bishop Thornton
as a Pro-Cathedral, and early in 1877 Mr. Potter
was appointed, by the Bishop, Archdeacon of Bal-
laarat. By this time Church matters in the whole
city and town were in a state much in advance of


that in which Mr. Potter found them when he first
came here, and, when the Church had reached
smoother currents, it was hoped that the rev. gentle-
man, whose life of constant work for his Church and
repeated family bereavements had begun to tell
upon him, would be able to enjoy a season of needed
and well-deserved rest, and, for the future, less
anxious times. But it was not ordained that he
who had so well borne himself under the heat and
burden of the day should reap the reward of his
labors here. The anxiety attendant upon diocesan
matters which required his notice as Archdeacon,
coming upon his already weakened frame, resulted
in serious illness, and nearly four years ago he was
advised by the Bishop to make trial of a trip to
England, as a means of recovering his health.
He sailed in January, 1878. The voyage had
most beneficial effects upon the invalid; but, too
earnestly pursuing his vocation in the cold of winter
time in the mother country, he became again so
affected that his ultimate recovery was considered
improbable. A slight paralytic stroke laid him on
a sick bed, and it was some time before he could
get about again.
With shattered health, but still hopeful of the
future, he returned to Ballaarat in July, 1879, and
was gladly welcomed on his return by his congrega-
tion. For a little while after he returned, he offi


dated in the pulpit from which he had so often
preached the religion of his Divine Master ; but the
strength he then had was as the last flaming up of
the dying lamp before the light goes from it for
ever. His illness culminated, on November sth, in
a second paralytic seizure, which deprived him of
speech, and of the use of his left side. At that
time it appeared that he would not leave his room
alive, and the deepest sorrow for his suffering was
expressed, not only by those more immediately con-
nected with him as Incumbent of Christ Church,
but by others in this city who knew him for a kindly
and thoroughly Christian gentleman. This illness,
however, did not prove immediately fatal. The
Archdeacon was able to leave his room, and for
many months past might have been seen on fine
days in the Church yard, or walking laboriously
along Lydiard Street. He was unable to speak,
but appeared to experience great pleasure when, in
his house, he was visited by old friends, or if he
encountered in his limited rambles any persons, old
or young, whose faces were familiar. Not unfre-
quently, on Sunday evenings, especially in the
summer, he might have been observed beside the
door of the Church, motioning to late attendants to
hasten to the service, or silently admonishing by
gestures any of them he knew personally; and he
frequently attended and received the Sacrament.


On Thursday, 14th July last, the closing scene of
his useful life began. He suddenly became worse,
and his medical attendant, Dr. Whitcombe, who had
tended him throughout his illness, was hastily sent
for. The doctor could then give no hope of
recovery, and the Archdeacon gradually sank.
From the time of his third stroke, to his decease,
he was conscious but at intervals. He relapsed into
a state of insensibility early on Wednesday morning,
3rd August, and never regained consciousness.
The closing moments of his life, watched over by
his nearest relatives, were calm, and he passed
quietly from the scene of his labors here to the
presence of the Divine Master he served, at 10.30
on the night of Thursday, August 4th.
Archdeacon Potter leaves a wife and one child,
the latter the only survivor of a numerous family.
Though not in affluent circumstances by any means
at the time of his death, the lamented gentleman
has, we understand, by an insurance policy and
other means of the same nature, made some provi-
sion for those he left here. His brother, the Rev.
Robert Potter, Incumbent of St. Mary’s, Hotham,
was with him for some time prior and up to the time
of his death.


TITHE Funeral took place on Saturday afternoon,
6th August, and drew together a large con-
course of mourners and spectators, who testified
by their presence to the esteem in which the deceased
gentleman was held by all who knew him.
The flags displayed on the public buildings were
lowered to half-mast, and during the afternoon one
of the large bells in the City Hall, and the bell at
Christ Church Pro-Cathedral, tolled at intervals.
The remains of the deceased were borne from the
vicarage to the pro-Cathedral at half-past three
o’clock, and were met by the Bishop, and the Choir
and Clergy (robed in surplices), at the entrance.
The first sentences of the Burial Service were read
by the clergyman in charge, the Rev. J. Lewis. The
body was placed in the Chancel; the appointed
psalms were read by the Rev. H. W. H. Adeney, and
the Lesson by Bishop Thornton. The body was then
carried out to the hearse, and the funeral procession,
which included many of our eminent citizens, left
for the Old Cemetery; the places of business along
the route being closed as a mark of respect. The
Anglican clergymen present were the Bishop, Revs.
C. G. Allanby, H.W. H. Adeney, C. Campbell, H.
E, Cooper, R. T. Cummins, J. H. Gregory, J.
Glover,W. Kildahl, J. Lewis, R. J. Mercer, R. Potter,
E. S. Radcliff, H. T. Tranmar ; and Canons Chal-
niers, Goodman, and Handheld, There were also


present ministers representing nearly every denomi-
nation in Ballaarat. The pall-bearers to the grave
were : —Messrs. Claxton, Caselli, Clegg, Bailey,
Acheson, Rogers (Q. C.), Lewis, and Dr. Embling.
The coffin was covered with violet-colored velvet,
and bore an inscription, “ John Potter, M.A., died
4th August, 188 1, aged fifty-four years.” It was
covered with flowers. At the grave the first prayer
was read by the Rev. R. T. Cummins, and the
Committal by the Rev. J. H. Gregory. The con-
cluding portion of the Burial Service was then
impressively repeated by Canon Chalmers, and the
Benediction by the lord Bishop.
The Services at Christ Church Pro-Cathedral, on
Sunday, 7th August, both morning and evening,
were in harmony with the recent sad event. The
Lectern, Pulpit, Communion Rails, Choir Stalls, and
Bishop’s Chair, were draped in black, relieved with
white crosses ; and the Choral portion of the Ser-
vices were in a minor key, while the Hymns used
were solemn and affecting.
Allusion was made to the death of the Archdeacon
by the officiating Clergymen in all the Anglican
Churches of Ballaarat; and by the Rev. W. Hen-
derson, at St. Andrew’s Kirk. The Dead March in
“ Saul ” was played at the Pro-Cathedral and St
Paul’s Church ; the Clergy who officiated referring
to the deceased in terms of warm affection.


PORTION OF MEMORIAL SERMON
PREACHED BY
THE REV. J. H. GREGORY,
INCUMBENT OF ALL SAINTS, ST. KILDA,
AT CHRIST CHURCH PRO-CATHEDRAL, BALLAARAT, ON
SUNDAY MORNING, AUGUST 7TH, 1881.
Colossians i. 24 : “ Who now rejoice in my
sufferings for you, and fill up that which is behind
of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh for His body’s
sake, which is the Church.”
After pointing out that the expression “the afflic-
tions of Christ” did not refer to His all-sufficient
meritorious sufferings for human guilt, but to those
sufferings in His cause in which all His faithful
servants, with whom He is one, learn willingly to
share, for the sake of Christ’s Body, the Church,
and to benefit others; —and after illustrating this
by examples from “ the extended procession of
Christian sufferers that winds along through every
age, headed by the King of Martyrs Himself, and
including many of lower spiritual stature, as well
as the glorious names the Church has blazoned in
her calendar,” the Preacher continued: —


“Of that band was he, my very dear friend, who
was ‘for you a faithful minister of Christ.’ Highly
gifted, courageous, enthusiastic (as his very look at
once proclaimed him to be), naturally impetuous, he
was called by God to bear the cross; to bear, indeed,
not one cross, but many. To use George Herbert s
words, ‘afflictions sorted, anguish of all sizes’ were
part of the education to which it pleased God to
subject him. And why ? Not only to make him
‘ like unto Christ by suffering patiently adversities,
troubles, and sicknesses,’ but also to teach him how
to minister to others, how to weep with those who
wept, and to enable him to impart to others the
consolation wherewith he himself had been com-
forted of God. I know —you know also —how
constantly and lovingly he did this. I may truly
style him the father of the Church of Ballaarat. Not
only did he raise it up when it was in a state of utter
weakness, not only did he long watch over it with
all a father’s care; but he spent himself, he gave
out his very life, his whole heart, and all the sym-
pathy of which that great heart was capable, ‘ for
the sake of Christ’s Body, the Church,’ that the
least and lowest of Christ’s members who was
exposed to temptation or overcome by sorrow,
might be helped and comforted.
I feel it to be very difficult even to speak of my
friend, much more to try to delineate his character.


He made mistakes; he had his failings and infirmities.
‘The best men are moulded out of faults.’ I think
I may say that in him was a remarkable and rare
combination of courage, rehned from selfishness by
means of suffering, and of tenderness. If it be true
that, as it has been said, the greatest sin of which
a minister of Christ, regarded in his official capacity,
can be guilty, is the sin of cowardice, then all who
knew him will admit that that sin could not be laid to
our friend’s charge. At the call of duty he rose
and calmly did his best, fearing not and heeding not
what man might say of him or do unto him. He
was no reed to be shaken with the wind of popular
opinion. He had a tough nature, and could make
a stand, in entire forgetfulness of self, for what he
believed to be true and right. Too large-minded
and too generous to become the gladiator of a party,
he was yet ready to maintain the great Christian
verities which commended themselves to his manly
reason and his enlightened conscience. As a loyal
servant of Christ he could look up to his Master and
say,
“ Is there a foe before whose face
I fear Thy cause to plead ? ”
but he could say also :
“ Is there a lamb in all Thy flock
I would disdain to feed ? ”
He did feed the lambs of Christ’s flock. He did


tend them, help them, lead them on in the right
path in which he himself as a good shepherd
endeavoured to go before them. He made their
difficulties, their trials, their sorrows, his own, with
a tenderness and affection which he had learned of
Christ, which Christ had taught him in the school
of suffering. O, my friend, forgive these feeble
words which I have ventured to say of you!
He rests from his labours; his weary waiting is
over; he is released from his sufferings, endured
‘for the sake of Christ’s Body, the Church.’
PORTION OF MEMORIAL SERMON
PREACHED BY
THE REV. H. W. H. ADENEY,
AT ST. PETER’S CHURCH, BALLAARAT, ON
SUNDAY, AUGUST 7th, 1881.
“ He had in His right hand seven stars "—Rev. i. 16.
The Preacher drew out from the chapter the sublime
description of the Lord as He appeared to St. John in
Patmos, dwelling especially on the significance of the
stars borne in His right hand, and giving reasons tor


recognising these as symbols of the presiding ministers
of Churches : —bright, because He has poured light
into them, —only needed till the day shall dawn, but
helpful till then, —given and withdrawn as Christ sees
fit, —secured and directed by His right hand of power.
He went on :
u We have seen, during the last few days, the removal
of one who, for many years, held the onerous position
of the senior clergyman of our Church in this place,
and who has given the best of his life to the service of
the inhabitants of this city. He came here young, and
comparatively inexperienced, to find himself in sole
charge of a seething multitude of excited people. I
have heard him speak of the work as having been
overwhelming and bewildering; but he had enthu-
siasm and energy to face it, and he shirked no labour
that promised usefulness. He took no unimportant
part in fostering the various institutions of which we
are so proud : upon the Hospital, Benevolent Asylum,
Mechanics’ Institute, and Savings Bank, he bestowed
thought and labour, and the stories of the first begin-
nings of many Schools and Churches are buried with
him. He it was who, in those first years, when the
wave of progress rolled so rapidly, tried in some
measure to make preparation for prospective wants,
and endeavoured to secure sites tor Church and School
buildings. It was by his energy that the wooden
School-house by the Lake side, in which our congre


gation first met, was erected ; and, I may add, it was
by his persuasion, and in consequence ot arrangements
which he made, that I took charge of this parish, the
second off-shoot, St. Paul’s being the first, from the
district under his care. And while he was working
tor this outward extension of Church influence,
his active mind was busy with deep doctrinal and
metaphysical problems, and as the great revival of
Church life in England made progress, he drank in
the elements of it, and sought diligently a share in
it for this place. Whatever alteration we saw him
make, he made on principle ; it was not love of
music that made him introduce a musical service
and surpliced choir; it was not aestheticism or
dilettantism, or an eye for colour and form, that
made him seek the decoration of his Chancel and
Holy Table; it was a growing belief that the more
stately ritual and richer surroundings of divine
worship and the Holy Sacraments conveyed truer
ideas of the reverence due to the Almighty, and of
the fact that inward and spiritual grace is Divinely
conjoined with outward and visible signs. We
know that his efforts were prospered, and that, while
other Churches were rising round him, and attract-
ing congregations, the attendance at his own Church
largely increased, a much more satisfactory propor-
tion of communicants was obtained, —large numbers
of young persons upon whom he bestowed special


care and attention were presented for confirmation,
and he himself preached with a vigour, a fullness,
and faithfulness which excited much remark. But
though this seemed to be only the unburdening
himself of that which was laid upon his spirit, the
breaking forth of a fire kindled within him, it was
using up his life quicker than we knew. The division
of the Dioceses brought us all more work, and
specially increased the pressure upon him. Then
came a succession of ailments, followed by that
disastrous visit to England,—disastrous because the
severe winter induced an illness which culminated
in a stroke of paralysis. Otherwise the visit ripened
and gave more definiteness to his judgment. He
took pains to observe what the different parties,
which alas ! rend the Church at home, were doing,
and came back confirmed in his belief in the wisdom
of the moderate and sober rule of our Church.
Would to God he had been spared to show to the
whole diocese the spirit that was in him in these
later days. We have wanted him much in the
councils of the Church. The withdrawal of a man
with such experience, who has borne so much, loved
so much, laboured so much, suffered so much, has
been a great calamity to the Diocese in this stage
of its existence. He knew the colony, he under-
stood the people of Ballaarat, he believed in them,
as people who would do noble things under good


leadership, and they believed in him as a genuine
man, who worked in earnest, and knew how to take,
as well as to give, hard blows in the battle of life.
Among humble people he has many faithful
friends, for his tenderness of heart and benevolence
were very great: of this there are many witnesses
in this parish as well as in his own.
In his protracted suffering, from Nov. sth, 1879,
whenever his disease permitted it, he showed much
true Christian resignation and patience. His affec-
tion was still toward the house of his God, and he
liked to hear of the progress of God’s work else-
where.
For his own sake we cannot but be thankful that
he is at rest; and we believe that the expression
of utter peace and full content which his counte-
nance bore after death truly indicates the state into
which his spirit has entered.
Withdrawn from us, his light most assuredly is
not quenched, but adds to the radiancy of the happy
throng, who are abundantly satisfied with the ful-
ness of the Father’s House of many mansions, and
“drink of the river of His pleasures.”


Memorial Sermon
PREACHED BY
THE BISHOP OF BALLAARAT,
AT CHRIST CHURCH PRO-CATHEDRAL, BALLAARAT,
ON SUNDAY EVENING, AUGUST 7TH, 1881.
At Christ Church pro-Cathedral, on Sunday even-
ing, Bishop Thornton paid the following tribute to
the memory of his late Archdeacon. The Bishop
took for his text Romans xiv., B—“ Whether8 —“Whether we
live, we live unto the Lord ; and whether we die, we
die unto the Lord and spoke as follows :
“ There is a sense of Loss in the air to-night. It
did not need the dark drapings and saddened music
to remind us, that a great change has come. All
of us are feeling it, and thinking of it. Before our
mind’s eye rises up continually a Face we shall see
again on earth no more : in our ears there seems to
sound a Voice which will never plead with our souls
again. True, your pastor’s lips were sealed ever
since that first sad day when he was stricken, so that


the echoes of his earnest words come to us across
nearly two years of silence. And it was not the
strong, magnetising countenance of days gone by,
but a saddened, pleading face that has looked forth
at you from time to time of late from this corner of
the Church. But the voice so familiar for five-and-
twenty years can never be forgotten ; and for some
few of us the recollection of the suffering face of
which I spoke has been almost obliterated, through
our having seen that face again as death had left it.
For, after death, all that was noble, and vigorous,
and beautiful in the features seemed to come back
again, tinged with a heavenly rapture; as though
the happy spirit, in departing, had set its seal of
indisputable ownership on the body, as an earnest
of the final reunion of both.
‘ No one can safely be called happy till he dies,’
was the maxim of a wise Greek, ages since. It is
true in a far higher sense than that in which he
meant it; but it is also true in the sense in which he
meant it. The end of a man’s earthly course is
commonly the true test of it, and shows what it has
been worth. O, to end well! O, to hand on to
our successor the robes of whatever office we have
worn on earth, not only unsullied, but the fairer for
our wearing them ! O, to discharge our function in
such a way that it may be intolerable for an inferior
or bad man to undertake it after us ! O, to die such


a death, that it may be harder for any of those we
leave behind to live an evil life !
Well, John Potter’s life on earth is done; and
may I not boldly say, now that we have laid him in
his grave, that his has been a noble life, consummated
by an honoured death ? His was a life that illus-
trated the principle of our text, ‘ None of us liveth
to himself.’ And so it has come to pass, that
neither has he died to himself. His loss has been no
isolated incident in the daily life of our great city,
no mere private sorrow of a single family, but matter
of concern to all. Indeed it has been beautiful to
observe how, for months past, his sad affliction,
instead of dulling men’s regard, drew around himself
and his home a tender interest, a persistent sympathy,
which seemed only to grow intenser as his illness
lasted on. And now that the end has come, the
desire to honor his memory, which gathered throngs
yesterday around his grave, has filled this Church
to-day with worshippers, wearing in many cases some
badge of sorrowful affection, and all of us conscious,
as I said at first, of a real and heavy loss, in the
final passing away from the midst of us of a potent
and a noble human life.
Did you ever notice how, in the Book of Exodus,
it is said that, when the Almighty showed Himself
to Moses on Horeb, He 1 covered him with His hand
while He passed by’ ? It was only when God had


passed by, that Moses was able to contemplate Him.
I My face shall not be seen.’ It is no irreverence to
say, that there is some analogy to this in the passing
before our view of a human life. There is something
in the individuality of some men, which cannot easily
be studied by their fellows face to face ; and the
deeper and the more God-like the man’s character,
the more surely is this the case. It is when the vision,
as it were, has gone by—when the personality of the
man is passing back into the dread unseen from which
it emerged—that we can contemplate it best. If this
be true, it is now that we may fitly begin to ask our-
selves, what was the true meaning and secret of this
life just ended • what was the central principle of
John Potter’s character; on what axis it revolved,
and towards what end it aimed itself.
Looking at his whole career, now closed as far as
this world is concerned, does anyone who knew him
doubt that the former part of our text supplies its
true interpretation— ‘ we live unto the Lord ’ ? In
other words, faith in God, and consecration of his
heart to Christ, were, in this man’s case, not only
one department in the structure of his life, but the
very ground-plan upon which it was built up ; not
only one important branch of his life’s activity, but
the very root out of which it grew.
Whatever John Potter was besides, he was above
all a Christian believer ; but he was this, not in default


of, but through triumph over, intellectual difficulties,
to which his analytical and somewhat restless mind
was keenly sensitive. He read much and thought
deeply; and it is no secret that, for a while, he was
distressed in soul about some aspects of religion* : not
that his faith towards Christ ever wavered, but that he
chafed at the necessity of reposing, with child-like
patience, before mysteries, to which reason failed to
supply the interpretation for which he craved. And
this experience put him into special sympathy with
others similarly tried. Taking care to make himself
familiar with the current phases of thought and specu-
lation on religious subjects, he was recognised by men
perplexed by modern objections to the Gospel as one
willing and able candidly to appreciate these, and who,
though strong in his own convictions, had not a word
or a thought of unkindness for the doubter, whom yet
he longed and strove to win. Yes; John Potter
was a man of strong, deep, reverential faith. He
admitted that he could not understand some things in
our religion which others could, or said and supposed
they could; but, happily, we can believe and obey,
where we cannot comprehend and define ; and the
former my dear Archdeacon did, with all his heart and
(which is harder) with all his mind, for the great
central teachings of Christ’s Church ; and his faith
, # This single statement in the Sermon is questioned by one of the late
Archdeacon’s best and oldest friends.


pulsed like a life-blood through all his daily existence.
O, it was a stimulating thing to note how intensely he
grappled gospel truths to his heart, as with hooks of
steel, or (to change the metaphor) drank them in, till
they passed into the substance of his character, deter-
mining all his hopes and fears, his joys and sorrows.
Assuredly, living thus by faith, his life was ‘to the
Lord;’ but it was to a large extent a hidden life. ‘ In-
wardness’ was a special feature of your departed pastor.
He never paraded his private emotions; but in times
of crisis his deeply religious and conscientious spirit
could not be disguised.
The word ‘conscientious’ reminds me of another
marked feature of his character, in which we should
seek to resemble him, as he followed Christ. I mean
his unfaltering integrity, and unswerving fidelity to
duty. He was ‘ true as a die,’ as men speak; pervaded
with a constant sense of his responsibilities—not to
men, but to God; and resolute and persistent in his
efforts to fulfil them. Of course, this truth and con-
scientiousness implied boldness and candour ; fearless
outspokenness in word, as well as unflagging diligence
in work. Here was no bidder for popularity—no
‘ reed shaken with the wind.’ In the atmosphere of
free and fearless, and not always kindly, criticism
which marks life in Ballaarat, and marked it still more,
I am told, in days gone by, the stubbornness of his
manhood brought him inevitably into collision of


opinion and purpose with other men. John Potter
was no more infallible than any ot us; but I never
heard that he was ever suspected either of ungenerous
treatment of an opponent, or ot self-interested or
unworthy motive in the views he championed. A
high, a heavenward principle it was which, to the
best of his convictions, dominated all his action : I he
lived unto the Lord.’
I have touched upon his freedom from self-interest.
A basely selfish man he never could have been ; but
what was disinterested and considerate towards others
was all the more beautiful in John Potter, because
there must have been a strong tendency in a man of so
much individuality to be self-contained and self-limited
in many ot his sympathies, and to retire into a gloomy
isolation from those who might find a difficulty in
understanding him. There is no doubt that, by
temperament, he was inclined to severity —I had
almost said irritability; and his immense domestic
sorrows, and a certain thorn, or infirmity, in the
flesh, the trial of which he felt for years before his
final illness, were a heavy tax on a naturally anxious
spirit. At times, like Shakespeare’s “ much-
enforced flint,” he would show the “ hasty spark
but, in such instances, the amende was always so
sure and honourable, that one loved him the better,
rather than the less, for them. To warm feelings
m others he was exquisitely responsive ; and beneath


astern (and at times imperious) outward manner, there
lay oceans of strong - affection, going forth intensely
towards those linked to him by the sacred family
tie, but manifested in a thousand acts of generous
charity and delicate consideration for others. Yes,
he was one of the most thoroughly kind-hearted
men I ever knew. He longed earnestly to be made
a blessing to you, my hearers ! He loved you all,
and especially the young and the children ; and had
a kind and charitable word to say of everyone.
From petty self-importance and ostentation, like all
high-souled men, he seemed to me wholly free; as
also from that other form of selfishness—love of gain.
No doubt, had he given his life to secular business,
his abilities would have placed him in a far better
position as regards wealth than is attainable in the
service of the colonial Church. But for money-
making he manifested not the slightest taste or
ambition. Seldom have I met with one who, to
considerable shrewdness and accuracy in financial
things, united so complete a freedom from personal
selfishness in such matters.
And here, while touching on his unselfish loving-
ness that unmistakeable note of in-dwelling grace,
I feel bound to speak for one moment of his personal
relation to myself. No one man did I ever feel
better able to trust and love than I could John
Potter ; and it has been one of the most consoling


circumstances of my life in Victoria to know, that
this feeling was reciprocated. The relations between
my late Archdeacon and myself were never so much
as ruffled for a single day. As a friend, he was
unalterably true; as an officer, he was unfalteringly
loyal.
‘ None of us [Christians] liveth to himself,’ says
St. Paul; ‘we live unto the Lord.’ I have tried to
show that this man’s life was aimed precisely at this
ideal; in the faith in Christ which inspired it; in
the fidelity to duty which directed it; in the unselfish
lovingness which was its true complexion, I have
been speaking to those who have watched him for
years, and who can judge whether I have erred or
exaggerated. Most of you have known him far
longer than I ; indeed, for nearly four out of the six
years I have known him he has been absent or dis-
abled. But Ido not think very many of you knew
him much better, though doubtless you could speak
of him more fully, and far more eloquently. Some
of you remember him in his early manhood ; you
could tell how hard he worked in those old hard-
working days; how he was the inceptor or promoter
of the Churches and parishes that one by one were
built or organised around this great centre; what
he did for education; how thoroughly he tried to
identify himself with the colony and city which Pro-
vidence had made his home; how all the best men


were drawn to him, and how he drew all the best out
of men; the part he took in forming-our Diocese; and
how, after I had persuaded him to go to England,
he insisted on turning his holiday there into a time
of toilsome work in its behalf. On all these things
we must not dwell; and well I know that, if he hear
me now, his dearest wish about what I should say is
this, that at the feet of his crucified Redeemer the
crown of all the honour we would yield him should
be cast, and that we should spend our thoughts
chiefly in pleading with Heaven for those so dear
to him, who can no longer, along life’s pilgrim-path,
lean on that strong and loving arm, and hear the
pulsings of that large, warm heart. Pray for them
indeed we will; but honour him, too, we must. All
their defects forgotten, ‘ the righteous shall be had
in everlasting remembrance.’ Dear sainted brother,
it is with bursting heart and brimming eye we lay
our garlands of respectful fondness on the honoured
grave, where thy dust has nestled to rest at last
among thy children’s! And O, be thy better
monument found in some strong resolve registered
by some amongst those who hear me now, that the
tenderness with which they recall thy looks, thy
words, thy life, shall not evaporate in sentiment: but
be shewn in their closer walk with God; their more
strenuous grasp of the things for which thy life was
lived; in a more earnest, and a more united, flock !


In conclusion: here is the honour Heaven assigns
to those who live to God —‘ They die unto the
Lord.’ What this means I cannot dogmatically
explain. It does not mean, surely, that a dying
Christian commends his spirit to Christ only to be
absorbed into however sublime an ocean of Imper-
sonal Being; but rather to enter, in an ampler world,
upon some activities in His service akin to, though
far transcending, the noblest which employed his
energies on earth. Some think our Lord’s occupa-
tion, while His flesh was in the grave, when He paid
that mysterious visit to the spirits in the unseen
world and preached to them, mentioned as it is by
St. Peter for the comfort of saints threatened with
death, was really a type of the service that is still to
be done there in His name by His disembodied
servants. We do not understand these things. We
know next to nothing of the immediate future of the
holy dead. But we know this, that for them ‘to die
is gain.’ Let us accept this inspired dictum. Let
us believe it for this man we loved. Let us carry
this confidence about with us, as heaven’s own balm
for the wound his loss has made. ‘ Dying unto the
Lord,’ —‘ Departing to be with Christ,’ cannot mean
anything else but the loftiest and most congenial
experiences of the regenerate spirit. O, it must
have been with a shock of sublime surprise
that he who is gone felt himself, once the last sob


was breathed, bathed in God’s light, and folded to
the bosom of his Lord ! There now he rests, until
the day when those who loved him shall rush to his
embrace in the glad ecstasy of the resurrection
morning, and see again that face that all in Ballaarat
knew so well, no longer part of the body of humilia-
tion that now is mingling with the dust of our burial-
ground, but radiant for ever with ideal beauty in
the likeness of his Lord, such as befits the life of
Paradise, and the companionship of angels, and the
society of God Himself.”
PORTION OF SERMON
PREACHED BY
THE REV. WM. HENDERSON.
The Rev. W. Henderson, of St. Andrew’s Kirk,
spoke as follows from his pulpit, on August 7th, at
the close of a sermon on the text Rev. xiv., 13 :
“ Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord from
henceforth : yea, saith the Spirit, that they may
rest from their labours; and their works do follow
them.”


“ To-night we, with our fellow citizens, are called
on to think of the removal of one who has been for
a quarter of a century known as an earnest minister
of Christ, and who, so long as his strength allowed
him, was a very unremitting labourer in the Lord’s
vineyard. We are to see John Potter no more.
It is true that it pleased God to deprive him of his
power of working a good while before he was taken
away. Long before he had his summons, the place
in which he had done his work did not know him
any more. Life had become a helpless burden for
him ; and now the Master has freed him from that,
as from all else, and has taken him to His rest. He
* rests from his labours* rests too from that enforced
idleness which was more painful to him than all his
labours had been : and we are to see him no more
on this earth of ours, —earth that is ours still, though
not his any more; save only in so far as it holds
within itself the poor tabernacle of flesh that he
inhabited for a while.
While he was able to work, he worked right nobly,
as one who felt only too acutely all the responsi-
bilities which the high service to which he had
pledged himself had laid upon him. There was, as
we know, much that he, as a minister of Christ, had
to do in those early days, which, in other circum
stances, would have been spared him. How to
build up a congregation, a Church, out of all those


who had been, as it were, thrown together from all
the four ends of Heaven, and had hardly anything
else to bind them together, that was a problem the
difficulties of which are not to be forgotten by us.
The members of the Church of England gathered
round Mr. Potter loyally, and he did his work among
them as a true, self-denying minister of Christ
should. Honestly believing as he did (and who is
to find fault with him for that ?) that the form of
Christianity represented by the Church of England
was the best of all extant forms, he did the work of
his Church, thinking that he was thus best serving
Christ. Who, over the grave of such a man as our
lost friend, is going to quarrel about the particular
way in which he sought to serve the Divine Master
whom all Christian souls love ? What I, who am of
another Church, have to testify regarding him is,
that, while he had a heart full of very broad Christian
sympathy, he still sought to work out his honest
convictions as a minister of the Church of England,
as one who felt sure that he could fulfil the purposes
of his life better in that than in any other way.
What gifts he had —and these were of no mean
order —had to be consecrated to that service. The
Church he belonged to had grown very dear to him,
and its peculiarities of government and worship had
so worked themselves into his spiritual nature, as to
have become more or less necessary for him. But


though a good Churchman, in his own sense of that
term, he was able to see also the marks of a living
Christianity that lay outside his own Church. For,
indeed, Christ and the Gospel of Christ were more
to him than any Church. If sometimes his devotion
to Church traditions, Church forms and so forth, may
have seemed slightly excessive, there was always in
him so much of the humble Christian man, full of
a generous sympathy for all that was good and godly
among others who might differ from him, that no
one could think the less of him for the loyalty he
showed to the Church in which he had been born
and bred. It was for the realising of all that Christ
had been sent into the world for that he laboured so
unweariedly : and now he is with the Master.
Yes ! and the work he had to do was made very
hard for him. The grief and loss that came over
his heart and home in those days, when he had most
to do in the building up of the Church he belonged
to, have not been forgotten by those who remember
those earlier days of the history of this city of ours.
Once and again it pleased God to send sore affliction
upon his household. The hearts of father and
mother in that home were often wrung by the loss
of those nearest and dearest to them. And, though
as with riven and bleeding heart, how patiently and
resignedly he bore it all, and kept on doing the work
that had been appointed him ! If happiness were


the being’s end and aim of us poor mortals here upon
the earth, then I think our friend’s life was a hard
one. But with the answer of a good conscience
towards God, to say nothing of the respect which he
won for himself everywhere by his resolute adherence
to what he looked upon as duty, he was able to
accomplish the time of his sojourning here among
us in all honour and in all godliness. Ballaarat owes
much to him, though the benefits he laid it under
are of the sort which are apt to be only too soon
forgotten.
In any case, he is here among us no more.
Even in those last helpless months we always had
the feeling ‘he is still with us, and it may please
God to restore him to us and to health again.’ But
now that last hope has been taken away from us.
The earth holds all that was mortal of him : but
‘ Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord.’ He
surely is one of them. The Lord gave him to this
place, some twenty-five years ago, and now the
Lord has taken him away. Blessed be the name of
the Lord. He rests from his labours : yes, and I
think there are some good works that were done by
him here in Ballaarat that are following him.
For myself the loss is great. For here was one
with whom I have stood side by side for the last
three-and-twenty years, as a true soldier and servant
of the same Christ Whom I, with weak and faltering


steps, seek to follow. So many others gone—and
now he too gone ! It makes me feel somewhat more
lonely, as again I have to shoulder my burden and
take up my pilgrim staff for what remainder of the
journey may be reserved for me. It is true enough
that he belonged to another branch of the Church
of Christ: but it is one of the pleasantest things for
me to remember that he who had his ideas on
Church matters, and I who had mine, could meet
together,—could talk them all over, without one
word that ever left a feeling of regret on either side,
or could for a moment interrupt the full flow of
friendship There could be no bitterness between
us. I shall not hope to find many better friends
than John Potter during the brief remainder of
my pilgrimage. Meanwhile, he is at rest. Absent
from the body, we feel confident that he is present
with the Lord, which is far better. And his removal
from us is only another call on you and me to be
ready against the Master’s summons, and to be
doing the work of the Lord while it is still day,
seeing the night cometh —is so soon coming—
wherein no man can work.”


*lepov "Yttvov KOifiaTcu * Qvrjcnceiv [xf] Xeye.
He was so brave, so strong !
With the long years his ripening wisdom grew
To help the weak, to check the giddy throng,
To fight for right, to crush down every wrong,
To hurl back Falsehood, and bid Truth stand true.
And yet we must not mourn.
Is life —our life —so joyous or so glad
That we dare wish him back now he has gone,
To his sweet rest, dear Lord, by Thy love borne
Where earth’s best memories are but pale and sad ?
He did his duty well,
Working as ever in his Master’s sight.
No garish scrolls of Fame his honour tell,
Only fond hearts throbbed while the Passing Bell
Told us his darkness now was lost in light.
All pain, all weakness o’er !
God in His mercy guides His children best;
The crown of anguish his worn body bore,
The weary waiting on life’s darkening shore,
Were but the martyr road to Jesu’s breast.
And there, in peace at last,
We leave him, Lord, with Thee till time is done.
Upon Thy Cross our cross and cares we cast;
And when our lives, like his, are but the past,
Dear Lord, receive us too among Thine'own !
WM. HENRY EMBLING.
C. Boyd, Printer, Ballaarat.


