

433
GRAY’S INN CHAPEL
3fn iftlemonam
THE HON.
SIR JULIAN SALOMONS
KNIGHT, K.C.
A MASTER OF THE BENCH OF THIS SOCIETY
Friday, 9TH April, 1909




j®r&er of Service
343 Old Melody.
Venite.
Psalm XXXIX.
305 Brownsmith.
I SAID, I will take heed to my ways : that I offend not in
my tongue.
I will keep my mouth as it were with a bridle ; while the
ungodly is in my sight.
I held my tongue, and spake nothing : I kept silence, yea,
even from good words; but it was pain and grief to me.
My heart was hot within me, and while I was thus musing
the fire kindled : and at the last I spake with my tongue;
Lord, let me know mine end, and the number of my days:
that I may be certified how long I have to live.
Behold, thou hast made my days as it were a span long:
and mine age is even as nothing in respect of thee; and
verily every man living is altogether vanity.
For man walketh in a vain shadow, and disquieteth him-
self in vain : he heapeth up riches, and cannot tell who shall
gather them.
And now, Lord, what is my hope : truly my hope is even
in thee.


Deliver me from all mine offences : and make me not a
rebuke unto the foolish.
I became dumb, and opened not my mouth : for it was
thy doing.
Take thy plague away from me : I am even consumed by
the means of thy heavy hand.
When thou with rebukes dost chasten man for sin, thou
makest his beauty to consume away, like as it were a moth
fretting a garment : every man therefore is but vanity.
Hear my prayer, O Lord, and with thine ears consider my
calling ; hold not thy peace at my tears.
For I am a stranger with thee : and a sojourner, as all my
fathers were.
O spare me a little, that I may recover my strength:
before I go hence, and be no more seen.
Psalm XC.
185 Barnby.
LORD, thou hast been our refuge : from one generation
to another.
Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever the earth
and the world were made ; thou art God from everlasting,
and world without end.
Thou turnest man to destruction : again thou sayest, Come
again, ye children of men.
For a thousand years in thy sight are but as yesterday:
seeing that is past as a watch in the night.
As soon as thou scatterest them they are even as a sleep:
and fade away suddenly like the grass.
In the morning it is green, and groweth up : but in the
evening it is cut down, dried up, and withered.


For we consume away in thy displeasure : and are afraid
at thy wrathful indignation.
Thou hast set our misdeeds before thee : and our secret
sins in the light of thy countenance.
For when thou art angry all our days are gone : we bring
our years to an end, as it were a tale that is told.
The days of our age are threescore years and ten; and
though men be so strong that they come to fourscore years:
yet is their strength then but labour and sorrow; so soon
passeth it away, and we are gone.
But who regardeth the power of thy wrath : for even there-
after as a man feareth, so is thy displeasure.
So teach us to number our days : that we may apply our
hearts unto wisdom.
Turn thee again, O Lord, at the last : and be gracious
unto thy servants.
O satisfy us with thy mercy, and that soon : so shall we
rejoice and be glad all the days of our life.
Comfort us again now after the time that thou hast plagued
us : and for the years wherein we have suffered adversity.
Shew thy servants thy work : and their children thy glory.
And the glorious Majesty of the Lord our God be upon
us : prosper thou the work of our hands upon us. O prosper
thou our handy-work.
Benedicite.
Blair in G.
Benedictus.
67 Henley.


Anthem : “ Crossing the Bar.”
SUNSET and evening star,
And one clear call for me
And may there be no moaning of the bar
When I put out to sea.
Bridge.
But such a tide as moving seems asleep,
Too full for sound and foam,
When that which drew from out the boundless deep
Turns again home.
Twilight and evening bell,
And after that the dark
And may there be no sadness of farewell,
When I embark.
For tho’ from out our bourne of Time and Place
The flood may bear me far,
I hope to see my Pilot face to face
When I have crost the bar.
Hymn 264.
MY God, my Father, while I stray,
Far from my home, on life’s rough way,
O teach me from my heart to say,
“Thy Will be done.”
Though dark my path, and sad my lot,
Let me be still and murmur not,
Or breathe the prayer divinely taught,
“Thy Will be done.”


What though in lonely grief I sigh
For friends beloved no longer nigh,
Submissive would I still reply,
“Thy Will be done.”
If Thou shouldst call me to resign
What most I prize, it ne’er was mine;
I only yield Thee what is Thine;
“ Thy Will be done.”
Let but my fainting heart be blest
With Thy sweet Spirit for its guest,
My God, to Thee I leave the rest;
“ Thy Will be done.”
Renew my will from day to day,
Blend it with Thine, and take away
All that now makes it hard to say,
“ Thy Will be done.”
Amen.
The
Dead March from “ Saul.” Handel


CHISWICK PRESS : CHARLES WHITTINGHAM AND CO.
TOOKS COURT, CHANCERY LANE, LONDON,
