





StO
• . ; - - - S i X
38 August 2, 1915
I
I
msesmsssaam




THE HERALD,
July 19, 1915.
THE ARGUS,
July 19, 1915.
ROFESSOR MARSHALL HALL.
DEATH ANNOUNCED,
LOSS TO MUSICAL WORLD,
1 A STRIKING PERSONALITY.
Deep regret will be felt throughout the
Commonwealth at the death of Professor
G. W. L. Marshall Hall, Ormond professor
of music, which occurred last night at
Mount St. Evin’s Private Hospital. Pro-
fessor Marshall Hall was opei’ated on for
acute appendicitis, with peritonitis, on Wed-
nesday. After the operation he improved
somewhat, but from the first his condition
was regarded as extremely grave. The im-
provement was not maintained, and he gra-
dually sank.
The funeral will take place on Tuesday
afternoon to the Brighton Cemetery. The
arrangements are in ’ the hands of A. A.
Sleight.
With the death of Professor Marshall
Hall Melbourne loses an enthusiastic and
distinctive personality—a personality to
which it was possible to be friendly or an-
tagonistic, but never indifferent. Enthu-
siasm was the very keynote of bis charac-
ter. He was filled with the idea that the
musical energies of mankind were of all j
energies the most important. Art was the j
very highest, and the followers of art —and;
its exponents—the very elect of the earth.
Jmtq everything he did Jie infused enthu-
siasm, into his advocacy of Brahms and
Wagner, into his lectures, into his attend- I
ance at the opera, where his deep-toned
“Braved” was quite a feature of the per-
formance; and, unfortunately, turned into
more controversial channels, his enthusiasm
still burned brightly. His stride down Col-
lins street, his loud, decided voice; his
black, bushy eyebrows—all marked him
off as a man of energy and purpose far
above the common.
He was the grandson of a rather famous
physician, and was born in London in
1862, receiving his musical education in
London, at the Royal College of Music,
and in Berlin. In 1891 he came to Aus-
tralia as the Ormond professor of music at
the Melbourne Lniversity; and, as is
usual with a teacher of vitality and decided
views, inspired a passionate partisanship
amongst Hie students at that institution, a
partisanship which stood him in good stead
m the later and stormier days, when his
enthusiasm got the better of bis judgment.
AH Went well until about 1898, when a
volume of verse that he published excited. ;
such bitter eon troversy that he felt con-
strained to consider bis position as a mem-
ber of the University staff. He actually
resigned his professorship, but the students
!: espoused his cause, and the fighting spirit,
of the man caused him to withdraw it, and
to rim through his term. Then, when he
left the Onnond chair in 1900, he estab-
lished a conservatorium of his own in Albert
street, whither the devotion of the hero-
worshippers amongst his students led them
to follow him.
After the production of “Stella” here,
1 rofessor Marshall Hall went to England,
but did very little good for himself in the
pecuniary sense. At the time of the out-
break of the war he was in Switzer-
land, and shortly afterwards received
an offer of the Ormond professorship
again, which he accepted gladly. Re-
turning in February, he took up his
duties, again as professor of music in the
University of Melbourne, which be had
quitted 14 years before. He was twice mar-
ried. A daughter of his first wife was in
the Loretto Convent at Ballarat for some
time, vvhile his son by the present Mrs.
[Marshall Hall is rather gifted in music,'
| playing the violin, and is now in London.
I .Professor Mhrshall Hall was, beyond ques-
; turn, one of the most distinguished musi-
cians who have settled in this part of the
world. He touched many sides of his art;
he was composer, conductor, and teacher,
and in all three his work was distinctive
and thoroughly sound. His essays in com-
position represent the finest part of his
labours Truly enough, in these Professor
Marshall Hall gave himself over to the in-
fluence of some famous masters. His early
works, such as some of his songs and an
orchestral piece, “Idyll,” were plainly in-
spired by Wagner; later on, Brahms ap-
pears to have exerted sway, and in more
recent years he adopted an idiom
and style markedly suggestive of Puccini.
But lor all that his music has pronounced
individuality, and very considerable merit.
Moreover, it bears the imprint of sincerity
m every bar. Not to be ignored either is
its range and bulk. He composed many
songs, several works of a symphonic char-
acter, the incidental music to “Alkestis,”
a pd “The Trojan Women” (both by Euri-
pides), an imposing musical setting to a
I drama on a Greek subject, ‘^Aristodemus/*
! written by himself; two operas—“ Stella,”
and “Romeo and Juliet”—several concer-
ted pieces in chamber-music style, and a
number of other works. All are finely con-
structed, and, where the orchestra is em-
ployed, the scoring shows quite unusual
mastery in effects of colour and contrast,
f These works represent, of course, the more
enduring part of the late musician, al-
though it was in the role of conductor that
be was best known to Melbourne music-
lovers. Indeed, it was Professor Marshall
Hall who built up an altogether new
standard in orchestral performance, for,
while the achievements of Sir Frederic
Cowen, .as conductor during the Centennial
Exhibition, were magnificent, they were
necessarily not long enough sustained to |
have a lasting influence, whereas from the
early 90’s till a few" years ago the Ormond
professor gave orchestral concerts with such
regularity that they made the most
important functions of our musical life.
Nor were they significant merely for their
regularity; they were, almost without ex-
ception, made up of music of the best
quality, and admirably rendered. In his
methods of interpretation Professor Mar-
shall Hall combined force with finish. He
took great, almost undue, pains in getting
out the nuances of expression, and in this
connection his lengthy speeches to the
members of the orchestra on the import-
ance of details were a feature of the re-
hearsals, especially as he could always be
relied on to make his meaning dear" with
witty and pointed remarks. At the same
time the broader elements in a work were
never neglected, his large sweening beat
carrying along his men with splendid re-
sults. His finest performance as a eon-
doctor was perhaps achieved with Beeth-
oven’s C minor symphony; the chief theme
(“Thus Fate Knocks at the Door,” as it
was termed by its composer), with the
other virile elements, invariably made a
.stroii" appeal to him. and drew out all his
best qualities. His Brahms readings were
also impressive, while in Wagner he never
failed to rouse his hearers to a state of
intense enthusiasm.
Professor Marshall Hall’s dislike to
pedantry in teaching was very pronounced.
His advice to young composers was, in
effect, to follow their inclinations. In
harmony and counterpoint he adopted Ber-
lioz’s maxim, that “what sounds good is
good.” To pianists he was not over-sym-
pathetic in regard to technical questions
and problems (leaving those things to the
care of the teachers working under him),
but he was deeply interested in anything ap-
pertaining to the artistic side of music.
With singers and violinists he was much
the same; he was for ever holding up before
his students the finer purposes of art. and
with such enthusiasm that many of them
who received from him that “heaven storm-
ing” quality found their technical difficul-
ties almost easy of accomplishment.
| Tt w~as this enthusiasm, in fact, which,
allied to his other strongly marked charac-
teristics, made him such an influence for
good in the upbuilding of our musical life,
an influence which it is certain it would be
hard to over-estimate.
A striking personality has been re-
moved by the death of Professor Mar-
shall Hall. For more than a quarter of a
century he had been associated with the
life of Victoria, and in his own sphere
he maintained a commanding position
through times of: great storm and stress.
Music-lovers had their own special rea-
sons for their admiration and regard,
but he won high place in the esteem of
the people as a whole for qualities apart
from music. His vitality, his buoyancy,
his Joy of life, the thoroughness of his
work, his courage in adversity, and his
unaffectedness in success made an
intensely human personality. Such a
temperament as his would not permit
of a peaceful life, and he never sought
one. The peace which he despised was
the mental placidity which is the pre-
lude of rust. In the ordinary course of
nature many more years of active life?
might have been vouchsafed to him. Bub
death came to him in the way that nc|
doubt he would have desired. A fev|
days ago he was at his work. To-daa
he is dead.
ffJIHE CONSERVATOEIUM OF MUSIC,
Albert Street, East Melbourne.
As a Mark of Respect to the Memory of j
Professor M.ARSHALL HALL j
Hie Conservatorium will Remain CLOSED on ,
TUESDAY, JULY 20, 1915.
Madame Melba’s Class will be postponed until
Wednesday morning, at 10 o’clock.
FRITZ HART, Director.
LUCY HOWE, Secretary.




THE AGE,
July 19, 1915.
ALL-BALL
HIS DEATH ANNOUNCED.
iSihortly after 10 o’clock last night Pro- |
feasor George W. L. Marahall-Hafi died J
in St. Evin’s private hospital. Professor
; Marshall- Hall on Wednesday last under-
went a critical operation for appendicitis,
and from the outset his condition was .such
a® to cause grave concern among his wide
circle of friends and. admirers.
Grandson of the famous physician of the i
same name. Professor Marshall-Hall was
horn in London an March, 1862. He re-
ceived his early education at the Blabk-
heath Proprietary School. At a later period
he went to the Continent, principally for
Die purpose of studying modern languages.
Here, especially during a lengthy sojourn in
.Berlin, (he cultivated an earnest love for
flius'C- He also studied for a time at the
Royal College of Music, at which institu-
tion he came in contact with such men as
Grove, Parry and Stamford; men whose
names are for ever to be associated with
of the present significant school of
Bn ash music. The late musician, however,
was never one to thrive in the atmosphere
cu w hat to most is a healthy academic disci-
pline, and to a large extent he was self \
.aught like Edward Elgar himself. For j
some years he acted as a teacher of music j
and modern languages at Newton Abbot
oeiiooi and Wellington College, after which
he settied in London and devoted his entire
energy to his musical career.
In 1890 he was the successful candidate
ter the Ormond Chair of Music at Mel-
bourne University. Commencing his duties
m Urn following year, Professor Marshall-
Ha w soon gave proof of that extraordinarily
vital enthusiasm which was ever one of his
most striking characteristics. Not only did
e give an enormous impetus to orchestral
music in this city, but he opened a oon-
mume—assuming personal
responsiibdJity for tne success of the same—
-1 n tt c i 1 °n with the University.
, e none too
: a f? !y directed was one of the causes of
a public agitation m 1800 which resulted m
the University Council’s decision not to re-
SbU S a W°™ tT acnt 018 Ormond Professor.
aumted tar untoward drcu.m-
a-t^nCA’ ,-¥ ar| tiiaßfflall quickly gathered
around himself a number of devoted
mends, 1 “ 1 whose assistance he success-1
telly earned on what was once the Univer- '
mty Conservatorium, but which now be- j
rame known as the Melbourne Conserva- i
Music—or, perhaps, more popu-
ij, as the Albert-street Conservatorium.
or many yeans he directed the latter in-
stitution with the happiest of results, and
tra ! C(^ UOt ? r v of fcbe MarshaJlnHall orches-
concerts his name rightly stood for all
+ worthy in the musical his-
■ A ?-f He was aflso associated
i ' ~e E-iedertafel for some time, proving !
f l mo6t successful director of choral
music. I wo years ago he visited Europe,
Onp nf t? Pe °Lpn ting hIS °P eras produced.
W +ki ]lem ’i Ste a ’ V® in London,
outbreak of war prevented the
° f i }>,s RoTneo and Juliet, for
been mff, P rePmi nary arrangements had
nnrW4-.-k a ‘f e '+i, London firm, however,
wort rt S cu e ?" blK atjon of the latter ,
’ * iTl< iut3 trip to Europe was by
”r lt3l t l<? -f- Ibert -street Conservatorium,
flip TTn ( ;t Pl>ol t nted TT 36 orm °nd Prof ssor at
W J . He to Melbourne
tV L | ry last ’ “d addressed himself to
d " ties
i late Ormond Professor ,
| musician of manifold aeSeT Hfe com-
positions InclSHe three operas, a symphony, j
i ® e °hcert overture in G minor, music to !
j Greek jilays-—notably to Alcestis —seen an j
for voice and orchestra, chamber music and
| various pieces of a more fugitive order. |
jAs an orehestial conductor ‘he was re-
sponsible for a vast amount of truly excel-
lent work, and his influence upon music
in general, as far as Melbourne is con-
cerned, is not easily to 'be overestimated.
Reference has already been made to his
literary activities, which were many and
varied. As a man he was a stanch friend
and a virile, honest enemy. He struck
hard upon occasions, but without malice; |
and he accepted fortune’s buffets with the j
amused indifference of a big man. In Pro-
fessor Marshall-Hall Australia has lost not
only a splendid musician, but one whose
vigorous enthusiasm for all that is noble
( in" art is bearing fruit in the character of;
many a younger musician of to-day whose
art was nurtured and stimulated by him-
S6 lhe funeral of the late Professor Mar-
. dhall-Ha!l will take place at the Brighton
Cemetery on Tuesday afternoon.
The DAILY TELEGRAPH,
July 19, 1915.
DEATH OF PROFESSOR
MARSHALL HALL.
MELBOURNE, Sunday.-—Shortly after 10
o’clock to-night Professor George W. L. Mar-
shall Hail died in St. Evin’s Private 'Hospital.
On Wednesday last he underwent a critical
operation for appendicitis, and from the outset
his condition was such as to cause grave con-
cern among his wide circle of friends and
admirers.
A grandson of the famous physician of the jl
same name. Professor Marshall Hall, was horn 1
in London in March. 1862. Pie received his
early education at Blackheath Proprietary
School. At a later period he went to the con-
tinent, principally for the purpose of studying
modern languages. Here, especially during a
lengthy sojourn in Berlin, he cultivated an
earnest love lor music. Pie also studied for a
time at the Royal College of Music. For some
years he acted as teacher of music and modern
languages at Newton Abbot School and Wel-
lington College, after which he settled in Lon-
don and devoted his entire energy to a musical
career.
In 1890 he was a successful candidate for the
Ormond Chair of Music at Melbourne Uni-
versity, commencing his duties in the following ;
year. |
THE AGE,
July 20, 1915.
The announcement yesterday of the death
of Professor Marshall-Hall at St. Evin’s
Hospital on Sunday night caused wide-
spread regret throughout the musical and’
professional world of Melbourne. During
the day numerous sympathetic references
were made to his demise, and the loss the
community has sustained was recognised
on all sides. The Musicians’ Union of Aus-
tralia at a general meeting yesterday
passed a resolution of sympathy to the
widow and family of the deceased gentle-
man, and after wards adjourned out
of respect to his memory. Ar-
rangements have been made for
the funeral to leave the University Conser- i
vatorinm at 2.30 p.m. for Brighton Ceme-
tery. It is requested' that all members of
the teaching staff and students of the Con-
servatorium, as well as past students of the
late Professor .Hall, should meet at Brigh-
ton cemetery main gate at 3.45 p.m. A
conven lent train will leave Flinders-street
at 3 6 p.m. Academic dress will not be
worn. In consequence of the death of Pro-
fessor Hall, the Coipcrvatorium students''
midwinter concert has been postponed in-
definitely.
THE HERALD,
July 20, 1915.
Funeral
The funeral of Professor G. W. L.
Marshall-Hall, Orniond Professor of
Music, who died on Sunday afternoon, i
left Melba Hall, at the University to-
day, the burial taking place at the
Brighton .Cemetery. Sir John Mad-;
den. Chancellor: Dr. J. H. MacPar-
land, Vice-Chancellor; Professor
Orme Masson, Chairman of the Pro- I
fessorial Board; Rev. E. H. Sugden,..|
Chairman of the Conservatorium j
Committee; Mr J. P. Bainbridge, Re-
gistrar; Mr W. A. Haver, Vice Direc-
tor of the Conservatorium; Mr J.
Sutton Crowe, Secretary of the Con-
servatorium; members of the Council
and members of the professorial
staff represented the University.
There were also present many pub-
lic men, including Mr P. Tate, Direc-
tor of Education. The Rev. E. H. 1
Sugden conducted services at Mellya
Hall and at the graveside. The pall-
bearers were: —Dr. J. H. Macfarlane,
Professor Masson, and Messrs M. T.
Pox, J. E. Mackey, H. Bodenheimer,
and O. SobeL
THE ARGUS,
July 20, 1915.
THE LATE PROFESSOR MARSHALL
HALL.
—.
The news of the death of Professor Mar-
shall Hall caused widespread regret in musi-
cal circles in Melbourne yesterday. The
Conservatorium was closed, and will re-
main closed to-day, in honour of his
memory, and the students’ midwinter con-
cert, which was to have been held on Wed-
nesday evening, has been postponed in-
definitely. The funeral will leave the
Melba Hall at half-past 2 p.m,> arriving at
the Brighton General Cemetery at a quarter
to 4 p.m. Between 2 o’clock and 6 o’clock ■
this afternoon all lectures at the University
will be suspended as a tribute to his
memory, and to allow professors and stu-
dents to attend the funeral. The Univer-
sity will be represented at the funeral by
the vice-chancellor (Dr. J. H. MacFarland),
the chairman of the Professorial Board
(Professor Orme Masson), the chairman of
the Conservatorium Committee (the Rev.
E. H. Sugden), the registrar (Mr.
J. P- Bainbridge), the vice-director
of the Conservatorium (Mr. W. A. Laver),
the secretary to the Conservatorium (Mr.
J. Sutton Crew), other members of the
council, and members of the staff. Mem-
bers of the teaching staff and students of
the Conservatorium. and past students of
the late Professor Marshall Hall, are re-
quested to assemble at the Brighton Ceme-
tery at a quarter to 4 o’clock. The train
leaves Flinders street for Gardenvale at
six minutes past 3 o’clock. ,
The following resolution was unani-
mously carried at a general meeting of the
Musicians’ Union of Australia yesterday,
after which the meeting adjourned as a
mark of respect to the memory of the late
professor;—
“That this union express its deepest regret
at the loss sustained by the musical world by
the untimely death of the late Professor G. \V. L
Marshall Hall, and it hereby tenders its sincerest
sympathies to his widow and family.’’
It was also resolved that the union be
officially represented at the funeral.




arranging, scoring tor orchestra, and other
duties a budding composer would find use-
ful and instructive. It was with the ap-
pointment-to the Ormond chair that the
young musician really first got on his feet,
and began work which built him an endur-
TABLE TALK
July 22, 1916-
~ ~ ... ~, ~,,, , auu uegaa worn vvnicu uum mm an enuur-
i otessoi Marshall Kail always seemed the hog reputation. He tools up serious corn-
very embodiment of health and energy, for he position with great enthusiasm, the ardu-
. ' I - # i V u vu VAX/XX• XXv tvv I\ 11 kje 1 XX/ LXO V,V/XXI
PROFESSOR MARSH AT T TIATT very ombodimeni of health and energy, for he position with great enthusiasm, the ardu-
uo Jli jU.iuolLUjli HALL, had one of the vital personalities which make ous duties of conductor, and the trying task
La their presence felt in any company. Therefore of teaching. He added further to his labours
FUNERAL CEREMONIES l,is death at the age of 53 has caused a deep b y giving lectures and writing verse. He
’ feeling of regret, especially among musicians was an almost inexhaustible fount of energy
.2 mtennent of the Mate Ormond pro ()f Melbourne, for be took a, very big and active STcTh SI which t- i
Uook I pkcTat C, tht r 'B?i ff M’ L ‘ arS A U Hal1 ’ r » ,art in forwarding the study and love of good turn as enthusiastic, if not as strong, as
, , P f, the _ Brighton Cemetery yes- music in Melbourne. When he first came ever), and also to many quarrels. The
i ay atternoon, in the presence of a large among us some twenty years ago with all the Professor, all impetuosity, could not brook
gathering of people, the majority of whom influence of a German sojourn and German opposition, or even differences of opinion,
j were in a greater or less degree associated studies, it was as a firebrand and an iconoclast When he wrote a work in a great burst of
with the worid of musical art. Probably in things musical. His way was marked by enthusiasm acold dash ot criticism set mm
more than half of those present were fierce Encounters between himself and the m . a \\hen he conducted a concert
women, and the sincerity of the affection -V- enco , u f e , netween nimseii ana me wl th his typically fierce ardour the slightest ;
and esteem in which the late professor was : cntic ®’ an( * bor on § a ot almost warfare 0 f disapproval stirred him to wrath,
held was attested by the emotion that was [prevailed. Gradually, however, it was recognised He was without doubt a man with strong
noticeable from time to time on all sides, that Professor Marshall Hall was fighting for impulses. He was likewise subject to vio-
The floral tributes of love and respect were a, fine principle, although the means he had lent changes in his artistic opinions. Like
many and beautiful. The wreath sent by taken had sometimes antagonised the very ones most musicians, he got the vVagner fever
S™!* as , by a little who we re in sympathy with his aims. He when he, was in his adMescent period and
note expressive, of her affection and great i ..,,, . , ~ , though he never seems to have lost his
appreciation." learned to understand Australians and Austra- p ass j on f or grea t Bayreuth master, nor
The cortege moved from the Melba Hall liaa conditions and to in a great measure modi- £ ig a]most adoring admiration for Bee-
at the University, where a brief service fy his ideas and his strong advocacy of Ger- thoven and Bach, with other composers he
i i i i i feci v ICC 11X0 '
was held, early in the afternoon. The pall- man tut
bearers subsequently were Sir John Mad- years a'
den (chancellor' of the University), Dr.
J. H. MacFarland (viochancellor). Pro- Ln f\ lsh
fessor Masson, Mr. Mackey, M L.A. (a aucl 116
member of the University council), Mr. and w bi-
Alfred Deakin, Mr. M. Phillips-Fox[ Mr. This wa
H. Bodenheimer, and Mr. O. F. Sobell. the pen
The service at the graveside was con- fn
ducted by the Rev. E. H. Sugden, and an C
eloquent panegyric on the deceased gentle- , ~ V,
man was delivered by Mr. Herbert Brookes. sMa,J
methods. After his visit to Europe some
s ago a great alteration in his estimate of
lish and German musicianship took place,
he had swung to almost the other extreme,
whs inclined to condemn German methods.
This was after hearing and seeing things from I
the perspective given by long practical experi-
ence, far away from the influence of any one
school. Victoria owes much to Professor Mar-
shall Hall tor the big influence he has exerted
was both ‘‘hot and cold.” Brahms he at
first disapproved of, but later accepted as
a very great man, and Puccini he reviled,
and then acclaimed as a genius. He was
equally inconsistent in his attitude to
Tschaikowsky, and several _ others. The
1 consequence was that in his compositions
Professor Marshall Hall shows an admixture
of styles. At the same time, they are in
most cases very interesting pieces of work,
and not a few are of quite imposing pro-
man was delivered by Mr. Herbert Brookes nct ii IUI LIIW uig ixinutniet: nc iicic cac.™ . ” Trj' “<q + ,, lla ” nTI nncra is
“The master of music has gone like the .towards the elevation of music. He worked portions. Ills f t re
glow on the cloud at the effise of day." untiringly and whole-heartedly for the cause. sWmuric he Weated
in + t be course °f his often amidst conditions which must have WghttrHhe Jho^sdnV
heard of fhe^eem 6 been very disappointing. Personally he was his own Greek tragedy, “Aristodemus ” and
a fine man big in every way. A firm, true in Euripides' “Aftestk” The orchestral
as the sunshine. b Every inch a man—m- Mend and a most interesting personality in work “Idyll” is notable for some brdliant
summate artist, genCTous a fine man ~ bi S in every W- A firm, true
as the sunshine. Every inch a man—ro- Mend and a most interesting personality in
J XXXX/XX u, XXXCtXX X KJ
bust and buoyant and profoundly humor- whose company the hours flew unheeded.
ous—shall we not hear his manly peal of ■■ _ - - - -
laughter echo and re-echo down the corri-
°f our years? His life was one long rprrT? \ TTCHTD AT ACTA TVT 1
challenge, not a truce. To him the call of THE AU S 1 RALASIAJN ,
music was a spiritual necessity. The
memory of his glory passed away lingers July 24, 1915.
in evei’V heart- let it. be Cl ir>cnn«'i+irtta .I n I -- - -
memory of his glory passed away lingers
in every heart; let it be an inspiration as
well as a memory." In a brief supplement-
ary address, the Rev. E. H. Sugden paid
a tribute to the worth of the “magnificent
j man" they had been asked to bury that
[ day, and remarked that he was a devoted
i and loyal husband to her who was left
[ widowed to-day, and was a most affection-
I ate father. The remains were interred in
the Baptist portion of the cemetery, in
the grave in which a child of the late pro-
fessor was buried some years ago. Th§|
mortuary arrangements were carried out by |
DEATH OF PROFESSOR MARSHALL
THE ARGUS,
July 22, 1915.
" professor marshall hall.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE ARGUS.
Sir,—As one privileged to be present yes-
terday when the magnificent tribute was
ftaid by the musical world to the late Pro-
essor G. W. L. Marshall Hall, might I
Suggest that a memorial concert be held in
the Town Hall at an early date, the pro-
ceeds of which could be devoted either to
a the placing of a suitable memorial over his
grave or to the founding of a scholarship to
perpetuate his memory. I feel sure that all
branches of the musical profession would
gladly participate in paying Some slight tri-
bute to the memory ot one who rendered
such noble service to the cause of art in
this city. If such a concert were given and
leading conductors asked to conduct, say,
one work each, I believe that public support
would be heartily forthcoming.—-Yours, &c.,
STUART MACLEOD.
HALL.
, Deep regret will be felt in musical
circles at the death of Professor G. W. L.
Marshall Hall, who succumbed to illness
subsequent to an operation for appendi-
citis, at St. Evin’s Private Hospital, on
July 18. The late musician -was the most
recent occupant of the Ormond chair of
music, as well as the first. He was appointed
when the chair was founded in 1891, a posi-
tion he held until, exception being taken to
the tone of some verses he published, he
retired from the professorship in 1900.
Thereafter the chair was occupied by Profes-
sor Franklin Peterson, who died last year.
When the question of appointing a suc-
cessor was considered. Professor Marshall
Hall, who was at the time in England, was
given the post once more.
Professor Marshall Hall was born in Lon-
don in 1882, and although later on he was
somewhat scornful of academic training, his
chief musical studies were made at the
Royal College of Music. He also had in-
struction in Berlin {mainly from the well-
known contrapuntist Haupt),and elsewhere.
He made no pretence ot disguising the tact
that before his appointment to the Mel-
bourne University he was in somewhat re-
duced circumstances. Luckilv, he made the
acquaintance of Sir William Robinson, who
had recently been acting Governor of Vic-
toria, and who, as an enthusiastic amateur,
had sufficient discernment in things musical
- to see some of the gifts of the young man,
and help him in getting congenial occupa-
tion, much of which was in the nature of_
Wagnerian effects in scoring, and his colo-
ristic setting of Keats’s “La Belle Dame,
for tenor solo and orchestra, has some very
attractive touches.
Professor Marshall-Hall was, however,
best known by his conducting. In this he
was remarkably successful. He knew the
wonders that can be achieved by attention
to details, and in the working out of the
subtleties of a Wagner score he showed rare
skill and judgment. Yet he could handle
broad effect splendidly, and if Beethoven
remained always with him first favourite,
he could do the works of other composers
in thoroughly convincing fashion. His in-
fluence on the development of music in this
country certainly exceeds that of any other
musician who has settled here, and, despite
the somewhat intolerant attitude he took
up on certain questions, which caused even
his friends some regret, no ope, be he friend
or enemy, but regrets his comparatively
early death and removal from a sphere of
activity where he could do so much good.
THE LEADER,
July 24, 1915.
PROFESSOR MARSHALL-HALL.
HIS DEATH ANNOUNCED.
Shortly after 10 o’clock on Sunday night
Professor George W. L. Marshall-Hall died
in St. Evin’s private hospital. Professor
Marshall-Hall on Wednesday last under-
went a critical operation for appendicitis,
and from the outset his condition was such
as to cause grave concern among his wide
circle of friends and admirers.
Grandson of the famous physician of the
same name. Professor Marshall-HaM, was
, horn in London in March, 1882. He re-
i Myed his early education at the . Black;




: heath Proprietary'Stirool. At a later period
ie went to the Continent, principally for
tae purpose of studying modern languages,
mre, especially during a lengthy sojourn in
eihn, Ore cultivated an earnest love for
music. He also studied for a time at the
Boyal College of Music, at which institu-
tion lie came in contact with such men as
«iove, I arry and Stamford; men whose
names are for ever to be associated with
the jise of the present significant school of
British. music. The late musician, however,
was never one to thrive in the atmosphere j
of what to most is a healthy academic disci-
pline, and to a large extent he was self
taught like Edward Elgar himself. For
some years he acted as a teacher of music
and modern languages at Newton Abbot
School and Wellington College, after which.-
he settled in,London and devoted his entire
energy to Ids musical career.
In 1890 he was the successful candidate
tor the Ormond Chair of Music at Mel-
bourne University. Commencing his duties
in the following year. Professor Marshall-
Hai soon gave proof of that extraordinarily
vital enthusiasm which was ever one of his
most striking characteristics. Not only did
he give an enormous impetus to orchestral
music in this city, hut he opened a coo
eervatorium of music—assuming personal
responsibility for the success of the same—
m connection with the University.
His literary energy—sometimes none too
tactfully directed— was one of the causes of
a public agitation in 1890 which resulted in
the University Council’s decifkm not tore-
new his appointment as Ormond Professor.
Nothing daunted by untoward circum-
stances, Marshall-Hall quickly gathered
around himself a number of devoted
friends, with whose assistance he success-
fully carried on what was once the Univer-
sity Conservatorium, hut which now be-
came known as the Melbourne Conserva-
torium of Music—or, perhaps, more popu-
ar y, as the Albert-street Conservatorium.
ror many years he directed the latter in- !
stitution with the happiest of results, and
as conductor of the Marshall-Hall orches- I
tial concerts his name rightly stood for all !
Svi V®, mos . t , worthy in the musical his- j
with ?L t T I f, j l *?' f3® vvas aiko associated 1
» t-i the -iMiedertafel for gome time, proving I
himself a most successful director of choral !
music. !wo years ago he visited Europe I
One of °L ge i ting llk o 'Peras produced. |
Sri th?nn/K? te la ’ v l- as p 3 in London, |
but the outbreak of war preven ed the i
vhich Ct !, 0 l? of R <*wo and Juliet, for
wlucii all preliminary arrangements had
been made A London fi™ however
undertook the publication of the latter -
work, and thus his trip to Europe wasby
no means as unsuccessful as it might well
have been in the circumstances.
«■>« i
tM>n with the Albert-street CoMemSSfll
was reappointed as Ormond Prof isor hj
ta rteS’fct®* Melbourael
in I? eornary and addressed him'pit in
LSSr° f ** S -
1 musician*Af maSold HiTcoii
| positions include three operas, a symVonv
a concert overture in d miAor, music to
Gieek plays—notably to I
foi voice and orchestra, chamber music and
various pieces of a more fugitive order
As an orchestral conductor he was re-
sponsible for a vast amount of truly excel-
and> inflaet :f <! upou music
in general, as far as Melbourne is con-
cerned, ig not easily to be overestimated.
Kelerence has already been made to his
literary activities, which were many and
varied. As a man he was a stanch friencL
and a virile, honest enemy. He struck,
hard upon occasions, but without malice;''
and he accepted fortune’s buffets with the
amused indifference of a big man. In Pro-
fessor Marshall-Hall Australia has lost not
! only a splendid musician, but one whose
vigorous enthusiasm for all that is noble
in art is bearing fruit in the character of
many a younger musician of to day whose
art was nurtured and stimulated by him-
self.
The funeral of the late Professor Mar-
shall-Hall took place at the Brighton
Cemetery on Tuesday afternoon.
The announcement of the death of
Professor Marshall-Hall at St. Evin’s
Hospital on Sunday night caused wide-
spread regret throughout the musical and'
professional world of Melbourne. During
the day numerous sympathetic references |
were made to his demise, and t,he loss the I
community has sustained was recognised
on all sides. The Musicians’ Union of Aus- j
tralia at a general meeting passed a reso- {
, hition of sympathy to the widow and t
family of the deceased gentleman, and
afterwards adjourned out of respect to his
memory. In conseuence of the death of
Professor _ Hall, the Conservatorium stu-
dents’ midwinter concert has been post-
poned indefinitely. j
Death removed a personality of uncom- j
men interest when Professor W. L. Mar- j
shall-Hall passed out ami on. It is true
that of late years Marshall-Hall had
sobered temperamentally, and seemed con-
tent to figure as a great musician, whereas,
in his youthful days, he aspired to shine
as musician, poet and ipropoun der of a tur-
bulent sort of Bohemian philosophy. His
books of poems had a sensational reception
here, less for their literary merit than be-
cause of their bizarre unconventionality,
and their somewhat Parisian freedom in
dealing with matters upon which our Eng-
lish writers usually draw the curtain—or
is it a wet blanket ? But despite his some-
what strident unconventionality, “the
Prof.’’ succeeded in making a deep im-
pression here, and his ability as a musician
won him thousands of friends and ad-
mirers. who were delighted to have him
hack in his old seat, the Ormond Chair,
from which his earlier vagaries had im-
pelled the “unco’ gude’’ to eject him. Fate
has played him a dirty trick, indeed, in
drawing this conclusion so soon after what !
the professor called bis “resurrection.’’ !
I have a story of Marshall-Hall that il-
I lustratos his tempestuous youthful charac-
| tor. One summer he accompanied a email
expedition of Melbourne artists into the
mountains. The party pitched its tents
somewhere on Buffalo, and an orgie of
painting and sketching followed. There
was much mad music in the evenings, with
the refreshments customary among rabid
Bohemians in such circumstances. It was
young Marshall-Hall’s duty to, extemporise
melodious revels suitable to the occasion
and two or three of the artists still lament
that those fantastic products of youthful
fancy are lost to humanity One night a
fearful storm struck the mountain. ” One
tent was blown into the adjoining county,
and the campers had to hang on frantic-
I ally to prevent the others following suit.
At the height of the turmoil Marshall-
Hall was reported missing. A brace of
tentless painters went to seek him and
came upon him, standing out on a crag in
the furious wind and rain, drenched to the
skin, wagging a stick with extraordinary
energy. He was conducting the tornado !
ATTIOU&.
. It is not easy to realise that the
bounding pulse of Professor Marshall-
Hall, the Ormond Professor of Music,
is now forever still. In his magnifi- ,
, cent vitality seemed -to lurk the germ |
of something almost .like immortality. !
Putting Art on one side (a proceed- i
ing, by the way, that would have pro-
voked the biting scorn of the Profes-
sor), the little world of Melbourne,
through Marshall-Hall’s death, is made
the poorer by a witty man. Many are
the. good things which at one time or
another came from him; but one will
suffice.
A fellow musician had asked for the
address of a mutual acquaintance. The
Professor was quite clear that the
place was “somewhere In Fitzroy,"
and later he was able to recollect the
name of the street, but as regards the
number of the house, his mind was a
blank.
“Dashed if I can remember the num-
ber,” he announced; “hut"—with a
spasm of inspiration—"the door-
knocker is in B flat!”
THE AGE,
July 27, 1915.
THE LATE PROFESSOR MARSHALL.
HALL.
At a largely attended meeting of the
Lady North-cote Permanent Orchestra
Trust Board, specially called for the pur-
pose, and’ held on Friday last, sympathetic
speeches, deploring the death of the late
Professor Marshall-Hall, were made, and
the following resolution was unanimously
carried; —
The board records with deep sorrow the death
of Professor Marshall-Hall. To his inspiration and
self-denying devotion to his art was due the
initiation of tills .trust fund, and to the very end
he was intimately associated with the board’s
work, and the chief fafctor in any success it has
achieved. As a conductor of genius and intense
enthusiasm lie gained for Melbourne orchestral
concerts a widespread reputation, and as a
teacher he spared no effort that made for the
elevation of musical taste and knowledge. By
his untimely death the community has lost the
influence of a great personality, and those who
were privileged to work with him have lost a
much loved friend: The board conveys to . his
widow 7 and family its sincerest sympathy in their
grief.
It was also decided that the board should
initiate a movement to establish a
, memorial fund, and arrangements are
I being made for the formation of a repre-
sentative committee to arrange for a pub-
; lie meeting of all willing to assist. Due
notice will be published of the date of the




COMMITTEE APPOINTED.
I At the Town Hall yesterday afternoon a
meeting was held to consider the question
I of raising funds for the benefit of the wife
and son of the late Professor Mai-shall
Hall. During the first part of the meet-
ing the Lord Mayor (Sir David Hennessy)
presided, but, owing to bis being called
away, the chair was taken by Professor
Orme Masson.
The Rev. E. H. Sugden moved:
“That in recognition of, and gratitude for, the
services rendered by the late Professor Marshall
Hall to the cause of musical education in Vic-
toria, this meeting of friends and admirers ap-
proves of the proposal to raise a fund, hy suh-
I scription or otherwise, for the benefit of his
i widow, and, if possible, to provide for the com-
j pletion of the musical education of his son
Hubert, now in London.”
i In speaking on the motion, Mr. Sugden said
that the late professor was not a business
| musician, and it had been this, together
i with his extraordinary open-handness and
generosity, which had resulted in his
finances being in the state that they were
at his death.
Mr. Arthur Chanter, in seconding the
motion, said that he had known Professor
Marshall Hall very well. The latter was so
enthusiastic with regard to his work that
on several occasions he had forgotten to get
| his cheque from the University.
I The motion was agreed to.
It was then moved by Mr. J. E. Mackey,
M.L.A., that those present form them-
selves into a general committee, under the
i presidency of the Lord Mayor, in order to
give effect to the first resolution. In se-
conding this motion, which was carried, Mr.
Deakin spoke in warm terms of his friend-
ship, admiration, and appreciation for the
i deceased professor.
On the motion of Mr. E. Fitzgerald, se-
conded by Mr. Herbert Brookes, it ivas de-
cided that the following be appointed to the
executive committee:—Mrs. J. W. Barrett,
Mdme. Pinschof, Mrs. Sanderson, Messrs,
j Arnadio, Brookes, Davidson, Fox, Mackey,
Peake, Sutton Crow, Rev. E. H. Sugden,
Professor Masson, and Mrs. Maudesley.
Mr. E. Fitzgerald was appointed hon. trea-
surer. Subscriptions will be received at his
office in Bank place.




Marshall-Hall.
Abiit—Heu ! Non Rediturus.
Yes ; he has indeed left us ; and this time
there will be no return. A short five months ago
he came back to occupy for the second time the
Ormond Chair of Music, to take up again the
control of the University Conservatorium, over
which he was the first to preside. Many teachers,
of piano, of violin, of singing and what-not, who
had accompanied him into exile (at Albert-street)
when the control of the parent institution was
taken from his hands, came hastily back again
the moment he was re-installed in his original
place ; a fair indication of the sway he exercised
over those with whom he was professionally asso-
ciated, or brought into close personal contact.
For next to —if not above and beyond—his
quality as a serious and genuinely enthusiastic
musician, he owed his influence to his strongly
marked personality. For what “ they ” might
say, or for what “ they ” would think —the great
“ they ” by whose thoughts and sayings so many
of us allow our actions to be swayed —he cared not
one scrap. He saw clearly what he considered
to be the path of duty, and he trod it with a fear-
less joy, reckless alike of warning friends who
counselled caution, of those who gleefully waited
for his stumbling in one of the many pitfalls to
be found on that path, and of the protests of the
immense body of Philistines against whom it was
his chief aim to arm his small, but augmenting
Davidsbund. Such a man is bound to make
enemies; and he made many. Such a man is
bound to make blunders ; but here comes in the
ancient precept “De Mortuis nil nisi bonum.”
Marc Antony summed up his own part in the
solemnities of the day by saying, “ I come to bury
Caesar, not to praise him.” In our comments on
the lamented demise of Mr. Marshall-Hall at a time
when, to all outward seeming, he had years of a
useful life in store, we conceive, like Antony, that
it is no part of our duty “ to praise him ” with
extravagant eulogy ; but we are absolved also
from any necessity to point out his blunders,
how many they were, or in what he went astray.
Not only would it be unseemly to do so with his
grave hardly filled up ; but it so chances that
even were it not unseemly, we are absolved from
any such task, since on the occasion of Mr. Mar-
shall-Hall’s leaving for England, we gave in an
Editorial a brief resume of his musical career in
this city, and in that article, though assuredly
there was “ nought set down in malice,” we did
not absolutely confine ourselves to singing his
praises, albeit we easily found much to admire and
commend.
Leaving all thought of praise and blame aside,
let us briefly consider what he did for the cause
of music in Melbourne. For eight years he
was the Director of the University Conserva-
torium ; the operatic recitals by students of
that institution came to be regarded as quite a
regular December event, while the mid-winter
concert —also by his alumni- —used to be
similarly looked forward to. So successful were
these displays of budding talent, that when the
University made “ other arrangements,” Mr.
Marshall-Hall speedily re-instituted them in con-
nection with the new Conservatorium which he
founded, and which is still “in the running” (with
Mr. Fritz Hart in control) at the rooms of the
Victorian Artists’ Society, in Albert-street. He
took with him, on his migration, most of the
teachers who had throughout worked under his
direction, and who migrated with him ; so too,
did most of the students ; and he acted as the
director of this establishment for a dozen years.
Surely this is a teaching record of which his
friends may well be proud.
But his work as a musician will chiefly be re-
membered by the truly yeoman service he ren-
dered to the cause of orchestral music in this city.
After the final disbandment of the Victorian
Orchestra in 1891, it was no light task to get to-
gether a body of men whose performances should
be worth listening to ; moreover it is to be feared
that the achievements of the defunct band had
hindered more than they had helped the cause of
music. Leaving on one side the merits or de-
merits of that Orchestra, its plan of operations had
been on too generous a scale. Week in, week out,
there were always orchestral concerts on Thursday
evenings and Saturday afternoons ; the thing
became an infliction rather than a blessing ; we
were fed-up and altogether surfeited with or-
chestral music, and in the two years or so which
elapsed after its cessation many of us came to the
conclusion that we were better off without it.
Thus Mr. Marshall-Hall had not only to organise
an orchestra, but to provide a clientele . “ Begin
with what is tuneful and easy to grasp ; and by
degrees instruct your audience to appreciate
better and higher things ’’—thus advised many
of his friends ; but Mr. Marshall-Hall was not
built that way. Nothing but the best
and the highest should figure on his programmes ;
even graceful little pieces of lighter texture
by way of hors d’ouvres were rigidly barred out;
and by consequence his menus were somewhat
solid for facile digestion—especially in a city which
had quite dropped the orchestral habit. Yet he
persevered, serene and undaunted ; and it was
only the lamentable schism five years ago in the
ranks of the players that brought his arduous
and self-sacrificing task to a premature close.
Small wonder that he should have decided to shake
the dust of Melbourne from his feet, for it was a
poor reward after he had done so much for this
city.
As a composer, his fame here rests chiefly on
the fine incidental music he wrote for the per-
formance of “ Alcestis ” by the students of
Trinity College ; for of his two operas, one—
“ Romeo and Juliet ” —is only known by a frag-
ment, and the other—“ Stella ” —suffered from an
almost impossible libretto. These two works
it was his object to get produced in Europe ; the
former had actually been accepted, and was under
rehearsal at Cologne when war broke out. He
has also written a string quartet, several or-
chestral pieces, and songs with orchestral accom-
paniment.
At first his style was largely influenced by
August 2, 1915










The Sears Studios, Melh.
Melbourne Philharmonic Society.
hardt Smith, Mr. J. R. Mair, Miss Nellie Billings,
Royal Victorian Liedertafel.
Miss Elmhirst Goode, Miss Lucy Rowe, Miss
Musical Society of Victoria.
Constance Browne, Mr. Harold Elvins, Madame
Musicians’ Union of Australia.
Louise Mathese, Misses Ruby and Olive Gray,
Uady Northcote Permanent Orchestra Trust.
Miss Louise Watkins (Queensland), Miss Mary
Melbourne Symphony Orchestra.
Campbell, Miss Mary Bowley, Miss Alix Lamande,
Melbourne Amateur Orchestral Society.
Miss Elsa Warman, Messrs. F. Taylor, W. Mohr,
Albert Street Conservatorium.
P. Briginshaw and F. Wood, Mr. Alfred Peters,
Mr Charles Tait (Allan’s),
Mr. Manus O’Donnell.
Victorian Orchestral Association.
Pall Bearers. —Sir John Madden (Chancellor of
Ballarat Musicians,
the University), Dr. J. F. Macfarland (Vice-
University Conservatorium Committee.
Chancellor), Mr. Alfred Deakin, Mr. J. E. Mackey,
University Professorial Board.
Mr. M. P. Fox, Mr. Bodenheimer, Mr. O. F,
University Council.
Sobell, Professor Orme Masson (President of the
University Staff and Students of Conserva-
Professorial Board).
torium.
Service at the grave was conducted by Rev.
Pianola Company.
E. H. Sugden, and a tribute to the late Professor
Besides the above, wreaths were sent from
was read by Mr. Herbert Brookes.
August 2, 1915 39
V' THE AUSTRALIAN MUSICAL NEWS.
Late Prof. Marshall-Hall’s
Funeral.
The funeral proceeded from Melba Hall, at the
University Conservatorium, prior to which a
short service was conducted in the hall by Rev.
E. H. Sugden, Master of Queen’s College. At the
Brighton Cemetery gates a large number of the
late Professor’s friends and students joined the
cortege.
The following societies were represented :
Madame Melba, Mr. and Mrs. Alfred Deakin and
Miss Deakin, Mr. and Mrs. Herbert Brookes,
Mrs. Albert Miller, Mrs. Staughton, Dr. and Mrs.
Bccles, Mr, and Mrs. Carl Pinschof, Madame
Carmen Harris, Mrs. Elizabeth Einley, Miss
Louise Pinschof, Mr. John Grice, Mr. and Mrs.
E. L. Wilson, Mr. and Mrs. Edgar Dye, Mr. and
Mrs. M. Philip Fox, Mr. and Mrs. Hugo Wertheim,
Mr. Bodenheimer, Hon. J. E. and Mrs. Mackey,
Mrs. Oswald Syme, Dr. W. F. and Mrs. Orr, Mr.
and Mrs. Fritz Hart, Mr. O. F. Sobell, Mr. Bern-


Vol. 23, No. 6. SEPTEMBER 10, 1915. Price Sixpence.^
Price Sixpence.
THE TRIAD.
A Monthly Journal devoted primarily to the interests of Musi-
cal, Literary, Pictorial, and Dramatic Art. Posted direct to
subscribers—-Within New Zealand, 6s. per annum; Oversea,
6s. 6d. per annum.
The TRIAD is the most courageous, conscientious, and can-
did magazine in the Dominion. It is unique in its style and func-
tion. In the realm of criticism it has neither partialities nor pre-
judices. It goes directly to the homes of the best and keenest of
the people all over the country. When read it is not flung aside.
The width of its influence is proved by the number of its enemies.
It is' unsurpassed in New Zealand as a High-class Advertising
Medium.
The TRIAD does not accept advertisements or tickets-of-
admission from any visiting musical or dramatic company : nor
will it publish the advertisements of any teacher or public per-
former. Thus it declines to be placed in the false position of
being the cautious critic of its advertisers or the uncomfortable
guest of its entertainers.
All proffered contributions or communications regarding
literary or critical matters must be addressed to the Editor, Box
536, Wellington, written legibly on one side of the paper only,
or, whenever possible, typed. When stamps are enclosed, every
effort is made to return rejected contributions: but the Editor
accepts positively no responsibility in that regard. Wise contri-
butors will keep' duplicates of all matter submitted. Contribu-
tions of terse, bright, original matter are always welcome, and are
paid for at a fixed rate and whatever over that they may be worth.
Short and truthful paragraphs concerning people who count for
anything in matters for which the TRIAD is concerned are espe-
cially desired.
The Triad is published on the 10 th of each month. All
alterations of standing advertisements should reach the Manager
not later than the FIFTEENTH OF THE MONTH PRECED-
ING ISSUE.
Address all business communications or remittances to
the Manager, Box 536, Wellington.
HAVE YOU PAID YOUR SUBSCRIPTION, SIX SHIL-
LINGS, FOR THE CURRENT YEAR? IF NOT KINDLY
i REMIT IT NOW, TO SAVE THE ACCOUNTANT
I TROUBLE.
OBITER DICTA
“Satire’s my weapon, but I’m too discreet
To run a-muck, and tilt at all I meet.”
The news of the death of Professor Marshall-Hall
reached us when the August Triad had gone to press.
He was a sound musician of distinguished ability, while
his passionate and sincere enthusiasm, his utter hatred of
every variety of cant and masquerading humbug, won him
a certain reputation for eccentricity among lazy people
with little time to think. In 1891 he became Ormond
Professor of Music at Melbourne University, and retained
the post until he resigned it in 1900. Shortly afterwards,
he founded the Albert Street Conservatorium. He pro-
moted many admirable concerts, on most of which he lost
money. He would never stoop to cheapen or vulgarize
his art, and “playing to the gallery” was a vice he held in
absolute contempt, steadily regarding it as rather worse,
because so much less excusable, than the other and more
ancient forms of prostitution. He didn’t hit it very well
with the Melbourne University authorities, and nobody
needs be very much surprised at that. He never admitted
that what passes for social eminence in this curious island
could entitle any man to special respect or consideration.
He never apparently suspected that he should so order his
tongue as not to interfere with the University’s business
interests. He never truckled to obtrusive mediocrity.
He was never very patient with stupidity. He loathed
conceit. For these reasons, it was not considered surpris-
ing that the Melbourne Argus should make a savage and
utterly unwarranted attack on him in 1900. The Argus
in those days was staffed by respectable dullwits among
whom Mr. John Sandes shone as a brilliant exception.
It was felt that Mr. Sandes was always too brilliant for
the Argus —too brilliant, too tolerant, too human. How-
ever that may be, the Argus set-up as the querulous grand-
mother and chief critical patron of God in Victoria, and
the Argus was merely one of many rather illiterate and
stupid old women who hated Marshall-Hall with feminine
bitterness and pursued him with feminine spite. So that,
when the Professor wrote a slender volume of satirical
verse and called it “Hymns Ancient and Modern,” the
Argus had its chance, and took it. In the language of
the gutter, whose tactics for the nonce were adopted, the
Argus “give ’im everything.” He was roundly accused
of immorality and indecency. No allowance was made
for his eminence as a teacher of music: quite possibly,
that was a thing the Argus never suspected. The aim was
to down a man who dared to call his soul his own, and
that aim was pursued without scruple. Looking back
to those articles of the Argus now, one is moved to laugh-
ter —they are at once so impotent and so ludicrous. But
they were meant to wound, and they wounded —Marshall-
Hall had not the thick skin of the average respectable no-
body to whom the Argus cried for vengeance. The Pro-
fessor was a man of high courage and dauntless spirit,
but for a time the virulence of the Argus made Melbourne
very uncomfortable for him. You cannot argue with a
harridan who throws mud at you from behind a fence.
The only thing the Professor could have done would have
been to state that the attack upon him was deliberate
calumny based on lies. There was certainly nothing in
the little book of verses to warrant it. And yet —how well
one can imagine the dazed distress and complete bepuzzle-
ment of the Argus over a man who writes of a familiar sea-
beach in such terms as these—


Keen sparkles of fire are up-flashing
Through wavelets of opaline flame,
And their hues are as sound of their splashing.
Alike and yet never the same;
No mis-tone may here mar their music, nor cloud put their sun-
light to shame.
More soft and more fragrant-sweet is not
The smooth bubbling clarionet,
Than the hum of the wavelets that was but
The rise of the sun and the set,
And but sing to the light and the night, and the beaches their
kisses leave wet.
What rubbish (one can imagine the Argus saying) to
speak of things that are “alike and yet never the same”!
It isn’t rubbish, but how could the old lady know that?
Criticism no man objects to; but the Melbourne paper
never attempted or pretended reasonable criticism of the
Professor. The little book is fairly full of faults of tech-
nique. But it’s moral enough—it is even over-weighted
with didactic purpose. The trouble was that the Pro-
fessor did not preach down his nose, as all moral pro-
fessors should. He even dared to write, “To a Back-
biting Parson”
You paint the devil very black
(Yet ’tis a pious hue!)
I wonder, charitable sir,
What colour he’ll paint you.
And there was this, which might in a vein of prophecy
have been written to the very address of the Argus of that
time.
TO A CRITIC
The weak must ever fear the strong,
The false must ever hate the true,
And so, my friend, I am well pleased
To see you hate and fear me too.
And there can be no doubt that the Professor’s preface
irritated Granny very much indeed. She called it im-
moral, but she meant to say that it was, in her idea, im-
pudent.
It is the impertinent belief alike of the professional pietist,
and of the most unconscionable rascal, that his unspeakably in-
significant ego is destined to exist for ever. This arises from a
typically vulgar misunderstanding of the instinct common to all,
but which appears most clearly and intelligibly in men of large
natures, in men of genius, which assures us that amid the eternal
metamorphoses of Nature, nothing perishes, nothing begins; that
man too —O sublime and consoling thought!—is part and parcel
of the ever-changing Universe, in no essential different from the
splendid manifestations around him, the innate unity of which
becomes perceptible to his higher grade of consciousness; that
the earth, the sun, the air, everything that is, are in fact akin to
him, nay! portions of his own identity; that he himself but awaits
the touch of the enchanter Death, to become once more resolved
into those primary elements, of whose manifold combinations he
is but one.
Nothing there that a Professor might not honestly
and freely write, if he were so moved. The hope ex-
pressed may not seem very comforting to such of us as,
groping however blindly, have faith to look for something
better and more perfect. Still, the Argus in the end did
Professor Marshall-Hall no injury. He remained in
Melbourne, and to the end he cared no more for the Argus
than he did for any butcher’s boy—less, probably. He
was a generous and sincere man. He was passionately
loyal to great ideals. He was not always very easy to get
on with, but his place was secure in the hearts or his
friends. He was a man in the big sense —a sovereign
human person, no slave of invertebrates, no timeserver,
no tufthunter, no coward, no Judas. He said what he
felt, and if he saw a thing damned bad damned bad he
called it. He was never known to whine or to seek the
easy sympathy of the vulgar. He bent no knee to graven
images however exalted. He did what he thought was
right, and about what other people thought he very sel-
dom bothered his head. He may not have forgiven his
meanest enemies; but he never lacked the decency to
despise them.
♦ ♦ *
RUFUS ISAACS,
Baron Reading, Lord Chief Justice of England.
N. Y. Times Pictorial.
484
September 10, 1915.
THE TRIAD.


September 1, 1915.
Tf-f E
'TTTEA'TJFtE
AT A ZIKTE
presence, and nobody was ever
more amused than Hall himself.
He never contradicted it, because
he recognised that it was a good
yarn, if it wasn’t precisely true. He
was too good a sport to spoil a good
yarn for the sake of mere accuracy
—-“the refuge of the commonplace,”
he styled it.
Emotional Intensity.
Marshall Hall’s lectures were the
most wonderful ever delivered.
The only people who turned up were
members of his own particular cult
—musicians, artists, literai’y per-
sons, and the rest of the class which
other people regard as useless and
THE LATE PROFESSOR MARSHALL
HALL.
The above photograph, taken a few
months before his death, shows him in
characteristic attitude.
Block by Bacon and Co.
hopelessly insane. For all that,
Hall’s phraseology was so weird
and eccentric that even their pro-
found sympathy with him was un-
able to restrain them, and in a
few minutes he would break them
up. His language was like that of
no other man on earth. He was full
of strange nouns and stranger ad-
jectives. He would lecture, for in-
stance, on “The Emotional Inten-
sity of A Minor,” and enlarge on it
for hours, with references to his be-
loved Nietszche and Schoepenhauer
and Nordau and Havelock Ellis.
And the most wonderful part of it
all was the remarkable good humor
w r ith which Hall received the laugh-
ter of an artistic audience at his
most sacred thoughts, sometimes
pausing in the middle of a passage
which had struck listeners as par-
ticularly funny to join in the laugh
himself.
The Girl and the Temperament.
He was frank to bluntness, but
never to brutality. On one occa-
sion a girl pupil who had passed all
her examinations came for advice.
“You have been taught all it is
possible to teach you,” said the
Professor. “But you lack tempera-
ment. You are a splendid musical
machine now; but you must awaken
before you become an artist.”
“How can I do that?” inquired
the damsel.
“That is not for me to suggest,”
replied Hall. “There are many ways
of awakening the soul. The
simplest would be to fall in love.”
“Oh,” cried the girl, with rising
indignation, entirely misconstruing
his remarks. “And I suppose you
want to teach me?”
The Professor shook his head
with a smile. “No, thank you,” he
replied; “my duty is to point the
way, not to arrange personally-
conducted tours.”
Verses—Topical and Tropical.
It was Hall’s lack of conven-
tional understanding which led to
his being deposed from his Uni-
versity professorship in 1900.
Some years previously, a visit to
Sydney (a place he greatly ad-
mired) led to his publishing a
volume of verse —“Hymn to Syd-
ney.”’ Some of the thoughts and
phrases of this book severely
shocked the Presbyterian con-
science of the unco guid of Mel-
bourne. Still, nothing in the way
of a formal protest was made. But
in 1900 Hall came out with another
volume, “Hymns Ancient and Mod-
ern,” the contents of which made
“Three Weeks” look like an expur-
gated edition for the use of the
young, and for sheer outspokenness
put Walt Whitman in the kindergar-
ten class. There was a wild howl,
and Hall was charged with deliber-
ately insulting the whole Christian
community.
As it happened, his term at the
University was just expiring, and
when the council met his support-
ers were such bad tacticians that
they allowed the meeting to pass
without re-appointing him. Before
the next meeting the unco guid had
raked up a majority, and the result
was that the late Franklin Peterson
was appointed professor of music.
Hall thereupon entered into compe-
tition with the University by con-
tinuing the Conservatorium at
Eastern Hill, and there is little
doubt that, musically, it was re-
garded as the more important in-
stitution of the two.
Created an Art Centre.
As a musician, Hall was a man
possessed of a world reputation,
and it was frequent that musical
strangers expressed surprise that
such a man should be content to re-
THE BEST SUIT OF ITS KIND
SPORTS SUIT
IkEADY'TO'WEAR
A SUIT that meets the requirements of the busi-
ness man who wishes to combine in one a suit
that can be worn for ordinary or business wear,
and yet possesses the necessary ease for play.
The popularity will be greater than ever this com-
ing season. The newest colorings are brown, grey
and fawn mixtures, in English, Scotch and Irish
Tweeds. The coat is unlined, without padding or
stiffening; back is loose fitting, pleated into a half
band, long vent, large pockets with flaps, ordinary
lounge front with three buttons and one outside
breast pocket. Trousers finished with permanent
turn-up bottoms. In all men’s sizes. AA /
Jacket and trousers only J l j'
Superior qualities, 45/-, 50/-, 55/
WE FAY CARRIAGE
DAVID JONES LTD
SYDNEY
OPP. G.P.O.
main in Australia, when he might quarters of the Victorian Artists’
be a star of the first magnitude for Society, and a nucleus was created
the asking in any big European around which gathered all those
centre. And it was not alone in whose development depends so
music that Hall’s influence was so much on their mixing with their
valuable. He formed a centre to- fellows. By the death of Marshall
wards which all the arts were at- Hall artistic Melbourne has sus-
tracted. The Conservatorium on tained a blow whose effects cannot
Eastern Hill was also the head- be over-estimated.




September 1, 1915.
MTA GJK ZIIS/E
Professor Marshall Hall.
Melbourne’s Weird Genius.
Under the above headings the “Sun” (Sydney) publishes an;
article written by a man who manifestly was for years on inti-
mate personal terms with Professor Marshall Hall. Besides relat-
ing some amusing Hall stories, the writer points out that he was
“a man who was eternally looking for trouble,” and shows how
fortunate Australia was in possessing a musical star of such mag-
nitude. Nor was it in music alone that Hall’s influence was so
valuable. “He formed a centre towards which all the arts were
attracted.” The article is here reproduced because of its excep-
tional value as a pen-picture of the late professor.
Marshall Hall is dead, and there
is not a person in Melbourne who
knew him who is not genuinely
grieved. In all probability those who
were most affected to hear of his
death were his enemies, if those
who came into conflict with him
during his lifetime can be regarded
so seriously. Enemies they certainly
were not in the ordinary sense of
the word. It is impossible to be-
lieve that the “Prof.” ever had a
personal difference, in the ordinary
sense, with anybody in his life.
He was too cheerful a soul, too
large-hearted, too boisterously
humorous. All the same, he was a
born fighter, and a man who was
eternally looking for trouble—and
finding it. He was an instinctive
antagonist, and the very fact of a
thing’s being established and con-
ventional was sufficient to arouse
his ire to unprovoked assault and
battery on an inoffensive principle.
Politics For Children.
Marshall Hall didn’t bother about
fighting over what the average man
is accustomed to regard as the
great things of the earth. Politics
he dismissed with an amused smile
as a silly sort of game fit for chil-
dren and utterly unworthy of the
attention of grown-up, sensible men
-—a fact which indicates him to
have been a very far-sighted mail
and a profound thinker. Though
his headquarters were situated in
Albert-street, Eastern Hill, right
opposite the altar of St. Patrick’s
Cathedral, Marshall Hall was un-
affected by the Green and unmoved
by the Orange, though it used to
be said that his love of conflict was
so great that he invariably wore a
yellow tie on March 17 and a green
one on July 12. If he had a re-
ligion, nobody ever knew it. But
it is unlikely that he had, for
he was a profound admirer of
Nietszche, and theoretically, at any
rate, held “the blonde brute avid
for victory and spoil” to be the
advent in Melbourne, Hall won
the personal love of everybody
who met him, the deep admiration
of the musical and artistic people,
while the Philistine looked on
him with feelings invariably hostile,
but differing hugely in their appli-
cation. Some of the old crusted
Toorakians would almost shriek
with horror at some of Marshall
Hall’s outbursts, and demand loudly
that this man ought to be sent to
gaol. The majority, however,
looked upon him as a sort of in-
spired crank, whose musical value
justified his other eccentricities be-
ing tolerated.
B Flat in Purple.
Many are the strange yarns—
some true, some Berlin wireless —-
which were circulated around Hall,
and nobody laughed more heartily
over the recital of them than the
one central figure himself. One of
the first questions he put to his stu-
dents led to much comment and
ridicule. It was:
“Distinguish between the sublime
and the beautiful, and give your
reasons fully for the conclusions
you arrive at.”
It is also on record that in an ex-
amination in practical music he
asked a budding violinist to sound
B flat. The youth nervously
dragged his bow along the string.
“Ow!” yelled the Professor, in dis-
gust; “I wanted a deep purple—not
a pale mauve.”
Leading the Lightning.
But the champion story related of
Hall concerns his action during
the severe storm of 1897, when a
cyclone struck Melbourne, unroof-
ing the smaller houses and flooding
the low-lying suburbs.
When the storm was at its height,
and the thunder was booming like
a battery of 42-centimetre guns, and
the sky was wriggling with light-
ning flashes, the Professor was
missed. Yelling to one another to




THE ARGUS,
March 20, 1915.
_
IDEAL AND REAL.
ANARCHY IN MUSIC.
By PROFESSOR MARSHALL-HALL.
At the formal opening for the year of the
University Conservatorium at the Melba
Hall last evening, Professor Marshall-Hall
(Ormond professor) delivered an address, in'
the course of which he said:
Personally, I would sacrifice a good deal
to bridge over the gap that has widened
between myself and my whilom friends of
the orchestra. I have alwayk had an affec-
tionate partiality for those descendants of
Pan whose mission in life is to produce
beautiful sounds. , The . business man
tells me they are unreasonable. Of!
course they are. What beautiful, en-
during thing did reason ever bring
forth. No, no! Their business is
most unreasonably, by cunning witchery, to
coax from their beautiful pierced reeds the
delicate tone-spirits inhabiting, there. With)
Faustian art to eon the magic formula which i
shall lure them forth from their woody or
metal lurking-places, and to learn to pro-
nounce the cabalistic master-word which!
binds them to the service of the soul. Only
to him is this power granted in whom dwells
some, subtle affinity to the. world of tone-
spirit; only such an one can persuade and
cajole the rare Ariel from her inaccessible
retreats —and, surely, hot alone with the
greasy coin of commerce is this subtle
magician to be rewarded, but with that;
generous appreciation which every one of
us owes to whatsoever god-imparted power
is* able to raise us momentarily above mere
base corporeal needs, and give to our spiri-:
tual eyes visions of that wonderful life be-
yond life, towards which blind, dumb mat-
ter ceaselessly seems to strive. . . .
You see there before you a wooden case’
filled with iron, and brass, and wires, and
curious mechanisms. A hundred may, sit
at, it, and handle it, and put its ingenious !
machinery in motion; but then comes the
chosen one,-impregnate with deity* and sud-
denly through the “vast inane” spirit calls
to spirit; mechanism, reality vanishes; the
mere materiality of sound, of physical phe-
nomenon, is transmuted into some inex-
i plieable soul-qualit y which penetrates the
superficial visibility of existence, and re-
veals to us a new world, the .world behind
Our known world, the world in which Ave are
Avhen reason, intellect, consciousness-
vague illusions of our time-and-space-limited
individuality—are; stripped from us, and Ave
are one Avith all that lies beyond knoAvledge,
but Avhich Is now realised by some inner-
most indefinable capacity for experience in
us.
U».
“Pooh* pooh!” exclaims the realist, “this)
is idealism run mad!” Yes, dear sir,, there i
are speculations of the soul as Avell as of
the Stock Exchange. The fluctuations of
the money market do not for all of us ex-
haust the possibilities of existence.
“SHAMEFUL HAND OF REALISM.”
But the realist, it must be, admitted, has
for the last half-century had everything his.
own way. The world around us, as we know
and feel it to-day, is his proud creation.
Behold modern Commerce, the most in-
spired emanation of his. wisdom, with its;
gentle and soothing hand reaching to the
uttermost recesses of the earth; its great
merchants and petty traders, all vicing with
one another in probity, humanity, and
gentle dealing; employer and employed
everywhere knit together in, fraternal amity
to his intelligent zeal! Or shall
we turn to the Governments he has insti-
| tilted, and applaud. their unselfish political
efforts, their wise ordering of affairs, the
glorious world-wide amity of nations Avhich
crowns their administrations? Where now
is to he found the people -within whose
borders justice, content, and goodwill do
not reign? Do we not everywhere behold
<the equal distribution of wealth and happi-
ness? Do we not everywhere see the
honest man prosper in high positions, while
the clever rascal is kept within bounds and
forbidden any more to roam a beast of prey?
And all this is the work.of,the happy de-
spiser of idealism, of the, realist,,, the man
of common sense, the plain, practical man,,
the man of the streets, bless his heart!
No wonder he will hot listen to our charm-
ing. He is absorbed in contemplation of
the miraculous fruits of his practical wis-
dom—and indeed they are such as to make
even the idealist pause and wonder. But
let us leave our twentieth-century Richard
the Third to the phantom company which
waits upon his slumbers—for even the
realist can, when put to it, do something
in the way of spirit-rapping. ...
European civilisation bears on its
brow the shameful brand of realism—and is
not ashamed. And Europe to-day is aton-
ing her desertion of hope-crowned idealism
for the cold, cruel, pitiless creed of the
realist, by the wholesale slaughter of her
.youth, the destruction of her precious monu-'
ments, the massacre of entire populations—
by famine, disease, and universal ruin. Real-
ism has brought a once noble people under
domination of a faithless, merciless horde
of barbarians, and converted Europe into
a butcher’s shambles. Let us turn away
our eyes.
Often in times past have I asserted from
this place, and I assert again, that our I
whole system of education is tainted with j
over-realism, and we are letting its fatal
poison instil into the, minds of our children.
One great educationalist avc have had in
our midst* Avho* like another Hercules, has
for years Avrestled Avith this Hydra, and,
against all opposition, has succeeded in lop-
ping off its heads one by one. I allude, of
course, to onr director of Education, Mr.
Frank Tate, to Avhom the rising generation,
when it attains to manhood, will erect the
fines u statue that has CA r er been seen in
Australia, and I hope to be represented at
its unveiling by my son, or grandson.
And Avhat has Mr. Tate done? He has
recognised that every separate child-being
has an individuality of its own, a mode and
capacity of apprehension different from
that of anyone else. He lias insisted on J
the fact that the power of original thought |
derives from the piecing together of per- |
sonal experience, and that this experience
must precede or accompany every step in I
intellectual training. He has recognised
the undeniable troth that all our ideas
originate in sensation, and must be referred
back to sensation for verification; that in-
telligent thinking consists in the continual
resolution of the complexities of thought
to their elemental origin—that,percept must j
precede concept, the concrete the abstract, I
the particular the general. And the sys-
tematic general inculcation of this principles
constitutes nothing less than a revolution.
Following on the same lines, he has insisted
that the powers of perception must be in-
tenified and widened; and this implies de-
velopment of the sympathetic, emotional
faculties, and the continuous exercise of the
imagination. It is at this point that he I
comes into contact with art, and especially
with that branch of art which I represent
—the art of music.
MUSIC AND SOUL LIFE.
Music , gives utterance to those strange,
sub-conscious powers, those instinctive
movements of will, which lie behind and
beyond processes of thought. Thought,
after all, forms a very minor part of all
the myriad operations which go on in each
individual nature and build its inner life.
The musician, indeed, thinks in tones rather
than ideas, and gives musical form to the
tendencies, propulsions, aversions, attrac-
tions, and all that vague interplay of un-
known forces which lie, mostly inexpres-
sible, in the depths of our being, masked
from the eye of the unspeculative mind.
Man knows no more of life than is reflected
in the mirror of his soul. Hence each one
; sees life from a different standpoint. It is
this subtle' differentiation in our apprehen-
sion of things which imparts to art its
eternal variety, and to which the artist en-
deavours to give perspicuous form—a form
which, in the case of music,i does, not neces-
sarily bear any relation to external form
[ With its hampering limitations. Music deals
only with the internal soul-life, which
Involves in its own way according to the
■ innate character of the individual. And it
deals with this soul-life only after it has
assimilated or rejected—in fact, after it has
digested—the effects of outer experience.
Music records the secret history of the
soul, its strivings, its failure, its fears, and
its laughter, its frantic desires, its bitter 1
disappointments, its hopes and fears, its
Avild re\ T olt and its desolate abasement, its
aspiration, its despair, its moments of
lofty and sublime contemplation. All this
music faithfully records in the glories of
harmonic colour and melodic line, and to it
super-adds the anodyne of supreme
sensuous beauty and the Avonder of imagina-
tive form. And hoAv and whence this new,
astonishing Avorld arises no one can ever
know. This life within life—with Avhat is
it connected? What has it to do with the
commonplace, tabvdry reality amidst which
we live? Is it a sub-conscious reminiscence
of unknown pasts? Is it a magnetic current
running along the innermost fibres of being,
a sort of spiritual telephonic communica-
tion from those of Avhose existence we are
not even otherwise aware? Who shall
say? Certainly neither the scientist, pinned
doAvn as he is to sense-phenomena, nor the
futile spiritualist, Avith his materialistic
hobgoblinism. Is it perhaps the collective,
concentrated experience of our race, that
stirs the soul to expression of what it has
never actually known? ....
The musical temperament thinks and
feels in tones, just in the same Avay as the
painter in line and colour, or the poet in
AA’ords and sentences. The emotions Avhich
art —especially the best art —arouses have
frequently nothing in common Avith the
stale, wearisomely reiterated emotions
forced on us by the impertinent events of


'
; ' ■■■ •- ' ; - w ■ V ■ ■■ ' , • ’ ‘ ... •' ■ ■ ‘ - / - . , ■ ■ > ss V • ’~ > ' 's ' ' -■"
,
■ '
'
A .
■
: - : s' s' ,■ , . ..
- . ' • ' ■' , ' , * -s ■- ' : ' v _ ■ ... , . ' ■■ ' ; -


.every-day existence. Those who, speaking
out of the fullness of their folly, tell us
that art is the imitator of life, fondly
imagine that the life imitated by art is the i
life they know,, is their life—truly an
assumption which touches on the sublime.
No, really! The important doings of Tom,j
Dick, and Harry and their innumerable!
progeny find their suitable epic in the
, daily papers and the' police news, but
scarcely as the subject-matter of art. The:
life which art loves, and ponders over, and
reproduces in her myriad forms of beauty
is the life of the imagination. Life itself,
as a mere series of facts, of -sentient states,
is a most wretchedly .paltry affair. It is
bad enough to have to live it, without hav-1
ing to talk about it. Indeed, what is there |
in it to talk about? At best it is but an |
ill-danced quadrille, in whicn different sets j
of people, each in their turn, go over and j.
over again through the same insipid, mono- j
tonous, movements and make the same un-
entertaining blunders, at which no one \
laughs. Out of this unpromising material
the imagination builds up her wonderful
worlds, and peoples them with beautiful
shapes and beings of splendid passions and
high-wrought deeds, who bear but the
faintest resemblance to the brute litter
which greedy, selfish, incontinent Nature
carelessly produces and callously leaves to
their fate.
For music reveals to us the reality behind
all phenomena; the colour which is neither
upon sea nor land, that the painter strives
eagerly to catch, but that exists only in
the imagination; the form of ideal beauty,
which Nature endeavours vainly to produce,
but bungles in her amateurish haste; the
miracle of active energy, no longer losing
itself in the multitudinous chaos of aimless
life, like a stream which the sands soak in
ere it can reach ocean, but building up ever
new worlds of vital beauty. The artist does
not interpret, but transmutes matter into
mind. He is a soul calling to soul, in the
language of art. The message is various, but
beauty is one. To be awakened to her pre-
sence is to have, as in a dream, all know-
ledge, all experience, simultaneously poured
forth.
It is chiefly owing to the realistic 1
Itrend of our education and habits of
thought that we British have accomplished
so little in the most ideal of arts. But
the awakening has come. There is a throng i
of composers of the younger generation
eager to work out their own salvation, and
who have learnt the sacredness of illusion —
illusion, art’s mystery, man’s nearest guess
at truth; the effort of his innermost being
to attain conscious expression; this supreme
quality that persists through the perishing
forms to which he pins his intellectual faith
-and which mock him as they perish.
PERCY GRAINGER.
1 We may be proud that one of the fore-
ihost British musicians to raise the banner
of musical idealism—one who has sought,
and found, and followed, the light of his
own genius, and has thereby now attained
rich and fruitful maturity, is an Australian,
a Melburnian —one of ourselves. I mean
Percy Grainger.
Grainger has succeeded beyond anyone
that I know in getting right behind the
English folk-song spirit, and recreating
musically something of that beautiful,
healthy, careless life which has been well-
nigh lost to us, thanks to the blighting curse
of Puritanism from which the British race
is only now becoming healed. We get a
glimpse of . that old-time life in the poems
of Herrick, and his immediate successors,
and again, long, after, in the songs of Arne
and his contemporaries. Then it died out
amid the degrading imbecilities of the Vic-
torian Royalty ballad—that one sole link
between the drawing-room and the slum.
-Then came the complete severance of the
earnest English musician from English
music from English life and thought and
feeling. He fled to Germany for consola-
tion in his despair, and adopted German
ways of thinking, and , German technique.
What else, indeed, could he then do? But 1
now has come the reaction. With German,
ideas the new British school has also cast
off German methods, and is trying in a
thousand ways to realise that something
Which is to be found in no other country
hut its own. One of the most original
and most musically-gifted of these is, with-
out doubt, Percy GLj-ainger. He has always
had his own ideas about things. He has
i always shown a proclivity for seeking out
modes of expression different from those
prevailing. He is an anarchist, but an
anarchist with definite principles.
To the musical anarchist the world of
art owes a debt of gratitude. He has para-
lysed—temporarily, at all events—that
greatest of all nuisances—the man who
wants to put things right. The type of
mind which peers with, indefeasible curio-
sity into the mystery beyond has always
existed side by side with that other con-
ventional type, which regards with holy
horror all attempts to transcend traditional
limitations.
This latter is not so much wrong as im-
i possible, for, according to his gospel, art
I would be nothing but an eternal repetition
I of the same formula over and over again ad
! nauseam. For the actual subject-matter
j of art can, of course, undergo no change,
j but only the point of view of the artist and
the convention by which this is expressed.
There are 1 pedants who would make it a
criminal offence to write any sort of music
but sonatas in binary form, although this
form has been done to death, and is not
iiv the least adapted for modern ideas. But
it has become a sort of fetish for them,
and they cannot conceive that this sacred
script must he followed, even as it was
preceded, by something vitally different.
MUSICAL LAW BREAKERS.
-Change is a law of existence, but we
cannot calculate what the law of change
will produce next in the world of art. All
we perceive is that the mystery of the re-;
peated line remains constant —phrase
; springs from phrase, even as cell produces
cell. The musical anarchist claims nothing
more than to be allowed his own ceil-!
growth, his: own conventions, and not to be
refused a hearing merely because they do
not conform to those of somebody else. But
the pedant, ‘ who has appointed himself a
sort of musical policeman, responsible for
musical morality, has everlastingly the same
cry in his mouth, that if every man be a
law unto himself the poor public will be
;imposed on. The public is not such a fool.
Nor does it in the least concern itself with
banal academic discussions as to what is
!: good or bad. It only wants to be interested
; or amused. Besides, surely the most atro-
cious cacophony of the futurest of futurists
cannot be so dangerous to sanity as the
weird result of the perspiring classicist’s
sonata-manufacture? Any form of death is
preferable to that by boarding-house hash.
A school of art consists of one success fol-
lowed by a myriad failures. It is, of course,
the failures that constitute the “school”— j
not the one success. An original ai-tist gives
to the world his individual vision of life.
At once his pattern is seized, mechanically
imitated, and a “school” is formed. Then
comes a new man, with a new vision, and
formulates a new pattern, and is anathema
to this “school,” who cannot be always
unlearning what was acquired with so much
labour.
Speaking about Percy Grainger's charm-
ing and brilliant work the other day, one
of our musical ichthyosauri grumbled that
he only wrote quite short things, and that
none of the “self-taught” younger genera-
tion seemed able to piece together a “well-
made, solid, symphonic work, in several
movements.” Perhaps so. But, on the
other hand, the musical public flock to hear
Grainger’s tit-bit; they don’t tire of it
either; they want it over and over again.
It is alive—and very much alive, too. But
they yawn religiously through the four
movements of the scholiast, praying all the
time for a speedy end, and quiet burial.
Besides, mud) of the music of the law-
| breakers, Grainger’s especially, is very beau-
tifully made. The part-writing is animated
- and flowing, the harmonic combination in-
\ genious and fresh, the thematic structure
clearly answerable to a logic of its own, and
the reiteration of traditional formulas most
happily replaced by original designs. One
of the most favourable signs of the times is
this determined effort of the younger gene-
ration of British artists to free themselves
from the out-worn art forms of foreign
origin. British music has been wet-nursed
too long. It is high time we struck out for
ourselves. And it is only by putting forth
roots in many directions that we shall ever
get a firm hold of our native soil, and begin
to shoot upwards towards blossom and fruit.
The worth of a work of art is not accord-
ing to its poundage or mileage. Twenty
bars of real live musical mentality are worth
more than a whole Birmingham Festival of
dead cantata rubbish. The artist tvho
understands his limitations, and works
within them, will always effect something
delightful. Not every one can wear the
lion’s skin convincingly, though there is
one seemingly very prolific animal that is al-
ways hankering after it!
ILLUSIONS OF ART.
That all sorts of extravagances are now a
days daily committed in the name of the
Muse, must be admitted. But even these
ebullitions of youthful rebelliousness are a
sign of health and vigour, much preferable
to the patient drudgery of scholarly respec-
tability. We must always keep an open
heart for the joys, the beliefs, the aspira-
tions of those that come after us, however,
! different from our own. The vast social
upheaval slowly taking place around us is
giving rise to new outlooks, and forms of
art other than those which satisfied our
fathers —not for that the less perfectly
beautiful. With the greater bitterness of
: the struggle for existence, and the keener
intelligence evolved, the dreams of art are
no longer a luxury, but a necessity. Let
us then give up trying to measure the worth
of our dreams by our Grove’s dictionaries.
But let the pedant and the sceptic cavil,
the world will yet not begrudge the dreamer
his quiet corner, where he may abide at




peace from the phantoms which haunt the
nightmare of daily life, until the day come
when it once more consents to listen to
him, while he sings, perchance, of how.
“On some such shore as this, ’neath skies
iso blue, and o’er so blue a sea,
Fond Ariadne wept, and Theseus flew,
And riotous Bacchus, vine-crowned, led his wan-
ton crew.
Or how, perchance, toil-torn Odysseus shook
From matted locks the brine, and met
Fair Nausicaa’s wondering look,.
While all her fearful maidens, shrieking, her
forsook.”
Or, may be, he will tell us of gracious and
lovely ladies that never were, and will never
cease to be, of patient, smiling Imogen; and 1
of imperial Cleopatra, passion-pale; and of
her that crowned the visionary’s brow at
i last; of famous deeds of heroes yet un-
born, yet evermore enshrined in golden
rhyme; of king’s ne’er crowned, and peoples
to no history known; of tears unshed, and
laughter never heard; of phantom wars,
fierce passions fancy-fed, mad sins all un-
committed. Or, perhaps, leaving for a while
to vex the heart with mutable passions too
like its own, he will lead us by strange ways
to lands no traveller ever trod, upon whose
shores uncharted oceans pour their smooth,
admnbrons waves, or o'er pale Himalayan
heights, to where the stars, like fitful fire-
flies, chase each other down the steep.
And we surmise that these things, that
never were, yet which live for evermore ” *
with the more vivid life of the imagination, j
are an emanation of that unknown force •
which, in its passage from eternity to etef-
nity, momentarily irradiates the brittle clay ;
of which wc are made. Let the realist
smile. For this clay is to him the one thing
real, and he believes in it, as the poor
savage believes in the wooden god which
he is able to touch and see.
But all things pass away, and the forms
we know are but as the frozen crystals On
a pane, which are, and are not. But the il-
lusions of art remain, beautiful and eternal
as the truth of which they are a symbol.
To the body, then, let us render the things
that are of the body; to the mind, what is
of the mind. But the soul, let us leave to I
its dreams, for
“We are such stuff
As dreams are made on; and our little life
Is rounded with a sleep.” ■


*


•
r
-


