

MEMORIAL
REMINISCENCES OF
Rev, JOHN TAIT
AND
ELIZABETH TAIT




REMINISCENCES
OF
JOHN & ELIZABETH TAIT


REV. JOHN TAIT


IN MEMORIAM
REV. JOHN TAIT
ELIZABETH TAIT
LONDON
ST. MARTIN’S PRESS. 1$ CRAVEN STREET, W.C.
1914


“ HONOUR THY FATHER AND THY MOTHER, THAT
THY DAYS MAY BE LONG UPON THE LAND WHICH
THE LORD THY GOD GIVETH THEE.”


PREFACE
THESE memorial reminiscences were compiled
by one of the Rev. John Tait’s sons, and are
now issued in the form of a book by his eldest son
for private circulation among the family and their
descendants, in the hope that the volume may prove
interesting, instructive and profitable.
“We pass: the path that each man trod
Is dim, or will be dim, with weeds:
What fame is left for human deeds
In endless age ? It rests with God.”
TENNYSON.
“ Every noble life leaves the fibre of it interwoven for-
ever in the works of the world.”— ruskin.
The compilers desire most thankfully and grate-
fully to acknowledge the valuable assistance so
cordially tendered by Mr. Finden Brown, of the
St. Martin’s Press, in preparing and revising the
proofs of this little volume.


I.—JOHN TAIT


CHAPTER I.
1809-1837
JOHN TAIT was born at Moffat, Dumfriesshire,
Scotland, on the 2nd November, 1809. His
father was a cloth merchant, and his mother’s
maiden name was Catherine Beattie. He had two
brothers, William, older than himself, and George,
younger. His mother died when her son John was
only nine years old. He had very tender memories
of his mother, and must have inherited from her
his loving nature and earnestness of character. His
father died at the age of forty-eight, when his
sons were still young, and his eldest son William
succeeded him in the business at Moffat.
John Tait and his brother George attended
Glasgow University, the former as a Divinity student,
and the latter to study medicine. As the family
income was small they both had a hard struggle to
qualify themselves to enter the University and to
get through their course of study, and—like many
other students of limited means—engaged themselves
as tutors to enable them to pay the necessary fees.
It was a proud day for them when they were able to
enter their names as students and don the red cloak.
John Tait used to tell his sons that the street boys
jeered at the students as they walked the streets of
Glasgow in their red cloaks, saying, “Collie, Collie,
h


lift up your lugs.” The two elder brothers were
very proud of the younger, George. He was an
able student and an amiable young man, and great
things were expected from him. These hopes were,
however, destined to be disappointed. He had finished
his medical course, and was gaining experience in a
Glasgow hospital when he contracted typhus fever
from one of the patients, and died after a short
illness. This happened on the 14th September, 1838,
about a year after John Tait and his wife arrived
in New South Wales, and when they were settled at
Wollongong. His brother William wrote a long
letter to him, giving full particulars of the sad
event. This letter is still extant, having been
preserved with great care. Although John Tait was
not so brilliant a scholar as his brother George, he
acquitted himself very creditably at the Glasgow
University and College during a course of study
from 1824 to 1831. He gained at least two book
prizes, which are still fondly preserved as mementoes
of his success. Of his College companions and friends
the most distinguished as a scholar was James
Halley, whose early death was greatly lamented.
Halley was known in the University as the man who
beat Tait, viz. Archibald Campbell Tait, afterwards
Archbishop of Canterbury, who was a very brilliant
scholar and also a fellow-student of John Tait’s.
Mr. Halley’s esteem and affection for his friend John
Tait is referred to in his Memoir; “May, 1837. I
then walked down with the Hamiltons to Newhaven,
where, on the quay—how true an emblem of our
short meetings here —we saw my dear friend John


From an old painting.
[?]


Tait, who was about to embark next Monday for
New South Wales. In him, ever since I knew him,
the grace of our Lord has been exceeding abundant.”
And again: “I crossed to Edinburgh . . . took
a long farewell of Tait, in which (alas, how vainly)
I spoke of holding the rope while he went down
into the missionary pit.” But John Tait’s chief
friend in those early days was Robert Johnstone,
afterwards Free Church Missionary at Madras, with
whom for many years he kept up a correspondence
in shorthand. His sons were all familiar in their
childhood with the pleasing countenance of Robert
Johnstone, as shown in his likeness that hung on
the walls of the study. John Tait assisted his friend
very materially by sending large contributions from
his congregations in Australia in aid of the Madras
Mission. The Sabbath-school connected with his
former congregation in Geelong still continues to
support two native girls in Madras. After leaving
the college John Tait was employed in Mission work
in Glasgow, and it was while so engaged, and to assist
in his work, that he, together with some other
students, James Halley among them, drew up the
“ Catechism of Scripture Doctrine for Young Persons.”
This Catechism was published in Paramatta, and
afterwards at Geelong, for use in the Sabbath-schools
connected with his congregations, and it was exten-
sively used by other ministers and- schools. Several
editions of this Catechism have been published since,
and it is still in use.
In 1836 John Tait was appointed Missionary
Assistant to the Rev. John Bonar at Greenock,


and it was there that he became acquainted with
his future wife, Elizabeth Blair, to whom he was
introduced by a mutual friend, Mrs. Macfie. The
acquaintance of the two young people quickly ripened
into affection, and so it came about that John Tait
and Elizabeth Blair were married at Greenock on
the 2nd May, 1837. A few days after their marriage
they had the pleasure, while crossing in a steamer
to Burnt Island, of meeting the great and good
Dr. Chalmers. He was much interested in the young
minister and his wife who were going to the far-distant
Colonies of Australia. Dr. Lang, of Sydney, New
South Wales, had been urging the Church to send
out young ministers to Australia, and John Tait was
one of those chosen for this service.


From an old painting.
[?]


CHAPTER II.
1837-1851
AND so, in the same month of May in which they
were married, John Tait and his wife sailed
from Scotland in the good ship North
Briton. There were three other ministers in the
ship with them, viz. the Rev. John Lillie and the
Rev. William Hamilton, young men who, like John
Tait, were going out to Australia in response to
Dr. Lang’s appeal for ministers, —and the Rev. James
Clow, a retired Chaplain of the East India Company,
who, with his wife and family of six daughters and
two sons, was going to settle in Tasmania. The
voyage was a very pleasant one. It lasted four
months. John Tait gave a very interesting description
of the ship and its passengers, and a full account of
the voyage, in a letter to his friend Robert Johnstone.
This letter was begun on the voyage, and was finished
on their arrival at Sydney. It was written in short-
hand, and Mr. Johnstone copied it out, or rather full
extracts from it, for John Tait’s brother in Scotland.
This copy was afterwards sent to Mrs. Tait, who
preserved it with great care, and it is still a treasured
possession in the family. John Tait mentioned in his
letter that the ship carried six cannon and twenty
guns, as a defence against pirates, and that the talk
in the evening sometimes turned on the subject of


pirates, and terrible tales were told of their boarding
vessels and overpowering officers and crew, removing
all valuables, and then sinking the ship with the
passengers. Some bad dreams were the result of these
tales. However, in the kind providence of God, they
escaped these and other perils of the sea, and reached
Hobart safely on the 7th September, 1837.
They were surprised to see Mount Wellington
covered with snow, as they had not expected to see
snow after leaving Scotland. Mr. Clow and his family
landed here, and also Mr. Lillie, who had come
out to be minister at Hobart. John Tait and Mr.
Hamilton went on in the ship to Sydney. The
Rev. Irving Hetherington, an old friend, met them
when they landed. They were unable to get lodgings
“ for love or money,” and were granted the use of
rooms in Dr. Lang’s College, where they stayed until
Mr. Tait was appointed to the District of Illawarra,
about sixty miles south of Sydney, on the sea coast.
Mrs. Tait’s only brother, William Blair, accom-
panied them to Australia. Through Mr. Tait’s
influence he obtained an appointment in the Bank
of Australasia, Sydney, where he remained for very
many years, until, as an old man, he retired on a
pension.
Mr. Tait’s first parish was a very large one,
extending about one hundred miles along the coast.
He lived at Wollongong, which was in the centre of
the district, and took long rides to the North and to
the South alternately. It was hard work for a man
unaccustomed to riding, nevertheless the open-air
exercise was good for his health, although he could


not study much. Mrs. Tait also had her difficulties
in the house, as servant-girls were not to be had.
The only help they could get was a convict, an
Irishman named Tom. They had to provide him
with food and clothing in lieu of wages. He proved
a most valuable servant. He was cook and baker
and gardener and Minister’s man, and was faithful
and efficient in all his duties. He had, however, one
fault, when he got a holiday and a little money to
spend, he would come home incapacitated for work
for a day or two by indulgence in strong drink.
While resident in Illawarra two children were
born, a daughter and a son. Among the many
warm friends made in Illawarra may be mentioned
the Shannons, Menzies, Waughs, and Hindmarshes.
Mrs. Tait’s mother, Lillie Blair, and her two sisters,
Mary and Ann, came to Australia about this time.
Mr. Tait advised Mrs. Blair to come out, as her Uncle
Greig had died some years before and she had no
ties in Scotland, half of her family being already in
Australia. Her uncle had left her a good deal of
money, so that she was well provided for. Mrs. Blair
did not live long after coming out to Australia,
and died at Paramatta in 1842. Mary married
Dr. Fowlis of Sydney, and died within two years of
her marriage, leaving an infant daughter, Agnes, nine
months old. This child was sent home to her grand-
mother, Lady Fowlis, in Edinburgh, where she died
of rheumatic fever when she was ten years old.
Ann Bush Blair lived with Mr. and Mrs. Tait for a
short time after her mother’s death. In 1843 she
married Lithgow Coupland, a solicitor, practising in


Sydney, and attached to Mr. Want’s office. The
Couplands lived at Pyrmont, and having no family
took a great interest in their nephews and nieces,
who spent many happy days in their pleasant home
at Pyrmont.
In 1841, after a ministry of four years at
Illawarra, Mr. Tait, at the request of the Presbytery
of New South Wales, removed to Paramatta, with
the object of uniting the two Presbyterian con-
gregations in that town. In this, however, they were
not successful, as a section of one of the congregations
refused to unite with the other. Mr. Tait in
consequence laboured under great disadvantages at
Paramatta. The church was a small wooden building
and the congregation limited. His people were,
however, very much attached to him, and two of the
families composing it, the Frazers and the Stewarts,
afterwards followed him to Geelong. He took an
active part in the business of the Synod of the
Presbyterian Church, the meetings of which were held
in Sydney. Mr. Tait’s stipend was at first paid by
the Government, until, in 1846, when the disruption
of the Australian Church took place, he took the side
of the Free Church and gave up his Government
grant. His congregation, agreeing with his views
and sympathising with him in the sacrifice he was
making, contributed for his support the same amount
that he had previously got from the State, viz. JPISO.
While Mr. Tait was at Paramatta, three sons and
two daughters were born, John, George, James,
Elizabeth, and Catherine; the last only surviving
nine months.


In 1850 there was a proposal among some of the
leading Presbyterians of Sydney to bring Mr. Tait
to that city, but this was frustrated by some of his
brother ministers. After that Mr. Tait found his
position an unpleasant one. He considered that he
had been unfairly treated, and this led to strained
relations with his fellow-ministers. At Paramatta
Mr. Tait had more opportunity for study than in
his former charge, and probably too eagerly availing
himself of it, he injured his health, which was at no
time very robust. The people of his charge kindly
presented him with a pony in order that he might
take more out-of-door exercise. While resident at
Newlands Mr. Tait endeavoured to supplement his
small income by teaching, and the Elliot boys came
to him for that purpose. One very hot day their
studies were interrupted by the presence of a snake
on the door-mat which they were called upon
to dispatch. Some of the skeleton maps which
Mr. Tait made for the purpose of teaching his pupils
geography are still in existence. About this time
the Rev. W. Woolls, afterwards Dr. Woods, started
a school in Paramatta, to which Mr. Tait sent his
eldest son. Mr. Tait’s ministry in Paramatta was
not wanting in spiritual results, and at least two
of the members of his Bible-class are known to
have received great blessing therefrom. Among the
families attending his church may be mentioned the
Elliots, Howiesons, Stewarts and Frazers.
At the close of 1850 Mr. Tait visited Melbourne
at the invitation of the Rev. James Forbes. He
was greatly impressed with the importance of the


District then known as Port Philip as a sphere for
ministerial labour, and encouraged by the hearty
welcome extended to him by the Free Church
ministers, and more especially by Mr. Forbes, he
resolved to leave Paramatta and go to Melbourne.
After a ministry of nearly ten years it was not easy
for him to take leave of a people so much attached
to him, and who valued his ministry so highly, but,
on the other hand, his position in the Pres-
bytery was not comfortable, and so, with the hearty
concurrence and encouragement of Mrs. Tait, he
left Paramatta, and removed to Melbourne in
February, 1851.


CHAPTER III.
1851-1858
TRAVELLING was a very serious business in
those early days of the Colonies, and with six
young children the journey, or rather voyage,
to Melbourne was a great undertaking. The means of
transit was a small schooner called the Hirondelle ,
Captain Saunders in command, and it took ten days
or a fortnight to go from Sydney to Melbourne.
The voyagers were at sea on “ Black Thursday,”
February, 1851, a day memorable in the recollection
of the residents of the Port Philip District, on which
bush fires were raging among their homesteads, doing
an immense amount of damage.
On arrival at Melbourne the family stayed for
a few days with Mr. Forbes, who was then minister
of John Knox Free Church, Swanson Street. After-
wards the family lived in Zinc Cottage, Collingwood,
for a few months. Meanwhile Mr. Tait was occupied
preaching in and around Melbourne, and in the
country districts, until in April, 1851, the Free
Church, Little Malop Street, Geelong, called him to
be their minister. The church building, erected three
years previously, was situated in rather an out-of-
the-way and unsuitable locality, and was at this
time in rather an unfinished state, the walls on the
inside being rough and unplastered. The seats were


movable, for the convenience of a day-school which
was held in the building, and consequently were
somewhat rickety. The pulpit, too, was not a very
substantial erection, and threatened at times to
succumb to the ponderous eloquence of some of the
visiting divines. More especially at night the building
presented a very dismal appearance, the lighting being
effected by candles in tin holders placed on the top
of cedar poles about six or seven feet high. The
bell and the clock were, however, more up-to-date,
and are still in use in the High Church, Geelong.
The day-school was under the Denominational system
then in existence. McDonald was the name of the
teacher, and the names of some of the boys were,
George Graham, Andrew Crowl, Henry and Charles
Pawsey, and Tom Gumming. Mr. Tait visited and
examined the school periodically, and exercised a
general superintendence over it. Some of the family
attended this school for a short time, but soon after
the eldest son, William, was sent as a boarder (the
first boarder) to the Melbourne Academy, just opened
by Mr. Robert Lawson, in 1851, at the corner of
Little Collins Street and Spring Street, Melbourne,
and his brothers John and George accompanied him
the following year.
The year 1851 was memorable in the history of
the Colony for at least two events. First, there was
the separation of the Colony of Victoria, formerly
known as Australia Felix, from New South Wales,
to commemorate which the first of July (Separation
Day) was ever afterwards kept as a public holiday,
until federation again united the different Colonies.


And second, and chiefly, there was the discovery of
gold, which completely changed the whole order of
living in the Colony. This latter especially added
greatly to the difficulties of church life, and even
more to the trials and discomforts of the domestic
arrangements. Provisions of every kind became very
expensive, and a load of water, brought from the
Barwon river to the house, cost ten shillings. But
Mr. Tait did not allow the excitement and distraction
of this unsettled state of things to turn him
aside from the earnest prosecution of his work
as minister; and Mrs. Tait was so efficient and
economical a housekeeper that, notwithstanding all
these disadvantages, the family lived in comparative
comfort.
They first lived in a house in Bellarine Street,
not far from the church. It was one of a row of
brick cottages built right on the street without any
front garden or verandah. This was found to be a
disadvantage to their cost, as one night thieves
entered the house by the front window, and stole a
number of valuables, including a traveller’s desk,
which was afterwards found forced open on the
beach by some school-boys, who, hearing of the
robbery, returned it to Mr. Tait. They also stole
a valuable coloured miniature likeness of Captain
Greig which Mrs. Tait highly prized and which was
never recovered.
That winter of 1851 was a very trying one to
Mr. and Mrs. Tait, as the roads and footpaths of
the town were then in a very primitive state, and
mud and dirt were met with everywhere. Mrs. Tait


on one occasion lost her shoe in the mud attempting
to go to church.
A son, Lithgow, was bom in Bellarine Street, on
the 15th of June, 1851. The family left Bellarine
Street about the end of the year, and removed to a
two-storied house in Yarra Street, one of a terrace
—Foster’s—opposite the Wesleyan chapel. Although
somewhat small, it was a great improvement upon
the first; and here they were very comfortable.
Unfortunately, about a year after they had taken
it, the house was sold, and the family had to move
to a much less convenient house in Myers Street,
where they were hampered for room and otherwise
incommoded, Mrs. Tait’s housekeeping skill and
ingenuity being taxed to the utmost. Fortunately
three of the boys were away at school in Melbourne
most of the year, being only home during the
holidays, and the eldest daughter, Lillie, was also at
Miss Loftus’s school in Melbourne for about a year
or so (in 1851-1852). Lithgow Coupland, Mrs.
Tait’s brother-in-law, died at Brisbane about this
time, and Mrs. Coupland came to live with the
family in Geelong.
Probably it was a sense of the discomfort their
minister and his family were experiencing in the
very inconvenient house in Myers Street that led the
members of Mr. Tait’s congregation to devise means
to obtain a more comfortable residence for them.
The originator of this movement was Mr. John
Armstrong, of Bush Station, who at all times proved
himself a staunch friend and helper to Mr. Tait.
The result was the purchase of a newly-built double


fronted brick cottage —7, Skene Sti’eet, Newtown—at
a cost of i? 2,000, one-half of which was paid by
the congregation, the other half being raised on
mortgage. Towards the end of 1853 the family
moved into this comfortable and commodious manse.
A few months after they were settled a daughter,
Annie Catherine, was born, on the 6th May, 1854.
Meanwhile the congregation in Little Malop
Street, at first few in number, had increased greatly,
and was still rapidly growing, until in 1853-4 the
accommodation afforded in the church building, by
no means a small one, was found insufficient to
contain all who wished to come. Mr. Tait was then,
and indeed up to the time of his death, the most
popular preacher in the town, if not in the Colony,
and members of all denominations came to hear him,
and some of them joined his church and became
Presbyterians. At this time people were arriving in
the Colony in great numbers, attracted by the reports
of fabulously rich discoveries of gold, and Geelong
was receiving its full share of additional population,
so that the town was rapidly growing both in the
number of its inhabitants and the wealth of its
citizens. The managers of the church, therefore,
resolved to enlarge the building to accommodate
the rapidly increasing number of its members and
adherents. This they did in 1854, by taking out
a portion of the western side-wall of the church
and building a large addition in the form of a nave,
leaving the former ends of the church as transepts.
The pulpit was transferred to the centre of the eastern
wall,, a new and very handsome structure taking the


place of the former very dilapidated erection. This
new pulpit was afterwards sold to the Reformed
Presbyterians, and is still in use in their church in
Fenwick Street. Comfortable fixed pews were also
substituted for the former rickety seats, and handsome
chandeliers took the place of the tin candle-holders
of former times, the whole alterations and additions
making a very commodious and comfortable place
of 'worship, which, despite the unfavourable position
in which it was situated, was invariably well-filled
with worshippers. These additions cost £2,000; half
of which was raised on mortgage at 15 per cent.,
so dear was money at that time. About the same
time, in 1854, the school-house and teacher’s
dwelling in Gheringhap Street were built at a cost
of £4,200, the Denominational School Board paying
£2,800 of it, and the Little Malop Street Congre-
gation £1,400. There was also a school building in
Wellington Street, Ashby (now- West Geelong), where
a Denominational school was carried on under the
auspices of the Little Malop Street congregation.
When Mr. Tait became minister of the Little
Malop Street congregation there were two elders in
the Session, Mr. John Armstrong and Mr. John
Beattie, both of whom were very excellent godly men,
and they assisted Mr. Tait very much in the admini-
stration of the spiritual affairs of the congregation.
Mr. Tait acted as Session Clerk himself from the
very beginning of his ministry in Geelong, and to
its close; except, of course, when he was absent in
Scotland. The Minutes of the Session were written
out by him with great care in his own beautiful


handwriting, and are still admired by all who see the
book in which they are preserved. Mr. Tait and
the elders visited the members of the congregation
very systematically, reading the Scriptures and offering
up prayer in their homes. Mr. John Stewart, who
had been an elder in Mr. Tait’s congregation in
Paramatta, having in 1852 come with his family
to Geelong, was asked to sit in the Session as
an associate-member, which he did. By a curious
coincidence all the members of Session at that time
were named John, and no one of them had any
other Christian name. There was the Rev. John
Tait, and Messrs. John Armstrong, John Beattie,
and John Stewart. As the congregation increased
three additional elders were elected in 1854, and
joined the Session, viz. Messrs. John Wood, Neil
McCallum, and James T. Mackerras. A very solemn
event occurred in connection with this election of
elders by the sudden death of Mr. James Stewart.
Mr. Stewart had been an elder in Scotland, and was
one of those elected on this occasion, he having the
largest number of votes, being greatly esteemed for
his worth and excellence as a Christian man. His
death took place two days after the result of the
election was announced. Mr. John Stewart was
elected an elder at the same time, but for reasons
which appeared satisfactory to Mr. Tait he declined
to accept office, being willing, however, to act as he
had hitherto done, as an associate-member of Session.
This being the first ordination of elders since Mr.
Tait became minister of the congregation, and, indeed,
for many years, it was a very solemn and interesting
C


occasion. Mr. Tait preached from the text, “Take
heed therefore unto yourselves, and to all the flock,
over which the Holy Ghost hath made you over-
seers, to feed the Church of God, which He hath
purchased with His own blood”—Acts xx. 28. In
September of the same year, 1854, five deacons
were elected and ordained to that office. During
the early years of Mr. Tait’s ministry in Geelong,
the Thursday before the Communion was observed
as a day of humiliation and prayer,—the Fast Day
as it was called, —and public worship was held in
the church at eleven o’clock in the forenoon and
seven o’clock in the evening. The second service
on the Sabbath was held at three o’clock in the
afternoon during the winter months, with the object
of encouraging and inciting the members of the
congregation to personal and family religion on the
Sabbath evenings.
A large addition was made to the membership of
the Church during the years 1853-4, as many as forty
joining at one communion. This entailed a great
deal of hard work on Mr. Tait in maintaining all
the services and also in having the oversight of so
large a congregation. Besides having to interview so
many new members, several cases of discipline had
to be dealt with, taxing his skill and patience to the
utmost. About this time it was proposed that a
Missionary should be appointed in connection with
the Little Malop Street congregation, and although
the project was not carried out in the way originally
intended, the result was the formation of what is
now the Geelong Town Mission and Bible Woman’s


Association. This Association is supported by all the
Protestant Churches in the town, and has done
an immense amount of very useful work in all the
years since.
In addition to the work in connection with his
own congregation, Mr. Tait, as Clerk of the Free
Church Synod, which position he occupied from the
time of his arrival in Victoria, had a great amount
of heavy work to do, more especially in connection
with the negotiations for Union with the Established
and United Presbyterian churches which were then
in progress. On him devolved the onerous duty of
drawing up all the most important documents in
connection with the long and trying deliberations on
the Union question. His family well remember the
piles of pamphlets and documents that accumulated
in his study, and can realise what labour and close
application the unravelling and replying to the
numerous statements and counter-statements involved ;
and more especially when his own brethren in the
Free Church Synod, the Rev. Arthur Paul, William
Miller and others, endeavoured to thwart, hinder and
block—by irritating appeals and threats—the Union
when fairly in sight.
This more than any other strain of his heavy work
told upon Mr. Tait’s health and fatally undermined
his never robust constitution. The members of his
congregation, however, showed their appreciation of
his devoted and unremitting labours by presenting
him with a handsome silver tea-service, with
the following inscription engraved thereon:—“This
service, together with a purse containing one hundred


sovereigns, presented to the Rev. John Tait by the
congregation of the Free Presbyterian Church, Little
Malop Street, Geelong, on the 14th day of October,
1856, as a mark of their esteem for him as their
Pastor.” It is interesting to know that this tea-
service, or part of it, has been frequently used at the
Annual Tea Meeting of the Geelong Town Mission
and Bible Woman’s Association, which Mr. Tait was
instrumental in founding, and that too at the table
provided by members of his former congregation.
The whole of the one hundred pounds received with
this service was used by Mr. Tait to pay Mr. Lawson’s
account for the boarding and schooling of his four
sons at the Scotch College, Melbourne.
Daring these busy years of Mr. Tait’s life work
in Geelong, from 1852 to 1856, three of his sons—
William, John and George all the time, and James
part of the time—were boarders at the Melbourne
Academy, Spring Street, afterwards, in 1854, removed
to Eastern Hill and called the Scotch College, a
building for the purpose having been erected by the
Presbyterian Church. Here they enjoyed the very
best educational advantages that the Colony could
afford at a great cost of money, however, to their
devoted parents, which they very ungrudgingly bore.
His sons remained at the Scotch College until the
close of 1856, when Mr. Robert Lawson retired
from the Rectorship. The eldest son, William, then
entered the service of the London Chartered Bank of
Australia, Geelong, in December of that year; and
during the year 1857 his sons John and George
attended a very good grammar-school situated just


opposite the Manse in Skene Street, recently opened
under the charge of the Rev. George Oakley Vance.
His son James had already gone to this school the
year before.
In October, 1856, Mr. Tait’s congregation, and
himself more especially, suffered a severe loss by the
death of Mr. John Armstrong. He had been a very
true friend and helper to Mr. Tait. He was, as we
have said, mainly instrumental in securing the Manse;
and many other good services he rendered to the
family. He occupied a large pew in the corner of
the church, with a table in the centre of it, round
which his large family, mostly sons, sat. The Session
recorded “ the great sorrow with which his loss afflicted
them, and their deep sense of the great services he
had rendered to the Free Church cause, both by the
faithful and zealous discharge of the duties of the
eldership in the congregation, his wise counsel
and Christian spirit in the higher Courts, and his
magnificent liberality in contributing to the funds of
the Church.” A monument was afterwards erected
to his memory by the congregation over his grave
in the Eastern cemetery.
The year 1857 was a very busy and important
one in Mr. Tait’s life, both in respect to his own
congregational work and in the Courts in connection
with the Union question. Unfortunately, however,
his weak state of health began to show itself in
more serious forms. Bleeding at the nose became
distressingly frequent, and other signs of a weakened
constitution began to be apparent. The members of
his congregation were most sympathetic and kind,


and in October of that year they presented him
with a dog-cart and a horse and harness. The letter
accompanying the gift is still preserved and reads
thus:—“ Permit us on behalf of your congregation
to congratulate you on the measure of health and
strength to which you have been restored [Mr. Tait
had been laid aside altogether for about seven or
eight weeks], and to express the gratification we feel
in the prospect of enjoying your ministrations for,
we hope, many years to come. We know that the
arduous duties of your office necessarily entail upon
you much close and trying study, and render a large
amount of exercise in the open air indispensable to
the due preservation of both mental and physical
vigour, and with a view to facilitate your obtaining
this great desideratum, and as a small token of
our esteem for you as our Pastor, we beg your
acceptance of this dog-cart, horse and harness, with
the expression of our earnest hope that you may
be long spared to use them.—Signed, on behalf of
the congregation, Wm. Strachan, J. G. Carstairs,
J. T. Mackerras, J. Guthrie, Hugh McPhiliimy;
Geelong, 6th October, 1857.” At the same time
they built a stable and coach-house at the rear of
the Manse.
The Annual Report of the Little Malop Street
Congregation for 1857 disclosed a very prosperous
state of affairs. The contributions of the congrega-
tion amounted to nearly i? 2,000, the minister’s stipend
was raised from £5OO to i'6oo. There were three
flourishing Sabbath-schools in connection with the
Church. One in the Church building, under the


superintendence of Mr. Thomas Brown; another in
the Gheringhap Street school building, under the
superintendence of Mr. James T. Mackerras; and a
third in Ashby, under the superintendence of
Mr. Robert Shirra. Mr. Tait’s sons, for a time
at least, attended one or other of these schools,
either as teachers or scholars. The day-school in
Gheringhap Street was at first under Mr. Ross, and
then under Mr. Andrew Burn, who was formerly a
master in the Scotch College, Melbourne. The
attendance numbered one-hundred and fifty. The
Ashby school was under Mr. Thomas Fargie, and
numbered eighty-three in attendance.
At the close of the year 1857, the Synod of the
Free Church of Victoria appointed Dr. Mackay and
Mr. Tait a deputation to visit Scotland to lay before
the Free Church there the present position of the
affairs of the Synod, and to solicit their counsel and
assistance. Mr. Tait called a special meeting of his
Session, on the 18th of December, and stated “that
he had been appointed by the Synod to proceed to
Scotland with the view of laying the present state
of the Church before the General Assembly of the
Free Church of Scotland, and procuring an additional
supply of ministers; that the present state of his
health was such as to very much unfit him for duty,
and that his medical advisers had strongly urged
upon him the necessity of immediate rest and
change of scene; that he was disposed to regard the
appointment as a call in Providence which he could
not well set aside, and as the brethren of the Synod
had agreed to supply the vacancy during his absence,


which would not extend beyond ten months, the
congregation would not be allowed to suffer.” The
Session unanimously approved of the appointment,
and acquiesced in the temporary absence of their
minister, “believing it to be calculated, under the
Divine blessing, to be of eminent service to the
Church generally, and especially beneficial to the
congregation, as the most likely means of restoring
the health of their Pastor.” A meeting of the
congregation was held on the 22nd of December,
which also approved of the appointment and agreed
to Mr. Tait’s going. He preached for the last time
before his departure on Sabbath, 27th December,
from the text, “ Pray for us: for we trust we have a
good conscience, in all things willing to live honestly.
But I beseech you rather to do this, that I may be
restored to you the sooner”—Heb. xiii. 18, 19.
He preached also for Mr. Hetherington in Scots
Church, Melbourne, and for Mr. Divorty at South
Yarra, before leaving.


CHAPTER IV.
1858
IT had been arranged that Mr. Tait should proceed
in the ship Anglesey, which was timed to sail
from Melbourne on the 12th January, 1858, and
that his eldest daughter should accompany him.
Friends in the congregation were very kind in making
arrangements for their departure. Mr. Tait sent a
farewell message to Mrs. Tait by the pilot, who left
the ship at five o’clock on the evening of the 13th
of January, and on the voyage he wrote very long
letters to her and to each of his sons, which they
still possess and greatly prize. The wind being
contrary, the ship had to sail west and go round Van
Dieman’s Land, and so crossed the track of the
North Briton, on, as Mr. Tait said, “that memor-
able morning when we sighted land on our voyage
out nearly twenty-one years ago.” The first four
Sundays he preached, as he said afterwards, rather
unwisely, both in the cuddy and in the steerage of
the ship, until a severe illness compelled him to
desist. It began on the 11th of February, when the
ship was nearing Cape Horn, with bleeding at the
nose, which continued for a day and a night. The
ship’s doctor gave him some medicine which so
disagreed with him as to bring on a severe attack
of bile, from which he suffered great pain for three


days and three nights. He then set aside the doctor
and took some pills Dr. Motherwell, of Melbourne,
had given him, which gave him relief, but it was
three weeks before he came round. “At the time,” —
he wrote in a letter to Mrs. Tait, —“ I had some
very solemn thoughts of death and a watery grave.
After a painful struggle I was enabled to commit
myself into the hands of God, and to rest in simple
confidence on the Redeemer, and then felt calm and
resigned. I w'as comforted, under the inexpressibly
painful feeling of being so far separated from you
and the dear children, by the assurance that God
could make my death a greater blessing to you than
my living, but I was much distressed by the thought
of the long, long time you would be in hearing
the painful news, and of the desolation poor Lillie
[his daughter, who was with him] would feel. But
the Lord mercifully delivered me from all my fears.
I gradually recovered strength, and while I began to
be much more careful of ray health, I was also
spiritually quickened and took much more to the
Word and prayer.” There were about 300 people on
board the ship, and Mr. Tait described in his letters
to his family very minutely and interestingly all about
the ship, the officers and crew, the passengers, the
provisions, and other particulars. The Rev. J. Baird,
of Ballarat, and Mrs. Barnet (widow of the Rev.
John Barnet, of Bellarine, who was drowned in
attempting to cross a creek near Camperdown) and
her children were among the passengers; also the
late Sir Frederick (then Mr.) Sargood and his family.
The voyage lasted just one-hundred days, and they


arrived on the 22nd April. Mr. Tait and his daughter,
together with Mr. Baird and Mrs. Barnet, went ashore
at Portsmouth, where they visited the Queen’s yacht
and the Duke of Marlborough, one of the largest
men-of-war in the British Navy at that time. From
Portsmouth they proceeded to London by train.
Mr. Tait was very much struck with the great
contrast between the thickly-peopled and highly-
cultivated country through which they passed and
that through which the railway from Geelong to
Melbourne passed.
On reaching London their first object was to get
the letters that had been addressed to the care of
Messrs. James Nisbet and Co., the booksellers. They
went to Regent Square Church on the Sabbath, and
saw Dr. Hamilton, the minister, after the service.
Mr. Tait spent the afternoon of that day with
Dr. Hamilton, who was much interested in Australian
Church history. Mr. Tait and his daughter visited
Parliament House and Westminster Abbey, and
then hastened on to Moffat, by train, as Mr. Tait
wished to rest there for a time before going on to
Edinburgh.
He was greatly delighted to see once more “his
native hills, the dear old village, and the family
house.” They arrived at eight o’clock in the evening
of the same day that they left London. “I talked
with my brother,” he wrote, “ till long past midnight,
and scarcely slept a wink from the rush of tender
memories and sacred recollections that passed through
my mind.” After spending a very happy week at
Moffat, Mr. Tait went on to Edinburgh, and took


up his lodgings with Mrs. Barnet, at her father’s
house, where he was made very comfortable. Dr.
Mackay met him in Edinburgh, and for the next
two or three weeks they were busy interviewing
leading ministers on the Union question. While in
Edinburgh Mr. Tait consulted Professor Miller, one
of the most eminent medical men in Scotland, who,
after examining him very carefully, prescribed for
him, and cautioned him not to preach or speak
more than was absolutely necessary.
Dr. Mackay and Mr. Tait were very cordially
welcomed by the Free Church of Scotland, as Deputies
from the Australian Church, and on the 31st of May
they spoke in the Assembly. Dr. Mackay spoke
first, and then Mr. Tait. “ After the first trepidation
was over, in facing the tremendous audience,” he
said, “I got on very comfortably, and was listened
to with most marked attention.” A summary of his
speech is given in Sutherland’s “ History of the
Presbyterian Church of The mission of
the deputation was entirely successful, and Mr. Tait
was greatly cheered by the cordial manner in which he
was received everywhere in Scotland. Following the
doctor’s instructions, Mr. Tait only preached twice
while in Scotland. The first time he preached was
on the 6th June, at East Kilbride, in the church of
Mr. (now the Hon.) James Balfour’s brother. After
travelling about in Scotland for some weeks, he
returned to Moffat, where he again preached in
July from the text, “God forbid that I should
(') See Chapter VI.


glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ,
by whom the world is crucified unto me, and I
unto the world” (Galations vi. 14). But now, and
indeed long before this, all his thoughts were
homeward: “ I am wearying very much,” he said,
“to be home.” And so he began to prepare for the
voyage back to Australia.
During Mr. Tait’s absence his pulpit was supplied
by ministers from Melbourne and elsewhere; the
Revs. Dr. Cairns, Donald McDonald, James Nish, and
others. Each minister acted as Moderator of Session
as occasion required, and Mr. J. T. Mackerras ably
acted as Session Clerk, and saw that the arrangements
for pulpit supply were earned out.
The same ship Anglesey in which Mr. Tait
and his daughter went to England was timed to
sail for Melbourne about the beginning of August,
and they took their return passage in her. They
left Moffat at the end of July and came to London,
where they met Mr. Balfour, who had recently come
to England on business, and with him they visited
several places of note. They went with Mr. Balfour
to hear Spurgeon, who was then preaching in the
Music Hall, Surrey Gardens, while the Metropolitan
Tabernacle was being built, to audiences numbering
10,000 people. Miss Tait went on board the
Anglesey at the Docks, but Mr. Tait stayed a little
longer in London and joined the ship at Plymouth.
In a letter to Mrs. Tait, dated Bth August, he
writes: “I am writing on the very same little cabin
table or desk, in the same ship, and in very similar
circumstances as when I wrote you my last note


before leaving the shores of Victoria. I left London
for Plymouth at ten o’clock on Friday, the 6th
August, having gone to visit the Coliseum the evening
before. We ascend to the outside of a magnificent
dome and look down upon a view of Paris by
moonlight. It was very splendid, and not to be
distinguished from the reality. My only regret was
that dear Lillie was not with me. The journey from
London to Plymouth was, in one respect, the most
pleasant since I left you, because every mile of it
was bringing me nearer my love. I was in great
spirits, and enjoyed the beautiful day and the
beautiful country. The fields were white unto the
harvest, and male and female reapers were busy on
every side. Next morning the Anglesey came in,
and I joined Lillie and the Simpsons [the Rev.
Patrick Simpson and his wife, who were afterwards
stationed at Horsham for many years]. I have now
got my little apartment put in tolerable order, and
though all is noise and bustle outside, I feel happy
in its seclusion, and next to the enjoyment of
having you in it is the pleasure of thus communing
with you. I have rather more luggage in it than
when I came, and, among other things, is a fine new
tin case, rather larger than your old one, and I mean
it for you. Yesterday we went to see the Royal
Albert Bridge, a piece of engineering work next
in importance to the tubular bridge over Menai
Straits. It is a most extraordinary work, and I bring
a description and view of it with me. There is also
a famous breakwater here within which we are now
lying, and outside, at some distance, is the Eddystone


lighthouse. And now, dearest, I must bid you adieu,
commending you, as I now especially do, to the care
of our heavenly Father, and the dear ones with you.
Not long after you read this I hope to be with you,
and to find you all safe in His gracious keeping.”
This is not only the last letter that Mr. Tait wrote
to Mrs. Tait from England, but it was probably the
last letter ever received from him by her, as, after
his return from Scotland, he never left home for
any length of time. Mr. Tait preached seven times
on board ship on his voyage back to Australia,
his health having improved greatly. Mrs. Tait,
and indeed all the family, were eagerly looking
out for the arrival of the Anglesey , and friends
in the congregation were vying with one another
as to who should give the very earliest news of her
appearance in Australian waters. Early in November,
after a passage of ninety days, the good ship came
in, and Mr. Tait and Miss Tait received a warm
welcome home. Mr. Tait conducted the Thursday
evening service in his own church following his
return, preaching from the text, “But we, brethren,
being taken from you for a short time in presence,
not in heart, endeavoured the more abundantly to
see your face with great desire” (1 Thess. ii. 17).
A public meeting was held later on to welcome
Mr. Tait back to Geelong.
Mr. Tait at once took up the full work of his
charge, preaching twice every Sunday and conducting
the Thursday evening service, for which latter he
always made very careful preparation.


CHAPTER V.
1859-1860
THE year 1859 was a very busy one for Mr. Tail,
both in his own congregation in Geelong and
in the Church Courts in Melbourne. Early
in the year, on the 10th January, a meeting of
the congregation was held, when the result of an
election of three additional elders was announced,
viz. Messrs. John Guthrie, James Balfour, and
James Campbell. Two additional trustees, viz.
John Guthrie and Thomas Brown, were elected at
the same meeting, also a new Board of Management
for the year.
Mr. Tait, as chairman of the meeting, fully
explained the new basis of union among the
Presbyterian Churches in the Colony, as approved by
the Free Church Synod at its meeting on the first
Tuesday of December, 1858. It was unanimously
agreed “that the congregation heartily approves of
the basis of union, and desires to see it accomplished
without delay.” A proposal to erect a new church
building was also brought forward at this meeting
and duly discussed and agreed to. An influential
committee was appointed to carry the proposal into
effect. Mr. Tait himself, however, was not at all
anxious to have a new church, and was more


concerned about the spiritual welfare and prosperity
of his people.
In April of that year, 1859, the Union of the
Presbyterian Churches of Victoria, for which Mr. Tait
had laboured so earnestly and for so long was
at last consummated. On the 7th of that month
the Synods of the various churches proposing to
unite met separately for the last time, and at
twelve o’clock they met together in Scots Church,
Melbourne, and after preliminary services proceeded
to elect a Moderator. The Rev. James Clow, the
oldest minister in the church and the first who held
regular services in the Colony, was chosen. Fifty-five
ministers in all joined the Union at that time. In
the afternoon of the same day the members of the
General Assembly, as the highest Court of the United
Church was called, attended at North Melbourne
to witness the laying of the foundation-stone of
a new church, to be called “ Union Church,” in
commemoration of the Union just consummated.
Sir Henry Barkley, then Governor of the Colony,
performed the ceremony.
At seven o’clock on the eventful day a public
meeting was held in the Old Exhibition Building,
Bateman’s Hill, North Melbourne, when addresses
were delivered by prominent ministers and laymen
of the church on the principles of Presbyterianism
and the advantages of Christian Union. Two of
Mr. Tait’s sons, who were then attending at the
Scotch College, were present on that auspicious
occasion, and can remember the enthusiasm that
pervaded the large assembly. Dr. Caims was the
D


first and chief speaker, then Mr. David Ogilvie,
followed by other ministers and laymen. The United
Synod met the following day for the despatch of
business The Rev. Irving Hetherington proposed
that the Rev. John Tait, of Geelong, should be
appointed Clerk of the General Assembly, which was
unanimously agreed to.
Mr. Tait continued to prosecute his arduous
duties both in his own congregation and in the
Church Courts almost to the close of the year, not-
withstanding his declining health. He endeavoured
to sustain his failing strength by means of all
kinds of nourishing food, until, on the 18th of
December, he preached his last sermon in the evening,
having preached in the morning of the same day
as well.
The doctor, thinking that a change to the
seaside would do him good, recommended him to
go to Queenscliffe. He went there accompanied by
Mrs. Tait. But the effect was disastrous: he could
not sleep or lie down, and his breathing became
difficult. They returned therefore as speedily as
possible. From that time he grew gradually weaker,
only finding refreshment and nourishment in taking
grapes. At the beginning of February his illness
took a very serious turn, and on Sabbath, the 12th
of the month, the congregation assembled in Little
Malop Street were startled by the announcement that
their minister was at the point of death.
The Rev. I. Hetherington had come down from
Melbourne to preach, and he was called up on
Saturday night to break the sad news to the


members of the family who were at home, and
afterwards to the people in the church. Much
earnest prayer was made for him, not only by his
own congregation, but also by many others, and his
life was prolonged for a time. Dr. Robert Hope,
who had retired from practice and was living at
Batesford, was called in, and his treatment gave
great relief; indeed, his opinion of the case differed
altogether from that of Dr. Carstairs, who till then
had been the chief medical adviser. But the disease
had got too firm a hold of the system to admit of
any permanent improvement, and for five weeks
he lingered on amid various fluctuations, until on
Monday, the 19th of March, 1860, he departed
this life and entered into his eternal rest and
reward. His sons George and James were the only
members of the family absent from home at the
time, they being at the Scotch College, Melbourne.
And Mr. William Grant added to many other
thoughtful kindnesses that of driving up for them
on Sunday, and bringing them down in time to
receive their father’s last message and blessing. His
sons well remember that solemn and sad occasion
when they were taken into his room to hear
those never-to-be-forgotten farewell words: “ Take
Jesus Christ for your Saviour, and make him your
Friend.”
The home at the Manse was now indeed desolate,
and poor Mrs. Tait was greatly distressed and
bowed down with sorrow, but she had many
comforters, and very much sympathy from numerous
friends. There was a very large and representative


attendance at the funeral, at which the four sons
of the deceased took part as chief mourners. The
Little Malop Street congregation afterwards erected
a monument over the grave of their late pastor in
the Western Cemetery, Geelong, with the following
inscription:—
ERECTED
BY THE PRESBYTERIAN CONGREGATION, LITTLE MALOP STREET,
GEELONG,
fn 4Hemor»
OF THEIR LATE PASTOR,
THE REV. JOHN TAIT,
WHO DIED ON THE IQTH MARCH, iB6O,
AGED 50 YEARS.
He laboured for 14 years as a zealous minister of
the Gospel in the Presbyterian Church of New South
Wales, and for the last 9 years of his life as Pastor of
the Little Malop Street Congregation, Geelong. By
his death the Church has lost one of its ablest and
most useful Ministers, and the Congregation a faithful
and devoted Pastor.


CHAPTER VI.
ON the following Sabbath, after the funeral of
their late beloved pastor, the congregation
of Little Malop Street Church attended in
large numbers to hear the funeral sermon which was
preached by the Rev. Dr. Cairns. Dr. Cairns took
for his text the 10th verse of the 23rd Chapter of
Numbers, “Let me die the death of the righteous,
and let my last end be like his.” The sermon
appeared in full in the “Australian Messenger” of
April, 1860. “In his sermon Dr. Cairns dwelt on
four prominent attributes in the late Mr. Tait’s
mental constitution; first, the vigour and clearness
of his intellect; second, his singular honesty and
uprightness; third, his disinterestedness; and fourth,
his unwearied diligence.” With regard to his efforts
in promoting the Union movement, Dr. Cairns said:
“ From the commencement to the close of this
protracted discussion Mr. Tait held the chief place as
counsellor. He was selected to prepare the Articles
of Union and to guide the deliberations of the
Committee, because in the opinion of his brethren he
was best qualified to occupy so difficult a position.”
Speaking of Mr. Tait as a pastor, Dr. Caims said;
“ He was an able witness for the Lord of the Temple
—he was a fearless standard-bearer-one who never
shrank from the task of declaring the whole counsel


of God, and never did human lips publish the
message of salvation with greater fullness, with greater
distinction or with greater solemnity.”
The following tribute to Mr. Tait’s memory was
engrossed in the records of the General Assembly of
the Presbyterian Church of Victoria:—“ Called by
God’s providence to fill up with a new name the
official position held in this General Assembly by
the late Rev. John Tait, the brethren have agreed
to enter on their records this brief memorial of
respectful esteem for the departed, and sorrow for
their common loss. They found him skilful in
the laws and customs of the Church, painstaking
and accurate in conducting its business, and wise in
counsel. Possessed of these excellences, his influence
was deeply felt in the negotiations for uniting the
divided sections of the Presbyterian Church in the
Colony. He was permitted to rejoice in the con-
summation of his labours and prayers; to participate
in the first General Assembly of the Presbyterian
Church of Victoria; and, as its first Clerk, to initiate
its records. Believing that his work on earth was
finished, and that the Master he served has called
him hence to receive the Christian confessor’s crown,
the brethren of this Assembly bow submissively before
His sovereign will, and ask His grace to follow in
his steps, and to carry on the work he was permitted
with them to commence.”
While in his public and Church duties Mr. Tait
was so faithful and true, he was even more so in
his private and family relations. His letters to
Mrs. Tait, whom he always called “my dear love,”


show what a kind and affectionate husband he was,
and that not only when he was away from home,
but at all times. His children can all testify to his
being a good, kind and loving father, and have many
tender recollections of his many acts of kindness and
love. Mr. Tait was particularly methodical and neat
in all his habits and ways. His study was always
tidy, and as the family never had a drawing-room
in the house, the study was always used as such. He
always wrote at a desk that lay on his table. The
drawers and pigeon-holes in his bookcase were always
neatly arranged and everything in order. “ A place
for everything, and everything in its place,” was not
only his rule, but his practice. A notebook is still
preserved in which is recorded the date, text, and
place in which every sermon was preached by him,
from the time of his coming to Geelong, to the very
last sermon, with occasional remarks in shorthand
about attendance, weather, etc. An intimate friend
of the family bears testimony to his habits of prayer
and reading the Word of God, and also that his
study was the scene of long and earnest seasons of
prayer. His conduct in speech and behaviour was
at all times becoming a minister of Christ, although
he could enjoy a good hearty laugh, and even
perpetrate a pun when occasion offered. A gentleman
in Geelong used to relate that at meetings of the
Bible Society Committee when anything really witty
or humorous was said, his laugh was the loudest and
most hearty of all the members. An old gentleman
of the name of Wright, who was married by Mr. Tait
to a Miss Sutherland, was very fond of telling that


after the marriage, when his wife was telling them
of all her relations and friends who were named
Sutherland, Mr. Tait said to her, “Well, you have
got the (w)right name now." The influence of his
life as well as of his preaching was deep and
abiding. His sons have vivid recollections of an old
gentleman’s very hearty recognition of their relation-
ship to their father, and of his saying how well he
remembered a sermon Mr. Tait preached forty years
before, repeating the text, and adding his testimony
to the beneficial effect of his life as well as of his
preaching. And not only so, but everywhere one
went in the country districts, or even in other
Colonies, people who heard Mr. Tait preach bore
testimony to the vivid impression his earnest words
made upon their minds and hearts.
Mr. Tait wrote all his sermons out in exquisitely
neat shorthand, on letter-size paper, and all on two
pages opposite each other, so that as the manuscript
lay on the pulpit Bible in front of him, he did not
require to turn over a leaf in reading it, and so
good was his eyesight and so fluently did he deliver
his discourse, that few people had any idea that
he read at all. All his sermons were kept in
a small tin box, which, together with most of the
books of his extensive library, were handed over to
his son George when he became a minister of
the Presbyterian Church of Victoria. Six of these
sermons were written out in ordinary writing by one
or other of his sons after their father’s death, and
they have been again transcribed in clearer hand-
writing, and form a neat and convenient volume, and


a fitting sequel to these memorials. They are as
follows, viz.:—
1. Pre-Communion Sermon on Psalm li. 17:
“ The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit: a broken
and a contrite heart, O God, Thou wilt not despise.”
2. Communion Sermon on Isaiah xxviii. 16:
“Therefore thus saith the Lord God, Behold, I lay
in Zion for a foundation a stone, a tried stone, a
precious comer stone, a sure foundation: he that
believeth shall not make haste.”
3. Ordinary Sermon on Romans vi. 16: “ Know
ye not, that to whom ye yield yourselves servants to
obey, his servants ye are whom ye obey; whether
of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness?”
4. His last Communion Sermon, a memorable one,
on Isaiah xxv. 9: “And it shall be said in that day,
Lo, this is our God; we have waited for Him, and
He will save us; This is the Lord; we have waited
for Him, we will be glad and rejoice in his salvation.”
5. His last Sermon, preached in Little Malop
Street Church on the evening of 18th December,
1859, Psalm cxvi. 11, taking in the last clause of
the 10th verse: “ I was greatly afflicted: I said in
my haste, All men are liars.”
6. A short Sermon or Address on 3rd Epistle of
John i. 2: “Beloved, I wish above all things that
thou mayest prosper and be in health, even as thy
soul prospereth.”
Also a Special Sermon on the occasion of the
Disruption of the Australian Church, on Revelation
xiv. 4: “ These are they which follow the Lamb
whithersoever He goeth.”


Perhaps the most memorable occasion in Mr.
Tait’s life was when, after having striven for the
Union of the Presbyterian Churches of Victoria so
ably and persistently, in the month of May, 1858, he
faced that tremendous audience in the Free Chui-ch
Assembly Hall, Edinburgh, and spoke on the Union
question. The following are a few extracts from
the epitome of this speech as given in Sutherland’s
“History of the Presbyterian Church of Victoria”:—
“Mr. Tait mentioned that he had laboured in
Australia for twenty-one years. He had during that
period read about and sympathised with the con-
tendings and struggles of the Free Church. In the
Colonies the principles they developed were those
of the Free Church; both the freedom of the Colonial
Church Courts and the rights of the people being
practically acknowledged. . . .” He proceeded to
show the evils of disunion in Australia. “ The whole
of the Presbyterians resident in the country are but
a part of the population, and when divided into
three or four sections, having little co-operation and
sometimes ... in direct antagonism, it weakens
the common influence they might exert for good;
and where their denominational peculiarities are
prominently put forth and vehemently contended for,
it tends to shake the common platform which they
occupy and drive people away from Presbyterianism
altogether. With an Episcopal Church having more
than double their numbers, and with the great
activity and thorough unity exhibited on the part
of other Churches, Presbyterianism has but a poor
chance. By Union they had no desire to aggrandise


their own Church, as had been falsely asserted, but
desired it with a view to enable them the better to
promote the spiritual good of a greater number of
their own Presbyterian people, and to accomplish
the great purposes for which the Church exists. And
if these are not accomplished, if souls are not
converted, and the people of God nourished and
fed, of what avail was everything else ? In fact, the
secret conviction of this, their own felt necessities,
and the mere instinct of self-preservation, of keeping
alive the knowledge and life they already had, led
to actual union among the people. The universal
feeling of those living in the same district was to
receive with open arms whatever Presbyterian minister
settled among them, and if he was a prudent and
earnest man, laying the stress of his teachings in
the proper quarter, he soon gathered a congregation,
and united in one Church those who belonged to
separate communions in the mother-country, and
who under other circumstances might have preferred
to exist as a Church in a mere denominational
character. The effect of the three Presbyterian
Churches continuing separate in these circumstances
was simply this: that the country and the people
would be divided between them, according to the
numbers and the zeal and faithfulness and discretion
of their ministers ; and that every separate congre-
gation would consist of a number of members of each
separate section now amalgamated, and ultimately
becoming themselves and their children members of
that denomination to which their first minister
belonged. In this way there was in reality, and


evidently arising out of the circumstances of the
country, that very union among the people which
the continuance of separate Synods and Churches is
designed to prevent, and yet with all the weakness
and the evils which separation engenders.”
This speech was listened to with “ most marked
attention,” and made a very favourable impression
upon the vast audience to whom it was addressed,
as well as upon the members of the Assembly itself,
and contributed not a little to the countenance
which they ever afterwards gave to the Union of
the Churches in the Colony.
Appreciative notices of the career and work of
Mr. Tait appear in all the histories and records
of the Presbyterian Church of Victoria, and also of
New South Wales, from some of which the following
references may be appropriately quoted.
The Rev. Robert Sutherland, M.A., in his
“ History of the Presbyterian Church of Victoria,”
after referring to Mr. Tait’s arrival and settlement
in Geelong, writes: “Mr. Tait was an able and
popular preacher, an excellent man of business,
and deeply read in ecclesiastical law; he proved a
great acquisition to the Free Church. His con-
gregation rapidly grew in numbers, large schools
were established, and the prospects of the Church
brightened. . . . As a Presbyterian Minister who
distinguished himself both in New South Wales and
Victoria, his name will be mentioned with honour
in the history of the Presbyterian Church in both
of those Colonies. ... In both Colonies he was
very popular as a preacher; for massiveness of


thought and ability in handling his text he perhaps
had no equal.”
The Rev. Dr. Campbell, in his “Fifty Years of
Presbyterianism in Victoria,” writes: “The Rev. John
Tait was a man skilful in the laws and customs of
the Church, accurate in business, and wise in counsel,
whose influence was deeply felt in the negotiations
for Union in 1859. He was besides an admirable
pastor, whose doctrinal expositions—clear, forcible,
and grandly Scriptural—exhibited in quite an unusual
way the power of Divine truth in building up men
in their holy faith. Not the least gift which he
brought us was two sons, who gave themselves to
the ministry of our Church. He was the first minister
whose loss the United Church had to mourn.”
The Rev. F. R. M. Wilson, in his memoir of the
Rev. Irving Hetherington, writes: “ Mr. Tait, as
Clerk of the Synod of the Free Presbyterian Church
of Victoria, from the beginning of the Union
negotiations to their consummation, had shown great
ability and diligence in drawing up the minutes and
synodical documents and in arranging and expediting
the business of the Synod and its conferences. He
was specially skilful in the suggestion of intermediate
resolutions by which unnecessary divisions might be
averted, and his tact in managing without appearing
to manage was remarkable. His death in 1860 was
felt by the Assembly to leave a blank which no
other man could fill so well.”
The Rev. C. Stuart Ross, in his “Colonization
and Church Work in Victoria,” writes: “The Rev.
John Tait, of Paramatta, a distinguished member of


the Synod of Eastern Australia, who was on a visit to
Melbourne, was present at the Free Church Synod held
in December, 1850, and associated with the brethren,
from whom he received a cordial and fraternal
welcome. Mr. Forbes, in speaking to the complimen-
tary motion, bore warm and affectionate testimony to
the worth of Mr. Tait and to the high esteem in
which he was held as a minister of Christ
Mr. Tait was a solemn and impressive preacher,
of loving heart and kindly ways, and he was
profoundly reverential in his treatment of the deeper
mysteries of our evangelical faith. We do not wonder,
therefore, that he speedily established for himself the
reputation of a faithful and devoted pastor and
the trusted counsellor of all his people; that some
of those who sat under his ministry still, after a lapse
of nearly forty years, speak with admiration of his
gifts and graces, and of the grateful sense of the
privilege which they enjoyed in being permitted to
sit at the feet of one who so clearly and impressively
expounded divine truth. He was possessed also of a
shrewd judgment and of large knowledge and ex-
perience of ecclesiastical procedure, and was accounted
a most important accession to the strength of the
Free Church Synod. His congregation increased
rapidly in numbers and influence, and under his
direction large and efficient schools were established
for the education of the young.”
“his memory long shall live in all
OUK HEARTS.”


II.—ELIZABETH TAIT


MRS WILLIAM BLAIR


CHAPTER I.
MRS. TAIT, the subject of these memorial
reminiscences, was born in Guernsey, Channel
Islands, on the 24th September, 1813. Her
father, William Blair, was Purser on board 11.M.5.
Dartmouth. Her mother’s maiden name was Lillie
Greig, whose parents died when their little daughter
was quite young, and her uncle Greig adopted his
little niece, and brought her up and educated her as
his own daughter. Lillie Greig was married when
very young. Their home was in Guernsey, where
three of their children were born, —Elizabeth, William
about three years after, and Mary. The Tait family
were all very familiar in their childhood with the
excellent life-size oil painting of their grandfather
and grandmother Blair, the former of which, more
especially, is a valuable work of art. These paintings
are now in the possession of Mrs. Lillie Wilson the
eldest of the Tait family.
When Elizabeth Blair was very young her parents
sent her to school in France to a Roman Catholic
boarding-school or pension, in an old chateau, and
conducted by Mademoiselle Aime. The father of
this lady was shot while sitting at the breakfast
table in his own house during the French Revolution.
Miss Blair remembered seeing marks of the swords
on the cupboards and presses in the old Castle,
E


made by the soldiers in their search for the hated
aristocrats. There were a good many Protestant girls
at the school, but there was no attempt made to
proselytize. The French priest, the father-confessor
of the Roman Catholic pupils, had been kindly treated
in England, where he had gone to escape from the
troubles in France, and he was very kind to the
English girls. It was noticed that the Protestant
girls envied the Roman Catholics on fast days, as
they had fish and eggs, while the Protestant girls
had their usual fare, beef or mutton.
When Miss Blair had been about two years at
this school, her father came for her and took her
home to Guernsey. Fie looked pale and ill. Soon
after this her father sailed on the Dartmouth on
a voyage from which he never returned. He died
of Sierra Leone fever, and was buried at sea off the
West Coast of Africa. He left a considerable sum
of money. Meanwhile, the wife of Mrs. Blair’s uncle
Greig died, and he asked his niece to come and live
with him. The Blair family, therefore, removed to
Greenock, and took up their abode in his commodious
house. Miss Blair was asked whether it would please
her best to return to school in France, or go with
the rest of the family to Scotland. Her wish was
to return to France, and accordingly her mother sent
her back to school.
After Mr. Blair’s death, and when the family
were in Greenock*, another daughter was bom,
Ann Bush, in October, 1824-. In the following year
Miss Blair was brought home from France bv her
O
grand-uncle Greig. They travelled by steamer and


WILLIAM BLAIR


stage-coach to Greenock by way of Plymouth. On
arriving at home, Miss Blair saw for the first time
her sister Ann, who was then about a year old.
The first thing Miss Blair had to learn on going to
school in Greenock was to speak English, as her long
residence in France had caused her to completely
forget her mother tongue.
o o
Mrs. Blair belonged to the Church of England,
but the family attended a Presbyterian Church in
Greenock, the minister, Mr. Smith, being an earnest
evangelical man, and it was under his ministry, and
by the influence and assistance of a pious nurse, that
Mi ss Blair first imbibed those religious principles
which so largely moulded her after-life. Miss Blair
was fortunate in having a friend—a Mrs. Macfie—
who fully sympathised with her in her religious
feelings, and was a great help to her. It was
Mrs. Macfie who introduced Miss Blair to the
Rev. John Tait, who was at that time engaged in
mission work in Glasgow. The acquaintance of the
two young people quickly ripened into affection, and
so it came about that John Tait and Elizabeth Blair
were married at Greenock on the 2nd May, 1837.


CHAPTER II.
IN the memorial reminiscences of the late Rev.
John Tait, reference is made to the whole-
hearted devotion of Mrs. Tait to her husband
and family during the twenty-three years of her
married life, and these reminiscences now deal with
the events of her life after the decease of her
much-loved and lamented husband.
After her dear husband’s death on the 19th March,
1860, Mrs. Tait and her family remained in the
Manse, 7, Skene Street, Geelong, for some months,
and then removed to a two-storied house in La Trobe
Terrace, quite close to her former residence. Her
sons, George and James, returned to the Scotch
College, Melbourne, while her son Lithgow attended
a school opened by Mr. J. B. Wilson (afterwards
of the Grammar School) on Newton Hill, and her
daughter Bessie attended a Ladies’ School in the
town. Her son John entered the service of the Bank
of Australasia, Geelong, in April, 1860. Mr. Tait
had been a customer of the Bank for many years,
and his influence, together with that of Mr. John
Guthrie, Collector of Customs, procured this situation.
Her son James was the next to leave the Scotch
College, and he entered the London Chartered Bank
of Australia in December, 1860. Her son George
remained at the College to continue his studies for
the University.


ELIZABETH TAIT


The most important event that took place while
the family were living in the house in La Trobe
Terrace, was the marriage of her daughter Lillie
to the Rev. F. R. M. Wilson, of Camperdown, on
30th April, 1861. The Rev. Irving Hetherington,
who baptized Miss Tait at Wollongong twenty-two
years before, performed the marriage ceremony. The
marriage was a very quiet and private one, but
being the first in the family created much interest
among its members. Mrs. Tait subsequently made
two journeys to Camperdown, the first in June, 1862,
and again in July, 1863. On one of these occasions
her youngest daughter, Annie, accompanied her. The
road was very rough in those early days, especially
in the Stoney Rises between Colac and Camperdown.
The journey was anything but a pleasant one, more
especially when her little daughter became alarmed
at the violent jolting of the coach and cried out in
terror. Had it not been for the kindly intervention
of a fellow-traveller, who took the child on his knee
and comforted her, Mrs. Tait’s position would have
been still more painful; as it was, a lively recollection
of that journey ever afterwards remained with her.
Mrs. Tait and her family continued to attend the
Little Malop Street church, and afterwards at the
new High Church, in Gheringhap Street, and some
of the family taught in the Sabbath-school, while
others attended as scholars, until the family left
Geelong. This came about in the following way.
Her son John had to leave the Bank of Australasia
on account of his health breaking down in October,
1862, after two and a-half years’ service. After an


absence of about six months in the country he
obtained a situation at the London Chartered Bank
in Melbourne. Meanwhile her son James was removed
from the Geelong branch of the London Chartered
Bank to the Maryborough branch in July, 1853.
Her son George was at the time in Melbourne
attending the University, and living at the Scotch
College as a resident master. As, therefore, two of
her sons, John and George, were in Melbourne, and
only one, her eldest son William, in Geelong, in
the Colonial Bank, it was decided, after much
prayer for guidance, to remove to Melbourne, which
accordingly was done in December, 1863. On
arriving in Melbourne Mrs. Tait wished to obtain
a house within walking distance of Scots’ Church,
Collins Street, so as to be able to attend the ministry
of her old friend, the llev. Irving Hetherington. A
house was taken in East Melbourne, and afterwards
another in the same locality, as being a little more
convenient. One of these houses was two-storied.
One night a thief entered by the staircase window, and
lighting a candle placed it on the floor and began
to reconnoitre for plunder. He entered a bedroom
in which Mrs. Tait was sleeping, and ransacked a
chest of drawers. He then opened the door of the
room in which her sons John and Lithgow were
sleeping, and the light flashing in awoke the former,
who called out, “Who’s there?’’ Whereupon the
thief, in remarkably quick time and very cleverly,
disappeared out of the window. Nothing was missed,
and, beyond giving the family a little fright,
the thief’s visit was harmless. Her son Lithgow


attended the Scotch College at this time, and her
son George was a frequent visitor at her house in
George Street, East Melbourne. Her son William
came up from Geelong to see her occasionally, as
did also her daughter, Mrs. Wilson, from Camper-
down, and her son James from Maryborough. On
the whole, her stay in Melbourne at this time was
very pleasant and agreeable, more especially as it
enabled her to see much more of her son George
prior to his departure for Scotland than would other-
wise have been the case. Her son George having
completed the Arts course of study at the Melbourne
University on the 29th of April, 1855, sailed for
London in the ship Suffolk, to study theology at
the Free Church Divinty Hall, Edinburgh, with a
view to the ministry of the Presbyterian Church.
Meanwhile, her son John was removed from the
Melbourne branch of the London Chartered Bank
to Geelong in December, 1864. He went to lodge
with Mrs. Baylie in Yarra Street, where his brother
William had been living for some time. It so
happened that the old Manse, in Skene Street,
was at that time in the market for sale. The Little
Malop Street congregation had disposed of it two
or three years before, as Mr. Frazer, their minister,
did not care to live in it. Mr. J. D. Robinson,
the purchaser, laid out a good deal of money in
renovating and improving it, and now, 1865, he
wished to dispose of it. Her son William hearing
of the proposed sale opened up negotiations on
behalf of his mother for the purchase, which resulted
in the family once more resuming possession of their


old home in May, 1865. They found the house
improved in many ways, more especially by means
of a layer of damp-proof material on the foundation
of the back rooms, while the foundations of the
front rooms had also been strengthened. With the
exception of three absent ones, viz. Mrs. Wilson
at Camperdown, George on his way to Scotland,
and James at Maryborough, the family were once
more gathered in the old familiar house from which
their dear and much-loved father had been borne
to his grave in the Western Cemetery just five years
before.
On thus returning to Geelong Mrs. Tait decided
to join St. George’s Church in La Trobe Street, the
Rev. A. J. Campbell being the minister. The family
were very fortunate about this time to make the
acquaintance of the Rev. William Burns Landells,
minister of the Aberdeen Street Baptist Church. Mrs.
Tait became very much attached to Mr. Landells,
and frequently, in conjunction with one and another
of her family, attended his church, and more especially
his Thursday evening lecture, which was valued very
much as a means of grace.
Mrs. Tait conducted a very interesting prayer
meeting in her house in Skene Street for some
years, and indeed until the time came for her to
leave Geelong again in 1870. The most devoted
and earnest of the lady members from almost
all the Protestant churches in the town attended
this prayer meeting. Among others attending may
be mentioned Mesdames Cameron, Joseph Shaw,
A. J. Campbell, Harris, Petifer, Blackall, Young


(Bible woman) and Landells, and the Misses Davies
and Vines. On Mrs. Tait’s departure from Geelong
the members of this prayer meeting presented her
with a handsome timepiece, which is now in the
possession of Mrs. Wilson.
Meanwhile, Mrs. Wilson’s family at Camperdown
had increased since 29th July, 1863, when her first
son, John Tait Wilson, and Mrs. Tait’s first grand-
child, was born. Three more children were added to
the home in the country while the family were living
in Geelong, viz. Andrew Francis, Lillie Blair, and
Margaret Muter. Mrs. Tait took great delight in
her grandchildren, and when they came to see her
did all in her power to gratify and please them.
Among other means of doing this a large Noah’s
Ark was bought and kept in the house especially
to interest and amuse them.
Her eldest son William, who entered the service
of the Colonial Bank of Australasia as ledgerkeeper
in 1858, had been promoted, first to be teller and
then to be accountant, until in 1867, when the
manager, Mr. A. S. Park, went away for an extended
holiday, he was appointed manager of the Geelong
branch of the Bank, and resided on the premises, his
sister Bessie keeping house for him. Meanwhile, her
son James had been removed from the Maryborough
branch of the London Chartered Bank to the
lledbank branch, where he was very lonely and rather
uncomfortable, and in consequence, and much to the
satisfaction of Mrs. Tait, he resigned, and obtained
a situation in the Geelong branch of the Bank of
New South Wales. This was in 1865, and James


lived with the family in 7, Skene Street until in
1866 he was removed to the Melbourne branch of
the same Bank.
During these years her son Lithgow attended the
Geelong College, recently established by Mr. (after-
wards Dr.) George Morrison, and remained until
December, 1868, when he was Dux of the College,
and was prepared to enter the University, which
he did in the following year. This necessitated his
leaving Geelong, and going to reside in lodgings
in Melbourne. He had decided to study for the
ministry of the Presbyterian Church, and Mrs. Tait
gave him every encouragement and facility for doing
so. Her daughter Annie attended a school established
by Miss Vines, who took a great interest in her young
pupil, and with whom Annie remained as a boarder
for some time after the family removed to Melbourne
in 1870. Her son John was removed to the Ballarat
branch of the London Chartered Bank in April, 1866,
and then two weeks later to the Majorca branch, and
then again in August of the same year to the Stawell
branch, and from Stawell back again to Geelong,
where he remained for the next three years. He
returned home in November, having been away a
little over six months. Her son James, while in the
Bank of New South Wales, Melbourne, was married
to Jessie, daughter of Captain H. Macmeikan, on
the 13th February, 1869. Mrs. Tait and other
members of the family were present at the wedding,
which took place at Captain Macmeikan’s house at
Kensington Hill, Melbourne. Her son George having
completed his course of study in Scotland was married


to Mary Agnes, the fourth daughter of the Rev.
John Sym, of Free Grey Friars, Edinburgh, on the
22nd June, 1869, and shortly afterwards sailed for
Australia, arriving in Geelong in September of the
same year, after an absence of four years and five
months. Mrs. Tait was very much overjoyed on
receiving her long-absent son back again, and indeed
the family were all much delighted to have George
and his wife with them at 7, Skene Street, for a time
at least.
On the return of Mr. A. S. Park, the manager
of the Colonial Bank, to Geelong, her son William
was removed to the head office of the Bank at
Melbourne, in November, 1868, and shortly afterwards
to the Sandhurst, now Bendigo, branch. Whilst there
he obtained a month’s holiday and went for a trip
to Tasmania, visiting Launceston, and going through
to Hobart by the stage-coach, which then ran in
quite old English equipment and style through
the beautiful holly-hedged roads of the island.
After remaining for over a year at the Sandhurst
branch he returned to the head-office, Melbourne,
and some months thereafter resigned his position in
the Bank, after thirteen years’ service, and received
a flattering testimonial from the general manager,
the late Adam Burnes.
Early in 1869 her son Lithgow went to Melbourne,
as before-mentioned, to attend the University, and
in December of the same year her son John was
removed from the Geelong branch of the London
Chartered Bank to the head-office, Collins Street,
Melbourne.


These removals and changes in the position and
prospects of her children gave Mrs. Tait a great
deal of anxiety and concern, more especially during
the last few years of her residence at 7, Skene Street,
and it was her custom to spend long and earnest
seasons of prayer and supplication on their behalf,
more particularly in the evening when the family
had all retired to rest.
After the removal of her son John to Melbourne,
Mrs. Tait had none of her sons living with her
at Geelong, and three of them were in Melbourne,
John and Lithgow in lodgings, and James in his
own house.


CHAPTER III.
AFTER much and earnest prayer for guidance,
Mrs. Tait resolved to sell the house in Skene
Street and remove to Melbourne, which took
place in February, 1870. The one thing which more
than any other reconciled her to this step was the
fact that the family would be able to attend the
ministry of the Rev. Duncan S. McEachran, of
St. Andrew’s, Carlton, where her sons Lithgow first,
and John afterwards, had attended since they came
to Melbourne. They secured a very comfortable
two-storied terraced house in Drummond Street,
Carlton, —7, Warwick Terrace, —near the Church
and convenient for the University, and also for the
city. However, they did not remain long in this
house, as her son John was appointed accountant of
the newly-opened branch of the London Chartered
Bank at the comer of Lygon Street and Faraday
Street, Carlton, in August of that year, 1870, and
had to reside on the premises. As this latter meant
the saving of rent, L°B4 a year, and also servants’
wages, as well as fuel and gas, —in all more than JPIOO
a year,—Mrs. Tait went to live at the Bank, although
the accommodation was scarcely sufficient for the
family, and was otherwise inconvenient and uncom-
fortable. It was very much exposed to the hot sun
in summer, although they had shutters on all the


upstairs windows, and also to the dust, as it was
situated at the corner of two main thoroughfares;
the noise, too, at times being very disagreeable.
Mrs. Tait, however, very willingly and unselfishly
put up with the discomfort and inconvenience of this
house for two years for the sake of her son John, to
j J
whose advantage it was to live at the Bank.
Meanwhile, her son William, after visiting
Sydney and Queensland, where he spent about three
months with his uncle, James Gibson, manager of
the Bank of New South Wales, Ipswich, obtained an
appointment in the National Bank of Australasia, in
Melbourne, and subsequently the management of one
of the country branches; but not liking the isolated
life, some time after returned to Melbourne and
retired from the service.
Having long had a desire to visit New Zealand,
in January, 1872, he left Melbourne in the steamer
Albion , one of Macmeikan Blackwood’s boats,
and arrived in Dunedin about the middle of the
month. He brought letters of introduction to
Mr. P. C. Neill and other influential residents, and
having known the Tolmies, Holmes, George Mac Lean,
Rattray, Mackerras, and' Larnach, in Victoria, was
able to obtain employment in various capacities,
and ultimately succeeded in securing a good
position as accountant in the National Insurance
Company of New Zealand, which commenced business
in September, 1873. He was associated with the
late Mr. Richard H. Leary, the Interim Secretary,
who was appointed to float the Company, and
he joined the staff at its establishment on the


appointment of Mr. A. Hill Jack as General
Manager.
While living at the Bank in Carlton, Mrs. Tait
came to know and was much interested in the work
and career of several earnest young men, who visited
the house frequently. Daniel McDonald, afterwards
and now Dr. McDonald, Missionary to the New
Hebrides; John McNeil, then a student at the
University, afterwards the well-known evangelist;
William Thomson ; then the Rev. McEachran,
missionary, and now at Camperdown ; William Howat,
and others. And they on their part were much
gratified and encouraged by the enthusiastic way in
which Mrs. Tait entered into all their plans and
projects.
Early in 1870 her son, the Rev. George Tait,
accepted a call from the Presbyterians living in the
neighbourhood of the Richardson River, in the
Wimmera District of Victoria, having his head-
quarters and home at Donald, where his two eldest
children were bom, John Sym and George Blair.
In August, 1872, the congregation of South Yarra,
a suburb of Melbourne, called the Rev. George Tait
to be their minister, and Mrs. Tait, wishing to be
near her son’s church, purchased a cottage in
Osborne Street, South Yarra, and in November of
that year left the Bank at Carlton and went to
live there with her two daughters, Bessie and Annie.
Unfortunately, Mrs. Tait suffered from rheumatism
while living in this cottage, caused, it was supposed,
from the dampness of the land in the immediate
neighbourhood. Otherwise her stay at South Yarra


was very pleasant, and the ministry of her son
during her two or three years’ residence at Osborne
Street was greatly enjoyed.
Meanwhile, that is during the years Mrs. Tait
lived at the Bank in Carlton, and while at South
Yarra, seven grandchildren were added to her family
circle, viz. Elizabeth (Elsie) Wilson, the first grand-
child called after herself, and Frank Wilson, at
Camperdown; in her son James’s family, Cissie,
Edith and Lillie; in her son George’s family, in
addition to the two boys already mentioned, Katie
and Elsie.
In November, 1874, her son, the Rev. George
Tait, was appointed Principal of the recently-
established Presbyterian Ladies’ College, and, in
consequence, left South Yarra. Mrs. Tait having
no longer any tie there, and as the locality did not
suit her health—rheumatism still troubling her—
sold the cottage in Osborne Street and returned to
Carlton. A cottage in Rathdowne Street, quite near
the Church, was vacant at the time, and a removal
to it was made. Although not a very convenient
house in many respects it was in a good situation,
and Mrs. Tait’s health improved while living there,
and her rheumatism almost entirely left her. It
was while Mrs. Tait and her daughters lived in this
cottage in Carlton that her daughter Annie began
to develop an epileptic tendency, which became the
great trial and burden of Mrs. Tait’s life. Mrs. Tait
took upon herself the chief, if not the sole and
unremitting charge of her afflicted daughter, and
this duty became more and more necessary as the fits


increased in number and severity. There was, how-
ever, this compensating element in the trial, and
which Mrs. Tait was every ready to acknowledge
with devout thankfulness and gratitude, that it drew
out towards her all that wealth of loving affection
and childlike confidence that was natural to her
beloved daughter. And more especially was this the
case when, soon after the commencement of the
attacks, her daughter became the subject of very
decided and warm religious convictions and feelings,
the beginning of which was fondly attributed to
the earnest and sympathetic teaching of Mr. Samuel
MacGregor while Annie was a member of his Bible-
class in connection with St. Andrew’s Sabbath-school,
and for whom his pupil ever afterwards entertained
a strong affection and loving remembrance.
Mrs. Tait remained in this cottage in Rathdowne
Street for nearly two years. In the meantime her
son John continued to reside at the Bank in Lygon
Street, Carlton, his sister Bessie keeping house for
him during the latter part of the time, uhtil
August, 1876, when the manager of the Bank
came to live in the new premises erected in Elgin
Street, and the old building was vacated. The
two households were then once more united, and,
as the cottage in Rathdowne Street was not large
enough, they took a very commodious and con-
veniently situated two-storied terraced house in
Grattan Street, about midway between the Church
and the Bank.
Perhaps the most notable event that occurred
while the family were living in this house in Grattan
F


Street was the visit of Mrs. Tait’s sister (Mrs.
Gibson) and her two daughters. They had just
returned from a visit to Scotland, and were on
their way home to Brisbane, Queensland. The
sisters had not seen each other for many years,
and they were not likely to, nor did they indeed,
ever meet again. The visit, though brief, was very-
pleasant, recalling memories of the long past years,
and much of interest in connection with their
respective families.
In February, 1877, her son John was removed
from the Carlton branch of the London Chartered
Bank, and was appointed sub-manager of the Fitzroy
branch. In order to be near the Bank, and hoping
to get more business by living in the district, in
January, 1878, they removed to a newly-built cottage
in Groom Street, North Fitzroy. This, however, was
a mistake, and gave a good deal of trouble and
annoyance to Mrs. Tait, as the rain came through
the side-wall of the house, and so, for the sake of
her son’s health, they removed again in April of
the same year and took a house at Northcote. This
house was built by one of the pioneer settlers in the
early days of the Colony, and was at the time quite
in the country, although only about three miles from
Melbourne. The walls, which were of bluestone, were
very thick, and everything about it was good and
substantial, although somewhat out of repair at the
time of their residence in it. The garden in front
sloped down to the Merri Creek, and contained a
number of very old fruit trees. On the whole, it was
a tolerably comfortable house and healthy, although


the distance from town was somewhat inconvenient.
They attended a small Presbyterian Church quite
close at hand, of which the Rev. Duncan Fraser was
the minister, in conjunction with the Heildelberg
Church, Mr. Fraser preached at Heidelberg in the
morning and at Northcote in the evening, the morning
service at Northcote being supplied by laymen.
Meanwhile, Mrs. Tait’s son-in-law, the Rev.
F. R. M. Wilson, accepted a call from the Pres-
byterian Church at Kew, a suburb of Melbourne.
Mrs. Wilson’s family now numbered eight, two more
sons having been born, Irving Hetherington and
William James. The family accordingly left Camper-
down and came to live in Kew. This change in the
position and circumstances of her daughter’s family
was very gratifying to Mrs. Tait, as they were now
near enough to visit frequently, and it was obvious
that the change was much to their advantage in
many ways.
On the 17th of May, 1873, her son Lithgow
sailed for Scotland in the ship Northumberland,
intending to complete his course of study for the
ministry of the Presbyterian Church at the Free
Church College in Edinburgh, as his brother George
had done. His health, however, broke down before he
had completed his course, and a tutorship having
been offered him in a family in Launceston, Tasmania,
he accepted it, and returned to Australia, after
an absence of about three years. He afterwards
completed his studies in Melbourne, and in due
course was licensed and ordained as a minister of
the Presbyterian Church of Victoria. On the 14th


of November, 1878, he was married to Jessie
Gillespie at Geelong, and, having accepted a call
from the Presbyterian Church at Maffra, he and his
wife took up their residence at the Manse there.
Mrs. Tait gave her sons every encouragement and
help in the prosecution of their studies, and watched
with great interest and much thankfulness their
success. Her fervent prayers and continued inter-
cessions on their behalf were no doubt heard, and
have received an abundant answer.
While the family were living at Northcote her
son William came over from New Zealand on a
visit to his relatives and friends after an absence
of seven years, and on the 80th of April, 1879, was
married by the Rev. Dr. Strong in the Scots’ Church,
Melbourne, to Minnie, youngest daughter of the
late William Kerr, late Town Clerk of Melbourne,
and founder of the “ Melbourne Argus.” Mr. Tait
returned to New Zealand almost immediately after
his marriage, as the term of his leave of absence
had expired. Her son James and his family left
Melbourne and removed to Geelong in 1874, where
another daughter was born (Maud). He was after-
wards appointed Manager of the Urana branch
of the Bank of New South Wales, and he and
his family removed to that place in 1878. A
fifth daughter was added to his family at Urana
(Linda).
Her son George’s family had in the meantime
increased to six by the addition of two more
daughters (Ethel and Georgie). And another daughter
having been added to Mrs. Wilson’s family (Mary),


the total number of Mrs. Tait's grandchildren at that
time was twenty.
Mrs. Tait had taken the house at Northcote for
two years, and at the end of that time, in April,
1880, they removed back to Carlton, securing a
conveniently-situated terraced house in Carlton Street,
opposite the newly-erected Exhibition Building in
Carlton Gardens. They resumed their connection
with St. Andrew’s Church, under the ministry of
Mr. McEachran, with much satisfaction.


CHAPTER IV.
IN April, 1881, her son John was appointed
Accountant of the Geelong branch of the
London Chartered Bank of Australia, and
Mrs. Tait and her two daughters, Bessie and Annie,
once more accompanied him there. They took a
very comfortable cottage in Gheringhap Street, but
were no sooner well settled in it when the house
was sold and, the purchaser wishing to reside in
it himself, they had to leave. They removed to a
cottage in Virginia Street, Newtown, in a rather
better situation, and equally convenient for the Church
and the Bank. Mrs. Tait’s health was not at all good
for some time after her return to Geelong, suffering
from erysipelas, which made her feel very unwell.
On their return to Geelong the family once more
joined St. George’s Church, where at the time the Rev.
Mr. Rolland, Mr. Campbell’s son-in-law, was assistant
minister. Good Mr. Landells, to whom they formerly
looked for spiritual nourishment and stimulus, had
been called to his rest and reward in February, 1871.
Her son, the Rev. George Tait, resigned his
position as Principal of the Presbyterian Ladies’
College at the close of 1878, and shortly afterwards
he accepted a call to the Presbyterian Church at
Warnambool. While he was minister at Warnambool
two more children were added to his family: Jean,
born at Edinburgh, Scotland, while Mary, his wife,


was on a visit to her relatives there, and Gordon,
bom at Warnambool.
The first child in her son Lithgow’s family,
Nellie, was bom at Maffra, and the second, Robert,
at the same place. The family remained in the first
cottage in Virginia Street for nearly three years,
until in May, 1884, they removed to a new brick
cottage in the same street, but a little nearer the
Church and town, and so more convenient for
Mrs. Tait, who could not walk far.
In November of the following year, 1885, her
son John was married to Margaret Agnes Thomson,
and having been appointed Manager of the Clunes
branch of the London Chartered Bank, he took up
his residence at the Bank in that town. Mrs. Tait
visited her son at Clunes on the 17th March of the
following year, 1886, when he was recovering from a
severe illness. Her doing so at great inconvenience
and discomfort to herself was another proof of her
great love for her children, and her anxiety for their
welfare. After her son John’s recovery from this
illness, which necessitated his absence from the
Bank for three months, the Bank authorities very
considerately transferred him back to the Geelong
branch, which change was very gratifying to himself
as well as to his mother.
Mrs. Tait continued to live in the cottage in
Virginia Street, although it was rather large for her
requirements, until after the return of her son John
to Geelong, when a smaller cottage in Myers Street
was taken in August, 1886. After about two years’
residence in this house Mrs. Tait removed again into


a more pleasantly situated and in every way better
cottage in Fenwick Street, and remained there until
her final departure from Geelong in September, 1892.
During these years two sons were born in her son
John’s family, John and James, and their frequent
visits to their grandmother gave her great pleasure,
and Mrs. Tait on her part bestowed on them many
favours and blessings. Meanwhile, four more children
were added to her son Lithgow’s family at MafFra,
Lithgow John, Jessie, George and May. Another
son was added to her son George’s family, Allan
Taylor, making the total number of Mrs. Tait’s
grandchildren thirty-two. Mrs. Tait attended Eyrie
Street Presbyterian Church during the latter years
of her residence in Geelong, under the ministry
of the Rev. Arthur Davidson.
The collapse of the land boom in Melbourne
affected Mrs. Tait’s finances very seriously. Up to
that time, 1892, a very comfortable income was
derived from Australian Deposit and Mortgage Bank
dividends, and interests on deposit receipts in the
same Bank, also interest on the portion of money
allotted to her use for life under her mother’s will,
and which was placed as a deposit receipt in
the Freehold Investment Company, and lastly the
dividend from the Widows and Orphans Fund of the
Presbyterian Church of Victoria. The first three of
these sources of income were entirely cut off, and
calls on the Australian Deposit and Mortgage Bank
shares demanded, leaving her solely dependent on the
dividend from the Widows and Orphans Fund, viz.
£SO per annum.


CHAPTER V.
JUST about this time her son William came over
from Auckland, New Zealand, on a visit to
his relatives and friends in Victoria, and he
very generously undertook to contribute £SO a year
to his mother and sisters’ support, and which he
continued to do for a period of five years. It was
while her son William was in Melbourne that he
persuaded his mother to leave Geelong once more,
and take up her residence at Kew in a house which
he had taken for her quite near to her daughter’s,
Mrs. Wilson’s, home at the Manse. The house was
afterwards found to be a little damp, and Mrs. Tait
suffered from rheumatism while in it. However,
another house nearer the Church and the Manse
became vacant, and Mrs. Tait moved into it. Both
these houses were in the same street, St. John’s
Parade a very quiet, retired neighbourhood.
Although Mrs. Tait for a considerable time after
bitterly regretted having left Geelong, and perhaps
a removal at her time of life was rather hazardous,
there can be no doubt that it proved a very great
advantage to her in every way. At Kew all the
members of her numerous family could visit her far
oftener and with greater convenience to themselves,
than they could possibly have done had Geelong
been her place of residence, and more especially


when great-grandchildren were added to the
number. Her own health, too, improved, and was
better than it had been for some years previous.
Then many kind friends visited her from time
to time, whose society and friendship was valued
very much, more especially that of Mrs. Sprod,
Mrs. Richardson and the Rev. D. S. Maxwell, who
were a very great comfort and help to Mrs. Tait
during her last illness.
Meanwhile, her son George had been appointed
agent of the Presbyterian Church of Victoria, and
accordingly left Warnambool in 1889 and took up
his residence at Toorak, Melbourne. Again, in 1891,
he accepted a call from his former congregation at
South Yarra, and removed to the Manse there. Her
son George and other members of his family had
thus opportunities of frequently visiting Mrs. Tait
at her house in St. John’s Parade, Kew, and also
her daughter Mrs. Wilson, and her husband, the
Rev. F. R. M. Wilson, together with their children
and grand-children. Her son Lithgow remained at
Maffra for seventeen years, until 1896, when he
accepted a call from the Presbyterian Church at
Kyneton, and this town being nearer Melbourne and
easily accessible by rail, he and other members of
his family were able to visit Mrs. Tait more
frequently than formerly. Her son John also came
up from Geelong on every available occasion, and
stayed with Mrs. Tait at Kew for a longer or
shorter time. Her son James, too, and members of
his family, then living at Surrey Hills, a suburb of
Melbourne, some little distance down the railway


line from Kew, came to see Mrs. Tait from time to
time. Thus all the members of her family residing in
Victoria were able to see her more or less frequently.
While Mrs. Tait was living at Kew, news was
received of the illness and subsequent death of her
sister, Mrs. Gibson. Mrs. Gibson was ten years
younger than Mrs. Tait, and her only surviving
sister. Being much attached to her sister, the news
of her death proved a great blow to Mrs. Tait. In
writing to her son John, allusion is made to her
sad bereavement as follows:—“You will not be
surprised to hear that my dear sister—your only
surviving aunt entered into the promised rest
last Sunday morning, 2nd January, 1898, at half-
past five. I received the telegram on Monday at
midday, and though I had been expecting it for the
last two weeks, yet when it really did come, it came
as a great blank, a sense of loneliness, that she is no
longer an inhabitant of this poor world, that I can
no longer have tidings of her or from her; but I
could only wish her joy, and long to follow'.”
The Rev. Mr. Wilson resigned his charge at Kew
in 1897, and early in 1898 he and his family
removed to Canterbury, a suburb of Melbourne.
Mrs. Tait at one time thought of following them
there, but fearing that the moving would be too
much for her, wisely refrained from doing so.
Mrs. Tait was well pleased with the Rev.
John Bamaby, Mr. Wilson’s successor, and enjoyed
his preaching and his visits very much.
Mrs. Tait was fortunate in securing the services
of an elderly woman, Margaret, as a servant during


the last few years of her life, and although not all
that one could desire as a servant, having been
at one time a nurse, she was very helpful, especially
during Mrs. Tait’s last illness and at the time of
her death.
About three or four years before her death, a
swelling appeared on Mrs. Tait’s breast, which the
doctor pronounced to be cancer, and although it
was of a mild description and not very painful, it
was sufficiently distressing, and caused her great
uneasiness and made her very weak. Nevertheless,
Mrs. Tait was enabled to bear the weakness and
suffering of these weary years with exemplary patience
and fortitude. At the close of the year 1900
Mrs. Tait suffered great pain from an obstruction
caused by a growth internally, and the doctor, after
vainly endeavouring to give her relief by means of
medicine, very reluctantly resorted to an operation.
At Mrs. Tait’s great age, 87, it was considered
hazardous to place her under chloroform ; however,
the doctor resolved to do so, and the operation was
performed with gratifying success. The doctors
were very much surprised and pleased to find that
Mrs. Tait bore the operation so well, and that no
evil effects followed. As, however, the great pain
and suffering previously experienced, and the
weakening effect of the operation, brought her very
low, a very marked diminution of strength and
vitality was visible. After a time, however, at the
beginning of the year 1901, Mrs. Tait was able to
resume her place in the parlour, for a portion of
the day at least, but never regained strength.


Mrs. Tait was always very much interested in our
late beloved Queen, and was much affected on hearing
of her death, which took place on the 22nd of January,
1901, not so much with grief, as gladness at her
happy release, and in anticipation of her own soon
to follow. In many respects Mrs. Tait’s course of
life was much like that of Queen Victoria. They were
both born in the teens of the last century, Mrs. Tait
on the 24th of September, 1813, and the Queen on
the 24th May, 1819, and at places not far distant
from each other, Guernsey, Channel Islands, and
Kensington, London. They were both married early
in life, Mrs. Tait in 1837, at the age of 23, and the
Queen in 1840, at the age of 21; and they both lost
their husbands at a comparatively early age, Mrs. Tait
in 1860, at the age of 50, after a married life of
23 years, and the Queen in 1861, at the age of 42,
after a married life of 21 years. Moreover, they
were both devotedly attached to their husbands and
singularly happy in their married life, and their
husbands were both earnest Christian men, who
sacrificed their lives in their devotion to duty and to
God. The Queen survived her husband and remained
a widow for 40 years, and died on the 22nd of
January, 1901; Mrs. Tait survived her husband and
remained a widow' for 41 years, and died on the
22nd of July, 1901, exactly six months after the
Queen. Thus they were both born on the same day
of the month, viz. the 24th of May and the 24th
of September, and they both died on the same day
of the month, viz. the 22nd January and the 22nd
day of July. Both the Queen and Mrs. Tait had


large families, the Queen had nine children, two of
whom died before her and seven survive her ;
Mrs. Tait had ten children, two of whom died before
her and eight survive her. The difference being that
whereas the Queen’s two children died in mature life,
Mrs. Tait was spared that additional sorrow, inasmuch
as her two children died in infancy. Moreover, both
the Queen and Mrs. Tait were devoted to their
children and lived to see a numerous offspring of
grandchildren and great-grandchildren growing up
around them. In character also, and more especially
in their religious character, they were similar. They
both reverenced and loved the Word of God—the
Holy Bible; they both held sacred the Holy Sabbath
Day and spent it in God’s service and worship; they
were both much interested in the advancement of
Christ’s Kingdom in the world at large, and had a
mutual admiration and esteem for all good and great
men and women ; and further, they w'ere both “ looking
for that blessed hope and the glorious appearing of
the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ,” for
Mrs. Tait could re-echo the beautiful sentiment of
the Queen, “ Oh, how I wish the Lord would come
in my life-time, I should so love to lay my Crown
at His feet.” For although Mrs. Tait had no earthly
crown, her Royal sister and herself and the dear ones
who went before are now wearing “a crown of glory
that fadeth not away,” and a like crown is “reserved
in Heaven” for each one of all their dear children
who will follow them there.
Her son William came over from New Zealand
in September, 1898, and saw his mother prior to his


departure for England at the end of the same month.
He returned to Victoria in February, 1899, and saw
his mother before going back to New Zealand. In
May, 1900, he again came to Melbourne and remained
for six months, during which time he frequently
visited his mother at St. John’s Parade, Kew. On
the Ist of November he came to tell her that he
was going to Hobart, and to say good-bye; and
this was the last time he saw her. Of this visit
Mrs. Tait wrote hopefully to her son John. This
letter was one of the last—the third last—letters that
Mrs. Tait wrote, and it reveals her great love for her
eldest son, as indeed for all her children her much
concern, nay, intense anxiety, for his and their
welfare, and also her fervent prayers on his and
their behalf.
From the time Mrs. Tait came to reside at Kew,
in September, 1892, until December, 1900, about six
months before her death, and indeed until her
strength would not admit of it, she wrote letters to
her son John at Geelong, in answer to his, every
second week with great regularity. Many of these
letters cost her much effort to write, and the whole
of them, about 200 in all, have been carefully
preserved, and are now bound up in a volume,
and treasured as very precious mementoes of the
“vanished hand and the voice that is still.” They
are almost all four note pages in length and are
written in her own clear and neat handwriting.
The last of these letters, and probably the last letter
Mrs. Tait ever wrote, is written in pencil, without
any date or address, evidently in much weakness,


but nevertheless very clear and distinct. It was as
follows:
“My dear, dear John, —How I long to be able
to write you a few lines. Thanks for your kind
letters, so full of love and sympathy. I was grieved
to hear of your illness, but trust you keep better.
I hope you will be able to come up shortly. I
am very slowly getting weaker, nearing my home.
Ever your loving mother, E. T.”
That “ home ” was then, and indeed had been
for long, clearly in view, and as the weary months in
the early part of 1901 went slowly past, her state
became weaker and weaker and her hopes nearer and
nearer that more and more intensely longed-for place
of rest—her home on high.
Notwithstanding her increasing physical weakness,
her mind was clear and vigorous, and all her faculties
remained unimpaired (except her hearing, which for
some years had been dull), until within a week or so
of the end, when her mind wandered somewhat.
Mrs. Tait continued to get up about eleven o’clock,
and came into the parlour, remaining as long as her
strength permitted, until about the end of June,
when it became necessary to finally take to her bed
altogether.
The chief burden of the nursing and attention
which Mrs. Tait now more and more required toward
the last, as well as the cares of the housekeeping,
fell upon her daughter Bessie, who at the same time
had to keep up her collecting for the Orphanage,
and too much praise cannot be awarded her for her
devotion and excellent management. Margaret, the


ELIZABETH TAIT


servant, proved of invaluable assistance at this trying
time, and as the end approached Mrs. Wilson and
Mrs. Sprod came to Bessie’s assistance, and, more
especially as night watchers, were of great service.
The Rev. Mr. Maxwell, and Mr. Barnaby her
minister, as well as her own sons, visited her, praying
at her bedside and speaking words of comfort and
encouragement which Mrs. Tait appreciated very much.
All her children, with the exception of William,
who was at Hobart, saw her on what was known to
be her dying bed, and to them were spoken many
kind words of love and hope and earnest entreaty,
and of these the two mentioned by Mrs. Wilson in
the “In Memoriam” notice, published in the “Church
Messenger,” are specimens; “ Tell them ” (her children
and grandchildren) “they must come to Jesus and
meet me in Heaven. Tell them to put on no
mourning for me, but to give thanks that rest has
come at last.”
The end came sooner than was expected.
Mrs. Tait appeared no worse than for some days
previous, and, after arranging household matters,
Bessie went out, leaving Mrs. Wilson watching at her
bedside. It was Monday morning, the 22nd of July,
about twelve o’clock, Mrs. Wilson noticed a change,
and going nearer found that her dear mother had
quietly passed away in her sleep, and thus reached
the Home longed for, and was at rest for ever with
the Lord and the dear ones gone before, reminding
us of the beautiful lines of Bickersteth, which
Mrs. Tait was so fond of and often recited with
great delight;
G


“ Thus Heaven is gathering one by one in her capacious
breast,
All that is pure and permanent and beautiful and blest;
The family are scattered yet, though of one home and heart,
Part militant in earthly gloom, in Heavenly glory part:
But who can speak the rapture when the circle is complete,
And all the children, sundered now, around one Father
meet, —
One fold, one Shepherd, one employ, one everlasting home ?
Lo, I come quickly, even so, Amen, Lord Jesus, come.”
Although the family all knew that their dear
mother could not be with them very long, the
announcement of her death by telegram on Monday,
22nd of July, was sufficiently startling, and those
of them who could do so hastened to the house,
mourning their great loss, and trying to console
themselves with the thought of her great gain.
The Rev. George Tait was preparing to start for
Sydney, to attend the Federal Assembly in that city.
He would not have gone, but he was told on legal
authority that his presence as Moderator of the
Victorian Church was absolutely essential. He
therefore went, hoping that he might be able to
hasten back to the funeral, which at one time it
was thought might be postponed till Thursday. As,
however, there was an uncertainty about his being
able to return in time, and on the urgent advice of
the doctor, and for Miss Tait’s sake, the funeral was
fixed for Wednesday, the 24th of July.
Mrs. Tait always had the fixed desire that her
body should lie beside that of her dear husband in
the Western Cemetery at Geelong. Indeed, long ago
a piece of ground had been purchased adjoining his


place of interment, under the impression that as
Mr. Tait’s congregation had purchased the ground
and erected the monument over the grave it should
not be disturbed. However, it was ascertained that
the ground—three allotments—was a gift to the
family as a burying-place, and that Mrs. Tait’s body
could be placed at the side of her husband’s without
interfering with the monument.
Mr. John Tait, who had come from Geelong on
Monday night, after arranging with his brother
Lithgow the local mortuary proceedings, went back
to Geelong on Tuesday evening, and obtained the
willing consent of the Rev. Arthur Davidson, Mrs.
Tait’s minister during the latter years of her stay in
Geelong, and the Rev. J. V. McNair, the minister
of the Rev. John Tait’s former congregation (the
High Church), to officiate at the grave. A short
service, conducted by the Rev. John Bamaby, was
held at the house, St. John’s Parade, Kew, early on
Wednesday morning, at which relatives and friends
in and around Melbourne were present. The body
was then conveyed to the Spencer Street Railway
Station and thence to Geelong by the mid-day train.
Lithgow came by the train from Melbourne to
Geelong, and was met at the station by Mr. John
Tait and the friends who came to pay their last
mournful respects to the deceased, one of whom,
Mr. Alexander Stewart, had known her in Paramatta.
Owing to a mistake in the announcement of the day
of the funeral, some who wished to be present were
disappointed. The day was beautifully fine, and the
service at the grave, in which both Mr. Davidson


and Mr. McNair took part, was very appropriate
and feelingly rendered. Mrs. Tait was laid to rest
by the side of her long-lost husband, there to await
the resurrection summons, when the trumpet shall
sound, and the dead in Christ shall rise to reign
with Him for ever and ever. “We sorrow not as
those who have no hope, but, believing that Jesus
died and rose again, even so them also who have
been laid asleep by Jesus will God bring with
Him.” Let us comfort one another with these
words. The following inscription was placed on the
north side of the monument, and just above the
spot where Mrs. Tait’s body lies buried:—
Also to the fHtmorj) of
ELIZABETH TAIT, Wife of the Rev. JOHN TAIT,
Born 24TH September, 1813. Died 22nd July, 1901.
“ I go to prepare a place for you. And if I go
and prepare a place for you, I will come again
and receive you unto myself; that where I am,
there ye may be also.”
“In Memoriam ” cards were in due course
printed, and sent to all relatives and friends.
Just a fortnight before Mrs. Tait’s death the
family were startled to hear of the death of their
dear sister-in-law, Minnie, their brother William’s
wife, who had been in delicate health for a long
time, and who succumbed after a serious operation
undertaken as the only hope of prolonging her life.
She died on Monday night, the Bth of July, 1901,
at Wanganui, New Zealand. Mrs. William Tait
had been staying at Manutahi, New Zealand, with


her old and tried friends, the Wilkies, and was accom-
panied to Wanganui by her devoted and kind friend,
Miss Campbell, who had waited on her during her
long and trying illness with a truly sisterly affection
and care, and now soothed and comforted her in her
dying hour. Her poor husband was greatly upset
and crushed on receiving the sad news by telegram
from Miss Campbell, and had the additional sorrow
of his mother’s death so soon after, and that, too,
when he was at Hobart, Tasmania, far from all his
relatives and friends. His mother was too weak to
be told the sad news, and died without knowing it.
G*


CHAPTER VI.
IT would be quite impossible to give a full and
just description of Mrs. Tait’s character. To
her much-loved children Mrs. Tait was the very
best of mothers, always loving and kind, ever unselfish
and good. The home was very comfortable at all
times, and was always made as pleasant and happy
as possible. Reference has been made to her
husband’s methodical habits and to the neatness
and tidiness of his study, and Mrs. Tait was no less
so in all her housekeeping arrangements. Although
by no means wanting in taste, not to say elegance,
comfort rather than show and style was the pre-
dominating feature of all the household arrangements
of the home. When Mr. and Mrs. Tait came to
the Colony of Victoria in the early days of the
gold fever, the temptation to get rich, as others
were doing, was very great, but neither of them
allowed themselves to be drawn aside from their
duty to the Church and to their family by such a
snare, but steadily devoted all their time and energy
to the building up and extending the one, and
educating the other; and thus they have left to their
children, by their noble and unselfish example, a
legacy far exceeding in value all the gold that has
been taken from Australian mines. The generosity


and unselfishness of Mrs. Tait’s character was mani-
fested in her giving up, instead of hoarding it for
her own use in old age —when indeed, alas, it was
needed—the money received under her mother’s will
for the use of her family, thus supplementing her
husband’s small stipend at Paramatta, N.S.W.; and
when they came at first to Geelong, Mrs. Tait was
heard to say that they could not have managed
without that money. It was known to the family
as the Sydney money, and amounted to from £BO
to £IOO a year. How much—how very much—
they owed to their dear good mother.
Reference has been made in previous Memorial
Reminiscences to one instance of Mr. and Mrs.
Tait’s generosity in giving all the money, viz.
,£IOO received as a testimonial, to pay for their
son’s education, and Mrs. Tait continued to manifest
the same generous spirit by giving numerous and
valuable gifts to her children. But her chief
contribution was giving two of her sons to the
ministry of the Church—assisting them in their
University course of study in Melbourne—enabling
them to go to Scotland and continue their studies
there. This was done almost entirely at her own
expense, without obtaining any assistance from the
Church. And when relieved from this strain upon
her income it was her custom to give liberally and
largely to all Christian work, Missions and such
like, more especially to the China Inland Mission
and Missions to the Jews, in which latter her interest
was intense. One of her last commissions was to
give £1 to a needy Christian friend, and her chief


regret in respect to her smaller income was her
inability to gratify, as formerly, her generous feelings
by contributing to her favourite missions.
But the outstanding and distinguishing feature
in Mrs. Tait’s beautiful character was her religious
life—the spirituality of her mind and heart. God
was everything to her. He was in all her thoughts.
The Rev. Mr. Barnaby said that he never met any
one whose mind was so occupied with spiritual things,
and the Rev. Mr. Maxwell confirmed his statement.
And the Rev. D. S. McEachran, who knew Mrs. Tait
so well and was well able to judge of her state of
mind, thus writes:—“ I always regarded your mother
as a devout, earnest, tender, spiritually-minded
Christian, who sought to walk humbly and softly
with God. Her death, while a cause of sorrowing, is
also a cause of rejoicing. Your mother has been
gathered home as a shock of com fully ripe.”
And he thus further comments on her death:
“Mrs. McEachran tells me that your mother was
wearying to go home. And what a change has
death made to her; who can tell the joy entered
into; gone to take her place among the spirits of
the just made perfect, and to meet loved ones who
have gone before, and, what is better still, gone to be
for ever with the Lord. What must have been her
amazement and joy to have passed at once from her
bed of languishing into the presence of her Lord,
and all the great and good who have served Him
in every generation. May we be stirred up to be
followers of them who through faith and patience
are now inheriting the promises.”


Before her marriage serious things engaged her
attention very much, and although in the early days
of her married life the cares of a young family
absorbed her attention, prayer and reading the Bible
were never neglected, and her children were diligently
and carefully trained in “ the nurture and admonition
of the Lord” both by precept and example. During
her husband’s life Mrs. Tait naturally looked to him
for spiritual nourishment and quickening, and sat at
his feet and learned from him those sober, robust,
and thoroughly evangelical views of Divine truth
that so eminently characterised his preaching and
teaching. After his decease Mrs. Tait was thrown
back as it were on her own resources, and drank
deeply from the living fountain of truth itself. The
Bible was her constant companion, and an unfailing
source of strength and comfort to her soul. Besides
which, Hawke’s “ Daily Portion ” was used by her as
devotional reading for many years, Mrs. Tait having
her well-worn copy rebound. Her acquaintance
with Mr. Landells, to which reference has already
been made, whose devout and earnest spirit was
akin to her own, brought under her notice
Spurgeon’s “Morning by Morning,” a copy of which
Mr. Landells kindly presented to her. The quaint
and racy thoughts of the great Baptist preacher
interested her much, and, without dispensing altogether
with Hawke’s, she used Spurgeon’s book ever after-
wards, and added his “Evening by Evening” series
to it. The little devotional text-book “ Daily
Light” was also a favourite of hers, and both the
morning and evening series were used constantly.


During the last ten years of her life great delight
was found in the Rev. George Bowen’s “ Daily
Meditations,” and her pencil-marks show how much
the author’s striking thoughts on the texts selected
were appreciated.
Mrs. Tait read very extensively in all departments
of Christian literature, not only weekly and monthly
periodicals, but books of biography, etc., thoroughly
enjoying a good book, and entering most fully
into the aspirations and feelings of like-minded
Christian men and women. George Muller was a
special favourite of hers: his strong faith w r as greatly
admired, and being greatly interested in the success
of his Orphanages Mrs. Tait went to see and
hear him when he visited Australia. Dr. Barnardo,
Spurgeon, D. L. Moody, and indeed many others,
were favourites of hers. Latterly, Mrs. Tait was
much interested in the career of Herman Warszawick
and his work among the Jews in New York; and
indeed her interest was great in anything that
concerned the Jews. Her sympathies were broad and
wide, taking in all sections of the Christian Church.
Mrs. Tait was accustomed to write down in a
note-book, or on pieces of paper, anything considered
particularly striking or beautiful. Reference has
already been made to Mrs. Tait’s habits of prayer,
and also to the exercise of her gift in leading the
prayers of others, in connection with the Prayer
Meeting held in her house at 7, Skene Street,
Geelong. Mrs. Tait was pre-eminently a woman of
prayer, not only at stated times, but continually;
her mind and soul were always in a prayerful


spirit, ever endeavouring to fulfil the precept, “ Pray
without ceasing,”—and more especially intercessory
prayer, for her children first, but chiefly for missions
and for the furtherance of Christ’s cause and
Kingdom throughout the world. And thus “ growing
in grace from day to day, ever increasing in the
knowledge of the Lord, and becoming more and
more meet for the inheritance above,” Mrs. Tait
was eagerly anticipating the joyful meeting of the
glorified saints around the Throne, and has now
joined that great company in the Father’s Home on
high. Her children sorrowfully bid farewell to their
dear devoted mother until they meet her again,
together with their much-loved and honoured father,
in that bright Home, never, never more to part.
“loved with such love, and with such sorrow
MOURNED.”


THE following are the surviving members of the
late Rev. John Tait’s family:
Mrs. Lillie Wilson (widow of the late Rev. F. R. M.
Wilson), Canterbury, Melbourne; William B. Tait,
F.R.A., Auckland, New Zealand ; John Tait, Haw-
thorn, Melbourne ; the Rev. George Tait, M.A., South
Yarra, Melbourne ; Bessie Tait, Kew, Melbourne ; the
Rev.' Lithgow C. Tait, M.A., Kyneton, Victoria; and
Annie Catharine Tait, Hawthorn, Melbourne.
LONDON: FINDEN BROWN AND CO., 15, CRAVEN STREET, CHARING CROSS, W.C.


