

3M= D
610
Hit Utmorg
duriurn JFxnk
ItUlciJ tn Hattie
(gallipot!
iHag 2n ts, 1915




Dardanelles,
25th April, 1915.
May I, speaking out of a full heart, be permitted
to say how gloriously the Australian and New
Zealand contingents have upheld the finest traditions
of our race, during this struggle still in progress—
at first with audacity and dash, since then with
sleepless valor and untiring resource. They have
already created for their country an unperishable
record of military virtue.
lAN HAMILTON,
Commander-in-Chief of the Allied
Forces in the Eastern Mediterranean.




(garbnn Jfntk
Horn at“ UrnrdtanbE,” -J3arra, IHxe.
Slat llotrEmbEr, 1884
HUllefc in (SalltpoU,
Snb Jltag, 1915


At School
The Grange Preparatory School,
South Yarra. (Miss Turner)
“ Cumloden,” East St. Kilda
(W. Martin-Burn)
Mr. James Clezy, m.a.
1903-6
Melbourne University (Ormond
College)
9th April, 1907
Bachelor of Laws, Melbourne
University.
Admitted to practise as a Barris-
ter and Solicitor, Supreme
Court, Victoria.
3rd August, 1908
1907 ■ 1909
Served as Gunner of Australian
Field Artillery.
6th July. 1909
2nd Lieutenant Australian Field
Artillery.
February, 1910 to
April. 1911
April. 1911
Left Australia for Malay States.
Returned to Australia and settled
in Kununoppin, Western Aus-
tralia, with Carl Pirani.
29th July. 1913 ...
Called to the Bar in Western
Australia.
3rd Sept, 1914
Enlisted Perth, Western Aus-
tralia.
22nd Dec., 1914
Left for Egypt with 16th Bat-
t alien, 4th Brigade, 2nd
Expeditionary Force.


Ibttera almut dtorium
From letter
from COLONEL MONASH
Gallipoli,
12 th May, 1915
(Brigadier)
to his wife
I am sorry to have to impose upon you the painful duty of
letting Mr. and Mrs. Theodore Fink know all that can
he told about the loss of their son.
Among the many hundreds of killed, wounded, and missing
in the heavy fighting which has been continuous for the past
three weeks, it has been very difficult to get any particulars
or to trace the course of all the details. You may well
imagine that my hands have been more than full, and there
has been scarcely a moment’s breathing time. I have only
to-day been able to get reliable particulars about young
Fink.
On the night of Sunday, May 2/3, the 16 th Battalion was
ordered to attack a strong position held by the enemy, a ridge
from which our line of supply could be threatened, and to
hold same till dawn. Young Fink was acting as Observer
to Major Mansbridge, who commanded the centre of this
attack. Preceded by a heavy artillery' bombardment, I
launched the attack at 7.15 p.m., and the Battalion very
gallantly gained and held the ridge. Later in the night the
firing line was running short of ammunition, and young
Fink volunteered to carry more out. This he did very gal-
lantly, in the face of heavy machine fire ; but, like so many
others of his Battalion, he did not return. Although his
name is returned as missing, I am afraid he was certainly
killed in action, as all the wounded were got in before the
firing line withdrew at dawn.
The charge of this Battalion, in which young Fink took
part, was one of the most gallant and glorious of the many
fine feats of arms which stand to the credit of Australian
soldiers.
Tell Mr. and Mrs. Fink how deeply sorry I am to tell
them this very sad news.




MAJOR W. O. MANSBRIDGE
16th Battalion.
Gallipoli,
12 th June, 1915.
Theodore Fink, Esq.
Dear Sir, —I waited so long Jor writing materials that
now I think it advisable, while there is yet light, to convey
to Mrs. Fink and yourself heartfelt sympathies on the death
of your son Gordon, and, if I may be permitted, to convey my
appreciation of the services rendered by him.
He did yeoman service during the anxious six nights and
five days in which my Company held the left flank of our
outpost position, with the Turks on three sides of us. Many
fine fellows went down, but we resisted the persistent attacks.
Eventually we were relieved, and retired down Monash
Gully. We and our tired fellows were subjected to mur-
derous firing from snipers. Gordon did much here in patch-
ing up the wounded.
We received orders on Sunday evening, the 2nd May, to
storm ridge now known as “Bloody Angle.” We carried
out the orders, but at what a cost! Your son, who was my
personal observer—that is, he was always with me in the
firing line—requested permission to assist the ammunition
carriers to get the necessary wherewithal into the trenches
{being dug). I gave my assent, with the condition to be
careful, and I never saw the poor boy alive again. No man
was braver in the Company ; in fact, sometimes it bordered
on recklessness, and I was continually warning him.
Our casualties have been very heavy ; my Company alone
at the roll call only mustered 28 out of a total of 219. At the
moment one cannot realise that so many brave and true men
have gone to their rest. Our Battalion, out of a total of
1013, mustered under 200.
Trusting Mrs. Fink and yourself are well, and with
every kind wish,
Believe me.
Yours truly,
W. O. MANSBRIDGE. Major.
P.S.—I have heard that Pirani returned to Australia from
Heliopolis.—W.O.M.


Anzac Cove, Gallipoli,
18 th June, 1915.
My Dear Pirani y
I have just now received your note per Mr. Chalvel, not
dated, asking about poor Fink. The poor fellow was killed,
night of 2nd May, during the storming of the “Bloody Angle,"
but his death was not known until a fortnight afterwards,
or, should I say, until the Turk obtained an armistice to
bury his dead, when we did likewise. Fink’s body was
recognised, and his pay-book obtained. Tibbs, my batman,
has the remains of the small field glasses which he carried.
These are, however, but of action, having been repeatedly
hit by shrapnel.
I have written to Fink’s father, conveying my sympathies
and appreciation of Gordon's services. His work here under
fire was heroic ; in fact, the poor chap’s conduct bordered on
recklessness. The few of the old hands who remain and knew
him speak highly of his fearlessness.
You will be, I am sure, sorry to know that of the 219 of
“A ’’ Coy., only 28 and myself were able to answer the roll
call. It made my heart bleed, and, in fact, I can hardly
retain myself now when I think that so many good and true
men have gone. However, we have not lost heart, and intend,
despite the consequences, to keep the flag flying. We have
Johnny Turk well in hand. He likens the Australian to the
South Sea cannibal, and thought we were black ; but since
we have come in contact with him, he thinks we are more
dreadful than the Bulgar, and he is the devil incarnate with
the Turk.
We are building up the regiment slowly, but a lot of
leeway requires to be made to build up to 1023, our strength,
from 183, which was our total after the week’s work.
I am pleased to learn that your health was so far sufficiently
good to permit of your returning home, and may you continue
to make satisfactory progress towards a complete recovery.
With my kindest regard,
Yours truly,
W. O. MANSBRIDGE.


Statement made to Lt. Col. Reay,
at Red Cross Hospital, Congleton,
England, on 13th July, 1915, by
PRIVATE SUTHERLAND, 16th
Battalion, Australians.
I live close to Gordon Fink’s place at Kununoppin,
Western Australia. My dad knew him before we enlisted.
He was in the same platoon as I. I knew him perfectly well.
There is no doubt about that. A man named Leake is a
private in the same platoon, comes from the same district as
Private Fink, and knows him well.
The landing at Gaba Tepe took place in the morning,
and we landed in the evening of the same day. Fink was
with us, and attached to Major Mansbridge. There was
fighting all the time, and by 2nd May we had only 24 of the
platoon left. We were on the left of the position, and the
Turks were sniping down a gully further on the left. We
were sent on Sunday, 2nd May, to try to clear out the snipers,
and went up the gully. We were driven back by the
Turks on the following day [Monday). I did not see
Gordon Fink, who was with us during the movement,
either on the way up or coming down, as we were acting in
extended order and he was not near me. I was wounded—
shot in both legs, one of them broken —pretty early in
the fight, and brought to the rear. I was sent on to
No. 17 General Hospital, Alexandria. A fortnight later
one of the platoon named Bolton came in there and told
me that Private Fink was missing. That was the first I
heard of it. Later on Private Leake was brought in
wounded to the hospital at Alexandria. He told me that
he was all right and on duty when the armistice took place
on 2Ath May. It was he who told me about the armistice.
He said that he had helped to bring in our men, and that they
had found Private Fink. I don’t know whether Leake said
that the identification disc had been found, but Leake did
say that they could only recognise Gordon Fink by his pay-
book and by the papers found in his clothes. Leake did not
say that he had seen Private Fink buried. I don’t think he
told me what was done with the pay-book and papers, but I
suppose they were handed to an officer. It was nearly a
month after I came that Leake came to the hospital at Alex-
andria. He said that the bodies brought in during the
armistice included those of men who had fallen three weeks
before. Leake is badly wounded, and I think he must still
be at Alexandria. He has the best information about Gordon
Fink, unless Major Mansbridge has it.


\
I||||i|
jr
W V/
TO 1 U . i
* *
March of Second Australian Expeditionary Force, through Melbourne, Deo. 17, 1914. 16th Battalion passing
Town Hall. Brigade-Commander Colonel Monash, at salute. Major W, 0. Mansbridge, at head of Battalion (since
decorated D S.o ); to his left Corporal Skinner. Front rank (left to right): Angus Cramond, Gordon Fink, Harry
Leake, Carl Pirani (all of Kununoppin, Western Australia).


Mr. E. POPE,
Kununoppin,
with extract from
Lt. Col. Pope, 16th Battalion.
West Australia,
1 5th July, 1915.
Dear Mr. Fink,
Though I am almost a stranger to you, I hope you will
allow me to condole with you on the loss you have recently
sustained. We shall miss your son very greatly hereabouts.
My brother, Col. Pope, writes to me about him—Gordon
“Fink—who was a perfect hero —one who did not know what
fear meant—was killed in a big fight we had attacking
a high ridge held by Turks on the night of 2nd/3rd May,
when the 16 th lost very heavily in carrying out a job more
than equal to storming the heights of Dargai.”
I feel sure that this will be of interest to you at such a time
With renewed expressions of sympathy,
Believe me, Yours sincerely,
E. POPE.


Gordon Fink and Harry Leake, both of 16th Battalion.
Taken by Thorold, at “Cathay,” Toorak, 13th Dec., 1914.


No. 161 “A” Company, 16th Battalion,
D. P. H. Hospital ,
Alexandria.
4 th Brigade A
Intermediate Base Depot,
Alexandria, 30 th July, 1915.
Hon. Theodore Fink
Collins Street,
Melbourne, Australia.
Dear Mr. Fink, —Please accept my deepest sympathy at
the death of your son Gordon, who was killed in action on
2nd May, 1915, but I am sure you and Mrs. Fink will be
consoled by the fact that he died gloriously.
On the evening of 2nd May our battalion made an advance
forward to take up a new position, and Gordon, who was
Major Mansbridge’s observer, left the major to assist the
ammunition carriers get the boxes of ammunition up to our
new trenches.
There was one place where they had to go through a perfect
hail of bullets, and Gordon was the only one who would face it.
He got across safely with two or three boxes, and was then
unfortunately shot through the head. Death was evidently
instantaneous.
We had to retire from the trenches the next morning, and
he was put down as missing until his death was confirmed
by the recovery of his pay-book and disc on the day of the
armistice some days later.
I am giving you as full an account as I possibly can,
because I feel sure you will like to have full details from one
who was his friend and who feels his loss very much.
I trust the censors will not consider it necessary to obliterate
any passages in this letter.
Please convey my sympathy to Mrs. Fink and the other
members of your family.
I remain,
Yours sincerely.
HARRY W. LEAKE.
PS.—I am being sent to the convalescent camp next week,
after being nine weeks in hospital here in Alexandria recover-
ing from a shrapnel wound through the side.


Letter from
MAJOR MANSBRIDGE.
The following letter from Major Mansbridge, D.S.O
appeared in a recent issue of the '‘Daily News,” Perth
‘‘We have been away from the fire trenches for two days,
and we were not withdrawn too early, as all our poor fellows,
or, at least, those of them that are left, are completely worn
out and weary. Australia has done well, and much of the
magnificent material we brought with us, I regret to say,
will remain here. However, around here the Australian as a
soldier and a fighter is par excellence. The English papers
are ringing with his praises. Ido not want any better to
lead or take into action. Our regiment, I understand, suf-
fered the most of any Australian unit. Our losses are
per cent. Think of it! Do you wonder at one’s heart
bleeding? Speaking of my own company, I must say I
wept to see the poor fellows bowled over. After the first
week, when I don’t remember even lying down, we were
posted right on a pinnacle, with the Turks on three sides of us.
We determined to fight it out ; in fact, I had made provision
for this course with heavy supplies of ammunition. As for
food we had tinned meat and hard biscuits for four days.
On the fourth day the good doctor, Captain MacGregor,
sent me a pannikin of tea (the first), and it was a luxury.
My regrets are that many of the finest men the world can
produce are buried at the foot of this hill, which is now known
as Pope’s Hill. The Sunday after we landed we advanced to a
ridge on the right of Pope’s. The Turks stood up to it man-
fully, but we managed to entrench our section. Oh, the agony
of it all through the night, with the rattle of musketry, the yells
of dying men, the strains of ‘Tipperary,’ and dead men
everywhere. Gordon Fink, who was my observer, and
always at my side, asked if he could give a hand carrying
ammunition up the side of a hill we call ‘Bloody Angle.’
I reluctantly gave permission, and that was the last I
saw of him. His body was found 14 days later shot
through the head. Poor Tibbs ; he was faithful, and stuck
to me. He had a bullet through his equipment, while in the
front the water bottle and haversack were also pierced with
bullets. Captain Blythe and myself are the only officers left
of ‘A’ Company; only two of my sergeants are with me,
and a corporal. As a fighting unit we are non-existent.
However, lam proud to say the 16 th Battalion has made a
name for Australia and itself, and when the history of the
war is written, it’s record, although short, will be one of
glorious pluck and determination. Private Leake, of Keller-
berrin, my other observer, was badly wounded yesterday.”


To himself and his father’s house eternal fame;
And, which is best and happiest yet, all this
With God not parted from him,
But favouring and assisting to the end.
Nothing is here for tears, nothing to wail
Or knock the breast, no weakness, no contempt,
Dispraise or blame —nothing but well and fair.
And what may quiet us in a death so noble.
Milton (Samson Agonistes .)


