

cn\ f r
PUBLISHED BY REQUEST
In iVlemoriam
Per Gracious majesty
gueen Victoria.
Sermon Preached in St. Stephen’s Church, Sydney,
on Sabbath, January 27th, 1901,
by Rev. Professor Harper, M A., 8.D., of Ormond College, Melbourne.
Issued by a Committee of the Audience.
Born map 24tD. 1819.
Ascended Ibe Cbrone. 1837.
Died Januarp 22nd. 1901.
PRESENTATION EDITION.
Sgbntg:
ANGUS & ROBERTSON, 89 Castlereaqh Street.
C, C. MIHELL, Pitt Street, next y.m.c.a.






4>
O
’>
u
13
*C
o
E
4>
S
4)
£
-4-*
t. f
0 w
T 3
4>
O.
C 3
u
■O
CO
C 5
? «
3
•C
"i/3
C
V
1
a
0)
* #
o
u
o
*C
a>
c


e B)cath of the Queen
Text; Job v., 26. Thou shalt come to thy grave in a full age, like as a
shook of corn cometh in in his season.
Script.: Job v., 6. Revelations vn., 1-4, 9-17.
We come together to-day as part of a nation of mourners,
saddened by the death of our Sovereign Lady, Queen Victoria, one of
the most powerful rulers of the world, and perhaps the most beneficent
that has reigned within the memory of man. Her Lmpire extended
over half the world. Under her sway were men of almost every race.
Almost every known religion was freely tolerated under her govern-
ment. And to-day, from all quarters of the earth, from every race, in
the temples of every religion, there goes up a cry of sorrow for the
death of this noble lady, as for a personal bereavement. Death, which
comes with equal foot to the palace and the cottage, has come to her,
and she has been summoned away from all the splendour of her lot
and the glory of her power, to the unfailingly just, and tender, and
sympathetic judgment of the ever-living God. It might seem, there-
fore, a time to treat of the transiency of earthly things, of the vanity
of human wishes, of the inadequacy of any earthly grandeur to meet
the real, permanent, needs of any human soul. It might seem a time
to deal with the contrast between earthly power and pride, and the
equality imposed by death, the leveller. These have been the common-
places of preachers at the death of Princes, and many a time they
have been pressed home with such power, that even the most frivolous
hangers-on of the Court have been sobered for a moment. But such
topics have really no place when we think of the Queenly life which
ended four days ago, in the chill of a winter evening, far off across the
sea. Had it been a life of material splendour, of ostentation in the
exhibition of riches, had there been a pagan pride exhibited in the
holding of such unmeasured power, then there would have been an
opportunity, a demand, to proclaim the triumph of death, to show
how in a moment at his touch all that power and might had become
like the chaff of the summer threshing floors, and had been borne
away as by the viewless wind. But in the life of Queen Victoria all
was otherwise. Though tenacious of all that concerned personal
dignity, she never valued grandeur. She sought happiness in a
simple life, and fled, as some thought too much, from the pomps and
splendours of royalty to her home in the Highlands of Scotland. And
her power, and the power of the great Empire which she saw growing
with such marvellous rapidity under her hand, never intoxicated her.
She never spoke of her glories, but she often spoke of her cares. The
anxiety to do right was constantly present to her mind ; and the men
she loved and honoured most, were those who seemed to her to have,
the surest vision to guide her in that path. No, we are not called
to-day to press home the lesson of the transitoriness of earthly glory.
We are called rather to think of a noble nature, formed and shaped
by the heaviest responsibilities which could rest upon a human being,
of a heart made “ sad and sure at once by many sufferings and one


love,” of a mind tempered to endurance and fortitude by the widest
reaching cares, of a life shaped to the finest issues, finishing its
development by a quiet death when bodily weakness was beginning
to make life a weariness. What we are called to think of is the com-
plete and wonderful way in which the promise of our text was fulfilled
in the death of our beloved sovereign : “ Thou shalt come to thy
grave in a full age, like as a shock of corn cometh in in his season.”
That, it is true, was the utterance of Eliphaz, one of the mistaken
friends of Job. But he was the least mistaken, and the noblest
minded; and he set forth with all the eloquence of close observation
and ripe experience and with unequalled truth, the ordinary course of
divine dealings with men. And he tells us here, how a life of
strenuous duty lived in the fear of God ordinarily and most fittingly
ends. It ends naturally, beneficently, at the most fitting time, and
neither our grief at the national loss, nor our natural enmity to death,
ought to blind us to the fact that
“ Nothing is here for tears, nothing to wail
Or knock the breast; no weakness, no contempt,
Dispraise or blame; nothing but well and fair,
And what may quiet us in a death so noble.”
GROWTH OF HER PUBLIC CHARACTER.
But we owe thanks to God for all she was and did, and to-day we
desire to recall with warmest gratitude the debt she laid her people
under as a Sovereign. There are few now living who can recall, as a
personal memory, the political and social state of Great Britain at the
beginning of the Queen’s reign. When she was awakened at dawn by
the great officials of the kingdom, to receive their homage as Queen,
on the somewhat sudden death of her uncle, King William IV.,
she was only a girl of 18. She was totally without experience
of life, for the Court of those times was such that a good woman like
her mother had no choice in bringing up her daughter between seclu-
sion and a lowering of the tone of her character. She had no con-
spicuously wise advisers, for though Lord Melbourne, the Prime
Minister of the time, won her gratitude by his chivalrous kindness, he
was not a man of the highest ability, and was probably less wise than
he was able. Until her marriage, some three years after she had as-
cended the throne, she had greatly to rely upon herself, and neither
then nor afterwards did she make any serious mistake. She grasped at
once the most difficult principle of constitutional government, that a
free people can not be hindered by authority from going wrong, that
when it believes in that which is false, or determined to do that which
is evil, there is no remedy save to wait for the teaching of experience,
and to ward off meanwhile as much of the disastrous effects' as can be
warded off. Consequently, she never threw herself across the path of
her people, and though the wise and disinterested advice of her great
Consort may have helped her to steadfastness, yet her own intellect
must have first grasped that truth, and that fact stamps her as gifted
with exceptional mental power. For we must not forget that until
her accession personal rule still lingered. Her predecessor still held
4
Cbc Death of the Queen*


that he had a right to dismiss his Ministers even when they possessed
the confidence of Parliament, and to summon others who had not.
But with the accession of Queen Victoria all that passed away, and
the full acceptance of constitutional liberty began. That brought with
it great changes. In 1882, five years before King William died, the Re-
form Bill had taken the governing power out of the hands of the
wealthy land-owning upper classes, and given it into the hands of the
middle class. The effects of that were just beginning to be realised
when he died ; and from the beginning of the Queen’s reign we must
date that march to full democratic freedom which ends logically only
with the universal suffrage of every adult man and woman, to which
we are now so near. We, who have seen the end only of the quiet
but enormous revolution, which has placed the final decision on all
things which concern the welfare of the country in the hands of the
people, can hardly realize with what agonies of apprehension it was
entered upon, with what distrust each new step forward was received.
To us, now, Thomas Carlyle’s shrieking pamphlet “Shooting Niagara and
After,’’ with which he greeted only one of the steps in the process, seem
simply hysterical. But something like that must have been the feeling
of all those who had been brought up among the ruling class. Nay,
we may say with confidence that few or none of the Reformers of 1882
would have put their hand to the plough had they seen where the fur-
row was to end. To the Queen, therefore, much of the change she
lived through must have been distasteful. At many points her doubts
as to the result of the course her advisers were taking, must have been
little short of overwhelming. Many a time her desire for the welfare
of her people must have thrown her into feverish anxiety ; and the goaf
to which things were moving must have been absolutely hid from her
eyes. Yet we can only conjecture that these things were so ; for she
never departed in her public action from the whole hearted acceptance
of her role as a Constitutional Sovereign. Friends whom she person-
ally loved and trusted might be driven from her counsels as the issue
of the Parliamentary warfare, and men much less acceptable thrust
upon her ; but she never failed to work with them. Measures she dis-
liked were often presented for her acceptance, but she never caused
danger to the throne, nor shook the loyalty of her people, by rejecting
them at her own personal will. Many and many a time, during her
long reign, the temptation must have presented itself to her to throw
herself into the political arena, with all the prestige of the crown, to
side with one party or another. But she never yielded to it, nor
seemed to wish to yield. Through that long progress towards com-
plete democracy, our beloved Sovereign has sat, to all outward appear-
ance almost stoically calm, never swerving from her path as a
constitutional Sovereign ; letting her people work out their own
destinies, trusting God and their political instinct for a happy issue
out of all the troubles which might arise. Only a masculine intellect
could have so grasped and held the cardinal principle of British freedom,
only a conscience trained in the fear and love of God could have kept
her to the path of duty with such iron consistency. And surely she
has had her reward. When she became Queen, the Throne had little
5
CDc Dcalb of m Queen.


hold upon either the affections or the imagination of the people. The
character of some of her predecessors had been such as to give
encouragement to wild republican ideas, and to some it seemed only a
question of time when the rule of Kings should cease. But throughout
her reign of three and sixty years the prestige of the Crown has con-
tinuously increased, the love of the people has gathered round it as never
before, save, perhaps, in the days of Queen Elizabeth. The influence
of the Sovereign upon the course of politics has again and legitimately
become very great, and royalty throughout the world has been rehab-
ilitated in the eyes of the nations. For many years now, her unrivalled
experience, her masculine ability, her love of justice, her passion for
peace, her womanly sympathy with suffering, and her transparent
desire only for her people’s welfare, have based her throne upon the
rock of unmeasured trust and love. Above all party cries, and remote
from the tumult of political warfare, Queen Victoria became to her
subjects the embodiment of justice, and truth and peace, and she has
left to the time to come an utterly unshakeable belief that constitutional
•monarchy, as she conceived it, is the most perfect form of Government
to secure to all men liberty and justice.
GROWTH OF HER PRIVATE CHARACTER.
And as her power and might as a ruler grew, and made her the
centre of a national life so vigorous that the Empire has grown to
multifold strength in her one reign, so also can we trace a constant
growth to higher levels in the late Queen’s personal character. She
came to the throne an innocent girl, endowed with natural firmness
and dignity, and from that moment she brought back the Court to a
purity such as it had hardly known before. We have no need to tar-
nish the record of her ancestors in order to make her reign glorious in
this respect. But all historians agree that during the immediately
preceding reigns, at least, the tone of Society was deplorably low, and
the Court was rather below than above the Society of the day. With
her accession, all that stained the purity of family life had to abandon
the Court, or to hide its head, and so it continued throughout her
reign. She was always and everywhere an inexorable foe of license,
and on more than one occasion she was the one fatal obstacle to the
rehabilitation of evil men. And it was well for Britain that she had
established righteous living as the fashion of her Court in the earlier
and better days of the Century. For in these latter days, when the
wondrous change in our ways of thought wrought by the immense
advances of science, have infected us with the moral laxity of a trans-
ition time, it has been a fact of immense value that the royal influence
has been so decisively thrown into the scale of the highest moral life.
A quarter of a century ago it almost seemed as if Faith had been mor-
tally wounded. Then, as always where faith fails, men began to doubt
the validity of the moral sanctions which had been sacred hitherto.
Literature next deserted the cause of purity, and sank correspondingly
in power. It seemed as if it was going to become in Britain as in
some other countries, the handmaid of corruption. If it
has not permanently been so, if men’s minds are turning away in
6
tDe Death of the Queen.


healthy nausea from corrupting thought and corrupting reading in
England, there can be no doubt that one outstanding cause has been
the pure life of the highest lady in the land, and of those she specially
honored with her friendship. From her earliest and most inexperi-
enced years she gave us this priceless benefit. And as the years went
by, bringing to the Queen the joys and the sorrows of life, they only
strengthened her character, and brightened the lustre of her virtues.
First of all, she had, for a Queen, the almost unique good fortune to
marry where the love of her heart directed her choice, and for 20 years
she tasted the highest happiness life has to give, in union with Prince
-Albert, a man of noble character, who gave her a whole-hearted love
in return. It is not easy for those outside of Court circles to know
much that is true of the life of the great. The tales that appear con-
cerning them from time to time in newspapers and books of fashionable
gossip, are for the most part the product either of malignity or adula-
tion. But our late gracious Queen has taken us all into the secret of
these happy years in her journal of her life in the Highlands. In the
sweet serai-solitude of Balmoral we see the mutual love of husband and
wife growing stronger even than the quenching waters of death. We
see the aspirations of the Royal pair for the good of the nation
taking even more daring flights in the atmosphere of their great
happiness, and just when their happiness was most perfect, when
the father’s hand was most needed for their children, when they
had nothing to ask for in life save that their life might only
goon as it then was, “God’s finger touched her husband and he
slept.” Out of the highest and most solemn happiness that life can
give, Queen Victoria was dashed at once into its most irreparable
sorrow, and her life had to creep for 40 years on broken wing. Most
often such griefs shake the character to its foundations, and turn men
to sullen rebellion against God. But she recovered from that
staggering blow, and addressed herself with almost heroic courage to
the life of self-sacrificing duty which was all that now remained to
her. Her heart’s love she gave to her children, and watched over
them with unsurpassed motherly devotion. To the nation she
turned with all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge brought to
her by “ God’s healing angel, Pain.” “In that fierce light which
beats upon a throne, and blackens every blot,” she showed what
Browning has called the finest “ woman’s manliness ” and seemed
to grow in self repression, in reticence, in devotion to the people’s
good in each one of her lonely years. And how lonely they must have
been ! It is the penalty of high position that it shuts away from that
equality in which alone friendship can exist. Her one equal, the man
she worshipped, was taken away from her, and she had alone to “ go
forth companionless, among new men, strange faces, other minds.”
Her children grew up, and entered into intimate relations with others.
Death removed sons and grandsons, and sons-in-law. One by one
those she had been familiar with in her happy years passed away, and
the inexorable years darkened round herself, enfeebling her powers.
Her heart might easily have died of solitude. But all that seemed to
those who watched her public acts, only to widen her sympathies.
7
Che Death of the Queen.


She knew the burden of life as many in humbler positions never have
known it; and her heart went out to all the sorrowful. She seemed
to grow pathetically eager to bear the burdens of others, and wherever
there was a conspicuous grief, or a public misfortune, or a crushing
calamity, the great Queen was always first with her word of comfort
and support.
And the secret of her patient continuance lay undoubtedly in her
Christian Faith. She chose in quiet reticent ways to let it be known
that she knew by experience what Keble has sung
Who hath the Father and the Son
May be left, hut not alone.
and her religious life was conspicuously sane, sincere, and tolerant.
She was the head of the Church of England, and was loyal to
it. But always when in Scotland she worshipped along with her
cottars and farmers in the little Presbyterian Church, standing with
them on a common level before the King of Kings and Lord of
Lords. And the simple and reverent worship of the Church of our
fathers touched her greatly. She has left a most vivid account of
the first Presbyterian Communion service she saw. Its manifest
nearness to the great scene it represented drew her to it, and after
that day she regularly partook of the Lord’s Supper in the Scottish
manner whenever opportunity offered. In the first and darkest days
of her great grief she found help and consolation, too, in the
ministrations of more than one Presbyterian minister, notably Dr.
Norman McLeod, and in her little parish kirk among the hills
she had visions of God which brought with them the consolation she
sought so eagerly and needed so sorely. Surely, she was one of those
for whom “ all things must work together for good, because she loved
God.” Out of weakness she was made strong, and became more
than conqueror through Christ that loved her.”
Long ago, while yet her greatest grief was still fresh, Tennyson,
in his dedication to her of the Idylls of the King, wrote —
May all love.
His love, unseen, but felt, o’ershadow thee.
The love of all thy sons encompass thee,
The love of all thy daughters cherish thee.
The love of all thy people comfort thee.
Till God’s love set thee at his side again.
The first part of this prayer has been most richly answered
throughout all the years since then, and in these present days the last
has been fulfilled before our eyes.
There can be no cause of grief in that, but rather of solemn joy.
Our late revered Sovereign has laid down that crown which had
become “ a lonely splendour,” and has departed whither her yearning
heart has called her all these 40 years.
Nothing is here for tears, nothing to wail.
She has come to her grave in a full age, like as a shock of corn
cometh in in its season, and around her now —
“ Those angel faces smile
Which she had loved long since and lost awhile.”
8
CDe Death or m Queen.




Sgbiug
Marchant & Co„ The City Press,
289 Pitt Street,
