

IN MEMORY
§mn Colkn IpctMtj), m.b.
Captain, Australian Army
Medical Corps,
Who eEIL at EgRBERTSHOHE, September 11, 1914,
active Service with the First Australian
Military Expedition,
New Guinea.


This tribute to the memory of a brave, good lad was
written out for his home from notes of an address in
St. Paul’s College Chapel, and of a speech at the
prize-giving of the Church of England Grammar
School, North Sydney. It is now printed in response
to suggestions from various quarters that the address
should be made available for a wider circle of friends
and acquaintances. Any proceeds that may result
from its sale will be given to the Red Cross Society.
L. B. RADFORD.


S. John xv. 13: "Greater love hath no man than this,
that a man lay down his life for his friends”
Wisdom of Solomon iv. 13: “He, being made perfect
in a short time, fulfilled a long time.”
There is but one thing to do this morning, and that is
to try to interpret and intensify the thoughts and feel-
ings which have been stirring in our minds this past
week, ever since the news of Brian Pockley’s death
brought home to us all so sharply the reality of danger
and the cost of duty. Yet from the first moment of
realisation the College was proud as well as sad. We
had given our best, and he had gone from us by the
best of all deaths, a death brought a step nearer to
himself by surrendering to the safety of another man’s
life the badge of mercy which might have protected
his own life. “Greater love hath no man than this,
that a man lay down his life for his friends.”
We are the poorer for the loss of his companion-
ship ; but we are far the richer, not only for the elo-
quent significance of his life and death, but also for


the new and wonderful sense of something which is,
after all, a realisation of one aspect of “the communion
of saints,” as we find ourselves conscious and certain
beyond all doubt of the permanence of his personality
in the vast order of things of which this world and
life are but part.
Three ways at least there are in which we cannot but
think of his passing. First and plainest, it is the set-
ting of a standard. His life told always for every-
thing gentle and pure as well as for everything true
and strong. He taught us all more than he dreamed
or we realised, and he taught even more by what he
just was in himself than by what he said or did. And
now his life stands forth in a new glory of service and
sacrifice which will be for many a generation of fresh-
men and graduates a very beacon-light of college
tradition. Perhaps here in part lies the secret of the
mystery of his early passing. Sometimes a standard
must be lifted to a higher plane, not only to be seen
more clearly and brightly by all men than it was seen
by the inner circle of friends in whose midst it moved
quietly along, but also to be seen afresh, even by those
who thought they knew it best, in the true setting
of its divine origin and its eternal destiny. Something
of the truth of our Lord's cross is true of every life


of service which rises at last in one great sacrifice;
if it be lifted up, it draws all men unto it, upward,
Christward, Godward.
Again, it is a sacrifice accepted. Thousands of men
of all sorts and conditions are now offering the sacri-
fice of their life in the service of country and em-
pire, and with a more or less conscious grasp of the
moral issues at stake in this war. Thousands of homes
are offering the sacrifice of their dearest and their best.
There is much pure gold in this mass of offerings;
yet there is also dross, here a little, there a little
more. There is proof enough on all sides of the pure
chivalry of knightly heroism latent in the crowd of every
class beneath the love of gain or pleasure; but there
is sometimes in the offer of service a less worthy note
of craving for adventure or of looking for valuable
experience, and even where the motive of the offering
is pure there is something of airy confidence or shallow
pride in the spirit in which the task is being faced.
But now already in the case of one fife known to
many, an offering as nearly pure as man can offer has
been accepted in full, even unto the sacrifice of death.
Now we are realising, with all the sharp proximity of
friendship bereaved, the stern facts which were but
seemingly remote possibilities on the horizon of dan-


ger—facts which we were willing to face ultimately
but did not look ahead to contemplate—facts which
sounded but faintly through the cabled summaries of
distant losses from the main field of war. Now we
have felt the hand of God actually taking all that was
implied in our offer of service, requiring of us and
ours the whole sacrifice not only in will but also in
deed. And this agony of experience will make all the
difference in the world to many a man. It will not
check the rush, but it will purify the stream of offer-
ings ; it will not cool but only consecrate the spirit
of patriotism; it will draw that spirit from deeper and
purer springs of manhood. Courage and generosity
will be touched with more solemnity and reverence
as men count the cost and face the prospect. Aus-
tralian manhood has been flinging itself forward im-
pulsively and resolutely to seek a foremost place in
the glory of a great conflict for right against might.
And now the death of one of their first fellow-volun-
teers seems to be echoing in men’s ears the question
which the Lord and Master asked of his ambitious
disciples—“ Can ye drink of the cup that I drink of?”
And like those eager young followers of the Christ on
the way to the cross, the sons of Australia seem almost
to be saying with a new note of awe in their voices,
with a fresh resolve all the stronger because it has


been sobered, “We can.” The strength of a nation
depends upon the depth and purity of its patriotism,
and in this tremendous war the moral and spiritual
factors have counted already for much, and are going
to count for much more before the end. Here lies
the gain of our present loss. All that our lads and
men wanted perhaps was- just the note of reverent
restraint, of conscious solemnity, to cleanse and temper
the spirit of their service, and now that has been done
for them by the sacrifice of a brother whose life had
already won for him more hearts than he knew.
Once again, here is an instinct confirmed. Deep
down in the hearts of men of all races and ages lies
the instinctive conviction that this life is but part of
a greater life. For all who hold the Christian faith, that
instinct has been confirmed and enriched by the Christ
who rose from the dead. Yet even to those whose
belief in that resurrection is but weak and waver-
ing, there comes home with the news of such a death
of such a friend a moral certainty which they cannot
perhaps define in terms of theology, but which they
would never waste time in defending by argument-
the certainty that such a life must still be living some-
how, somewhere, in the universe of which this world
is part. And if living, then working—serving still,


and that more perfectly, the spiritual purpose which
runs through all life, the purpose of a God who is the
Father of spirits and the Lord of life. “Being made
perfect in a short time, he fulfilled a long time.”
This does not mean merely that
“One crowded hour of glorious life
Is worth an age without a name,”
true as that saying is. His training here in time
was short; perhaps in God’s sight it was sufficient to
prepare him for the call to the service of eternity. He
did not live to die; he died to live. We are not saying
these things to ourselves to console our grief; it is
his death that is saying these things to us to confirm
our faith. Knowing him, we feel that it is a moral
impossibility to think of him as dead. Hackneyed
words start again into fresh vigour of simple truth,—
“not dead but gone before.”
One more thought of what his life has to say to home
and school and college. We have been told lately in
the name of science that nature is supreme over nur-
ture —that heredity is predominant over environment
and influence. We refuse to pit these factors of per-
sonality against each other. Nature and nurture com-


bine as often as they conflict; and when they work
in combination, fair and strong indeed is the product.
Every schoolmaster knows how inexpressibly wonder-
ful is the look of home shining in a boy’s eyes—the
look which reflects the inheritance of a mother’s nature
and the fostering influence of a mother’s nurture. To
school and college falls sometimes the task of supply-
ing what is lacking, or of strengthening what is weak,
or of correcting what is perverse. But school and
college have no greater privilege, no prouder glory,
than to crown with their gifts of nurture in body, soul
and spirit the nature which God gave to a boy through
the lives that met to make his. Some there are who
receive from school and college more than they give;
some again who give even more than they receive.
Brian Pockley’s loyalty to his school and his college
was touched with a generous gratitude for all that
they had done for him. We who knew and loved him
can never forget how much his school and college and
university owed and owe to him. And now he has
done even more for the whole manhood of his country.
Yet his death has but crowned a life which reflected
the motto of his college: Deo, patriae, tibi —God first,
country next, self last of all. Such was the unobtru-
sive but unmistakable order of his life; and now it is
his best epitaph.


rL I w
/
Church Stores Ltd.,
Daring House,
Rawson Peace,
Svdnev.


