

CTfVf p
8.7 o
Kit
IRev>. IRobcrt James Mallace,
.. % ate /IDtnteter of
St. l€i|ocl)’s |rcsliukrini| C l^iurclf.
IRewtown.


-*•


flfoemortam.
'7THE sad news of the death, from apoplexy, of
the Rev. R. J. Wallace, will call forth the
deepest sympathy throughout the Church for
Mrs. Wallace and her family, and for the con-
gregation at Newtown. It is but a little over
three years ago that the death of the Rev. T.
Dunn, in the very prime of life, directed the
sympathies of our church towards Newtown ;
and now the passing of another minister from
the strenuous service of Christ in that thickly-
populated district has come as a shock to us all.
Rev. R. J. Wallace was born in Lanarkshire
on October i, 1859, and received his training
for the ministry in the Glasgow University, and
the Free Church Theological Hall. He was
chosen by the Home Church for service in
Queensland, in which State he arrived in 1888,
just 20 years ago. For two years he served the
Church in Gympie, and then removed to the
beautiful district of Killarney, where he exercised
a most fruitful ministry for 12 years. The
parish was an extensive one, and involved long
journeys both on Sabbaths and week days.
Three new churches were built in the parish
during Mr. Wallace’s ministry ; other churches
were enlarged ; and, in every sense of the word,
our friend’s 12 years’ ministry was a prosperous
one. The faithfulness of his service may be
judged from the testimony of one of his elders,
that his last sermon was always his best. Ihe
then Prime Minister of Queensland presided at
his farewell meeting, and universal testimony
was borne to the esteem in which Mr. Wallace
was held by all classes and .churches. In
Killarney he was not only pastor, but physician,
and his - skill in medicine was often of great
service in the remote parts of his large parish.
During the Killarney ministry, Mr. and Mrs.
Wallace took a trip to the old land and across
America. *, v Their return to Killarney was the
occasion of a" most enthusiastic public reception.
At the beginning‘of 1903, Mr. Wallace accepted


a hearty call to Singleton, where he was in-
ducted on February 12 of that year. Mr.
Wallace’s brief ministry in Singleton was
marked by the culmination of a long-con-
templated scheme for erecting a new church.
During a holiday in Sydney, early in 1905,
Mr. Wallace took a service at Newtown, which
was then vacant. The result was a unanimous
call, which, though unsought, he did not feel
justified in refusing, seeing in it the hand divine.
That such it was has been proved by the fruits
of his singularly successful ministry. Mr.
Wallace was inducted into the Newtown charge
on March 30, 1905, just three years ago ; and it
is almost incredible that during that short
ministry he should have admitted into the
fellowship of the hurch upwards of 500 per-
sons. At his very first communion, 6q were
admitted, and at the next 40. On two different
occasions, 84 were admitted. Many of these
communicants were young people w T ho had been
brought to Christ under Mr. Wallace’s ministry.
Such a ministry is one to thank God for ;
such a man will be greatly missed ; his memory
will be treasured in the minds of many hundreds
who have benefitted by his preaching and work.
The annual report of St. Enoch’s reveals
evidence on every page of a successful pastorate.
The Session, in referring to the continued ill
health of their pastor, say: “We must all
acknowledge that his w r ork has been blessed of
God, and that he is beloved by his people.’’
They also state that last year, 1907, 112 new
members were added to the roll, that 80 had
been lost through death and disjunction, but
that the membership at the end of the year was
578. The average attendance at the communion
w r as 300. The tone running through all the
reports was of the highest, testifying to the
spirituality of Mr. Wallace’s ministry.
Our friend’s preaching was of a high order.
His sermons were characterised by their earnest-
ness and clearness, their manly directness of
appeal, their evangelistic spirit.


The late Rev. R. J. Wallace.
A GOOD MINISTER OF CHRIST JESUS.
[iTim. 4ch. 6v.]




It was as far back as August last that Mr.
Wallace had an attack of apoplexy, following
upon influenza. As his health continued un-
satisfactory, he was granted three months’ leave
of absence. Part of this time was spent upon
the Blue Mountains, without beneficial effect.
A short stay at Manly resulted in some improve-
ment ; but lately, serious misgivings were
entertained by his family, and on Sunday after-
noon, at half-past four, our friend passed away.
A large congregation was assembled in the
church for the evening service, which was to
have been conducted b} r the Rev. M. Hermann.
Mr. Hermann, however, and Dr. Kinross had the
painful duty of announcing the minister’s death.
Suitable prayers were offered, and the congrega-
tion dispersed greatly affected by the sad
announcement.
We offer our sincere sympathy to Mrs.
Wallace and her family in their sore trial,
coupling it, however, with the confident hope
that all divine consolation will be theirs in their
hour of need.
The funeral took place on Tuesday. Service
was held in the church at 1,30, in the presence
of a very large congregation, including many
members of the Sydney Presbytery, and repre-
sentatives from his previous congregations in
Queensland and Singleton. In the absence of
the Moderator of Presbytery, Rev. R. Scott
West, presided, and the Revs. Dr. Clouston, C,
A White, and Dr. Kinross took part. The
Rev. R. Scott West delivered the address. At
the cemetery the Revs. C. W. Willis, J. S.
Scott, R. K. Davies, Dr. Dill Mackay and others
took part.
Not only in the church, but also at the
grave, the evidence of the esteem in which the
late minister of St. Enoch’s was held was over-
whelmingly manifest. “ He, being dead, yet
speaketh.”


Bn appreciation
[By one of the Elders of St. Enoch's, Newtown.]
It is customary when one of our ministers
leaves this parish in accepting a call to another,
to hold a function at which all manner of good
and kind things are said, compliments ex-
changed, the virtues and character of the de-
parting one eulogised, and a happy and prosper-
ous future predicted, When, however, the
Master of Assemblies calls his servant away
from this mundane state, translating him to a
higher position in the “ general assembly and
church of the first born who are enrolled in
Heaven/’ we mourn. Should we not rather
rejoice to know that our late minister has en-
joyed a great promotion in his transla-
tion from among the mixed multitude here, to
that perfect assemblage yonder ?
Thus the Lord has again, in his infinite
wisdom and love, rendered this church pastor-
less in this recent translation. In succession the
last three ministers of this church were each
translated while engaged in the work of their
charge. Each of them before their translation
having had this witness borne to them that
they had been “well pleasing unto God.“
Happy Ministers of the Lord Christ Jesus I
Honored servants of the living God !
Our late beloved pastor, Rev. Robert
James Wallace, was pre-eminently a man, and a
man with a mission. He did not in any re-
spect undervalue his work, nor did he over-
value his attainments, which to those of us
who knew him best, were felt to be of a high
order. He was a genius. He never darkened
counsel by words without knowledge. He was
transparently clear in his deliverances, and in
all his ministry used great boldness of speech.
As a consequence, he was understood, respected,
appreciated, and beloved. Among the thou-
sands who, during his all too-brief ministry of
barely three years amongst us, heard the sweet


messages of redeeming love and divine mercy
from his lips, hundreds have avowed themselves
to be on the Lord’s side, accepted the Christ as
their Master, and associated themselves in
fellowship with his church. With the youth of
his congregation, he was youthful in his buoy-
ancy, keenly appreciative of their truest wants ;
ever ministering with a dignified discretion to
their happiness, improvement and advancement.
His attractive Lord’s Day morning sermon-
ettes to the young, were something to be re-
membered. To the present day, they are well
spoken of. But the other day, a lassie of thir-
teen years was repeating, in substance, one of
these choice talks to children of our late dear
pastor’s, which she had heard him deliver many
months ago These sermonettes, simple as they
may have appeared to be in their delivery, were
manifestly sublime in their effectiveness.
At our mid-week service, after the toil and
bustle of the day w r ere over, it was most refresh-
ing, delightful, and stimulating to receive the
heart thoughts our pastor indulged us with.
Some of our happiest memories are associated
with these times of refreshing from the presence
of the Lord. At the Saturday and Lord’s Day
evening meetings for prayer and praise, our
pastor’s encouraging and inspiring presence lent
great zest to these services, which were rich in
spiritual blessing, and tended to unite us more
closely to each other and to the Lord.
It was at the Communion season and in the
dispensing of this Holy Sacrament that the
entire manhood of our pastor appeared suffused
with a sacred, mystic light. Christ crucified
was openly set forth in our midst, and our
pastor’s tongue was as the pen of a ready writer,
his heart overflowing with a goodly matter as
he spoke of those things' he had made touching
the Christ.
The life of our lamented pastor was as clear
and transparent as his speech. Impatient as he
was with mere professionalism of every kind,
and religiously severe as he was with all fraud


and pretentiousness, he was tenderness itself in
his endeavour to raise the fallen, encourage the
timid, strengthen the weak, and restore the
backslider. Like his Divine Master, he hated
sin, but he loved the sinner so well, that he
sought in his Master's name and spirit to save
him. In the chamber of sorrow and affliction,
his strong personality was felt as an encouraging
and helpful power. His noble sympathetic soul
seemed to irradiate with an almost celestial light,
his every feature, emphasising with all the
chastened tenderness of the love of Christ, the
words of consolation, sympathy and life he
spoke.
The large and scattered nature of his parish
used to distress him, as the conviction kept
forcing itself upon his mind that he could not
possibly overtake its demands, labour as he
would, and labour right earnestly he did.
As a husband, we know he was most de-
voted, as a father most affectionate, as a friend
most sincere and true. But there ; how dare
we eulogise such a man of God. as our late
pastor, who is now raised as high above us and
our most exalted conception of truth, honor, and
virtue as are the heavens ; into which he has,
by the Grace of God, entered.
Reverendly “ we remember those that had
the rule over us. men that spake unto us the
word of God, and considering the issue of their
lives, let us imitate their faith. Jesus Christ the
same yesterday, to-day and for ever.”
Of our departed pastor, it is true, that “ he
being dead yet speaketh.” Is it fanciful to
imagine we once again hear his voice admonish-
ing us in such words as these : —“ Wherefore,
watch ye, remembering that by the space of
three years I ceased not to admonish everyone
x x x x x. And now I commend you to
God and to the word of His grace, which is able
to build you up and to give you the inheritance
among all them that are sanctified.’’


St. Enoch's Church, Newtown.




The late lamented Rev. R. J. Wallace s
favorite hymn, sung at the morning and evening
Memorial Services on Lord’s Day, the 29th
March, 1908 ;
0 Love that will not let me go,
I rest my weary soul in Thee !
1 give thee back the life I owe,
That in Thine ocean depths its flow
May richer, fuller be.
O Light that followest all m} r way,
I yield my flickering torch to thee :
My heart restores its borrowed ray,
That in Thy sunshine’s blaze its day
May brighter, fairer be.
0 Joy that seekest me through pain,
I cannot close my heart to Thee :
1 trace the rainbow through the rain,
And feel the promise is not vain
That morn shall tearless be.
0 Cross that liftest up my head,
I dare not ask to fly from Thee :
1 lay in dust life’s glory dead,
And from the ground there blossoms red
Life that shall endless be.
Amen.


dfll|e liirjjtcmis is IBlcssi'il.
[Prov. loch. 7v.]
