

IRe\>. 2). flfc. Stuart, 2X2).
Minister of Jlnox (Ekurrlt, Dunebin,
PULPIT REFERENCES, PRESS NOTICES, AND REPORTS
OF THE FUNERAL AND MEMORIAL SERVICES
PRINTED AT THE OTAGO DAILY TIMES OFFICE, HIGH STREET
MDCCCXCIV.


THE LATE REV. D. M. STUART, D.D.


—
fTfcemonam.
IRev. 2>. flfc. Stuart, 5D.3D.
iflinister of |inox (Klrurch, Duncbin,
®ho fieb Jftaj 12th, 1894.
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH,
PULPIT REFERENCES, PRESS NOTICES, AND REPORTS
OF THE FUNERAL AND MEMORIAL SERVICES.
JDuncfciu:
PRINTED AT THE OTAGO DAILY TIMES OFFICE, HIGH STREET.
' “ MDCCCXCIV. ' '
Hh -W+




flDemoriam.
REV. D. M. STUART, D.D
StimsUx of Jlnox Churrh, Jlanebin,
mho 9»b JJa 2 X2tk, 1894.
Fhe Reverend Dr Stuaet is dead. It
leems almost trivial to say that it is with
;he deepest possible regret we make
his announcement, charged as it is
v'ith the power to send a thrill of grief
hrough a multitude of hearts, and to
lonvey an abiding sense of loss into
mndreds of Otago homes. Since the
leath of James Macakdeew, seven
r ears ago, Otago —the Otago which
»oth these adopted sons of hers loved
sdth a passion so leal and ardent —has
lot been called upon to mourn a loss
omparable with this, and it is no
iisparagement to the men who survive
o say that many a year is likely to
»ass without the repetition of such
icartfelt regret. For Dr Stuaet’s
•ersonality has been bound up in a
niquely intimate fashion with the
ife of this city and province during
he past generation. As pastor and
s friend, in joy and in sorrow,
t baptism, bridal, and burial, he has
oen a familiar agent of social bene-
olence and spiritual consolation—an
gent of whom much was expected,
nd not expected in vain. Of the
’resbyterian Church he was regarded
s the embodiment rather than as a
lere representative, and that big heart
E his had a warm place for afl other
tiurches and organisations that make
h* righteousness and Christianity,
'he stalwart figure, the cheery face,
le hearty manner, will be missed long
and sorely by the men and the women,
the boys and the girls, who either
reckoned themselves among the host of
his friends or had learned to look up to
him as a wise and loving elder within
whose man’s heart the heart of a child
still moved.
His memory long will live alone
In all our hearts, as mournful light
That broods above the fallen sun,
And dwells in heaven half the night.
Let us not forget, however—he would
certainly not have wished us to forget—
that he had completed his seventy-
fifth year, that he had served his
generation from boyhood to old age
with unflinching fidelity, and that, to
use a common but impressive phrase,
his time had come. Voices, he used to
say, were to be heard calling him from
the further shore, and though the desire
to retain his presence here might be
invincible, it is no evil thing that
infirmity was not allowed to lay an
oppressive hand upon him through long
years of lingering decline. Until quite
recently it might be said of him, as of
that greater servant of God who died
on Pisgah—“ his eye was not dim, nor
his natural force abated.” Moreover,
he would have bid us remember, with
the great Anglican bishop : “ Men may
come, and men may go, . . . but
the broad, mighty, rolling stream of
the Church itself—the cleansing, purify-
ing, fertilising tide of the river of


God —flows on for ever and ever.” edin found what they were seeking 36
Grief there needs must be, hut it may
well be grief with a note of exultation.
“You are one of those people,” said
Rogee Wendoyee to Robeet Elsmeee,
“who imagine we owe civilisation to
the heart. I, on the other hand, be-
lieve that the world, so far as it has
lived to any purpose, has lived by the
head ” Dr Stuaet believed in the
mission of both heart and head. The
proverbial kindliness of his heart has
perhaps been wont somewhat to obscure
the notable qualities of his mind. If
he was not a man of great intel-
lectual power, we make bold to
say that he was a man with a
touch of something higher—a touch
of something akin to genius; while
as for the worth of his practical
sagacity we may borrow a word from
Ween’s epitaph and say Circumsjoice.
He has left his mark upon the institu-
tions of Otago, and his lifelong activity
in the cause of education would alone
make his name honourable. From the
Fifeshire days, when, at his “adven-
ture school,” he taught one scholar for
six weeks at a fee of threepence a week,
to the very end, when for years he had
been the honoured Chancellor of the
University of Otago and Chairman of
the High Schools Board of Governors,
his zealous interest in public education
never flagged. As the handmaid of
religion, as the complement of social
life, as the crown of citizenship, educa-
tion may be said to have been to him a
holy thing, and though there will be
need of no memorial to keep his memory
green and fragrant, still, should there be
a wish to identify his name with some
lasting monument in this, his “own
romantic town,” the project will most
fittingly take an educational form. Of
his strictly ministerial work it is not
for us to speak, but no one requires to
be told that the Presbyterians of Dun-
years ago —“ a pious, energetic, and
godly man—one who would take a par-
ticular interest in securing the hearts of
young men for public good, and who
would visit and allure the people to
church-going habits, ...” a man
“large-minded, prudent, affable, gentle,
yet firm, and ready for every good work.”
Such were the requisitions forwarded
to the Commission of Selection in 1858,.
and the words might aptly be in-
scribed on the selected ministers grave.
Imaginative sympathy can realise the
void which the beloved pastor’s removal
must leave at Knox Church, but
it is ours rather to bear testimony,
albeit superfluous, to the warmth and
sagacity of his patriotism, to the lofti-
ness of his ideal of civic duty, to the
whole-hearted qualities of his manliness.
It was well said the other day that he
only valued strength for the sake of
expending it in the public service, that
he only valued money for the sake of
giving it away. Robust in body and
soul —without an atom of mawkish
sentiment, but with a world of charity —
wearing to the last the blitheness of his
native mountain air ; “ servant of God,
man’s friend,” —such was the man
whom we deplore. Amid the multi-
tudinous cares of his special avocation
he found time—made time —to dis-
charge general duties of citizenship
with a thoroughness that would have
done credit to a man of leisure; and
in these days, when civic duty seems
hardly to be reckoned among the
necessary virtues —when men of light
are far too seldom men of leading—the
force of such an example may well bear
emphasising. Doubtless not to every
man is given the special gift—that
which “in him was the peculiar
grace ” —the gift of an all-useful
versatility, stirred by an active sense
of public responsibility; but there are
4


few who will not be the better for attack alleviated than the doctor was up and
Studying the motives of Dr Stuaet’s Indeed it was this life of ceaseless toil
studying the motives of Dr Stuaet’s
life.
What more can be said ? What
more needs saying ? “ Let us all to
meditation,” said King Henet at the
death bed of Cardinal Beaueoet, and
the counsel is at least as applicable to
the close of a good man’s life. The
name of the good Doctor Stuaet will
be heard by the ears of children for
many years to come, and it will never
be associated with a belittling thought
or an unkindly memory.
Sleep sweetly, tender heart, in peace :
Sleep, holy spirit, blessed soul,
While the stars burn, the moons increase,
And the great ages onward roll.
Sleep till the end, true soul and sweet.
Nothing comes to thee new or strange.
Sleep full of rest from head to feet;
Lie still, dry dust, secure of change.
—Otago Daily Times .
HIS LAST ILLNESS.
Though the state of the health of the Rev.
Dr Stuart was generally understood for some
weeks past to have been so precarious that his
death might be expected at any moment, and
the community was thus in a sense prepared for
the event, a mighty throb of grief was felt
throughout the city on Saturday morning, and
was not confined to any class or denomination
or sect of the people, but was absolutely general,
when the mournful word was regretfully passed
from one to another that the much-beloved
pastor of Knox Church, who occupied a posi-
tion in the minds of the public of Otago that
was quite unique, had passed away. Outward
signs of mourning were exhibited in many
directions—the flags on the shipping, on the
flagstaffs at the Town Hall and Garrison Hall,
and at various business offices being displayed
half mast high—and the event was everywhere
spoken of in reverent whispers. By the rev.
gentleman himself and by those who pos-
sessed the privilege of being his intimate
mends the termination of his life was
not altogether unexpected. Serious abdominal
disease had for a long time been slowly
undermining his strength and breaking down
even his fibrous constitution, and this, coupled
with returning symptoms of the heart failure,
which first loomed up in the latter end of 1887,
caused grave anxiety to his medical adviser.
— now an d then he had periods of great
bodily stress and pain, but no sooner was each
and abnegation that hastened his end. About
five weeks back Dunedin was visited by a
■ remarkably severe, cold wintry day—it was a
, Monday and on the previous day the doctor
had preached with unusual vigour and energy
his last pulpit sermons. He had been early
astir, as was his wont, and with his usual reck-
lessness of self, had not observed the weather
until it was too late. A very severe chill, fol-
lowed by extensive congestion of both lungs,
ensued, and though he recovered from the acute
symptoms of this fresh trouble the strain on his
vitality proved too much for him—he never
regained his old strength, and on and off he had
days of great distress. On Friday his condi-
tion was very critical, and, as illustrative of
that anxiety to spare trouble to others which
was characteristic with him, it may just be
mentioned that on that day, when he was
already within the shadow of the dark valley,
he expressed a desire to leave his room up-
stairs and to die in the manse dining room,
so that those who would have to do
with his body after the spirit should have
taken its flight might be relieved as much as
possible of inconvenience. Towards Friday
evening he revived somewhat, and later on he
obtained several refreshing snatches of sleep.
About 5 o clock on Saturday morning he arose,
but shortly afterwards he lay down again on his
bed. His nurse, noticing a sudden change upon
him, at once sent for DrCoughtrey, who remained
with the patient for over an hour. From the
, w r hich change was observed Dr
Stuart s life gradually ebbed away, and at 7
a.m., peacefully and without a struggle, the end
came. His son, Mr William Stuart, who, on
being caoled for, arrived from Melbourne about
a week ago, his faithful and patient house-
keeper (Miss Laing), and his nurse (Mrs
Cxroves) were present when death almost imper-
ceptibly came upon Dr Stuart, and his medical
adviser who had been with him just before,
was with him also immediately after the event.
From 5 o clock until the time of his death the
rev. gentleman, though conscious, was almost
speechless, and now after life’s fitful fever he
sleeps well.
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH.
The Rev. Donald M‘Naughton Stuart was
°K. 1819, in a hamlet
on the banks of the Tay. His early education
was obtained in the parish school of Kenmore.
which is situated at the place where the Tav
.nnT its parent loch - T be school was
conducted by a university man, named Mr Arm-
strong and the curriculum embraced such
subjects as Gaelic English, Latin, Greek, and
mathematics. With a view, moreover, to
acquiring fluency in speaking English, young
5


Stuart was sent for two summers into the Low- regulation hours. Fifty-one years later, when the
lands. He was passionately fond of reading, young teacher of 1837 was revisiting Fifeshire, he
and he more than once, in his old age, acknow-
ledged the benefit he had received from being
afforded access to books and newspapers.
“ Though in my first teens,” he said publicly on
one occasion, “before I had access to a news-
paper, yet I was in no sense a waif, for I was
within reach of church and school, and such
books as Bunyan’s ‘ Pilgrim,’ Boston’s ‘ Four-
fold State,’ Hervey’s * Meditations,’ ‘ The
Scottish Worthies,’ one or two histories, and
Burns's poems. To these institutions and
books I am a debtor to a degree more than I
can express. Still, it was a red-letter day in
my life when I was asked as a boy to become
reader to an old couple who received the
Scotsman newspaper from a son who
had pushed his fortunes in the South.
I then heard for the first time the
glowing words of Brougham and Russell,
and Peel and Graham, and became acquainted
with the questions and discussions which
engaged the high court of Parliament. My
little world, hitherto bounded by the Gram-
pians, suddenly embraced London and Paris,
the Indies, and the Americas. In the Scots-
man I found a schoolmaster with more force
and greatness than Mr Armstrong, at whose
feet 1 had sat for years.” The lad was fired
with the ambition to get to college, and, as a
means to that end, he did what many other
young men in similar circumstances did—he
took to teaching. In those days the fruits of
this calling were insignificant in the way of
pecuniary reward, but the opportunities which
they presented of reading and studying
were eagerly welcomed by the boy from
Kenmore. The field of knowledge which
his occupation as reader to the old couple had
opened up to him was, at the same time, one
which he was anxious at all hazards to retain ;
and with the object of getting a newspaper so
that he might still be able to gain an insight
into the doings of the great world, he entered
into communication with the editor of the Fife
Herald, whom he succeeded in inducing to
allow him a copy of that weekly publication in
consideration of his furnishing the news of the
town in which he resided. The fact of his
having such a prize as a newspaper regularly
delivered to him made him a personage of im-
portance in his town, and he was besieged with
requests for a sight of it; so much so that, as
he used to relate, he had in the interests of
peace to give his landlady a discretionary
power in lending it. In 1837 he pur-
chased the goodwill of an “ adventure school”
in Leven, Fifeshire. He started with one
scholar, from whom he received a fee of 3d a
week, and, attending to his duties with a dili-
gence that could not have been surpassed had
he a roomful of pupils, he met this solitary
scholar for six weeks for the full number of
traced out this solitary pupil, whom he found,
he wrote to one of elders in Dunedin, “now a
maiden of 57 years.” His earnestness attracted
general attention, and the attendance at-his
school increased to such an extent as to enable
him in two years’ time to enter St. Andrew’s
University, where he took his undergraduate
course of four years—a bursary, supplemented
by assistance in kind from a friendly home,
placing him at his ease during this portion of his
career. At the university his desire to keep
himself abreast of current events in the world of
politics, science, and literature lost none of its
keenness. “ When I went to college,” we
again quote his own words, “my first
engagement was to join a firm of six members
to secure the celebrated Edinburgh Witness,
edited by Hugh Miller. We prized the pre-
lections of our professors, but the arrival of our
newspaper never failed to withdraw us for an
hour from science and philosophy. The ques-
tions and discussions with which it dealt had an
irresistible charm. Prizing the newspaper I
never grudged its cost, or deemed the hours
devoted to its study as wasted or lost.” In
184-3, while Mr Stuart was at St. Andrew’s, an
important event in his life occurred, this being
none other than his expulsion from his alma
mater. In the quiet university town, the agita-
tion which was destined to cause the dis-
ruption of the ancient Kirk of Scotland was
sharply felt, and the students were naturally
divided in opinion respecting the movement—
some upholding the existing order, and others, of
whom Mr Stuart was one, advocating reform in
the church and in the government of the univer-
sity. The election of the Lord Rector brought
about a crisis. The Reform party nominated
Dr Thomas Chalmers as their candidate, in
opposition to the nominee of the senatus, and
secured his election. Mr Stuart voted with the
majority. The senatus hastily summoned the
rebels, as they were termed, and asked them to
submit to an admonition for their part in the
election. They respectfully declined on the
ground that their action was within the limits
of the constitution, and thereupon the senatus,
by a large majority, expelled them. The ex-
pulsion touched Mr Stuart and others in both
purse and pride, and entailed many grievous
consequences, which, however, did not long
outlive his restoration, and that of his fellows,
by a Royal Commission. Leaving St. Andrew’s,
he entered the New College, Edinburgh, where
he pursued his theological studies, and in doing
so had the advantage of sitting at the feet of
Dr Chalmers. In 1844 Mr Stuart received an
appointment as classical master in a first-class
school near Windsor, and shortly afterwards he
was elevated to the position of principal. He
did not, however, neglect his studies for the
ministry, which he carried on in London under
6


Drs Lorimer, M‘Crie, and Hamilton, subse- the commissioners Dr Guthrie made a remark
quently completing them in Edinburgh. From the substance of which was that “ some years
the Free Presbytery of Kelso he obtained his previously he felt much interested in a young
license to preach, and he then received a call
to the Presbyterian Church of Falstone, in
the upper reaches of North Tyne, on the
English Border. For 10 years he laboured
with acceptance in this parish, his minis-
terial work being occasionally relieved by
such outdoor recreations as bridge-building
and the establishment of district libraries.
Always accounting education as second only to
religion as a factor in true national prosperity
and happiness, he strove to enlarge the range
of knowledge of all the families within the
bounds of his district. “On becoming a
minister in the uplands of dear Northum-
berland,” he said, referring to that period of
life, “I set myself to make the acquaintance of
the people. I soon found that while some
families were both intelligent and pious, taking
a generous interest in the state of the nation,
there were others, good and kind, but without
any interest in the outside church and world ;
for while the former received reliable news
from many lands through their weekly paper, the
latter heard nothing of what was occurring in high
places, except what chance tramps and travellers
brought them. I decided to do my utmost to
introduce a weekly paper and a monthly maga-
zine into every family, in the interests of educa-
tion and religion. I never hesitated to com-
mend my scheme from the pulpit, for I noticed
that the intelligent (other things being equal)
were the Gospel’s best and fastest friends.”
In 1858, the steady increase of the population
of Dunedin, combined with the thought of the
advancing age of the Rev. Dr Burns, for3ed
the conviction upon some of the settlers that
the time had come for the establishment of a
second Presbyterian Church, and the proposal
was heartily supported. The selection of a
minister was entrusted to a commission consist-
ing of Dr Bonar (the convener of the Colonial
Committee of the Free Church of Scotland), Dr
Guthrie, and Professor Miller (of the Edinburgh
University), who, in the letterof instructions chat
was forwarded to them, were informed that it
was of the utmost importance that the minister
should be “a pious, energetic, and godly man—
one who would take a particular interest in
securing the hearts of young men for public
good, and who would visit and allure the people
to church-going habits.” The minister, it was
further stated, “ would require to be large-
minded, prudent, affable, gentle yet firm, and
ready for every good work.” It was desired
also that the clergyman selected should be
“ vigorous in health, but not a young man—a
man rather of some experience in the ministry
and in the business of church courts.” The
choice of the commission fell upon Mr Stuart,
respecting whose selection there is a traditionary
story to the effect that at the first meeting of
minister he met while attending an induction
at Trinity Church, Newcastle, who had a strong
flavour of the Grampians and had the advantage
of some travel, and he suggested that Dr Bonar
should make inquiries concerning his work and
report.” The suggestion was acted upon, with
the result that at the next meeting it was
resolved to offer the appointment to the young
minister in question, who, it was thought,
possessed the necessary qualifications—as,
indeed, his subsequent and prolonged labours
among the people to whom he was called
showed he possessed in a degree that was
beyond expectation.
On January 25,1860, Mr Stuart, with his wife
and three children, arrived in Otago Harbour
by the ship Bosworth, from Gravesend, and
losing no time in getting into harness began at
once to visit the people and perform other
pastoral work. His induction into the pastorate
of Knox uhurch did not take place, however,
till May 16, the church being opened for divine
service 10 days previously. From that time to
the present the history of Knox Church may be
said to be the history of its revered minister
who has just passed away; but not so the
converse, for the history of Dr Stuart—
as he became in 1872 —is much more
than the history of Knox Church. His sphere
of usefulness extended far beyond the limits of
his ministerial work, though his performance of
this, in which he was unsparing of his own
energies, involved an amount of toil and
anxiety that would speedily have broken down
the constitution of any but a man of uncommon
physical and mental strength. His pastoral
duties were, however, undertaken by Dr Stuart
with a cheerfulness and unweariedness that
could not but be admired however much his
self-abnegation might be deprecated ; but the
ceaseless strain of 29 years’ labours in pastoral
and public work necessitated action being taken
in 1889 to procure for him a colleague who
would relieve him of the multifarious duties
which he was called upon to perform, and as a
result of this action the Rev. A. P. Davidson was
inducted in 1890 as co-pastor of Knox Church—
a position which he resigned only a few
weeks ago. In 1886 Dr Stuart’s health
had been so very unsatisfactory as to
cause great concern to his congregation, but
the office-bearers prevailed on him to take a
much-needed holiday in the form of a six-
months’ trip to the old country. He derived
great benefit and enjoyment from this visit to
the scenes of his boyhood, and to a land that was
dear to him as to all others who have left it
behind to seek their fortunes in a new country,
and on his return to Dunedin in December 1888
he was greeted with touching demonstrations of
welcome from all classes of the community.
7


During his absence the Presbyterian Synod, in of the province were eminent in the highest
which body he was always a commanding degree. He was one of a Board of Advice who
figure, paid him the compliment of electing were appointed in 1875 to recommend to the
him their moderator for the following year,
but a sad bereavement which occurred to
mar the pleasure of his home - coming in-
duced him to decline the honourable position
which the synod desired to bestow upon him,
and which he had held on more than one occa-
sion previously. In the deliberations of the
supreme court of the church his utterances,
distinguished as they were by breadth of view
no less than by simplicity and homeliness of
expression, were always received with the
greatest respect. The synod’s church extension
scheme was one which especially engaged his
attention, and for some years he was one of the
conveners of the committee which was charged
with the duty of extending the operations of
the church within the bounds of the synod.
The interest, too, which he manifested in the
foreign missions was not surpassed by that
of any of the other members of the
synod. It was on his motion, in 1867,
that the church first took action in
respect to breaking ground among the
pagan population of the New Hebrides, and he
repeatedly brought under the notice of his con-
gregation the needs of the mission field. In
this connection, it may be mentioned that
his was one of the controlling minds
of the Otago Bible Society, and that
at the annual meetings of the auxiliary of
the London Bible Society he was always pre-
sent to show and express sympathy with the
objects of the society. The establishment of a
Divinity Hall in connection with the Presby-
terian Synod was warmly advocated by him,
and for the first year he held the position of
tutor in the department of church history. The
whole of his salary in that capacity he donated
to the hall in order to provide two annual
prizes, since known as the Stuart prizes,
for the encouragement of theological students
in the study of church history and
pastoral theology. There was, however, no
scheme established under the synod having
for its end the promotion of the Gospel, the
extension of education, and the advancement
of humanity which had not a loyal and ardent
supporter in Dr Stuart. He was one of the
most prominent of the many prominent educa-
tionists to whom Otago can proudly point. He
always deemed the exclusion of the Bible from
the public school curriculum to be a radical
defect in the system of primary education, and
in his place in the synod and as a leading mem-
ber of the Bible-in-Schools Association, which
existed and flourished for some years, in the
pulpit and on the public platform, he lifted his
voice on many an occasion against what was re-
garded by him and many others as the severe secu-
larity of the Education Act. His services in the
management of the principal secondary schools
were appointed in 1875 to recommend to the
Education Board “such measures in connec-
tion with the management and organisation of
the Boys’ High School as might be deemed
advisable ” ; and on the establishment, in 1877,
of a Board xff Governors, in whom was vested
the management of the Boys’ and Girls’ High
Schools, Dr Stuart was not only appointed one
of the first members of the governing body, but
he was elected chairman—a position which, by
the unanimous desire of his colleagues, he held
continuously from that year down to the
present time. His happy little addresses at
the annual ceremonies for the distribution of
the prizes were generally the features of those
functions, at which the reverence of the youthful
audiences, most of whom he knew either them-
selves or through their parents, for “thedoctor,”
as they all affectionately styled him, never
failed to be conspicuously shown. It is only a
few weeks ago that, as the outcome of a
movement initiated by the Ex-High School
Girls’ Club, a portrait of him —a portrait which
be was himself never destined to see—was pre-
sented to the Girls’ High School by the past
and present pupils of that institution to be a
memorial for all time of the great and unflagging
interest he took in the school. The univer-
sity, as well as the high schools, had a good
friend in Dr Stuart. He was one of those who
were most eloquent in urging the establishing a
college in Dunedin for the purposes of higher
education, and upon the incorporation of the
University of Otago in 1869 the part which he
had taken in the movement that thus bore fruit
was fittingly recognised by his appointment as
one of the members of the original University
Council. In 1871, on the appointment of the
late Sir John Richardson to the office of
chancellor, which was rendered vacant by the
death of the Rev. Dr Burns, Dr Stuart was
appointed vice-chancellor. He was re-elected
without opposition in 1874 and in 1877, and on
the retirement of the late Mr Justice Chapman
from the position of chancellor, in which he
had succeeded Sir John Richardson, Dr Stuart
was in September 1879 unanimously appointed
to the chancellorship. His qualifications for
that important office were always acknowledged
to be of the highest, and on four subsequent
occasions, as his term expired, he was re-elected
by the undivided voice of the council. He was
also for some time a member of the Senate of
the New Zealand University, but he was never
reconciled to the surrender by the University
of Otago of its power of conferring degrees.
In 1872, the honorary degree of Doctor
of Divinity was conferred upon him by his alma
mater , the University of St. Andrew’s, from
whose doors, nearly 30 years previously, he had
been thrust forth for having the manliness to
stand by his opinions. All the institutions
8


which from time to time were formed with the heartfelt sympathy of the community went
philanthropic aims secured his most hearty freely out to Dr Stuart, and doubtless
sympathy. The Patients and Prisoners’ Aid
Society and the Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals were bodies whose claims to
the support of the public were strongly urged
by him as opportunity offered or occasion
demanded. The Benevolent Institution and
the Hospital obtained a large share of his
attention, and a visit from him to these institu-
tions rendered the monotonous life of the
inmates, for whom he always had a kindly
word, temporarily brighter. The Industrial
School also was frequently visited by him, and
with the young people there, as with the young
people wherever he went, he was a great
favourite, although the boys who witnessed the
success of one of the weakliest among them,
whom the doctor on one occasion allowed to
“ throw ” him in a wrestling bout, probably
entertained but a mean opinion of his physical
powers.
The life of Dr Stuart was saddened by
several trials of the most grievous description.
On April 16, 1862, at a time when the various
congregational agencies in connection with the
congregation had scarcely been brought into fair
working order, he was called upon to endure
the death of the wife who had been for 12 years
his devoted helpmate and fellow worker in the
service of the Master. It was when he was at
Falstone that Dr Stuart’s engagement took place,
but the ceremony which united him to Miss
Jessie Robertson was performed in the south of
England—in Slough Church—the date being
July 1850. At Falstone, also, the three sons of
the marriage, only one of whom survives, were
born. Mrs Stuart was in feeble health when
she landed with her husband at Port Chalmers,
but she applied herself with diligence to the
work that lay before her, and her “ many excellent
qualities, her good example, and her earnest
desire to prove useful soon gained for her,”
says the historian of Knox Church, “the
esteem and confidence of the members of the
congregation and of the general community.”
In little more than two years after her arrival
she was, however, summoned to her rest, and
the poignant grief that wrung the heart of her
bereaved husband—who never throughout the
whole of his life spoke of her without
a pathetic tremor in his voice—far and
near aroused expressions of the deepest
sympathy. Twenty-one years later—on the 6th
July 1883— another great grief came upon
Dr Stuart, for on that day his second son,
Alexander Thomas, a young man of remarkable
promise and possessing natural abilities of a
high order, was unexpectedly removed; and
on the 12th January 1889 his third son, Mr
Donald M. Stuart, who also had exhibited in a
very marked degree the possession of natural
talent, expired after a long and painful illness.
On the occasion of each of these bereavements
strengthened him to bear the affliction.
The Hon. W. Downie Stewart and Mr
Edmund Smith have been appointed executors
under the will of Dr Stuart. During the last
few days of his life the reverend gentleman
burned a large number of the documents he had
in his possession, but it is to be hoped that
others, which doubtless have a historic value,
remain extant. His library he has bequeathed
to the library of Knox Church congregation.
Already a great many wreaths have been for-
warded to the manse to be placed on Dr Stuart’s
coffin and grave, the number including one from
the Prioress of the Dominican Convent.
HISTORY OF KNOX CHURCH,
By John Hislop, LL.D , F.R.S.E.,
With an introduction by the Rev. D. M. Stuart
D.D., first minister of the church.
By some oversight we omitted to notice this
book when it first appeared some time ago, but
the sad occasion of Dr Stuart’s death gives us
a fitting opportunity of repairing our error of
omission. Dr Hislop undertook the work now
under review at the request of the office-bearers
of Knox Church, and it is difficult to think of
anyone to whose hands the task could be
entrusted with such certainty of its being ably
discharged. Dr Hislop’s connection with the
church has been so intimate and of so long stand-
ing that, with the exception of the pastor for
whom his people are at present mourning, there
is no one who could have spoken with such
authority and such certainty of knowledge. If
anything further were required to fit Dr Hislop
for this important piece of local history it is his
long and important connection with the public
life of this provincial district and of the whole
colony. It is particularly fitting, we think, that
one who has done such distinguished service
for the education of this province and colony
should address himself to telling the story of a
church that has so largely shaped the spiritual
life of the community.
We are not going to repeat the story of Knox
Church. There it is in the permanent record
of Dr Hislop. From the first suggestion that
the time was come when there must be a
hiving-off from the First Church up to the time
when Mr Davidson arrived to take from the
shoulders of the ageing pastor part of his heavy
burden it is all recorded in this history. The
church institutions are noted as they sprang
each into being—the Sabbath school, the Bible
class, the weekly prayer meeting, Young Men’s
Christian Association, the Missionary Associa-
tion, and so on ; and Dr Hislop does not fail,
ia connection with the various movements of
development, to award praise and honourable
mention where it is due.


What makes the book additionally acceptable
and valuable is the pious tribute that Dr Hislop
pays to the memory of men who did good work
in their day. We do not suppose that in any
church in this hemisphere has work been carried
on with greater devotion and enthusiasm than
in Knox Church. We have every reason to
believe that this church has before it a future
as prosperous and beneficent as the past that
lies behind it, but it is well that there should
be a permanent record of its day of small
things and hard work, and of the zeal of its first
founders. In this work of piety Dr Hislop
renders justice to all and sundry ; except to
one, perhaps—Dr Hislop himself, who has
always been a man of mark in the congrega-
tion, but about whom Dr Hislop, modestly,
says less than is due. His well-known features,
however, appear in an excellent portrait; and
there are other good illustrations —portraits of
the two ministers of the church, and views of
the old church and the new.
The most striking and interesting figure in
this history is, of course, that of Dr Stuart.
He is not at the present moment, whilst the
city is under the shock of his death, likely to
lack eulogists, and therefore we will refrain
here from uttering praises which are sure to be
abundantly uttered by many mouths. In read-
ing this book, however, we could not help
speculating as to that quality in him that made
him, in spite of any faults he may have had, a
man powerful to move men. We have always
thought, and are confirmed in our thought by
reading Dr Hislop’s book, that a large part of
Dr Stuart’s power outside his church lay in the
fact that he had an essentially poetic basis
to his character. When he spoke at his
best he spoke, to our thinking, better Eng-
lish, as well as better Scotch, than any
man in Dunedin terse, vigorous, glowing ;
and often capped with a flashing jewel of
poetry from Holy Writ. We have often heard
it said that Dr Stuart was not an eloquent
preacher. Of that we are not in a position to
judge. But he certainly was, on occasions, an
eloquent speaker. To hear him pray at a
grave, when the circumstances of death affected
him, was to listen to the voice of a poet-seer ;
we cannot imagine eloquence more solemn or
moving, or with more in it of the oil of comfort.
Then, again, when he tad to address the
young, if he happened to be in a happy vein—
how he could let himself go, what fire be had,
and what a knack of happy phrases. When,
on the other hand, his imagination carried him
to his native Highland hills, with their heather
and their birches, end their simple and lowly
modes of life, Burns or Scott could not glow
with more genuine fire. And so it was that he
was indispensable at every public gathering
where there was any subject of interest more
humane than mere beggarly party-politics.
Without him somehow things would not kindle.
It is true, as he once said to his flock, that
there is no man necessary to the world : but it
is equally true that there are men whose
empty place cannot be filled as long as any
survive who once knew their influence : and
Dr Stuart was such a man. In the hearts of
all the men and women, friendly or unfriendly,
into whose life he entered there will hence-
forth be a vacant place that cannot be filled,
be the next who he may.
We ate, of course, speaking of Dr Stuart as
a public man, as he was known to the citizens
at large, and not as he was known to his flock,
with whom he had deeper spiritual relations.
He was essentially a public man—so much so
by nature that he would have been unhappy
had he been confined to the interests of a private
life, however prosperous. A large church, com-
posed necessarily of more or less conflicting
elements, gave a wide scope to that passion for
direction and government which was so strong
an element of character in Dr Stuart. But it
did not give scope enough. The republican
system of government of the Presbyterian
Church, which allows a man to count for one
and for no more, did not allow room enough for
his perfervid love of action. The fact is that
Nature meant Dr Stuart for a bishop, but forgot
to bring him forth on the right side of the
Tweed. So that the energy which was enough
for a whole diocese, and too much for the
government of a single church, flowed over upon
public institutions, chiefly those concerned
with education. He was essentially a man
devoted to ideas—too little regardful, perhaps,
of material things, and expecting too large a
disregard of such things from other people. He
would have had young preachers go forth with
scrip and staff to preach in the remote wastes,
where there is small comfort and little pay,
as he would have had young teachers,
also, teach with a lofty disregard of
money returns, finding their emolument in
their work. This is noble and apostolic doc-
trine, though not usually acceptable; fortu-
nately in Dr Stuart’s case no one could say
that he did not obey his own self-denying
ordinances. One of the most characteristic
anecdotes, in a life fruitful of anecdotes, is
that which Dr Stuart himself used to tell of
his first attempt at school-keeping. In 1837,
desiring to earn the wherewithal to keep him-
self at the university, he bought the goodwill
of a school in Fifeshire, and started work with
one pupil, and that a girl, at 3d per week.
“For six weeks,” says Dr Hislop, “he met
his solitary pupil for the full number of regu-
lation hours. This circumstance drawing
general attention, led to an attendance of
pupils which put it within his power in three
years to enter St. Andrew’s University.”
It may be asked who is to weave the annual
chaplet for the grave of the early pilgrims, now
that Dr Stuart is gone. Year in, year out, he
10


spoke his mindful tribute, and now he is him-
self one of those that were. It is clear to any-
one who reads Dr Hislop’s book, that however
well the aged pastor may have loved his flock
of these latter days, his best affections were
with the band who gathered round him when
he came out a young man, with the “ wife of
his youth” and his three boys, in the year
1860. Who can wonder if, as years were added
to his back and sorrows came thick upon him,
he lived more and more in the memory of
those early days, and took every opportunity
of rescuing from forgetfulness the names of
those who had first welcomed him, and helped
him to build up his church. —Otago Daily Times.
SUNDAY’S SERVICES AT KNOX
CHURCH.
The services at Knox Church on Sunday were
conducted by the Rev. H. Kelly, 8.A., of
Waimate. The pulpit was draped with black,
and the congregations were exceptionally large.
As the memorial service to the late Rev. Dr
Stuart is to be held next Sunday, no direct
reference was made to the decease of the
pastor of Knox Church, but at the morn-
ing service one of the oldest office-bearers
of the church was deputed to address the
congregation on the subject. The following
gentlemen occupied seats on the pulpit dais :
The Hon. W. D. Stewart, Dr Hislop, Dr
Dunlop, Messrs E. B. Cargill, C. M‘K. Gordon,
W. B. Harlow, Robt. Glendining, W. Hislop,
G. L. Denniston, Edmund Smith, John Reid,
Alex. Stewart, James N. Fraser, R. Chisholm,
and Geo. Dutch.
THE LATE DR STUART.
At the close of the first prayer,
Mr E. B. Cargill stepped forward, and
addressing the congregation said ; Friends, —I
have a word or two to say. Our dear pastor
Dr Stuart has gone from us. Yesterday
morning about 7 o’clock the spirit de-
parted from the frail and worn body
very quietly, peacefully, and happily; so
much so that the nurse and attendants
scarce knew when the spirit had fled.
He has gone. After his long and loving and
abundant labours he has gone to his reward ;
he has entered the Kingdom of the Blessed. On
Thursday last he had a severe attack in the
afternoon which called for the active help of
the doctor—Dr Coughtrey. And here let me
say that the kind and constant and unremitting
attention of Dr Coughtrey to our dear friend in
his last days is beyond all praise that I can give
to him. Our pastor had apparently a little
relief, and gained some sleep that night,
so that on Friday morning he seemed a
little better and was a little more himself.
But in the afternoon another attack of great
severity came on. It was only towards evening
that the doctor was able to obtain some im-
provement and to get for him a little rest dur-
ing the earlier part of the night. He then had
some ease and relief, and between 3 and 4
o’clock in the morning he awoke and got up
and spoke to the nurse ; but after a little while
he laid down again apparently under great weak-
ness and exhaustion, so much so that the nurse
shortly afterwards sent for Dr Coughtrey, who
came in somewhere between 4 and 5 in the
morning and found his patient in a very weak
and precarious condition. The doctor did not
anticipate that the end was so near, nor did
the nurse, and he left him and went back to his
house. Towards 7 o’clock in the morning the
nurse saw a change coming over him and sent
again for the doctor, who did not arrive until
life was gone. At the end Dr Stuart passed
off, as I have said, so quietly, so peacefully,
that the watchers simply became aware that
the heart had ceased to beat, that the breath
had ceased to come, and that the great active
brain was set at rest for ever. You all know
that for a month past the doctor has had a
great deal of suffering. From time to time he
brightened up, and in his own fashion was
marvellous to ns. Whenever he could get the
opportunity he was out doing something in the
way of work We could have wished that
he had laid himself more entirely aside,
and said so to him time after time, but
what he said was that the only joy left to him
in life, the only thing good in what remained
to him of life worth living for, was the feeling
that, when his strength permitted it, he might
be out and doing what he could in the work he
had been doing so long. And who could have
the heart to say “nay” to that? For my part
I am glad to think that in his latter moments
he was able to find that pleasure and joy which
it unquestionably did give him to do something
of his old work as far as his strength permitted.
He was ever bright in his mind. Down to the
last his mind was ever bright and clear—as
interested in all that went on round about him,
and as active as ever. He could take an active
interest in whatever was told him of what was
going on, and at the same time his own faith
was strong and unquestioned and simple. He
was perfectly satisfied to commit his soul to
God and to know that He would not leave him
at the time when most greatly needed. I am
quite sure that his firm, settled faith in God
and Christ as his Saviour never wavered nor
faltered in the least degree unto the very end.
Well, he has gone ; he has entered into his
rest; he has gone to receive the welcome of
those loved ones whom he loved on earth and
who have gone before him ; to receive the wel-
come of many who, in their last moments,
he helped over the dark waters, and
to join the great company of the
saints of God ; to see face to face that
which we only now see as in a glass darkly ; to
11


join the great company of the redeemed; to be
present with the Lord; to partake in the
beatific vision, and to receive that crown of
righteousness which the Lord, the righteous
judge, will surely bestow upon him. He has
gone from us. We shall no more see that
stalwart form which was the dwelling place of
his great spirit: in former days strong and
active, but of late much reduced by weakness
and sickness. We shall no more see that form
in the pulpit before us ; it only remains to us
with due respect and honour to commit it to the
dust. We shall no more witness the play of
that honest, manly, great countenance, which
reflected so honestly and straightly every
emotion that came from his heart; and we
shall no more hear that loving, sympathetic
voice—not, indeed, gifted with great oratorical
powers, but having the greater gift of speaking
from heart to heart, impressing us with the
belief that what came to us came from his own
heart and was directed honestly to ours—the
kind of address which, as has been often said,
always gave us something to take away of
advantage to us. I am sure that his departure
will leave a blank not only with us, but in
this whole community, which it will be very
difficult to fill up. No man, I take it, has
departed from the midst of us in our time that
has been so widely honoured, so widely loved,
or so widely respected—not only as a preacher
of righteousness, as the minister of this great
congregation, but as a man ever forward in
everything for the good of his fellow men. He
was a noted and great philanthropist, giving his
ready and effective aid in everything which
made for the good of his fellows, and particu-
larly for the aid of those who were in want or
suffering, or in need of temporal aid. A great
educationist, the chancellor of our university;
the ardent advocate of everything that made for
the strengthening and building up of our
educational system, bringing to bear his great
knowledge and experience, and giving his active
and earnest help to the utmost of his strength.
On all occasions a great citizen and patriot,
filled with the highest aspirations for the
country of which he had become a denizen ;
always bright and hopeful, looking with con
fidence to the future of this colony, and always
ready to lend a helping hand in everything that
would make for the good of the people at large.
He was felt to be the friend not only of every
man and woman within the range of his voice
here, but was looked upon as a universal
friend without regard to creed or state in
riches or poverty. At all times there was he,
ever ready wirh help and with words to make it
acceptable. It is no wonder he was looked upon
with reverence and with respect and with love.
But to come back to ourselves What has he
been to us for these long years which he has
been in the colony since he laid the foundation
of this great congregation—the greatest congre-
gation, let me say, in some respects that now
exists in the Australasian colonies ? For these
thirty-four long years he has laboured honestly,
and to the utmost of his strength, heartily,
zealously, and lovingly, showing all considera-
tion for those with whom he was associated,
ever ready to give the utmost credit for the
smallest services to those who helped him. We
all know that in the main this congregation was
created, built up, and maintained in its strength
chiefly by his own great personality, by his
largeness of heart, and the liberality of his
views. Thirty-four years he has been with us.
That forms a large portion of the life of any one
of us. There are many of you who now hear
me who have lived the whole of your lives under
his ministry. You have been baptised by him,
you have been received into the church by him,
and you have grown up under his ministry into
the strength of manhood and womanhood.
There are others of you who during that
time from youth have passed into middle
life and have advanced towards age.
There are others again who met him as middle-
aged men and women, who are now far
advanced into old age. But whatever the stage
of life the influence of Dr Stuart throughout
that long period has been a great and good
influence, for which we may all bless God, I am
very sure, this day. For my part I cannot but feel
thankful that so large a portion of my life has
been spent in contact and in fellowship with a
man who has been so great a factor in all that is
good, and who has so greatly encouraged all
that one would wish to be. I think we may all
join in that feeling, and my hope and prayer is
that the memory of Dr Stuart in the few days
or years that it may yet please God to grant
unto me may be ever kept fresh and green, and
that although he has gone from us I may
retain the sense that he has not gone alto-
gether, that his influence may fill what remains
to me of life, so that I may be able to look
back to and remember his wise counsel not only
with satisfaction, but with benefit of every
kind. He has been a friend throughout all
those years, throughout all the vicissi-
tudes of our life. In prosperity or ad-
versity, in sunshine or in sorrow—always
our sympathetic friend, ready to join with
us in our rejoicing in days of brightness and
prosperity ; ready to bring his kindly sympathy
and advice in days of trouble, sorrow, and be-
reavement ; under all circumstances coming
into our houses as a gleam of sunshine. I can
say no more, friends. He has now gone to his
rest. I praise God that his sufferings have
ended. They have not been light; they have
indeed been very considerable, but he has borne
up, strengthened by his strong faith and assur-
ance of the love and goodness of God, which
has never forsaken him.
During the course of his remarks, which were
delivered extemporaneously, Mr Cargill was
12


several times strongly affected, speaking with
much emotion, which was largely shared by the
sorrowing congregation.
The hymn, “For ever with the Lord,”
followed. The subject of the Rev. Mr Kelly’s
discourse was “ The Church’s Distress and De-
liverance ” (John vi, 16 to 21). Mr Barth, at the
organ, played Cowen’s “Better Land ” as the
opening piece, and at the offertory the “Dead
March” in “Saul” ; while Beethoven’s “ Dead
March ” was played as the congregation dis-
persed.
Evening Service.
At the evening service the Rev. H. Kelly,
8.A., preached, taking as his subject, “The
Unconscious Service of God ” (Ist Samuel vi,
12). Towards the close of the sermon the
preacher pointed out that, while all men do
and must in a measure unconsciously serve
God, this was not to be regarded as the kind of
service properly due from man to God. Con-
tinuing he said: “ The fact that a man is a
free moral agent carries with it the implication
that the service due from him to God must be
entirely determined by his constitution. Know-
ledge of this truth conveys of itself a summons
t© definite, deliberate consecration to God.
Such a summons is made stronger and more
solemn by the circumstances on which we are
this evening met. It does not fall to my lot to
pronounce an eulogium upon Dr Stuart:
that task has been assigned to brethren more
nearly equal to it. In a characteristically kind
letter which I received from Dr Stuart on
Wednesday last, he said, referring to my visit,
that he hoped I would be the bearer of a bless-
ing both to Knox Church and its minister. As
to Dr Stuart, he is now beyond the reach and
the view of any poor words of ours. He who
so richly comforted others is himself comforted,
and all pain and sorrow have ceased for him.
After so many years of untiring labour and
devotion, after a lifetime of unremitting
activity in the service of the church and the
community, shall we grudge him his rest and
his reward ? Shall we not rather say, * Servant
of God, well done ’ ? May we not say of him, as
is said of the builder of a great English cathe-
dral, ‘ If you seek his monument, look around
you ’ ? Look at this building, look at this con-
gregation—compact, united, vigorous ; look at
the various institutions, philanthropic and
educational, which felt his touch and were
moulded by his master hand. Think also, for
you cannot know them, of the innumerable
unrecorded deeds of kindness ; and, re-
membering and reflecting upon his achieve-
ment, lift up your hearts for God’s gift to
Dunedin and to New Zealand. That sublime
and pathetic presence is no more with us ; we
shall not grasp his hand again on earth, and
we are infinitely the poorer by his absence.
But as he will live in our memories, so should
he live in our lives as a perpetual inspira-
tion to the wholehearted service of God.
If, as some suppose, the departed saints are
aware of our actions and keep loving watch
oyer our destinies, then I am sure that in the
high safe height of Paradise nothing will so
gladden the spirit of your late pastor as to
learn that on the first Sabbath after his transla-
tion some of his flock thought upon their ways
and turned their feet unto God’s testimonies,
and deliberately and definitely as became them,
devoted themselves to Christ. Even out of
death let us draw life, and our very loss as it is
Dr Stuart’s gain will turn to our advantage
and the glory of that God whose he was and
whom he served.”
The anthem in the evening was “The Home-
land,” and the vast congregation, comprising
1400 people, stood in reverent silence while the
“ Dead March ” was played. As the congrega-
tion dispersed Mr Barth played Guilmant’s
“ Funeral March” in C minor.
REFERENCES IN OTHER CHURCHES.
The death of the venerable pastor of Knox
Church was referred to on Sunday in nearly
every church in the city and suburbs, and,
it is safe to assume, in every congregation in
Otaga which had received news of his having
passed away. We give below some of these
references
First Church.
At the First Church the Rev. J. Gibb, before
beginning his sermon, alluded to the late Dr
Stuart, and spoke as follows “ The tidings that
Dr Stuart passed away yesterday morning were
not unexpected. It has been for some weeks clear
that the hand of death was upon him. Indeed
this has been the case not for weeks but during
many months, and that the end did not come
sooner was due in a great measure, I believe, to
the doctor s resolute will, and to the native energy
of his character. These closing months of
Dr Stuart’s life have been touched with a deep
pathos. Burdened with the weight of 75 years,
and almost continually harassed by a deadly
disease, he yet stood manfully by his post, and
bo ti- m J 1 * 8 own congregation and in his many
public offices he continued almost to the last to
discharge his laborious duties. It was extremely
pathetic to see the veteran literally dying on his
feet. I well remember the last time I saw him at
the presbytery, and how sorry we all felt to
observe the manifest effort it cost him to follow
the business before the court, and to recognise in
the emaciation of his features, the dimness of his
eye, the tokens of his swiftly approaching depar-
ture. And now the end has come. Now the
labourer’s work is o’er; now the battle day is
past. I shall not now attempt to delineate his
character or to estimate the value of his work.
That will be done by others who knew him much
more intimately than myself. He was in many
respects a very remarkable man. He had many
virtues, and even those characteristics which may
have seemed to some of us less praiseworthy than
others were after all only the defects of his quali-
ties. The most eloquent testimony to his good-
ness will not be the eulogies which will in due
13


course be publicly pronounced upon him, but the
many sore hearts that in Dunedin and beyond it
this day grieve for the loss of a wise counsellor, a
trusted friend, a brother born for adversity. I
have often heard it said, and have myself had
frequent evidence of the fact, that Dr Stuart was
always to be relied on in the event of trouble or
misfortune. Towards the mourner, unsuccessful
in the battle of life, the victims of sin or misfor-
tune, his heart went out impulsively, and his
emotion never spent itself in its own transports.
His time, his strength, his worldly means were all
cheerfully placed at the disposal of those who had
suffered from Fortune’s buffets. His memory will
be enshrined in the hearts of many a man and
woman in this community as that of the good
Samaritan was in the heart of the man to whom
he proved a friend indeed. It would not be easy to
exaggerate the services rendered by Dr Stuart
to the Presbyterian Church in this pro-
vince, to the cause of education, to the various
social and philanthropic movements of the time.
From this point of view we may say : ‘ Take him
for all in all, we shall not soon look upon his like
again.’ A man of great natural powers, of tireless
energy, of marked individuality, he has made a
deep impression in his generation. No man is
indispensable, and the world and the church will
move on their way without him ; but he will be
greatly missed. During my residence in Dunedin
no one has gone from us whose place it will be so
hard to fill. The loss the Presbyterian Church
has sustained by his death will not appear to-day
or to-morrow. He was our representative man. In
the University Council, on the High Schools Board,
in the countless other public positions he occupied,
he kept the church to which he belonged well in
evidence, and to the utmost of his large powers
furthered her interests. I shall not further pro-
long these remarks. As a congregation we extend
our sincere sympathy to the church he served so
long and with such rare devotion. They will
miss him most of all. That God may overrule
the bereavement they have suffered for their
good and His own glory is our earnest prayer.”
At the conclusion of these remarks the organist
(Mr Timson) played the “ Dead March,” the con-
gregation rising to their feet and standing during
the performance. Special reference was also
made in one of the prayers to the present circum-
stances of Knox Church.
St. Andrew’s Church.
At St. Andrew’s Church on Sunday morning
the Rev. Rutherford Waddell at the close of
his sermon referred to Dr Stuart’s death. The
sermon was one of the ordinary course on “The
Hebrew Prophets and their Times,” the text
being as follows “For 10, I will command and
I will sift the house of Israel among all nations,
like as corn is sifted in a sieve, yet shall not the
least grain fall upon the earth.” After alluding
to the fact and method of the divine sifting and
detailing some of the means which God employs
for winnowing the chaff from the wheat in men
and nations, Mr Waddell referred to the death and
said : “I suppose that is the thought which is
uppermost in the minds of this community to-
day. Yesterday our most prominent man fell.
Dr Stuart is dead. It is impossible at this stage
rightly to appraise his worth and work, and I am
not going to do that. Others better qualified
will undertake the duty. ... Dr Stuart has
been a foremost figure in the life of this com-
munity for more than a score of years. He won
his way into its favour by that ready hospitality
of heart and hand which was one of his charac-
teristic excellencies. But Dr Stuart was more
than a smiling figure of kindness. He had a large
brain as well as a large love. *He had under-
standing of the times.’ Of this there can be no
better proof than the educational establishments
of this city. To the creation and culture of
these he gave the passion of his heart
and the utmost labour of his hand. He
knew himself the worth of knowledge,
and experienced some of the hardships that
beset its attainment for the youth of earlier days.
There is, indeed, no royal road to learning ; but
the path may be smoothed considerably for the
swift and eager foot, and if it is that for this
colony’s children it is due to the wisdom and the
foresight of the early pioneers. And chief amongst
these was the man who rests from his labours
to-day. As a minister he spared no toil to fulfil
faithfully the duties of his office, and to commend
the Gospel in his own way to the congregation
whose oversight was committed to him. But he
realised that the city was his parish, and in what-
ever seemed to him helpful to civic well-being he
took a prominent place. As the Star said last
night, he strove ‘to be all things to all men.’ It
is a supremely difficult ideal. It requires rare
tact, and flrm-fibered Christian conscience, not to
be unfaithful to the principles of righteousness
in the deceptive glamour of popularity. There
may be an honest difference of opinion as to how
far Dr Stuart succeeded in this. But there can be
no difference of opinion as to the undeviating
steadiness with which he gave himself to what
seemed to him the general well-being of church
and State. St. Paul’s words were certainly true
of him, ‘ln labours abundant ’; and to the
very last he continued so. It is a matter
of extreme regret that he declined to
husband the strength of his latter days. With a
heroism which would have been splendid had it
not been so needless and so extravagant, he stood
up to his work to the last. He had in him the
old < 'eltic blood, which delights in resistance, and
meets death with defiance. If it be true that
* Endurance is the crowning quality,
And patience all the passion of great hearts,’
the closing days of Dr Stuart’s career manifested
these to a very remarkable degree. There was
none who did not often wish he would ease off a
little and husband his strength for certain works
which he only could do. He disappointed the
hopes of all and he irritated a little some of his
best friends by what seemed a reckless»prodigality
of energy. Remonstrance was useless. He had
resolved to die at his post. He had resolved, we
might say, like some of the old heroes of the race
from which he sprang, not even to sit down to
death, but to make death sit down to him—to
meet death, in fact, upon his feet. And now he
is gone, most of his company had preceded him.
He was 75.
‘ As life runs on the road grows strange
With faces new ; and near the end
The milestones into headstones change.
And ’neath every one a friend.’
A pathos gathered round his closing days. There
were troubling clouds about the sunset. But now
that the light is finally withdrawn we shall know
the blank that is left. His place will never be
14


filled. No man can stand in another’s shoes, and
Dr Stuart’s was a specially unique personality.
He has left no successor capable of taking up the
educational work to which he was so devoted, and
the church to which he belonged will miss him
sadly in many ways. But loss need not be despair.
It would be a silly scepticism to suppose that any
man or any institution is essential to the work of
God. Age after age He buries His workmen, but
He carries on His work. One after another are
recalled from the field, but others step to the
front and rally their forces for the fight. . . .
One of the great lessons of the life just ended is
fidelity—fidelity to work at all costs and all
hazards. Most of us will think that in his case
there was a somewhat reckless disregard of
prudence. But Dr Stuart could not rust out. * I
must work the work of Him that sent me. The
night cometh when no man can work.’ His
passionate devotion to duty and his indomitable
energy is a call to us to follow in his footsteps.”
North Dunedin Church.
The Rev. Gibson Smith last evening took for
his text I Corinthians ix, 19 to 22, and in the
course of his sermon said : “I feel that I should
not be doing justice either to your natural ex-
pectations or to my own obligations if I did not
make some reference this evening to the event
which has been in all our minds this day—the
death of the aged minister of our sister congrega-
tion of Knox Church. Dr Stuart has taken a
large and prominent part in the religious life of
this city for a whole generation. He has been
identified with our church during the years of her
growth, and by his own individual exertions h*s
done much to spread throughout Otago and South-
land the Presbyterian Churches which are now
found in every district of our province. For many
years he has represented our Presbyterianism in
the eye of the general community, and his passing
away from our midst to that borne whence no
traveller returns represents an occasion for solemn
thought. I do not propose, however, to pronounce
any eulogy on the aged minister who has so
recently gone from us. I do not think this is the
occasion for the utterance of our human judg-
ments. We know that no man can have his
character fairly and justly weighed without some
faults and flaws being brought under our atten-
tion, and at a moment like this to deal with such
matters would be repugnant to every feeling of
the heart that prompts us to regard the
chamber of death as sacred. I do not,
therefore, offer you any estimate of Dr
Stuart’s life and work. I desire rather to
turn your attention to the great distinguishing
characteristic of Dr Stuart’s character, which was
the chief source of the success of his ministerial
career—namely, his adaptability, his power of
accommodating himself to all sorts and conditions
of men. Arriving in our land in the earlier years
of colonial life, Dr Stuart found himself con-
fronted with men of every type of character, and
recognised at once that the only condition of suc-
cessful work was to adopt a much freer policy
than was needful in the old country, where one
type of character was always found predominant.
He was suited by natural gifts to play the part
assigned to him. He had a large and sympathetic
heart, combined with much practical shrewdness
and common sense. He was able by his cordiality
and heartiness, by laying aside all sacerdotalism,
to win the affections of men who above all things
hated cant and pretence. His coming here repre
sented a new departure in Presbyterianism. He
helped largely to banish much of the unnecessary
strictness and almost Jewish respect for old forms
and ceremonies which was characteristic of the
older Presbyterianism. That was a work which
needed to be done, and needed especially to be
done in a colony like this, where there was such a
mingling of races and creeds. Perhaps the time
has now come when such work is no longer
required—when, rather, it is necessary to make
resistance to the tendencies of the time than to
accommodate ourselves any further to their
currents. There may appear to some to be a
danger lest the church may sacrifice her own vital
principles if she pursues the path of accommoda-
tion any further. But the work that Dr Stuart
did needed to be done in his own time. Either
the policy he pursued had to be adopted, or else
the church must have been left high and dry,
stranded on the sandbank of exclusiveness and
formality, alienated from popular sympathy, with
a larger gulf than need be of prejudice and
misunderstanding between her and the masses of
the people. If it seems to any of us that Dr Stuart
carried his policy of adapting the services of the
church to the conditions of the colony too far,
let us remember that it is not given to any but
the wisest of men to know exactly where the
line is to be drawn, and that in the kingdom of
God one man usually has only one piece of work
allotted to him to accomplish. It is certainly
true that Dr Stuart gave himself most cordially
and heartily to work for the Church of Christ in
this land according to the light that God had
given him. He was unwearied in his diligence—
his busy life was a marvel to all that knew it,
And now that he has gone to his rest, it is for us
who remain to take up the work that he has left
us—to strive as he did for the good, not of a single
congregation only, but for the church as a
whole; to seek the good, not merely of the
religious part of the community, but of the whole
circle of society; and ever as we labour to remem-
ber that the time is short, and that soon the dark
angel will come for us also with that summons,
which no son of man can disobey, to appear before
God and render an account of the deeds we have
done in the body.”
Anderson’s Bay Church.
At the Anderson’s Bay Presbyterian Church
last night the Rev. A. Cameron preached a sermon
having reference to Dr Stuart, taking his text from
John xi, 11. He spoke as follows “ ‘ Our friend
Lazarus is fallen asleep ’ So our Lord spoke of
His dead friend, and so he has taught us to speak
of our friends who die in the Lord. Surtdy we
may use the words with peculiar fitness in speaking
of Dr Stuart, who fell asleep yesterday morning
as the life of the city began to stir. Long and full
of pain has been the struggle between life and
death; but it is over now, and ends —not in
death. No, not in death ! Sleep, to be followed by
a glorious awakening, is the end which we believe
has come to this child of God. Often have I
heard Dr Stuart say, even when health coursed
through all his veins— 1 What a beautiful thing
death is!’ He knew the weariness and pain of
life too well to wish to live always in the flesh.
That no ordinary man has fallen out of our ranks
all will admit, and one name by which he will
long be remembered is our friend. There is not a
child in New Zealand to whom he would not have
15


willingly shown himself a friend had the need
arisen. And many are the men and women in
Otago, and especially in Dunedin, to whom he
has shown himself a faithful friend. Among
those I feel it an honour to class myself. It is
now nearly 20 years since I was brought into
personal contact with Dr Stuart, and during the
last 10 he has been to me almost like a
father. In these years I have been brought much
into contact with him in private, and have
learned to love him as one who with a great
heart loved both God and man. This evening I
have no intention of trying to describe the place
Dr Stuart has filled in our midst. As a minister
and a citizen he has been in the front rank for
more than a generation, and has occupied high
and responsible positions, in which he sought
only the good of men and the glory of God. I
desire rather to point you to some of the qualities
which made him the man we have known and
loved and now honour. If to his parents Dr
Stuart owed little in the matter of rank and in-
fluence, he owed them much for the splendid
constitution with which they gifted him. Humble
but wholesome was the fare which in the little
home among the beautiful hills of Perthshire
nourished in him a sound mind in a sound body.
But better far was this gift than one of broad
acres. Because of it Dr Stuart has been able to
accomplish an amount of work which would
have overwhelmed most men. But few have
any idea of the work which claimed his at-
tention. All classes sought his help, and
found him ready with open ear and willing hand.
The power to work is a great gift, and Dr Stuart
had that. When he herded sheep among the hills
of his native Highlands he looked with open eye
on bird and bush so as to become familiar with
their names and habits. At home he busied him-
self with the few books within his reach, and that
he might win his way to the university took to
teaching when a mere boy, and became special
correspondent to a weekly paper (the Fife Herald)
that he might through its pages extract his know-
ledge of the world. At Falstone, in Northumber-
land, where he was minister for 10 years, he not
only preached and performed all the duties of a
pastor, he also founded schools, and sought in
manifold ways the good of the people. So greatly
did he make his power for good to be felt that on
it becoming known that it was proposed to re-
move him to New Zealand the Episcopalian
clergyman publicly declared himself anxious that
Mr Stuart should remain in Falstone, because he
was doing better work among the people than he
(the Episcopalian) could do. One secret of his
power of work showed itself in his care of the odd
ends of time. You never found him idle. Sermon,
letter, or book was in his hands if you found him
alone in the manse. And even his bedroom was
stored with books. One day we were in com-
mittee and concluded the business a few minutes
before another committee met. Several of us
went out for freth air, and on return-
ing found the doctor had written two letters,
which the business just transacted required him
to write. What would have grown to be a burden
unbearable in other hands thus became in his easy
to bear. I cannot remember ever hearing Dr
Stuart decline work on the ground that he was
too busy. He did all his work, and yet was always
at leisure to give counsel or help. Another
feature in the character of Dr Stuart was his love
of men. This showed itself in countless ways,
and will long remain a sweet memory in many
hearts. It manifested itself in him when as a
student he publicly espoused the popular side,
and so incurred the censure of his minister, who
countermanded the invitation already given
to Dr Stuart to dine at the manse. It
showed itself again in Falstone when, in the
cause of liberty of worship, her defied the
act of Parliament which forbade meeting for wor-
ship in unlicensed buildings. In our midst it has-
shown itself in ways too numerous to mention.
He has clothed the naked, fed the hungry, nursed
the sick, and visited the prisoner, because in his
heart there beat the love of man. This made him
an ardent supporter of education and helper in all
efforts for the social and religious advancement of
the people. It was his love of men also which
made him every man’s minister. He was filled
with love for his own church, but was
broader than all churches —a truly catholic
Christian and minister, who lived to
serve rich and poor, high and low, simply because
they were men, the work and children of God.
Another beautiful feature in his character was his
patience in sore trial. Dr Stuart used to say he
feared he would make a bad patient when he
came to die if long-suffering were appointed to
him. But such as knew him, and how he suffered
heavy trials all through his ministry, from the
day he laid his young wife in her early grave to
the close of his career, knew well he would never
lack patience. When Mr Nerli was painting the
doctor’s picture for the Girls’ High School, I was
present in the doctor’s study one morning, and
after about one hour’s patient sitting—which, to
one in the doctor’s condition of health, must have
been a sore test of patience—the doctor said : ‘Mr
Nerli, when you write your memoirs, you must at
least give me credit for patience.’ Never once
have I heard the good doctor murmur, though the
waters of affliction went high over his head.
Patience, we trust, has now had its perfect
work, and the stricken, but brave and true
soldier and friend has gone through the dark
valley of the shadow of death to dwell in the
presence of Him whom here he loved and served—
the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
* Our friend Lazarus is fallen asleep; but I go
that I may awake him out of sleep.’
“ * Earth to earth, and dust to dust,’
Calmly now the words we say.
Leaving him to sleep in trust
Till the resurrection day.
Father, in Thy precious keeping
Leave we now Thy servant sleeping.”
Chalmers Church.
At Chalmers Church, York place, on Sunday,
the pastor (the Rev. J. M. Fraser), after reading
the 39th Psalm as the first lesson at the morning
service, said : “ In common with all the congrega-
tions of our land—and that, I venture to
say, not merely of our own order—we are
called upon to-day to bewail the death of one of
whom it may well be said ‘ a prince is fallen in
Israel.’ You are aware that lam not in the habit
of preaching what are called funeral sermons on
departed friends, as I always have had the feeling
that they would, if permitted, be the first to pro-
test against the displacement of the sermon—
God’s message to hungering and thirsting
souls—for a mere tribute to their memory, or a
eulogy, however deserving. That feeling, how-
16


ever, has not, as you know, prevented me from
finding a fitting place during the service to refer
to our departed ones as the occasion arose, and I
take thi* to be a fitting time for me to add my feeble
tribute to the many that will be offered to the
memory of one who showed to me personally, and
no doubt to many of you present to-day, much
kindness and loving sympathy. It is of that
personal relationship that I wish to say a
a few words now—for of his public life there is no
necessity to speak, as it is * known and read of
all men.’ The very first day—a Sabbath day —
I landed in Dunedin I called upon him, almost a
perfect stranger, yet he at once extended to me
the right hand of fellowahip, and pressed me to
occupy his pulpit that same evening. During my
brief but anxious pastorate at Caversham he
showed his goodwill and sympathy in numerous
ways ; and I was glad to learn that not long ago
while addressing a meeting there, he made kindly
reference to my work in that congregation. On
my removal to Lawrence—which removal was
mainly at his wish—his kindly interest still
followed me, and it was he who opened the new
church built there during my pastorate. Then,
when trouble darkened my door, his kindly mes-
sages cheered me greatly, and shall ever be grate-
fully remembered. Returning again to Dunedin,
I had always his sympathy and help in my work
in Chalmers Church, for, as you know, it
was he who opened this church when we
took possession of it, and twice since then
had he preached at our anniversary services.
A little over 12 months ago was the last time, and
on that occasion we remarked that with his load
of 74 years, his eye was undimmed, and his vigour
and force in the pulpit were such as might be
envied by many only half his years. Though we
knew it not, even then were the seeds of death
sown in that seemingly robust frame, and now he
is no more on earth. Failings he admittedly had,
for who have not, and his life was not free from
the mistakes and failures common to all, but all
these are now forgotten in the memory of a
devoted life of abundant labours, of many sore
trials borne with remarkable cheerfulness and
resignation, and of never wearying in well-doing,
as many can surely testify who survive him, as
well as many who have preceded him into
eternity. It is said that Spurgeon once remarked
to a friend, ‘ If I shall die rich, you may have
grave doubts of my salvation.’ Dr Stuart might
well have remarked similarly, for it would be a
falling from grace indeed for him to hoard while
the suffering poor were around him. As a co-
presbyter we were never opposed on important
questions, and as an occasional opponent I always
found him fair and considerate—in this respect
a really shining example. Though desirous
of being well abreast the times in all
things, yet I am assured that he never
took kindly to the flood of innovations that is
swamping our Presbyterianism at the present
day, and that he warmly admired the courage
with which our congregation has adhered to the
primitive principles of our faith. The posi-
tion he occupied in the community was unique,
and shall never again be occupied by any one
man. nor is it desirable that it shonld. His
familiar figure, kindly smile, and open hand will
long be missed in his loved city Yet we must
not lose faith that all good work shall utterly
cease, for the promise of God is sure, that the
children shall be instead of the fathers ‘ Whom
thou mayest make princes in all the earth.’ Hia
removal at this time is a lesson for us all. Of this
day and generation it may be said as of old,
‘ The righteous perisheth and no man layeth it to
heart; and merciful men are taken away, none
considering that the righteous is taken away
from the evil to come.’ Let us all lay this to
heart to-day, as well as the solemn lesson of God’s
providence and the Master’s exhortation, * Be ye
also ready, for in such an hour as ye think not
the Son of Man cometh.’ We unite to-day with
thousands in this land in heartfelt sympathy
with sorrowing relatives and a bereaved congre-
gation, praying for them all, that they may be
comforted with the comfort of the Holy Ghost.”
Mornington Presbyterian Church.
At the Mornington Presbyterian Church the
Rev. Henry Adamson, of Port Chalmers, who
occupied the pulpit, took occasion to allude to the
demise of Dr Stuart. He said : “I cannot con-
clude this service without some reference to the
solemn event which bulks so largely in the
thoughts and affections of the people of Otago to-
day. I refer to the death of Dr Stuart. It was
not unexpected, and yet it came as a shock to us.
We cannot read the meaning of it yet, but we feel
that there is a blank —‘ one is not.’ What
thoughts this sense of loneliness will beget in
many homes and many families to-day is a sub-
ject too sacred for us to touch. What shall we
say, then ? That he was always to the front in
everything that concerned the upbuilding of this
branch of the Presbyterian Church is to give but
a slight idea of the interest he took in her well-
being. That he was an important factor in the
development of the educational interests in this
province is too well known to require any men-
tion on my part. Of his work as a Christian min-
ister, of his kindly interest in the poor and the
distressed, of his sympathy with every movement
that had for its object the smoothing of life’s path-
way for the weary ones of earth, a thousand
tongues, made eloquent through a sense of grati-
tude, will gladly speak to-day. He is gone. A life
full of labour has come to an end. May it be ours
this day to be still, that through the silence of
death the voice may speak to us —‘ Occupy till I
come.’ * Therefore be ye also ready, for in such
an hour as ye think not the Son of Man cometh.’ ”
The “Dead March” in “Saul” was played at
both diets.
Caversham Church.
At the Caversham Presbyterian Church on Sun-
day morning feeling reference was made by the
Rev. Mr Dutton, minister of the congregation, to
the death of Dr Stuart. He said that Dr Stuart
had taken a deep and particular interest in the
Caversham Church ever since its foundation, and
by many of the older members of the congrega-
tion his death would be felt as a personal loss. He
reminded the young people of the many times
that Dr Stuart had come to Caversham specially
to speak to them, and how he had so often im-
pressed upon them the importance of searching
the Scriptures and studying the Word of God. Dr
Stuart had himself been an earnest student of the
Bible. It was only the previous Sunday that it
had been his (Mr Dutton’s) privilege to occupy
Knox Church pulpit; he used the doctor’s Bible,
and the many marginal notes in the doctor’s own
handwriting, which covered every page, bore ample
testimony to the diligence with which Dr Stuart
17


himself had studied the Word of God. He asked
the young people to remember the words of Dr
Stuart, for the older people were ever and anon
being called away from their work here, and
the younger ones had to fill their places. The
Bible would be of great service to them not only if
they became preachers of God’s Word, like Dr
Stuart, but in every other calling in life. Dr
Stuart had died in harness ; indeed he had re-
cently stated, when asked by his friends to retire,
that his work was his only joy in life, and that
if he ceased to work he would cease to live. His
life was over, his work was done—he had been
called to his rest. Mr Dutton enlisted the prayers
of his hearers on behalf of the Knox Church
congregation, that God would soon send them
a teacher and minister who would effectually
carry on His work aniongst them. Dr Stuart had
occupied a unique position in his church in Dun-
edin and in Otago, and he doubted whether it
would ever be possible for another just to fill his
place. After Mr Dutton had spoken, the organist
impressively played “The Dead March” in
“Saul.”
Knox Church Bible Class.
The Rev. J. Ryley, who, since the departure of
the Rev. A. P. Davidson, has conducted the Knox
Church Bible Class, referred in feeling terms at
Sunday’s session, at which fully 120 young
people were present, to the great loss the church
and community had sustained through the death
of Dr Stuart, and mentioned that he had known
Dr Stuart for over 30 years, and the longer he
knew him the more he respected him as a man,
as a friend, and as a Christian. Indeed, he could
say that within the range of his knowledge in the
colonies he did not know a more philanthropic,
self-sacrificing, and self-denying man. Dr Stuart
lived for the good of the church and the com-
munity. He was one of those men who did good
by stealth, not letting his left hand know what
his right hand did. Knox Church would never
again get his equal. For many years Dr Stuart
had taken a very deep interest in the welfare of
the young of the congregation and the commu-
nity, and had maintained one of the largest Bible
classes in the church. Did time and opportunity
permit, he could give many instances of Dr
Stuart’s unbounded generosity. He had been the
means of drying up the tears of the widow
and the fatherless, and of helping many cases
of distress in the community; and that in
connection not merely with his own church
but with other denominations. He was a man
whose sympathy was beyond the lines of mere
sectarianism—his field of operation was the
world-and wherever he found any needing help
or sympathy these were readily rendered. “Our
loss," said Mr Ryley in conclusion, “is Dr
Stuart’s gain. He rests from his labours, and
his works will follow him. Let us, young friends,
seek to manifest his spirit; let us tread in his
footsteps, and strive so far as we can to
imitate his example.” The Rev. Mr Ryley
occupied the pulpit at the North-East Valley
Presbyterian Church yesterday forenoon, where
again he made reference to the death of Dr
Stuart.
St. Paul’s Church,
Bishop Nevill, in the course of a sermon on the
Whitsuntide at St. Paul’s Pro-cathedral on Sun-
day (Whitsunday) forenoon, made a brief and
graceful allusion to the death of the Rev. Dr
Stuart, speaking in warm terms of his many
estimable qualities. The organist, Mr W. E.
Taylor, played “The Dead March” in “Saul” as
a voluntary.
All Saints’ Church.
At All Saints’ Church on Sunday evening, before
the sermon, the Rev. A. R. Fitchett said : “ It is
fitting, and you will expect it, that reference
should be made to the death of one whose name
is a household word throughout Otago, and who
yesterday, after a long life well filled with ser-
vice to God and man, passed peacefully away to
his rest. In a sense which you will all recognise,
Dr Stuart was the possession of the whole com-
munity. Such was the nature of his life and
work that he belonged not to his own congrega-
tion alone, but to all of us, and so, although
I have no qualifications for speaking of the
service he rendered to his own congregation
and his own denomination, I may speak of him as
I knew him in the neighbourly intercourse of
many years as a Christian citizen and patriot of a
very eminent type. We learn from the biographi-
cal sketch published last night that he came to
Otago 34 years ago, when as yet it was the early
days of colonisation, and when many of the in-
stitutions essential to the life of a civilised com-
munity were but struggling into existence. He
was then in the early stage of a vigorous man-
hood ; he had already had considerable experience
as a minister of religion and in the practical work
of schools ; he came a young Presbyterian minister
to a young community at that time almost
entirely Presbyterian; and all this is to say
that he found here a great opportunity. Emphati-
cally he was the man for the opportunity. How
he embraced it, filled it, and utilised it you all
know. He had the exalted estimate of the value
of education which is almost peculiar to those who
have had a hard fight to obtain it for themselves.
This had been his own experience. He had striven
persistently, worthily, and successfully, and, hav-
ing attained, he devoted himself on his arrival in
this new country, in the spirit of Christian
philanthropy, to making the path easier for others.
Leaving out of view the national system of
primary schools, which, as you know, was created
by the central Parliament, Dr Stuart’s influence
was paramount in shaping and fostering our
educational institutions. N o man was so closely
identified with the early life of the high
schools and university ; no man can be
so identified with them in future the
opportunity will not recur. Whoever in future
retraces the history of these institutions must
come upon his name. So with our charitable
agencies—the hospital, the Industrial School, the
Benevolent Institution, the refuge for fallen
women—all were indebted to his fostering care
and influence. He might have been a mere
ecclesiastic, many men in his circumstances would
have been nothing more, but he toek a wide view
of his opportunities and responsibilities, and not
even his bitter domestic sorrows were able to
interrupt his service to the community. His was
a life that was devoted to the service of the whole
community, not to sect or party, and the whole
community honours his memory. He goes to his
grave at a full age, and we need not lament him.
With all confidence we may say, as will be said
doubtless to-day in many Christian congregations,
with special reference to him : ‘ Blessed are the
dead which die in the Lord, for they rest from
18


their labours, and their works do follow them.’ ”
Miss Treseder, the organist, played Beethoven’s
“ Funeral March ” as a voluntary at the forenoon
service, and Handel’s “ Dead March ” from “ Saul ”
at the evening service
St. Matthew’s.
At the conclusion of his evening sermon the
incumbent, the Rev. K. T. Howell, said:— “We
lament to-day the loss of one who in the ministry
of the Word for more than 30 years in this city
had won for himself the love and reverence of
every one who knew him. He was not, indeed, of
our communion, but he was bound to us by ties
far stronger and more vital than the forces which
kept him from joining in our worship. He was
indeed a member ef Christ, and in him, as in so
many others who hold a similar position, we had
the most abundant evidence that the Spirit of
Christ is not restrained in His working, but sheds
His grace abundantly everywhere upon mankind.
He of whom we all are thinking now took a blessing
with him wherever he went, because he brought to
ail who needed it, sympathy, encouragement,
hope. Sorely tried himself, he knew how to com-
fort those who were tried with the consolation
wherewith he himself was comforted of God.
Many a heart will be touched to-day with the
thought of what he has been and done for them.
His example helped us all, and drew us all nearer
together with a sense of common brotherhood
which all the divisions in the world are powerless
to extinguish. May God grant him peace and rest
in His paradise, and a joyful resurrection at the
last day.” The organist, Mr A. W. Lilly, played
the “ Dead March ” while the offertory was being
collected.
St. Joseph’s Cathedral.
At St. Joseph’s Cathedral on Sunday evening the
Rev, Father Lynch said that Bishop Moran was
deeply gratified for the very kind inquiries which
were constantly made about his health. His
lordship had directed a letter to him containing
an expression of his gratitude and his sentiments
on a matter of public interest. Though it was
formally addressed to himself it was really
intended for the»people. He would therefore read
it for the congregation. The letter rendered any
remark on his part wholly unnecessary :
“ Bishop’s House, Rattray street,
“ Dunedin, May 12,1894.
“ My Dear Father Lynch,—A long and trying
illness has kept me confined to my room for
several months, and rendered me incapable of
taking my wonted interest in the things going on
around me, but I have been carefully kept in-
formed of the interest which the people (my own
and others) have taken in me, and of their deep
sympathy with me in my affliction. 1 feel that,
under the providence of God, owing to the care of
a skilful physician, and, above all, to the prayers
of the people —particularly of the little children, —
I have been snatched from the brink of the grave.
Wonderful are the ways of Almighty God ! May
His Holy Will be blessed and praised for ever!
There are many things that I would have done
had it been physically possible for me to do them.
For example, I should have felt it my duty to
personally call on Dr Stuart in his great trial,
and I would esteem it an honour were it in my
power to attend his funeral on Wednesday next,
and join in paying the last tribute to his memory.
I must, however, ask his friends to take the will
for the deed. An old and a useful citizen, a
humane and charitable gentleman, indefatigable
in doing good all around him, he has claims on
the respect and veneration of all his fellow
citizens. But there is another reason why I
regret my absence. The citizens of Dunedin are
unanimous in their high appreciation of his good
qualities and services, and my respect for them,
even if I had no other reason, would bring me to
the side of his grave. I request you to attend the
funeral on my behalf and as my representative.
As I cannot personally thank all the people, my
own and others, for their unmerited charity
towards me, I charge you to do so on my behalf,
saying to them that no words that I can command
can adequately express the depth and sincerity of
my gratitude ; and as the almost only thing that
I can do is to pray for them, 1 shall not fail to
earnestly and fervently ask Almighty God to
bless them abundantly, in time and eternity.—l
am, Ac., “t P. Moran.”
Trinity Wesleyan Church.
The Rev. J. Newman Buttle was the morning
preacher at this church, and before the sermon, in
addressing the congregation, he said that it was
only fitting that some reference should be made
to the loss that the community had suffered in
the death of the late Dr Stuart. It was a national
loss. Although the late doctor’s life had been for
the most part closely identified with the interests
of Dunedin and the Otago provincial district, yet
his sympathies reached further than these locali-
ties. His best energies had been put forth to
advance the welfare of the people amongst whom
he lived, still he delighted in the progress of
settlement and civilisation in other parts of the
colony. His large-heartedness carried him beyond
geographical limits or sectional divisions of
churches. The Presbyterian Church would feel
most the loss which had come upon all the
churches in his death. Wise in counsel, earnest
in spirit, true to his church, and sound in the
faith, he was a strong man among many strong
men. His catholicity of spirit led him to
feel, and in some measure to carry, the
burden of all the churches, for his services
and help were frequently laid under contribution
by sections of the church other than his own, and
as gladly were those services rendered. Dr Stuart’s
life work was not confined entirely within the
bounds of his own church. As an educationist
and citizen he had done splendid service. In
many respects he held a unique position. No
other man of the present time or of future genera-
tions could ever accomplish what the doctor had
done. Conceiving the idea early in life that, next
to religious training, mental culture was a gift to
be brought within the reach of everyone, he set
himself on his arrival in the colony to do what he
could to promote schools for the people. He was
always a warm friend of our primary schools, a
stout-hearted supporter of the secondary educa-
tional system; and our university colleges have
had no more intelligent advocate than Dr Stuart.
He was at the foundation of things in these
matters. Into this work he threw all his charac-
teristic energy, and had the joy of building up
institutions which have been a distinct benefit to
the young people of this part of the colony. He
counted everyone his friend. In this respect he
was a true Methodist. Like John Wesley he made
himself the friend of all and the enemy of none.
His philanthropic work was worthy of all praise,
19


and his life showed his true love to God, and
sympathy for humanity in its varied forms could
find expression in a life of unswerving self-
sacrifice.
In the evening the Rev. R. Taylor, who was the
preacher, after an impressive and forcible sermon
on the “Witness of the Spirit,” from Romans
viii, 15, 16, 17, concluded by referring in a very
sympathetic manner to the great loss which had
come upon. Dunedin and Otago, upon the whole
community—not only Knox Church, but the
whole of the Christian churches,—the death of
their old friend Dr Stuart. Dr Stuart did not
belong merely to the Presbyterian Church—he
belonged to all. His name was a household word
for large-heartedness, generosity, and Christian
charity. His interest in the young was ever fore-
most in his mind. They all mourned with his
congregation over his departure and deeply
sympathised with them. Special prayers were
offered up on behalf of the bereaved friends and
congregation during the day.
Immediately after the sermon the “Dead
March” was played by the organist (Mr T. F.
Faulkner) both morning and evening, the congre-
gation remaining on their feet the whole time.
The choir (led by Mr W. Manson) rendered
appropriate hymns during the offertories, and as
the people left the church in the evening the
organist played Beethoven’s “Funeral March.”
The services through the day were of a very
solemn nature.
Hanover street Baptist Church.
At Hanover street Baptist Church the Rev A.
North in the course of the service read verses 11
to 16 of Job xxtx, and said : “ I have read this
passage because of its applicability to him for the
death of whom all Dunedin mourns just now. I
do not know that more or better could be said in
his praise than that. It appears to have been the
special business of Dr Stuart to expound in his
conduct that word of the Apostle James—‘Pure
religion and undefiled before our God and Father
is this : to visit the fatherless and widows in their
affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the
world.’ Distinguished for many things, he was
specially distinguished by benevolence and blame-
lessness of life. He was essentially a large-hearted
man, and he cultivated ‘a large interest in
humanity ’ I would remind yo u of his catho-
licity. The narrowness of bigotry was, perhaps,
to him the most distasteful of all the things
that are. His sympathies' extended far and wide
beyond those of his own communion. He loved
all those who loved the Lord Christ Jesus, and to
his love of the brethren the wider all comprehen-
sive love was added. He was a friend to this
church; scarce an anniversary gathering has passed
which he has not attended to express his hearty
interest in the work of God amongst us. At our
last Sunday School anniversary he conducted one
of the Sunday services. Combined with his
catholicity was the happy habit he had formed
of thinking the best he might of men ; in sharpest
contrast from the censoriousness with which many
men embitter their own lives and the lives of others,
stands his extreme unwillingness to believe evil of
any; and I cannot but think that this characteristic
of his is worthy of special note, for the tendency
to its contradictory amongst us is exceeding
strong. His unselfishness and generosity were
marked; with a free hand he gave, and was as
liberal with his time and toil as with his money.
And who amongst us has not been attracted by
his geniality ? Sunny and breezv, like a summer’s
day on his native hills, was he in his bearing
toward all. It was a pleasure to meet him, to
hear his greeting. He would, more than any man
I have ever met, set a timid stranger at his ease
with him at once. The children especially loved
him. I make much of that, for 1 have a great
respect for the judgment of children concerning
character. Who that has seen him amongst the
children on ‘ breaking-up day ’ can have failed to
notice with rare pleasure his delight in them, and
theirs in him? He could stir them to enthu-
siasm as no other could, was emphatically
their friend, and was felt to be so by them ; they
regarded him with reverential confidence. His
death is a great loss to the whole community. I
regard it as an irreparable loss to the children.
We all know how active an interest he took in all
our philanthropic and educational institutions ;
and I would have you remember, too, how much
he loved this city—its name and fame were dear
to him ; it was difficult for him to tolerate aught
that told against them. The feeling of which
Paul’s one reference to his native place
testifies, moved him, he gloried in that he too
was a ‘ citizen of no mean city.’ Of his services
to his own church it is not mine to speak. I
know that they were exceeding great, and
doubtless they will find fit recognition from her
leaders. Of his devotion to Christ Jesus and his
love of the Gospel I do know, for I have heard from
his lips in private and in social circles the simplest,
manliest, and most touching declarations con-
cerning his relations with his Saviour and his
reliance upon Him—declarations marked by a
pathetic and beautiful humility. He rests from
his labours, and we are impoverished by his
removal. ’Tis a great gap he leaves behind him,
and a most healthful example too. We are in
sympathy with the great congregation which had
gathered about him, with his family, and with
his friends, and we rank ourselves also amongst
his mourners as those who love and honour him
and suffer loss by his removal.”
The congregation then joined in the hymn—
“ Captain and Saviour of the host
Of Christian chivalry,
We bless Thee for our comrade true
Now summoned up. to Thee.”
Subsequently the organist played the “ Dead
March.”
Moray Place Congregational Church.
Rev. Edward Walker, speaking on Sunday morn-
ing at Moray place Congregational Church in
place of Rev. W. Saunders, who was absent
through illness, said that verses 23 to 31 and verse
37 of the thirty-seventh Psalm, which he read,
were aptly illustrated in the life and death of the
beloved and revered doctor. The excellences of
his later life were the fruit of devotion to what
was right and good in his younger days, and this
devotion was in turn the fruit of his early sur-
render of himself to the Lordship of Christ. If
the young desired to leave behind them a memory
which, like that of the doctor, would stand for
whatever was good and noble and pure and kind,
they must, like him, yield themselves now to
Christ, to be fashioned and inspired in character
and life by Him. A prince in Israel had fallen,
but the King of Israel lived for ever, and was
calling others to princely service. None would be
20


more ready than the doctor to repress praise of
himself, and to exclaim with the rest of the
redeemed in Heaven, whom he had joined : “ Not
unto us, not unto us, but unto Thy name give
glory." Sym pathetic reference to the bereaved
congregation was made in the public prayer.
St. John’s, Roslyn.
At St. John’s Church, Roslyn, on Sunday morn-
ing the incumbent (the Rev. W. A. Diggens)
before concluding his sermon referred to the
death of the Rev. Dr Stuart in very feeling terms.
He said, although he did not know him very well
personally, he had known him by repute as a man
who was a friend to the poor, fatherless, and
widows, who had kept himself unspotted from
the world, and whose soul, he trusted, “ would
rest in peace.”
The Synagogue.
At the Jewish Synagogue on Saturday morning
the Rev. Mr Hanison, preaching from Leviticus
xix, 1 and 2, said that although not privileged in
knowing the Rev. Dr Stuart intimately he had
heard from many quarters instances of the great
good he had done, and of the holy influence he
had exerted over those with whom he was brought
in contact. They were told by the sages that the
pious of all nations had a share in the future
world, and the late Dr Stuart, he was sure, would
be a participant in the glories of the hereafter, for
in his life on earth he was upright, honourable,
and good. The reverend gentleman concluded
the service with a most impressive prayer, in
which he commended the soul of the late re-
spected pastor to the care of the Ruler of the
heights above, there to mingle with the righteous
and noble who had passed to that blessed home
before him.
St. Mary’s, Mornington.
At St. Mary’s Church, Mornington, on Sunday
evening, in the course of a sermon on W hitsun-
tide, the Rev. C. S. Bowden referred to the late
Dr Stuart as one loved and respected by all who
knew him. Although not belonging to his (the
preacher’s) branch of the Catholic Church, he ven-
tured to say his memory would be honoured and
revered by every branch of the Catholic Church
in this city and colony.
Ashburton.
The Rev. G. B. Inglis, of the Ashburton
Presbyterian Church, made feeling reference to
the death of Dr Stuart, pointing out his many
excellent qualities, his loyalty to his church, his
country, and his Queen, and his many public
services, concluding by reading the following
letter which Dr Stuart had sent him shortly after
his induction :
“ Dunedin, 13th October 1893.
“ Dear Inglis,—l was sorry I happened to be
out when you called at the Manse. I would have
liked very much to have seen you and to have
wished you peace and prosperity in your new
sphere. Some three years ago I conducted the
anniversary services and was deeply interested in
the district and congregation. I greatly enjoyed
the drive on a spring-tide afternoon to the kirk
seaward, and the springing wheat and the pad-
docks full of life and knee deep in grass. Let me
hope that the change and the climate will suit
you, and that a large blessing will come down
upon your work. Kindly let me have an account
of your opening meetings and services, that your
fellow ministers and fellow Christians may have
a call to pray for you. Uur people take a deeper
interest in the labours of our prophets than
many think. It is to me a pleasure to hear of
their well-being and well-doing. I am working
away as best I can, notwithstanding that my
trouble pays me, as a rule, a weekly visit. It is a
joy to me that I am not laid aside as a broken
bottle. Knowing that my course is near Its close,
it behoves me to take care of the fragments and
use them wuely for the Master’s glory and the
people’s good.—Yours ever,
“D. M. Stuart."
Lawrence.
Before commencing service in Trinity Church,
Lawrence, on Sunday evening (says the Tuapeka
Times), the Yen. Archdeacon Beaumont made
feeling reference to the late Rev. Dr Stuart. He
was sure, he said, that he was in accord with the
feelings of his people in referring to the death of
Dr Stuart, late minister of Knox Church, Dun-
edin. It had pleased the loving God and Father
to call him home. Dr Stuart was a man of great
earnestness of character and untiring zeal in the
cause of his God and Master. Of large-
hearted charity and wide sympathies with
sorrow and suffering, full of years and
work for his dear Saviour, he had entered
into his rest. “ But he being dead yet
speaketh.” It was well not to allow such a life
to pass away unnoticed, or without giving utter-
ance to their loving sympathy with those mourn-
ing for the servant of the Lord—a sympathy
resting on the one foundation —Jesus Christ the
Righteous, deepened by the conviction of the
heavy loss sustained by those whose spiritual
guide and comforter he was. Those comforting
words of Holy Scripture—“ Blessed are the dead
which die in the Lord from henceforth ; yea,
saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their
labours, and their works do follow them”—had in
the case of Dr Stuart a singularly striking exem-
plification. As the closing voluntary the “Dead
March ” in “Saul” was played.
During the service at the Presbyterian Church,
Lawrence, on Sunday, the Rev. Mr Comrie paid
a graceful tribute to the life and works of Dr
Stuart. His services in the cause of religion and
in promoting the interest of the church of which
he was so distinguished a minister would long be
remembered. The loss sustained by the church
by his death was a heavy one, and equally heavy
was the loss to religion. His whole life and abili-
ties had been devoted to the service of God and
His church, and his memory would long live in
the works which represented the labours of his
life.
Mosgiel.
At Mosgiel Presbyterian Church on Sunday the
Rev. J. M. M'Kerrow referred to Dr Stuart’s
death at the morning service, both in the prayers
and in the sermon. The rev. gentleman said :
“The death of Dr Stuart is an event which will
occasion deep sorrow over the length and breadth
of this colony, and beyond it. It is the silencing
of a voice which spoke for many a long year with
an influence that we are scarcely, at present in a
position to estimate It is the withdrawal of a
force in the Presbyterian Church and in general
society which leaves none to equal it. It is the
21


cessation of an activity which never rested, the
stilling of a heart which was full of sympathy
with all good men and measures, the creation of
a void which can never be filled up as before
It is not merely the loss of ability of no mean
order, but the loss of those things which tried
fidelity, wonderful adaptability, and long experi-
ence in the work of the Lord and the service of
mankind brings. Publicly and privately, in
church and commonwealth, a figure so conspicu-
ous, a man so influential, a character so great,
must and will be sadly missed. Yet the Lord
liveth and His truth abideth. The servant, how-
ever good and faithful, is only here for a time,
and then he hears the Master say ‘Well done!’
and enters into the joy of his Lord. There he
rests from his labours, and his works do follow
him. He dwells in the perfect light of God, and
is satisfied, for he has awaked in His likeness.”
St. Peter’s, Cayebsham.
At St. Peter’s Episcopal Church, Caversham,
on Sunday last, the Rev. Bryan King made
reference to the death of the Rev. Dr Stuart.
The text chosen was Ephesians iv, 3
“ Endeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit
in the bond of peace.” The unity of the Spirit,
the preacher said, could be kept in two
apparently opposite ways. First, by the bold
and uncompromising statement of that which
we hold to be true ; and secondly, by avoiding
in social intercourse anything that could
possibly offend, and dwelling rather upon points
upon which all agree. Dr Stuart was an un-
compromising Presbyterian, as he (the speaker),
as all who knew him were aware, was an un-
compromising High Churchman, but in his
interviews with Dr Stuart, sometimes involving
matters of great delicacy, he had always found
him warm-hearted and friendly. In concluding,
he said—“ There has gone from us a great
man, a good man, and a true Christian, who
always endeavoured to keep the unity of the
Spirit in the bond of peace. God help us to
follow his example.”
Choral Hall.
At the forenoon service at the Choral Hall
on Sunday special prayer was offered for those
more immediately connected with the family of
Dr Stuart, and also for Knox Church con-
gregation ; while in the evening, when an
evangelistic service was held, Mr A. R. Fal-
coner opened the meeting by giving a few
words of personal testimony concerning the late
Dr Stuart, who had received him more than 30
years ago on his arrival in Otago with a kind-
ness he could never forget, and whose guest he
had often been for days together.
Geraldine.
At the forenoon service at Geraldine Presby-
terian Church on Sabbath, the Rev. A B Todd
referred to the death of Dr Stuart. Comment-
ing on the first lesson (Psalm cii) he said verse
14- might fittingly be said of one whom God had
called home the previous day—Dr Stuart, of
Dunedin. Their church throughout New Zea-
land, and especially in Otago, had sustained a
serious loss Dr Stuart had done a great work,
not only in the church but also in education,
and all matters of a philanthropic kind. He
was a noble pioneer of the Gospel in the early
days, and his whole heart and soul was thrown
into the work of advancing the Kingdom of
Christ. They should thank God for giving them
such a man and for the work which he had been
enabled to do Now his work was done, and the
Master had called him home to receive his
reward and to rest from his labours; their
sympathies should be with the sorrowing con-
gregation in Dunedin, so lately deprived of their
junior pastor and now bereaved of their senior,
after a pastorate of 35 or 34- years.
Pleasant Point.
A Pleasant Point correspondent telegraphs:—
“There is general sorrow among Presbyterians
here at Dr Stuart’s death. Tne Rev. J.
White, formerly of Kelso and Dunedin, on
Sunday preached an impressive funeral sermon
to a crowded audience on the noble Christian
and self-sacrificing of the departed minister.
The ‘ Dead March ’ was played in the church ”
Wellington.
At St. Andrew’s Church on May 13 the
service had especial reference to the death of
the Dr Stuart. The Rev. C. S. Ogg
preached from the text “For we know that if
our earthly house of this tabernacle were dis-
solved, we have a building of God, an house
not made with hands, eternal in the heavens ”
(II Corinthians v, 1). Speaking of Dr Stuart,
he said that the words “ They rest from their
labours, and their works do follow them”
applied very aptly to the character and work of
probably the best known and most extensively
beloved minister in the colony, the news of
whose not unexpected death had been tele-
graphed to us from the southern city where for
about the space of 34- years he had exercised a
useful and most important pastorate. He had
passed away full of years, and after enjoying the
honours and consideration to which a long and
useful career, where charity and benevolence
were the most conspicuous features, entitled
him. He possessed a large share of bodily
health and vigour. He had excellent talents,
and his moral and intellectual powers were of
no mean order. He was esteemed by his
friends, and most dearly beloved by his hearers.
He was peculiarly gifted with a power which
provoked attachment to his person on the part
of those with whom he came in contact. He
was rigidly and seriously occupied with those
questions that concern the intellectual training
of the youth of the colony, and he believed it
was his constant aim and endeavour to make
that institution a focus whence the light of
knowledge should emanate. He worked in the
22


hope of making his college a copy and
example of si mil w foundations in his
native land, and, like them, a power for
good. He thought he was not wrong in saying
that in the sphere of religion his views were
broad and tolerant, his Christianity was manly
and utterly free from the semblance of cant; it
was altogether pervaded by the principle of
love. He had seldom known one who acted
out so thoroughly the principle expressed by
the Apostle James: “ Pure religion and un-
defiled before God and the Father is this, to
visit the fatherless and widows in their
affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from
the world.”
At St. John’s Presbyterian Church on May 13
reference was made by the Rev. J. Paterson,
both in the morning and evening, to the loss
suffered by the Presbyerian Church in the death
of Dr Stuart. In the evening the sermon was
based on the words, “Well done thou good
and faithful servant.” The rev, gentleman
said they must all have been grieved by the sad
news of the death of Dr Stuart. The event was
not indeed unexpected, for he had been in a
very critical state of health for some time past.
When he saw him a few days ago the doctor
was telling him of bis complaint, and his awful
suffering at times, and said—“ I shall not get
over this. It will in the end prove fatal.” But
he was prepared whenever it was the Master’s
wish to call him. He said to him—“ Doctor,
you have comforted many with the promises
of the Gospel and the consolations that are in
Christ; you will yourself be comforted with the
comfort wherewith you comforted others.”
“ Yes,” said Dr Stuart, “ I trust in the Saviour
I have preached to others I rest simply and
solely on the Lord Jesus Christ.” The doctor
was a man of great gifts, and these he had con-
secrated to the service of the Master. He had
fine social qualities, a warm, kind heart, and a
benevolent spirit, and those were all exercised
in the service of Christ and for the good of
humanity. They were mainly the elements of
his popularity and usefulness. He was a good
man, who served his generation well. He was a
prominent figure in Dunedin, and there he
would be missed, but he would be mourned
throughout the church, for his influence was
widely felt. His death was the removal of a
large personality from amongst them, and
they could not but sympathise with the congre-
gation of Knox Church, who had lost so eminent
and so good a pastor. Tennyson’s “ Crossing
the bar ” was sung by the choir as an anthem,
and the “ Dead March” played as a voluntary
at the close of the service.
MISCELLANEOUS REFERENCES.
The widespread area over which keen regret
is felt at the death of Dr Stuart was manifest
on Monday by the pouring in of messages of con-
dolence from all parts of the colony. Among
others, telegrams of sympathy were received by
the office-bearers of Knox Church from the
following gentlemen, old members of the con-
gregation, who are resident in Wellington :
The Hon. T. W. Hislop, Dr Chappie, Messrs
M‘Kerrow (chief commissioner of railways),
Glasgow (collector of customs), Campbell,
Lambert, Reith, Scoullar, Young, and Morrison.
Another telegram from a distance, was from
the Rev. J. Anderson Gardiner, and was in the
following terms : —‘‘The session and congrega-
tion of the Bluff Presbyterian Church desire to
express their deep sympathy with the congrega-
tion and session of Knox Church in the great
loss sustained by them and the church in the
death of Dr Stuart.”
The registrar ©f the University of Otago
on Monday received a telegram from the
chancellor of the University of New Zealand
desiring him, on behalf of the university, to
convey to Mr William Stuart and to the
colleagues and friends of the late Dr Stuart an
expression of condolence.
At a meeting of the executive of the Schools
Committees Conference held on Monday morning
it was resolved—“ That the executive, while
recording their sense of the loss that the com-
munity has sustained by the death of the Rev.
Dr Stuart, and especially the loss to the cause
of education, beg to express their desire that
the various school committees of the city and
suburbs will arrange for the head masters and
teachers requesting the attendance of their
pupils at the funeral of the doctor on Wednes-
day afternoon.” At the meeting of the Arthur
street School Committee last evening it was
decided to request the head master to invite the
pupils, with the exception of the younger
children, to attend the funeral.
The Right Rev. Bishop Moran has written to
Mr William Stuart a letter of condolence in the
occasion of Dr Stuart’s death. The bishop
regrets that his own serious illness prevented
him from visiting Dr Stuart in his sickness, as
it will also prevent him from attending the
funeral. Dr Moran feelingly alludes to the
public services rendered by Dr Stuart and to
his many acts of charity. The Rev. Father
Lynch has been deputed to act as the bishop’s
representative.
An Auckland correspondent telegraphs ;
“ Great regret is felt here at the news of the
death of Dr Stuart. Kindly references are
made in the press as to his career and
labours.”
The following telegram has been received
by Mr W. Stuart from Sir R. Stout
and Mr H. D. Bell, M.H.R’s., Wel-
lington : “ William Stuart, Esq., Knox
Manse.—On behalf of many past and present
Otago men and women now resident in Wel-
lington, we tender our heartfelt sympathy with
you on the loss of a kind father, and to Knox
23


Church on the decease of a beloved pastor.
We feel that Otago has lost one of her greatest
settlers.”
The Hon. W Jennings, M.L.C , of Auckland,
has also telegraphed to Mr Stuart:—“As an
old Dunedin resident allow me to express regret
at the death of your father. He will live in
the memory of all who knew his kind and
benevolent disposition.”
The following cable was received on Wed-
nesday by Dr Hislop:—“ Representatives New
Zealand Conference sympathise Knox Church
bereavement.—(Signed) M‘Nicoll, president,
Adelaide.”
At the annual meeting of the Mornington
Presbyterian Church on May 16, the Rev.
Mr Porter, before commencing proceedings,
referred feelingly to the death of the Rev. Dr
Stuart, and expressed his regret that they
had found it impossible to postpone the meet-
ing or they would gladly have done so. He
went on to say that he was quite sure that
throughout tbe whole congregation there was
universal regret at the sad event, and deep
sympathy with the congregation which had
that day buried their dead. Dr Stuart was
so dearly loved by numerous members of the
congregation, and he was sure that if Dr Stuart
could communicate with us now he would be
the last to propose the postponement of a
meeting such as this.
Lodge Ivanhoe, U.A 0.D., at their meeting
on Monday night, which was attended by re-
presentatives of many of the sister lodges
expressed regret at the death of the Rev. Dr
Stuart.
At the fortnightly meeting of the Antidote
Division, Sons of Temperance, Bro. A. Adam,
W.P., presiding, it was resolved to record on
the minutes the heartfelt sympathy and re-
spect felt for the late Dr Stuart, and regretting
the loss sustained by Otago, and especially
Dunedin, by his death.
The pupils at the Boys’ High School were
assembled at 12 15 p.m. on Tuesday, when they
were informed of the arrangements of the share
they were to take in the funeral of Dr Stuart.
The rector (Dr Belcher) went on to say “It
would not become the rector of this school to
allow the present juncture to pass away without
some reference to the event about which all
Dunedin, indeed all Otago, is both thinking and
talking. Dr Stuart has for so many years stood
in very intimate relationship with this school.
Since the formation of the present Board of
Control he has year after year been elected as
chairman, while year after year his name has
been found on the donors’ list of our annual
prizes, and in various other connections inci-
dental to the main purport of his trust.
The last occasion on which he addressed
the school was on the morning of the funeral
of my predecessor in this office, the late
Dr Macdonald. I recollect his saying to me on
that occasion that the list of the rectors of the
school was already long considering the age of
the school, and that there was a word of warn
ing in the fact. It is now our melancholy duty
to be gathering together the threads of memory
to present our old friend to you possibly for the
last time. I am, of course, devoutly hoping
that some memorial to him will, independently
of the wider efforts outside, be erected within
these walls. This is, however, a matter best
left to the feeling of the hundreds—nay, thou-
sands—of boys who have passed the portals of
the school during the last 30 years. To
hundreds of these boys he must have been
more than an official figure: to them he must
have been the house friend, the pastor, and the
teacher of souls. There must have been
hundreds—many, doubtless, now listening to
me—for whom he has done the functions and
duties of Christian minister. I surmise that
both in the hour of rejoicing of the young, and
in the abandonment to sorrow of the old, Dr
Stuart has been a familiar and a welcome figure
to many whom this school claims as her own.
It cannot be, therefore, that they will allow his
work to pass without a fitting memorial. As to
other matters, it remains for me to say little.
Much has already been said, much remains yet
to be said, which falls from lips more appro-
priate to the work than mine; but I doubt, as
there has never yet been in the history of this
colony, whether any of you will live to witness
an outburst of tribute so spontaneous and so
remarkable as that of which we are this day
spectators. The school will be closed to-morrow
until 1.30, when all boys are expected to be in
their places.”
In estimating the character and influence of
the minister of Knox Church (says the South-
land Times) we have much light thrown upon
both by reference to his nationality and up-
bringing. He came of a robust Highland
stock, and inherited the fervid genius of the
Scottish hills. His mind was deeply tinged
with the romance of nature, and his discourse
breathed of the woods and the heather. Many
will remember an occasion on which, with seem-
ing unpremeditation, he threw himself loose, in
the pulpit, on the scenes of his early days,
tracing the education of the youthful herdsman,
on the hillside, in the family, in the school,
and in the church ; and ending with the picture
of a Highland communion at which there stood
side by tide the peer and the peasant —a
picture s® vivid that one could almost see
the bowed heads of the worshippers and
hear the footfall of the elders as they moved
from pew to pew. So completely was the
mind of the doctor cast in the Highland
mould that he even found himself possessed of
that mysterious gift called “ second sight ” —a
gift which we have heard on competent
authority he crushed down within him as a
' somewhat incongruous adjunct to his sacred
24


office, or as a something the exercise of which
he himself regarded with dread. The story of
his student life is the story of scores of his
countrymen —a record of indomitable persever-
ance, self-denial, and independence, crowned
by influence, honour, and success. It would be
vain, in a brief sketch like this, to attempt to
say all that might be said of the great figure
that has disappeared from among us. That
task may safely be left to those who, when the
first shock of bereavement has passed, will
know how to gather up and present in full
detail all the facts and features of a noble life.
We can but say at present—“ Know ye not
that there is a prince and a great man fallen
this day in Israel ? ”
At a meeting of the local assembly of
the Knights of Labour the following resolu-
tion was passed :—“That this assembly deeply
regret the loss sustained by the communitv
through the death of the Rev. Dr Stuart, and
bear testimony to the fact that the deceased
clergyman was ever the friend, counsellor, and
helper of the poor ; and that he was eminently
successful in carrying into his daily life the
principles of the Christianity he preached.”
INCIDENTS AND ANECDOTES OF DR
STUART.
The anecdotes told of Dr Stuart are nume-
rous. Not a tew of them have been already
published, and most of them are to be found
recorded in “ The History of Knox Church ” by
Dr Hislop, and “ The Story of the Church and
Settlement of Otago,” by the Rev. C. S. Ross.
A few of those stories are here reproduced :
It was the custom with Dr Stuart to expound
the chapters of Holy Writ which in the course
of the service would he read to the congregation,
and the worshippers in Knox Church always ex-
pressed and experienced a great delight in his
expositions. The copy of the Bible which he
invariably used was much dog-eared and
liberably adorned by marginal notes in his own
handwriting. He used frequently to quote the
observations of eminent divines respecting
different passages, and he was earnest in im-
pressing the notabilia upon his congregation.
On one occasion he was reading and expound-
ing a chapter from one of the Pauline epistles,
and, after reaching a certain verse, it is
recorded of him he raised his eyes upwards and
exclaimed, “Aye, Paul, was that your
opinion ?” And, after a pause, he added,
“ Well, may be, you were right!”
The charitable disposition of Dr Stuart was
such that it is to be feared that he did not
always discriminate between the deserving and
the undeserving claims which were made upon
his generosity. On one occasion he met with
an unpleasant adventure while he was on his
way to fulfil a preaching appointment. He was
making the ascent of Mount Stuart when he
overtook a wayfarer who protested that he was
“quite knocked up,” whereupon Dr Stuart,
with characteristic benevolence, gave him his
horse to ride, telling him to keep the track
while he himself would proceed by a short cut
to the other side of the hill. On reaching the
try sting-place Dr Stuart found his horse tied
securely enough to a tussock, but on opening
his valise he found that there had been ab-
stracted from it a dressing case, which also
formed a writing desk—the valued gift of a
friend. The desk contained, among other
things, the discourses which the minister in-
tended to preach, and the flush of very natural
resentment which was provoked by the dis-
covery of the theft yielded to the benevolent
wish that his sermons might at least arrest the
attention of the ungrateful wayfarer.
Extraordinary though it may seem, the late
Dr Stuart attributed his rise in life to no less
potent an agency than a bottle of whisky. In
the days when ne conducted his “adventure
school ” at Leven he attracted the attention of
two maiden ladies, who, seeing the raw-boned
young Scotchman, as he then was, walking
daily along the street with his only pupil, were
led to make inquiries about him, and having
ascertained that he was a schoolmaster they
called upon him. In those days Highland hos-
pitality dictated that whisky should be offered
to visitors, and as it occurred to the young
teacher that he should in such a manner enter-
tain his visitors he sent out for a bottle of
whisky. The ladies, Dr Stuart used to say, were
much struck with his hospitality, and through
their good offices he obtained an introduction to
a family in which he obtained the position of
tutor. The gaining of this tutor’s situation he
regarded as the foundation of that measure of
success he was enabled to achieve in life.
The stories are numberless which could be
told of Dr Stuart’s homeliness of manner in the
pulpit. One, which found its way into print
about the time, had relation to a baptism that
took place in the church. The mother and
child duly appeared on the dais, but for some
reason the father was not so prompt as he
should have been in coming forward. After
waiting for a few moments, the doctor in-
quired : “Is Mr W here ?” The father
then advanced from the far end of the church.
When he was halt-way up the aisle the doctor
remarked : “Toots, man! you ought to know
better than keep the congregation waiting so
long. Why, this is your fifth !”
No one in Otago ever occupied a place in the
minds of the young as that occupied by Dr
Stuart, and this fact led to the worthy doctor
having ascribed to him by children the accom-
plishment of much greater work than he—ever
foremost in good works as he was—was ever
able to perform. The story is probably an
authentic one which is told of the lesson that
25


was being given in a secular school when the
children were asked by the teacher to name the
writer of the book of Psalms. The teacher
failed at first to get any response, and becoming
impatient he encouraged the class to answer.
The boys were appealed to in vain, and then the
girls were tried. “ Come, now, some of you
girls, who wrote the Psalms in the Bible?”
After some hesitation the answer came, “ Please,
sir, Dr Stuart.”
Many of Dr Stuart’s sayings in the pulpit
were extremely quaint and forcible. He was
always homely and never strove for oratorical
effects, but many things that he has said will
live longer than would merely fine phrases and
neatly balanced sentences. On one occasion
when politics were looming largely and with
a rather threatening aspect, the doctor in his
prayer at the morning service prayed for
deliverance from “ the sins of the world, the
flesh, and politics ” ; thus amending the ordi-
nary phrase in a manner which at once struck
home.
On one occasion Dr Stuart paid one of his
periodical visits to a poor old widow who had
been long ill and confined to bed, and then
went into the house of the next door neighbour,
a woman who paid great attention to the
poor widow. “ Well,” said the doctor, “ I find
your neighbour a little better to-day, and that
you have been attentive to her wants.” “O,
aye,” she replied, “ Mr cam’ in till see her
last nicht, an’ gae’d a prayer, but it was sae
skimpie that I gae’d one mysel’.”
The story of the woman whose husband was
ill, and who accompanied Dr Stuart to the door
after praying with the sick man has been often
told, and is now about to be realised. When
she had opened the door and was bidding him
good-bye, she said, “Eh! my, Doctor, but ye’ll
hae a gran’ funeral! ”
In connection with the illness and death of
Dr Stuart it will be of interest to friends to
know how the reading of the Psalms was to
him a never-failing source of consolation.
When he was unable himself to read, his house-
keeper would take a seat by his bedside and
read to him, and even when he was too weak
for speech he would smile and nod his head
approvingly, in the characteristic manner his
friends know so well, as one or other
of his favourite Psalms was read. His
mind did not fail even when power of
speech was gone, and when in a very low condi-
tion he frequently by signs made known the
fact that he was conscious of what was going
on around him. The last of these Bible-read-
ing scenes was full of pathos. It can but be
inadequately described, and yet some account
of it ought to be given. On Saturday morning
last, as has been stated, his medical adviser
had been hastily called, and on arriving saw
that in all human probability the end was nigh.
All proper means were taken to restore the
patient and failed. Just before leaving for
home in order to change for other clothes the
dressing gown which he had hurriedly put on
when called, Dr Coughtrey made the remark
that nothing more could be done. The house-
keeper then asked if she could not read a Psalm
to Dr Stuart, saying; “You know he always
liked me to read to him.” “Yes,” said the
doctor, “ you can do that.” The big Bible was
opened on the bed, and as his life slowly and
imperceptibly ebbed away the words of Dr
Stuart’s favourite Psalm were read to him by
his faithful servant and friend.
A TRIBUTE OF RESPECT.
TO THE EDITOR OTAGO DAILY TIMES.
Sir, —As a proof of the estimation in which the
late Dr Stuart was held even outside Otago, I enclose
an extract from a letter received shortly after the
publication of the “ History of Knox Church’
from a well-known gentleman in another provin-
cial district, and one of the most eminent of
our colonial statesmen, himself an Englishman, a
member of the English Church, and a university
man, who was for a time associated with Dr
Stuart in connection with New Zealand Univer-
sity work. —I am, &c.,
May 12. H. J.
“Anything connected with the church of Dr
Chalmers, and especially that section of it that
performed the greatest act of self-sacrifice that
was ever made by any ecclesiastical body, will
always be of interest to me. lam glad to have a
record of Dr Stuart’s work. He looms largely—
physically, socially, intellectually—as no unworthy
follower of the great ones that have gone before.”
IN MEMORY OF THE REV. DR STUART.
“ Rest! ’twas the gift he gave; and peace ! the
shade
He spread, for spirits fevered with the sun.
To him his bounties are come back —here laid
In rest, in peace, his labour nobly done.”
William Watson.
The solemn march, the muffled drum—*
Beating, as ’twere, against the breast—
The drooping heads, the sighs that come
For one whose goodness all impressed :
This reverence not alone can tell
How loved was he who lived so well.
* In anticipation of a military funeral, the
newspapers having at first announced that there
would be one.
26


Soft as the fall of golden leaf
That rustled round the gloomy manse
He faded from us. Our relief,
When once again the green leaves dance,
Is sweet; but though they will return,
Alas, not he for whom we yearn !
O thou, who brightened many a life
With deeds and words of pure design ;
Who led us through the ills so rife,
Cheering us with a care benign ;
O noble friend ! so true, so dear,
To lose thee leaves the bosom drear !
Charles Umbers.
May 13, 1894.
LINES ON THE LATE DR STUART.
Dedicated, to Robert Glendining , Esq., one of his
warmest personal friends.
Still’d is that voice, which, prompt at duty’s call,
Invok’d a blessing on the heads of all;
Cold is that pallid brow, which once could
wear
The cheery smile to chase away the tear.
His eyes are closed in Death’s eternal sleep,
While mourning friends around in anguish weep.
In him, no angry passions played a part,
But charity and love inspired his heart.
He had no wish to war with others’ creeds,
But judged them by his standard —by their
deeds.
If men were weak, by error led astray,
He served as guide to show the better way.
Firm as the rugged rocks of Scotia’s hills,
His faith would triumph over human ills ;
An ardent worker in each noble cause—
He never slackened pace, nor made a pause.
If others grew faint-hearted, looked dismayed,
His words would cheer—“ Kind friends, be not
afraid;
The Christian’s goal, though distant, is in
sight:
ut forth your strength—advance in all your
might.
Be ours the task to elevate our brother,
To do what good we can for one another ;
Exhaust not precious hours in wordy strife,
But win the crown of everlasting life.”
Revered and loved, he was a welcomed guest
In every home where Virtue raised her crest.
If he at times would tread the rich man’s floor,
He ne’er ignored the sufferings of the poor:
He knew no class—disdained all outward show,
But nursed within a sympathy for woe ;
Though plain of speech, his words were soft and
mild.
His manners gentle as the meekest child.
True to the hardy clime that gave him birth,
No meretricious polish graced his worth ;
Majestic, pure, in feeling, thought, and tone,
A stout, brave Scotchman to the very bone ;
As Burns was Nature’s poet, rich and wild,
So Stuart lived her preacher, undefiled.
Yet deem not he was blind to Beauty’s wiles,
For few could woo her with more winning
smiles;
The woods, the glens, the heather bloom and
flowers
Drew forth his praise and fed his mental
powers ;
And none with sweeter accents could impart
The balm of comfort to the aching heart.
The widow, mourning for her husband lost;
The helpless orphan, on Life’s ocean tossed ;
The wasting form, on couch of sickness laid ;
The wandering outcast, and the ruined maid,
Were each in turn the objects of his cares,
That claimed his succour, solace, and his
prayers.
No man approached but found in him a friend;
No woman pleaded but she gained her end.
While e’er intent to bring men to their God,
He ne’er despised the earth on which they trod.
He strove to give them pleasure in this life,
To purify their tastes, and banish strife.
Has he succeeded ? Mark the tearful eye,
The heaving bosom, and the stifled sigh,
The grief that stamps on every face its seal,
Which tells how bitter are the pangs they feel.
But why thus mourn ? His soul has winged its
flight
To realms all radiant with celestial light;
The noble heart that throbbed at every pore
Hath ceased pulsation and shall throb no
more.
Mornington. E. S. Mantz.
IN MEMORIAM.
The Rev. Dr Stuart.
Thy image comes to us amid the toil and fret
Of busy day—a loving memory—a picture sweet,
Without which life seems so incomplete,
Undarkened by one shadow of regret,
Thy dear old-fashioned face that charms us yet;
27


Smiling from soul unsullied by deceit,
Recalling happy hours that fled too fleet,
Crowded with memories we can ne’er forget,
Brightening the misty canvas of the past.
Dunedin’s noblest father, proved by unselfish
test,
Whose character in noblest mould was cast,
Whose memory holds our hearts while life shall
last,
Death claimed thee yesterday, as God thought
best,
And now thy tired soul has found that blessed
rest.
Oh, venerable pastor, truest friend to all,
Thy soul has fled from out its earthly wall,
Thy pulse is still, thy noble form is cold,
Thy weary spirit’s resting in God’s sheltering
fold.
’Tis hard to think thy face no more we’ll see,
Whose noble countenance bespoke a soul so free.
No more we’ll hear thy earnest, manly voice
Bid youthful converts glory in their choice;
No more we’ll listen to thy cheery word,
Prompting old age to lean upon the Lord.
Good doctor, now thy earthly labours cease,
Thou’rt gone to dwell in ‘ ‘ Heaven’s perfect
peace,”
Among thy loved ones there, the choirs to swell—
With bleeding hearts we bid a fond “ Farewell.”
Dunedin, May 13, 1894-. H.F.C.A.
XTbe Ceremonies.
The mourning of Dunedin on Wednesday,
like the “ mourning of a mighty nation,” was
eminently solemn. The most conspicuous
figure in Otago was laid to his rest amid the
lamentations of an entire community which
loved him as he also loved it. The remains of the
Rev. Dr Stuart were committed to the dust,
and the whole of Dunedin—and not the whole
of Dunedin only, but large contingents from
various portions of the province—assembled
to do honour to his memory. With a
unanimity that afforded striking testimony to
the public appreciation of the doctor’s worth
and to the feeling of sorrow at his death the
business people of the city closed their ware-
houses, their factories, and their shops at mid-
day so that the fullest opportunity might be
given to their employees to join in the last
tribute of respect to one whose removal involved
what nearly every man, woman, and child in
the community regarded as a personal loss, and
the bulk of the establishments so closed were
not reopened at all on Wednesday. It was a
remarkable demonstration of grief which the
afternoon witnessed a demonstration in
which all ranks and classes of the citizens
with one accord took part. The weather
was favourable to the assembling of a large
crowd, and full advantage was taken of it, the
main streets of Dunedin being thronged as they
never have been before on such an occasion.
Upstairs windows, balconies, the roofs of houses
and verandahs along the line of route from
Knox Church to the Southern Cemetery were
occupied by great numbers of people, but there
was no hilariousness in the crowd, the prevailing
tone being one of sadness at the falling of a
great man and a prince in Israel. The bells of
Knox Church and First Church were tolled, and
the visible signs of mourning were numerous.
KNOX CHURCH.
The scene in the church was most impressive.
From the hour at which the church doors were
opened until the commencement of the service,
crowds of citizens quietly entered and left the
building, passing along under the pulpit and
looking for the last time at the composed and
peaceful countenance of the departed pastor.
The coffin, with the exception of the crystal
face-plate, was loaded with wreaths of white
flowers. Over the pulpit and the railing in front
of it floral designs were displayed, and a
number of large ones were fastened above the
pulpit, extending along the face of the choir
gallery. The heavy drapery was everywhere
almost concealed with flowers, the pulpit and
platform being a dense mass of floral offerings.
A number of the ladies of the congregation were
present all the morning receiving the flowers
that continued to come in from all quarters,
arranging them with affectionate care, and
doing all that could be done to mark their
veneration and love for one who had been so
28


much to them, and who for long years had been H, Adamson (Port Chalmers), D. Dutton, A.
solicitous for their welfare. Don, J. S. Reid (Strath-Taieri), J. M. David-
Among the numerous wreaths sent there was Kilpatrick (Warepa), D. Ross,
. Lnrtsome one from the Hon. T. W. Mr W. H. Ash (Ravensbourne), Yen. Arch-
a very handsome one from the Hon. T. W.
Hislop, Dr Chappie, Messrs Campbell, Glasgow,
Lambert, M‘Kerrow, Reith, Scoullar, Young,
Smith, Jenkins, and Wright (old members of
Knox Church now resident in Wellington).
There were also wreaths from the following
office-bearers of First Church (“In kindly
sympathy with their brethren of Knox
Church”), St. Paul’s Presbyterian Church
(Invercargill), East Taieri Presbyterian Church,
the Port Chalmers Presbyterian Congregation,
the rector and senior boys of the High School,
the rector and junior boys of the High School,
and the masters of the High School, the rector,
staff, and pupils of the Girls High School, the
the East Taieri Christian Endeavour Society,
the Kaikorai Presbyterian Young People’s
Christian Endeavour Society, the High street
School, the Union street School and the infant
class of same school, the Leith Lodge,
1.0.0. F., the North School (Oamaru), the
students of Otago University (with “an
expression of deep grief at the death
of their dear old chancellor”), the lady students
of Otago University, the Knox Church Ladies’
Association, Knox Church Young Women’s
Society, Knox Church Sabbath School teachers,
the cboir of Knox Church, Mr Chisholm’s Bible
class, Knox Church infant class, the children of
Miss Smith’s sewing class, the lady prioress
and community of Dominican nuns, the hospital
nurses, Sir Robert and Lady Stout (“in loving
remembrance of a kind and faithful friend ”),
Mrs Hely and pupils, Mr Justice Williams, Mrs
W. N. Blair (Wellington), and Mrs James
Gardiner (Queenstown).
THE SEEVICE IN THE CHUECH.
Shortly after 12 o’clock the members of the
congregation began to assemble in the church.
Nearly everyone was in black and many of the
ladies were in deep mourning. Certain seats
were reserved for persons who were expected to
attend as representing various bodies and
organisations. The members of the Ministers’
Conference attended in a body, and so did the
Mayor of the City and the members of
the City Council. Some time before
1 o’clock the church was crowded with adults.
Among those on the platform were the Rev.
Messrs Sutherland (Kaikorai), Bannerman, Will
(Taieri), Gibb, Gibson Smith, Chisholm (Mil-
ton), W, P. Brown, Finlayson (Waitati), Greig
(Peninsula), J. M. Fraser, D. Borrie, J.
M'Kerrow (Mosgiel), Spence (Clinton), Wm.
Gillies (Timaru), M'Cosh Smith (Naseby),
A. B. Todd (Oamaru), Kirkland (Taieri),
Christie (Waikouaiti), R. Waddell, A. H.
Stobo, Ferguson (Invercargill), Wright (Ote-
popo), Dr Copland (Gore), Dr Watt (Green
Island), Dr Dunlop, A. North, R. J. Porter,
deacon Edwards, Hon. W. D. Stuart, Dr
Hislop, Messrs Glendining, E. B. Cargill, B.
Smith, C. M‘Kenzie Gordon, and Wm. Stuart.
There were also among those present in the
body of the church the Revs. A. R. Fitchett,
J. Ryley, W. Ready, E. Walker, W. Saun-
ders, A. H. Wallace, A. Cameron, and W. G.
McLaren (Owaka).
Punctually at 1 o’clock the service was com-
menced, the Rev. R. R. M. Sutherland pre-
siding, and giving out the 396th hymn :
Take comfort, Christians, when your friends
In Jesus fall asleep.
This having been sung, the Rev. Mr Borrie
read a number of passages of Scripture such as
are usually read at funeral services, and prayer
was then offered by the Rev. A. B. Todd.
The Rev. Dr Watt, addressing the congre-
gation, Jspoke as follows : —My dear friends,
I scarcely need to add anything to what has
been said, and said so admirably elsewhere, in
commendation of the character and work of the
great and good man whose mortal remains
we are to-day committing dust to dust. The
universal wail of regret which the news of his
death awakened throughout Otago, and may I
not add throughout the length and breadth of
our colony, indicates what a strong hold he
had of the affections and esteem of the people
of this land—the land of his adoption, the land
he passionately loved, and in the soil of which
he is now finding on honoured grave. It may
be my melancholy privilege to say a few words
about Dr Stuart in this place on a future occa-
sion. Let me now simply say that be has gone
from ns ; we shall no more see his stalwart form
passing our streets, nor hear the ring of that
cheerful, manly voice we all know so well. Well,
we would not recall him though we could. To
use a favourite phrase of his own he had done
yeoman’s work in his day, and he has well
earned his rest. To depart and be with
Christ is far better. He is now at home at
last—at home with the Lord. We cannot add
anything to him by our praise or take anything
from him by our blame. He has heard the
“ Well done ” of the Master, and any accent of
ours, either in concord with or discord from
that Great Voice will not disturb the profound
peace of the presence into which he has now
entered. Still we owe it to ourselves, and it is
a distinct encouragement for those who are still
with us in the flesh battling with the trials of
this lower arena, to let them know how those
who survive them will regard them when they
have fought the good fight, and how gladly we
would have retained them with us for some
time longer if it could be done consistently with
their own best interests, and with the holy will
29


of the Supreme. Let me detain you for a and of the Holy Ghost. Let us come for
moment when we gather up two or three lessons strength and inspiration to the same Great
of the life and death of our departed friend. I
would remark that the death of a good man
suggests with irresistible force the belief in
immortality. The secret of the grave has been
well kept. Of the countless millions who have
passed to the other side few indeed have given
any sign—furnished survivors with any distinct
evidence of their continued existence after death.
The grave has been Well named the bourne
whence no traveller returns. And yet as we
stand by the bier of a man of distinguished worth,
a man who has served God and his generation,
according to the will of God, we shrink with one
of the strongest repugnances of our moral nature
from believing that the great spirit taken from
us has lapsed into non-existence the moment it
has passed beyond our ken. Science tells us
that the smallest atom of what we call matter
is never annihilated; it only transmigrates
from old into new forms—but remains at the
basis of its being, ever the same. ■ Can we
believe that those moral qualities which are
the very crown and flower of human life, the
so-called fruits of the spirit—the love, joy,
peace, long - suffering, gentleness, goodness,
faith, meekness, temperance, which constitute
the very image of God in man, are at death
dissipated into nothing along with the soul
in which they inhere. Such a fact, if it were
a fact, would introduce purposelessness into
a universe otherwise, as we feel, most wisely
ordered. God would have been ashamed to be
called the God of His people if he had not pre-
pared for them a city. The Christian hope of
immortality is a plant which flourishes best in
the congenial soil over a good man’s grave. But
may we not gather from the great life that has
now been extinguished as another lesson what
someone has termed the sumless worth of a
man ? Useful institutions confer benefit. A
good book continues to minister stimulus and
inspiration long after the hand that wrote it is
cold in death. But of all foci raying forth
wholesome spiritual influence commend us to a
living man, full of faith, of love, of hope. I
never left the presence of the friend whose loss
we mourn to-day without feeling myself better,
spiritually richer, than when I had entered it.
I believe this was the experience of many. He
had great faith in man’s capability of being
redeemed from evil, because he had still greater
faith in the love and power of the redeeming
God. His faith in the power and wisdom and
love with which God rules the universe and
orders His dealings with individuals never
faltered ; and many who sought his counsel in
great mental depression he comforted —he sent
them away cheered, to begin the battle of life
anew, having succeeded in infusing a portion of
the indomitable courage and hope with which
his own spirit was filled into theirs. He was
pre-eminently a man like Stephen, full of faith
Fountain Head from which he drew his. But
should not the removal of so faithful a worker
in the service of God and mankind pledge us
who survive him to greater diligence in the work
from which he has now for ever retired. When
David Livingstone died the other year, in the
swamps of Labe Beuguela, his death lent a
mighty impetus to the cause of the christianisa-
tion of the Dark Continent; many volunteered
to help the work in the midst of which he so
gloriously fell, and we may say that the great
missionary explorer accomplished more for the
object which he had at heart by his death than
he would have accomplished even if life had
been continued to him. You know the inde-
fatigable ardour with which our deceased
brother flung himself into three great causes—
the cause of philanthropy, the cause of educa-
tion, and, above all, the cause of religion. And
would he not look down from the altitude at
which he is now standing and rejoice to think
that he had not died in vain if he saw that his
death had been the means of awakening more
profound interest in those great causes in this
community in which he considered it a privilege
to have lived and laboured so long ? Let me
not make end, however, without, in a word or
two more, attempting to point out to the
young people here present this afternoon the
moral of the sight they are now privileged to
witness. Some 70 odd years ago a boy was
born on the banks of the Tay, in a home
doubtless humble enough, but a home which
had the fear of God in it; and this boy, now
full of years and honours, is laid to
his final rest in this far island of the Southern
S eaß _a whole city, one voice, making
lamentation over him. How did the boy
of such humble antecedents, when become a
man, win such great love ? By the use of arts
which we make bold to say are within the reach
of every boy and girl here to-day. He lived
not for himself. He looked not at his own
things only, but at the things of others also.
He rejoiced with those that rejoiced and wept
with those that wept. He was indefatigable in
doing good, his charity was boundless, his
courtesy unfailing, his kindness uniform, his
love unfeigned. After the example of the
great Master Himself, he delighted to be
among his fellows as one who served. Go thou
and do likewise. And now to bid him a long
but, thank God, not an everlasting farewell.
Some of us have reason to bless God that we
ever knew him, and we shall preserve his
memory fresh in our hearts while life endures.
We thank God that He bestowed him as His
gift in this community, in which he has done
noble work and brought forth fruit that shall
remain ; and we thank God, when His servant s
work was done, that He recalled him, saying :
“ Come up higher. ‘ The Lord gave; the Lord
30


hath taken away ; blessed be the name of the
Lord.’”
The Rev. Wm. Kirkland having prayed, the
choir and congregation sang hymn 409 :
How bright these glorious spirits shine !
Whence all their bright array ?
How came they to the blissful seat
Of everlasting day ?
The Rev. Mr Sutherland then pronounced
the benediction, and the congregation left the
church while the “Dead March” in “Saul”
was played on the organ.
The men of the congregation formed four
deep in the church ground, and thence marched
to the place assigned to them in the funeral
procession.
The service closed at 1.45 p.m., and 10
minutes later the coffin was raised and carried
down the aisle by the principal exit to the
hearse. At 2 o’clock the signal was given,
when —
Hush, the Dead March wails in the people’s ears :
The dark crowd moves, and there are sobs and
tears.
THE PROCESSION.
Thanks to the arrangements which had been
made for the funeral and to the manner in
which they were conducted under the direction
of Major Callan, Captain W D. Milne, and Cap-
tain E. R. Smith, who discharged the duties of
marshals, the procession was started very
shortly after the appointed hour. The police,
who in the vicinity of Knox Church were under
Sergeant O’Neill, preserved a clear passage for
the cortege , notwithstanding that George, Pitt,
and London streets were densely thronged with
people, and it was in large measure due to the
valuable service rendered by the police that no
hitch of any kind occurred here. The proces-
sion was headed by the Engineers’ Band, who,
immediately on the word to march being given,
struck up Handel’s famous and solemn “ Dead
March.” A large number of children from the
Industrial School, with Mr G. M. Barlinson,
the master of the institution, were next in the
order of procession ; and they were followed by
a picked number of children from Knox Church
Sunday School, under Mr W. T. Todd, their
superintendent, each of whom was entrusted
with the carrying of a wreath from the piles of
floral tributes in the church. The male members
of Knox Church Bible class —which for over a
quarter of a century was conducted by Dr
Stuart—were allotted the next place in the
order of procession, and then came the High-
land Pipe Band, consisting of Pipe-major
M‘Kechnie, Pipers Adair, Gray, J. and D.
M'Kechnie, and three drummers—the pipers
playing appropriate Scottish airs—and a strong
representation of the members of the Gaelic
Society, of which the deceased was the chief,
prominent among them being Messrs John
Gunn, J. Ogg, A. (mayor of Roslyn),
T. C. Matheson, and A. M‘Gregor. Then
came the hearse, the coffin within it being
concealed from view by the mass of
flowers offered by sorrowing friends. Walk-
ing on either side of the hearse were
the pall-bearers, who were flanked by the High-
land Rifles, under Captain Gillies —the com-
pany in which Dr Stuart always took a lively
interest, and of which he was the chaplain.
The pall-bearers were eight in number—Mr
William Stuart (only surviving son of the de-
parted divine), the Hon. W. D. Stewart,
M.L.C., and Mr Edmund Smith (the executors),
Mr Colin M‘K. Gordon (clerk of Knox Church
session). Dr Hislop, Mr E B. Cargill, Mr R.
Giendining, and Mr J. M. Fraser (elders of
Knox Church). Walking with Mr Stuart were
the three grandchildren of Dr Stuart —Master
Willie Stuart, the son of Mr W. Stuart, and
Masters Donald and JamesStuartjthetwosons of
the late Mr D. M Stuart. The late doctor’s buggy
—a buggy which had been presented to him, and
which, with himself in it, has been commonly seen
at funerals in the past—followed the hearse,
the groom driving; and the sight of this buggy,
loaded, as it was with wreaths, affected many
people as powerfully as any other spectacle in
the imposing procession. A mourning carriage,
engaged for the executors, had for its occupant
Dr Coughtrey, the medical attendant of Dr
Stuart, and then came the office-bearers of
Knox Church. Some of the elders and deacons
of the congregation are mentioned as having
been in other parts of the procession, but in
order that the list may be complete the repeti-
tion of a few names may be pardonable. The
elders present, so far as could be ascertained,
were Messrs E. B. Cargill, R. Chisholm, G. L.
Denniston, the Rev. Dr Dunlop, Messrs
G. Dutch, D. Ferguson, J M. Fraser. R. S.
Gardner, R. Glendining. C. M‘K. Gordon, W. B.
Harlow, A. Herdman, Dr Hislop. Messrs Walter
Hislop, W. Hutchison, M.H.R., J. T Mackerras,
John Reid, John Roberts, C.M G., W. Simpson,
Edmund Smith, A. Stewart, the Hon. W. D.
Stewart, M.L.C., Messrs W. D. Sutherland, G.
M. Thomson, W. T. Todd, and J. A. Torrance;
and the deacons included in the procession
were Messrs A. Bartleman, A. Burt, G Calder,
John Campbell, William Cowie, H. Guthrie,
R A. Johnston, Colin Macandrew, G. M‘Carter,
S. M‘Donald, John M‘Farlane, jun., John
MTherson, W. D. Main, James Mann, T.
Moodie, J. H. Morrison, J S. Nugent, P. G.
Pryde, F. Shaw, E. R. Smith, R. S. Sparrow,
William Stevenson, R. Sutherland, J. C.
Thomson, William Wright, and T. G.
Young. Following the office-bearers of the
church with which the late Dr Stuart was
immediately connected came the clergy of the
Presbyterian Church, and these embraced not
only ministers belonging to the Presbyterian
Church of Otago and Southland, but also a few
from the Presbyterian Church of New Zealand,
31


among those present being the Revs. Dr Elmslie their places as members of the Kirk
(Christchurch), W. Gillies (Timaru), H. Kelly Session, The members of the Burns Club
(Waimate), A. B. Todd (Oamaru), A. H Stobo
(Invercargill), J. Ferguson (Invercargill), J.M.
Davidson (Mataura), J. U. Spence (Clinton),
W. P. Brown (Waikaia), J. M‘Cosh Smith
(Naseby), W. Wright (Otepopo), R, R. M.
Sutherland, J. Ryley, W. Will, W. Bannerman,
J. M. M‘Kerrow, A, Cameron, R. Waddell, J.
M. Fraser, Dr Watt, J. Kirkland, J, Gibb, J.
Gibson Smith, H. Adamson, R. J. Porter,
D. Dutton, A. M. Finlayson, D. Borrie,
J. Christie, A. Greig, and D. Ross. The clergy of
other Christian denominations were also well
represented, among the members on foot or in
vehicles being Bishop Nevill, the Venerable
Archdeacon Edwards and Venerable Archdeacon
Fenton, the Revs. A. R. Fitcbett, E. T.
Howell, H. C. Frere, and B. M. King
(Anglican), the Revs. Father Lynch and Father
Murphy (Roman Catholic), the Revs. J. N.
Buttle and R. Taylor (Wesleyan), the Revs. W.
Saunders and A. H. Wallace (Independent),
the Rev. A North (Baptist), the Rev. W. Ready
(Bible Christian), the Revs. J. Chisholm
(Milton), A. Don, J. S. Reid (Strath-Taieri),
J. Kilpatrick (Warepa), and the Rev. L. J.
Harrison (Jewish), the latter being accompanied
by his executive, consisting of Messrs D. E.
Theomin, L. Mendelsohn, M. Joel, J. Hyman, F.
Hyams, R. M. Marks, G. Jacobs, and F. Falck.
Mr A. Blair and other shipmates of the late
Dr Stuart occupied a prominent position
in the procession, and after them came the
members of the University Council, the High
School Board of Governors, and the Education
Board. The staff of the Otago University was
present in full strength, Professors Sale, Shand,
Ulrich, Black, Salmond, Gibbons, and Gilray,
Dr Scott, Dr Brown, Dr Colquhoun, Ur
Roberts, Dr Batchelor, Dr Ogston, Dr Lindo
Ferguson, Dr John Macdonald, Messrs A.
Dallas, A. R. Barclay, and D. Wilkinson, and
Dr Findlay being all noticed in the procession.
The members of Knox Church congregation,
who were present in large numbers, and the
office-bearers of other churches were next in
order, and following them was a strong con-
tingent of members of the Salvation Army,
male and female, wearing white badges
on their left arms. The University
Students’ Association, headed by Mr C.
M. Mouat (the president), Dr Ross, and
other prominent graduates supplied a con-
tingent about 120 strong ; and following them
came the rector (the Rev. Dr Belcher), a squad
of the High School Cadets, and the pupils of
the High School. A place was assigned to the
High School teachers, the following members
of the staff being present—viz., Messrs A.
Wilson, Brent, Watson, Williams, Campbell,
and Auderton. Dr Belcher was present at the
head of the High School boys; and Mr
G. M. Thomson and Mr M‘Pherson were in
—prominent among them being Dr Sten-
hoase, Messrs A. J. Burns, J. B. Thomson, and
J. R. Thornton —were assigned the next place in
the procession ; and they were followed by the
Ordnance Band, whose excellent playing of the
“Dead March” was generally admired. The
North Dunedin Rifles, under Captain Myers
and Lieutenant Johnston, were present in
force; and the representatives of the
Independent Order of Oddfellows numbered
over 100. About a dozen Chinese, belong-
ing to the humbler class of the Mongolian
residents of Dunedin, attracted a considerable
amount of attention, but they had probably,
in common with the European section of the
public, experienced acts of kindness from the
doctor and not unnaturally desired to pay their
tribute of respect to the dead, and there were
also some Assyrians in the procession. A long
string of children from the Union, George, and
Arthur street schools, under their teachers,
occupied the next place in the procession, the
Arthur street boys carrying wreaths, and then
followed a large number of the general public
on foot, the procession being ended with pro-
bably more than 100 vehicles and a number of
horsemen. Any attempt to enumerate the pro-
minent citizens who were present would be a
hopeless task, but in order to convey some idea
of the representative character of the funeral it
is necessary to mention some of those who were
present. At the same time it must be remem-
bered that in such a large gathering it was in-
evitable that many persons of light and leading
in the community passed by unnoticed, The
Hon. J. G. Ward (Colonial Treasurer) was
present on behalf of the Government, and be-
sides the members of Parliament already men-
tioned the Legislature was represented by the
Hon. H. J. Miller (Speaker of the Legislative
Council), the Hons, R. Oliver, W. H.
Reynolds, S. E. Shrimski, W. M. Bolt, and
J. MacGregor, M.L.C.’s, Messrs D. Pinker-
ton, W. Carncross, James Allen, T. Mackenzie,
W. Fraser, J. Green, and R M‘Nab, M.H.R.’s.
The Mayor (Mr H. S. Fish), Crs Gourley,
Gore, Hardy, Dawson, Wales, M'Gregor,
Cohen, Swan, Owen, Toomey, Carroll,
and Solomon, the town clerk (Mr W. B.
Taylor), and the city surveyor (Mr S. H.
Mirams), represented the civic authorities;
Messrs E. G. Allen, and W. Murray, the
harbourmaster (Captain M‘Callum), the secre-
tary (Mr J. L. Gillies), and the inspector of
works (Mr D. G. Stephens), occupied carriages
provided for the members and officials of the
Harbour Board; Dr Hocken, Messrs G. G.
Russell, D, R. White, M. Fraer, J. R. Sinclair,
A. M‘Kerrow (Hampden), and H. Clark (chair-
mar of the Bruce County Council), represented,
besides the members already mentioned, the
educational bodies; and among the general
32


mourners were noticed the Hon. W. J. M. the pavements as the cortege passed along, a
Larnach, the Hon. T. Fergus, Captain Thom- dense mass gathering in the Octagon, and
son. Cameron, Dr M‘Caw (Brighton). Dr Will another large mass in Custom House square.
son, Cameron, Dr M‘Caw (Brighton), Dr Will
(Abbotsford), Dr Copland (Gore), Dr Closs,
Dr Macpherson, Dr Gordon Macdonald, Dr
Reimer Dr Fulton, Dr Barnett, Messrs
F. R. Chapman, J. Horsburgh (Mayor of Morn-
ington), A. H. Burton, G. Calder (North-East
Valley), B. Sievwright, G. S. Brodrick, T. H.
Dick, H. E. Williams, W. Henderson, J.
Richardson, A. W. Morris, John Davie, F.
Leech, Charles Haynes, F. Mallard, W. J.
Moore, D. Nicol, W. Elder, Keith Ramsay,
John Duncan (Waikouaiti), W. Melville, P.
Barr, A. H. Heycock, G. R. Hercus, A. S.
Adams, J. Walker Bain (Invercargill), D. M.
Spedding, G. E. Eliott, A. D. Lubecki, T. R.
Fisher, E. B C, Quick, G. Fenwick, R. H.
Leary, H. H. Inglis (Mayor of Mosgiel), J. M.
Jamieson, J. Elmer (Waitati), James Hume
(Ashburn Hall), E. H. Carew, W. Somerville,
W. S. Fitzgerald, W. Barron, John Sidey, T.
K. Sidey, A. F. W. Lorie, R. Campbell, J.
Hazlett, F. Meenan, J. Liston, T. Cornish, A.
Owen, John Golder, F. A. Cutten, F. W.
Pecre, E. H. Hart, James Mills, G. Joachim,
E. C. Reynolds, dames Macandrew (Porto-
bello), A. R Ure, J. Sinclair-Thomson, C. B.
Grierson, James Coates, G. Mondy, H. North,
B. C. Haggitt, J. M. Gallaway, W. M. Hodg-
kins, S. Brent, W. Emery, James Todd, A. A,
Finch, W. Fele, D. D. Macdonald, J. P. Arm-
strong, O. J. Hodge, W. M‘Adam, R. Hume,
C. Ziele, R. Hay, J. Mollison, G. C. Matheson,
A. Sligo, H. Wise, I. Selby, T. Scott, D
Heenan, A. Lees, C S. Reeves, J. R. Monson,
D. Baynes, D. Baxter, W. Patrick, J, P, Mait-
land, W. Dallas (chairman of the Clutha
County Council), A. Wilson, A. Mowat, James
Hogg, T. W. Whitson, W. R. Perston,
James Hislop, G. Grant, P. Duncan, S. N.
Brown, J. C. Buckland (Strath-Taieri), J.
Timson, A. J. Barth, A. Hamilton, W. L.
Simpson, P. Keligher, C. Sonntag, J. P. Simon,
A. M‘Diarmid, W. Milne, J. Rennie, J. H.
Chapman, P. Miller, J. Mathew*. A. Tapper,
Detectives Henderson and M‘Grath, and many
others. The cortege was fully a mile long, and
the time it took to pass given points varied
from 30 to 4-0 minutes. It is estimated that
from 6000 to 7000 persons took part in the
procession, while there must have been 15,000
people in George and Princes streets thronging
The funeral was undoubtedly the largest
ever seen in Otago, and most probably the
largest that has ever taken place in New
Zealand. A visitor to Dunedin at the
present time states that he has only seen
two funerals in the colonies which could com-
pare with that of Dr Stuart, and both of these
were funerals in Australian capitals of the
victims of disasters which evoked widespread
feeling of sympathy.
THE CEREMONY AT THE GRAVE.
For a considerable time before the procession
reached the cemetery large crowds of people
had gathered in the immediate vicinity, some
thousands viewing the spectacle from the high
vantage point afforded by that portion of the
Town Belt overlooking the burial ground. Into
this the general public, however, were not
admitted until after the arrival of the cortege , a
large number of the police force and some of
the corporation employees being told off
to watch the gates and openings in
the fences with the object of preventing
people from entering the cemetery. When the
procession arrived at the gates, owing to the
excellence of the arrangements, very little
crushing took place, and the North Dunedin
Rifles formed an enclosure in front of the
place of interment so as to prevent any crush-
ing there. The coffin was carried to the grave
on the shoulders of six members of the High-
land Rifle Corps, and after it had been lowered
into the grave by the pall-bearers, the Rev.
A. Cameron read some passages from the
Psalms and the New Testament, The
Rev. W. Will subsequently engaged in
prayer, the service being brought to a con-
clusion by the Rev. R. R M. Sutherland pro-
nouncing the benediction, A couple of floral
wreaths were then placed on the coffin by two
of Dr Stuart’s grandchildren; and when the
grave had been filled in a large mound about
three feet in height was formed on top with the
floral offerings of school children and others
who attended the funeral. When the burial
service was over a very large number of people
gathered eagerly round the grave to get a view
of the last resting place of him whose death is
now so generally mourned.
33


XLhc Memorial Services.
Knox Church.
A memorial service to the late Rev. Donald
M‘Naughton Stuart, D.D., was held in Knox
Church on Sunday morning, and was at-
tended by a congregation of some fifteen
hundred persons, the church being crowded.
Almost all the members of the con-
gregation wore black, and many of the
ladies appeared in deep mourning. The service
was conducted by the Rev. Dr Watt, and the
following gentlemen occupied seats on the
pulpit dais :—Hon. W. D. Stewart, Messrs E.
B. Cargill, R. Chisholm, Alex. Burt, James
Mason, G. L. Denniston, Gardiner, R. Glen-
dining. Wm. Hutchison, M.H.R., Wm. Stuart,
G. M. Thomson, John Reid, R. Sutherland,
F. Shaw, Johnstone, P. G. Pryde, W. Hislop,
G. Calder, C. M‘Kenzie Gordon, W. D
Sutherland, W. B. Harlow, E. Smith, T.
Moodie, W. Simpson, Rev. Dr Dunlop, Rev.
Dr Belcher, and Rev. James Chisholm.
The service opened with the 23rd Psalm ; the
34th chapter of Deuteronomy was read as the
first, and the 15th chapter of First Corinthians,
from the 35th verse, as the second lesson. The
hymns were the 411th and the 391st.
The Rev. Dr Watt preached from Acts xiii,
36 : “ For David after he had served his own
generation by the will of God fell on sleep.”
Towards the close of his discourse, referring
to the late Rev. Dr Stuart, the preacher said :
This morning, from the vacant pulpit of your
late revered pastor and my own warm friend of
30 years’ standing—a pulpit from which I have
often heard him eulogising the gifts and graces
of friends who have passed over to the
majority,—l had intended to say a few—
surely needless—words in commendation of his
own noble Christian character and of the
splendid work which he has been privileged to
accomplish in this community. I find, how-
ever, my duty anticipated, and I feel as if to
open my mouth on the subject were a work of
supererogation. My feeble testimony would
be inaudible in the remarkable chorus of loud
and unanimous praise which has come from all
hands to salute his memory. I may, however,
record my belief that years will come and go,
to be numbered by scores, before another
citizen will be found pacing the streets of
Dunedin who will fill so large a place in the
public eye. There will be found in the coming
as in the past years men of worth and standing,
with now and then a man of commanding
genius, with whom, after they have faithfully
served their generation, the community will
part with deep regret—God will never leave
Himself without those who will witness
and work for Him in Church and
State ;—but let me again record with deference
my conviction that for many long years to come
there will not be seen in Dunedin another who
will unite in himself the wonderful combination
of qualities Dr Stuart possessed, and who will
succeed in so remarkable a manner in making
his personal influence felt through all classes of
his fellow citizens. There is already talk of
some worthy memorial of him being set up, and
I sincerely hope that it will be done, not so
much for his sake as for the sake of the young
who are growing up around, and who ought to
be taught to emulate and imitate examples of
civic worth and public spirit. Still, as someone
has already felicitously quoted: “Si monumen-
tum queer is, circumspice .” What useful institu-
tion is there in Dunedin which has not received
the shaping touch of Dr Stuart’s hand—if he
did not give it the instant impulse ? Dunedin
largely owes to him, with the help of other
worthy citizens —some of them departed and
some of them still with us, and whose loyal
help he valued higher than any part he was
privileged to take himself in the matter, —some
of our most prominent public buildings—such
as the Boys’ High School, the University, and
the noble church in which we are now met;
and we may fairly say that his name will
remain for many years to come written in very
large and legible characters across the face of
our fair city. Dunedin herself will remain
long a monument to his memory unless she
sink out of sight, swallowed up in some great
cataclysm of Nature. If he himself were con-
sulted, the monument he would like best to
carry down his memory to coming years in this
city would be Knox Church continuing the
same spiritual force as when he presided over
her various organisations. He loved his church
with a passionate love, and was proud of her
with surely an innocent and pardonable, if not
even praiseworthy, pride. She was his spiritual
home, to which he always returned with
pleasure from his excursions into other fields of
philanthropic effort and social usefulness. He
often spoke to me of his office-bearers, whose
co-operation in the work of Christ he valued
highly; and he lost no opportunity of
mentioning with affection those of them
who had gone before and joined the General
34


Assembly and Church of the Firstborn. I
took more than once particular notice of the
anxiety, amounting to even anguish of spirit,
with which he regarded those whom he was
introducing to the fellowship of the church for
the first time. He evidently wrestled hard in
prayer for them that they might hold true, and
I think I learned something of the meaning of
the remarkable words of Paul: “My little
children, of whom I travail in birth till Christ
be formed in you.” There are many here
to-day whom he was privileged to receive into
the communion of the church —some, perhaps,
whose hair is now turning grey. Let me
entreat you for his sake to stand fast, to
stand true to yourselves and to give him, on
the great day that is coming, the opportunity
of presenting you faultless before God as his
crown of joy and rejoicing. And if there is
any in this church to-day who has heard the
Gospel from his lips acain and again, receiving
the message to reject it with indifference, will
you not remember that being dead he yet
speaketh to you in that message, and will you
not now receive it after the voice of the mes-
senger is silent ? and will you not give him
where he is, before the throne, the joy of
knowing that though he is dead the words
spoken by him still live, and is the power of
God unto salvation to you. Your pastor and
friend is now fallen asleep in Jesus, and He
giveth His beloved sleep.
Of all the thoughts of God that are
Borne inward unto souls afar
Along the Psalmist’s music deep,
Now tell me if that any is,
For gift or grace, surpassing this—
“ He giveth His beloved sleep.”
What would we give to our beloved ?
The hero’s heart to be unmoved,
The poet’s star-tuned harp to sweep,
The patriot’s voice, to teach and rouse,
The monarch’s crown, to light the brows—
“ He giveth His beloved sleep.”
What do we give to our beloved ?
A little faith, all undisproved,
A little dust, to overweep,
And bitter memories, to make
The whole earth blasted for our sake —
“ He giveth His beloved sleep.”
“ Sleep soft, beloved 1 ” we sometimes say,
But have no tune to charm away
Sad dreams that through the eye-lids creep :
But never doleful dream again
Shall break the happy slumbers, when
“ He giveth His beloved sleep.”
And friends, dear friends, when it shall be
That this low breath is gone from me,
And reund my bier ye come to weep,
Let one, most loving of you all.
Say, “ Not a tear must o’er her fall—
He giveth His beloved sleep.”
During the offertory Mr Barth played the
Funeral March in C minor (Guilmaut), and as
the voluntary the Funeral March from
“Erocia Symphony” (Beethoven).
children’s service.
The children of Knox Church Sabbath Schools
assembled in the church in the afternoon, and,
accompanied by teachers and friends, entirely
filled the body of the building.
The Rev. D Borrie, who took for his
text Hebrews xi, 4—“ He being dead, yet
speaketh ’’—said : Dear Boys and Girls, —I am
here to-day to express my deep sympathy with
you in your sore bereavement by the death of
your much beloved minister, Dr Stuart. I can
do this with my whole heart, for I too feel
bereaved. I too have lost my friend and father
with whom I often took sweet counsel. Allow
me, not only in my own name but in the name
of many outside Knox Church—in the name of
many Sabbath school teachers and scholars—to
express our symoathy with you in your loss.
We pray that God himself may comfort and
bless you in this your great sorrow, and that you
may know the sympathy and fellowship of
Jesus, the great sympathiser. Dr Stuart is
dead, but he still speaks to you by his life and
character, by his words and works, remember ;
and Jesus lives and says, “My grace is suffi-
cient for you,” “ My grace is made perfect in
your weakness ” He has promised, “ Lo,
I am with you always unto the end of the
world”; “I will never leave you nor forsake
you.” May you remember and realise this.
But I am here to do more than to sympathise
with you, I have to say something about our
departed friend and father, and to draw lessons
from his life and character. This is a thing
sanctioned by Scripture, a great part of which
is taken up with the lives of good men, and
surely we may refer to good men still and show
what God has done for and by them, not for
the glorification of the men themselves, but for
our own instruction and to the glory of His
Grace, who not only made them to be accepted
in the Beloved, but hath made them what they
were, and enabled them to do their good work.
My text, then. |to-day is, “Dr Stuart being dead,
yet speaketh.” Now, you do not need me to
tell you about Dr Stuart, for you know more of
his love and goodness than t do. You knew
his large, loving heart, so full of kindness to
all; you knew his love for the children, and
his deep interest in all that concerns them;
you knew that he was foremost in every good
word and work. If I were to describe his
character I would say that he was a Barnabas —
the son of Consolation, a good man, and full of
the Holy Ghost and of faith; and that, like
Persis the beloved, belaboured much in the Lord:
for Dr Stuart was indeed a son of Consolation,
was a good man, full of the Holy Ghost and of
faith. He was a true bishop of blameless
character —apt to teach, a lover of hospitality,
a lover of good men, sober, just, holy,
temperate : a man thoroughly furnished to
every good work. He was, indeed, a good and
1 a great man, and we might say, “ Know ye
35


not that there is a prince and a great man
fallen this day in Israel,” —a man and a
Christian minister, who will be missed bv your
children, by Knox Church congregation, by the
whole Presbyterian community of Otago and
Southland, by all the churches of Christ in this
city, by every good cause, for many a day ; and
who is truly mourned for by all classes through-
out the land. I did not, however, come here to
eulogise our dear departed friend and father,
for he does not need our praise; and yet, as
one who knew him intimately and loved him
well, I may be permitted to add my testimony
to his worth and to lay one small wreath on his
grave. But I am anxious to draw lessons from
his life and work that we might learn, like him,
to live nobly—that you young people might
learn to follow in his footsteps, as he followed
in the footsteps of Jesus. And if from his
place in glory he sees us here now, if in spirit
he is present to-day, I am sure this would be
more pleasing to him than saying good things
about himself. The Rev, Mr Bonie then spoke
to the children of Dr Stuart’s early home, of
his early consecration to Christ, of his integrity
of character, of his perseverance and untiring
industry, his liberal studies, his kindliness of
spirit and great-hearted generosity, and,
concluding, said : “ All Dr Stuart’s
labours were for others and for the
cause of Christ. When you think of the
meetings he attended, of the visits he paid, of
the letters he wrote—(he was always writing
letters, in season and out of season) —of the
visits and interruptions he endured, of the
marriages he solemnised, of the funerals he
officiated at, his labours were truly great. He
was always at it I have been to his study at
all hours and never found him idle, and seldom
resting. He was mostly busy, with pen in
hand, correcting exercises or matter for the
press, directing newspapers and periodicals,
filling up forms, or writing letters. He was the
busiest man I ever met with. He was not sloth-
ful in business, fervent in spirit serving the Lord.
‘ Seest thou a man diligent in business, he shall
stand before kings, he shall not stand before
mean men, ’ and ‘ the home of the diligent maketh
rich.’ Dr Stuart is rich to-day in good works
that shall be his crown of rejoicing in the day
of Christ, and he stands to-day before the King
of Kings. Truly, like ‘ Persis, the beloved, he
laboured much in the Lord,’ and copied his
Master in continually doing good. And
his message to you and me is to be
up and doing while it is day, for the
night cometh when no one can work.
And what shall I say more, for time fails me
to point the lessons from the life and character
of our departed friend and your minister ? He,
being dead, yet speaks to you in many ways.
But he is dead—he sleeps in Jesus. He rests
from his labours. He has gone home to be with
Christ, which is far better. ‘ Having served
his generation, by the will of God he fell asleep.’
Yes, he is at rest, and dwells forever with the
Lord he loved and served so well. So we can
well say “Servant of God, well done.” We
do not mourn for him as those who have no
hope, for we believe that Jesus died and rose
again, and those also that sleep in Jesus, God
will bring with him. We shall meet again.
We would not have him back, but rather we
thank God that he gave him to us so long, by
grace enabled him to do so much, and at last
took him to Himself. May we hear him speak-
ing to us to-day ! May we seek to follow in his
footsteps, as he followed Christ! May we, too,
seek to win, through grace, the welcome ‘Well
done, good and faithful servant, enter thou into
the joy of your Lord ! ”
EVENING SEBYICE.
In the evening there was an overflowing
congregation. The gallery and body of the
church were almost filled before the bells com-
menced to ring out the summons to worship,
and the building was not only crowded in every
part before 6.30 p.m.—forms and chairs being
brought in for the accommodation of a number
of persons, while others were content with
standing room, and remained on their feet
throughout the service,—but hundreds of people
were unable to gain admission. The pulpit was
occupied by the Rev. J. Chisholm, of Milton,
who preached from the text Hebrews xiii, 7 and
8 (revised version): “ Remember them that had
the rule over you,” and the words following. He
said :—The death of Dr Stuart will be most
felt in Dunedin. He was wont to speak of it,
in Scott’s phrase, as “ Mine own romantic
town.” He worked loyally to advance its
highest interests. There is hardly an institu-
tion that does not owe something to his counsel
and energy. But the shadow of his loss will be
like an eclipse over the whole province, darken-
ing many a home. His name is a household
word among us—it is linked by bridal or
baptism to many a fireside. Along with the
tear that gathers in the eye at thought of his
death, there will start up memories of some
little mannerism or quaint utterance, and the
story of how he acted at tbe christening or what
he said at the wedding will be told anew with
weeping and with laughter. He stood in every
pulpit of our order from the Waitaki to the
Bluff, and there are reminiscences of some
hearty word spoken or some timely service
ungrudgingly rendered in every congregation.
His plaided form seemed always to remind one
of the breezy hillsides, the pine woods, and the
heather of his native lan<3. His sunny face, his
cheery manner, his forceful talk, bore with
them a kind of inspiration. Drooping spirits
seemed to rally in his presence. All limpness
of energy stiffened when he was by into courage
and hope. He was
36


One who never turned his back, but marched
breast forwards; ~ ,
Never doubted clouds would break;
Never dreamed though right was worsted wrong
would triumph;
Held we fall to rise, are buffeted to fight better,
Sleep to wake.
Long before the first step was taken to establish
a second Presbyterian Church in Dunedin, God
was preparing a man to be its first minister.
The requirements set down for the guidance of
those at Home who were asked to select a
minister for the new charge were briefly these :
He was to be a man with a fresh, genial nature
to attract the young ; a liberal-minded man,
with wide sympathies, easy of access to all
classes; a man in vigorous health, not too
young, with a varied experience of human
affairs. These very requirements were being
got ready during all the years that young Stuart
toiled on amid the often adverse and always
changing conditions, which helped to develop
his robust and valiant and many-sided person-
ality. The providence and grace of the church’s
adorable head worked marvellously together,
and when the call came the man was ready.
We are to see fora little how the needed equip-
ment was provided and how it came to be
applied. He was born at a small village called
Styx, in the Highlands of Perthshire. His
father, a staid, God-fearing man, and much
respected by his neighbours, was a stonemason
to trade. His mother was a tall, spare woman,
with an earnest face and a tender look in her
eye. Both had to toil hard and stint them-
selves in order to make a small income over the
needs of 11 children. It was a pious home.
Family worship was never missed. Those who
have had no experience of this element in
Scottish piety may read of it in the “ Cottar’s
Saturday Night.” Burns has given us there a
picture which has all his vividness—the rich
colour, the varied movement, the pathetic in-
terest—of real life. There was the singing of
a Psalm, the reading of a lesson from the sacred
page, the prayer that winged the soul to loftiest
outlook.
From scenes like these old Scotia’s grandeur
springs,
Which makes her loved at home, revered abroad.
Amid such influence gentle spirits are nurtured
and grow through the coming years to the
stature of heroes. David Livingstone felt the
spell of home piety all through his wanderings.
That scene, photographed on the heart of the
civilised world, of the worn-out traveller kneel-
ing by his bedside at Ilala, in the heart of
Africa, was but the end of a subtle chain whose
first link was forged and fastened in the home
at Blantyre. When not long ago I climbed the
circular stairs and stood in the little room
where the great missionary was born, and after-
wards read the epitaph which they have graven
on the black marble in Westminster Abbey, I
thanked God for the pleasant homes of Scot-
land with their frugal living, their simple
pieties, and their sturdy virtues. What Dr
Stuart became amongst us here was very much
the ripe result of the seed that had been sown in
the home of his childhood. He went to school
for a while, but when nine years of age was
sent to eke out the scanty resources of the
household by herding cows. The farmer liked
him, and wanted to engage him for another
year, but the place was deemed unsuitable, and
he returned to home and school again. There
is one incident of these days which gives an
insight into several things, and shows that the
child was father to the man. He was won over,
partly by the coaxing and partly by the threats
of some older boys, to play truant and go to the
woods to gather blackberries. On the way he
was enjoined not to tell. He agreed to this,
but “if I am asked,” he said, “I must speak
the truth.” Some time after his father went to
pay the school fees. The teacher inquired
where the boys had been on such and such a
day. The father could only reply that they had
left home to go to school. When he got back
the boy frankly confessed his fault, expressed
sincere regret, and submitted with a good
grace to the chastisement which, in loving
solicitude for his future well-being, the
father saw meet to inflict. After his own
school days were over he began to teach
others. He was wont about this time
to carry a bottle of milk to school with the
avowed purpose of making his dry bread more
palatable at dinner time ; but the milk usually
found its way to the table of a poor widow near
by, whose only son was disabled by asthma.
You have all read with what patient valour he
fought his way at Leven, and how, surmount-
ing all obstacles, he passed with distinction
through an ordinary arts curriculum at the
University of St. Andrews. Here, during the
long winters, his own earnings were eked out by
a little box regularly sent from the old home
with cakes and scones and eggs and butter,
“ smelling of flora and the country green.” The
colour that had faded through burning the mid-
night oil came sooner back to the pale cheeks
of the student when he got away for a brief
rest to his boyish haunts from the fact that he
had used to good purpose the strength and
courage which the home supplies invariably
yielded. During the summer vacations he
taught a school or travelled here and there as
tutor, ever keeping his eye and ear open to what
was lovely and of good report. In Edinburgh
he came for a short time under the spell of Dr
Chalmers, and drank deep draughts of inspira-
tion from that greatest of modern Scotchmen—
so massive in every noble quality. From the
grey metropolis of the north he went to the
sunnier south, and did good educational work
at Windsor. Thence he passed to London,
where he studied theology and kindred sub-
37


jects, and so became fitted by scholarly attain- us to write short essays on prescribed themes
ments for the work of the Christian ministry— There was clear proof when these were handei
the goal which he had kept steadily in view
from the beginning, and towards which all his
past efforts had been persistently directed.
Ere long he was settled in Falstoue, where he
was brought into contact with men of a primi-
tive type : grave shepherds many of them, who
had leisure to meditate on the deep things of
God. I called when at Home on Dr Marcus
Dods with a letter of introduction from
your late minister. Dods, as some of you
know, is a professor of high standing and one of
the most trusted leaders in New Testament
criticism at the present time. He hails from
the borders, and knows the district on Tyne-
side where Stuart laboured. His face lit up at
once with a fine, appreciative glow when he saw
the familiar handwriting. He spoke in the
heartiest terms of our common friend, and urged
me, if it were possible, to visit Falstone. “Man,”
said he, “the very dogs go to kirk there.” The
young minister soon endeared himself to the
people and commended the Gospel not only by
his vigorous preaching but by his devoted life.
He took a keen interest also in education —not
only saw that there were schools for the
children, but, what was even more charac-
teristic, tried to remove all hindrances, whether
of a physical or a moral kind, out of the way of
children going to school. A friend told me the
other day that when he was at Home he saw a
wooden bridge which had been erected over the
Tyne, chiefly by the efforts of Stuart, for the
convenience of scholars. And every year since he
came to Dunedin he has sent Home a pound to
keep that bridge tarred and in good repair.
While there the call to Knox Church found
him. He had been attracted to colonial life.
His vivid imagination loved to picture the
landing of the Pilgrim Fathers at Plymouth
Rock and the building amid the primeval forest
of ‘ ‘ villages which are now opulent cities, but
which have through every change retained some
trace of the character derived from their
founders,” He deemed it a rare privilege to
live at the beginnings and have a hand in
shaping the destinies of national life. He knew
that in the old country other things besides
freedom had broadened slowly down from pre-
cedent to precedent. Here he felt we were
young, our affairs plastic, and much might
be done to shape and guide national
life to finer forms and better issues
than had yet been reached in older lands.
Thus he came amongst us well equipped for
his great work, with the precise requirements
which had been sketched by the foresight of
those who may be justly regarded as the fathers
of this congregation. Hew were his gifts and
graces applied ? As a member of his Bible
class I can speak from experience of his work
amongst the young. He was never tiresome,
always fresh and stimulating. He got most of
back that they had been carefully read. There
was always a footnote with some word of cheer.
He marked the tiniest bud of promise, and
flooded it with the sunshine of his approval.
The corner of Old Knox Church where a band
of young communicants sat one summer even-
ing is sacred ground to me. It was near the
communion, and we were looking forward with
a certain tremulous desire to commemorate the
dying love of Jesus. The tones of our beloved
pastor grew more solemn and tender as the
shades of night deepened. He seemed to lead
us to the very foot of tbe cross. We saw the
Christ hanging in utter loneliness of spirit and
unspeakable agony there. We heard a voice
that seemed calmer than silence pleading with
us, and our inmost hearts made grateful
response, “ God forbid that I should glory save
in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ.” He
loved, as you all know, to preach the Gospel.
He had faith in its efficacy. It made him the
hopeful man ho was. He could never despair
of even the worst, seeing that Christ’s blood
had been shed to atone for sin, and His risen
and glorified manhood, with its garnered ex-
perience of earthly toil and temptation and pain
and sorrow was now on the throne of the uni-
verse. He held his Presbyterianism in subordi-
nation to the Gospel, deeming it in accordance
with the Word of God, fitted to give expression
to the rights of the Christian people, and to
furnish effective means of bringing the un-
searchable riches of Christ to bear on the hearts
and lives of all. On one occasion he had been
speaking with his usual enthusiasm about the
blue banner, when Justice Richmond, who was
sitting beside him, said, “I like to see yon
waving it over me, so long as you keep it waving
under the glorious banner of the Gospel.”
“That,” he replied, “is what I always do.”
He regarded the Presbyterian Church as a
regiment in that consecrated host which no man
can number. It had its own banner, its own
uniform, its own forms of drill and discipline)
its own methods of carrying on the great war-
fare against evil and bringing the world into
subjection to Christ. His own experience and
his wide reading in church history convinced
him that the Presbyterian Church had been
used by God to do a noble work in the old worle
and the new. But he never dreamt of unchurch-
ing others because, forsooth, their banner was
different in shape or colour from his own, 01
because the kind of weapons they used, or then
mode of handling these, did not meet with hu
approval. The one great end was to get humat
souls, in the name of Jesus Christ and througt
the power of His Holy Spirit into the death-
grapple with sin. He was jubilant then. Foi
he well knew on whose side the victory woulc
lie. His many and valuable services in the
cause of education were with the same intent,
38


He worked on the lines laid down by the them to the utmost. And thus he exemplified
Scottish Reformers. He was never weary another great truth of the Kingdom, “ With
lauding their enlightened zeal in seeking to
establish a school in every parish and a college
in every notable town to lead up to the national
universities, That was his model. His time and
energy were freely given to adapt it to our new
conditions. Ignorance he was sure could never
be the mother of devotion. Every spark of truth
and every shred of reality must help to reveal
the highest, and beget in men’s hearts a deeper
reverence and in their lives a more acceptable
worship. Knowledge, he felt, was the hand-
maiden of religion, only she must know her
place. She is the second, not the first.
A higher hand must make her mild,
If all be not in vain, and guide
Her footsteps, moving side by side
With Wisdom, like the younger child.
No one insisted more than he on the fact that
“ the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wis-
dom.” He knew well that learning was but a
will-o’-the-wisp and life an utter failure apart
from the “ wisdom that cometh from above,
which is first pure, then peacable, gentle and
easy to be entrusted, full of mercy and good
fruits, without partiality, without hypocrisy.”
Further, by his widespread activities in visiting
the sick, in relieving the destitute, in comfort-
ing the bereaved, in shedding the light of kindly
sympathy into despairing hearts and darkened
homes, in lifting the fallen and luring them into
the paths of virtue, he was but seeking to bring
the manifold grace of God to bear on the varied
needs of humanity. The spring of his tireless
philanthropy was in the Gospel. It was the
love of Christ that constrained him. We regard
as his highest claim to our reverence and love
the fact that he was a faithful minister of Jesus
Christ. Considering his manner of life let us
imitate his faith. He believed in Jesus Christ,
and gave himself in free, joyful surrender to do
his bidding. It must have seemed sometimes a
hopeless task to do all the work that was laid to
his hand. How was he with his few loaves and
fishes to feed such a multitude? He never
wasted time or courted failure by idle question-
ing. He just set about doing what he could,
giving what he had, and his resources increased
and became wonderfully adequate to meet the
unceasing demands that were upon him. He
exemplified a mighty truth which our weak
faith is apt to let slip : that the way to get more
in the Kingdom of God is to use with diligence
and fidelity what we already possess. “ To
him that hath shall be given, and he shall have
abundantly.” Because of his faith in Jesus
Christ he had faith in the possibilities of
human nature. He did not stand aloof from
his fellows in any exceptional or self-righteous
mood and coolly criticise their failings. The
sneer of the cynic was never on his lips. He
drew out what was best in men by trusting
what measure ye mete it shall be measured
to you again.” His faith taught him that where
sin abounded grace did much more abound.
It gave him some insight into the dimensions of
redeeming love and clothed him with a beauti-
ful humility. He said to me when nearing the
end, “ The prayer that seems to suit me best is
just the prayer of the publican, ‘ God be merci-
ful to me a sinner.’ The text that keeps re-
peating itself to my mind is this, * Faithful is
the saying and worthy of all acceptation that
Christ Jesus came into the world to save
sinners, of whom lam chief.’ Oh, Chisholm, I
am content now to take the lowest place in His
Kingdom, and would fain creep in to kiss His
feet.” He has gone. To the last he stood at
his post. He would not lay down his weapons,
or unclasp any part of the armour that had
been dented in many a struggle. Time
and Death alone unharnessed our Chris-
tian knight and laid him to sleep. And
who will grudge him his repose ? Grief is apt
to be selfish, and bereaved hearts will continue
to sigh for the touch of a vanished hand and
the sound of a voice that is still. Our loss we
should remember is his gain ; and we have
much still related to him to be thankful for.
His bodily presence is gone, but the stirring
example of his Christ-like life, the radiant in-
fluence of his unselfish devotion to every good
cause, remain. Let us imitate his faith, let
us fight the good fight, that we too may lay
hold on eternal life!
Into a murky chamber I beheld
Enter an armed warrior, bowed with eld,
With harness battered as in mortal fight,
Who to the twain there watching sadly said ;
“ A solitary man, I ride on quest
All unachieved, and with you fain would rest
A little space, for sore am I bestead.”
Then rose the twain—the one with mournful face
Yet beautiful, the other gaunt and grey—
Said: “Take thy rest, hence none are turned
away,
Hence none may pass ; ” then softly did unbrace
His armour, whispering, “ Rest, thou weary one,
Here in this quiet house; thy quest is done.”
Aye ! and Time and Death in thus gently un-
harnessing our Christian knight were but the
messengers of Jesus Christ, in whose blessed
presence his glorified spirit now suns itself,
while his body, being still united to Christ*
rests under His faithful watch and ward till the
resurrection mom. What, in a word, then, is
the great lesson of his life ?It is this, verified
by an ever-increasing cloud of witnesses, that
all might, and varied power for well-doing, come
to the man in whose heart Christ dwells by
faith. Ah, brothers, amid the cross currents
and surface billows, that are stirred by the
passing winds and often buffet us, we may lose
ourselves, and be drifted hither and thither,
and tossed on the cruel a rocks at last; but we
39


may, all of us, if we will have it so, feel the
ground-swell of divine grace, the deep current
of eternal love, that sets steadily to the desired
haven. It was to this he committed himself.
It is present and available for all of us in such
grand words as these ; Jesus Christ is the same
yesterday as to-day and for ever. He is able
to make all grace abound unto you, that ye
having always all sufficiency in everything may
abound unto every good work.
The musical portion of the service, during
which many of the congregation were deeply
affected, again had special reference to the
occasion. The preliminary voluntary, played
by Mr Barth, was “ Oh, rest in the Lord ” ; the
anthem was “ What are these ” (Stainer); and
the out-going voluntaries were Handel’s
“ Dead March,” during which the whole of
the vast congregation remained standing, and
Beethoven’s “Funeral March.” The collections
for the day, which were in aid of the poor of
the congregation, amounted £54- lls 3d.
St. Paul’s Cathedral.
At St. Paul’s Church on Sunday the Yen.
Archdeacon Edwards preached from Revelations
iv, 8: “ They rest not day and night, saying
Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, which
was, and is, and is to come.” The Archdeacon
said inter alia in reference to the late pastor of
Knox Church;—“l wish to say a few words
about that striking figure that has passed away.
Of course I refer to Dr Stuart. During the
many years I have been in Dunedin I have
been present at several public funerals which
have been largely attended, but not one to
be compared with his, when so many of
all classes, rich and poor, high and low, were
to be seen in the precession; and they were
there not because they had been requested to
attend, but because they were mourners indeed.
Now, why was this? Because Dr Stuart had
endeared himself to them by the many noble
and Christian qualities that adorned his charac-
ter. His whole life was spent, not only in
doing good to the souls, but also to the bodies
of men. He was ever ready to rejoice with
those that rejoice, and weep with those that
weep. As to his generosity, it was boundless.
As I walked in that enormous procession that
followed him to the grave, my thoughts re-
verted to a public funeral which left this church
nearly five and twenty years ago—viz., that of
Mr Patterson, an eminent civil engineer, who
was drowned in a small stream near Oamaru.
He was a member of the English Church. Mr
Balfour, also a civil engineer (a shipmate of his
from Scotland, where they had been school-
fellows and dear friends), hearing the news of
Mr Patterson’s death, was hurrying from
Christchurch to attend the funeral when he too
met the same fate, being drowned off Clamaru
when landing from the steamer. His body,
being recovered, was brought to Dunedin, and,
being a leading member of Knox Church, there
was a Presbyterian service, at which I was present,
and at which Dr Stuart officiated before starting
for the cemetery. At the request of his frieudf
I willingly consented to allow his body to rest
by that of Mr Patterson. Dr Stuart accom-
panied me to the cemetery, where I read tht
service at the grave. I mention this to show
the large-hearted Christian liberality whicl
marked the whole life of Dr Stuart. I maj
add that it is gratifying to me to make the
following quotation from the published historj
of Knox Church:—‘Archdeacon Edwards hat
from first to last maintained the most pleasanl
and kindly relations with the minister and con-
gregation of Knox Church, and has ofter
manifested his sympathy by his presence
among them on occasions both of rejoicing anc
mourning.’ Dr Stuart has gone to that resi
that remaineth to the people of God, and h(
has left in the hearts of those that loved him e
memory that will never die.”
Trinity Wesleyan Church.
At Trinity Wesleyan Church on Sunday the
Rev. J. Newman Buttle preached a discourse
on “The Enduring Life,” taking his text from
John xii, 23, 26. He dwelt specially upon that
portion of the text which says, “ He that loveth
his life shall lose it; and he that hateth his life
in this world shall keep it unto life eternal.”
This passage, he pointed out, contained the
principle of the enduring life. The examples
of the operation of this principle, he observed,
were so numerous that a selection became diffi-
cult, but he referred to the lives of John
Howard, William Wilberforce, David Living-
stone, Dr Brown, the missionary, and Dr Stuart
as examples ; and more especially to the lives of
the two latter. In alluding to Dr Stuart, he
said it seemed that their old friend had caught
his inspiration from God’s truth when he was
led to live the life that he did, and to accom-
plish the work he did in their midst, and
although they loved to have him with them,
and rejoiced in his labour, although his work
was a distinct advantage to this present
moment, and although they mourned with
heartfelt grief for his death, yet out of all this
there would come a more fruitful blessing,
and in the days that were to come they would
see the harvest of the seed-sowing of their dear
friend who had gone home to God. Most of
them knew the doctor in his private life—some,
perhaps, very intimately. They rejoiced in his
friendship, and they felt that in him there was
one in whose heart there was sympathy for
everyone who was in trouble. He had a word
of counsel for all who needed it, and encourage-
ment for all those whose spirits drooped by
the way. It was because of the wonderful
sympathy in the man’s heart that they were
drawn to him. It was Christlike, and there-
fore it had a power over men’s hearts. Those
40


connected with his own congregation would
realise, too, how great their loss was at this
present moment, for he gave to that church
and congregation long years of devoted, self-
sacrificing labour; and it seemed that the
partner of his life—his young wife—was taken
home at the commencement of his career
that he might give a more undivided atten-
tion to his congregation, and he responded
to that call. And so in connection with
that church there had been established and
maintained through all these years all the
agencies which were suggested by the neces-
sities of our time. After referring to the
various agencies of the church, the preacher
proceeded to say that the intense grief mani-
fested by the congregation at the doctor’s
funeral showed how strongly his life had taken
hold of the people of his church. And now his
labours seemed to have been cut short, his
work was done, and he bad gone home to
heaven. And what was going to be the result
of it? He believed that by his life he had
given to his congregation such an illustration
of devotion to God and the cause of humanity
that it would be a distinct and decided benefit
to the whole community. In the lives of scores
of citizens of this place, especially in the lives
of young people, there had been such a powerful
illustration of his text that night that many would
say: “If leading a life like Dr Stuart means
being a Christian, I shall be one with Christ.”
Garrison Hall.
At the Garrison Hall on Sunday a service in
memory of the late Mrs Captain Best was held,
there being a large number present. The Rev.
Mr Ready in the course of his remarks referred
to the many excellent Christian qualities which
had characterised the deceased lady’s life, and
the fortitude and resignation with which she had
borne the illness which eventuated in her death.
He also mentioned that her husband, the late
Captain Best, who perished in the ill-fated
Kakanui, was a member of that congregation,
and the last sermon he had heard on earth was
delivered at one of their services in the Rattray
street Hall. Mr Ready, before concluding, also
referred to the late Dr Stuart, speaking as
follows : —“ We have been called upon to sustain
a great loss in the death of our dear and beloved
Dr Stuart. The best eulogy that can possibly
be given to the doctor was the expression of
universal sympathy manifested last Wednesday
at his funeral. In character he was humble,
gentle, and generous. Although he took a
leading part in all Christian and philanthropic
work there was no ostentation in his spirit or
bearing. Most affectionately he went in and
out among his brethren and his fellow-citizens.
He was a man greatly beloved. His sympathies
were as wide as the Cross. His heart was
strange to no man’s heart, for no heart was
beyond his sympathy. Little children received
his benedictions, and men and women strug-
gling with the worries and anxieties of life his
counsel and help. He was kind and courteous
to all. He was a man of liberal sentiment,
of broad and Catholic sympathies—no narrow
sectarian was he ; his heart was too warm and
too big for that. He was deeply interested in
the work and progress of every good institution
and church. His death is a national loss to us.
We will miss him. A good minister of Jesus
Christ, a kind brother, and a valued citizen is
gone from our midst. All churches will miss
his wise counsel, his generous help, his warm
sympathy and his genial presence. We deeply
sympathise with the congregation at Knox
Church. There is no doubt many of them feel,
to say as Dr Pierson said concerning the death
of C. H. Spurgeon, * When God made Spurgeon
He broke the mould.’ It is questionable
whether the congregation will find another Dr
Stuart. But it is not all darkness ; a Divine
light rests upon this scene of sorrow. ‘We
sorrow not even as others which have no hope.’
Our dear friend, brother, minister is gone from
us, but he is gone to Christ. The loss is ours,
the gain is his. John Foster calls death ‘a
radiant idea.’ The holy, happy dead are
‘ like the stars by day—withdrawn from mortal
eye, but not extinct: they hold on their way in
glory through the sky.’ Our friend is still ours
—‘ not lost, but gone before.’ Farewell, dear
brother and friend. Thy memory will long be
fragrant. Thy ‘works will follow thee,’ a
potent influence for good in the midst of men.
Thy happy spirit is ascended to those that are
‘perfect.’ One more motive have we who
still tread the pilgrim’s path to the celestial
country, in the prospect of meeting our sainted
friend, brother, citizen, minister there.”
41


