

In Memoriam
Mr. William E. Ross
nf
(iarangula, ®arfon, $[.5.311.


In Memoriam


THE LATE Mr. W. E. ROSS. “GARANGULA,” HARDEN.


In Memoriam
Mr. W. E Ross
T seems strange to me that I should be writing an In Memoriam
II note and foreword about the late Mr. W. E. Ross, of Garangula,
Harden. His personality was so impressive and vital that one
can hardly realise that he is gone "beyond these voices.” Full of hopeful
enthusiasm, he had a fine pride in the progress of our Church. Honest
worth and persevering industry led him on to great and real success,
yet whatever was best in him he was ever ready to acknowledge that
he owed to a good mother. He was a pioneer settler of the highest
type, and because of him our respect to-day is greater for duty and
work and thrift. ,No one envied him a wealth so devoted to noble and
generous uses. Given to hospitality, to enjoy his fellowship anywhere
was a delight. His best legacy is the gracious memory of a beautiful
life.
"So, when a good man dies
For years beyond his ken
The light he leaves behind him, lies
Upon the paths of men.”
William Robertson
Moderator of Assembly.
Dec., 1924.


Life of the late William E. Ross
mUSTRALIA has long been recognised as a country of great possi-
bilities. Many men who have started life there in humble
circumstances have by their own energy and foresight reached
to a high and honourable standing in the land.
Such was the case with the late William E. Ross. He was one of a
family that had to do pioneering work, and work out their own destiny
in a strange country. They started from the lowest rung in fortune’s
ladder, and by diligence and hard work, and pulling well together
through all the early trials that beset them, they gradually climbed up
step by step until they reached the top. They were then able to look back
with satisfaction at the difficulties they had surmounted, all of which
had been done by clean and straightforward dealings.
The father and mother, Mr. and Mrs. Alexander Ross, arrived in
Adelaide, South Australia, in 1854, having been induced to make the
trip from Scotland by hearing good reports as to the bright prospects
offering in Australia. They arrived with a young family, whilst William
was one of the children born in the new land. The date of his birth was
I Oth April, 1855, at Gumeracha.
After living in Adelaide for some years where Mr. Ross, Snr., who
was an expert blacksmith, devoted his energies to the building of drays,
strippers and other farming implements, they heard that good land was
to be had cheaply in New South Wales. The eldest son, Alexander, was
sent over to inspect, at the time that the Robertson Land Act came into
force. He went first to Albury, and from there to a place known as
Ten Mile Creek near Holbrook. He liked this country so well that he
took up an area of 320 acres, which was unsurveyed and in its natural
state. His brother James went over immediately and joined him.
When his father received the report on the country he at once
sold out his Adelaide interests, and the family moved across. Mr. and
Mrs. Ross with some of the children took the steamer to Melbourne,
thence mail coach to Ten Mile Creek. They arrived at their destina-
tion to find that a comfortable cottage had been erected by the sons
who had preceded them.
William, who was then aged twelve, and his brother John had the
task of taking over all the belongings of the family. They left Adelaide
toward the end of October with waggon and a spring cart. They went
to Albury, which town they reached on the 3I st December. There they
were met by their brother James. Stores were secured, and the boys
arrived at their new home early in January, 1 868.
Land was soon prepared for the plough by the Ross family, and
the ground was turned over by means of a team of bullocks, and a
plough with one wheel, and making a single furrow. A good crop was
secured, and it was carted about 45 miles to Wagga by William, who
was then only 13 years old. The roads were quite unmade, and a load
consisted of about 1 5 bags.
In 1868 it was decided to go in for sheep breeding. With this
object in view about 500 ewes were purchased from Mr. James McLaurin,
of Yarra Yarra, at 6/- per head. They were a nondescript lot com-
prising a number of breeds, and very few, including Mr. McLaurin, had
much faith in the success of their venture. The country was all
unfenced, and the sheep had to be closely shepherded by William and
Robert.


From these sheep a clip of 10 bales of wool was secured. As there
was no railway in those days it was sent to Melbourne by road, a dis-
tance of about 250 miles, and was eventually sold at 5Jd. per lb.
Extra country had been secured from time to time chiefly by what
was known as grass rights. In this way the (arming and sheep breeding
gradually developed, and it is worth noting that in the year 1895
82,000 sheep were shorn and 25,000 lambs raised on Kinross and Uri
Park Estates. The class of wool was brought to a high standard, and
in the 1924-25 season it made up to 45d. for fleece, and as high as 40Jd.
for necks. The sheep men were Messrs. James, William and Robert,
Messrs. Alexander and John looking after the land and financial matters.
Mr. Ross Senr. died in 1882, after which the five sons went into
partnership, and worked together until 1912. In that year Alexander
died, and the partnership was dissolved.
Mrs. Ross lived until 1894, and the sons all give her credit for what
she did to enable them to pull so well together. She took a keen interest
in all they did, and her sons were much influenced by her wishes, which
invariably proved to be to their benefit.
In June, 1883, William Ross married Elizabeth Beveridge, daughter
of Thomas Beveridge, of “Argoon,” and they took up their residence at
Uri Park where all their children were born, and where the first twenty
years of their life was spent.
When the dissolution of partnership was decided upon, the company
held four well improved properties at Holbrook totalling 70,000 acres,
Garangula, near Harden, 20,000 acres, Coleamby about 16,000 acres,
Uri Park, 10,000 acres, Ardersier, near Inverell, 27,000 acres, and Mac-
quarie Fields, 2,000 acres.
To acquire such a number of fine holdings after the humble begin-
ning that was made, was a tribute to the careful management and thrift
of the brothers, supported by hard work. It was ..also a proof of what
could be done in Australia by those who were not afraid to face
bravely their trials and difficulties, and who were ready to make the best
use of their experiences, and had confidence in their own abilities.
In 1903 Mr. William Ross took as his share of the properties,
Garangula, where he lived for the remainder of his life. In addition he
retained portion of Ardersier, where two of his sons, Knox and Thomas,
lived for some time. He had great faith in the Harden district and
acquired extra country adjoining Garangula, and eventually settled each
of his sons on a nice holding, where they are now all well established
as follows:
William Forester Ross, “Inverlochie.”
John Knox Ross, “Ardersier.”
Thomas Maxwell Ross, “Collingwood.”
Robert Bruce Ross, “Jellambi.”
Not satisfied with getting his own family settled in the district, Mr.
Ross secured further country. On this he settled sixteen families, letting
them have the land on very liberal terms as regards repayment. By
his efforts twenty-two families were living in the district where previously
there had only been three. During a dry season a few years back, he
purchased a property of 20,000 acres near Gunbar, and known as Five
Oaks. He used this for relief country, and when it was not further
required he cut it up, and it was sold to four small settlers adjoining.
It will thus be seen that Mr. Ross had a great deal of foresight, and
took a lot of interest in closer settlement. It is men of that stamp, and
with the same broad and liberal ideas that the country is in need of
to-day, as there are many good people waiting for a chance of securing
a living area on terms that they would have a chance of paying. Mr.
Ross knew the difficulties attached to starting on the land, and he was
ready to give all possible assistance and encouragement to those who
were prepared to undertake the work.
Mr. Ross was a very keen judge of horses and bred some very fine
draught horses and buggy ponies. He also knew a good polo pony
when he saw one and never missed an opportunity of securing anything


special. Garangula is noted for its buggy ponies, and lew men in the
State could handle a pair of ponies and buggy better than the late Mr.
William Ross. He dearly loved a high spirited pair, and in the bush
could drive them at full pace where most men would falter.
Despite all these matters that Mr. Ross had to attend to, he found
time to do good work in other directions. He was very hospitable and
liberal, and was fortunate in having a very happy home life, and being
ably supported in all his work by a generous and kind-hearted wife.
Mrs. and Mrs. William Ross were chiefly instrumental in the first
church being erected at Darlington Point and in conjunction with his
brothers the Presbyterian Church at Holbrook was built and endowed.
They also erected in memory of their parents, that very handsome
church at Harden-Murrumburrah.
Mr. Ross took an active and practical interest in establishing the
Presbyterian Ladies* College at Goulburn. In conjunction with the late
Sir Samuel McCaughey a cottage was erected at the Salvation Army
Homes for Boys, at Bexley,
In addition to all these fine works he founded the Alexander
Gordon Ross Scholarship for students of Divinity at St, Andrews’ Col-
lege, Sydney University, of £IOOO. This was given in memory of his
eldest son Alexander.
He gave £IOOO to the Presbyterian Church, and another £IOOO
to be applied to the Aged and Infirm Ministers Fund.
At the time of his death he was a Director of the Co-operative Wool
and Produce Company, Ltd., Sydney.
For some time before his death Mr. Ross had been failing in health,
and in August, 1925, moved to Sydney for special treatment. His
strength, however, gradually weakened, and he passed away on Sunday
night, I 4th September, at 46 Martin Road, Centennial Park, Randwick,
Sydney.
The large and representative assemblage which attended the
funeral services at the Ross Memorial Church, Harden, was a profound
testimony of the widespread esteem and affection in which he was held.
Members of all denominations were present, and there were numerous
wreaths sent by kind friends and sympathisers. Besides the relatives
there were present the Shire President and Councillors, the Mayor and
Aldermen, the Boy Scouts and School Children.
The service was conducted by the Rev. N. S. Millar, B.A. (formerly
of Murrumburrah-Harden), the Rev. Dr, Burgess, of Sydney, and the
Rev. J. S. Rapkins, of Young. The procession forming the cortege was
a mile long, comprising 62 motors, there being also 27 other vehicles.
The pall-bearers were six nephews of the deceased, namely: Messrs. J. A.
and N. Ross, of Holbrook, and Messrs. K. S. and F. Beveridge, of Mur-
rumburrah.
The late Mr. W. E. Ross left a widow, and a grown-up family of
four sons and four daughters. The sons are: Councillor W. F. Ross, and
Messrs. Thomas, Knox and Robert Ross. The daughters are Mrs.
J. G, Hufton, “Glen Ayr,” Harden; Mrs. W. Goodwin, Centennial Park;
and the Misses Jean and Mary Ross. One son died 21 years ago.


THE ROSS MEMORIAL CHURCH. HARDEN-MURRUMBLIRRAH. ERECTED BY
MR. & MRS. W. E. ROSS IN MEMORY OF THEIR PARENTS.


Memorial Services
A Memorial Service at the Ross Memorial Church, Murrumburrah-
Harden, on Sunday, 21st September, 1924, was conducted by the Very
Reverend John Walker, of St. Andrew’s Kirk, Ballarat, Victoria, ex-
Moderator of the General Assembly of Australia, who preached the
following sermon on the occasion:—
The Scripture Readings were Psalm 90, and Rev. 22, 1-14.
“Thanks be to God Who giveth us the Victory/*
“I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life; no man cometh to the
Father but by Me.”—(John XIV. 6.).
*1 am the Resurrection and the Life: he that believeth in Me,
though he were dead, yet shall he live.**—(John XL 25).
*‘Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth;
Yea, saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their labours; and their
works do follow them.”—( Rev. XIV. 13).
“Death is swallowed up in victoryl O death, where is thy sting?
O grave, where is thy victory? The sting of death is sin! but thanks be
to God Who giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ/’ —
(I Cor.: XV. 54-37).
Christianity is the religion of Hope and of Consolation!
Sin and death stalk through the world destroying happiness and
darkening life! Christ came into our humanity to save us from the curse
of hopelessness of both! And there is no other Saviour from the awful
power of one or the other. There are men who seem to find a weird
satisfaction in telling us that “Christianity is played out!” It is a ghastly
thing to chortle about! for if it is true, then humanity is played out!
All the worthy, pure and holy ideals of life are doomed, and the human
heart will have lost the secret of peace!
But thank God! Christianity can never be played out, for it is the
revelation of the Divine Heart; it is God’s Way of Salvation, it is the
Divine Panacea for Peace, here and now and for ever!
Do you know what it is to be lost? 1 do. Among the lagoons on
the Victorian side of the Upper Murray, near Towong! I cooeed until
heard half a mile away, and help camel “Come straight to me,” said
my deliverer, at length, and i was soon at home!
“1 am the Way!” says the Lord Jesus; “I am the Truth and the
Life!” Christ is the Way from ignorance to knowledge: from error and
lies to Truth: from the darkness and hopelessness of Death to the light
or joy, Eternal Life! The Lord Jesus Christ is the one and only way
to the Eternal Father, in Whom is formed and enjoyed all that the
heart most longs for!
1 suppose all people seek happiness, but how many seek it in what
extraordinary ways and with what tragic results! 1 suppose those young
men and women who recently thronged the Basement of the Sydney
Town Hall, and by their shocking carousals not only disgraced and
degraded themselves, but foully defamed the good name of Australia
throughout the world—wherever the ghastly report of their doings went
—1 suppose they also sought happiness! But there is no happiness in
sin—that is the way to broken hearts, wrecked homes, and the darkness
of death—here and hereafter.
Wise are they who hear and heed the voice of Him Who says:
“1 am the Way, the Truth and the Life!” and who trust, follow and
obey Him! His sacrifice saves; His spirit grants power to live worthily!
It was Jesus Who said: “I am the Resurrection and the Life: he that
believeth in Me, though he were dead, yet shall he live!” Faith in the
Divine Saviour gives Resurrection from the life and power and sin, and
also from the darkness of physical death, transforming it into the Gate of
Life!


As a Minister of Christ, how many men and women have 1 stood
with, in the hours of their sorest bereavement? Then it is that the
poverty of the consolations of the world are made tragically manifest.
All that the worldling has to say is: “Try and forget!” But how can a
heart which has lost its dearest, find true consolation in mere trying to
forget? If the Treasure is for ever lost, what can assauge the poverty
that remains? That is the Worlds Quack Remedy for Heart Grief;
and it is a fraud! The Good Physician has the only real cure for the
desperate wound caused by the stroke of death! He alone can and does
speak to the heart to assauge and cure such sorrow. “I am the
Resurrection and the Life: he that believeth in Me, though he were
dead yet shall he live!” He says: “Let not your heart be troubled: ye
believe in God (the Almighty, the Ail-Holy), believe also in Me (Who
am come to reveal the eternal love). “In my Father’s house are many
mansions (many safe abiding-places) ; if it were not so, I would have
told you.” (A Friend does not withhold urgent truth from his friends!)
“1 go to prepare a place for you, and if 1 go and prepare a place for you,
1 will come again, and receive you unto Myself: that where I am, there
ye may be also.” Christ comforts by reminding His believing and
bereaved children that their dear ones have gone from their sight are
not lost but just “gone before!” He—the Blessed Saviour—has just
fulfilled His promise! He has “come again and taken His own to His
Prepared Home in the Eternal City, where it is well with them, and
where with their beloved Master, they abide, to welcome, in God’s good
time, one by one of the loved ones, who have still service here to fulfil!
And I do not think that those whom we so loved, and have lost from
sight for a while, are very far away! Perhaps our Lord will let them
help us to gladly fulfil our daily tasks, by inspirations of love, and by
gracious memories.
“O death, where is thy sting? O Grave where is thy victory?
Thanks be to God, Who giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus
Christ. Therefore, my beloved brethren, be ye steadfast, immovable,
always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that
your labour is not in vain in the Lord.”
My dear friends, we are met this morning under the shadow of a
great loss, and our minds are full of thought of one who meant very
much to this community and congregation, and to the Presbyterian
Church of New South Wales. Of him 1 would now lovingly speak.
William Ross and 1 came into the world within seven days of each
other, though he was born in Australia, and 1 across the seas. 1 have
known him for 42 years, and the longer I have known him the more
1 have esteemed him. It was in 1881 that 1 went from college to
Germanton (now Holbrook), which had been receiving Presbyterian
services from Albury, once a month, for I I years. The McLaurins,
Balfours and Rosses were my leading and my generous supporters in
founding the new parish, and my very loyal and kind friends.
Mr. William Ross, came of good and honourable stock—Scottish
and Christian! His father and mother were of staunch Presbyterian
ancestry, and were worthy of the race from which they sprang. They
had neither lands nor wealth, but they wrought honestly for what they
had, greatly valuing the glorious privilege of being independent. They
trained their children to be honest, industrious, self-respecting and God-
fearing. No man or woman should be ashamed, but proud, of honest
toil! As Burns has sung:—
“For a* that, and a* that
Our toils obscure and a’ that:
The rank is but the guinea stamp;
The man’s the gowd for a* that.”
Alexander Ross—Wm. Ross’s father—was a gentle, pious, kindly,
generous, lovable soul. He was for many years an honourable elder of the
kirk, and was held in regard by all who knew him. When his work was
done it was my sad privilege to lay his tired body to rest in God’s Acre
near Germanton, in the presence of a great concourse.


His wife was a notable representative of a strong race, and a fit
mother of strong sons and daughters. She was God-fearing,
and God-honouring, self-denying, capable, hard-working, worthily-ambi-
tious—such a woman and mother as a great young country like Aus-
tralia needs! Her maiden name was Forrest, and she was distantly kin
to the Australian explorer, Sir John Forrest. She was a woman of iron
will and most tender heart. Difficulties, with her, were not things to
talk about or “greet” over, but to deal with and overcome! She
instinctively realized the vast possibilities in a great new land such as
this, waiting for honest industry, thrift, courage, and character. Then
she and her husband always put First Things first! Reverence for God
and the Sabbath, gratitude for the Gospel and great love for the Church
of their fathers and for the Ministers of the Church, coloured and
ennobled the lives and outlook of husband and wife. They were both
devoted friends and helpers of mine during the years of my ministry
among them, as were the members of their family, who were all gifted
in various ways. All of the sons have earned for themselves and their
families much deserved success, as well as honour and high regard.
Alexander died some years ago, John, James, and Robert are still, with
us.
William Ross—whose passing we all to-day mourn—had a great
affection for his parents, and an enthusiastic admiration and veneration
for his mother. Often has he said to me, with tears in his eyes (for
he was a most tender-hearted man). “Mr. Walker, you know what a
mother 1 had, and how much we all owe to her.” This affection—as
you ail know—expressed itself in a very noble, practical, and religious
way, when, in 1916, this beautiful church was erected and presented,
fully furnished, by Mir. and Mrs. Wm. Ross, in reverend and beloved
memory of the dearly-beloved parents of both of them, and to the glory
of Almighty God. As we think of this splendid act of filial love we are
impressed with the spiritual, moral and material value of the gift. It
is a notable addition to the public buildings of Harden and Murrum-
burrah, and has greatly added to the importance and dignity of this
town. Then it is a constant testimony to all who look upon it, of faith
in God, and belief in the great spiritual facts—which are so apt to be
forgotten in the rush of business and pleasure, which is characteristic
of the times in which we live. But this sacred building has a still more
intensely practical value. Within these walls men and women of ail
classes—rich and poor, young and old, meet to worship God, and to
come into living touch with the Eternal! Many will assemble here from
week to week, to gain strength to fight the good fight of faith, to get
Divine strength to resist evil and to do good! Within these walls, the
Psalms and Hymns of Zion are sung and will be sung, to abide in the
hearts and minds of young and old, as a sacred possession to the end of
life. Here, trained teachers and preachers of the Church of God will
expound the Holy Scriptures, and will make Gospel appeals, the results
of which will be found in changed and ennobled lives. It would be
impossible to exaggerate the spiritual and moral value of a church
building such as this, dedicated to the worship of Almighty God, and
used for the spiritual and moral uplift of the young, middle-aged and
aged. And this value stretches on through decades of years. But
Harden is not the only place where, in the providing of churches, Mr.
and Mrs. William Ross have taken an active part. When Messrs. Ross
Bros, purchased a property at Argoon in the Jerilderie district, Messrs.
William and Robert Ross and Thomas Beveridge (father of Mrs. W. Ross),
worked heartily together, and very soon (in 1883) got a neat little
church erected there. And when they went to live at Uri Park, Mr. and
Mrs. W. Ross were the main workers and givers in getting a church
built at Darlington Point. For years also, an assistant minister was pro-
vided for Narrandera, to give special attention to the Darlington Point
district, his salary being mainly provided by the same generous givers.
About the year 1900, Mr. W. Ross joined his brothers in giving
£2OOO towards the great Centenary Thanksgiving Fund of the Presby-
terian Church of New South Wales, four-fifths of which went towards
erecting a very handsome brick church in Holbrook—“Kinross” (the
home of the Ross family for many years, and now the property of
Mr. John Ross and his family), being five miles away.


Mr. William Rods wad ordained an elder of the church about 30 years
ago, at Darlington Point, and in that honourable and responsible office
he has rendered valuable service to the Church of his fathers. He was
well-known and highly esteemed in Presbytery and General Assembly.
This esteem was manifested when the news of the death of Mr. Ross was
announced during the recent sittings of the General Assembly of Aus-
tralia and Tasmania—of which he was to have been a member—when
eloquent and touching testimony was borne to his life and work, and a
resolution of sorrow and respect, and of deep sympathy with his wife
and family was carried, the whole Assembly standing in silence.
Another department of the Church’s work in which Mr. and Mrs.
W. Ross have shown great and practical interest, was that of education.
He was a member of the Council of Scot’s College, Bellevue Hill,
Sydney, one of the great Public Schools of New South Wales. He was
also one of the founders of Goulburn Presbyterian Ladies* College, and
an active member of the Council, giving a contribution of £230, and
lending £5OO. His eldest surviving son has recently taken his father’s
place on the Council.
The eldest son of Mr. and Mrs. William Ross was a fine young man,
and was studying with a view to the ministry of the Presbyterian Church,
with his parents’ cordial approval. 111-health, however, came upon him
and took him away in his 18th year. It was a great sorrow to his
parents; and they did a very fine thing: they handed over £lOOO to
St. Andrew’s College, Sydney University, to found a scholarship for
students for the Ministry of the Presbyterian Church, which bears his
name, as the Alexander Gordon Ross Scholarship. There have been so
far eleven students who have held this scholarship, some for two and
three years; and several of these have done excellent work as ministers
of the Church in New South Wales, and two of them in the Australian
Inland Mission—one in the Northern Territory and the other at Port
Hedland.
The important funds of the General Assembly have been generously
supported by Mr. and Mrs. W. Ross, as were the various War Funds,
and public movements of many kinds. The Boy Scouts received tokens
of his goodwill, and many individuals in many places will sadly miss a
generous and kindly friend.
In all Mr. Ross’s religious, philanthropic and other work, he has
had the wise, hearty .and loving encouragement of his devoted wife.
Their’s has been a most happy Christian home. They have been blessed
with a family of sons and daughters, who have been a joy and comfort
to their parents, and very happily suited among themselves. Mr. Ross
was a loving and most kind father. The sons and daughters are all
following the example of their parents, and I have no doubt, will con-
tinue to do so. My warm sympathy—as that of hosts of friends and
the general community—deeply and lovingly sympathise with Mrs. Ross
and her family; Mr. Ross’s brothers and other relatives, and with this
congregation and parish, in the very great loss which has befallen them.
The call to-day comes to us all—“Be ye also ready, for in such an
hour as ye think not, the Son of Man cometh I”
Memorial Service at Darlington Point
Sunday, the 28th September, 1924, a special service was held
t\\ J in the Presbyterian Church, at Darlington Point, with which
Mr. Ross and his family were connected for many years while
residing at Uri Park. There was a large and representative attendance
from all the surrounding stations and farms, and among those present
were two nephews, Messrs. Donald and Alister Ross.
The preacher was the Rev. G. R. S. Reid, M.A., Presbyterian Min-
ister at Roseville, formerly of Narrandera and Darlington Point parish
before it was divided into separate Charges. After referring to the pro


gress and prosperity of the district, and what it owed to progressive
pioneers and capable, public-spirited men who gave a lead in all that
was for the good of the community, Mr. Reid referred to the wide-
spread regret at the loss of such a valued and staunch friend as
Mr. Ross, and expressed deep sympathy with his widow and family.
Mr. Ross was esteemed and loved by all classes, rich and poor.
He was a loyal Churchman and noble benefactor, who had given a
splendid example in using his wealth not for selfish ends or self-indul-
gence, but for the public good. He will be remembered by a thousand
unrecorded acts of kindness and love, helping many a struggling settler,
and encouraging others in time of distress. There was nothing hard or
proud, or selfish or cynical in his nature. He was a man of remark-
able personality and force of character, with a strong sense of justice,
outspoken, fearless, open-hearted, open-handed, absolutely free from all
pretence, full of kindness, hospitality and goodwill. Such great
Christians and spiritual men were a gift from God, and a remarkable
proof of the power of His grace in Jesus Christ.
Mr. Ross came of true blue Scottish Presbyterian stock, and often
spoke of what he owed to his nationality and Church, and particularly
to his mother, who instilled into her sons principles of industry, inde-
pendence, domestic thrift, good management, reverence for religion,
and loyalty to the faith of their fathers. Like all early settlers these
brothers had a struggle at first; but by dint of sheer hard work and
pluck and perseverance they reached a high position in the pastoral
world. Our Church owes much to the influence of Mr. and Mrs.
William Ross both at Darlington Point and Harden and elsewhere.
They were foremost in every good work, and their religion lay at the
back of all their influence and service.
A leading Elder for 40 years, Mr. Ross was a familiar figure at the
General Assembly. He did not appear as a speaker on the platform,
but he, along with his brother John Ross, took an intense interest in all
that concerned the advancement and welfare of our Church. On one
occasion after 1 had spoken advocating the claims of our Sunday
Schools Mr. William Ross came and thanked me, and said: “You were
right in all you said; take care of the children. It doesn’t matter so
much about us older folk. We are fixed. Look after the young—the
coming generation,” When I saw him about a fortnight before he
passed away to the better Home, Mr. Ross spoke very kindly and feel-
ingly of his connection with the district of Darlington Point and his old
friends in this neighbourhood. This locality was very dear to his heart,
and in the little cemetery across the road there lies all that is mortal
of the son whom he had dedicated to the ministry, and who ever
remained a cherished memory.
During that last visit Mr. Ross spoke of God’s goodness to him
through his long life, and of the reason for thankfulness he had that
all his sons and daughters were doing well, and many of his children’s
children growing up among them. He knew his life’s work was done,
and we must not grudge him his release from weakness and suffering.
We believe it is well with him as it is well with all who die with faith
and hope in Christ, who can look back on a useful and well-spent life,
and who receive at last that gracious welcome—‘‘Well done, good and
faithful servant, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.”
‘‘Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my end be like
His.”
‘‘Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord, and their works do
follow them.”
‘‘The children of Thy servants shall continue, and their seed shall
be established before Thee.”


Mr. W. E. ROSS
A Noteworthy Tribute.
HS a foreword to his address on Sunday, 1 Oth August, the
Rev N. S. Millar gave expression to the following appreciation
of Mr. W. E. Ross, of “Garangula.” In the course of the
reverend speaker’s remarks, he said that he wished to pay both a
personal and public tribute to one whose name was so intimately and
honourably identified with this church and congregation to which he
had been minister for nearly five years. During that period he had
made no public reference to Mr. Ross’ life and work, and he felt at the
conclusion of his ministry it was fitting that he should do so.
“I doubt,” said Mr. Millar, ‘‘whether this town and this district
realise the spiritual and mental stature of the man who has been living
amongst them and making such notable contributions to the highest
and best interests of the community. As a personality it is my judgment
that he stands along with Dr. Andrew Harper, late distinguished Prin-
cipal of St. Andrew’s College, as one of the two most impressive and
arresting personalities that I have met with in Australia.
‘‘lt is easy, of course, to attribute success in life to sheer good
fortune, or good luck, as it is more frequently called.
‘‘But the subject of our remarks is a man of unique mental gifts,
and had he physical stature as he has intellectual, he would tower above
his fellows in almost any company.
‘‘As a philanthropist this community will never know the half of
what he has done and is still doing. He is large and generous-hearted,
to a degree, and were it not for his keen judgment of men, one
trembles to think how he might be imposed upon. In good works he is
successfully challenged by only one other, and that other is the lady
he made his wife.
“As a spiritually-minded Christian he is in touch with the deep
realities of the life that is lived in Christ. And that explains all else.
The Church belongs to him because he first belonged to the church.
He is living a life not planned by himself nor for himself, but a life
planned by God for the benefit of all.
‘‘After five years of most intimate association with him 1 feel that
I can do no other than pay this deserved tribute this evening to one
whom this town and district should ever delight to honour.”
A Tribute
HE visions of the past fade, the noon is short, the sun does not
fl! loiter, the past belongs to God, the present only is ours; and
w short as it is, there is more in it, and of it, than we can manage.
That man who can grapple it and measure it, and fill it with his pur-
pose, is doing a man’s work. None can do more. But there are
thousands who do less.
A biography touching upon the life of W. E. Ross would be
incomplete without taking into active consideration his earlier life at
Uri Park, Darlington Point. It was there his young and active manhood
found room for development, and as manager, found many avenues for
improvements, on the property and in improving the stock.


"GARANGULA" HARDEN, THE HOMESTEAD OF THE LATE MR. W. E. ROSS.


It was at Uri Park also, where the greater responsibilities of his
young manhood began, and where he spent the happiest years in his
eventful life.
It was there he brought his bride, Miss Beveridge, of a well-known
and respected family. It was there that his children were born, and it
was there that the first great grief assailed them, in the loss of their first-
born son, at the age of I 7 years. The shades of evening fell early for
him and cast a gloom over the erstwhile happy household. “The
visions of the past fade” and it is useless to repine. The serene and
amiable disposition of his wife kept in check a somewhat hasty and
restless disposition in himself, which found relief in plans of progress
for the district, and in the wellbeing of the family.
Mr. Ross took a leading part in the building of the first church
at Darlington Point—a small village nestling beside the Murrumbidgee
River. Seldom did the family miss a service; the distance to the church
was 10 miles from the homestead, with a rough bush track leading
to it.
There were no motor-cars in those days to lessen the toil of the
Outback. But the spirit of the pioneers was strong, and Mr. Ross
became associated with a body of men who had inherited that strong
spirit—self-reliant to a degree, honest in endeavour, be it in the sun-
shine or the shadow of many early difficulties.
Lifelong friendships were formed in those days. Many have gone
West, some few remain, who sincerely mourn the loss of a trusted
friend and early companion in many varied experiences of stress and joy.
A lovable character was formed, taking a wider outlook of his surround-
ings, tolerant of the opinions of those who differed from him and this
leading on to the greater achievements of later years.
When further favoured by fortune’s smiles, both materially and in
his happy family surroundings, with the assistance of a true and loving
wife, he was faithful to his Church, and a friend of its minister, who,
after travelling many weary miles, often found a welcome at Uri Park.
The nearest minister was stationed at Narrandera, 43 miles from Dar-
lington Point, and travelled by buggy. Later Mr. and Mrs. Ross subscribed
for the services of an assistant for the Church. He was always foremost
in church matters, but this did not deter him from joining in any pro-
position for the advancement of the district, and any rational sport
appealed to him, and had his ready assistance. He hated sham, and
was a determined opponent of aggressive unionism. In the course of
time the Ross family moved and took possession of their new home
“Garangula” near Harden. Their departure was a severe blow and loss
to the district in which they had played such an important part for a
number of years, and regret was mingled with the sincere good wishes
for the future in the new home by many friends. Harden gained by the
change, for the ever wakeful spirit of W. E. Ross drew him into active
work for the benefit of Harden and district, and into close co-operation
with church matters. In memory of his son, and parents, he had the
Ross Memorial Church built in Harden-Murrumburrah—a good work
which also will stand as a memorial to W. E. Ross, of Garangula.
He has gone all too soon,
The night has now come.
Hearts are knit together by sorrow,
As they had been by joy; a silver
Thread mingled with the gold.
Follow on to the land that is before us,
Which, when this is over, shall be ours also.
A tribute to a valued and sincere friend.
H.K.


SUCCESSFUL PIONEERS.
In confirmation of how the country south of Darlington Point, and north
of Fairley Grange, could appeal to the early selector, one has only to mention
the fact that it was here that the four sons of the pioneering Ross, of Mount
Crawford, South Australia —John, Robert, Alexander, and William—took up
four selections, and built up a home on the four corners, so that they could,
singly and collectively, carry out the conditions of personal residence. They
held this country until a few years ago, when they sold out to Mr. H. L, Austin,
who attached the four blocks, which bear the name of Coleambally, to his
Fairley Grange station. On these four selections the brothers Ross laid
the foundations of that extensive pastoral and financial success with which
they have been so widely accredited for many years past. The original home
of their father at Mount Crawford is to this day pointed out to strangers and
visitors as the prelude to a stirring tale of what pluck, thrift, and enterprise
can accomplish. Whether the father himself did, or did not, win the greatest
measure of success it is not for me to say. Certain it is that those four sons
who lived on the four corners of Coleambally are known far and wide throughout
New South Wales as well as other parts of Australia as most successful men.
Some members of the third generation are among the keenest and best polo
players in New South Wales. If ever a team goes over to Sydney from Adelaide
for the polo tournament there will be a meeting in friendly rivalry of the
grandsons of the original founder of the fortunes of the Ross family, and the
grandsons of John Murray, of Mount Crawford, the founder of the fortunes of
the Murray family, as well as of the Murray merino. That good fortune
attended the four Ross brothers during their early days at Coleambally in a
financial sense is too widely known to bear contradiction, but their good fortune
did not stop at this. When they decided to erect their house on the four
corners of the four selections, the central peg was so situated that they were
just (and only just) able to build clear of a box swamp and of the Coleambally
watercourse. A stranger visiting this spot cannot avoid thinking that there
must have been some anxious moments during wet seasons when the little
home was in danger of being flooded out, and yet apparently it never was.
However, there they built, and there their old home still stands. —“The Aus-
tralasian.” 1922


Memorial Tributes
R ROSS passed away during the sittings of the General Assembly
of Australia, and, on the motion of the Rev. R. G. Macintyre,
X ll*/ D.D., the Assembly recorded its profound regret, and expressed
its deep sympathy with his bereaved widow and family.
All members of the community showed their high appreciation of
Mr. Ross’s character and influence by their presence at the Memorial
Service, and many tributes to the value of his services were rendered
by the Press.
The following appeared in the “Harden Express”
of 25th September, 1924.
THE LATE W. E. ROSS.
ALDERMEN’S TRIBUTE.
Before commencing the ordinary business of the Council the Mayor
(Aid. Kelly), said he wished to refer to the death of the late
Mr. W. E. Ross, of “Garangula.” He could not express the regret he
felt at the passing away of such a great and noble character from our
district. He had had the honor of working with the late Mr. Ross on
behalf of many public movements —particularly for patriotic purposes
right through the war period and during the influenza epidemic. The
late gentleman was always in the foreground both with money and
sympathy in every patriotic movement during the war, and his
and influence had a very big effect on the successful appeals that were
made. During the influenza epidemic there was no one more ready to
assist in the trying work of that time than the late Mr. Ross. The Ross
Memorial Church, which was erected by him and his good wife, in
memory of the parents of Mr. and Mrs. Ross, is an everlasting tribute to
his noble character. In the matter of the proposed hospital he had come
forward with a large donation, and this with the influence of the Ross
family and large circle of friends had been the deciding factor in the
establishment of the proposed hospital. The late Mr. Ross had estab~
lished the whole of his sons on the land in this district, and such a fine
family would doubtless endeavour to emulate this noble father who
had done so much. The Mayor then moved that the Council place on
record its great appreciation of the many good deeds of the late Mr. Ross
and its great regret that he has passed away.
The motion was carried by the Aldermen standing in silence for
one minute.
Aid. Heggaton moved that the Town Clerk be instructed to convey
the deep sympathy of the Council to Mrs. W. E. Ross and family in their
sad bereavement caused by the death of the late husband and father.
Aid. Heggaton said that as a medical practitioner, he had on many
occasions called upon the late Mr. Ross for assistance for people in bad
health and sickness and he had always received the desired assistance.
He felt sure that the public did not really know the amount of good
work the late Mr. Ross had done. Much of his work had been done
unostentatiously and unknown to the public at all.
