

/ # M I I &
r 1 t
2 '|fn I t
■
METHODIST CHURCH OF
, AUSTRALASIA.
l r v ’
In fcflrtam
T
SOUVENIR
OF THE
OFFICIAL YEAR
of
Rev. JOSEPH BEALE,
PRESIDENT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
CONFERENCE, 1909-10.
WITH MEMORIAL SKETCH,
ADDRESSES, ETC.
•


l-lft r T3 y , vy v;v3—3 ’•'. - S ft_- ’•
' ft* ft ftr - --J~ ' ‘4 ~ ftft ft, ' _S*“ " - ' - ’'£&'* : ■■■ -■■ ■- 1
_ 3 >#- 7 / ' V ' - -> * _ '
3 I ? M — 77 jp7 2ft 7 7ft* Hli 1 MSz 81 ft i
¥ % 7 * x# - S1 > v tB W J& - At AT - H J
fenw * m m :&p- S ® ft - 77 - m r ■ S mAWmAi
- * .-; ~ ": ' , 7: -. -7* <- u* * . , _ >— v ~ . - * ~ ft- -,/■ 7
WS£Z- ~ ?& SSfefc A>-*¥W* >- £JsS . -7
**r h ' ''-'7 7 >-7 - *-■*£ ' 7 ■-■■ v — - ■-* . 7-' - - .7 : ’- 7 '-\ --7 '.?• •---. f *77r - .'.
_-- ■» > ' ft- ' -ftc-- ■%.■'♦— 3 -ft yA?A ft** 3 ft7 - ft-Tift -> ft —rftft ’ r' *" -" ** , • '* - "<
’ -- ft jlft bj || if •■■ -: -, S - W * * ft » _ ’"■
x nggs .* 5 j j,iv -. sc t
$# -V. ’ sf'wt ' jte * Ts'' -v _ f •■ j; ’
\.- . - ' - ■ :T ; ": ' - ' - ■•. *v - •. • ..-j( ":’■: ■ ■ • •-_;: ; ■ " - ' -•""-' ■ ' % iV . ..
,
;r- *' i {■•■;, dS ■-- *-.’’7 *5
~ " ~ 7 “%.- : -£-4 — I_ ■£■" , “
\ Si v < - .. . ifi * ■;.'- . -' - r- " ■ - ■ ■ -4
i:; ||0} lf§2 |- | | AA-AA-
. ' ’ ■-• •• - , ';' - ■ 7 M‘* 7 -
'■• : .■:• >- . § . - as s* 5 — g— . --- '-<_-4-‘ s=
itfsffif® jfes. :<£Sm^&S -/■a;f-;| "M 1 -?
1 t' -r-"; - ' ' > ' ’ ■'^- r ' " v »- >• C 1 V. ' >' >^*"
* - -A- ' ' —c*
- - li lM - £ - >; -> p ffli
-7 - 7 7- 75, : 77-7 ,“- 7* 77 7' _ k s
',*7 7- j. S'; — ® f>77r^-r-^7 ’’>>7'
■
37 7c w ' As AAA& T
-“ - - a - ' ~'A3%a j ~ sfi 'A* '' — A. ~3fx • • ..--"s **■ 7 <.7
7 7 7 7‘ 7 7' Jjgjf " ~Am :: ~ A : £ -%- I ' '7 S, T’^''' sK
? ft 3 '-' -, : -4V g - g ■ mi 1 R 3*
' * ftr t-> fg -..?- g > 3i 7 fti *7% -
- <g ~ "XL --- ’ %: ft:- I "7 *ft I&
Tift 3 : 1 g, ® «<» : - ft ISfe «3f - v 7“ I 7
vs*«, -TTr 7 A i ~tA V{£ AA- '7ft . 'ft 7— ' --- A AA&a 1
y -5 < A?Z 0u -T y - ' ’- - I>7 7 r,y * jft
', - ft 7ft % -Cr . > ft :7 , J? ft > jr 7 ft7 - '
. .- - ft f p ft 7 3 '
■- ftftftft 7ft =. . ripHP ft- v - ,w
■
3 - fe® '7, : - ft 7* X - $$ m , Vft- -
• ~~‘ 3 ■ “ >> 1 ft- ft ■ ; , ’ft — ..- ' ft ftft


METHODIST CHURCH OF
AUSTRALASIA.
SOUVENIR
OF THE
OFFICIAL YEAR
Rev. JOSEPH BEALE,
PRESIDENT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
CONFERENCE, 1909-10.
WITH MEMORIAL SKETCH,
ADDRESSES, ETC.
*sgfmey;
Epworth Printing and Publishing House,
218 Castleseagh Street.
19 11.




OUffirial A6i»msH.
On Retiring from the Chair. Delivered at the Opening
of the Conference, February 22nd, 1910.
Fathers and Brethren op the Conference, —
In retiring from the office to which last year yon elected
me, permit me to say the few words which custom sanctions
on such occasions. I very gladly see here to-night two
honoured leaders, who for a few years have been absent
from us —Dr. Brown and Dr. Sellers. I announce with
regret the prolonged absence, owing to illness, of Rev. M.
S. Fletcher. Then I think of those who during the year
have passed through death into life. Their names are in
our thoughts—Frank Firth, Joseph Spence, and James
Egan Moulton —all of them known, loved, and honoured
amongst us; and the last of them, in my opinion and af-
fection, a man by himself. Other workers, too', have passed
out during the year, men and women who, perhaps less
publicly, but not less devotedly, wrought for man’s good
in God’s Kingdom. Our hearts are busy with these —in
some cases with very special reason —and it is fitting that
these solemnities should meet us on the threshold of our
Assembly, and remind us to do well and swiftly, and with
our strength, what yet remains for us to do. It is for
this that we remain a little longer, and the quality and
wisdom of our work in this Conference may have much to
do in shaping the policy and determining the lines of de-
velopment in time to come. The programme now in your
hands is hint and outline of some of the things, in some of
their aspects, with which you will be asked to deal. So
large an assembly is not the most effective instrument for
dissecting and analysing the details of even great ques-
tions ; and it is never well employed in the minute examina-
tion of those petty, obscure, and often purely local issues,
which so often waste the time and try the temper of the
members of this Assembly. The fitness of the Conference,
as a popular representative assembly, to express the mind
of the Church upon broad principles, of general interest
and application, seems to me to unfit it for that other and
parochial work. Larger power in the lower courts would


be good for the people and the Conference. To fix the
interest of this church parliament upon the great issues of
the time, and give its members a definite sense of that great-
ness, will improve the statesmanship and add vision and
dignity to the deliberations and decisions of the Conference.
We shall never get the right proportion of the large things
while our eyes are full of the small and trivial; and we
shall not give our best to the important while our strength
is frittered upon the local and unimportant. And there
are big things for us in this Conference—there never were
any bigger—for this is no age of mere mediocrities, though
we often speak as if all the great men were dead and all the
Important principles settled. That is a degrading fault,
and tends only to the realisation of the ills it deprecates.
Despondency, loss of heart, discouragement, are bad for
the body’s health; they are disastrous in such work as ours.
We must believe in our work, have the vision which sees
the future, and that large sense of responsibility, the
pressure of which appeals to the best that is in all of us and
brings out the latent capacities for thought and action. To
depreciate our own age, capacities and responsibilities is a
step on the way to mediocrities, and to failure and con-
tempt—sure fulfilment of its own prophecy. We are not
simply playing on a great stage, but engaged in a great
work, teaching the truths and directing the influences from
which the character, the liberty, and the blessedness of the
people are to grow.
The direct personal spiritual work of the churches is
to-day rendered more complex and difficult by the social
and industrial ferment of the time, and of that ferment I
think Christianity is the germ cell. Some will think
otherwise. But surely it points upward, and is a struggle
(often mistaken, sometimes brutal) for righteousness and
liberty and happier conditions of life. Can Christian
people and churches sit back in silence, with very definite
views upon drink, gaming, harlotry, but dumb on the
things which are at their root. That silence implies the
relative insignificance of a number of the great questions
of our time. We must not speak until we know; my plea
is for honest study and honest and wise treatment. The
problems of Poverty and of Wealth, the conditions of
Labour, and the moral aspects of its organisations, mono-
polies of natural resources, chronic idleness, children and
home, the growing militarism—these things wait for honest,
open treatment, in the light of common justice and of the
teachings of Christ. I think we must see in them matters
of utmost moment, in the settlement of which Christian
6
In Memoriam.


sentiment and principle are destined to play large part.
To affirm and re-affirm the ancient dogmas as to the rights
of property, only makes the law an active agent in, or a
passive spectator of the exploitation and impoverishment
of the many by the fortunate or unscrupulous few, to whom
has come the accident of special opportunity or of brains,
or of both. The needs, the sorrows, the rights of human-
ity are more than the rights of property. Many ancient
creeds of Church and State are in the melting-pot to-day.
If society is to continue Christian in any worthy sense, it
cannot silently endure these things. In God’s providence
we are face to face with them, and surely it is that we may
rightly deal with them. Ido not ask your assent to a par-
ticular mode of treating these problems; but that you will
recognise them as such, and for your treatment, and also
the spirit and temper in which they are to be handled; with
open minds, frankly, prepared to hear truth, and to speak
it with good temper, and to admit that from whatever
causes arising, Christianity owes it to itself and to Human-
ity to unceasingly seek a cure for these evils. We must
know and understand the facts. We cannot escape re-
sponsibility by laying it off on the leading people or the
Government. Who made them leading people, and who
makes Governments? The people are responsible for the
laws and the social conditions, and we are the Christian
people and leaders to whom they have some right to look
for example and advice. Wealth and rank and privilege
will not take up the cause of liberty and justice for all.
Indeed we have to guard against some dangers, arising from
great wealth in society, in politics, and in the Church.
Money is a good servant, but a bad master. But it always
wants to be master. I shall not be charged with bias
when I say that the charge is made by some rich men against
themselves. The evils of mere wealth have probably never
been so serious; and vulgar greed, with its attendant mono-
poly and power, spoils many fine things. Social reforms
are not wrought by the gifts of rich men’s millions, but by
the united efforts of the people. Slums and sweating,
pauperism and vice go hand in hand with love of gold and
greed of power, and Christian work is hindered by hostili-
ties of class and mass, antagonisms of employer and em-
ployed. In this, as in all war, the Christian code is sus-
pended, and the inhuman rule of the Union, or the heart-
less law of property and power, of legal right or of num-
bers, becomes the sole guide:—“The good old rule, the
simple plan, that he shall get who has the power, that he
shall keep who can.” Recent events suggest how little in-
7
Official Address.


fluence conventional Christianity has with either party
when passions and interests are affected; how little the body
of the people care till their comforts are touched, and how
helpless those are who do care, to act upon a great evil.
Knowledge, and the sympathy growing from intimate
knowledge of conditions, would greatly help Christian peo-
ple to deal with such cases. Is it not part of our duty to
know how people live, and under what disabilities they
work? If we are to help we must not live upon other
people’s sufferings. King Leopold was, no doubt, an
amiable person, and died in the odour of sanctity, but don’t
ask the Congo natives for a certificate of character. 1 say
this to you, not because we are worse than others, but be-
cause these are needs and evils of our time, and because
many who are drifting from Church and worship, and hold
religion lightly, are looking and listening for that which
we can never give until we study and know and feel. They
do not respect our ignorance, nor do they honour our
silence in the presence of these evils. The ruling idea of
some people is safety, with a capital “S” and underscored.
There is no more false cry than that, for the way of duty is
often with risks and dangers, as every advance of human-
ity shows. A waggon, a prison van, a hearse, are safe
vehicles to ride in. If you want safety, take a trip in a
hearse; nothing will jar you there; but the lines of pro-
gress are train, motor car, aeroplane. Rich and poor ex-
pect Christian leaders and people to say and live the things
they hold true, and when that is done with honest kindness,
sympathy, and good temper, few will complain. These
are called cranks and fads, but it has been by the quiet trick-
ling in of these streams of fad, crank, and craze, that the
tides of religious, political, and social reform have gathered
bulk and power. No doubt reformers have always been,
and are still, aggravating and irritating people. They will
not keep quiet and let evils go on. They vex and annoy
the authorities, the leading people, the respectable classes,
and are generally as exasperating as a Sydney telephone.
They say unpleasant things to both rich and poor, and are
disliked by both. It is wonderful how calm and unmoved
we are. If drink, gambling, lust, greed and monopoly
stirred us as the vices and ills of other times stirred other
men, something would move. Too many are as cold as the
editors of some big papers, and keep what they call their
convictions in the ice-chest, lest they should get warm and
go bad. The central missions, children’s homes, brother-
hoods, unions for social service, clubs, gymnasia, industrial
homes and farms partly express the relation of this Church
8
In Memoriam.


to these questions, and they are a comment upon that oft-
quoted text, “You have nothing to do but to save souls,”
which ought always to be read in view of Mr. Wesley’s deep
and wide interest in all that touched the welfare of the
people of his time. I find a deepening interest in these
things, I am glad to say; and by the quiet reading which is
going on, a body of men is being prepared, who, both by
sympathy and knowledge, will be able to understand and in-
terpret the difficulties, needs, and aspirations of the masses
of the people. The more the Methodist Church recognises
that its chief work is to interpret the Gospel and express
the Christian ideals of life to the heart and understanding,
the sympathy and imagination of the people, the common
people, the people as a whole, the better for all. Why do
I say that? Because I notice that money and social rank
seem to find it difficult to blend with other elements in
Church life and work. Are these not good people? Yes,
they are alright if they are not spoiled; but as our Lord
with infinite pity has said, ‘ ‘ How hardly shall they that
have riches enter into the Kingdom of Cod. It is easier
for a camel to go through a needle’s eye.” There was a
certain rich man who gave up the Fellowship meeting, which
his coachman also attended, because the latter foolishly
spoke of him sometimes in the meeting as “Dear Brother
X. ’ ’ The needle’s eye was too small. It is hard but not impos-
sible with Cod, who has led many a camel through smaller
eyes than that. Sometimes in country villages, where the
ladies draw the lines carefully, there are amusing little social
comedies; and it is quite a study in expression to note the
air of one of these society leaders as she refers to “those
people who are in business,” and she the daughter of a
butcher in a distant town. Why make foolish distinctions
in the Church, or care for the cultured or the rich except
as men and women, or for the service they render. Honour
to whom honour is due, according to service and oppor-
tunity for service; but never because he is rich, or clever, or
a gentleman, or ‘ ‘ one of our leading laymen, ’ ’ or a man or
woman who “moves in good society, you know.” That is
all very nice, for those w T ho like it, but it is no good to me.
Two men, manly, loyal, helpful, Christian men, one poor,
with few opportunities, does proportionately far the great-
er service. To the rich man respectful deference and
thanks; to the other —nothing. Neither of them had
thought of thanks; but the Devil laughed at the whole silly
business, and so did the Socialist in the street if he heard of
it. Money and rank may be blessings in society, politics,
and Church, but they have their own serious dangers. Much
Official Address.


depends on how Church leaders treat the rich, and how they
in turn treat the poor. I think we shall all agree that if
Christ thought of such things at all, if He thinks of them
now, He must have desired, and must still desire, to see
social and economic justice among men. And yet, do we
all agree that He thought of such things, or that He cares
for them? I hear His words: “The poor ye have always
with you,” spoken in such tone and accent as makes them
prophecy, and marks a wish for its fulfilment. And they
say: “Why be wroth with the dispensations of God?” It
is urged, too, that these are political matters, and are not
for Christian teachers. That’s right. Personally I touch
only religious questions, and if there is a social or political
problem which is not religious, I have no time for it, nor is
it worth while. These are quiet, plausible modes of treat-
ing great movements; but they delay and kill. They re-
mind me of that gentle lady who herself did always drown
the kittens born in her house, but kindly; for she always
had the water in the pail made warm, for fear of giving
the poor little things too severe a shock. If lam to have
my throat cut, lam not particular that the knife shall be of
gold; only let it be sharp. This Church stands for
Righteousness, the Kingdom of God. Surely there lay en-
germed in the teachings of Christ all that has yet been
achieved against drink, gambling, lust, war, tyranny, and
for the elevation of woman, the better rewards of toil,
education, equal laws, and sweeter homes. But that
Gospel has also in it all that is yet to be gained, and there
is much; that which it has done is but earnest of the things
which it shall do. Where monopolies grow and fatten the
few and starve the many; where land lies idle or half used,
while men stagnate in slums or poverty; where access to the
means of life for the many depends upon the favour of the
few; where fashion or vice or poverty defrauds the home of
children; where there is a different standard of virtue for
men and for women; where untrained, ill-clad children
crowd on the streets, furtive or unashamed women live amid
half-decencies, and disheartened or hopeless men toil or
loaf; where these things are, in a country like this, I feel
something is wrong. They hurt like grit in one’s eyes, and
their presence is an insistent, pathetic appeal for the hope-
ful sympathy and intelligent aid of Christians and the
Church. You reply that we have little of this, and that it
is their own fault. There is too much; and suppose it is
their own fault, what then ? If the ox or the ass fall into
the pit, what then ? Its own fault? Yes, but because it
is an ass, and not a man, you pull it out, and leave human-
10
In Memoriam.


ity to rot. We need conscience—public, municipal,
citizens’ conscience. Is it nothing or little to us how the
poor live, for what vile purposes houses are used, what the
causes of poverty and of that despondency which is a grave
peril to thousands; that there are hopeless, soured, and re-
volted men and women in this new country? The Chris-
tian people are responsible for the moral standards and the
public conscience. The African savage organises a band
of warriors for a cattle-lifting foray, or an Arab chief does
the like for a slave-catching trip, as the Barons harried the
English-Scotch border 500 years ago. But we have
changed all that, and in these days men form a little com-
pany of capitalists, and make a “corner” in wheat, or cot-
ton or copper. Here two millions in cotton, by four men;
there one million in wheat; there again some millions in
copper. Or it is coal, or iron, or oil, or land, and the peo-
ple pay all the time. If we owned the people we would
have to feed and clothe and nurse them. This is far bet-
ter, we scoop the pool but evade the responsibilities. But the
Christian conscience cannot, I think, tolerate these and their
results; it must change them, or be itself changed for the
worse, and already there is protest and restriction. Such
things die hard. But we go on, however slowly, to achieve
and experience all that is involved in that Gospel which
leads the race forward. The ocean may be calm, or fret-
ted with a thousand movements, or tossed in tumultuous
upheaval and uproar; yet through and under and with it
all the mighty tides and. currents move steadily on their
ways. God’s purpose holds; and the Divine order for
that Humanity which Christ shares, leads on to His ideals
for Man. The attitude of this Church is an element in
the whole accomplishment. Ido not suggest to you modes
and methods. We cannot always in life follow the best
mode. We travel to our end by the bye-ways as well as
by the highways. Puzzled by conflicting policies, each
containing some good, and hampered by opposing men and
parties, we do the best we can with the stuff we have. My
plea is for recognition of the conditions, study of the ques-
tions, and realisation of their value, and of your relation
to them. We may be hindered by a supposed higher
work, a selfish interest in things as they are, or by ig-
norance of the facts. I ask for interested, devout, sym-
pathetic study of social conditions as the duty of every
Christian citizen, to the extent of his opportunity.
In the field of Foreign Missions the lesson is plain
that if we are to preserve the people whom we have
evangelised, we must reckon with the changing sanitary
11
Official Address.


and industrial conditions with which they are faced. We
have undertaken the task of redeeming from savagery the
people of our mission fields, and perhaps we expected in
earlier stages of the work that it might become, in any
given field, an increasingly simple problem. But to-day
we are looking at it with other eyes, and find that there are
aspects of the work larger, more profound, and more dif-
ficult than our fathers, saw. The presence of numbers of
our own race, the commercial enterprises which exploit all
lands in their ministry to modern life, and the problems of
education, training, and industry, which grow out of these,
are bringing new, expensive, and difficult situations. We
are responsible for the guidance of these people as they
emerge, semi-civilised, to meet the vices, the competitions,
the intenser life of the white man, or, still worse, of the
Hindoo coolie. We have to supplement our methods. If
the dark people are to have a fair chance, we must watch
their interests and pilot their way, teach them suitable arts
and industries, and, by quiet increase of their responsi-
bilities, help to develop character which shall make them
fit to survive. The spread of civilisation, the demand for
sugar, oil, and rubber, will probably continue to thus affect
us; soap and emollients, the motor car and aeroplane re-
acting upon Christian missions. We shall be particularly
dull if they do not eventually assist our extended enter-
prises. The world is open as never before to the Gospel,
and the mission field is wide beyond all present means of
occupation. On this field, as elsewhere, we must go for-
ward, and do more and do better; and for that end there
must be among the people an appreciation of the needs, and
an increasing and continuous generosity to new situations
and methods. The time is not only rich with widening
opportunity, but perplexing with swift change. (Many
things are quickly outgrown and obsolete. This city is
showing an amazing growth of stately beauty in its splen-
did buildings. Who wants to go back to its primitive or
middle age—the tank stream its water supply, and Pinch-
gut its defence ? In the Church we need this spirit of wise
adaptation and insight, which knows when “to take oc-
casion by the hand,” and in Home and Foreign field alike
moves resolutely to its end, prepared, like the merchants of
the city, to put our best into that which we build.
During the year we have received reminder and sug-
gestion from the great mission conducted by Dr. Chapman;
reminder of the effectiveness of evangelistic appeal, and
suggestion of the need for its more systematic and ex-
tensive employment. That mission was, further, an oh-
12
In Memoriam.


ject lesson of an admirable combination of personalities and
capacities, and a triumph of organising skill. There was
distinct genius in the art with which the various parts of
the services were combined and adjusted to the great end
of influencing the hearers. The addresses were models of
plain, concise, and powerful speech expressed with all the
effectiveness of a singularly interesting and attractive per-
sonality. All these things are worth noting if such work
is to be continued by some enterprises which the Conference
will be asked to consider and decide. If anyone thinks of
a calm philosophical Methodism, unmoved by revival in-
tensities and fervours, he must wait; the time is not yet.
It would mean no Methodism. We were born in these
heats—they belong to our life, and, however expressed,
must be retained. And if anyone thinks of a toney, se-
lect, society Methodism, he is in for a bad time. It ill
squares with the evangelistic temper and methods. Then
each year in February you will have to meet Wayback—
Brother Wayback, from Sunset —at the Conference, and
at the harbour excursion and garden party, and he will be
an irritating reminder to you of your origins. He brings
to the Conference an odour of pine trees and gums, wood-
smoke and ploughed soil, and his loose gait and homely
garb tell us that we do not stand for fashions and conven-
tions. If he and his kind dropped out there would be
little real Methodism, a poor, flavourless, unseasoned resi-
due. I hope to die before he passes.
If Methodists are fervent, evangelistic, and generally
of simple life, may I not add that we stand for Peace and
against War, and all that leads to war. Militarism in the
Old World has made and kept the European peasant poor,
diverted the skill and energy of thousands to unproductive
and hurtful channels, and sinned against the moral sense
of the world. We now seem likely to have laid upon us a
system which in the very nature of things must result in a
large and steady growth of that evil in this land. Most of
us will be in hearty accord with proposals for the physical
training of children; but personally I very heartily detest
the military spirit and temper and system, as hostile to
the best things in life, and opposed to the ideals of the New
Testament. Though defence be a necessity of our case,
it by no means follows, and I venture to think that
neither experience nor reason requires, that young boys
should be handed over to a military caste, to be taught the
false ideas of patriotism which seem ever associated there-
with. If the recommendations be carried out, it is pretty
certain that in a few years most of the officers of the Aus-
13
Official Address.


tralian army will be the sons of rich and well-off people.
Another privileged profession for the leading people, and
this in spite of the statement that pure merit is to win;
that would be a novelty, indeed. Some later day some
strong, wise nation will illustrate its peace principles by
leading a policy of reduced armaments, and there may
stand in other places statues of the Christ, as Prince of
Peace, like that which on the Andean peak, commemorates
the decision of Chile and Argentina to settle their disputes
by arbitration.
Probably this year Good Citizenship will do even bet-
ter than at the last poll on the licensed Liquor Trade. But
an early and active interest by all its friends will be wise
in this great reform. The evil is rich and strong, and en-
trenched in the habits of the people, in brewery companies,
in Tied Houses (from the House of Lords to the bush pub.),,
and in the virtues of many of its supporters. Rents from
evil houses, profits from others’ shameful habits, are hard
to square with some positions, professions, and virtues.
Our work as citizens, indirect and secondary as it may be
held by some, is many-sided and important, but, direct and
indirect, have the same end of achieving in and for men
Christ’s great purposes and ideals. Along that line surely
lie the same moral code for men as for women, for rich as
for poor, and equal access to the means of life for all.
That drink, gambling, prostitution shall have no license
and no quarter. That war and all that feeds its flame
shall die. That home shall be fenced about and kept sacred,
and that the physical and moral interests of children shall
be thought of, and eared for, in the life, education, and
avocations of women. There is a special sense in which
Home and Woman are linked together. It can never be
utterly degraded if she is true to it; it must always be a
poor thing if she fails it To women, the Christian wives,
mothers and daughters, we look to keep sacred this holy
place of our social system. Christ has made Home what
it is to us, and it is to Christian, not pagan ideals, that
we look. Here is woman’s chief work, her throne, and
from this she touches every point of the circle. But our
social vices re-act and make the work difficult. Inefficient,
poorly-paid workmen, narrow, jerry-built, landlord-cursed
hovel, from which mother and daughters alike go forth to
toil, and to return tired in body and temper; slatternly
housekeeping, ill-cooked food, bad air, foul surroundings!
That is not Home, nor is it any wonder that the pictures of
comfort, decency, food, lodging in the Socialist Paradise,
attract and charm those who have so keen a need, and to*
14
In Mcmoriarn


whom the end is so much and the mode so little. The
home must be kept right, and to that end Woman’s in-
fluence and character are essential. We are citizens of a
great Empire, and inherit an inspiring history and tra-
ditions, including the finest conceptions of citizenship. We
live in a great country, wherein the bounds of freedom have
been widely set, and the foundations of liberal institutions
happily and peacefully laid. A land of liberty, stored
with riches and girdled by the sea; of variable climes, but
all habitable, and of unlimited scope of production, and
held by the children of the foremost people on earth. This
land and this people are ours. It has beauty, splendour,
sublimity; treasures of the deep, the mine, the field, the
flock; and as its best wealth it has a capable, versatile, re-
sourceful, courageous people. In many things we possess
a heritage probably unequalled by that of any other people
at a similar stage of national life. There slowly emerges
from the chaos of our public life some instinct of nationhood
—a sense of responsibility, capacity, and strength. We
need stable government, for which and other good we must
look to the quality of our citizenship. And toward this the
Christian institutions can contribute largely. For citizen-
ship is based on character, which grows from moral quali-
ties. All the way the race has come, its powers expressed
or latent—all are subtilly linked to, bound up with, that
mysterious world of thought, spirit, imagination, intellect
(in humanity) to which religion makes its appeal, and in
the cleansing, steadying, and ennobling of which Christian-
ity has done its conspicuous work. I have no vision as to
the future, but I hear a present, pressing, insistent call to
us so to present Christ and the Gospel in city and country
as to create new ideals of citizenship, of home, of business,
of social relations, pleasure, wealth and war, and to do it
with those things in view. Saving souls is all right, but
in the best sense it is complex, not simple; and we are best
saving the soul which we put in the way of work, health,
and responsibility, as well as of religion.
Important as is the work of this Church in the great
cities, and difficult, unspeakably difficult, as are the pro-
blems of religion therein, I do not regard even that as the
most important work of the present time. In view of the
growth of settlement, I ask your attention to the rural dis-
tricts of this State. This city is not, in this connection,
the strategic point of New South Wales. It is not self-
contained ; the strong life of the country has to flow into it
as certainly as do wheat and milk and mutton. The
Church which holds the country need not fear that it will
15
Official Address.


fail in the city. I venture to voice a plea for the scattered
people of the rural lands (while not forgetting the city and
suburbs), that now and onward, sharing with them in their
early hardships and poverty, we may do our part to ef-
fectively influence and mould these simple, loyal, and per-
sistent people, from whom shall flow in the stream which
shall keep fresh the currents of human life in this city. I
am an Australian, born in this State. Here I have lived
and worked through the years in the country and with the
people that I love. Every honourable motive appeals to
me to be and do and say the best that is possible for this
land and its people; and where I have failed through the
year, and to-night, it has not been for lack of motive or in-
tention. From my heart I thank you, Fathers and
Brethren, for your love and trust in the high office from
which I retire.
16
In Memonam .


(Eljanj?.*
Delivered to the newly-ordained Ministers, in the
Bourke-street Church, March Bth, 1910.
My Dear Brethren, —
My office calls me to speak to yon at a time which
is especially important to you. Many things in your
converge to this point, and come to focus in a light and
heat of unusual intensity and interest; and from this point
your future will grow out in new conditions of responsi-
bility and influence. You, lam sure, will hear as never
before. May Ibe enabled to say what will match your
interest and meet your need. I can speak only of the
things which grow out of my own thinking and observa-
tion, and I shall prefer not to seem to make any prophet or
apostle responsible for them. The things of which I shall
speak may seem to be not of the highest importance. They
will concern, chiefly, the human side of your life and min-
istry ; in my opinion of utmost moment, and the foundation
on which to build the higher things. But however homely
or commonplace, they will at least have that value which at-
taches to all that has passed molten through the fires of one’s
own heart’s experiences. lam not to-night concerned
with the controversies or heresies of the time. The Virgin
Birth, the New Theology, Jesus or Christ need not, just
now, disturb us. We shall read and think and wait and
form our opinions, slowly, as crystals grow, till in some
great pressure, or fierce heat, the thoughts and convictions
will take form, and express themselves in a sufficient
symbol. It has been suggested that the Bible relies less
upon miracles than upon the fact that it grew out of a view
of things, a condition of thought, strange and unprecedent-
ed. The mystery and majesty of that vision of things is
still present to those who steadily work their way into its
*Delivered on the occasion of the Ordination of Rev. S. W. Bonner,
J. J. Boyd, J. W. Dains, R. O. Finigan, F. H. McGowan, L. H. Peacock and
W. M. Robson.


inner heart; but there is so much familiarity with the
terms and forms and symbols that the wonder seems less
than of old.
‘ ‘ Shall eagles not be eagles, wrens be wrens ?
If all the world were falcons, what of that?
The wonder of the eagle were the less,
But he not less the eagle.”
The great Message and the great Messenger still remain,
and surely it does not detract from it or Him that men are
still guessing their way into the inner shrine of the mys-
teries of His teaching and nature.
Nor need we linger upon the objections sometimes ex-
pressed as to the position of Methodism as a branch of the
Christian Church in the absence of Episcopal Govern-
ment, or as to our obedience to Christ in the absence of
Immersion. I think we seek no controversy with other
Christian Churches and people on these topics, but we often
meet with offensive reminder that that is not always ap-
preciated or reciprocated. It is really of no consequence,
to those who have got past the bondage of form and ritual,
w r hat is thought of them by those to whom such things count
for more than life and love and courtesy. Think of that
little girl, who had been taught bv her father to blow out
first a match and then a candle, and who made her next
attempt upon the sun, one foggy day when she could look
straight at it. The dear child tried it again and again;
and the sun still shines.
You have here, to-night, brethren, been formally set
apart to the service of Christ, to bear His message, in the
organisation and ministry of Methodism. To me it seems
of the utmost importance that you should be men. Of
your faith and doctrine we have been assured, and of your
purpose and worth, and your attachment to this Church;
but we do need, as a primary essential element in a success-
ful ministry, the highest quality of manhood. You may
remember how Charles Kingsley in “Westward Ho!” puts
it to “Jack Brimblecombe.” A priest is a man and some-
thing more, viz., his priesthood, and if he show himself no
man he can be no priest. That is even more emphatically
true of this ministry. You must win the respect and
esteem of people by your real worth. The commandment
which says “Honour father and mother,” says silently but
mightily, by implication, to parents “be honourable.” And
this Church, as it sends you forth credentialled to its peo-
ple and officers, and asks from them for you, in spite of
your youth and inexperience, that they will give you
honour, accept your leadership—really says to you, “be
18
In Memoriam.


men.” It is all the more imperative and impressive to
the thoughtful because it is not expressed, but implied,
taken for granted in the very nature of the case, not de-
manded. You are supposed to be “men.” That in you
will meet in symmetrical balance and proportion something
more than the average of the ideals of Christian manhood.
Those who expect to be followed and honoured, because they
are ministers, apart from worth and character, deserve the
contempt to which they are usually consigned. The peo-
ple who are frequently voluble upon the “ Dignity of the
Ministerial Office ’’ remind me of the captain of militia who,
at Church parade, walked so upright that he fell over back-
wards. Silly assumptions of authority and affectations of
dignity are no good. Be men whom other men can respect
and love, and you will very seldom have to claim any rights.
They will be accorded you by willing consent. Besides,
apart from your manhood and character, you have no title
to respect and honour, for you are lacking in the implied
and supposed primary essentials of your work and office,
and of all beings who lack these, you are least worthy of
that which you demand. For you are in the highest moral
office, handling the supreme themes, standing for that which
is the soul of Truth; and yet you are false to your standards
and ideals, lacking that upon which the others are built.
The chief thing is not accurate knowledge, correct reason-
ing, profound ability, desirable as these may be (and they
are very important), but a quality and amplitude of man-
hood (of humanity) of which all shall feel the presence and
power. That is where we meet all other human beings, and
it is the sense of that true and complete humanness in
Christ which links us on to Him and has turned all eyes to
Him through the ages. The lack of this in you will not,
perhaps, be intelligible to your people, and no one may sug-
gest it to you. All they will do will be to feel that some-
how you do not “catch on.” They will not detect the
cause, but will feel the result. It is you who have to guard
these points and be careful of your equipment, not only of
knowledge and conduct, but of that which no one but your-
selves can cultivate and use. This perfect manhood, and
the understanding of, and sympathy with, us which flow
from it, link Christ on to the heart of man; and as we re-
member and culture and perfect this bond, we too shall
get close to the men and women of our time, and better
understand them and those of old.
What makes the minister? —Examinations, sermons,
Ordination? These and more. A Christian manhood in
full sympathy with humanity and all its needs. You may
19
Ordination Charge.


know Theology, Homiletics, Science, Mrt: but if yon do not
know human nature you are quite on fill: to teach and preach.
These are but the tools with which jyou work, the instru-
ments you use; man is the organism mpon which you work.
The skilled surgeon knows all aboutt his saws, lancets,
probes, knives; but he knows also anaatomy, physiology, the
blood currents, and the paths of thee nerves, and, withal,
walks carefully, allowing something ffor what he may not
know. You hear it said of some mten that they have no
tact in dealing with men. Sometimes it is far worse than
that—they have no knowledge of mem; have not taken the
pains to observe and learn. Tact isi the art of using the
knowledge you have in relation to mem, but you must know
human nature. You have to study men from no low or
common motive. It is in order to u]plift them. Not the
morbid analysis which chiefly deals with disease, but first
and most to find the Divine in man amd to appeal to that,
and so restore to health. Knowledge of disease? Yes,
surely; but supremely knowledge of Healer and Healing.
The cure of souls.
This humanity of yours must be as far as is possible
like His —open on all sides, receiving and giving by a thou-
sand channels, not only of mind but of feeling and sym-
pathy. We sometimes meet a man who seems to be built in
water-tight compartments, mentally, so that his shares and
interest in say a hotel or a brewery, do not affect his
opinions or his vote on the No-License question. That may
do for ships and for some people, but not for you, brethren.
You must breathe the open air—microbes and all—and the
mighty tides and currents must flow and move through you.
You must be discriminating, honest judges of the current
opinion and sentiment, and to that end must know and
feel. Your own spiritual good health and vigour must be
your guard against infection, and at the same time an aid
to assimilate all that is good and true. Beecher says,
“He who does not know how wisely to meddle with public
sins does not know how to preach the Gospel.” “Is the
Gospel a sing-song lullaby to put people to sleep in carnal
indulgences, to give peace to men in their sins?” The sins
of fashion, of public life, of rich or poor are condemned by
the Gospel you preach and the Christ you serve. The just
thing is the strong thing, and, however misunderstood, it is
the safe thing in the end. Remember Gordon’s epitaph in
St. Paul’s —“Major-General Charles George Gordon, C. 8.,
who at all times and everywhere gave his strength to the
weak, his substance to the poor, his sympathy to the suf-
fering, his heart to God.”
20
In Memoriam.


Upon such manhood God stamps character. It is not
self-created. It is a spiritual creation. To condense into
a word what might fill a volume I may express it all in
“truth.” To be, to speak, to live truth in word, deed,
thought, feeling, sentiment, affection —that is Christian
character. And Christian character is the stamp of Christ
upon pardoned loving humanity. Back of it lie our creeds
and beliefs —what we think of God and Christ.
Now with this manhood and Christly character you
are to be preachers, the prophets of God. For the great
of the prophet was not the foretelling of a few future
events, but delivering God’s message of life and death. He
had the vision of the relation of obedience to life and
blessing, and of sin to pain and death. Not priests but
prophets. No sacerdotal caste touching altar and sacrifice,
but men, heralds, taking God’s message to the ears of the
people. Preaching is not firing rockets, which spend them-
selves in the air, and make a had smell. The desire to he
popular or brilliant preachers is frequently the minister’s
weakness. There is preaching which makes men comfort-
able, even happy, but does not improve them. That’s no
good. It is better that you should be full of trouble for
the conditions and needs of your people, than that they
should be troubled with problems for which they get no re-
lief from you. They are silent and burdened with puzzles
which are in the air. The thing eats into them, lowering
spiritual tone and dimming vision, and you, full of your
ambitions, give no light. There should be in you that fine
quality, subtler than common sympathy, an insight born
of sympathy—a wireless telegraphy—a spiritual
faculty which catches the pain-signals of a soul
in trouble from afar as it were—an alertness of
spirit which anticipates the needs of others. It is said of
Sir James Simpson that his presence in the sick-room was
half the cure, and that his sympathy with pain was the
secret of his discovery of chloroform. Such a faculty in
you will be the secret of your power to soothe and help
sorrowing hearts, both as preacher and pastor. It will cost
you something. Christ’s cures took virtue out of Him,
Himself took our infirmities and bare our diseases. In the
tones of Jeremiah and Ezekiel you catch the thrill and vi-
bration of personal suffering as they see and feel the evil of
their people —true patriots! “Oh that my head were waters
and mine eyes a fountain of tears that I might weep day
and night for the slain of the daughter of my people. ’ ’ So
Paul could wish himself accursed for Israel’s sake. You
must pay the price if you wmuld have the true preacher’s
21
Ordination Charge.


influence, and without it you are nothing. In these things
there is a note of passion, and it reminds me that intensity
is essential to success in this calling. I distinguish “in-
tensity” from displays of “emotion.” I have heard of a
speaker who called for more ‘ ‘ emotion ’ ’ and demanded that
people should “sob”; he was leading the way to hysteria.
But a clear vision of man’s need and God ’g love may fairly
stir emotion deeply, and interest and effort should always
be intense. The heavenly kingdom still suffers violence,
and the intensity which dares, risks, hazards all things,
counts not life dear, but joyfully counts all
as dross, wins the big rewards. Not education,
eloquence, ability (valuable as they are) ; but deep, earnest,
spiritual intensity. This makes those effective, and gives
the whole personality an impact and force of influence
charming and victorious. We may still preach Theology
and, with our hearers, be better for it, if we flash through
and through it the electric spark of vivid, fervent, intense
personal acceptance and experience of the doctrine we
preach. A cold doctrine makes cold, heartless life. A
formal Gospel will help no one, and will re-act on you in a
moral dyspepsia and depression, till all that is best in you
dies of inanition. There must be depth of life and growth
in order to great and lasting fruitfulness. Out of depths
of character and experience grow the best things in us.
Depths of mystery, too, in your religion and beliefs, seem
also needful. There is no life rich in mellowed fruit which
has not touched profound mysteries—often of sorrow. A
religion without mystery—for which some ask—would be a
religion which could have no real appeal to human nature.
A God whom I could understand through and through,
would be less to me than one chopped from a stump, for in
the fibre of the wood are mysteries inscrutable. There are
mysteries in us, and a sense and capacity for the in-
scrutable which demands that element in our religion.
That is spoken of by our Lord as, at any rate, a not un-
worthy motive for following Him. You are to preach a
Gospel of love, joy, peace, faith, hope, patience, courage,
fortitude—elements which blend by the law of their own
affinities to form perfect human character and beautiful
life. To preach them is itself an inspiration and elevation,
and tends to their growth in the preacher. To live them,
to find your intellect and heart, your mind and affection
charmed, ablaze, aglow with approval, conviction, love of
these, till the whole undivided personality is caught up into
the great enterprise of Gospel ministry—that, I think, will
spell success. Let no ambition lure you from that. It
22
In Memoriam.


may be that some distant planet in your sky will touch you
with its influence and pull your course into an unusual but
neither erratic nor disastrous curve. But remember, we
are told that the pull of one or two far distant planets upon
the earth produces the chill which we call an ice age. An
ambition which so changes your orbit as to lower your solar
heat is a disaster. No matter how magnificent the curve,
nor how immense and splendid the sweep of that eclipse, the
swing which removes you from the source of heat and light
is full of danger and loss. Be content. It is something
to have had your dream though it never be realised. So
ail great and good souls have lived, never quite reaching
what they dreamed, but never quite unhappy. What is a
successful ministry? What is good preaching? What is
good farming? What is good fishing? Who is the suc-
cessful lawyer? “By their fruits ye shall know them.”
Books are written about farming full of theories as to soil
and seed, stock and grain. That is alright. But good
farming is 40 or 50 bushels of wheat, and 80 or 100 of
maize per acre; 90 to 100 per cent, of lambs; stock healthy
and in good condition; the top price for wool; and pastures
and soil in good heart for the coming season. That’s good
farming every time. Good fishing is not your rod or lines
or baskets or hooks; but the largest catch, the best fish.
The successful lawyer is not merely the man who has well-
appointed rooms and whose library has Addison on Con-
tracts, Pollock on Torts, Blackstone’s Commentaries,
Brougham’s Legal Maxims, Stephen’s Criminal Law, and
other juicy food for the legal mind. No! It is the man
who has won the trust of his clients, and to whom they come
with their family and business difficulties, and to whom both
father and sons look up as guide and friend; who betrays no
interest, and neglects no trust. He may or may not be
rich, but the man who fulfils the finest ideals of his calling
is entitled to be called successful. Good preaching is that
which makes men sit up and think, and face about and
follow Christ. The successful ministry will lift you and
your hearers out of your lower selves and cause to grow in
you and in them the finer, higher things, for lack of which
men go hungry and ill-content. It will help you to help
others if they know that you are to be trusted, that even
your wife does not share some of the things confided to you,
and that your perplexities and difficulties with men are
known only to yourself. That will help her and them and
you.
You have to minister to the sick and dying and to the
bereaved. When men’s hearts are failing them for fear,
23
Ordination Charge.


and all that looked so solid is shaken into ruin—that’s
where you come in, sometimes only after the doctor has said
there is no hope. You, strong in hope and faith, have to
comfort these afflicted and encourage these dying. Opinions
differ, and possibly practice too. My habit has been to
go at any hour, to any case, whatever the disease might be,
and I have never been a copper the worse. That is what
I would encourage you to do. We never come so near to
men as in their sorrows. The doors of life seem wide open
then to every kindly soul, and links are forged which never
break. But it must be no cold, formal ministry which you
offer to these broken souls. That would be shameful.
You are to deal with children, too, the boys and girls who
may seem sometimes not worth while. Pray, do not think that,
brethren. There is no part of your ministry better worth
while. Get to know them. You were children once. It’s not
so long ago, you know; you cannot have quite forgotten.
They are so approachable, so responsive, so keen; they will
know you long before you know them. And if you slight
them they will despise you. I have always taken it as a great
compliment when horses, dogs, poor folk and little children
have taken kindly to me. They know. And when you feed
the sheep, do put some fodder within reach of the lambs.
Then there are the awkward, spiney, sharp-tongued
people: God’s queer children. Of some you will wonder
if they are of the family at all, they are so unlike. And
then there will be some deed or word that will shame you,
and like a flash of resemblance tell you that these, so crook-
ed and broken, share the family blood and life and are God’s
children, too. It is pitiful in homes, sometimes, to see the
crippled, deformed, weakly children, born so, or hurt in
youth; but beautiful to note how all combine to make them
forget their loss in ministries of love. I knew a woman
who for twenty years nursed her child, an infant in all but
age. A sad, pathetic sight, but graced by exceeding
tenderness. Surely God’s dwarfed and crooked children
may be treated as our less fortunate children are, and not
told too often, or too bitterly, that this inherited kink or
twist, or that warp of early training, has made them utterly
repulsive. Be kind to them brethren. God only knows
their loss and hardship.
Duty, as a motive for work, is, I think, apt to fashion
a colder and harder life than some other motives. It has
not counted much in my own life scheme. I have loved
my work and have done it very gladly, or at any rate very
willingly. You will find that the unpleasant things will
catch some grace and charm from the love which you have
24
In Memoriam ,


for the whole work. If the beauty of it attracts you, the
bitter will be taken as a matter of course. There are
beautiful women who love and marry ugly men, and pre-
sently think them handsome, or don’t think at all—they
love. Love your work; put your best, your all, into it,
with an intensity and passion which cannot find expression
save in a life’s service—or else swop it off, for God’s sake,,
and get out of it and into something that can stir your
frozen hearts. This is not a trade, nor a profession to
which a man who has lost touch with its sublime motives
and aims may cling for the sake of a “ piece of bread. ’ ’
May I warn you against mere professionalism. May
God save you from being merely parsons, members of a
caste, ruled by its instincts and the sentiment and custom
of a “ set. ” It is bad in any calling; worse than bad in a
minister of Christ. And of all its sick and evil forms the
most disgusting is the professional evangelist, whose dis-
tinctive marks are cant phrases and an ordered smile. Be
men ! Be human! Keep your religion humane! Live
with your fellow men! Belong to them! My friends tell
me that I have too much the point of view of the layman.
Perhaps so. My tastes go that way. But it has its
value.
You must have elevation, for you must have outlook.
The landscape seen from the top of a tub in your back
yard will not help you much. At sea or on land at great
distances the high peaks first appear—a point, a gleam,
very faintly seen in the glass, and very elusive. Why do
we not see the rich slopes and valleys, the cattle, the tillage
and the homes of men? The curve of the earth lies be-
tween. So in spiritual vision, a glimpse, a peak, a hope.
Why no more? Earth curves up between. You
must rise higher, come nearer, live higher. Eleva-
tion of life must be permanent if the outlook is to
be constant. Low views become restrictive. They say
a pig cannot see the stars. His eyes are fixed to watch his
nose grubbing in the earth.
You are preachers, and that will have its own rewards
and disappointments. Some things can only come to you
with time —and sorrow. Only that last can teach us some
lessons. When they come you will understand. You will
wonder that people were helped by sermons in which you
had a bad time. When Christian people tell me the good
they have got out of my dry stuff, I suspect that the age of
miracles has not passed, and I am sure that compared with
them, it is silly to mention the modern processes for ex-
tracting gold from refractory ores. What you think your
25
Ordination Charge.


best will often be passed in silence. I cannot explain it.
The man counts, I think. Men are sometimes much better
than their sermons, and sometimes very much worse, re-
garding the sermon as a work of art. There is no subject
upon which you can speak so confidently as that about
which you know least, and with that you will be apt to be
well satisfied. You must teach in due proportion to fit-
ness and capacity. “Said to them of Old Time; but I
say unto you,” shows how Christ advanced beyond other
teachers. So we must consider whether milk or meat be
the right food. Touch life on many sides. Read and
think and know what is possible of its conditions and needs.
Know all sorts of people. This Gospel is for all. Christ
would not feed Himself by miracle. Pie would not even
for food part Himself from us. Beware lest office, learn-
ing, money, prejudice sunder you from humanity. Touch
with light, kind hands those who fail. In other years I
knew those who failed sadly in office and character. As
the years have passed I have had ever kindlier thoughts of
them, learning better to sympathise with the human frailty
which makes failure so easy to all of us. To have been
kind in sentiment and judgment to such, will be a happy
memory in your later years. Controversies may come your
way. If you start out to prove things you must get there.
One night at the quay, as the boat was leaving the pontoon,
a man rushed down and jumped. He made a fine leap,
and got quite 9-10ths of the way across. After he had
hung for a time embracing a worm-eaten, weedy pile, they
gathered him up, looking very sick and limp. That hap-
pens sometimes in controversy. But I wmuld not check
heroism unduly. It may be duty and privilege to attempt,
honestly, what is beyond our powers. I have known a
brave boy take a bad licking in trying to defend the
weak; and a brave girl was drowned a few days ago at-
tempting to save her friend. Such are not really failures.
But the rule is “Get there.”
Have a hobby, something which may feed life and
health and enrich mind and heart, while taking you out of
common ruts. Some study of nature, excursions in the
pleasant ways of science, manual skill, telescope, microscope,
lathe, bench and garden—a help to you while strong, a re-
fuge from vexations. When circuit stewards are awk-
ward, you will find bugs and beetles and cabbages good
company, and very comforting. They will not “answer
back” as even wives sometimes do. And in those other
days of supernumeraryship' they may assist to save you
from self-absorption and loneliness.
26
In Memoriam.


The occasion which sets you apart from other interests
is not to sunder your interest from those of others. This,
your supreme work and interest, is to include an interest in
and knowledge of all other men and work. That is for
your sake and for the sake of your work. Some general
knowledge of men’s habits and occupations lets in light
upon character and opinions. The only occupations of
which some ministers know anything, seem to be those of
parson and publican. Nor is this to sunder you from other
Churches. Understand them, get their view-point, and see
the good that is in them. Have no bigotries. Love your
own Church; but it is not perfect, any more than your
wife or—her husband. Sometimes the minister of the
other Church is misunderstood, as you may be. You hear
such diverse tales about him that it is hard to tell if he is
Simon Legree or the Good Samaritan. Have nothing to
do with any such stories. Live in communion with God
and realise His companionship, in spite of the unbeliefs of
the time. Men believe that the pull of the moon, a dead
and distant world, spills the tides about on earth; but they
think it not credible that God the Omnipotent should touch
men’s hearts or Nature’s forces. The atmosphere of doubt
will affect you unconsciously, subconsciously. Live above
the malaria. Your life and character may have no one
great element in them. So of your work; and yet there
may be such an equipoise and balance of parts, such blend-
ing and combination, such proportion and ordering of
elements as will make not only greatness of life and
character and work, but real beauty over and above all—
God working in you bringing all the tree to bud, the bud
to blossom, the blossom to fruit, and every fruit to ripened
beauty and sweetness —food for the soul of man to the glory
of God. “The hope of God’s people is for a new world;
but the heart of the new world is new men and women,”
and for that you are called to live and work. Are these
all? Oh, no! They are a few of the many things which
could be named did time permit. Think of these.
Do you know Hawthorne’s romance “The Scarlet
Letter”—the awful record of an unfaithful minister—the
scaffold scene in the chapter last but one, a climax of pain
and tragedy, not quite untouched by hope? Such things
are true. You, if you fail, cannot be quite as other men.
Your office, your vision, your work and experiences, this
setting apart to-night—all are sadly and bitterly for ill if
you fail. Such an illustration, even from fiction, em-
phasises my plea to you. Be true! Be true! Be true!
“Now the God of peace that brought again from the
27
Ordination Charge.


dead our Lord Jesus, that Great Shepherd of the sheep,
through the blood of the everlasting Covenant, make you
perfect in every good work to do His will, working in you
that which is well pleasing in His sight, through Jesus
Christ; to whom be glory for ever md ever. Amen.”
28
In Memoriam.


CHRISTIAN ENDEAVOUR AND THE CHURCH.
Abbreaa
Delivered at the Methodist Endeavour Council,
April 29th, 1910.
Christian Endeavour and the Church, meaning not
simply Christian effort and work, but an organisation called
Christian Endeavour. Meaning also the Methodist Church,
for lam not, just now, concerned with any other. First
the Church, in order of time, in order of importance, in
order of thought; the other within the Church. The
Christian Church, a vast human organisation,—in its en-
tirety the most important and the greatest of all such, and
even in this section, worthy of respect and honour for its
work, its ideals, its spirit. Within this Church (itself but
part of a vaster whole) there are a number of more or less
perfectly combined and equipped associations, which to-
gether make up in large part the working machinery of the
Circuit System of Methodism. Sunday Schools, Fellow-
ship Associations, Class Meetings, Christian Endeavour
Societies, Bible Classes, Church Members’ Meetings, not to
mention public worship and the various Church Courts, —
all these take their places in the organisation of what is
called the Methodist Church, which includes them all. Not
one of them exists for itself, each is a means to an end, and
that end is the realisation of the ideals of the Church to
which they belong. In particular is that true of the
Christian Endeavour Society, which is definitely pledged to
attend and support its Church. There is a difference be-
tween the Christian Endeavour Society in the Church and
Christian Endeavourism. To that lower stage there is al-
ways tendency. We are apt to live for the smaller ideals
rather than the larger, to take the narrow vision rather than
the wider. The Army disparages the Navy,
the Navy scorns the Army, and in paltry contentions, per-
sonal and sectional ambitions, the needs and ideals of the
wider Statecraft, and the Regal authority and prerogative
are forgotten.


It is said that in the Ist edition of Edward YI. Prayer
Book there was a petition “Lord grant to me to tell my
neighbours their faults without dissimulation.” It has
been left out of later editions, but it is not a bad prayer,
though it is a risky practice, and one adventures it with full
sense of its dangers, and praying for happy escape. Please
to remember that lam not here as a hostile critic. The
Christian Endeavour Society came into the Methodist
Church, and continues in it, for the purpose not of forming
another society or meeting, but to promote Christian Fel-
lowship and Prayerfulness of the Methodist type among the
Methodist people, and in particular among its younger
people. Am I right there? I direct your attention
again to that statement, for it is important. There is a
Methodist type of fellowship and devotion. It is said
that there is a Methodist “face.” I think those who know
agree that we have our own type of fellowship and prayer.
It does not lend itself to exact definitions, for it has its
own wide varieties. It expresses itself in tone and accent,
in phrase and mode; but chiefly in fervour and intensity;
and in homely Christian love for each other, and in frank
companionableness, arising out of common beliefs and in-
terests. But it is not possible to define spiritual ideals
which are never fully realised in any one life, and the
shades and tones of which will always vary infinitely in a
healthy, living Christian organisation. It is only in dead
things that you find the machine-made article, which is
just like some other. Where life builds the organism there
is variety. So our types have their varieties; but also
central identities; —fervour, love for each other, assurance
of pardon, prayerfulness, and testimony of these and other
things. We have always stood for these in our own way,
and the Christian Endeavour with us is one of the means to
assist in attaining and realising them. These ancient
things, of proved value, are worth conserving, even in face
of the craze for novelties, Even motor-ear and aeroplane
must not displace the good old-fashioned exercise of walk-
ing. Where life is there will be things old and new. To
change the form of the ancient good matters little if we
retain its essence, and find its virility and grace flowing in-
to and shaping and colouring the new forms. But to mis-
take mechanics for life is of all stupidities the most stupid;
and to lay a fresh line of brand-new pipes to supply the
town with water, when the real trouble is that the connec-
tion with the reservoir is broken, is a folly not to be ex-
pressed by words known to me. Our organisations should
be the outcome of life, its exuberant overflow, a sign of its
30
In Memoriam


healthy vigour. They should add to life, but always ex-
press in every branch, and leaf, and flower the type and
characteristics of that of which they are the multiplica-
tions : a sort of swarming of the old hives, fruit of abound-
ing vitality, and means of spreading it and increasing it,
and of accomplishing the primal ideals of the Church. If
they are not that, they kill and die, as overgrowths some-
times exhaust a feeble life and perish. We do not exist
to found a new order, another society, to become merely
parasitic, diverting the life of the greater organism into
another form, but adding nothing to it or to its efficiency.
If this be so, may we not ask how we are achieving the
ends for which we exist. Prayer was once a common
grace and accomplishment in the religious life of Me-
thodism. Not among the educated and more intelligent
people only, but even more conspicuously among those
whom you would call illiterate, both men and women.
My memory supplies many instances. lam an optimist,
but I view with grave concern the passing away of an ac-
complishment and grace of the religious life which nothing
else can replace. Ido not blame Christian Endeavour for all
of this, but what are we doing to acquire and cultivate that
grace and habit of public prayer and to arrest the decay of
that virtue? I say nothing as to private prayer except
this, that I suspect the failure in one respect has its roots
in a fault in the other, —a fault not peculiar to Christian
Endeavour, but to correct which we exist. What is the
reason of this failure? Frankly it puzzles me, and Ido
not trace it to any single or simple cause. A chief
element in the complex reason I think is an enfeebled sense
of sin, and of our need of Divine help. If sin meant to
us what it meant to our fathers, we too would seek the only
possible aid from that point of view. We form guilds and
circles for prayer, but building a machine and calling it
prayer or sunshine or any other pious name, does not bring
to human souls the craving for God and comfort, for light
and peace, which is and expresses the heart of all prayer.
Indeed, I think the machine-made, factory-built article is
hurtful to true prayerfulness.
Then, how does fellowship prosper among us. Com-
munion of the Saints is part of the creed we all believe,
rarely rehearse, and may I add seldom practise as we
ought. I think fellowship should not be held immutable in
its forms. We must have it, a real thing, but it must be
fluid, adaptable, fitting the varied conditions of life, ad-
justable to all states and circumstances of humanity. It
is the intercourse of Christian souls upon the supreme
31
Christian Endeavour and the Church.


topics, and upon all the experiences of the Christian life.
It is more than social intercourse. They may touch and
overlap, but are separable. Ido not forget that it is not
quite with us as it was with our fathers, for whom, often,
the chief humanly-derived inspirations and helps in Chris-
tian life came from prayer and fellowship meetings. For
we live in an age of books and schools, and from that side
we receive stimulus from other men’s minds, denied to those
who were not readers, and to a period when good hooks were
scarce. lam not forgetting that, but Ido not believe that
you are using it as you ought, and in any case it can never
till the place of the face to face, heart to heart communion
with those who walk life’s common ways with you, and to
whom you should be linked by this tie. And however
valuable the practice of reading or reciting hymn or Scrip-
ture as a response occasionally for variety, or as a crutch
for beginners, it is a poor substitute for frank personal tes-
timony, and like crutches, if persisted in, is, at once, sign
and occasion of weakness. Your own may seem to be worse
in form, and yet be better in fact, because it is yours. A
young convert’s first testimony often moves old saints to
tears, it is so manifestly his own—broken, spontaneous,
thrilling, natural. First prayers in public often have the
same effect, and for similar reasons. Art is all right in
our religion, but it must be true to nature, of which, real
and ideal, it is, at its best, the representation, through the
imagination and hand of man. If you do yourself an
injustice by excess of feeling using your own words, you
may do much greater by the absence of it with words not
your own: and I need not say which is the greater loss.
You are robbing and being robbed.
Much of our Bible reading is of this cold kind. Did
you ever hear of the man who, being hungry, very hungry,
and foodless, found some comfort in sitting down and read-
ing recipes from a cookery book. Much depends upon
what of yourself you put into these things—what of in-
terest, sacrifice, passion, intensity you are willing to spend.
Let your nature be aroused, your whole being stirred, by
the greatness of the times and the vastness of the issues
amidst which we live. Is there not among us too much
disposition to think that the battle is all in the future, and
that we are only getting ready ? I hear many prayers and
speeches which suggest that our chief work is to keep our
armour bright. Rubbish —this is the day of battle, and
this the centre of the fight. Get the blood and dust of the
hard-fought field upon you. Scars and wounds are fruits
■of conflict and signs of valour. Soldiers who work only
32
In Memoriam.


in pipeclay and polish win no battles. The uniform of
active service is khaki, and he who goes to the front is to be
concerned for efficiency, not show. Let that soak into yon
—efficiency, not show. Not that the latter is worthless ;
but it is of lesser rank—extrinsic, incidental, accidental,
non-essential. Eiding to the Convention with the engine
dressed in wreaths, and the passengers singing the “ Glory
Song,” may have its place as whipped cream is all right for
dessert-dressing; but do not make a meal of it, and certainly
not a constant staple of diet. We create our own times,
and we carry our own atmosphere with us, as does the earth.
A love of mere prettiness and of religious pleasures and en-
joyments, a light-hearted, pious gaiety, which shuns, or
fails to seek, the sad and serious things which are breaking
human hearts and ruining the lives around us, is so com-
mon, so easy, so natural that we fail to see its seriousness.
We bear our influence, our odour with us too. We dislike
that of the black man, but he says that ours is strong and
unpleasant to him, though unknown to us. Let us remem-
ber that. We are tempted to over-refinements and to for-
get the practical things—concerning ourselves with such
questions as “What would Jesus do?” instead of “What
ought I do?” The opinion and sentiment of the best
people of to-day, the call of the Church and its leaders, the
providences which shine in opportunity and circumstance
and silently plead for your service, may be God’s revela-
tion to you and the measure of your responsibility, clearer
and simpler than any casuistry and refinements as to what
might be done by Jesus. He has stated the great guiding
principles of conduct in no obscure terms, and he that doeth
His will shall know, and shall have the Spirit’s guidance.
Moses was to make the lower things, the furniture of the
Tabernacle, after the pattern he had seen in the Mount.
The vision caught in prayer will shape and colour daily life
and its work and workmanship. But without elevation,
without the Mount of Prayer, how can there be Vision.
Jesus came down from the Mount with some of its trans-
figuring glory still in His face, and coming down He
changed the epileptic. It is so still—and with us. Inter-
course with God and men means spirituality, and that we
must have if we are to do our best, and if God is to do His
best through us. It is more than merely an interest in
unseen and Divine things. It is an enlargement of senses,
a widening of capacities, a new world—call it a new di-
mension of space, if you like. A ray of sunlight pours
through some narrow opening. Pass it through a prism,
and as it emerges catch that now broken up ray and you
33
Christian Endeavour and the Church.


have a glory of colours. A man colour-blind would see the
white ray, but not the glory of the colours, and would not
know his blindness: and he would be less likely to believe
you if you told him, because not in all respects blind. So
with some good people, whose very excellencies make it hard
for them to believe that they lack a higher good.
Part of spirituality is to see the tints, to possess the
vision which catches the colours of which the Light of God’s
Truth is built. Spiritual sight sees the glory of colours
as well as the white ray. Spirituality is a grace which fits
for leadership, and we need that everywhere. Men feel
and know, but lack insight and farsight. We need states-
manship—that farsighted, wide-sweeping vision, taking in
man and his needs, the world and its possible adaptations
and ameliorations, and the method of connecting and blend-
ing these. We need these things in Christian Endeavour
—leadership is a great lack, here as elsewhere. The old
law forbade yoking ox and ass together; but I fear we do
it sometimes. If at all, do it wisely. I once saw horse
and ox harnessed together, the ox in front. It was odd,
but safe for both. But the pace of the team is the pace f
the slowest member, and alas, if that be he the leader. What
we read, and our habits generally, will affect character and
efficiency. What share have mere amusements, pleasure,
love of sensation, pious gossip, and other forms of harm-
less, aimless dissipation in our time and interest? My
dear friends, value life, time, youth, strength, love, hope,
and joy in all things visible and invisible, as God pours
them into your nature. But value them aright, and put
them to high uses, for “these sands are all of gold.” It
was said of one that he was ‘‘ a worker in precious stones, to
whom no stones were precious,” and of another “he has
cultivated his ignorance, but it was a natural gift to begin
with. ” It is sadly easy to be religious and to miss the real
values of the things we handle, and to be content with that
which is our blemish, but is so much part of us, and is so
pleasing to amiable self-esteem that we do not suspect its
real character. You remember the phrase “a reason
which I can conscientiously give to my Saviour. ’ ’ If that
seriously means anything at all, then some shocking things
are happening. People give Him any excuse as reason, if
they think of it at all, such as no common human intelli-
gence can receive or respect: reasons which no decent dog
would offer for similar failures in vow and duty. He
would be penitent, they are chirpy and assured. This is not
peculiar to Christian Endeavour, though the pledge phrase
is, but it is our duty to alter it there. Conscience needs
34
In Memoriam.


education, and it will not then dare to do some things it
does to-day. I find some people regarding what they call
their “conscience” as an infallible guide, however morally
ignorant and uninstructed they may be.
In “Marmion” Scott tells of how they walled up, built
in, the renegade nun, alive, in her awful tomb, row
by row, brick by brick, from feet to head, from floor to roof,
and left her there to die in horror unspeakable. It is still
so: and men build themselves up in a tomb, and the bricks
may be the gold or pleasure they love over-much, or the
dead religious forms and habits (for these things are in the
Church as well as out of it) from which spirituality, prayer-
fulness, fellowship have passed. This Church and its types
of religious life and character were fashioned in stressful
and strenuous times. I believe in their past, present and
future value to the world, and wish to see them handed on
to later generations. But that cannot be done by other
than the life that built them. The higher types are not
fixed beyond danger of degeneracy here. Reversion to
lower states is possible, and there must be constant effort
for preservation and improvement. This being so, and be-
cause Christian Endeavour is so widely influencing the
younger life of Methodism, I say these things to you, to
secure your aid in impressing our ancient ideals and types
in prayer, fellowship, simplicity of life and character upon
the Christian Endeavour Societies. For similar reasons,
while I wish you well, and hope that all your ships may
have right weather and get safely to port, I do not hope
that it may be a stormless voyage; for struggle and diffi-
culty were the tools with which Cod fashioned this Church,
and with which He still does His greatest and enduring
work. When needs are great and greatly felt, prayer and
human sympathy will stand for more; and in devotion and
fellowship we shall he more closely united to Cod and man,
and therefore more effective for work.
35
Christian Endeavour and the Church.




ODbituartj #krtdi
Prepared at the request of the Chairman of the District
for the Sydney District Synod, 1910.
By Joseph Woodhouse.
Joseph Beale was born at Jamberoo June 15, 1854.
The gracious atmosphere of a Christian home, the training
and example of consecrated parents, and the marked in-
fluence of the Kiama Sunday School, with which from an
early age he was connected, all tended to give tone and
character to his future life.
He was converted and brought into membership with
the Church during the ministry of the late Rev. William
Hill in the Kiama Circuit, and soon after, under the super-
intendency of the late Rev. J. Walkden Brown, became a
Local Preacher.
He entered the ministry in 1878, and for thirty-three
years exercised an ever-expanding influence as a chaste,
original, and powerful preacher, a faithful pastor, and a
wise administrator. From the beginning it was manifest
that he was endowed with exceptional gifts. These he
sedulously cultivated by constant study and discriminating
observation, giving all he possessed with lavish freedom to
the service of his Church and country.
Though he served with conspicuous success in two or
three Metropolitan Circuits, yet, for health reasons, his
ministry was spent chiefly in country districts. He loved
“the man on the land,” and more perhaps than any of his
brethren, understood and entered into the life of country
folk. He spent himself without stint in their service, win-
ning, like the ancient tribe of Joseph, “the good will of
him that dwelt in the hush.” His watchful oversight of,
and tender sympathy with, those under his Chairmanship
in “Wayback” stations gave him unique grip upon their
affections. Frank, winsome, and with crisp and kindly
humour, he won his way to the hearts of all with whom he
came into contact. Especially were the humblest and
roughest surprised to find in him a friend and brother.
He held very high place as a counsellor. With deep


respect for essential principles, and close acquaintance with
our laws, he was yet free from anything like bondage to
conventionality or tradition; he quickly detected, and with
skill and clearness exposed, any fallacy or baseless assump-
tion, Fearless and pointed in expression of his views, he
yet never wounded the susceptibilities of those from whom
he differed by words unkind or unfair.
His term as President of the Conference was signalised
by special ability in the Chair, inspiring utterances on
various public occasions, and by the memorable deliver-
ances with which his Presidential year closed, only a few
months before his death, and which attracted attention and
bore fruit far beyond Methodist circles.
Great however as was the record of his work, he was
greatest in his character. His finest qualities were known
only to those of his own home and of his intimate friend-
ships. Of frail physique, often having to fight against
acute pain and weakness, he bore himself with unfailing
cheerfulness and patience. His manliness, his loyalty to
conscience, to his friends, to his God; his unselfish devotion
to duty, his self-sacrificing and tender sympathy with the
needy and distressed; his chivalrous espousal of the cause
and claims of any suffering injustice; his scathing denunci-
ation of any public wrong; his hatred of shams; his calm
wide outlook on human life; his insight into social pro-
blems; his love for
“All things bright and beautiful,
All creatures great and small”;
in brief, the spirit of the Divine Master seen in him, made
him greatly beloved and pre-eminently useful.
His removal, at an age when the Church looked for yet
many years of advantage from his ripened wisdom and
sagacious leadership, is one of the greatest losses the Con-
nexion has sustained in this generation. Yet he lives.
Not only in “the perfect presence of God’s face,” but in
many characters he, through the grace given unto him, has
helped to mould and uplift. He was one who
“Never turned his back,
But marched breast forward;
Never doubted clouds would break.
Never feared though right were worsted
Wrong would triumph;
Held we fall to rise,
Are baffled to fight better,
Sleep to wake.”
He passed away on the 29th of August, 1910.
38
In Memoriam.


Aiii>r?oa
By the President of the Conference.
Delivered at the Funeral Service in the Willoughy Church,
Thursday, September Ist, 1910.
‘‘Within the circle of that brotherhood which unites
those who belong to the ministry of the Methodist Church,
there are closer ties binding one to another, just as within
the apostolic band there were closer relationships between
Simon and Andrew, James and John, Philip and Bar-
tholomew. These arise from a variety of causes—because
we have come from the same town, are related by marriage
or otherwise, have been taught in the same Sunday School,
or fitted for our work in the same Theological Institution.
It was not my privilege to be united by any of these to our
beloved brother; but there was one link between us on which
I look with peculiar tenderness. He was my predecessor
in office as President, and I want to bear testimony that
never has President had a kinder or more sympathetic help-
er at his right hand than I had throughout the last Con-
ference. If I had known nothing of our brother before,
the experience of those few weeks would have been enough
to enable me to form a tolerably correct view of what he
was. In a watchfulness that never slept, in a joyful
pleasure in the discharge of every little duty, in a sweet at-
tentiveness almost womanly in its touch, as well as in a
masterly grasp of all the details of busi-
ness, I saw the man. Kindliness, helpfulness, unselfishness,
were the qualities that stood out distinct and clear.
His kindliness of disposition was recognised on every
hand. Wherever he went, those associated with him bear
testimony to the kindly fascination by which he drew those
under his care to himself. His colleagues loved him; the
brethren in the districts over which he presided as Chair-
man were devoted to him. In his circuits it is hardly too
much to say that his name was a name to conjure with. If
any one had wished to say a word against him, it would have
been hotly resented. He laid his hand upon the hearts


of his people in a way in which any man who calls himself
a minister wonld be thankful and proud to do.
His kindness of disposition did not evaporate in senti-
ment. He was glad to give active help to those who need-
ed it. In Charles Kingsley’s rough vernacular, he was one
of those always willing to help lame dogs over stiles. His
hand and his heart were ready to do all that in him lay for
the welfare of those he cared for. For country people he
had a peculiar sympathy. The power by which he learned
to understand horses and dogs was exercised on a higher
scale when he used it to understand his fellow-creatures.
No one knew better the temper and character of the man
on the land, and few exerted themselves more to promote
his welfare and alleviate his lot.
He was an unselfish man. No man ever thought of
him as a self-seeker. I have known two men who, in
making bargains, needed to be watched, not lest they should
over-reach others but lest they should injure them-
selves —one was a University professor, the other
was Joseph Beale. These were the qualities which
won the hearts and sympathies of those who were associated
with him, and who mourn to-day that he has been taken
away.
He was gifted with some valuable talents, which he gave
unreservedly to the service of the Church. Nature gave
him ability of no mean order, and he did his best to extend
and utilise it, and to lay it cheerfully and completely upon
the altar of consecration. What he was in the discharge
of his duties, you know without my telling you. I need do
no more than recall to your minds, for they are fresh in
your recollection, the memorable addresses he gave at the
last Conference, in closing his Presidential year, and in the
charge to the young men who were ordained. He was
diligent. His body was worked to the full extent of its
power, and at times when he could not obtain the normal
amount of sleep, his busy brain was at work and his pen
was in constant activity. His beautiful handwriting was
made familiar in many quarters, for he kept himself in com-
munication with many men and maintained numerous in-
terests. Over all he said there played the lambent light of
a kindly genial humour, homely, fresh and delightful.
He was a true pastor. Though he carried no pastoral
staff on State occasions, he had the true shepherd-heart.
He did not tend his flock for gain.
‘ ‘ Far other aims his heart had learned to prize,
More bent to rise the wretched than to rise.”
In Memoriam.


He was not one of those
‘ ‘ Blind months that scarce themselves know how to hold
The sheep-hook.”
Rather he was one of those ministering spirits that with
almost a genius for pastoral work, teach ns to understand
the immense potency for good of the pastoral office.
His last illness excited a keen and painful interest. It
is hardly too much to say that the eyes of Methodists all
over the State were turned to that sick chamber as to a
Mecca watched by Mohammedans. It was a sacred spot.
The Rev. M. Maddern tells me that on the Sunday week
preceding his death, a message came to him from the suf-
ferer requesting him to give out two hymns. One was a
hymn of praise; the other was hymn 143. Let me read a
few verses:—•
O Thou whom once they flocked to hear,
Thy words to hear, Thy power to feel;
Suffer the sinners to draw near.
And graciously receive us still.
They that be whole, Thyself hast said,
No need of a physician have;
But I am sick, and want Thine aid,
And want Thine utmost power to save.
Thy power, and truth, and love divine,
The same from age to age endure;
A word, a gracious word of Thine,
The most inveterate plague can cure.”
Oan you not almost hear the sympathetic plaintive voice of
Joseph Beale, “But lam sick, and want Thine aid.” What
shall we say the answer was? Shall we say, “He answered
him never a word.” We may be sure he did not think so.
He had learned his Master’s secrets too well not to under-
stand that the prayer which said, “If it be possible let this
cup pass from me,” said also, “Nevertheless, not my will
but Thine be done.” God answers our prayers in His
way, not in ours. He has taken our dear friend from our
midst, but he has left behind a memory that will be
fragrant for many years to come, and an incentive to be a
follower of him as he followed Christ.
41
Funeral Address.




Aiii>r?aa.
By the Rev. E. J. Rodd. Delivered at the Grave.
“Standing beside the grave of our dear brother who
is gone, I wish only to say a few simple words from the
heart. As one who loved him very deeply I speak to you
who loved him too about the things that won our love. Let
us lay emphasis upon love. We are told that is the great-
est of all things that can enrich our nature, and in the days
that will follow this bereavement, it is the fragrance of a
loving spirit which will linger longest with us, the memory
of love’s kindnesses which will remain greenest. When we
have thought and said all other things about him, and they
are many and noteworthy, this will remain—he loved great-
ly and was greatly beloved. That is the best of all. He was not
lacking in qualities that make for full manhood. On the
intellectual side, he was a notable man. We need go no
farther than the two addresses he gave on retiring from the
chair of the Conference, the influence of which is upon us
yet. He was a man of clear, strong and beautiful mind,
and we remember in the business affairs of our church he
displayed a more than usual insight and grasp. Some of
you who have been with him in the homes of sickness and
distress have felt that his sympathy was as delicate and
tender as a woman’s, and if you have been with him behind
a pair of head-strong horses, and seen the self-possessed
courage and masterful will with which he controlled and
governed them, you will be satisfied he had the virile quali-
ties. What a firm stand he could make for the right.
How he could combat the wrong which he knew was wrong
and scorn the consequences in pursuing the path of duty.
As you recall him to-day can you remember any circum-
stances in which he was other than a manly man. He was
in all essential things a Minister of Christ, and yet in his
ease it was the man who impressed you more than the min-
ister. Officialism was nowhere, but a wide genial human-
ity was everywhere manifested. That was how he got in-
to such close touch with his people. He delighted to get
into the wool-shed or wheat paddock or dairy, and with
heart-affluent talk enter into his people’s experiences. I
suppose the country always had the better part of his heart.


I am sure nowhere was he so Moved as by the people in
those country circuits. There aire many stories current in
the circuits in which he travelled about the kindness of his
heart. Two years ago in Cootaramndra I heard a story of
a poor old fellow who was seriously ill in a lonely hut, and
how every day Joseph Beale carried him food, and with
his own hands ministered to thee man’s necessities. He
could censure, and censure severely. I suppose there was
no man who could with more directness tell another he
was a fool, and yet do it in such a spirit that the man was
thankful and resolved to be wiser. He was loved by the
young, who were associated with him in the district in
which he was chairman. They felt he was approachable,
that he was in sympathy with them, and they could come
to him for help. How chivalrous his kindness was! How
often in Conference he has espoused the cause of some de-
linquent, and how stoutly, in the face of adverse opinion,
has he sought to deliver him. He has now gone from us,
gone just when it seemed to us he was in the best position
to render the fullest service to the church. For 33 years in
his own quiet unobtrusive way he worked as a Circuit Min-
ister, faithfully, self-sacrificingly, often with much physical
weakness and suffering. The Conference came to see his
sterling worth and the value of his work, and sought him
for the high office he would never have dreamed of seeking-
for himself. How he filled the office, under what obliga-
tions he laid the Conference and the whole Church is fresh
in our memories, and this adds bitterness to our sorrow. We
bow to the Will which removed him just when he reached
the height of his influence, but we thank Cod for permitting
him to reach it, to render his crowning service to the Church
and to show us as we had not before seen how great a gift of
Cod to us he was. How greatly we shall miss him—his
direct sensible speeches, that inimitable humour which
played upon the surface of his strong thinking and deep
feeling as the ripples upon the surface of a deep strong
stream, his capable handling of difficult affairs. But what
our hearts are saying to us now is that what we shall miss
most is the quiet courteous spirit, the tender sympathy, the
kindly help of Joseph Beale. There are some who are far
nearer to him than we can possibly be, to whom he has been
more than to us. How greatly they will miss him. May
Cod enfold them with His love, His comforting, sustaining,
healing love. We glorify Cod for all that was so Christ-
like in the life and character of our departed brother. The
fruits he brought forth witness to his soul’s union with the
True Vine. That union, death does not affect. Because the
44
In Memoriam.


True Vine lives the branch lives also, and in another sphere
shall bring forth more fruit. So the things that have been
are the hint and promise of what is yet to be. Let that be
our consolation for the loss of our dear brother. Let us
find in it hope and inspiration for our lives. Some of us
have stood many times by the grave of an old comrade. Our
company is going before. Our past is rich with tender
sacred memories, our future beyond death holds unwithering
hopes and affections. May God help us to fill the little
space that lies between with living, loving, sacred service.
45
Funeral Address.




3omqilt Ikalp: An Apprrriatton.
By James Green.
Not only has the Church sustained a tragic loss in the
death of the Ex-President, when he was just at the zenith
of his usefulness and influence, but the sad news comes to
us all with a profound sense of personal loss.
Though he was not a strong man physically, his
courage which had surmounted weakness so frequently led
us to count on him for the future, and we always thought
of him, as having but entered upon a new chapter in his
useful career, and we were prepared to put him to the front
more and more as one of the leaders of Methodism who
would carry the flag forward into new regions of activity.
Now he has answered his name at the Roll Cali of
Heaven, and we naturally think of those qualities which
endeared him to us and made him so essentially a leader.
First, we remember that he was absolutely unconven-
tional. Born in this land, he was not overwhelmed with
any old traditions, or unduly conscious of the ecclesiastic
status of other churches or schools of thought. No dead
hand of the past ever caused Joseph Beale’s judgment the
slightest deflection. To him Australian Methodism was an
organ to speak for Cod to-day, and he would not have been
deterred by any false sentiment from tuning up any of
the pipes, changing some of the stops, introducing a'new
note or a simpler coupling if only the organ might speak
more clearly for God and truth. Such a mental attitude
may have its disadvantages, but it also has its great value,
in the upbuilding of an Evangelical Church in this new
country. He appraised everything in the Conference at
the value of its fruitfulness, —“Was it worth while?”
What would be the practical result. So he judged men—
not by the claims they made, but he applied to them this
query as a test, ‘ ‘ What can they do ? ” To every problem
he brought an untrammelled judgment and fearlessly ap-
plied the verdict of a just mind in which the scales were not


weighted. His unconventionality was due to an innate and
manly honesty. It revealed itself in his speech, so that
graceful diction was rendered the most effective by startling
paradox and the relentless application of biting logic which
ate away fallacy in the mind like acid. Then would fol-
low homely common sense expressed in the language of the
street, and through it all there would be a kindly humour
and sympathy. It was a great asset to any Conference,
Synod, or Council to possess one mind which might always
he relied on to look at a question all round and right
through.
In the second place, the Ex-President was a great lover
of country Methodism. Notwithstanding the excellence of
his Presidential utterances and his great value as an ad-
ministrator of Conference and Synod interests, his real
throne was the pulpit, and his domain the circuit.
His name through 25 years of service in the country has
become a household word in Methodist homes of the bush.
He was not deceived by the glamour of the spreading
Metropolis, but recognised that the future of the State, as
well as Methodism, depended first of all on the country
towns, and that the supreme factor in our progress was
the pioneer, ‘ ‘ the man from Sunset. ’ ’ He was a boundary
rider for Cod, a fearless driver, with a great love for good
horses, which commended him to the man on the land. He
knew it was worth while to round up the stray sheep and
shepherd them into the fold.
He also looked after the out-stations and the fencing
of the paddocks and the finding of watering places, which
is another way of saying that he believed in giving visibility
and permanence to Methodism throughout the land. He
sought out the strategic points for the Church, and though
not a great builder of Churches, he made it possible for
those who came after him to build. Then again he was an
optimist. He took the largest views of things, and though
cautious, was never on the depressing side of Little Faith.
In some ways he was a curious blend. Though fearless and
outspoken he was modest. With a vein of shrewdness and
even healthy cynicism, he was sympathetic. Given to keen
analysis and critical examination of every project, yet he
was optimistic. Over against a freedom of speech, a casual-
ness which sometimes surprised, we had his power of grace-
ful fancy rising almost to poetry. He was spiritual.
Familiarity with sacred things had not blunted his percep-
tion of the deep things of the soul. Amid the problems of
administration he valued the outer things of the Church
only as they made more possible the inner work which goes
48
In Memoriam.


on in the region of thought and emotion. He wrote in
the autograph book of a friend—
“Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting;
The soul that rises with us, our Life’s Star
Hath had elsewhere its setting and cometh from afar,
Not in entire forgetfulness and not in utter nakedness,
But trailing clouds of glory do we come
From God, Who is our Home.”
Yes, God was always in his sky, and his life had the
widest horizon. Living within the shadow of weakness so
much as he did, he recognised, as his passing helps us to
recognise, that—
“Just when we’re safest there’s a sunset touch,
A fancy from a flower-bell, someone’s death,
A chorus-ending from Euripides—
And that’s enough for fifty hopes and fears
As old and new at once as nature’s self.”
49
An Appreciation.


Urttm front Sim. ir. fnungman.
President of General Conference.
“Rev. C. J. Prescott, M.A.,
“President N.S.W. Conference.
“Dear Mr. President, —
“Will you kindly convey to the brethren —ministerial
and lay—my sincere and deep sympathy with them in the
great loss you have sustained in the calling home of Ex-
President Beale f And lam sure this may be regarded as
the expression of the entire Church in Australasia. Few
of us who met him at the General Conference in Adelaide,
thought we were looking into his face, or hearing his voice,
for the last time, however conscious we might be that he
was not to be reckoned with the robust. It was my
pleasure to meet him later in Sydney, and feel the impress
of his alert mind, and frank, courageous spirit. We all
knew him as one of our most useful leaders, and hoped he
might have been with you to reach yet greater prominence
and effectiveness. It has all been ordered otherwise. He
has gained his rest, others must gird themselves anew to
labour.
‘With fraternal condolence and kind regards,
‘ ‘ Faithfully yours,
“H. YOUNGMAN,”


,7 - 111 H 7*7 "’■-■’■■ ■ pi 1 a
t-''* - %1 T ’ '\.-,-r- J --- , ; v - i - 1 I '■, >
%S. r ■'X- *'£*& c ; r :V
: i *^3p
*> f —— r r f -, *, Steft
'
?r ’^7r~‘%».jr' ' T/ - 7 *7> * l '' v ' > -'’ ' 7
■
" 7 7I ?«5 \ J
7 r 7 :••■' r 7 -r7•• V 77' r ,7rf^7-'. ■ . J7£7 7'" 7t7 'I-r7s%77^:.? 7' 7 ' ; -7
■ -f£ - a'.:..** -■■■- - -' v i- . , v - -
|v . ■“ .. - " 7' „“ - ;
7 5* 5 ‘-771-7 . :
777 _ . 's 7 7 - 7 ; '7 - ’, .?#>!
> #» Si' U ..
ii5®l f7 - - :€ -*» 1
ri -• ;,
1 - 4' -# - &J r P3 ImI 1 M 1 ' --.: : - ,
Pi p* 1 SiPiu> # »■&I -
r v ?„ - ||p| - |||gi? ir i 1 - «v -
gs 3 T' J- i U'ri tk. - $ |gLss» w ‘ ' “ 47
ff|fe ?: J H v, '— *4'-- - T >v’
»* 7-7 S iB s ts7 $ & *», fel Tar T * A?® i® -- s
I 2 ■- HP - * \? r ' * ' " 'v. -Jsllr - - - ' V
_ - :- -- c r>.\ v-- 'vr- - . c' ? | .
' =f - M ¥p5* <> 1:
=-- "'•' :v . ' '■ ; s ■'■ " " " . 7-' - 7
utv (
f '& ~~ -■ - . 1 - ; * prA . h v
.
" > X '*■ ' \ 7 1 &$}$■ 'y "V « - <r /jv - " - ■*- _?■* * \ " v< - %
-
vO:_ 1# ;c
■ '>--73 r |* ; &.*% .4* - \ ?'
■ .. -: — J»v?» - < r -4 4
- •# 5 fk : - ** “ ' >-- w - . * . W* s" -,Sp-
ft* -l “4 ■ -,f 1 • K : t£s
I: g f a g K# - - 4 . •- 5 -
. -.-.•■■■■„ v- 3 ■■■”;■- -.■ s*, -'!' , H®Kr ,. _S- v- ',-. —7 ■■ -■•«• J
S . V i v4 ; / II i 1 fe |h S
8 Jl 11 m i?s lii 3 #
■- 4 ?>g£3 ?■?
f \ ( ' 7^
- 7 # '
g $S
1 - r '-7 %C
: j| ' n m J m iiSp »
~ '■> - \:' V. .. J;S X- 7~
s» ■ " - ,- ‘ t
7-- . ..^r : -77 ,: ' . -; ■ |7 v~7 : -4 _ vr 7 71.
r 7 *7 ’ --J ■'. ■ 7;1' 7 - V ’ - :r C-
: • -~f 77 V f ® || 77-7 '“77
' - 7 l ‘ *’77 S "> -- 77
-
7_* ' “ '- rfc*' \1~ »: <777757;:a7
' '7' '7 7*7 ir -fj 7 i
-y ' - ’7
'
V 1r r - -7'“? ” '7*
£ **-,
’" ■■-U'3 ■. '7
*■
* >- JtT:4i '■'-


: -• ' - • ' V \"5 S “ 4 ~<X ,t* -
‘ / ' . i - x -' - - : •- * ■'- “ i,. . K
a. v i , < ' * -
*xj£- *■» : 4 4^
• - 4 ,v * - 14# - “ ' : - i \ :
. c ; #‘ - ?J« : *v
V~ * - '4" ( ’* i _ c | 'i ' * ' > i
~ ■ ' V V r ,> s ' .. > “ ’ > ‘ -,
'4 ; g 'f" 4 > X L .?4I '- * * IK
' ' ' L i -§l ! - w> p& v% :4 W$ .v *
•-'-S -v - ''-'%t %"X Sr v' s t .-
J j; ;« ; ' - • A y v -> 4
. f 1, & ,4 4 t j & V £ - V
.
■
J- ;’■ T-;r- ■■ - ' , . , jMjk** • * y f$- W ififc a®,; V ■•/'-.-■; . .. , Vs- V :>S??S5
- r. .' ' 4‘ ' - 4i-iv: r ' v, ; 4’ jV
■ - • f '•"/-■ 3 ® / - »t - 5fe i?5 -/■
e* ,. ' - . . f Sg n. i-C , - V »- * ' ‘ "ft itt- Vv
.
- ;; -- ~'-' «i! , - , i, "’7 >?4 r ’V Vrfi- * ’ 1 % <- ~
/• ;-., v - :" _ / > '7; --i , “ ' --
> r -, 4.
' ,r “ \ - 41 " . > Sj :
£ g m m 4 - -
* *&, r v ' <C ’ ' „ . ' r '> t. ' •
-' ' -' J '-£&' f ' y. , ®y- r jt - ':, C, '
kA *& mM 7, vis - I 1 • -t * '
v, 4 v , *■ J k*> /m3
v *-' * 4 7 - v ”' ' ' 4 4«'- %• < , *» . 7 v „
'f ’1c >' %' M f‘ xA- tfi J -
j. A iy f o J- ' I3? ?
■r. . #. ’ ;:f gl> f -«
*- ’ f "’ 1 '’t- T^7 ,i^'-‘
tf*S&A 14M-® u %?Sy* Wifi
: a { >r k/i «, f>x -
' ’ '■ . ■,• • . ...
- jA&i r- ' r i K £ 1 y ' / '; f 1, ( V c ,
1'4- X- -TV 4/A.' * ' /' AX' t-- _ 2' 4 1c-/XQJ V V'-- '1' ' <- y I ” V X : cl ‘, '* ; . ; >4
■--"> X. i; : ■■■■■. ■ V s,.- •■ ■" ."-T., - •
i-r \ ~ ■ - C- -r i X Tj T' 1 ■ K
-*i -i*i / * f f r ' ■--.y,.--:. xis ‘-vt 4, , - .■;•, _ ~ ”
i , 1 - t ~T *# ± BT*f ■
' %,» t ■» V {
x-- %r „ ' , "\ :; j ,a *
