

Kn iftmomm.
THE LATE REV. JAMES M‘NAIR,
EROMANGO.




|n Ipcmoriam
THE LATE REV. JAMES M'NAIR,
EROMANGO.
EDINBURGH:
PRINTED BY CHARLES GIBSON, THISTLE STREET.
1870. 1
30°f




THE LATE LEY. JAMES M'NAIR.
BY THE KEY. JOHN INGLIS.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE REFORMED PRESBYTERIAN MAGAZINE.
Axeityum,
New Hebrides, July 26,1870.
My Dear Sir,
Before this reaches Scotland you will probably
have received, through some other channel, the sad intelli-
gence that our highly esteemed and beloved brother, the
Bev. James M'Nair, of Eromango, died rather suddenly at
the mission station in Dillon’s Bay, on that island, on
Saturday morning, the 16th inst. Hoping that a brief
notice of our departed brother may be acceptable to your
readers, I shall attempt to supply the same, being sorry,
however, that my limited acquaintance with the deceased
will prevent me from doing that justice to his character
which a fuller knowledge of his history would have enabled
me to do.
Of Mr M'Nair’s early history, of his boyhood that
interesting period in human life, in which the boy is often
seen to be the father of the man, —I know nothing. He
was a native of Argyllshire: he was brought up in the
Free Church, and, like Obadiah. had feared the Lord from


his youth. The first that I have heard of him was, that,
when a youth, he was assistant to the postmaster of Dunoon,
and afterwards, and while he was still young, as the result
of his activity and good conduct, a vacancy having occurred,
he was raised from his subordinate position and appointed
to be postmaster himself. Mr M'Nair was a self-made man.
He created his own patrons. While holding the office of
postmaster in Dunoon, like many other postmasters, he also
carried on business as a bookseller and stationer, thus con-
veniently supplying the public with all the requisites for
letter writing. He had good professional prospects: he
had secured the confidence both of the Post-Office autho-
rities, and also of his business connections, especially that
of the well-known firm of Messrs Dickson, stationers, in
Edinburgh. Eut he had higher aims than these. He was
eager to become a minister of the Gospel, or a missionary
of the Cross. He was prepared to relinquish all his encour-
aging business prospects if he could attain this object, and
the Lord, in a singular and unexpected manner, opened up
his way for the successful prosecution of his studies, so
that, in due time, the desire of his heart was attained.
It is well known that Dunoon is a much frequented
watering-place. Among other notabilities who resorted to
Dunoon to spend a portion of the summer months, for one
or more seasons, was the great Post-Office reformer, Sir
Rowland Hill. One day, when Sir Rowland called at the
Post-Office on business, Mr M'Nair, as his custom was, was
improving his spare time in the prosecution of his studies ;
but, as usual, the moment any one entered, he laid down
his book to attend to his official duties. While thus at-
tending to the business on hand, Sir Rowland’s eye was
attracted to the well-thumbed, dumpy, little volume lying
on the desk, and, curious to see what the young man was
reading, he stretched over his hand and lifted the book, and


found that it was Bagster’s Poljmicrian Greek New Testa-
ment. Surprised to see an official in this department occu-
pied in so unusual a study, he entered into conversation
with Mr M'Nair, and learned from him that he was very
desirous to pursue his studies with the view of entering the
Gospel ministry; that he was most anxious to go to college,
but could not aiford to give up his situation and his busi-
ness ; and, finally, encouraged by the kindly deportment of
Sir Rowland, Mr M'Nair put the question to him, if he
thought that the Post-Office authorities would allow him
to retain his situation as postmaster, providing he should
employ a trustworthy and properly qualified deputy during
the sessions of college. Sir Rowland said the case was a
novel one; he did not know that such an application had
ever been made; but he would think about it and advise
him. After satisfying himself as to Mr M'Nair’s antece-
dents, attainments, and character, Sir Rowland brought the
matter before the Post-Office Commissioners, and, although
the case was unprecedented, he secured the arrangements
which Mr M'Nair wished; and he has been ever since his
warm and steady friend. It was only last year that Mr
M'Nair showed me a very kind letter which he had, only a
short time before that, received from Sir Rowland. It is
an interesting fact to know, that Sir Rowland Hill, the
author of the penny postage, and our other great postal
reforms, a man of world-wide celebrity, should, by his kind
and considerate conduct, have been so largely instrumental
in providing the New Hebrides Mission with one of its
most earnest agents. Surely the hand of God is seen in
arranging the most seemingly trifling coincidences. Surely
“the steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord,” both
as to his doing good and his getting good. There are far
more people interested in this Mission than either the mis-
sionaries here, or the Churches supporting them, are aware


of; and in times of trial and great discouragement, like the
present, we hail this as a token for good.
Mr M'Nair went to the University of Edinburgh, and
had the privilege of pursuing his literary and philosophical
studies under Sir William Hamilton and his illustrious
associates. He studied theology and the cognate branches,
partly in the Free Church College, under Drs Buchanan,
Bannerman, Smeaton, etc., and partly in the Reformed
Presbyterian Hall, under Drs Goold and Binnie; while, to
fit himself more fully for missionary labours, he entered
the Medical Missionary Institution, and also attended the
lectures of Sir James Simpson and some others of the dis-
tinguished medical professors in the Edinburgh University.
His mind appears to have been early directed to mission
work; but it was not till one of our students and he were
lodging together, that he became acquainted with the his-
tory of this Mission. Its claims, however, approved them-
selves so to his mind, that he resolved to offer his services
for this field, and did so. Our Foreign Mission Committee
had, only a short time before, accepted the services of two
of our students, Messrs Cosh and Neilson, and were afraid
of incurring pecuniary responsibilities which they might
not be able to fulfil; but they gladly entertained the offer,
and corresponded with the Mission Board in Nova Scotia,
and Mr M'Nair was finally engaged by the Presbyterian
Church of the Lower Provinces as their missionary. He
was taken on trials, licensed, and ordained, by the Re-
formed Presbyterian Church.
Before leaving Scotland, Mr M'Nair was united in mar-
riage to a young lady, who, by her education, her Christian
character, and her missionary spirit, has proved herself to
be in every way a help meet for her husband; while by the
meekness and gentleness of Christ, exemplified so fully in
her daily life, she has endeared herself to every member of


this Mission. She, with her infant daughter, less than a
year old, will be followed by the esteem and love, the prayers
and blessings, of all who knew her in these Seas.
Mr and Mrs M'Nair arrived at Aneityum in August
1866. He accompanied the “ Dayspring” round the islands,
when she went to bring the brethren to the Annual Meet-
ing. At the Annual Meeting in September he was ap-
pointed to Eromango. When the “Dayspring” returned,
bringing the missionaries to the meeting, the “John Wil-
liams” was in this harbour, but so much injured by the
accident she had met with on entering, that we unani-
mously agreed to send the “ Dayspring” with her to Sydney,
lest she should founder on the voyage. The missionaries
had to remain on this island till her return. In the mean-
time a small trading vessel was proceeding to Eromango
and Efate, the captain of which kindly offered a passage
to as many as he could accommodate. So eager was Mr
M'Nair to be at his station, that he and Mrs M'Nair, in
company with Mr and Mrs Morrison and Mr Gordon, set
off at once, although the vessel was swarming so with cock-
roaches that they were like to be eaten up alive; and while
the vessel lay at Port Resolution, where they had to put in
during the voyage, they had all to sleep on deck, the cabin
was so intolerable. Mrs M'Nair was laid down with fever
and ague during their first year. Mr M'Nair also suffered
from it. In consequence of this they returned to Aneityum
when the “ Dayspring” went up to the colonies, and resided
chiefly at my station till the vessel returned, when they
went back to Dillon’s Bay, where they have lived ever since.
Mr M'Nair, though not a robust man, continued to enjoy
a fair measure of good health till about six months ago,
when he was attacked by fever and ague, of an obstinate
rather than a violent character; but under which he finally
succumbed. Whether it had become complicated with some


other disease or not, it is difficult to say. Most probably it
had. He was present at our Annual Meeting in June,
attended every sederunt, and took a part, more or less, in
all the business; and although he was weak, and suffering
a good deal, no one seemed to suspect that he was in any
immediate danger. He was appointed to accompany the
“ Dayspring” on her voyage next month to Auckland and
Raratonga, a voyage expected to occupy about two months,
in the hopes that the change would go far to restore him to
his wonted health. But his strength had been much further
reduced than any of us supposed. He had reached home
just about a fortnight when he died. Indeed, till the very
last no immediate danger was anticipated; although he had
stated to some of the brethren on his way home, that he
felt he had not long to live. On the Friday afternoon he
took a walk out as usual, but after coming in a severe
paroxysm came on. Mrs M'Nair, while attending to him,
asked him if he had much pain ; he said, “No ; but it was
his heart, and the difficulty in breathing.” The paroxysm
passed off, and he was easier during the night; but about
daybreak another paroxysm came on. He began to retch,
and while Mrs M'Nair was holding him she felt his head
become heavy, and a cold clamminess on his hands. She
immediately sent for Mr Smith, a white man, who had been
there for a few weeks, commencing a whaling station, and
who had formerly been second mate in the “ Dayspring.”
He came in an instant; but all was over. On the Monday
following, Mr Smith set off in a boat to Port Resolution,
and brought Mr Neilson. The “Dayspring,” with four
of the missionaries on board, had left Eromango the week
before, no one suspecting that our brother’s course was so
nearly run. But his work on earth was finished.
Mr M'Nair was a true-hearted, earnest missionary. He
applied himself most assiduously to acquire the Eromangan


language. He taught the natives to read; he preached to
them the Gospel; he translated portions of the Scriptures ;
he administered medicine to the sick ; and in every way he
and his devoted wife laid themselves out for the temporal
and spiritual well-being of the natives; and their labours
were beginning to tell very effectively both on the Christian
natives around them, and on the more distant heathen.
Some months ago they had the satisfaction of seeing a few
converts, whom they had carefully instructed, added to the
fellowship of the Church; and the heathen, in consider-
able numbers, and from great distances, were paying them
friendly visits. During the first two years they lived on
Eromango, owing to epidemics and a great mortality among
the natives, their lives were often in danger from the
heathen; but during the last two years, owing partly to
the absence of these exciting causes, but chiefly, we be-
lieve, to their being better known, the heathen had become
friendly to them, and favourable to Christianity. They
were particularly well liked by those about them. One of
our Aneityum teachers and his wife were living with them
for a few months, about two years ago, to assist them.
When the news of Mr M'Nair’s death came to Aneityum,
and this woman heard of it, she cried bitterly, and said,
“Oh, they were so good; they were so good to us; their
words were so good; and their conduct was so good; yes,
both of them ; they two never scolded us, never spoke angry
words to us; no, neither the one nor the other; their words
were always soft and good; yes, they were so good; they
were so kind.” His missionary career, though brief, was
not in vain.
Mr M'Nair was a large-hearted man, and was devising
enlarged schemes of usefulness for Eromango. On that
island travelling is difficult by land; the sea is the prin-
cipal highway; but then the sea can be traversed only in


fine weather; there are no reefs along the coast forming
lagoons, inside of which boats may always sail safely, as in
many of the eastern and other groups. It is surrounded
almost everywhere by an iron-bound coast; even boat har-
bours are few and far between, hence a specially good boat
is required for sailing round the island. Mr M'Nair had
brought this matter so distinctly before some of his friends
in the colonies, that the Rev. Mr Maokie of South Yarra,
Melbourne, and his congregation, at a cost of <£so, pro-
cured him an admirable life-boat, alike adapted for sailing
or rowing, and which would be safe in all seas and in all
weathers, that he might be able to visit round the island,
as for and as often as he might require to do so. This boat
was brought down by the “Dayspring” when she arrived
here in May last.
He was fully alive to the duty and importance of using
“ all lawful endeavours to preserve our own life and the life
of others.” The mission-house at Dillon’s Bay, though an
excellent house, stands in, what experience has shown to be,
an unhealthy situation. To remedy this Mr M'Nair, when
here at the meeting, bought from a white man the frame of
a cottage of two rooms, which he took with him, intending
to erect it immediately on his return home, on another and
more healthy site, that they might at least sleep there. Two
of my most skilled teachers went with to assist him, along
with the Eromangans, in its erection. It was expected that
the “Dayspring” would be necessarily detained a few days
in Dillon’s Bay, and that as much help would be obtained
from the vessel, from missionaries and others on board, as
would enable him to get the frame up, and perhaps the
roof on, before the vcssol left Eromango. But these and
other schemes, however wise and however well laid, have,
in the providence of God, been cut short.
One prominent feature in Mr M'Nair’s character was


his thorough reliable honesty. lie was a Nathanael —an
Israelite indeed, in whom there was no guile. His piety
was sincere and unostentatious; it was best known by its
fruits. He was a reliable man, a peaceable man, a lovable
man. He was naturally of a quick and hasty temper; his
Celtic blood boiled up at every display of hollowness or
heartlessness, or injustice in any form. His whole soul
was moved within him at the kidnapping system, that has
been going on for these years past in these Seas, especially
when the poor Eromangans were the victims of this “ con-
summation of all villanies; ” and he wrote on this subject
to the Commodore commanding on the Australian station,
in language unmistakable, distinct, and strong; and which,
it is believed, did good in high places* But under ordinary
provocations his anger was brief and evanescent, while all
the benevolent emotions of his heart were strong and en-
during.
The learned and pious Ilervey says,—“l have always
looked upon gratitude as the most exalted principle that
can actuate the heart of man. It has in it something nobly
disinterested, and, if I may be allowed the term, generously
devout.” When I was in New Zealand, eighteen months
ago, I met a gentleman, to whom I was the bearer of a
letter from Mr M'Nair, and who had been one of his
securities when he was postmaster in Dunoon. After ex-
pressing his delight at receiving a letter from our brother,
and hearing of his welfare, he concluded by saying, “Well,
I think I never, in my whole life, met with a more grateful
man than Mr M'Nair,”
* A letter by Mr M'Nair was brought under the notice of Mr
Taylor, M.P., and containing a distinct statement of facts, induced
him to submit his motion on the subject to Parliament. A sensible
change in the tone of the Government was perceptible afterwards.
Ed. It. P. M.


He was a modest, unobtrusive man, and never strove
after effect; and hence first impressions of him were often
less favourable than of many others greatly inferior to him ;
but like all true men, he grew in the esteem of others as he
became better known ; and the longer and the better he was
known he was the better liked.
He was a liberal contributor to all good objects : he was
liberal to the full extent of his means.' He was an earnest
teetotaller; had been so, I believe, all his life; he used
neither alcohol nor tobacco in any form; but cheerfully
lent all his influence to assist those who are striving to
stem and drive back the fearful flood of intemperance that
is desolating both the Church and the world.
Though his death was sudden and unexpected, yet he
was found fully prepared—he was actually, as well as habi-
tually, prepared; his loins were girded and his lamp was
burning. He knew in whom he had believed. Mrs M'Nair
writes, that the whole of the night before his death he ap-
peared to be in an ecstacy of joy; grace in habit became
grace in exercise; dying grace was given on a dying bed;
as his day was, so was his strength. “ Mark the perfect
man, and behold the upright; for the end of that man is
peace.”—Yours, etc., John Inglis.
[The following notes, bearing more especially upon Mr
M'Nair’s earlier days, have been kindly furnished by David
Dickson, Esquire, Edinburgh, a gentleman whose friendly
interest in our beloved friend was often acknowledged by
him in the warmest terms.]
James M'Nair was born at Lochstrivenhead, in the parish
of Inverchaolain, district of Cowal, Argyllshire, in October
1829. After some instruction at home, he was sent to the


school at Glendaruel at the age of twelve. lie went to live
at Dunoon three years afterwards, when he was employed
by the postmaster there in delivering the letters around
Dunoon. Even then, his natural energy, sagacity, and
openness of character, drew towards him the good-will of
those with whom he came in contact. Brought under the
power of the truth as it is in Jesus, he diligently improved
all his spare hours in increasing his education, and adding
to his stores of useful knowledge. A few years after found
him a very useful man in the district. With but slender
means, he yet was able not only to support himself but
to minister to the wants of others. As a Sabbath School
teacher, and office-bearer in the Free Church Congregation
of Dunoon, he was very active and useful for several years.
On a vacancy occurring in the office of postmaster at
Dunoon, we have learned that the inhabitants at once ex-
pressed their desire that Mr M'Nair should be appointed.
A memorial was unanimously forwarded to Sir Rowland
Hill, then Secretary of the Post-Office, who at once com-
plied with the wish of the people. Mr M'Nair, while grate-
ful for this appointment, intimated, however, to Sir Row-
land, that he could only accept the office on the distinct
condition that no Sabbath work was to be done. The high
moral principle shown by this act, attracted Sir Rowland’s
attention. Mr M'Nair’s conditions were agreed to; and it
is a striking and gratifying fact, that this correspondence,
followed by personal intercourse during a summer residence
at Dunoon, was the means of forming a strong regard for
Mr M'Nair on the part of Sir Rowland Hill, as shown by
many acts of personal kindness both by himself and his
excellent lady, and continued to the very last.
Soon after his appointment as postmaster at Dunoon, or
even before that time, Mr M'Nair’s mind was drawn to the
work of the ministry, especially in connection with mis-


sionary labour in foreign lands. He resolutely set himself,
in spite of many discouragements and difficulties, to acquire
the requisite qualifications. Although there seemed to be
no opening for him, at the time, anywhere, for missionary
employment, yet he felt assured that the Lord would yet
open up the way for his attaining the desire of his heart.
There was nothing about our lamented friend that was
specially attractive; yet those who knew him intimately,
saw in him those qualities which fitted him for such a
sphere of usefulness as he afterwards occupied; and which
made him so successful a missionary. Not only his official
letters on the subject of the Mission, but those which he
sent to many friends at home, displayed a singular power
of graphic delineation. The communications from him in
the pages of the “Reformed Presbyterian Magazine ” we have
heard frequently referred to, as interesting in the highest
degree. Those which he sent from time to time to the
Students’ Missionary Association in the Free Church Col-
leges in Edinburgh and Glasgow, will long be remembered
by those who heard them. His great moral courage, and
his extraordinary power of resolution, were accompanied
with, if they were not the result of, a simple, and therefore
strong, faith in God. His eye was single, and therefore his
whole body was full of light. Naturally affectionate, grace
made him singularly generous and unselfish. In many little
ways, not only among his own kindred, but among others
who had no claim on his care, he was ever ready with kind
deeds as well as kind words. Along with a sound and able
mind he manifested the spirit of meekness and of love.
This gave him power even with the poor Eromangans, whose
souls he longed after in the bowels of Jesus Christ.


BURIAL OF REV. JAMES M'NAIR.*
On Saturday morning, the 16th of July, Mr M'Nair died.
He was buried the same afternoon by the side of the grave
where the Gordons lie. Mr Smith, who was formerly car-
penter on board the “Dayspring,” had begun whaling at
Dillon’s Bay;—he made a coffin, and saw him properly in-
terred, and came over to Port Resolution for me on the
Tuesday following. On Wednesday morning we started,
and spent the night on Aniwa. On Thursday morning
Mr Paton accompanied us, and we arrived the same evening
in Dillon’s Bay. We found Mrs M'Nair in a very composed
frame of mind, feeling her trial heavily, but casting her
burden on the Lord, resting on the promises and on the
tender sympathies of Christ.
Mr Paton and I built a mound of stones over the grave,
and plastered it with lime. We then packed u£ everything
for shipping on board the “ Dayspring,” and in a few days
started for Aniwa again in the large boat, Mrs M'Nair and
her baby with us. Mr Smith accompanied us, to take charge
* From a letter in the “ Halifax Home and Foreign Record of
the Presbyterian Church.” By Rev. T. Neilson, jun.


of the boat; and after a night upon the water, we arrived at
Aniwa in the morning. There I left Mrs M'Nair and her
little one, under the kind and hospitable roof of Mr and
Mrs Paton. She intends (D.Y.) staying among the islands
till the close of the season, going up with the vessel to Mel-
bourne, and thence home.
Beside the grave of the murdered Gordons, by the bank
of the stream that was reddened by the blood of Harris
and of Williams, under the waving plumes of the cocoa-
nut palms, the broad Pacific gleaming in the sunshine close
at hand, lies awaiting a glorious resurrection the body of
James M'Nair, as devoted a missionary, as prayerful a
Christian, as sincere a man, as the Church has ever sent
into these Southern Seas.




