





f? 11 '




In Preparation for
Communion*
fl manual of Instruction
for Church members ::
BY
The Rev. A. R. OSBORN, M.A.,
Minister of St. John’s Presbyterian Church, Warrnambool
M. L. HUTCHINSON,
Presbyterian Book Warehouse,
305 Little Collins Street, Melbourne.




PREFACE.
This little book is intended to supply a
practical need. It aims at setting forth in a
short space, and in simple language, the essen-
tial doctrines of our Church. It has been
especially prepared as a text-book for young
communicants, who should at least know what
is contained in its pages. Each chapter forms
a lesson. The exercises at the end of each
chapter should be worked out by the young
people themselves. Then the answers may
either be gone over- orally in class, or they may
be written and given to the minister for cor-
rection. The latter method will be of special
advantage when the one to be instructed
resides at a distance. The texts at the head
of each chapter may, if it is thought desirable,
be learned by heart.


CHAPTER I.
Man’s Sinful Nature.
CHAPTER 11.
The Consequences of Sin.
CHAPTER 111.
Repentance and Conversion.
CHAPTER IV.
God’s Plan of Redemption.
CHAPTER V.
Atonement, Justification, and Adoption
CHAPTER VI.
Sanctification and the Christian Life.
CHAPTER VII.
The Means of Grace.
CHAPTER VIII.
Baptism.
CHAPTER IX.
The Lord’s Supper.
CHAPTER X.
The Duties of a Church Member.


CHAPTER I.
Man’s Sinful Nature,
Romans iii., 23: “All have sinned and
come short of the glory of God.”
1 John i., 8: “If we say that we have
no sin, we deceive ourselves, and
the truth is not in us.
These texts, to which might be added others,
make it clear that, from the Bible standpoint,
all men are sinners in the sight of God. Some
are greater sinners than others, but all have
sinned in some degree. This, then, is the first
fact we must realise when we come to consider
our relation to God. To put it personally, we
ourselves are sinners, and this does not so
much mean that we commit individual sins as
that we have a sinful nature, which causes us
to think, say, and do that which is wrong in
God’s sight.
Now because we have this sinful nature,
there is a tendency for us to make light of
acts of wrongdoing. We are apt to think that,
provided we live honest lives, and, it may be,
attend church regularly, we have done all that
is required of us. This is a great mistake,
and it arises from the fact that we have failed
to grasp what God requires of us. The same
mistake has been made by men in all ages. In
the days of the prophet Micah men thought
that God was pleased with them if they
brought Him abundant sacrifices. But the


prophet pointed out to them in God’s name
that the sacrifices were of little value.
What, he says, “ doth the Lord require of
thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and
to walk humbly with thy God?” (Micah vi., 8).
Now, you will notice that there are three
things mentioned here. They are: (a) Doing
justly. This means that we must be just and
honourable in all our dealings, (b) Loving
mercy. This means that we must be kind
and compassionate to our fellow men. (c)
Walking humbly with God. This means that we
seek for God and have Him in all our lives.
Jesus taught the same thing as Micah when He
said that the great commandments of God were
that we should love God with all our powers
and our neighbour as ourselves. (Mark xii.,
28-31.) So, too, if we look at the Ten Com-
mandments, which were given to the Israel-
ites as a summary of what God demanded of
them, we shall see that they divide them-
selves into two parts, the first showing our
duty to God, and the second our duty to
men. Neither of these two parts must be for-
gotten.
It is clear, then, that God demands from us
far more than merely being honest, and, when
we consider the matter, we must confess that
His demands are just. We ought to keep His
commandments, and obey His demands. Un-
fortunately we do not. We often forget God,
and do things which are unjust or unkind to
our fellow men, with the result that the world
is full of sin and of the misery due to sin.
It is, therefore, useless for us to say that we
are as good as others, or that we do nothing
particularly wrong. If we are as good as


others, we are still sinners, and, if we have
done nothing particularly wrong, it does not
follow that we have kept strictly to is
right. What John says is perfectly true, “If
we say that we have no sin, we deceive our-
selves, and the truth is not in us.” (1 John i.,
8.) All men are sinners, and the reason is
that they have sinful natures.
But, how is it that all come to have such
sinful natures? Does it not seem a great
tragedy that there should be so much sin and
wretchedness in the world? Most of the
misery in the world is due to sin. If we
could banish sin from among us, with its
anger and hate, it would be like bringing
heaven down to earth. It just seems as if
some awful curse had fallen on men. Now,
this is what the Bible tells us has actually
happened. If you read the third chapter of
Genesis, you will find the story of how our
first parents, Adam and Eve, once lived in the
Garden of Eden. In very simple, yet won-
derfully effective language, we have given us
there a picture of two simple souls, as inno-
cent as children, content to receive a command
without asking why, and not even enquiring
the name of the fruit they were not allowed
to touch. Then the serpent comes. He is
one of the beasts of the field, yet he is wiser
than the simple-souled man and woman. This
is the coming in of evil suggestion. The ser-
pent plays on Eve’s curiosity, and tells her of
all Adam and she may know if they will only
eat the fruit. What he said was partly true
and partly false. They ate the fruit, and then
they knew sin. For the first time they were
afraid of God, and tried to hide. But it was


useless. Sin always brings punishment. The
woman had to endure subjection and pain; the
man must toil to win a scanty living from a
thankless soil; the serpent was degraded and
became man’s mortal enemy. The story
closes with the driving out of Adam and Eve
from Paradise. They could never re-enter,
for the Cherubim with fiery swords guarded
the way. This is a wonderful story, and, as
we read it, it reminds us of what happens in
all human lives. Once we ourselves were in-
nocent little children, not knowing sin. Now
our innocence is gone. We are sinners, and,
being sinners, we are, like Adam and Eve,
under a curse. Perhaps you will ask, “ But
was this story of Adam and Eve true?” On
this there is a difference of opinion. Some
think that Adam and Eve were real people;
others think that they represent mankind, and
that the story is a kind of parable. It makes
little difference which view we take. In either
case the fact remains that sin came into the
world, bringing a curse on all men. The curse
is handed down from generation to generation,
and no one escapes it. By theologians this
inherited sinful nature is often called “ Or-
iginal Sin,” because it had its origin at the
very beginning of man’s history. Also the
passing from the state of childlike innocence
to that of sinfulness is called the “ Fall.” In
a sense each of us experienced the meaning
of the Fall the first time we sinned, but the
word is used specially of the result of the act
by which sin first came into the world, bring-
ing with it pain and woe.


EXERCISES ON THE CHAPTER.
(1) Paul says that all creation is groaning
under the curse of sin brought in by Adam’s
fall. (Romans viii., 22.) Have you noticed
any cases (a) of misery directly due to a
man’s own sin, (b) of misery due to the sin
of others, (c) of pain among the lower animals
due to sin?
(2) What reply would you make to a man
who said that he was good enough because
he had never done anybody any harm?
(3) What is “ original sin?” Why is it so
called?
(4) What do you mean by the “ innocence
of childhood?”
(5) Tell in your own words the story of
the Fall.
CHAPTER 11.
The Consequences of Sin.
1 John hi., 4: “Whosoever committeth
sin transgressed: also the law, for
sin is the transgression of the law.”
Isaiah lix., 2: “Your iniquities have
separated between you and your
God.”
James i., 15: “Sin, when it is finished,
bringeth forth death.
We have seen that all men inherit a sinful
nature which causes them to commit indi-
vidual acts of sin. We must now ask what
the consequences of sin are. It may be said
that sin in the individual life does three things


(l) It makes the sinner liable to punishment,
since sin is a breaking of the law of God.
(2) It estranges the sinner from God. (3)
It corrupts the moral and spiritual nature.
These three effects are bound up one with
another, but it is well to treat them separately.
First, then, sin is disobedience to the law
of God. This law may be looked at in two
ways. God, we know, has established certain
laws in His universe, which we call natural
laws. These laws cannot be broken without
punishment following. For instance, there are
laws of health. If people do not keep their
drains clean, they are punished by outbreaks
of fever. And the punishment comes
whether the people knew they were breaking
the laws of health or not. So likewise in the
spiritual world God has established certain
laws. If these laws are broken, punishment
follows, even if the transgressor did not know
he was breaking them. Such punishment is
often referred to as the “ natural consequences
of sin.” It might be added that, just as in
the natural world the punishment is not
always seen at once, and may even seem to
have been evaded, so in the spiritual world it
is often delayed. Nevertheless in both cases
it is sure to come sooner or later in some
form. There is one obvious lesson to learn
from this fact, and it is that we should be
diligent in our study to discover what God’s
law is.
There is, however, another way in which
God s law may be viewed. WF may think
of it after the analogy of our human laws.
There are laws which have been established
by the Government of the country to secure


justice. If we break these laws, we are liable
to punishment. Similarly, God, the great Ruler
of the Universe, has established His laws
for the government of men, and, if these laws
are broken, He must punish those who break
them. We must be careful not to represent
Him as taking delight in inflicting this pun-
ishment. God wishes all His earthly child-
ren to do right, and He is grieved when they
do wrong. But He must be just, and it would
be unjust for Him to allow men to break His
laws without punishing them. Perhaps the
best human analogy we can give is that of a
just father in the home, who has to punish his
children, not because he wants to, but because
it is impossible to pass over wrongdoing.
Now, the Bible has spoken of this punish-
ment which God must inflict on the dis-
obedient in very serious terms. It tells us
that in the future world those who have not
been forgiven will be tormented. It is not
necessary to take the descriptions of hell
which we find as anything more than pictures
setting forth an awful fact, but, because we
need not believe in real fire in which people
are burned, we must not therefore conclude
that the teaching about hell means nothing at
all. The fact is that he who disobeys God’s
commandments must expect to suffer in the
next world a dreadful punishment for what
he has done.
The second effect of sin we said to be
estrangement from God. The story of the
Prodigal Son explains what we mean. When
the young man went away to a strange land,
he lost touch with his father. At first he
thought that a fine thing; at the last he knew


what a sad mistake he had made. Then he
wanted his father, and found himself far away.
This is a picture of what happens sooner or
later to every sinner. We cannot do with-
out God, and sin leads us away from Him. In
the opinion of many this is sin’s most awful
result.
Lastly, sin corrupts our moral and spiritual
nature. We have seen that each one is born
with a sinful nature, and every act of sin has
the effect of making that nature more sinful.
This effect of sin has often been compared
to the taking in of unhealthy substances into
the body. These unhealthy substances act
as a poison, and slowly take away our health.
And, just as an unhealthy body renders us
weak, and unable to resist disease, so sin
harboured in the soul poisons our higher
nature, making us morally and spiritually
unhealthy, and unfit to resist temptation.
Thus sin gradually gains the mastery, and the
result, if it is unchecked, is degradation and
ruin, or what the Bible calls “ spiritual death.”
EXERCISES ON THE CHAPTER.
(1) What is meant by “laws of nature?” If
a baby puts its finger in the fire, will it escape
the consequences because it does not know
that fire burns? Will, then, a man escape the
consequences of sin because he does not know
about them?
(2) Is it safe to conclude that the breaking
of a law of God will not be punished because
the punishment does not appear at once? Il-
lustrate your answer by the case of a young
man who neglects his health.


(3) Would it be a just or possible thing to
inflict no punishment on criminals who had
broken the laws of the land, but who said they
were sorry?
(4) What essential truth is there in the
teaching about hell?
(5) Illustrate from the example of a father
and child how sin causes estrangement be-
tween man and God.
(6) Explain what is meant by referring to
sin as a disease.
CHAPTER 111.
Repentance and Conversion.
Acts iii., 19: “ Repent ye therefore and
be converted, that your sins may be
blotted out.”
You will remember that before Jesus began
His ministry there appeared in the wilderness
country, near the Jordan, a preacher called
John. John’s work was to prepare the way
for Jesus, and he did so by preaching re-
pentance. By repentance he meant change
of mind. We all know what it is to change
our minds. Sometimes we decide upon doing
a thing, and then something arises which
causes us not to do it. We say, “I intended
to do it, but I changed my mind.” Just as we
change our mind or intention about the or-
dinary afifairs of life, so may we change our
mind about the kind of life we have been
living in God’s sight. Usually there is some


special thing which causes us to change our
mind. John, when he preached, told the
people that the Messiah, the divine King they
had expected so long, was near, and that,
when he came, he would punish sin with awful
punishment. The result was that many who
were careless about doing right before,
repented, or changed their mind, and decided
to turn to God, ask His forgiveness, and live
better lives in the future. Of course, it is
not always the thought of punishment which
leads men to repent. It may be the thought
of God’s love and remorse for their neglect
of it. The motive leading to repentance
depends very largely on our disposition. But,
whether the motive is love or fear, repentance
involves that we have awakened to the fact
that our life has been wrong and must be put
right. The changing from an evil to a right
course of life we call conversion. Conversion
simply means “ turning round,” and, when we
hear that a person is converted, it is just the
same as saying that he has decided to leave
the old way of life, and go in God’s way.
You will see, then, that repentance and
conversion go together. Repentance which
is not followed by conversion is of no value.
It is simply a passing emotion, which is apt
to leave us worse rather than better. It is
usual to say that there are two elements in
repentance: —(1) Sorrow for sin. (2) A sin-
cere desire to live a better life and to give up
sin. A person may be sorry for his sin, and
yet not be willing to give it up. His sorrow
is not true repentance. When, however, a
person is not only sorry for his sin, but is
anxious to forsake it, then he may be said to


have truly repented. And, once he has re-
pented, he will, by God’s help, turn his back
on the old way and begin a new life. In
other words, he will become “converted.”
Now it is needful to bear in mind the exact
meaning of conversion, because there is often
much dispute regarding it. There are those
who maintain that conversion must be accom-
panied by a distinct spiritual experience;
others say that it may come gradually, and
that a person may scarcely be aware of the
exact time at which he turned to the new life.
The fact is that no absolute statement may be
made either way. There are some who have
been brought up in a Christian home, and have
been taught to serve God from their infancy.
This ought to be the .case with all children of
Christian parents. In addition, there are a
few who, though not brought up in Christian
surroundings, are, nevertheless, drawn to
Christ in their childhood, and never depart
from Him. Such cases are very different
from that of a man or woman who has lived
for years careless of God and disobedient to
His law. Naturally, conversion with them
will be a very definite and decisive act, be-
ginning with feelings of deep sorrow for sin,
and ending with joy at God’s pardoning grace.
But in the case of one who has followed Jesus
from infancy, conversion is little more than a
period of intelligent voluntary decision. Some
would not even call it conversion, but simply
a confirming of the way of life in which the
child has been brought up by the parents.
This is why, in certain churches, young people
are “ confirmed.” The only thing to be
guarded against in such confirmation is that


it be not a formal thing. What ought to
take place is this. When the young person
has arrived at such an age as to be able to
decide for himself or herself, the parent, or
some responsible individual, should explain the
full meaning of the Christian life, and, if need
be, point out kindly anything in the young
life which is not quite in accordance with
the Christian standard. Then the young man
or woman should consider seriously his or her
position in the sight of God, should earnestly
ask forgiveness for sins of the past, and
solemnly promise, by God’s help, to follow
Christ throughout life. This solemn deter-
mination may possibly mean little change in
the way of life, and in this case it is not likely
that it will be accompanied by the strong
sorrow and subsequent uplifting of one who has
lived for years in sin. Yet, if the one making the
determination has been sincere, it cannot but
be accompanied by a blessing. We say, then,
that repentance and conversion are not to
be judged by the strength of emotion ex-
perienced at the time, but by sincerity of
purpose. Those who have no recollection of
a definite experience at all need not be
troubled on that account. If they can honestly
say, “I am sorry for all my sins. I wish to
leave them behind me, and, by God’s grace, I
will follow Christ,” they have fulfilled all that
is involved in repentance and conversion.
EXERCISES ON THE CHAPTER.
(1) Illustrate by the story of the Prodigal
Son the meaning of repentance and conver-
sion.


(2) Mention any motives which you have
observed in your own experience as leading
people to repent.
(3) What is meant by “ sorrow to repent-
ance?” (2 Cor. vii., 8-11.) Distinguish it
clearly from sorrow which does not lead to
repentance.
(4) Do you know any cases where conver-
sion has been accompanied by great emotion?
Is conversion necessarily accompanied by emo-
tion of this kind?
(5) What is the idea underlying the practice
of confirmation? What danger would you
see in such a practice?
CHAPTER IV.
God’s Plan of Redemption.
Galatians iii., 13: “Christ hath re-
deemed us from the curse of the
law, being made a curse for us.”
We must now hasten to set right a mis-
conception which may possibly have arisen
during the study of our last chapter. There
we spoke of repentance and conversion as
something which man himself does. It is true
that man has his part to play, because God
has given to each one of us the power of
choice. He might, if He wished, compel all
men to be good. Instead He allows us to
choose. The act of choice, therefore, is our
own. Yet, in saying that it is our own, we do
not mean that we accomplish it unaided. God.


by His Holy Spirit, is continually moving the
minds of men towards righteousness. This
fact is always understood, even when we speak
as if man himself did the work.
Then there is another aspect of our con-
version. We have said that conversion means
turning to God with true repentance for past
sins. Upon condition of such repentance our
sins will be forgiven. We must now make
clear how this is accomplished. There are some
thoughtless people who say that forgiveness
is an easy matter. They think that there is
nothing to be done except to let the past go.
But even earthly analogies will show that
this is wrong. A parent cannot pass over a
child’s offences entirely just because the child
is sorry. He may and will forgive the child,
but it might not be wise to simply let the past
slide. Again, an earthly judge, however bene-
ficent he may be and however desirous of re-
forming the character of the wrongdoer, can-
not allow an offence to pass by without con-
sidering justice. And these earthly analogies
are simple cases compared with that of sinful
man before God. In a previous chapter we
saw what the consequences of sin were. In
forgiving sin all these consequences must be
taken into account. For instance, if sin were
no more than a temporary estrangement, the
breach might be healed as soon as the sinner
repented, but in addition to being an estrange-
ment it is a breach of divine law, natural and
governmental, as well as a corrupting of our
nature. When people argue that because God
is love He can forgive sin at once and simply
let the past go, their language proves that they
are looking only at the aspect of estrangement,


and forgetting the other aspects. Now, it is
true that God is love. However rebellious His
earthly children may have been, He longs for
their return. This is the distinct teaching of
the New Testament, and also of the Old. But,
in order that man may be restored and made
truly a child of God, it has been necessary for
God to bring into operation a plan of redemp-
tion.
“ Redemption ”is a word used of slaves. In
ancient Israel, a man sometimes became so
desperately poor and needy that he sold him-
self as a slave. Only in very rare cases would
such a man be able to buy back his liberty.
The only means by which he might become
free would be for some one to take up his
case and purchase his freedom for him—in other
words, to redeem him. The Bible sees in this
redeeming of slaves a symbol of what God
does for sinful man. Man is in bondage to
sin. That bondage means two things—first, a
subjection of man’s nature in a greater or less
degree to evil; and, secondly, punishment fol-
lowing along the lines of unchanging law
because of this sinful state. It need not be said
that man is unable to free himself. Therefore,
if the bondage is to be broken and man to be
set free, it must be by God’s power. Now we
are in a position to understand what is meant
when it is said that “ God gave His only-
begotten Son, that whosoever believeth on Him
should not perish, but have everlasting life.”
(John Hi., 16.) God beheld man in a state of
bondage, and, although man was rebellious,
He loved him. He loved man so much
that it became His good counsel to rescue
him. This could only be done by taking


part Himself in our human lot, and so
He sent His Son to earth to live and die
as a man. It is impossible for us to under-
stand all that is meant by the title “ Son of
God ” as applied to Jesus. Our understanding
is so limited that we cannot understand God
at all. Therefore, it is well not to speculate
over much on such great mysteries; but the
Church has always maintained that Jesus was
God in a sense that neither men nor angels
can be. He was one with the Eternal Father,
so that, when He came to earth, it was not God
punishing some one else, but God in Christ
reconciling the world to Himself. We make
this point clear because people often wrongly
speak as if God were angry with men, and
Jesus had appeased His wrath. That is not so.
God loved the world, so loved it that He sent
Jesus, who was one with Him, to redeem it.
And this redemption, wrought through Jesus,
meant the bringing back of man to liberty and
sonship. That is to say, man, who by his sin
had become estranged from God, has been
restored to his position as a child of God. In
other words, he has been made “ at one ” with
God. In the next chapter we shall explain
more fully how this atonement or at-one-ment
has been effected.
EXERCISES ON THE CHAPTER.
(1) Is it correct to say that every movement
of the human soul towards good has been
brought about by the gracious influence of the
Holy Spirit?
(2) Give cases from daily life in which you


think it would not be right to pass over
offences without punishment in some form.
(3) What is meant by saying that sinful man
is in a state of bondage?
(4) What was a “ redeemer ” in ancient
Israel?
(5) It is sometimes said that God loves the
sinner, but is angry with his sin. Explain
this.
CHAPTER V.
Atonement, Justification, and Adoption.
Romans iii., 25: “Whom God hath set
forth to be a .propitiation through
faith in His blood.”
Romans v., 1: “Being justified by
faith, we have peace with God
through our Lord Jesus Christ.”
Galatians iv., 4,5: “When the fulness
of the time was come, God sent forth
His Son, made of a woman, made
under the law, to redeem them that
were under the law, that we might
receive the adoption of sons.”
We have said that God gave His Son to the
world to redeem it. It must now be made
clear that, while the whole of the life of Jesus
was spent in bringing liberty to the captives
bound under sin, it is the distinct teaching of
the New Testament that the deliverance was
effected specially by His death. They speak


of that death as a “propitiation.” Now “pro-
pitiation ” is a term connected with sacrifice.
According to ancient ideas, when a god was
offended, the only way of appeasing or pro-
pitiating him—that is, of turning away his
anger and making him calm and gracious
again—was to offer him a sacrifice. Therefore,
when Christ is said to have made propitiation
to God, or to have been a propitiation, it is
meant that His death was a sacrifice. But
we must be careful not to apply all the ideas
of the ancients to His sacrifice. For instance,
we have already said that God was not angry
with men in the sense of feeling personal
anger. God loved man, and we must direct
our attention away from personal feelings of
anger to the fact that the whole human race
had broken the laws of His divine government.
God had come into the position of a loving
judge who wished to pardon the guilty one,
and who was seeking to find a way. The
death of Jesus provided the way. He died for
sinful man. Now, how it can be that the
suffering and death of one man can bring heal-
ing and pardon to many is something which
we cannot altogether explain. Many have
tried to explain, but no explanation is really
satisfactory. Therefore, we do best to keep to
facts, and not to insist on any particular
explanation of facts. It may help us,
however, if we notice that in some
strange way there are, even in our human
lives, cases in which the suffering of innocent
people seems to bring pardon and help to
guilty ones. There is a mystery about suffer-
ing. Hence, though at first our reason rebels
against the idea of the death of Jesus being


a propitiation for sin, when we recognise this
mystery and see that as an actual fact the suf-
fering of innocent people does benefit the
guilty, we see that there is no valid reason for
denying the statement of the New Testament
writers that the death of Jesus was a propitia-
tion whereby He made atonement for our sins.
But it is needful here to make one point clear.
When speaking of the consequences of sin,
we said that law in this connection had two
meanings. There are laws of the universe,
usually spoken of as natural laws, and there
are also laws of moral government. Sin
breaks law in both these senses, but in speak-
ing of propitiation we refer only to the re-
moval of the offence against God’s moral
government. The Bible does not tell us that
the effects arising from the breaking of natu-
ral laws are cancelle-d. Let us take a simple
illustration. A man who has wasted his life
in sin, ruining thereby body, mind, and soul,
may finally repent and be forgiven. But that
forgiveness does not involve that his body will
be made sound again, or that his mind will
recover its vigour, or that his soul will
not suffer infinite loss owing to his years
of sin. The fact is that we cannot sin with-
out suffering for it. Moreover, it is only
reasonable that a man who has spent most
of his life in sin must suffer a great loss,
which he would not have suffered had he
served Christ from his youth. It is well to
recognise this fact, because there are many
who think that it will be all right as long as
they ask God’s forgiveness before they die.
God will pardon a repentant sinner, whatever


his age may be, but wasted years can never be
restored.
It will now be easy, if we have grasped the
meaning of propitiation and atonement, to
understand what justification is. A just or
upright man is a man against whom no word
of condemnation can be spoken. A guilty man
is not a just man, because he has broken the
law. When, therefore, we turn to God and
His law, we see that, since all are guilty in
His sight, no man is just before Him. The
apostle Paul tells us that he tried to keep all
God’s commandments and failed. Martin
Luther went into a monastery in order to
serve God aright; but, instead of feeling that
he was blameless in God’s sight, he fell into
great distress of soul because he recognised
that he had not kept the divine law. Peace
came to him at last through reading the
Epistle to the Romans. Paul there makes it
clear that all men are guilty in God’s sight,
but that Jesus died for them, and that now
God does not look on their guilt, but on His
righteousness. They are thus “ made just ”
or “justified” by His death. In simple Eng-
lish, this means that no word of condemna-
tion can be spoken against us sinners, because
Jesus has taken away the condemnation by
His death.
But, of course, it rests with ourselves
whether or not we accept this atonement
which has been made for us by Jesus, and
become justified. God wishes to free us from
our sin and its guilt, and He has prepared a
plan of redemption whereby this salvation may
be effected. All that is required of us is trust
or faith in H im. This trust we may, if we


wish, withhold. Justification, therefore, de-
pends on our faith, and that is why it is
spoken of as “justification by faith.”
Finally, if we do have faith in God and His
work of redemption through Christ, our sins
are forgiven, the condemnation passes away,
and we are restored to the position of sons.
This restoration to sonship is called in the
New Testament “adoption.” Adoption,
properly speaking, is a custom whereby a
child who does not belong to a family is
brought into it. Man by his sin has put him-
self outside the family of God, and the figure
of adoption serves to express the fact that,
upon his repentance and acceptance of Jesus
as his Redeemer, he is brought within that
family once more.
EXERCISES ON THE CHAPTER.
(1) Explain clearly what is meant by
propitiation.
(2) From your own observation of life can
you give any cases where the suffering of
innocent people has brought benefit or even
forgiveness to others?
(3) A man says, “If only I am forgiven
before I die, I shall be right.” Is his state-
ment correct?
(4) Why is justification always spoken of
as justification by faith?
(5) What do you understand by “ adop-
tion?”


CHAPTER VI.
Sanctification and the Christian Life.
1 Thess. iv., 3: “ For this is the will of
God, even your sanctification.”
1 Thess. v., 23; “The very God of peace
sanctify you wholly.”
We have now dealt with God’s plan of re-
demption in so far as that affects the first
two consequences of sin, namely, breach of
divine law and estrangement from God. But
sin is also corruption of our moral and
spiritual nature, and, until this corruption is
cleansed, man’s salvation is incomplete. And
let us note in passing that we should not
speak of salvation as if it only meant rescue
from punishment. It means entire deliver-
ance from the bondage of our sinful nature.
This deliverance is effected by the direct
agency of the Holy Spirit, which, as has been
already said, is continually acting on the minds
of men to turn them to the right. In man’s
unrepentant state he resists that Spirit; but,
when he repents of his sin, and asks God to
free him from it, he thereby provides oppor-
tunity for God to have full play in his life,
and cleanse it of its sinful taint. The pro-
cess whereby this sinful taint is cleansed is
called sanctification. Literally “ sanctifica-
tion ” means “making holy”—that is, making
pure and without stain of sin, even as God is.
You will notice that we have spoken of
sanctification as a process. Some regard it
as an act, and it is often spoken of as the


“ second blessing.” There is such a thing
as a second blessing, but it is a stage in
sanctification. Let us try to make this point
clear. When God justifies a man through
Christ, and receives him into the great family
of His redeemed children, He also begins to
regenerate him—that is, to make him a new
man. This is what is referred to when
we speak of the new birth. Of course, the
language is symbolic. We sometimes hear
people say, “My old life is dead.” They
mean that they have done with their old life,
and that a new kind of life has begun. It
is the same when a man repents. God’s Spirit
is then allowed to come in, and a new life
begins. It is just as if he were born a second
time. But birth is only the beginning of life.
By and by this new life will develop into a
pure and perfect character like that of Jesus,
just as a new-born baby develops in course of
time into a full-grown man. The rapidity
with which this spiritual growth will take place
depends on our willingness to let God’s Spirit
do His work. Unfortunately, while it is true
that a man who repents wishes to be rid of his
sin, that sin has become so entwined with his
nature that it continually asserts itself, and
hinders the growth of the new life. Not
only so, but sin prevents us from perceiving
clearly what a perfect Christian character
involves, so that you will see the Spirit of God
has not only by His healing power to over-
come the disease of sin within us, but also
to enlighten our minds in the knowledge of
holiness. It frequently happens in the course
of this enlightenment that the Christian dis-
covers to his shame that he has been doing


things which he should not have done, and,
above all that, by reason of the sin still within
him, he has not allowed the healing power
of the Spirit to operate in his life as it should.
In deep sorrow he asks God’s forgiveness, and
prays that the Holy Spirit may enter in and
take entire possession of him. The prayer
is answered, with the result that a great spirit-
ual uplifting is experienced. This he calls
the “ second blessing.” It is a second bless-
ing, but you will see that it comes along the
line of the work of sanctification. Moreover,
he may experience yet another blessing later
on, as new heights of holiness are opened up
by the same Spirit. In short, then, we may
say that sanctification, or the entire cleansing
of the soul from sin, is a process which is
gradual, though sometimes interrupted by sud-
den enlightenment and advance, that it is
throughout the work of the Holy Spirit, and,
finally, that its rapidity depends largely on our
willingness to surrender ourselves absolutely
to God’s will, and consecrate ourselves to His
service.
It will now be clear that repentance, con-
version, justification, adoption, and sanctifica-
tion are all united as parts of the great work
by which God saves us from sin, and makes us
truly His children. Sanctification, however,
differs from the others in this, that, while they
are acts, it is a process. That is to say, it
is not effected at once, but goes on from day
to day. The part we have to play in sancti-
fication is that of aiding God’s Spirit by striv-
ing with all our might against sin. We are
children of God, and are called to resemble
Him in character as we see that character


revealed in Jesus Some have fallen into
the strange mistake of supposing that, because
God has saved them, they may do what they
like. This is not so. We are expected to
keep God’s law, but, as children of God, we
have His help to do it. In fact, we are to
set an example to those who are not Chris-
tians. Let us now state briefly and practically
what this means. As Christians we must be
just and merciful in our dealings with our fel-
low-men. We must do good in every pos-
sible way, so that we may advance the cause
of Christ’s kingdom. In our personal life
all wrong thoughts, words, and actions must
be subdued. We must diligently seek for God
at all times, and seek to know His will to do
it. Thus we may at last attain to the charac-
ter of Jesus, who is our great example. The
ideal is very high, and by our own strength
we should not reach it.- But in God’s strength
we can do all things. Moreover, God has
appointed certain means whereby we may get
strength from Him. These are commonly
called “means of grace.” We shall speak of
these in our next chapter.
EXERCISES ON THE CHAPTER.
(1) What meaning is sometimes attached to
the question, “Are You Saved?” What mean-
ing would you attach to it?
(2) It is often said that justification is an
act, sanctification a process. What is meant
by this?
(3) What is the “ second blessing?” Is it
identical with sanctification?
(4) Sanctification is a work of God’s Spirit.


Does this mean that we have no part to play
in it?
(5) Write out a list of duties which are
binding upon us in our Christian life.
CHAPTER VII.
The Means of Grace.
1 Thess. v., 17: “Pray without ceas-
ing.”
2 Tim. iii., 16: “ Every scripture in-
spired of God is also profitable for
teaching, for reproof, for correction,
for instruction which is in righteous-
ness.” (Revised Version.)
Hebrews x., 25: “Not forsaking the
assembling of ourselves together.”
Grace is a word used so frequently in the
New Testament that it may be well to explain
its meaning. The Greek word for “ grace ”
is “charis,” which originally means “some-
thing that gives delight,” and so “ charm ”
or “ winsomeness.” Applied to persons, the
word signified kindliness or winsomeness of
disposition. As applied to God it meant the
good-will and loving-kindness which He feels
for men. But good-will and loving-kindness
manifest themselves in kindly deeds to those
who are loved, and so we find the word
“ grace” transferred from the character of God
to denote the gracious gifts which He has
bestowed upon men, especially the gift of sal-


vation through Jesus. In this sense the word
has a wide range of meaning. It refers to
the love of God in seeking sinners, to all the
work of Christ by which He redeems them,
and to the help which, through the Holy Spirit
God is ever willing to give us. It is to this
help that we now direct attention, because
God has ordained certain means whereby it
may become ours. These are called “ means
of grace,” and they are —prayer, reading the
Scriptures, public worship of God, including
the hearing of God’s message, and the sacra-
ments.
Unfortunately, there are many Christians
who think that these means of grace are not
essential, and may, therefore, be more or less
neglected. To the contentions of such we
simply reply that a sincere Christian will find
the battle against sin in his own life and in
the world round about him so hard that, in
order to maintain his Christian character, he
needs all the help he can obtain. It is because
so many are neglectful of their duties as
Christians that they do not feel more need
of help. A sincere Christian needs no pioof
that the means of grace are a necessity.
Of these means, perhaps the chief is prayer.
Prayer is simply the uplifting of the heart to
God. It may be that we have some special
trouble which leads us to seek help, or it
may only be that we desire to feel that God
is with us. In either case, the main object
is the same, namely, to have assurance of
God’s presence and help. Even Jesus felt the
need of this assurance, and, if He felt it, how
much more should we! In fact, if we are
really struggling to do right and to resemble


Him in character, prayer comes quite spon-
taneously. Even in our work-time we may
lift our hearts Godward. Concerning the
nature of prayer, much might be said. We
shall only remark here that real prayer con-
sists in a sincere desire to have God with us.
Without this sincere desire, the mere uttering
of words is of no value. As to answers to
prayer, it is always well to remember that
God cannot give us all we may think right,
and, therefore, to all requests for material
benefits we should add the words, “If it be
Thy will!” Let us, however, be assured
that God does hear our prayer, whether He
gives us the exact thing we ask for or not,
and that He will do for us that which is best.
The next means of grace is the read-
ing of the Scriptures. There are many ways
by which this may be done. Some read the
Bible through from beginning to end; others
follow some system of Bible readings; others
again prefer to study one book or subject at
a time. Most people have favourite passages
which they read repeatedly. The exact
method may be left to individual inclination,
but it is always well to remember that the
centre of the Bible is the life of Christ. Then
we should also bear in mind the necessity of
understanding what we read, and for this pur-
pose some explanation will probably be
needed. There are many helpful books which
can be read in connection with the Bible; but,
as tastes and conditions differ so much in
various people, it will probably be best for
the young communicant to ask the minister’s
advice as to the best method of Bible study
in his or her particular case.


Attendance at God’s House is also of im-
mense importance as an aid to the Christian
life. The fact of joining with others in the
worship of God has a value in itself. Then
the expositions of the Bible given from the
pulpit, together with the exhortations to
steadfastness and to higher life, serve to en-
lighten the mind and to stimulate the desire
for goodness. For these and other reasons
all Christians should, if possible, be regular in
attendance at the church to which they may
belong, and they should take a deep interest
in the work of that church.
Finally, there are the sacraments of Bap-
tism and the Lord’s Supper. These are the
two external ordinances instituted by Christ,
and, although they are by no means necessary
to salvation, they are of great value as a
means of grace. As they require some ex-
planation, we shall devote a chapter to the
exposition of each.
EXERCISES ON THE CHAPTER.
(1) What is meant by saying that God is
“ gracious ” to men?
(2) Explain clearly what you mean by the
“ means of grace.” %
(3) “ I sometimes say my prayers, but do
I ever pray?” What do you understand by
the distinction between saying one’s prayers
and praying?
(4) What system of Bible reading do you
follow? Are you satisfied with it? Do you
think it could be improved?
(5) What reply would you make to a man
who said that he did not go to church because
he got as much good at home?


CHAPTER VIII
Baptism.
Matt, xxviii., 19. “Go ye therefore
and teach all nations, baptising
them in the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.”
Baptism is a rite which has a Jewish origin.
In tlm Old Testament, especially in Leviticus
and Numbers, we read of various washings
which were enjoined on the Israelites as a
means of cleansing from defilement. Defile-
ment in this sense has a religious significance.
That is to say, a defiled person might be per-
fectly clean in our sense of the term. His
defilement was a religious matter. Because
of it he could not join in public worship. (Cf.
Numbers ix., 6,7.) To attempt to do so was
a great offence against God. Because of this
religious aspect of the defilement or unclean-
ness, we are accustomed to speak of it as
“ ceremonial.” There were various ways in
which a person might become ceremonially
unclean. Disease was one, and, if the disease
were incurable, the individual afflicted was
permanently unclean, and therefore perman-
ently shut out from public worship. Touch-
ing a dead body, or touching any unclean
person or thing was another means of con-
tracting defilement. In these cases, however,
the defilement was not permanent, and might
be removed by certain washings, most of
which involved the washing of the whole
body.


After the Exile the Jews became scrupu-
lously particular about their religious cere-
monies, and therefore special attention was
given to ceremonial uncleanness. They
began to perceive possible causes of defile-
ment which men had passed by before. For
instance, if a man went into the street, especi-
ally into the broad streets or market-places
where business was carried on, he might
easily touch by accident an unclean person or
thing, and so become unclean himself. We
are told that the Jews therefore, and especi-
ally the Pharisees, made it a custom to wash
themselves as a means of purification on com-
ing in from the street. (Mark vii., 3,4.) These
washings they called “baptisms.” It is a little
difficult for us now to know exactly what they
did. Some think that they immersed them-
selves in water, but there is no evidence of
such a custom, and, in any case, there was
too limited a supply of water to permit of it.
It seems more likely that they either
sprinkled themselves with water, or that they
washed their hands and arms to the elbow
and then their faces, just as Mohammedans do
to-day.
But it was not from these baptisms that
Christian baptism sprang. It came along the
line of the baptism of proselytes. A proselyte
was a Gentile who had been converted to
Judaism. Of course, being a Gentile, he was
unclean, and it became the custom, before
admitting him to the community of Israel,
to baptise him in water. When John the
Baptist appeared in the wilderness, he adapted
this use of baptism to his preaching. But
John baptised Jews equally with Gentiles. In


other words, John was not troubled so much
about ceremonial uncleanness as about
change of heart, which the Jew might need
as much as the Gentile. His baptism was
symbolic of this change of heart.
Christian baptism, like that of John, has
nothing to do with ceremonial cleansing, but
it differs from John s baptism in several par-
ticulars. J°hn baptised only those who con-
fessed their sins and repented, and his bap-
tism was a sign or symbol to them that upon
condition of their repentance God cleansed
their hearts. But in the Christian Church
from the earliest times children have been
baptised, and the reason will be Quite clear
According to Jewish ideas, children were
whatever their parents might be. Now, when
the Gospel was first preached, the converts
were necessarily men and women, and upon
their turning from heathenism or Judaism
they were baptised, just as missionaries bap-
tise converts in the mission field to-day. Their
baptism was an outward sign of their entry
into the Christian Church. But the children
of Christians were in a different position.
They were born within the Christian Church,
and they are therefore described by the
Apostle Paul as “holy.” (1 Cor. vii., 14.)
Now, “holy” in this sense does not mean
“ free from sin,” but “ separated for and dedi-
cated to God,” which, of course, a heathen
child would not be. Therefore baptism was
administered in token of the fact that the
child did belong to God, and in connection
with this it may be well to point out that in
the Presbyterian Church it is not lawful for a
child to be baptised unless one of its parents


is a Christian. Sometimes people foolishly
say that, when a child is baptised, it is made
a member of the Church. That is not so.
Membership of the Church only comes when
the child has grown up and definitely desires
to be enrolled in the congregation of Christ’s
servants. What it does mean is that, just
as a Jewish boy was circumcised in token of
the fact that he belonged to the congregation
of Israel, so a Christian child is baptised in
token of the fact that it belongs to the con-
gregation of Christians. You will see, then,
that your baptism as children meant that you
were dedicated to the service of God by your
parents. It is possible for you to turn your
back on Jesus, just as it was possible for a
Jewish boy to be faithless to the religion of
his fathers, but your right course is to follow
up your baptism by definitely seeking admis-
sion to the membership of the Church now
that you have come to the age when you can
think for yourselves. It may possibly happen
that you were not baptised as a child. In that
case, you should ask for baptism before ad-
mission to Church membership.
It now remains to deal with baptism as a
means of grace. Some say that by means of
baptism the nature of the child is regenerated,
in other words, that the new birth of which
we spoke takes place then. This is called the
doctrine of “ baptismal regeneration.” The
doctrine, however, is only a theory, and evi-
dence is against it. Yet there is a blessing in
baptism if there has been real faith on the
part of the parents. I suppose we have no
doubt that the little children whom Jesus took


in His arms and blessed received a real bless-
ing. The same kind of blessing came to you
when your parents brought you for baptism.
You will see, then, that baptism has a real
value, and that, if it is rightly understood, it
becomes a source of help and inspiration to
us. And what has been said regarding the
baptism of the children of Christian parents
applies also to those who seek baptism as
adults, not having been baptised as children,
save that in their case the blessing comes by
reason of their own faith and not from that
of their parents.
EXERCISES ON THE CHAPTER,
(1) Describe the washings necessary for .the
cleansing of one who was healed of leprosy.
(Lev. xiv.)
(2) Why did the Pharisees baptise them-
selves on coming in from the market-place?
(3) “John’s baptism was symbolic and not
ceremonial.” Explain this, referring in your
answer to the fact that John’s disciples and
those of the Pharisees had a dispute about
purification. (John iii., 25.)
(4) Explain the principle underlying the
baptism of children.
(5) What is meant by “ baptismal regenera-
tion?” What blessing do you think comes to
us in baptism?


CHAPTER IX.
The Lord’s Supper.
1 Cor. xi., 26. “As often as ye eat
this bread, and drink this cup, ye
do show the Lord’s death till He
come.”
It has always been the custom among
Presbyterians to regard the Lord’s Supper as
a most solemn ordinance, in which no one
should take part without due preparation. And
surely this is a fitting view to take of the
meal which Jesus ordained for His followers
throughout the ages in memory of Himself.
It is a sacred thing to thus bear in mind the
dying of our Lord, and it behoves all His
servants to see to it that they do so in the
right spirit, and with proper understanding of
all that the observance involves. If they do
this, the Lord’s Supper will be found one of
the most precious of the means of grace. We
shall now endeavour to make clear the mean-
ing of each part of the observance as it is
carried out in our Church.
In the olden days it was the custom to
order a fast-day wherein people might pre-
pare themselves for partaking of the Lord’s
Supper, or the “ Communion,’’ as it is often
called. This fast-day has now almost, if not
entirely, disappeared, but the need of prepara-
tion is kept in view by the holding of at least
one Preparatory Service previous to the Com-
munion Sunday. It is the duty of every mem-
ber who can possibly do so to be present at


that service. If anyone is absolutely pre-
vented from coming, he should set apart some
time in which he can examine himself before
God, so as to worthily partake of the Com-
munion on the Lord’s Day. The custom,
which is becoming all too frequent, of neglect-
ing such preparation, is to be most strongly
condemned.
The nature of the Preparatory Service will
be obvious from the name. It is a service for
recollection and self-examination before the
Communion. The minister usually chooses
some subject bearing plainly on the duties of
the Christian life, and the members are in-
vited severally to examine themselves to see
that they are true in their love and devotion
to Jesus. Those who harbour any sin are
admonished to repent and seek forgiveness
before coming to the Lord’s Table.
On the Sabbath Day set apart for the Com-
munion the communicants are invited to take
their places in the seats specially set apart
for them. These seats should be covered with
white linen, indicating that the Lord’s Supper
was originally a meal. The ordinary service
is shortened to allow due time for the cele-
bration of the sacrament, and the sermon usu-
ally has reference to some aspect of the death
of Jesus, which is to be commemorated. The
actual Communion Service itself may have
slight variations in different churches, but
there are certain essential features in all.
First of all, the words of institution are read
from one of the Gospels, or from 1 Cor. xi.,
23. Then follows what is known as “ fenc-
ing the tables.” A fence, of course, is put up
to keep away those who should not enter a


place, and the object of fencing the tables is
to keep away those who should not take part
in the Lord’s Supper. It consists in the read-
ing by the minister of a warning to those who
live in any known sin not to come to the
Lord’s Table, because in so doing they eat
and drink judgment to themselves. But, lest
this warning cause worthy people to stay away,
there is always added a gracious invitation to
those who truly repent of their sins and who
sincerely wish to obey Christ to come to the
Supper table. At this stage it is usual to sing
the hymn beginning, “ ’Twas on that Night.”
During the singing of this hymn the minister
and elders take their places at the table where-
on the bread and wine have been put. Next
follows what is known as the “Thanksgiving
and Consecration Prayer.'' In this confession
is made of sin, and forgiveness asked; thanks
are rendered to God foe the work of Christ
and all the blessings of redemption; petition
is made for faith to rightly receive the ele-
ments in the Communion, and for the bless-
ing of God upon these elements; and, finally,
the offering and consecration to God of each
individual life is renewed.
In former times it was usual, either at this
stage, or before the Consecration Prayer, to
have a short address. This is now usually
omitted, and the minister proceeds to the
distribution of the bread and wine, first to the
elders, and then to the communicants. The
bread is cut into large pieces, and, as the
minister repeats the words in 1 Cor. xi., 23, 24,
beginning, “The Lord Jesus the same night
in which He was betrayed,” he symbolically
breaks the bread. When taking the cup, he


repeats 1 Cor. xi., 25, and afterwards adds the
words in verse 26. After all have partaken
of the elements and a brief time has been
allowed for silent prayer, the minister gives
a short address, usually a word of exhortation
bearing on the Christian life. Then, by old-
established custom, Psalm ciii., or part of it,
is sung, the minister offers prayer, a closing
psalm, hymn, or doxology is sung, and the
benediction pronounced.
Now, it is desirable that each member should
follow intelligently each part of the Commu-
nion Service, and it is for this reason we have
given a brief summary of it. The right par-
taking of the Lord’s Supper has been found
by Christian people to be a great source of
blessing. We do not hold that there is any
mystic power in the bread and wine them-
selves, much less do we hold that the ele-
ments have been changed into the actual body
and blood of Christ, as the Roman Catholics
do. Nevertheless, the partaking of these sym-
bols of the body and blood of Christ serve to
remind us of His great sacrifice for us. More-
over, in the Supper, we have communion with
each other and with Him. By communion we
mean the uniting of our spirits in loving har-
mony of purpose and desire. The help and
upbuilding of our character resulting from
this communion is symbolically expressed as
“feeding on Christ.” This is what Jesus
meant when He said, “ This is My body
. . . This is My blood.” And, finally, by
observing the Lord’s Supper, we point for-
ward to His coming again, and, whatever that
coming may mean for us, it is something to


which we should look forward with fear,
mingled with glorious hope.
EXERCISES ON THE CHAPTER.
(1) Give in your own words the story of
how Jesus instituted the Lord’s Supper.
(2) What objects are aimed at in holding a
Preparatory Service prior to Communion?
(3) Connect the custom of fencing the
tables with the words of Paul in 1 Cor. xi.,
28, 29.
(4) What benefits flow from the right par-
taking of the Communion?
CHAPTER X.
The Duties of a Church Member.
Acts xx., 28. “Take heed therefore
unto yourselves, and to all the flock,
over the which the Holy Ghost hath
made you overseers (bishops), to
feed the Church of God, which He
hath purchased with His own
blood.”
1 Cor. xii., 27. “Ye are the body of
Christ, and members in particular.”
When Jesus left the earth, He entrusted
the preaching of the Gospel to His disciples.
In obedience to His command, they went
forth proclaiming the glad news of salvation.
The result was that in many towns and cities,
not only in Palestine, but throughout Southern


Europe, numbers of people, both Jews and
Gentiles, believed in Jesus and became His
followers. At first, these bands of believers
tried to keep fairly closely in touch with the
Jewish synagogue, but the bitter opposition
of the Jews soon forced them to form separate
communities. As yet they had no buildings,
and it would seem to have been a custom in
many places for one of the richer members
to put his house at the service of all for the
purpose of holding meetings. This was the
origin of the local “ Ecclesia ” or “ Church.”
It is even referred to as “ the Church in the
house.” (Cf. Romans xvi., 5; 1 Cor. xvi., 19;
Col. iv., 15.) Originally, then, the Church is
simply an organised body of Christians who
meet for worship, and particularly for the
celebration of the Lord’s Supper. Occasion-
ally the word is used to denote all followers
of Christ wherever found. This is the
Church universal as opposed to the local
Church. Our modern custom of referring to
the building in which the meetings are held
as the “ Church ” is a later usage which leads
to some confusion.
Naturally, in these apostolic Churches, the
Apostles, while they remained, were regarded
as the supreme authorities. But, before they
left, they caused local office-bearers to be
appointed. We read in the New Testament
of two classes of office-bearers—deacons, and
elders or bishops. The deacons were origin-
ally appointed to see to the distribution of
alms. (Acts vi., 1-6.) Their equivalent in
our modern Presbyterian Church is the Board
of Management. In some places managers
are still called deacons. Their work is


strictly confined to the business side of
Church life, and they are elected for a limited
period. Managers are not now ordained,
though deacons were. But the more import-
ant work of controlling and overseeing the
Church in its worship and various missionary
activities was entrusted by the Apostles to
the elders, who were first chosen by the con-
gregation and then set apart for office by
ordination, involving the laying on of the
Apostles’ hands. The Greek word for “ elder ”
is “ presbuteros,” and our Church is called
the Presbyterian Church, because, at the Re-
formation, we went back to the primitive
mode of government by elders. It may be
interesting for you to know also that the
Greek word for “ overseer ” is “ episkopos ”
or “ bishop.” An elder and a bishop in the
apostolic Church are the same, the name
“ elder ” being taken from the title of similar
office-bearers in the Jewish synagogue, while
the title “ bishop ” has reference to their work
as overseers. At first all elders were regarded
as equal, though, of necessity, there would be
some who would become prominent by reason
of special gifts. Then, as time went on, and
the duties devolving upon the elders increased,
it became necessary to set apart some to that
work alone. This was the origin of the
modern minister, who is really an elder
ordained to special work and therefore pos-
sessing special powers.
Having grasped these principles on which
the early Church was founded, and which
have been closely followed in the constitu-
tion of the Presbyterian Church, it now re-
mains to state precisely what is meant by a


Church member, and what the duties of such
members are. In apostolic times the distin-
guishing characteristics of a Church member
were that he had been baptised, that he joined
himself with other believers in public worship,
especially in the celebration of the Lord’s
Supper, and that he submitted himself to the
spiritual direction of the elders in the Church.
This last point is of importance, because it
shows that, from the earliest times, it was
not permitted that anyone should attach him-
self to the Church purely at his own will. He
must first be recognised as worthy, and this
was done, first by the Apostles, afterwards by
the elders. The qualifications of a Church
member are practically the same with us still.
He must have been baptised either as an infant
or as an adult. He is expected, if he is able,
to attend the Church services regularly, and,
above all, to be present at the celebration of
the Lord’s Supper. Previous to admission, he
must make application through the minister to
the court of elders called by us the “ Session,”
and, when the Session is satisfied of his know-
ledge and character, he is formally admitted
as a member, usually at the Preparatory Ser-
vice prior to Communion. It is naturally
expected of one who has been thus formally
acknowledged as a follower of Christ that
he will live a consistent Christian life before
the world. Unfortunately, Church members
often forget that they are expected to be just
and merciful in their dealings with their
fellow-men, as well as pure in their personal
life, and by their negligence they bring dis-
grace on the name of their Master. So,
too, all Church members should be actively


interested in all work undertaken by the con-
gregation to which they belong for the
advancement of Christ’s kingdom. They
should support this work, and do good in
whatever way is possible for them.
A word may be said, finally, about the rela-
tion of members to the Session or Elders’
Court. The elders, including the minister as
presiding and teaching elder, have supreme
control over all spiritual interests in the con-
gregation. They may alter or even stop any-
thing which they think is interfering with the
true work of the Church. We have already
said that they have the responsibility of ad-
mitting members to the fellowship of the
Church. They also have spiritual control
over the members, so that, if a member is seen
to be doing that which is wrong, it is the busi-
ness of the Session to admonish him. If he
commits open and grievous sin, he may, and
should, be summoned before the Session,
which has power, in case it seems right to
them so to do, to formally try him for the
offence and even depose him from member-
ship. Fortunately, such extreme measures are
seldom needful, but it is well to recognise
that the Session has such powers. It is the
duty of members to respect them, and to see
to it that, neither on their part nor on the
part of those who are only adherents of the
Church, is there any spirit of rebellion to this
lawful authority.
It may be well to add that there are other
Church courts higher than the Session. The
ordinary Church member seldom comes into
contact with them, but he owes obedience to
their decrees. More especially we may men-


tion the Assembly, which has the spiritual
oversight of the work of the Church in a
whole country or State. The Assembly
represents the sum total of all Presbyterian
congregations, and it undertakes work for the
extension of Christ’s kingdom in the name of
those congregations. All members should
have a general acquaintance with what that
work is, and, if the Assembly thinks it neces-
sary to make special appeals or appoint
special collections, these appeals should be
responded to willingly in accordance with our
powers. By so doing, the Church member
realises his position as one of a great army of
believers, who together constitute what
Paul refers to as the “ body of Christ.” In
proportion as he does his duty, that body is
in health, and prospers; in proportion as he
fails, that body suffers too.
EXERCISES ON THE CHAPTER.
(1) In what different senses is the word
“Church” used? What is its original and
proper meaning?
(2) Why are we called Presbyterians?
(3) What is the “Session?” What powers
does it possess?
(4) What constitutes a Church member as
opposed to an adherent?
(5) Write out a list of the obligations which
you would regard as binding on all Church
members.








