

>ll
i
7 3A
In the
A *r f
Sunbeam **
To
AV
ir^wwV/
New Zealand
) ' I k s 5
p\ J\C)
Ai
i /
Melbourne:
Messrs* George Robertson & Co*, Little Collins Street*
Echo Publishing Co*, Ltd*, 343 Flinders Lane*








.t (*) >*■••
' v , ' ■ >*' 7s‘
- 1 ■ ’
"’'m
....
' /: '-X
.-• y\
jra**lS as&Ki&nt to-H
gabuifem -slc^X?




In the Sunbeam^
to New Zealand
LORD BRASSEY, K.C.8., D.C.L.
Commander of the Legion of Honour,
Melbourne:
MESSRS. GEORGE ROBERTSON & CO., LITTLE COLLINS STREET,
ECHO PUBLISHING CO., LTD., FLINDERS LANE.


ECHO PUBLISHING CO., LTD.,
PRINTERS AND PUBLISHERS,
343 FLINDERS LANE, MELB.


In the Sunbeam to New Zealand
■*-a’'£7
I.—MELBOURNE TO NEW ZEALAND.
December 27, 1896.— -After several hot days a change of weather
took place this afternoon, and rain fell heavily. At 10 p.m., in a
drenching shower, we went on board the Sunbeam in the Customs launch.
December 28. —At 6 a.m. calm. Lighted hres. At 8: 30 a.m. The Outward
weighed and proceeded under steam. At 12 :15 cleared Port Phillip v °yage.
Heads. The scene this morning was delightful to lovers of sailing. A
full-rigged ship was entering the South Channel, running in before a
fresh breeze. Off Point Lonsdale a four-masted ship was standing in,
close-hauled, with every sail set. Outside the Heads my training ship,
the Hesperus, arriving from London, was hove-to, waiting for a pilot.
By signal we bid a warm welcome to Captain Barrett, whose ship
was being brought into port in perfect order. The clever handling of
these large vessels of the mercantile marine under a cloud of canvas
swelling to the breeze, with the reduced crews of the present day,
requires, in a high degree, that skilful seamanship for which, in this
age of steam propulsion, there is less opportunity than in the elder day.
The wind, blowing fresh and fair from the south-western quarter,
was favourable for our voyage towards New Zealand. We ceased
steaming and set all possible sail. As we stood along the coast for
Cape Schanck we experienced in rapid succession calms, heavy rain
and squalls, and later in the afternoon a strong breeze from the south-
west. Bowling along at ten knots, the light on Wilson’s Promontory
was sighted at 11 p.m. Half an hour later the high rock of Rodondo
could be dimly seen.


December 2 a.m. we were abreast of Curtis Island; at 6
Pyramid Island was in view; at g a.m. we were off Flinder’s Island.
At 10 a.m. it was nearly calm. At noon a pleasant sailing breeze set
in from the north-west, which carried us down to Swan Island.
At 7 p.m. we passed through Banks’ Straits. At sunset calm.
At 8: 30 p.m. breeze from the south-east. Worked to windward
through Banks’ Straits, gaining ground slowly against a contrary tide.
December 30. —In making short tacks all through the night the
crew did their work well, the older men showing that they had not
forgotten their profession, while the boys from Queenscliff were willing,
plucky aloft, and anxious to learn.
Calm after sunrise. At 8:30 a.m. breeze from S. S.E. At noon
the Sunbeam's position was 40.48 deg. S., 149.5 deg. E. The run of 100
miles under sail was a not unsatisfactory performance in a day of
light and contrary winds.
The afternoon was largely occupied in taking and working sights
for longitudes by chronometer. After a long interval on shore,
accuracy, even in simple things, demands more time than is required
after two or three days’ practice.
December. 31. —The weather during the past twenty-four hours
had been fine, but the wind contrary. After midnight the breeze
gradually worked round to the north ; the barometer slowly fell; the
wind gradually freshened, and with all possible sail set we were mak-
ing short miles towards New Zealand. In the forenoon a speed of
eight knots was maintained. At noon our latitude 41.53 deg., longi-
tude, 153 deg. E.
During the afternoon the breeze gradually freshened into a
moderate gale, slowly veering from N. to N. N. W. In the evening
we did some precautionary battening down. At 8 p.m. double-reefed
the mizen.
January i, 1897. —Our New Year’s Day of 1897 was spent in
contending with the heavy weather so frequently experienced in these
seas. At 4 a.m. in a squall, the wind shifted to the west. Took in
all fore and aft canvas. At noon 43.34 deg. S., 155.53 deg. E. Run
240 miles.
All through the afternoon the gale was blowing with unabated
strength. At 6 p.m, battened down fore and aft. At 8: 30 p.m. a
4
In the Sunbeam to New Zealand.


heavy sea broke on board abaft the main rigging on the starboard
side, causing damage to bulwarks, flooding the decks, and finding
its way into the saloon.
January 2. —At dawn the weather had improved, though the
wind was still strong and the sea heavy. At noon latitude 44.26
deg. S., longitude 160.56 deg. E. Run 228 miles.
Our little daughter Helen has proved an admirable sailor, cheery
as a cricket, and quite undaunted by the howling winds and heavy
labouring of the vessel.
January 3. —At 2 a.m. the breeze fell. At 6 a.m. running under
square canvas only. At noon under all possible sail. Breeze from
N.N.W. Latitude 45.22 deg. S., longitude 164.25 E. Run 158 miles.
In the afternoon the speed gradually increased to twelve knots
an hour. At 8 p.m. made the light at the South-West Cape of New
Zealand, —a perfect land fall.
January 4. —Through the night navigated the Foveaux Straits,
At 10 a.m. entered Bluff Harbour. At noon made fast to the wharf.
The run of the day was 185 miles, the total distance from Melbourne
having been : sail, 1,200 miles, steam, 265 miles. Our passage has
been rapid but boisterous. The Sunbeam has behaved well, and the
crew have been worthy of their ship.
lI.—BLUFF; INVERCARGILL; LAKE WAKATIPU.
On arrival at Bluff we learned that the annual regatta fixed for
Saturday last, and which had attracted thousands of visitors, had
been put off, the gale having been one of the hardest experienced at
this season in recent years.
In the afternoon walked up to the signal station, from which a
fine view is obtained of the Foveaux Straits and Stewart’s Island.
January 5. —To Invercargill by train. Received by the Mayor.
Visited the Water Tower, the Old Men’s Home, and the Athenaeum —
a spacious reading room well supplied with newspapers, periodicals,
and books. The proceedings ended at the Town Hall with a speech
on the advantages to the Mother Country and her daughter States of
remaining united in one Empire.
5
In the Sunbeam to New Zealand.


The county surrounding Invercargill is flat but not unpleasing.
The rising city is a prosperous agricultural centre for a large and
fertile district inland, producing oats in great perfection, and well
suited for raising cattle and grazing sheep. In this part of New
Zealand, Scotland has done the main work of colonising.
Our visit to the Old Men’s Home suggested many reflections.
The inmates represent the same class who, in their old age, gather
into our workhouses at home; and this in a new country where
fertile land can be had free of cost, and the normal wages are at
least 6/- per day. It is sad, and it is true: The poor we have
always with us! In no country, and under no social condition, do
we find the well-to-do relieved of a deep responsibility for the care
and maintenance of the unfortunate.
The streets of Invercargill are broad and regular; the shops
are well supplied; an air of general prosperity prevails. Late in the
afternoon made another climb to the signal station at Bluff. The
Union Company’s steamer, Manipouri, was in sight; at g o’clock she
arrived, bringing Lord and Lady Magheramorne, the Earl of Shaftesbury,
and the Hon. Randolph Capel, to join the Sunbeam.
January 6. —At io a.m. left by a special train for Lake Wakatipu.
We arrived at Queenstown at 4 p.m. The railway journey from Bluff
recalled the Lowlands; the lake, the Highlands of Scotland. Lake
Wakatipu is a grand sheet of water, hemmed in between precipitous
mountains towering up to heights of 6,000 to 9,000 feet.
January 7, —Walked out in the early morning. Weather glorious.
Magnificent views of the lake and surrounding mountains.
Many excursions can be made from Queenstown. We selected
the ascent of Ben Lomond, whose summit, —5,600 feet above the sea,
—is reached in a stiff climb of seven miles. The toil of the ascent
is amply repaid by the splendid view. The deep, blue waters of Lake
Wakatipu, and its irregular shores, with the surrounding chains of
mountains, form a picture of surpassing loveliness. The chain of
mountains, fitly named “ The Remarkables,” more than 7,000 feet
high, stands up like a wall above the waters of the lake. As the eye
sweeps round to the north and south, to the east and west, on every
hand are seen range upon range, mountain buttress upon buttress,
6
In the Sunbeam to New Zealand.


ridge above ridge, and peak towering above peak. All the loftier
summits are covered with snow, while the valleys are green and gay
with rich pastures and groves of trees.
In this expedition Sybil did a record performance, ascending and
descending Ben Lomond on foot. Near the summit the walking is
severe. An excellent horse had been provided; his services were
disdainfully declined.
January 8. —The weather showing every indication of those fine
conditions so essential for a trip to the Sounds, we hurried away with
reluctance from our charming quarters at Queenstown. At 10 :30 a.m.
embarked on a special steamer. Proceeded some ten miles to a bend
in the lake from which a view could be obtained of a grand snow-
clad range, the chief summits being the Cosmos Peak (8,000 feet)
and Mount Earnshaw (over 9,000 feet). Their robes of snow and
thrones of ice glistered on this lovely day in the unclouded sunshine.
How faintly flush’d, how phantom fair,
Was Monta Rosa, hanging there,
A thousand shadowy pencill’d valleys
And snowy dells in a golden air.”
— Tennyson. (The Daisy.)
Turning back to Kingston we were regaled with an excellent
lunch. Our special train started at 3 p.m., and arrived at the Bluff
at 7 : 30. Embarking on the Sunbeam without delay, we cast off from
the wharf at 8:30 p.m. Outside the harbour calm, with heavy swell
from the S.W.
THE SOUNDS.
January q. — At 7 a.m. we were off the Green Islands. Here a
wind suddenly sprang up from the N. W. of such force that the
Sunbeam could scarcely keep steerage-way. At 10 a.m,, after a hard
struggle, we entered Preservation Inlet.
I will not attempt to describe in detail this most beautiful arm
of the sea. Its sinuous and most graceful windings between moun-
tains many thousands of feet in height; its numerous islets, and the
exquisitely fresh green scrub which clothes the hills from the sea-level
upwards to a height of 3,000 feet, afford to the delighted traveller a
7
In the Sunbeam to New Zealand,


picture always changing and always enchanting. The amphitheatre
of mountains, richly wooded, at the head of Long Sound, presented a
scene of beauty on this sunny day not to be described in words nor
ever to be effaced from memory.
“ But high in amphitheatre above,
Gay-tinted woods their massy foliage threw :
Breathed but an air of heaven, and all the grove
As if instinct with living spirit grew,
Rolling its verdant gulfs of every hue.
— Campbell.
Care and watchfulness are needed in the navigation of these
land-locked waters, here contracting into narrow channels, anon
expanding into inland lakes. Happily the sunken dangers are few.
Rocks above water are useful to the mariner as beacons placed by Na-
ture for his guidance. At noon we reached the head of Long Sound,
After long gazing on this scene of surpassing loveliness, we
steamed down to Kisbe Bay and anchored, A mining settlement,
bearing the name of Cromarty, has recently been established on the
shores of the bay. We landed and had some interesting conversation
with the miners. An old fellow, who came here as a prospector
thirty years ago, was introduced as the first discoverer of gold in
payable quantities in this district. The subsequent history, as gener-
ally happens in the case of mining enterprise, has been chequered by
alternate developments and suspensions of mining operations. Things
seem now on the upward grade. In addition to gold, several other
minerals have been discovered, including silver and copper. Efforts
are being made to float a company in London, and, if successful, work
will be actively pushed in a mine opened up by a New Zealand
Company, but which, owing to an insufficiency of capital, has been
long closed. Prospectors and miners work hard, and their prospects
are always precarious. The pioneer of mining in Cromarty bore no
marks of prosperity in the past, but he was hopeful of the future :
“ Hope springs eternal in the human breast.” There is an element
of gambling in frail human nature which encourages bold and sanguine
men in these gold-producing countries to abandon easier pursuits and
go forth into wild and uninhabited places, giving up home and the
8
In the Sunbeam to New Zealand.


blessings of civilisation, and toiling hard for earnings, which, if evenly
distributed among all the workers, would yield to each but a scanty
wage.
We pushed into the primeval bush of Kisbe Bay. Here and
there a monarch of the forest is seen, but the trees generally are not
of vast size. The charm of these woods consists in the density of
the vegetation, the parasitical growth, and the lovely tree ferns.
From Kisbe Bay we crossed the Sound to Welcome Road, an
anchorage recommended by Captain Cook, and well sheltered from
the ocean rollers.
January io. —At 4 a.m. it was blowing too hard from the N.W.
to make a passage northwards. Steamed round to Cuttle Cove and
anchored. The eddy winds blew in heavy squalls all day. Finding
that a single anchor would not hold, steam was raised, and we moved
further off shore with both anchors down and a long scope of chain.
The view from Cuttle Cove is magnificent. The Sound, studded
with numerous islets, is like an inland lake. On every side the
mountains rise tier upon tier. The Treble, Solitary, and Forgotten
Peaks, names happily chosen by the great navigator, are the most
prominent features in the middle distance. Behind rise the snow-clad
summits of the central ranges. The hills surrounding Cuttle Cove
are clothed with primeval forests, whose rich green mass is relieved
by flowering shrubs of many hues, the gayest and brightest being the
scarlet of the Rata.
“ Sweet interchange
Of hill and valley, rivers, woods, and plains;
Now land, now sea, and shores with forest crown’d,
Rocks, dens, and caves.” —Paradise Lost, IX.
The singing of its feathered denizens is among the things which
charm in this lovely region. The clear, metallic notes of the Tui fill
these solitudes with a flood of song.
Service at 11 a.m.
In the afternoon landed, and, guided by two prospectors who are
living in Cuttle Cove, scrambled up to the outcrop of the gold-bearing
quartz reefs which they have discovered, and which, by the aid of a
favourable report of a mining engineer, they hope to sell to advantage
to a company which it is being attempted to float in London.
9
In the Sunbeam to New Zealand.


The position of these prospectors is a forcible illustration of that
interdependence of labour and capital which is nowhere so clearly seen as
in new and undeveloped countries. Without the persevering, laborious,
and intelligent explorations of our friends of Cuttle Cove, the held of
employment which the district offers to capital would not have been
discovered. Without the aid of capital to the extent of some £B,OOO,
the prospectors are unable to utilise their discovery.
January ii. —Weighed at 9:30 a. m. and proceeded under steam.
We determined to make another attempt to steer northward for Dusky
Sound. Once more we were doomed to disappointment. As we
rounded Gulches Point we encountered the wind which has been
blowing so fiercely during the last few days from the N.W. In the
Broke-Adrift Channel —a narrow passage inside a dangerous reef —we
could not keep steerage-way. There was nothing for it but to hoist
the jib a-weather and bear up. In a few moments we were under
the lee of the reef. We decided to go up Long Sound a second time
to see the waterfall and visit the lake from which it is supplied. As
we steamed up Long Sound the eddy winds had all the violence of
the williewaws of the Straits of Magellan, clouds of spoon-drift being
driven before the furious blast.
We reached Cascade Cove at 3 p.m. In this land-locked water
hemmed in by a cul-de-sac of mountains, the atmosphere was almost
still. We landed in the cutter close to the hne waterfall. A clamber
of an hour through the forest brought us to the edge of the lake from
which the Cascade is supplied. The vegetation of these untrodden
mountain fastnesses of New Zealand is almost sub-tropical. Large
groves of tree ferns fill up every opening between the giants of the
forest, and a dense reticulation of parasites binds bough to bough and
stem to stem in an almost impenetrable jungle. The soil is peaty.
Here and there the quartz rock shows itself at the surface, and will
doubtless be found by future explorers to be gold-bearing.
After a charming walk we returned to our old anchorage in
Cuttle Cove.
January 12. —Proceeded under steam at 6:30, having been delayed
in weighing by foul anchors. Steered to the northward through
Broke-Adrift passage and inside Chalky Island. Off Providence Point
we encountered a furious gale from the N. N. W. Wore, set double-
10
In the Sunbeam to New Zealand.


reefed foresail and steered for North Harbour, a well-sheltered place
of refuge at the entrance into Chalky Sound. Here we rode out a
heavy gale with frequent violent squalls, both anchors down, each
with fifty fathoms of cable.
Landed in the afternoon on a sandy beach on the main land at
the upper end of the harbour. Striking rather rashly into the bush, in
a short time we had completely lost our way. After careful consideration
of the bearing of the sun, the carry of the storm clouds high over
head, and the direction of the local wind as it whistled through the
forest, we decided upon a course which happily brought us out to
the beach from which we had started. It was an experience not without
its momentary anxiety. To lose your way in these dense and trackless
forests, would be a serious situation for men without knowledge of
the art of travel in such regions. In a forest which I know well in
Michigan, two half-breds employed as caretakers who are frequently
away alone for a fortnight, always find their way out at any
point which may have been previously fixed upon. We had not the
instinct of these men of the woods, whose unerring faculty comes from
a life-long experience.
During the evening and the first part of the night, squalls of wind
and rain followed one another in rapid succession.
January 13. —The rain brought a shift of wind to the S. W. and
fine weather. Weighed at 7 and proceeded under steam. Outside
the islands the sea was moderate and the wind light.
We entered Dusky Sound at 10 :30 A. m. The scenery is
magnificent. The coast-line is deeply indented by bays and creeks,
and the Sound is studded with islands and islets —some of considerable
size. The Acheron Channel, which connects Dusky with Breaksea
Sound, is most impressive.
After quitting Breaksea Sound we steered northwards, following
the line of coast. The wind was from the southward, and blowing
hard. We selected Charles Sound as our harbour for the night.
Feeling our way cautiously with the lead, we steamed up to the head
of the Sound, where alone anchorage can be found, and that not at
all satisfactory. The scenery is fine. In any other part of the world
it would be esteemed magnificent.
11
In the Sunbeam to New Zealand.


January 14. —Weighed at 5 a.m. and proceeded under steam.
Shortly after we had left our anchorage we grazed over a sunken
rock not marked on the chart. To avoid the sunken rocks shown on
the chart on the eastern sides of two small groups of islands, we had
hugged the western shore of the Sound perhaps too closely. It is
obvious that a most minute survey might fail to discover every sunken
danger in the far-extending ramifications of the New Zealand Sounds.
Some risk is unavoidable in such a cruise as we are now making.
Fortunately, we only touched with the keel abaft the mizenmast,
sustaining no damage.
We turned into George Sound for breakfast, and steamed up to
the Narrows some six miles in from the entrance. George Sound has
been highly extolled by all travellers for its beauty, and well merits
their high praise.
Following closely the line of coast, at 1 p.m. we entered Milford
Sound. This northern-most of the New Zealand Sounds is generally
the last to be reached by travellers. In the Admiralty sailing direc-
tions, not usually given to emotional language, Milford Sound is
described as a scene invested with a character of solemnity and
grandeur which description can barely realise. If it cannot be de-
scribed, it can never be forgotten.
In Preservation Inlet, in the sunny weather with which we were
favoured, the scenery was surpassingly beautiful. It became more
impressive in Dusky Sound. In Milford Sound the effects may
be described without exaggeration as sublime. Sheer precipices of rock
thousands of feet in height, snowy mountains —such as Mount Pem-
broke (7,000 feet in height), on the northern shore, and the famous
Mitre Peak on the south shore of the Sound, with other summits of
lesser elevation, yet so high as to be covered with perpetual snow and
crowned with glaciers —present a noble picture. The head of Milford
Sound is barred in by a massive wall of mountain over 4,000 feet in
height, appropriately named by the surveyors Sheerdown Hill. The
enchantment of the scene is enhanced by the Stirling and the Bowen
Falls. The anchorage at the head of the Sound is at the foot of the
Bowen Fall. The view from this point is not surpassed on coast
in the world. Every hour of the day produces new effects of light
and shade.
12
In the Sunbeam to New Zealand.


The passing clouds spread their graceful yet not impenetrable
veil now on this peak and now on that.
The swimming vapour slopes athwart the glen,
Puts forth an arm and grips from pine to pine
And loiters slowly drawn.”
— Tennyson.
As “the evening shade prevailed,” the rising moon, nearly at the
full, invested the scene with new impressions. It seemed to draw
the beholder to the mood of meditation on the greatness of the
Creator and the littleness of man. A land of such sublimity and
beauty inspires less of awe and fear than of humble adoration of the
Being whose hand has reared these noble and enduring monuments
of His creative power.
“All heaven and earth are still —though not in sleep,
But breathless, as we grow when feeling most;
And silent, as we stand in thoughts too deep
All heaven and earth are still: From the high host
Of stars, to the lull’d lake and mountain-coast,
All is concenter’d in a life intense,
Where not a beam, nor air, nor leaf is lost,
But hath a part of being, and a sense
Of that which is of all Creator and defence.”
We walked in the afternoon to the foot of the Bowen Falls, and
thence to the deep water basin. We called on Mr. and Mrs.
Sutherland, the solitary inhabitants of Milford Sound. Mrs. Suther-
land’s husband is an enthusiastic explorer and prospector. He
discovered the falls which bear his name and the track which leads
from the head of Milford Sound to Lake Te Anau —a distance of
thirty-four miles. In the whole distance between Milford Sound and
Preservation Inlet there is only one other inhabitant, who resides in
Dusky Bay, where he is employed by Government to collect speci-
mens of the native birds.
January 15. —On this day we did some hard work. Leaving the
Sunbeam at 7:30 a. m. we pulled in the cutter a distance of two
miles up the river. On landing, a walk of two miles brought us to
Lake Ada. From end to end of the lake is a pull of five miles.
From Lake Ada to a point where a view of the falls can be obtained
1 3
In the Sunbeam to New Zealand.


the distance is seven miles, and the walking in many places labori-
ous. We returned to the Sunbeam at 7:45, having been fully twelve
hours away, and this without resting anywhere except when in the
boat. We partook of food in making the passage up and down
Lake Ada. It was a hard day for Sybil, but she bravely struggled
on. At our turning point we were only a mile from the hut where
travellers invariably stop for the night on the way to or from Lake
Te Anau. We had done nearly two days’ work in one day.
The Sutherland Falls have a total height of 1,900 feet, but the
volume of water is inconsiderable. The chief charm of the walk
consists in the running stream which the path closely follows, the
beautiful vegetation, and the mountains, generally precipitous and bare,
towering up to heights of over 6,000 feet, which close in the gorge on
either hand.
It might be policy on the part of the Government of New
Zealand to improve the access to the Sounds, and especially to
Milford Sound. The track from Lake Te Anau should be made prac-
ticable for horses. A steam launch should be placed on Lake Ada
and kept under way during the season. At the head of Milford
Sound an hotel should be established, supported, at least in the be-
ginning, by a Government subsidy. These facilities would attract
thousands of travellers.
January 16. —Weighed at 5 a. m. and proceeded under steam..
Glorious morning. With regret we took our last view of Milford
Sound.
Having gained the open sea, we made all possible sail to a fresh
breeze from the north-west. Running merrily along at nine to ten
knots, we were abreast of Cape Puysegur at 9 :30 p. m. Here the
wind died away to a calm, and we completed the passage to the
Bluff under steam.
THE EAST COAST OF NEW ZEALAND,
January 18. —Sailed for Dunedin, In the evening rounded Cape
Waipapapa; at midnight made the Nugget Point light.
January 19. —During the night weather fine, wind contrary
from the north-east. As the day advanced the barometer fell rapidly.
14
In the Sunbeam to New Zealand.


and the wind increased in force to a moderate gale. All upper sails
were stowed, and lower fore-and-aft sails double-reefed. In the after-
noon hove-to for two hours. At three o’clock stood in for the land.
Later the barometer began to rise. In the evening the wind fell
away to a calm.
January 20. —At midnight we were under steam. At 6 in the
morning anchored in Port Chalmers. In the afternoon steamed up
to Dunedin.
January 21. —Dunedin is an important centre of trade and dis-
tribution for a large agricultural district, containing some of the
most fertile land in New Zealand. The town is finely situated
on a steep slope commanding an extensive view of the picturesque
harbour. The hills at the back of the town recall the scenery of
Scotland. The population is mainly Scotch; and the fine town
which they have created is essentially national in all its features,
notably the numerous churches and banks of the solid construction
so characteristic of similar buildings in Scotland. The Municipal
authorities of Dunedin are justly proud of a charming public drive
lately formed, and of their Museum and Library.
January 22. —At 6 a. m. weighed and proceeded under steam.
Outside the Heads made sail to a southerly breeze, light during the
day, but freshening to a moderate gale towards the evening. During
the night we averaged ten knots.
January 23. —At 6 a. m. rounded Bank’s Peninsula, a noble
promontory. At BA. M. made fast to buoys in Port Lyttelton. Later to
Christchurch. Saw a polo match between the local team and one from
Wellington, in which the former had a conspicuous advantage. Met
Lord Glasgow and his family. Dined with Mr. and Mrs. Rhodes.
Christchurch is built on the edge of a vast plain at the foot of
ranges of considerable elevation. The public gardens, the river
flowing round the town between grassy banks planted with willows,,
the rich, green foliage of the English trees, the Cathedral, —built from
the designs of Sir Gilbert Scott, —the charming group of University
buildings, the Museum, Hagley Park, and the perfect Polo Ground,
combine to make Christchurch one of the most attractive towns in
Australasia.
15
In the Sunbeam to New Zealand.


“ There, fast rooted in his beauty,
Stand, never overlook it, our favourite elms
That screen the herdsman’s solitary hut;
While far beyond
That, as with molten glass inlays the vale,
The sloping land recedes into the clouds;
Displaying on its varied side the grace
Of hedge-row beauties numberless, square tower,
Tall spire, from which the sound of cheerful bells
Just undulates upon the listening ear:
Groves, heaths, and smoking villages remote.
Scenes must be beautiful which, daily view’d,
Please daily, and whose novelty revives
Long knowledge and the scrutiny of years.” — Cowper. (The Task).
January 24. —A day of rest at Port Lyttelton. In the afternoon
visited the signal station. The man in charge served in the Navy in
the Crimean War. He hails from Maidstone, and knows Preston
Hall well. It was touching to hear him speak of my dear brother
Harry. After leaving the signal station I scrambled nearly to the
top of the high hills which encircle Port Lyttelton. The views are
very fine of the harbour and the Sound by which it is approached
from the sea. Port Lyttelton is one of the most satisfactoty
anchorages we have visited since our arrival in Australasian waters.
Read “Stanley’s Essays on Church and State.” Concur with his
views, and admire his perfect style.
January 25. —Sculled before breakfast. Prepared an address to
be delivered at Christchurch on Imperial Defence and the Federation
of the Empire. The Glasgows came to lunch. Dined at the
Christchurch Club at a farewell banquet to Lord Glasgow. Of the
party, numbering thirty-five, the great majority had been educated at
an English public school or university. It was a most pleasant
company of country gentlemen, such as would be gathered together at
a county club at Home.
January 26. —Completed address for Christchurch Branch of the
Navy League. Mr. and Mrs. Boyle to lunch. In the afternoon rode
on bicycle round Christchurch. Attended the afternoon service at the
Cathedral: excellent choir.
January 27. —To Springfield, distance fifty miles, by special train,
travelling over the Canterbury plains. This is the season of the har-
16
In the Sunbeam to New Zealand.


vest. The crops seemed heavy, but even •in this favoured district the
land is far from being of uniformly good qualit}o Patches are highly
fertile, while other parts are only fit for grazing, and the pasture by no
means luxuriant. Although a considerable proportion of the total
acreage consists of land inferior in quality, or absolutely unsuited for
settlement, New Zealand affords an abundant suppty of articles of
food. The crops of cereals are far heavier than those of Australasia.
The live-stock is of the finest quality: the production of frozen meat
and butter is large, and the clip of wool is heavy. In the North
Island the exports of kauri gum have reached a value of over half a
million sterling.
We lunched at Springfield, and in the afternoon drove forty-five
miles in three stages by special coach drawn by five horses. The road is
cut in many places out of the steep face of a precipice, with sharp
turns in most critical places. The leaders absolutely disappear round
the corners, and this on the edge of precipices with a fall of 2,000 feet.
If the horses were not perfectly trained, and the driving most skil-
ful, coaching would be impracticable. The scenery is fine, though
it will not compare with tljie Sounds. The mountains are, for the
most part, stripped of all vegetation by the constant landslips which
take place during and after the winter frosts.
January 28. —Drove fifteen miles through the Arthur’s Pass, 3,100
feet above the sea, to the Otira Gorge, The Gorge is so narrow as
scarcely to leave room for the bed of a mountain torrent and the
road running by its side. It is hemmed in by rugged slopes, which,
near the summit of the Pass, are naked and bare, but below are
densely clothed with trees and flowering shrubs; masses of the scarlet
blossom of the Rata glowing in the sunshine greatly enhance the
beauty of the scene. Two fine glaciers, the sources of the Bealey and
Teremakau Rivers, overhang the Gorge. Returned to Bealey’s in the
afternoon.
January 29. —To Christchurch. In the evening delivered an
address on the Defence and Federation of the Empire to a crowded,
attentive, and enthusiastic audience, whose manifestations of loyalty
were most gratifying. In the evening, embarked on the Sunbeam. I
append the report of the address from the two daily papers published
in Christchurch.
17
In the Sunbeam to New Zealand.


January 30. —Proceeded to sea under steam. When clear of the
harbour, made sail to a favourable breeze from the south-west. In
the morning the weather was fine; in the afternoon the wind freshened
gradually to a gale; at midnight it was blowing a strong gale along
the land from the south-west, accompanied by heavy rain. At 11 P.M..
we made the revolving light on Cape Campbell.
January 31. —At 1 a.m. we had passed Cape Campbell, scudding
before a heavy gale. At 3 a.m. we had nearly run the distance to Pen-
carrow Head. The light was not visible, and we decided to heave-to.
Soon after the Sunbeam had been brought to the wind, under storm
canvas, we saw through the gloom the land under our lee. As the
light on Pencarrow was still obscured, it was a moment of anxiety.
If b\ T chance we were to the eastward of our course, there was
risk of being embayed in Palliser Bay on a dead lee shore, in
a furious gale of wind. In a short quarter of an hour the rain
partially cleared away, the long desired light was seen, and cross-
bearings showed that the land under the lee was Cape Sinclair. We
were in an excellent position, and as dawn w 7 as approaching we ran
for Pencarrow. Driving forward at thirteen knots through a heavy
sea, we soon found ourselves in the welcome shelter of Port Nicholson.
We let go two anchors with sixty fathoms of cable, keeping the
engines going. The gale continued at its height until the afternoon,,
when we weighed and steamed into the anchorage of Wellington.
We had covered the distance of igo miles from Port Lyttelton
under sail at an average speed of ten knots an hour.
WELLINGTON.
February i. —Steamed alongside the wharf. In the course
of the day visited Government House, and took a long walk
along the Queen’s Drive. Dear 8., Freeman, and their party arrived
late in the evening. It was delightful to meet them.
February 2. —Bicycle ride along the beautiful shores of Evans r
Ba\u Took a walk with the Governor, who gave an interesting
account of his experiences in New Zealand. Admiral Bridge arrived.
The squadron now assembled here includes Orlando, three second-class
cruisers, and the gun boat Lizard, all in admirable order. Dined
with the Yacht Club.
18
In the Sunbeam to New Zealand.


Wellington is finely situated. The business quarter is on the
low ground, artificially formed in the vicinity of the line of
probably the largest structures of the kind south of the line. En-
terprise has received its reward in a busy traffic and a thriving
appearance everywhere, "which is pleasant to observe.
The residential quarter is on high ground commanding beauti-
ful views of the bay. The chief buildings are the Houses of
Parliament, the public offices, and the Government House, with
its extensive and well-kept garden gay with beds of flowers, the
Museum, the Public Library, the Club. The Public Gardens and
the Queen’s Drive, lately formed, are pleasant features of this ris-
ing capital.
Our visit took place in the week when the popular Governor and
his family were taking their leave of New Zealand. The Exhibition
Building was a convenient place of assembly on several occasions for
large gatherings of people, all anxious to testify their regard for Lord
and Lady Glasgow and their family. The regret at parting is mutual
and deeply felt.
It has not been the object of these hasty notes to enter into
public matters. The statistics show that New Zealand has a rapidly
increasing population with many sources of prosperity. In wool the
value of the exports has fallen in consequence of the drop in prices.
The stock of horses and cattle is increasing. The production of gold
is well maintained at over £1,000,000 a year. The value of the
exports of frozen meat is £1,250,000 ; provisions, tallow, and timber,
£1,647,000; kauri gum £419,000; the total exports aggregating
£8,390,153 or £l2 7s. per head of the population as against imports
valued at £9 4s. rod. per head. The public debt is more than £6O per
head. The colony, however, is prosperous, and can pay its way.
The Constitution of New Zealand is absolutely democratic. Taxa-
tion has been laid with a heavy hand on landed property. There is an
unsatisfied demand for land for the purposes of settlement, and the
Legislature looks with little favour on the owners of large properties,
more especially where the work of improvement has not been vigor-
ously pushed. Landowners complain of taxation. They have suffered
19
In the Sunbeam to New Zealand.


far more from the pressure of loans borrowed at high rates, and from
the fall in prices, both of wool and mutton.
The landowners must protect their interests by Parliamentary
methods. Their appeal lies to the electorate on the platform, in
Parliament, and in the press. The people may commit errors of
judgment from want of knowledge. They are not by intention unjust.
Friday, February 5. —Freeman arrived at Wellington, suffering
from a bad blow at polo. He has placed himself in the able hands
of Dr. Collins, and has been ordered to bed for a few days.
During this much to be regretted detention, we offered to take
some of the party to the Marlborough Sound, and last night embarked.
This morning at g: 30 we sailed on to Picton, arriving at 4 p.m.
Distance, fifty-live miles.
At the narrowest part Cook’s Strait is fifteen miles in width.
In lovely weather we steamed along the coast from Wellington for
some distance. Crossing the strait at the narrowest part, we
entered Tory Sound at 2 p.m., and after a hard struggle against a
seven-knot tide, we arrived at Picton at 4 p.m. The mountains are
less lofty than those of the famous Sounds already described; the
scenery is beautiful.
At Picton we caught a steamer of the Union Company, sailing
at 6, bound to Wellington. With regret we bade adieu to our
passengers, for whom this was a most convenient opportunity of
returning.
THE RETURN VOYAGE.
It now remains briefly to describe the return voyage from New
Zealand. On February 5 at 6:30 A. M. we weighed and proceeded
under steam down Queen Charlotte’s Sound. When outside the Sound,
we made sail to a strong breeze from the south-east.
After rounding Stephen’s Island, we encountered a heavy swell
from the north-west, and the wind falling light, the knocking about
was exceptionally trying.
20
In the Sunbeam to New Zealand.


At 8 p. m. it fell calm. At 10 lighted fires.
February 6. —Commenced steaming at midnight. At i: 30 fresh
breeze from south-west. At 2 a. m. under sail.
The wind increased to a moderate gale. Reefed down and
steered to the N. W. At noon, position 38.56 deg. S., 172.40 deg. E.
Distance, steam 15, sail no miles.
February 7. —The weather gradually improved, the wind veering
to the southward and gradually dying away. At 10 a. m. commenced
steaming. Noon, 37.25 deg. S., 170.48 deg. E. Sail 132 miles,
steam g.
February 8. —Continued under steam until 8 a. m., when we made
sail to a fresh breeze, which commenced at W. S. W. and gradually
worked round to south-east. Noon, 37.35 deg. S., 166.52 deg. E.
Steam and sail 157 miles, sail 18.
February g. —Steady breeze throughout from the south-east.
Noon, 35.58 deg. S., 164.28 deg. E. Sail 182 miles.
February 10. —A most satisfactory day under sail. Steady wind
from south-east. Noon, 34.20 deg. S., isg-5o deg. E. Sail 251 miles.
February ii. —Fine weather. Set balloon topmast staysails and
jib topsail. Noon, 33.3 g deg. S., 155.44 deg. E. Sail 223 miles.
February 12. —The same favourable breeze with diminished
strength. Noon, 33.52 deg. S., 151.54 de g- E * Sail *9° miles.
February 13. —Commenced steaming at noon, and made fast to
buoy in Farm Cove at 4 p. m.
S., Flelen, and R. P. N. left the ship. Inspected the China, the
latest addition to the P. &O. fleet, a splendid vessel. Dined at the
Australia Hotel. Excellent!
The run to Melbourne was accomplished under favourable con-
ditions. We carried a fair wind from the eastward the whole way,
light, with intervals of calm, during the first two days; fresh to strong
from Cape Howe to Cape Schanck. Thence to Melbourne under
steam with light airs. We rounded Gabo Island exactly forty-eight
hours after leaving Sydney. From Gabo Island to Cape Schanck
a speed of over ten knots was maintained with studsails set.
21
In the Sunbeam to New Zealand.


DAILY RUNS.
Date.
Sail,
Steam.
1896.
29th December
30th
Sailed from Melbourne,
31st
1897.
Ist January
2nd
3rd
4th
9th
13th
14th
16th
17th
19th
20th
3rst
4th February
s th
6th
7th
Bth
9th
10th
13th
14th
13th
16th
17th
Arrived at Bluff.
To Preservation Inlet.
In Dusky Sound.
Charles and Milford
[Sounds
Returned to Bluff.
Left Bluff.
Arrived Dunedin.
Left Dunedin.
Arrived Port Lyttelton
Left Port Lyttelton.
Arrived Wellington.
To Picton.
Sailed for Sydney.
47 .. .. Arrived Sydney.
.. I .. Sailed for Melbourne.
Total
22
In the Sunbeam to New Zealand.


Imperial Federation ;;j Defence
Address Delivered by
LORD BRASSEY, K.C.8., D.C.L.,
Commander of the Legion of Honour,
At Christchurch, New Zealand, 29th January, 1897, at the request
of the local branch of The NAVY LEAGUE.
.Jt




Imperial Federation w Defence
AM here this evening at the request of the local branch of
the Navy League to make a statement with reference to
Imperial Defence. Being out on a short holiday I might
perhaps have offered excuses. If I have not done so, it
is because I hold a strong view as to the duties of
Governors. In local affairs we occupy a strictly constitu-
*s* tional position. In all that concerns the Imperial con-
nection we have more active duties. We are bound to
do what we can to strengthen that connection, and to establish the
conviction in the mind of our Colonial fellow-subjects that the unity
of the Empire is for their advantage no less than for that of the Mother
Country. It will be my endeavour to-night to show that, with
adequate naval defence, such as the Mother Country has at great
cost provided, New Zealand is secure from all external foes.
We owe to Captain Mahan, an American writer of singular
lucidity and exhaustive research, the demonstration by historical
evidence that the British Empire has been built up by its naval
power, and that on the Navy the defence of its shores and its
commerce mainly rests. No invasion of the Mother Country is
possible so long as the British Fleet commands the Channel. No
invasion of the Colonies is possible so long as British fleets command
the highways of the seas.


Protection to the Colonies would, in many cases, be given more
effectively by operating with overwhelming force at vital points near
our own base of operations at Home, rather than by scattering our
forces too widely in distant waters. Efficient local forces in the Col-
onies will always prevent a landing by small parties from hostile
squadrons. This great principle of Imperial Defence was clearly laid
down by the Duke of Devonshire in his recent speech at the Mansion
House. It has been long accepted by naval strategists.
The British Empire is perhaps most open to attack in its oversea
commerce. Yet the experience of history teaches that an attack
directed against commerce alone has never led to the defeat of a
nation which possessed a powerful navy. In the great war which
lasted from 1793 to 1815, while no less than 11,000 British merchant
ships were captured, so elastic were our resources that the total
number of ships belonging to Great Britain rose from 16,875 in 1795
to 23,703 ships in 1810. Captain Mahan calculates the direct loss to
Great Britain at not exceeding two and a half per cent, of her com-
merce. On the other hand, the war was fatal to the commerce of
France. Before the Revolution it equalled that of England. In 1797
not a single merchant ship was at sea carrying the French flag.
Let us now pass on to consider what description of force is
required to enable the Navy to perform efficiently its great duties.
Battle-ships are, before all things, necessary. Superiority in the line
of battle assures the military command of the sea, the control of the
strategic centres of commerce, and the defence of the Coaling Stations.
In battle-ships, how do we stand ? In a lecture recently delivered
at Melbourne, my son, who has succeeded me as editor of the “ Naval
Annual,” gave the relative position as follows : “ It is certain,” he
said, “ that the British Empire is better defended to-day than it was
two years ago. In 1894 there were 46 battle-ships built and building
for Britain as against 51 for France and Russia. In first-class battle-
ships we had 19 built and 3 building as against 15 built and 12
building for France and Russia. In 1896 we had made a great stride.
M e had 12 building and 22 completed as against 14 building and 15
completed for France and Russia.” A comparison of numbers does
26
Imperial Federation and Defence.


not fully set forth the superiority of the British Navy. The average
tonnage of our ships is immensely beyond that of the ships of other
navies, and we have the further advantage that we have no ships on
our lists in a state of partial decay. Every ship is in seaworthy con-
dition, and ready to fill up the gaps which we must expedt after a
hard-fought engagement.
Turning from the battle-ships to the cruisers, on which we depend
for the security of our trade, the relative position according to the latest
information may be summarised as follows : In the first-class, ranging
in size from the 12,400 tons of the Powerful and Majestic to the 5,600
tons of the Flagship on this Station, Britain has 38 ships, aggregating
331,880 tons; France has 12 ships, aggregating 80,367 tons; Russia 10
ships, 68,479 tons - Our fast protected cruisers of the second and
third-class range in size from the 5,600 tons of the Eclipse class, of
which we have no less than twelve, to the Katoombas and Wallaroos,
with which we are familiar in Australasian waters. In this class we
have 75 ships, 285,605 tons; France, 22 ships, 81,258 tons; Russia,
3 ships, 11,000 tons. In effective fast cruisers our aggregate strength
is 113 ships, 615,395 tons, as against 45 ships of 283,493 tons in the
combined navies of the two Powers next in strength to ourselves.
The naval superiority acquired in recent years has involved a
great effort on the part of the Mother Country. In the years 1892-3
the cost to the British taxpayer of defending the Empire amounted
t° £3s's oo > o °o, the appropriation for the army being £20,500,000, and
for the Navy £15,000,000 sterling. In 1896 the expenditure for the
Navy was £21,800,000, and for the army £18,000,000 sterling. It
redounds to the credit of the Old Country, and is a telling proof at
once of patriotic feeling and the possession of ample resources that
so great an expenditure has been borne without a murmur, and,
indeed, with comparative ease.
dhe expenditure incurred by other Powers is incomparably less
than that of Great Britain. The naval estimates of France for 1897
are > £ lo ’^37’° 96; those of Russia, £6,440,000. The sums voted for
shipbuilding are, British Navy, £7,765,646; PTance, £3,100,000;
Russia, £2,033,386.
Turning to the manning of the Navy, the number of seamen has
2 7
Imperial Federation and Defence.


been raised in proportion to the increase of the ships; but the con-
dition of our naval reserve still leaves something to be desired. The
aid of the State is required to revive the merchant Navy as a
nursery, not only for officers as it is at present, but also for the
supply of seamen. In our fisheries we have a large body of valuable
men always near at hand, and easily trained in naval gunnery, while
the vast fleet of steamers in our mercantile marine is capable of
supplying a large body of skilled men to fill up the engine-room
complements of our ships-of-war.
Our advantages are not limited to the ships and the seamen.
We have a powerful element of strength, in which no Foreign Power
can compare with us, in the possession of a continuous line of
defended Coaling Stations on the ocean highways to the East, whether
round the Cape or by the Suez Canal. We have Gibraltar, Malta,
Aden, Ceylon, Singapore, Hong-Kong Sierra Leone, St. Helena,
the Cape, Mauritius. We have in Australasia ports full of resources
and strongly defended. We have in the West Indies, St. Lucia,
Port Royal, and Bermuda; in Canada, Halifax, and Esquimalt.
I now approach a branch of the subject of Imperial Defence
with which it is somewhat hazardous for one in my position to deal.
I refer to the apportionment of duties and responsibilities as between
the Mother Country and her daughter States. A tacit understanding
exists that the Imperial Fleet should be provided, and the defence of
the Imperal Coaling Stations assured, by the Mother Country. You,
our fellow-subjects in the Colonies, provide for your local defence,
d hat local defence is supplied by fortifications at certain vital points,
but your main reliance must be placed on the military forces which
you have organised. Your means of recruiting these military forces
leave nothing to be desired. You possess vigorous populations, for
the most part country-bred, stalwart, sturdy, and brave. You have
horsemen in numbers who are nowhere surpassed in the world. To
raise your forces to the highest standard of efficiency, a more liberal
appropriation of money is perhaps desirable. More officers should
receive a thorough training at Aldershot and Woolwich. Your rank
and file should be able to devote as much time to drill as is given
by the fine peasant army of Switzerland.
28
Imperial Federation and Defence.


While the Mother Country has undertaken to provide the naval
defences of the whole Empire, in Australasian waters, under an agree-
ment made in 1887, a contribution is paid to the Admiralty by the
Colonial Governments. The amount is inconsiderable, but it is a
recognition of the duty of co-operation, and, on that ground, in his
recent speech at the Mansion House, the Duke of Devonshire, on
behalf of Her Majesty’s Ministers, expressed an earnest hope that the
agreement might be renewed. It is my duty to join with the
Government, which I have the honour to serve, in urging that this
appeal should receive your favourable consideration.
It is, perhaps, premature to discuss the duty of making larger
contributions than at present. These countries are still in their first
youth. Another generation will, I trust, see a rapid development of
resources in population, in public and in private wealth. There
is more room for expansion here than in the Old Country. In
proportion as that expansion takes place, I do not doubt that you
will do your duty. So long as the sentiments of mutual pride and
affection, which now so happily prevail, endure, so long it is certain
that every State in the Empire will do its part. To cultivate these
sentiments is now the duty of the hour. To take some slender part
in the discharge of that kindly task was the inducement, the only but
sufficient inducement, to take office as a Governor in Australasia.
In contemplation of the development of the future, whether it be
near or whether more remote, it may not be unprofitable to direct
our thoughts to the changes which may be expected to take place in
the constitutional relations between the Mother Country and her other
daughter States. Self-governing States could not be expected to take
a larger share in the burden of the common defence, unless upon
condition of a more full representation in the great Council of
the Empire. That principle is thoroughly established under the
British constitution.
It is not difficult to make paper schemes of Imperial Federation.
As Treasurer of the Imperial Federation League, I had the honour to
preside over a Committee, appointed in response to a challenge from
Lord Salisbury, to devise a scheme of Federation. The Committee
included Lord Playfair, Lord Reay, Professor Bryce, Sir Charles
29
Imperial Federation and Defence.


Tupper, and other men of ability and varied experience. It was the
leading feature of our plan to hand over the control of foreign policy to
a representative Council of the Empire. Such a step may some day be
taken. It involves, however, a surrender of powers now exercised by
the House of Commons in favour of the federal authority which it is
proposed to set up. A change so sweeping could only be accepted
with reluctance, and in consideration of a substantial alleviation of
Imperial burdens by Colonial contributions. The Colonies have not
yet reached the stage when it would be reasonable to look for
contributions sufficiently considerable to afford substantial help.
If there is no immediate prospect of closer Imperial Federation, it
is in the highest sense gratifying to know that the forces making for
union are growing day by day throughout the length and breadth
of the Empire. Here in New Zealand your Premier is known to be
a strong Imperialist. Mr. Ballance, his predecessor in the same high
office, in the discussion which took place prior to the Federal
Convention in Sydney, declared that “Imperial Federation, with a free
management of its own affairs, was the only future he could look to
for the Colony.” If I turn to Victoria, in my chief adviser, Sir
George Turner, I find another staunch Imperialist. The general
feeling of the people has been described in glowing language by Bishop
Moorhouse, who did such splendid work when he was in Melbourne:
“ If,” he said, “ you go to Victoria you will find yourselves among a
kindly English race, speaking the kindly English tongue, having a tender
English heart.” If I turn to New South Wales, we had the following
declaration from a great Australasian statesman, lately called to his rest
in the fulness of years: “It is difficult,” said Sir Henry Parkes, “for
any thoughtful mind to discover what higher place can be found for
the new Commonwealth [he was speaking at the last Convention held
in Sydney] than the impregnable rock on which the parent nation
has so long stood. Men cannot be more free and equal in politi-
cal relations, and in Australasia all are free and equal under the
British Crown. Without cause of separation it is hardly within the
range of probability that the young nation would separate at the
bidding of the most worthless part of her population.” If I turn to
Canada, the present Premier, Mr. Laurier, has made a recent declara-
30
Imperial Federation and Defence.


tion of unreserved loyalty: “I am loyal,” he said, “to the flag of
England, because under the banner of England my fellow-countrymen
have found ten times more freedom than they would have found had
they remained subject to France.” As to the people of Canada, their
feelings are eloquently expressed by Principal Grant, who has done
so much in the advocacy of unity: “The Empire,” he writes, “to
which we belong is admittedly the greatest the world has ever seen.
In it the rights of all men are sacred, and the rights of great men
are also sacred. It is world-wide, and therefore affords most oppor-
tunities for all kinds of noblest service to humanity through the
serving of fellow-citizens in every quarter of the globe. Let Canada
ask for some emblem, let it be maple-leaf or beaver, to represent it
on the flag that represents so marvellous a past and present. Is it
to be thought that we would separate from such a flag without cause,
still less place our country in a position of antagonism to it ?”
The unity of the Empire is assured because, with a wise states-
manship, the ties which bind us are loose, and because local self-
government is absolutely unfettered. In the words of the historian
Freeman: “The essential of a Federal Government is this: That
each of the members of the union must be wholly independent in
those matters which concern each member locally. On the other
hand, all must be subject to a common power in those matters which
concern the whole body of members collectively.” The collective
interests, in so far as the}/ depend on Government, are security from
attack, and the joint exercise of influence all over the world in the
cause of peace and truth and justice.
The concession of full powers of self-government to Canada and
Australasia was made by statesmen who rank among the highest whom
the British Empire has produced. It was made by a Government over
which Earl Russell presided, and in which the seals of the Colonial
Secretary were held by the late Earl Grey. The administration of
Colonial affairs under that Government has been described by Earl
Grey himself in two admirable volumes. He tells us that to keep the
great and growing communities loyal to the Crown and the Empire,
they saw that they must be permitted to rule themselves. With the
consequences of the American Revolution before his eyes, Earl Grey
31
Imperial Federation and Defence.


was not prepared to say that the loss of our Colonial Empire must
necessarily be fatal to the national greatness and prosperity of Britain,
still he would have regarded such an event as a grievous calamity,
and as lowering by many steps the greatness of his country among
the nations of the world.
The policy of Earl Russell and Earl Grey has borne the fruit
which they desired. The cry for separation is nowhere heard, nay,
more, the conviction is happily universal that by our union we shall
best maintain the safety and security of every part of the Empire.
In the words of Sir George Bowen, a former Governor of New
Zealand, “ The true rallying point for the people of the Colonies, as
for the people of the Mother Country, is the throne,” and that throne
has now been filled for the long term of sixty years by a Queen who
is loved by all her people as perhaps no sovereign has ever been in
any country or in any former age.
3 2
Imperial Federation and Defence.




« #
t
<(>
# V
