

A Faithful Account
of the Early Days of
the Barrier Silver
Field
BY
W. R. THOMAS
1s
IN THE EARLY DAYS.
1s
REPRINTED
from the
"BARRIER MINER."
With Statis-
tical and Other
Information Con-
cerning the Mines,
Town, and District
at the Present Time
PUBLISHED BY ROBERT HOOD, BOOKSELLER
PUBLISHED BY ROBERT HOOD, BOOKSELLER.
Fenton, Knight, and Mills, Printers, “ Barrier Miner” Office, Broken Hill, New South Wales.




IN THE EARLY DAYS.
A Faithful Account of the Early Days of
the Barrier Silver Field.
IES-'ST ~XKr - R. TISOMAS.
With Statistical and Other Information Concerning the Mines,
Town, and District at the Present Time.
REPRINTED FROM THE “ BARRIER MINER.”
PRICE ONE SHILLING




IN THE EARLY DAYS.
By W, 11. THOMAS.
Reprinted from the “Barrier Miner”
fN the following description of the
early days of Broken Hill I have
endeavored to give the reader as
correct an idea as possible of the
town and of the people who lived
\ there in its infancy. In doing so
I can honestly say that in no case
(, have I mingled fiction with truth,
but have written of all things as I found
them.
***
The Broken Hill line of country was
first prospected by the late Patrick Green,
a onee well-known Menindie storekeeper,
some 15 years ago. He had a party of
men prospecting on it for copper, and
where the Alpha mine now is are to be
seen several holes sunk by his men. The
prospects not being good enough at this
place, it was abandoned, and the men
were shifted to a show some three miles
north of the Mount Gipps Hotel. This
is now known as the Yellowstone, and is
at present owned by Messrs. S. Browne
and R. B. Pell. There he sunk a 50ft.
shaft, prospecting for copper. This claim
was also abandoned, and nothing was done
with the Broken Hill lode until some six
years ago. Then Mr. Charles Nicholls,
the original prospector for silver on the
Barrier, came over from Thackaringa, and
prospected and pegged out the celebrated
No. 3 Block. This is situate between the
Sultan and the Round Hill companies’
leases, and from that day to this it has
been the cause of one of the most compli-
cated law cases arising out of any property
here. First Nicholls claimed it ; then
Mr. Brougham, of YVilcannia, came along ;
after him came C. Renhan and another ;
then a man named Martin had a “go ”
at it ; and last of all came Messrs.
Rakow and Fischer, and at the present
time they are ail claiming it. Shortly
after Block 3 was pegged out Charles
Rasp came over and pegged out the
original seven blocks of the Broken Hill
Proprietary Company, thinking at first
that he had found a mountain of tin.
And in one way, sure enough, he had!
Soon after this Block 17 was pegged out
by Otto Fischer, and was named by him
the Cosmopolitan, it after becoming the
property of the present Broken Hill
North Company. Some weeks after this
Blocks 5,6, and 7 of the Broken Hill


South were leased by Mr. Maiden, of
Menindie, Block 7 of the same company
being secured by Mr. White, of the same
place ; while the late Mr. Thomas Nutt
pegged out Block 9, which he named
the Elizabeth. This is the present Broken
Hill Central. Shortly after this the
Broken Hill Junction, then known as the
Great Northern Junction, was leased by
Messrs. Penglase and Carson. With the
exception of the Round Hill Company’s
M.C-Prf- and Block No. 1, on the White
Lead, these were all the leases applied
for, some six years ago, on the Broken
Hill line.
***
The first I heard of Broken Hill was
when we were camped at Purnamoota,
then known as “The Soakage.” The town-
ship of Purnamoota had just been sur-
veyed, and people were rushing out in
hundreds from Silverton to secure allot-
ments in it. When the Lubra had just
been floated, and that great wonder of
wonders, Morris’s Blow, found by Morris
and the Nolan brothers, who then ever
thought of Broken Hill ? Those who did
calleTl it a mountain of mullock that would
never pay. I was camped with a gentle-
man who owned three l-14th shares in
it, and he would gladly have given the
lot for a 50th in the Lubra or Morris’s
Blow, or the old Pluck Up either.
*
' The first time I saw Broken Hill was
when I v'as sent out to mark a tunnel on
it, some five and a half years ago. It was
the intention of the owners to put a tunnel
through the hill, somewhere where Rasp’s
shaft Qow is; but the idea fell through,and
the sinking of a shaft was decided on. A
contract was let to Dan M‘Kay and party,
at £2 ss. a foot, to sink 150 ft. in what is
known as Rasp’s shaft. It had already
been sunk 65ft., in carbonate of lead, by a
man named Rosewarne. At that depth
Dan and Jack M‘Kay, Sandy Kemp, and
J. Wills started in ’November, 1884, and
very soon sunk to the 100 ft. level. By
this time the lode went out of the shaft,
and the remaining 50ft. was sunk in
country. Things went on very slowly at
the Hill about this time. Some of the
original owners were getting tired of
paying calls—about 10s. a week fora 14th
and they would have been very glad if
they could have sold a 14th share, now
representing 10,000 shares, for £3O or £4O.
But no one would buy, so, poor unfor-
tunate fellows, they had to keep their
shares ! The highest assay they could
get only gave 16oz. of silver per ton, but
there was generally a good return for
lead. So it is no wonder the owners got
disheartened, especially when at that
time wonderful ore was being raised all
over the Purnamoota and Day Dream dis-
tricts and at the newly discovered Mount
Gipps mines,giving their tens of thousands
of ounces to the ton.
■ . V
At about this time Philip Charley, a
boundary rider on Mount Gipps, who
owned a 14th in the Hill, came over here
to have a look how things were. In
looking over the pile of ore he came
across a little bit of chloride, and, on
making a closer search, found several
pieces of carbonate of lead shewing
chlorides. At this time we were camped
on Stephens’ Creek, about three miles
away from the Lubra ; and, on the even-
ing of the day that Charley found the
chlorides, a friend of ours who owned
three l-14ths in the Hill came galloping
up to our camp in a great state of excite-
ment. Throwing himself off his horse, he
came into our tent and said —“ Boys, I’m
in it at last. Just look at that!” and he
threw a piece of stone on the table. We
did look at that, and simply remarked
that we didn’t see anything out of the
way about it only a bit of carbonate of
lead. “Carbonate, be hanged,” replied
he. “Don’t you see that?” and he
pointed out a few specks of chlorides.
How we all envied him then ! “I guess
you ought to be worth a thousand now, old
man,” one of us said. “A thousand, eh ?
Why, I wouldn’t sell out for twice as
much. Who knows but that I might get
£5OOO for my shares in a year or two ?”
It made us laugh to hear him talk so big ;
but how' little we knew that in three years
those shares had a market value of nearly
one and half million of money !
***
Soon after the discovery of chlorides
was known a meeting of the owners was
held, and Mr. William Jamieson was
appointed manager at £‘soo a year. Mr.
Sleep was appointed mining manager, his
qualifications being that he was a first-
class well-sinker, though he didn’t know


anything about mining. Mr. Fawcett
was shortly after appointed assayer. We
were then camped on the Wdly-Willyong
Creek, near the present site of the
town of Round Hill, at that time
the centre of population for miles
around. There was not a house of
any kind then on Broken Hill. I re-
member one evening a Mr. Thomas Low
coming to our camp and saying he had
found chlorides in several places on the
surface of the hill. Of course this news
made things pretty lively, and next
morning two or three of us accompanied
him to the Hill, and, sure enough, before
long one of the party, Jamieson’s black
boy, “Harry,” found a slug full of
chlorides. Then several other pieces
were found. We drove into Silverton
next morning with a buggy-load of speci-
mens, and it was the sight of those speci-
mens that first drove the Silverton people
wild about Broken Hill. Before going
into Silverton Low was smart enough to
buy of Rasp a l-28th share for £lOOO.
* *
*
A day or two after this a Mr. John
John, a boarding-house keeper from Sil-
verton, drove up to our camp, and, by the
bribe of a dozen eggs—a great thing in
those days—obtained the sole right to
erect dining-rooms on the syndicate’s
leases. And thus the first business was
started in Broken Hill. But, to show
how careful one had to be in those inno-
cent days, we found that nine out of the
dozen eggs were rotten, and the other
three had a most ancient and fish-like
smell. I have often thought afterwards
that those eggs were but the forerunners
of many other still more rotten swindles
in the shape of syndicates on the Hill.
***
At about this time Messrs. Logan and
Downie, who had been prospecting near
the Maybell, came over and pegged out
the lea-tes now known as the Diamond
Drill or Brisbane Blocks Company’s. Mr.
Logan had a bit of hard luck before this.
It appears that he found chlorides in
Rasp’s shaft a few days before Philip
Charley, and that he had written to Bris-
bane for monev, so that he could buy in ;
but, as there were no telegraph wires or
trains here then, it was several weeks
before he got his money, and by then the
cat was out of the bag. His partner,
Downie, liad £9OO in the bank at Silver-
ton, but he wouldn’t believe that Logan
had found chlorides ; so he, also, was out
of it.
***
.Shortly aftgr this the Victoria Cross
was bought by Messrs. S. Browne and
Morgan D’Arcy for £SOO from Daniel
M'lntyre and Daniel O’Connor. A few
days after this the South mine was
bought from Mr. William Maiden, of
Menindie, for £IOOO, by Messrs. Jamieson
and Keats, the latter only beating Mr.
Charles Chappie by a few hours in their
race to Menindie to buy the mine. Theirs
was a property worth soon afterwards a
million and a half as a stake, but neither
of them knew it. If they had, how they
would have flogged those poor horses !
V
Messrs. Logan and Dowme soon after
this determined to trace the Broken Hill
lode, if possible, past the alluvial flats
south of the South Broken Hill Company’s
leases, and, being old Victorian miners,
and having a fair knowledge of geology,
they succeeded in finding what is now
known as the White Lead. Before that
most people used to think that the
Pinnacles were the continuation of the
Broken Hill lode. The day after this I
pegged out two blocks on the White
Lead, one of them being afterwards the
Central White Lead, an 4 the other Block
8, at present the only block credited
with being on the Broken Hill line not
floated.
***
Our camp on Broken Hill was pitched
where Mr. Patton’s house now is, while
Dan M‘Kay’s camp was situate a few
hundred yards away,, in Lie,. direction of
the Junction, and Hugh Mullins had a
bag house somewhere near Chappie’s
Hotel. Jamieson, the manager of the
Broken Hill syndicate (it was not a com-
pany then), was camped where the Block
14 stables now are, and with him were
camped Mr. Fawcett (the assayer), young
Alf. Orman, well-known amongst cricketers
of to-day, and the camp cook, Thomas
World, who is now cook at the Broken
Hill Hospital. Near by two or three
miners were camped. That was about
the entire population of Broken Hill at
that time, some five years ago. Standing
at our camp one could see on every hand


nothing but mulga scrub, except a thick
patch of bull oaks in the direction of the
Junction. Where Argent-street now is
was thickly timbered' with mulga. I once
shot an old man kangaroo just about
where Finn’s Hotel now stands.
• • •
I remember one evening when sitting
around the camp fire having seen the
blaze of a new camp in the direction of
where is now Delamore’s Hotel ; and, as
w'e were ~nly too glad to have a “ pitch
and swap news” with any new ariival,
one or two of us worked our way through
the mulga (no easy job then at night) to
the new camp.
“ Good evening, mate!” one of us said.
“ Are you going prospecting around here ?”
“Not much, I ain’t. I guess I ‘busted
up’ my bit of stuff prospecting at Paddy’s
Flat, Purnamoota way, so I’ve taken up
my old trade of builder again.”
“ Builder, eh ? You don’t mean to say
that you’re going to build anything here,
do you ?”
“Yes, I am. I’m going to build a hotel.”
“What!” we all exclaimed. “You
don’t mean that, do you V’
“Oh, yes—straight wire.”
“ Who’s the galoot that’s fool enough
to build an hotel here ?” one of us asked.
“Why, a coon out Lake’s Camp way
named Delamore. You must know old
‘Delly ’ —don’t you ?”
Of course we all knew' “old Delly.”
What old Barrierite didn’t 1 After
having a good yarn with the new arrival
we washed him good night and made
tracks for home. Sure enough the next
morning w r e could see, over the tops of the
mulga, the white timbers of the first
building on Broken Hill.
9 • • •
Although Broken Hill is now known I
might say all over the world, there are
few even here who ever heard of its first
name. While we were surveying Logan
and Downie’s leases, a young fellow named
Hugh Mullins came and camped near us,
and a day or so afterwards pegged out a
20-acre block, whereon at present stands
the principal business part of Broken
Hill. 1 remember one very hot day
sitting under a shady tree talking to
Mullins about the future of Broken Hill.
“ I wonder,” I said, “ if there will ever
be a town here ! ”
“ Why, of course there will. You
must be a gawk to think that. I’ll bet
you a crown in less than three years there
will be two or three hotels here. I’ve a
good mind to start a town on my lease ;
and, by Jove, I will, too !”
And there, under that shady tree that
was standing in front of Sully’s new store,
with a bit of stick he sketched out in the
sand the proposed new town, and that
same evening I made a plan of it. What
bothered us was what name to call it.
One would have it called “ Silver City,”
another “ Mulga Town,” and so on. But,
in honor of the holder of the lease, I pro-
posed that we should call it the town of
Mullinsville, and so Mullinsville we called
it. Like Dickens’beautiful City of Eden,
we would have called it the “Beautiful
City of Mullinsville,” but that was rather
too great a stretch of the imagination.
Yes, the first name of the present
flourishing town of Broken Hill, with
15,000 or 16,000 inhabitants, was the
very uneuphonious one of Mullinsville.
What fun we had when I had the plan all
finished, save naming the streets! Of
course, everyone wanted a street named
after himself. Even our old cook, “Bill,”
insisted on having one. Poor old “ Bill ” !
He has had many a rough time to go through
since then. He, with many others from
the Barrier, was among the first to start
for the Kimberley gold rush,in West Aus-
tralia; and, after a year or two of almost
starvation and unheard-of hardship and
toil, returned to his old home on Broken
Hill to find it not a barren mulga-covered
waste like he left it, but a busy young
town of nearly 5,000 inhabitants ; and he,
like old Rip Yan Winkle, after an absence
of less than two years returned to his old
home a stranger amongst strangers. The
next I heard of old “ Bill” was when I
lay awake one night and heard his well-
known voice recuscitating that dismal cry
of the long ago obselete old “ Charley”—
“ One o’clock and a fine morning.” Yes,
old “ Bill ” had come back to fill the post
of night watchman to the town ; and it
was his cry of “ Fire, fire ! ” that roused
the sleeping town the night Barney
Harris’s hotel was burned down, when
poor, genial, old Tom Herara and young
Dawson were burned to cinders before our
eyes. Old “ Bill’s ” fate is still green in


the memory of all here, for it is only a
few months since he hanged himself
in his hut.
***
But to return to the town of Mullins-
ville. We soon fixed up naming the
streets, and not only that, but we had
reserves left for churches and universities,
for botanic gardens, public buildings, and
what not. Of course it was done to fill
in time; the mere idea of even an hotel
ever being built here was at that time
ridiculous. We little thought that in less
than four years within a stone’s throw
from where we sat great stone hotels,
theatres, skating rinks, warehouses, and
plate-glass-fronted shops would be teeming
with thousands of industrious, money-
making people, and that the shriek of the
locomotive, mingling with that of the
mine engine and the sawmill, would drown
for a few moments only the ceaseless hum
of a busy young town stretching forth its
strong young arms in every direction.
Shortly after this Mullins went into
Silverton to try and. sell acre blocks in
the town of Mullinsville. He did far
better than he expected. Several business
men there bought blocks, giving as high
as £25 for them; but out the lot Mr.
Sully and Mr. Strachan were the only
ones who kept possession of their acres.
Mr. J. S. Reid also bought half an acre
next to Delamore’s, whereon at present
Mr. Linton has a horse sale-yard. I had
an acre given to me for nothing, but it was
too. far away from the main road that
used in those days to pass in front of
Delamore’s, coming from Silverton via the
Nine Mile. Fare, £1 each way. It was
not until some months after that the new
road going up Argent-street and via the
Acacia Dam was started. My acre block
was just about where Elliott’s Hotel now
stands, and, by spending a few pounds in
registering it , I could have legally held
possession of an acre of land in the very
heart of the town. There was no pro-
claimed township here then. Anyhow, I
let my acre “slide.” A few months ago
during the boom that land would have
been worth close on £20,000.
***
Who amongst the old residents of
Broken Hill can ever forget the opening
of Delamore’s hotel ? What polishing up
of hob-nailed boots that had never
known blacking before ! What mending
of white moles, cotton shirts, &c., for
this great occasion, this long-talked-of
spree! Everyone Was there. Dust-
begrimed horsemen from Purnamoota,
bank clerks from Silverton, and pros-
pectors and such from all parts of the
held met there that night with the full
intention of having a “high old time.”
And they did. There in the new dining-
room, with its big table covered with a
snow-white tablecloth and loaded with all
the good things going, and surrounded
by real cane chairs, were grouped a
motley crew of all sorts and conditions of
men, and women too, impatiently waiting
the signal to begin. I remember one
great, burly, unkempt Murrumbidgee
whaler, with hair on his teeth, a man
redolent with the smell of Johnny cakes
and camp fires, sitting down at the table,
and remarking—“ Well, this beats my
time! Ain’t we a bit flash either ?
Clean pocket handkerchiefs in front of
every bloke ! ” And with that he took
the snow-white table napkin bet wen his
forefinger and his thumb, and—used it.
How the good things on that table did
disappear ! When once the hungry crowd
got a fair start at it nothing was heard
save the clattering of knives and forks
and the cry of ‘ ‘ Bring in some more beer,
landlord.” But, like all things, the dinner
came to an end at last, and the room was
cleared for dancing. I shall not attempt
to describe that ball. All I can say is that
by 1 o’clock in the morning very few
there could have accurately described that
or anything else. Even I, who am almost
a teetotaller, was “ just a little bit tight.”
There were no police here then, and one
could get as drunk, and swear, and kick
up as much row as he liked, and no one
would interfere with him. “Ah! them
was times, them was. So different from
now, when two fellows can’t even settle a
slight dispute with their fists in the street
without being run in ! ”
“ Delamore’s hotel was soon followed
by Sully’s old store (the first P.O. here),
the Silver King Hotel (built by Vaughan
and Bullock), and Brazill and Jones’
store. Then came Stewart, the baker, (a
brother of J. R. Stewart, of the Cigar
Divan), Neilson and Co., the butchers.
Langemeir’s billiard saloon, and several


other business people, amongst others
Mr. Angus Kennedy (the labor agent),
and ex-Alderman Duff. Mr. Vaughan
shortly after took it into his head to go
right away from the centre of population
and build an hotel amongst the mulga
scrub, and so started the present Argent-
street. Vaughan soon afterwards sold
out for a thousand or so, and retired to
his native town, “ Aulcl Reekie.” This
hotel “away out in the scrub” is at
present kept by Fred. Chappie.
*** .
Soon after the opening of the Silver
King Hotel the Broken Hill Syndicate
was floated into a company of 16,C'V
shares, 2000 being offered to the public.
Mr. Jamieson was still kept on as
manager, but after some months retired
in favor of Mr. S. R. Wilson, who was
previously manager for the Apollyon
Company. Mr. Slecp having retired from
the underground managership, Mr. Ros-
man, from Victoria, was appointed mining
manager. There was very little excite-
ment on the floating of the Broken Hill.
500 shares w r ere offered in each of the fol-
lowing places :—Sydney, Melbourne, Ade-
laide, and Silverton. There were no
brokers in Broken Hill then. I fancy I
can hear many of the respectable readers
of the Mixer say “ a good job too.” In
Melbourne and Adelaide the shares were
all applied for; in Silverton the list was
just about full; but in Sydney very few
shares went off. All it cost for a full
share then was £5 on application and £4
10s. on allotment.
The next mine floated was the South. It
was floated in one day in Sydney, by a broker
named Mullins, into 100,000 £1 shares,
teoon after this a scamp of a mining man
came up from Melbourne and bought the
North mine for £15,000 for a Melbourne
syndicate, which shortly afterwards re-
floated it. He also bought the Victoria
Cross for the same amount, and for the
same syndicate. After that he took a
trip home and forgot to give his partners
their share of the money made.
The Junction shortly after this was
floated in Melbourne. Mr. Gaffney, a
brother of Mr. Gaffney, the jeweller here,
who was one of the largest' shareholders
m it, was the broker for it in Silverton.
Mr. Rogers, at present n Broken Hill,
was its first manager. After him came
Mr. Giles (now underground manager of
the British), then Mr. Hebbard, and after
him the present manager. (I wonder who
will be the next !) The North mine was
managed by Mr. Lane, and the Victoria
Cross by Mr. J. E. Ellis, at present a
broker in Adelaide. After Mr. Ellis left
Mr. R. Gibson, the present manager of
the Pioneer mine at Thackaringa, was
appointed manager. After him came Mr.
Kerby, the present manager. It is a pity
that all the managers along the line are
not as reliable and honest as Mr. Kerby.
The Central was put on the market, but
did not float the first time. The Sydney
people were rather shy of it, so it lay idle
for a long time. J. W. King and myself
tried to “ jump” it, and, had we bothered
ourselves about it much, I believe we
would have got it, too. It was shortly
afterwards floated into a company.
After the building of Vaughan’s new
hotel fresh people began to arrive every
day, and very soon Argent-street began
to assume something like a settled ap-
pearance. W. J. Cummins built a hotel
(Ledgard’s) opposite Vaughan’s, which was
soon afterwards followed by Lees’ (now
O’Neil’s), Finn’s, and Reynolds’ (now
Frost’s Theatre Royal) hotels. After
this things became mixed. Dozens of new
buildings were being erected every day,
and continued to be erected until the
town had assumed its present size. When
one looks back for some three or four
years it seems impossible that such a
town could have sprung up in so short a
time.
I forgot to mention that the Broken
Hill South leases were first pegged out by
Daniel Mclntyre. He got as far as the
Mount Gipps Hotel, and was waiting
there to meet the coach to Silverton so
that he could go there to apply for the
leases. He happened, however, to meet
some old Ballarat mates of his, and
presently old Pat May, who was camped
with Charles Rasp, came along. They all
got into a private parlor, and some
whiskey was ordered in. They then sat
down and had a “ great old crack ” about
old times on Ballarat, when Mac. was
mates with Duncan Gillies, the present


Premier of Victoria, in a golden hole on
the White Flat, a regular jeweller’s shop,
when every other day or two they had to
hoist the red flag to let the other diggers
know that they had got another nugget ;
or about how some of them cleared the
ballroom shanty near the old Montezuma
Theatre, the night Lola Montes, the ex-
mistress of a German Prince,first appeared
as a dancing star at the Montezuma. And
than old Pat May told of his leaving
15oz. a day to rush off to Mount Alexan-
der, and of his adventures there, especially
on the night of the great storm when so
many hundreds of diggers were killed by
falling trees ; or of the stirring days of
Fiery Creek, the best poor man’s diggings
ever known, where in less than six weeks
80,000 diggers collected, and nearly all of
them were on good gold. And so they
kept on until far into that night : and
still on to the next night they kept at it,
telling how one of them had stood next to
the man who shot Captain Thomas, at the
Eureka Stockade riot, and how five seconds
after the same man lay a stiff ’un with a
bullet between his eyes. They had an
endless string of reminiscences to talk
about —of the daring deeds of Black
Douglas, the bully of Ballarat ; of the
Tip McGrath ; of Peter Lalor ; and of ,1 oe
the Bellman, the “ Apple Jack ’ ’ of Ballarat;
of the great dispute between the Working
Miners and the Albion G. M. companies,
when the latter broke into the Work-
ing Miners ground, and Archie
Campbell, the manager of the Albion, got a
lot of chemicals and smoked his opponents
out, smothering two of them in doing so.
And then, when Ballarat was worked
out, they started off to other fields. Old
Pat told them about the Palmer rush in
Queensland; of how he came down to
Cooktown to get a spear head that he had
received at Battle Camp taken from his
back ; or of the two young packers who
were caught by the blacks at “Hells
Gates.” They had made a fortune at
packing, and were on their way home to
Tasmania, when the blacks caught them.
They killed the youngest brother, and
cooked and ate him before his brother’s
face. They then broke the elder brother’s
arms and legs so that he could not escape,
and, after a time, killed and ate him also,
Old Pat was amongst the party who, some
days afterwards, “ dispersed the blacks ”
(a neat way of saying they killed every
one of the tribe), all save a young gin,
who told them of the poor young fellows’
end.
Then old Mac. chipped in and told them
of his weary eight months of toil on the
Queensland opal field ; of the money
spent in wiring home to Mr. Emanuel, the
diamond expert ; of his wire back, saying
“Opals too brittle;” and of how, in
disgust, he capsized his 2cwt. of them
into the Darling River, and cleared for
Mount Browne. So they kept on until
all of Mclntyre’s money was gone. Then
they had their “ dockendorris, ” and Mac.
went home to his camp,and ‘ ‘ let the South
Blocks slide.” About four years after
they were valued at over a million-and-
a half of money.
Truly this young town has made wonder-
ful strides ! Yet, young as it is, it has
seen the rise and fall of many a once
popular man. Where now is the great
O’Connell, the logding-house keeper, who
in his day kept many a crowd in roars
of laughter by his wild eloquence 1 Where
is the still greater stump orator Sycl.
Butler, who spoke for eight hours, yellow
with rotten eggs ?
And where, O where, is the only
Griffin, the once inimitable secretary of
A.M.A.? I remember one day meeting
Griffin in Silverton. He had just left the
Day Dream. He was a slag-tapper
there, and got the “ sack” for trying to
prove to Mr. Stearns, the smelter, that
he (Stearns) didn’t much about
silver smelting. Poor Griffin was “ dead
broke,” and, besides that, a hotelkeeper
was making things lively for him about a
little account of £lO or so. But he wasn’t
a man to let the grass grow under his
feet; so he wrote over to a mutual friend of
ours, Mr. G. Williams, the then president
of the A.M. A., for a copy of rules, and
for advice as to how to start a Miners’
Association here Both rules and advice
were forwarded by return of post. He
then, by an immense amount of talk and
work, succeeded in floating the Barrier
branch of the A.M.A. That was only as
yesterday ; but to-day Griffin’s name is
almost unknown. After a row with the


committee of the A.M.A. he resigned.
He then sold the Junction North for
LBOO to Mr. Matheson, of Sydney. With
that he started for the Croydon goldfields,
and “played his money up like a man”
in less than a month. He started a branch
of the A.M.A. in or near Croydon, but
was defeated for the secretaryship. The
last I heard of him was that he was feed-
ing a battery at Croydon.
Besides seeing the rise and fall of many
a once popular man, Broken Hill, like
most mining towns, has seen fhe end of
many a strange life, but none, I fancy, so
sorrowful as that of poor Parrish, an ex-
captain in the British Army. He was
wounded at the Cape, and came to
Australia for his health’s sake. We missed
him for a day or two, and the next we
heard of him was that he was found dead
in the camp by some miners. He was
buried next day, and a party of clowns
and acrobats from Banvard’s circus fired
a volley over his grave. What an end for
a gallant British officer—to die uncared for
in a bag tent, to be buried by
strangers, and fired over by clowns !
I think I am correct in saying that the
floating of the Black Prince by J. W.
King and myself was the dawn of the
great boom here. Prior to that it was
only the mines from the South to the
Victoria Cross that were talked of. Being
so successful with the Black Prince mine,
we soon after placed the Sydney Rock-
well on the market, and, seeing that the
shares were applied for seven times over,
it opened people’s eyes to the fact that it
was not a very difficult matter to float
outside mines. Very soon a much mixed
horde of people were busily writing out
prospectuses for companies and syndi-
cates. Then was the time for any old
prospector to go out and re-peg some old
proved duffer of a mine, come in to town,
and lay low for smart men from Adelaide
who came up to get hold of “a good
thing to lay their friends on to.” It was
useless for anyone to try and stop such
wholesale swindling; they would only be
put down as pessimists and told not to
cry stinking fish. Even the Barrier
Miner was later on abused right and left
for daring to speak the truth. Had such
advice been taken at the start there would
be many a good mine working now instead
of being shut down in the general scare
caused by the bursting of the boom, as,,
for instance, the Sydney Rockwell, Cop-
per Blow, Gorge, Nine-Mile, and several
other really good mines. It is needless
for me to describe the unique class of
experts who sprang up during the boom.
Everyone here knows all about them, that
they ranged from mining managers down
to—well, anything you like.
But, strange to say, almost the only
man who really could give a fair report
was about the only one here who was-
never asked to do so. I refer to Mr. C.
W. Marsh, who is at the present time as-
sayer to the Umberumberka Company.
Like the father of modern geolo-
gists, Hugh Miller, and that old South
Australian, Mr. Menge, Marsh is a self-
taught man, of many years’ experience,,
thoroughly wrapped up in the study of
geology. The very love of the difficult
subject would have prevented him from
giving an untruthful report. Unobtrusive
and studious in the extreme, he was not
the man to push himself forward; and,
whilst Jerrymadiddlers and mining sharks
were busily “getting at” the gentle
public, he was making a scanty living
cutting systems of crystals out of repi-
dolite, a very hard, black stone, or clas-
sifying minerals for other people, who,
by-the-bye, did net fail to take all the credit
to themselves. Marsh would get hold of a
piece of repidolite about the size of a
brick, a saw, made of an old dinner knife,
a file, and some sandpaper, and with such
rude appliances he could cut specimens of
crystals from a cube to an icosahedron
or any other shape, as sharply defined in
its angles and as correct as the finest
ground glass crystals to be seen in any
geological collection in Australia. He has
also collected and classified some of the
best collections of minerals and curiosities
to be seen on the Barrier. For, strange
to say, sterile and uninviting as it may
appear, the Barrier presents to the
student of natural history many curiosities
of nature well worth studying. Take for
instance the giant ant. On any little
sandy patch of ground, in some parts of
the year, hundreds of little circular holes
may be seen. The sides of them gradually
slope to the bottom like an inverted cone.


Woe-betide any unfortunate little insect
that ventures too near one of these
innocent looking holes! Once venture on
its brim and he is lost ; for the treacher-
ous sand gives way beneath his feet, and,
like a snail climbing up a pole, he falls
three steps for every one he climbs, and,
as a consequence, soon reaches the bottom
of the hole, there to be caught in the
terrible fangs of the giant ant, the
“ debble, debble ” of the blacks, that
lies hidden in the sand at the bottom of
the hole. With seemingly irresistible power
the ant drags him under the sand and
devours him at his pleasure, taking care
to leave some fragments around the mouth
of the pit as a bait for other insects.
I once examined a giant ant under a
strong glass, and, no mistake, he is well
named ; for a more ferocious-looking
monster it is impossible to imagine (ex-
cept, perhaps, when one’s “got ’em again.’)
With his shark-like eyes, his distorted
body covered with sharp hairy spikes,
his terrible fangs, once in his grip an
insect is doomed. The sharp fangs alone
are near the insect; the rest of the body
is below the sand. So, even a bull dog
art, with all his strength and courage,
soon falls a victim to the superior cunning
of the giant ant. Sometimes when his
prey is slow in slipping down, he will,
still keeping under the sand, scrape away
the loose sand under the insect’s feet, and
of course soon the poor insect falls to
the bottom. I once showed a giant ant
to a Melbourne man, and he was loud in
running the species down. “Oh !” he
cried, “what cruel, sneaking things they
are, to be sure, to hide away in the sand.
They don’t give the other insects half a
show ! I can’t make out why such wretched
things were ever created.” An hour after-
wards that man was creeping on his hands
and knees through the salt bush to get a
good “ pot shot ” at an unsuspecting
kangaroo quietly dosing under the cool
shade of a mulga. Of course, that wasn’t
mean ! Oh, no ; it was sport, you know!”
The first game of cricket played by a
Broken Hill team was played at Round
Hill against an eleven of that place. Head
was the captain of the Broken Hills, and
Morgan D’Arey of the Round Hills. The
game was won by the Round Hill boys by
one run. Amongst the Broken Hill
players were Head, Alf. Orman, Foley
(the butcher), Mclndoe, Reid, Lukey,
and Davis (the first banker here). At
that time the Broken Hill cricket club-
used to practice at the back of Delamore s-
hotel.
Talking once more about mining ex-
perts, I remember a story about old
Carson. He was working on the Junction
mine, and one day he threw a half-
emptied jam tin, the contents of which
the ants had spoiled, into the fire. Some
time afterwards, on giving it a kick, out
rolled a little ball of burnt jam, looking
for all the world like a bit- of gossan.
Carson showed it to a well-known mining
expert and asked his opinion on it.
“Well,” said the expert, “it’s keenly-
looking stuff. But it wants depth for
chlorides.” Poor man! He was only in
keeping with the rest of the experts on
the Barrier, from he who, when years ago
Mr. Hawson got him to report on Broken
Hill long before it was leased by Rasp,
came back and said that silver couldn t
live in the stuff. They are all much the
same, I say, from this man down to the
lowest Adelaide billiard-marker who came
here during the boom to float wild cat
syndicates, and to magnify a 2in. vein of
quartz into a 20ft. lode of silver-bearing
ironstone.
I have heard a very amusing story told
round the same camp fire at which I was
assured of the truth of the Carson episode.
It was about a party of gentlemen who
had pulled up for dinner at the Pilgrim
mine. Amongst them was a well-known
Government geologist. After dinner
they commenced talking about different
subjects, when presently some one spoke
about the divining rod, and how clever
old was with it. Of course every-
one had a lot to say about this, and at
last the discussion became so warm that
someone proposed that they should try
an experiment with the rod. He went
out and cut a little bough off a mulga,
and, pointing to a 400-gallon tank that
stood outside the camp, he said “ I will
now walk slowly past the tank, and we
will soon see if water will attract the rod.
He did, and sure enough the bough gently
bent towards the tank. Several others


had each a try at it, and in nearly every
case the bough bent slowly towards the
tank. Of course after this every one of
them was a thorough believer in the
divining rod. Half way back to Silverton
the party met Adam Renalson, the owner
of the tank. They told him about their
experiment on his tank, when, to their
disgust, Adam said —“ I think there must
be some mistake somehow, for that old
tank has been as dry as a bone for these
six months.” For the rest of the journey
home the members of that party were
open to discuss any subject save one —and
that one the divining rod.
There was once in this district
a new-chum policeman who arrested a
Chinaman for smuggling across the
border. Of course the Chinaman com-
menced to jabber away in Chinese, but
the sapient policeman quickly closed his
mouth by saying—“ Look ahere, now.
Ivery word yez says will be brought up in
ividence agin’ yez on the dty av yer
thrial.”
Still another story is told of Mr. F.
Berry, who read the burial service over a
poor fellow who was found dead in the
bush near Purnamoota. They could not
find a Bible in Purnamoota, so Mr Berry,
for want of something better, read the
Declaration of American Independence
over him. I don’t believe this story,
because Mr. Berry is a good young man,
and presumably always carries his ow r n
Bible with him. But I can fully believe
old Apple Jack when he was the grave-
digger at Silverton saying—“lsn’t it
lucky So-and-So ‘pegged out’ to-day.”
Burying him just paid my month’s board.
Visitors to Broken Hill in the summer
time have a great deal to say in running
the place down, because “ it’s so hot.”
They seem to think that anyone who
would come here for pleasure would go to
a very warm place for pastime. For my
own part, I don’t think it is so very hot
here, after all. It is just as bad in Ade-
laide or Sydney. Of course we have a
hot day or two now and then in the sum-
mer ; so they do in Sydney. One of the
hottest days I remember on the Barrier
was in January four years ago. I was
out with a friend looking at a mine near
Piesse’s Nob, and in the afternoon we
took our horses out to give them a feed
whilst we walked over to see the Alpha
mine. Really the heat was something
intense ; it was over 150° in our waterbag!
I knew that there was a 60ft. shaft on the
Alpha half full of water, so I suggested
to my friend the idea of having a bath in
it. As soon as we got to the mine my
friend stripped, and, climbing down
the rope, was very soon having
a good time in the water. I was
half undressed on the surface, when
presently I heard a most unearthly yell ;
and, looking down the shaft, I saw one of
the most ridiculous sights it is possible to
imagine. There was my friend hanging
on to the rope, with his eyes fixed on
those of a good-sized snake that was coiled
upon a ledge of rock on the other side of
the shaft, with its head raised, making
angry darts at my friend. Every time it
did so, he would throw up his arms and
legs, for all the world like a toy monkey
on a wooden stick. I called out to him
to keep quiet, and I would drop a stone
on the snake. That I did, and soon
settled all its accounts. By this time, my
friend was nearly pea-green with fright.
I soon pulled him up, and, though he was
a stanch teetotaller all his life, he didn’t
leave a drop in my whiskey flask, and I
had to drive all the way home without a
drink.
The first newspaper published on Broken
Hill was the Broken Hill Times, owned
by Messrs. Riddel and Scoular. Mr.
Riddel was the first Presbyterian minister
on the Barrier. Previous to accepting that
position, he was for many years a mis-
sionary in Africa, being stationed in the
very heart of that wild continent some-
where near Lake Albert Nyansa. Mr.
Scoular had been prospecting in the Rock-
well Paddock before he joined Mr.
Riddel. They bought a complete print-
ing press from that well-known old
Darling River character, “ the king of
Louth.” It originally belonged to an
insipid little rag called the Lonth Indepen-
dent, or something such. Mr. Finlay and
Mr. Riddel were the first editors, and Mr.
Scoular the printer. Mr. Waugh, late of
the Silver Age, had charge of the com-
positors, and your humble servant was
appointed to the honorable of


Round Hill correspondent. At this time,
in August three years ago, the Silver Age
was printed bi-weekly in Silverton. It
was owned and printed by Mr. J. S. Reid,
one of the present directors of the Broken
Hill Proprietary Company, who had
brought his plant from Wilcannia. Of
course, the Silverton people as well as the
Silver Age paper felt somewhat piqued at
the idea of a collection of bag houses, like
Broken Hill was then, starting a paper of
its own, and the Age passed some very
sarcastic remarks about the “old puffing
Billy” of a printing machine that had
driven half the printers in Louth out of
their minds, and they prophesied the pre-
mature demise of the poor old Times.
However, things went on very well with
it for some 12 months, when Messrs.
Riddel and Co. sold out to Mr. Stephens,
a Victorian newspaper proprietor.
Messrs. Riddel and Finlay, having resigned
the editorship, were replaced by Mr.
Prior, now editor of the Miner, who was
thus the first imported editor in Broken
Hill.
Mr. Stephens, after having run the
paper tor about six months, sold out to a
company who renamed the paper the
Broken Hill Argus. Mr. Prior having
retired from the Times, the position of
editor was assumed by Mr. Craig, who,
however, was replaced by Mr. Targett, an
ex-New South Wales M.P. He was suc-
ceeded by Mr. Chambers, and then by
Mr. Hammond, who remained on until the
company was wound up. During Mr.
Hammond’s editorship the Arg-us- Com-
pany brought out a weekly paper called
the Review. It’s dead now, so I’ll not
kick its remains. It never had any bones,
especially backbone, to kick. After
Messrs. Riddel and Scoular sold out of
the Times they intended to start another
paper, a daily one. It was to be called
the Blowpipe. I designed and drew the
headlinefor them—two blowpipes crossed,
with a view of Broken Hill on the top, and
the name beneath. They had everything
ready for issue, but for some reason or
other it never appeared. Mr. Riddel
is at present in Sydney, engaged in float-
ing mines, whilst Mr. Scoular is running
a patent gold-saving machine in Sand-
hurst, and rumor says is going to make
quite a big pile out of it.
One of the cleverest and most genial
journalists on the Argus staff was our
friend, Mr. Craig. To have him with
one on a long journey was a great ac-
quisition. He was always ready with a
host of interesting reminiscences and
anecdotes—especially Scotch ones. If
you were going down a shaft with him
and the rope broke he would buttonhole
you while you were falling, and say —“Ah!
this reminds me of when I was in the
Highlands of Scotland,” &c., &c.
A party of us paid a visit to a new find
one day, and amongst the party were a
well-known old mining captain and Mr.
Craig. After going all over the surface
the old captain got us around him, and,
standing on the top of the outcrop in the
favorite attitude of the immortal Pick-
wick, placed one hand under his coat-tails,
and, waving the other in the general
direction of the lode, said—
“ Well, gentlemen, in my opinion, this
yer lode is a ’eave hup.”
“Goodness gracious me! You don’t
mean that, do you l What did it ?” ex-
claimed Mr. Craig.
“ What did it ? Why diorite, you fool,
diorite !”
And the chiel’ amongst us takin’ notes
duly took a note of this startling fact.
After this slight interruption the captain
proceeded to inform us that the matrix of
this wonderful lode was “a micaceous sedi-
mentary deposit, placed there by a hover-
flow of metamorphosed lava from a decom-
posed glacier that had suddenly sprung up
from below many an ’oary hage before the
world was created,” or something equally
wise. Of course, all the party listened to this,
with their mouths agog, lost in admiration
of the wonderful geological knowledge
displayed by the captain. Even Mr.
Orr, who was of the party, and who is
long-headed even for a Scotchman,
remarked — }.
“ Yes, it’s pretty easy to see that he
knows his work.”
They were an interesting study, these
wonderful mining experts who sprung up
in such numbers during the boom. To
call them simple liars would be base
flattery, or an insult—which 1 They were
more than simple liars ; they were scien-


tific and ornamental liars of the first water.
But everyone knows now all about this
interesting class of frauds. Still it is an
amusing thing to get hold of one of their
old reports. One is a fair sample of the
lot. They would generally commence by
saying :—“ Gentlemen, —In accordance
with your request, I have examined your
valuable property, known as the Broken
Hill Extended No. 1 Round the Corner
Junction Company.”
Our “mining experts,” having in their
reports, introduced themselves, would
proceed to describe the mine by say-
ing that it lay about 25 miles N.E.
by W. in a southerly direction from
the celebrated Broken Hill Proprietary,
and was, -without a doubt, a continuation
of that company’s lode. Next they would
describe a little two-inch vein of iron-
stained quartz as a lode measuring from
wall to wall fully—be sure of the “fully”—
40ft., composed of manganese iron, car-
bonate of lead, chloride of silver, and a
fair percentage of gold. Like the soil of
Old Ireland, the lode only wanted tickling
with a pick to make it laugh both silver
and lead in abundance. Monte Christo’s
wealth, or all the treasures of all Aladdin’s
wonderful cave, would be a mere flea bite
compared with some of these mines—if
the experts’ reports on them were only
half true. The reports would generally
wind up by saying
“And, in conclusion, gentlemen, I have
no hesitation in saying that yours is a
mine well worthy of investment.”
Not a speculation, no fear ! —an invest-
ment !
I saw one report which, after informing
the gentle public that from one part
of the mine the smoke of the Broken
Hill Company’s smelters could be plainly
seen, “ thus enhancing the value of their
undoubtedly valuable property ” (a
favorite quotation), wound up as follows :
—“ And, in conclusion, gentlemen, I
have every confidence in saying that if
after a certain depth, is reached, should
you come on sufficient payable ore, your
valuable mine ’ ’ (another favorite quotation)
“would soon be on the dividend-paying
list.”
***
The bursting of the boom, of course, also
burst up the amiable “ expert,” and
Broken Hill was free for a time of his
presence, and with him went also to a
great extent that human parasite
who frequents mining towns—the
sharebroking adventurer. I met one
of the latter class in Adelaide
some months ago. When he was here in
the flush times he carried things with a
high hand. He had his buggy and pair,
his office and his clerk. Champagne was
his ordinary drink, and the easy, uncon-
cerned way he had of telling how many
hundreds of pounds he had made, “since
breakfast time, by Jove,” made us inno-
cent, slow-going, old Barrierites squirm
with envy. But by-and-bye the boom
burst, and he was amongst the first of the
many who left the Barrier in a great
hurry—because it was so dusty, don’t yer
know ! I met him in Rundle-street one
evening, but I hardly knew him again at
first. Like the Cardinal’s jackdaw,all his
fine plumage was gone. All his bounce,
his “ blow,” and his impudence also. His
attire, instead of being as of old, excessively
loud, was rather extremely subdued, not
to say shabby. Under his arm he carried
a remarkably fine cauliflower, and in his
hand he had a little basket of fish. We
adjourned into an adjacent hotel to
“lubricate,” as the Americans say, and,
over a good fat “butcher” of beer, he
told me how he was getting on. “ Ah,”
he said, “if I had only sold instead of
holding 1 should have made a pot out of
Broken Hill.” I think I have heard every
man, woman, and child on Broken Hill
utter the same sentiments, so I didn’t
contradict him, but simply nodded and
asked what his little game was now.
“ Well, I’m married now, and settled
down I’ve taken up my old trade again,
and do pretty well at it— £2 a week.”
***.
What a wonderful thing human nature
is ! I left Broken Hill some four months
ago. At that time, if anyone dared to
mention either syndicate or expert to a
Broken Hill body he would have been
barked at. After an absence of about six
weeks I returned, and one of the first
things I saw whilst walking down Argent-
street was our old familiar friend— a
prospectus of a syndicate ! Yes, there
it was—just the same as of old. The
same old romancing, not a bit changed !


I went inside and asked to be shown some
of the ore. There it was—just the same
old ore. Then I asked if there were
many shares applied for. Just the same
again. “Applied for, eh 2 Why, man,
they are all applied for, save three, and
we’ve just got a wire from Melbourne
ordering six, so you had better apply for
five at once or you will be too late. ” Yes,
the same old “gag.” I found out on
inquiry that not one-third of the shares
were applied for ; but, like little “ Jenny
Wren” in “Our Mutual Friend,” “I
know their tricks and their manners,”
so I didn’t invest.
•ft *
*
What surprised me was that anyone
should have had the temerity to try and
float a syndicate on Broken Hill so soon
after the bursting of the boom ; but,
seeing that one or two syndicates have
been floated lately, it confirms me in the
belief—well of the truth of the old adage,
“A fool and his money are soon
parted.”
***■
Just about the time chlorides were first
found on Broken Hill Messrs. Harnett and
Charsley pegged out seven leases on what
was then known as the “Razorback.”
They sent one of the party who was in-
terested in the leases, a man named
Graham, into Silverton with the money
to lease two blocks ; but, instead of doing
this, Graham spent the £75 in cham-
pagne. After that things were made
warm for him here, so he thought
he would go for a trip Mount Brown
way until things cooled down some-
what. He got as far as the Packsaddle,
and by some means fell in with a number
of squatters there. He wasn’t there long
before he had cajoled them in a proper
manner. He humbugged them into the
belief that he had found a lode that would
put Broken Hill in the shade in no time.
One of the squatters had an assaying
plant that had been left at his place by
Mr. Flude, of Ballarat, who some years
before had been prospecting in the district.
Graham had a rough idea of assaying, so
he borrowed the assaying plant. And
then the fun began.
Graham would procure a number of
sixpences and melt them down into little
buttons. These he would give to the
squatters and assure them that they were
the results of assays made from his won-
derful lode ; and, as most of the assays
gave returns of over 20,0000 z. to the ton,
for a time squatterdom in that district
went wild with excitement over the riches
of their wonderful silver mine. Graham
was thelion of the day. Squatter vied with
squatter in doing homage to him. He
was feted and champagned to his heart’s
content; and then, squatter-like, they
determined to lease mile after mile of
lode, and so have all the country to them-
selves. Graham got £ISOO out of them
to lease the ground with and for part
payment for some of his interest. Of
course the lode was a myth, and, instead
of leasing any ground, Graham got up
early one morning and started for
Queensland, and the poor squatters
were left, like Lord Ullin, lament-
ing. But Nemesis, in the shape of
Constable Bolster and a black tracker, was
soon on poor Graham’s track. Graham
had 300 miles start when the human
sleuth-hound got on his tracks at the
Packsaddle. For day after day they rode
at almost a gallop, but never for a moment
did the snake-like eyes of the tracker
leave the ground. It made but little
difference to him though their way was over
stoney hills or soft yielding soil, and so
they rode until they came to a fence.
Here, to all appearances, the tracks
ended. Not a sign of them was to be
seen, and any ordinary mortal would
have given the chase up in disgust. Not
so the blackfellow. After making a cir-
cuit of about half a mile round the place
the tracks were lost. He returned, and
said, “Baal that fellow go that way,”
pointing north; “Baal that fellow
go that way,” pointing east. “Me
been thinkit go ’long a fence.” So
they rode slowly along the fence
for about two miles, when, sure
enough, they came on the tracks again.
The poor, hunted fugitive had thought to
baffle his pursuers by walking for two
weary miles along the wire fence, until
the agony of holding on to the thin wires
was more than he could stand. After a
few more hours’ gallop they came to the
top of a little rise. The blackfellow drew
up his horse, and, pointing forward, said,
“Budgery!” A minute afterwards his horse


was saddleless and in hobbles, and he was
fast asleep under the cool shade of the
tree. His part of the contract was done.
Yes, there, not half a mile ahead, was poor
Graham, walking leisurely along, uncon-
scious of the nearness of his pursuers. In
a few minutes the trooper was abreast of
him, and, drawing his revolver, called on
him to bail up. But, instead of doing so,
Graham started off at full speed, and,
drawing his revolver, snapped it twice at
the constable’s head, but luckily it missed
fire each time. Bolster then fired, and
shot Graham through the head. The bullet
went in at the back of his head and
came out between the eyes, and he fell
on his face, stone dead. That was the end
of the first great mining swindler on the
Barrier. Poor Graham was a bit behind the
times, though. I should have liked to have
seen one of the boom swindlers run away.
Not they ! They would have stayed and
faced it out ! Graham was a great, soft-
hearted, good-natured fool, and there is
many a man now on the Barrier who is
guilty of many a worse thing than
Graham. The Razorback was abandoned
some time afterwards, and it is only
recently since it was repegged and
re-named the “ Mount Vulcan Iron Flux
Company.”
I was told by a traveller for
Mr. J. R. Saunders, of this place, and
who, by-the-bye, was the first draper on
the Barrier, that the Packsaddle squatters,
during the excitement about their great
mine, got wonderfully liberal all at once.
It was said that one of them even sent ss.
to the Silverton Hospital, and that another
actually fed a poor famishing prospector,
who had just strength enough left to drag
himself up to the homestead ! But I don’t
believe this ! It’s “a bit too thin.” Only
fancy a squatter feeding a “low thing of a
miner, by Jove !”
***
Mr. “ Joe ” Nash ! Every mine
manager in Victoria, at least, as well as
many a one out of the southern colony,
knows him, the chief mining reporter of
the Melbourne Argus. There are few
men who have really done so much
genuine good to the Australian mining
industry, and the Barrier has not a little
to thank him and his journal for. On
the whole —I write it after a good deal of
reflection—not another mining field has-
been influenced by the Press to such an
extent as the Barrier. There has always
been one good newspaper in the district.
At onetime the Silver Age, then published
in Silverton, was, indeed, a wonderfully
good production, and, in its time, it did
some splendid work for the field. Then
the Times and the Argus exerted consider-
able influence forgood ; but both these are
now dead. Then the Miner —but it is
idle to waste space on what is universally
admitted, that if has done more than any
other to place mining on the Barrier on
a sound basis.
But I have left Mr. Nash, the Mel-
bourne Argus representative. Mr. Nash
was in Broken Hill in the very early days.
I remember having seen him arrive in
Broken Hill from Silverton in company
with Mr. W. P. Macgregor (who was
about that time returned for the Went-
worth Parliamentary electorate). Rasp’s
shaft was then about 100 ft. deep. Mr.
Nash has since told me—for he was again
in Broken Hill some 18 months or so ago
—that as they approached the mine Mr.
Macgregor pointed out the spot where-
about the present post office stands, and
remarked—“lf ever this is a big town,
that will be one of the best sites.” Mr.
Macgregor’s forecast was wonderfully
true. On Mr. Nash’s return to Melbourne
the Argus published plans, the first to
aj pear in any newspaper, of the
Broken Hill, Umberumberka, Apollyon,
Day Dream, and Maybell ; and it is more
than probable that the appearance of
these plans and articles had no little
efiect upon Melbourne speculators. To
this is no doubt partly attributable the
fact that Melbourne got at so early a
time a firm hold on the Barrier business.
It will also be somewhat interesting to
many persons who have the idea that
tin is a comparatively new discovery on
the Barrier to learn that before this
visit, about four years at the least ago,
Mr. Sinclair had reported having found
the metal at Poolamacea. In fact, if I
remember rightly, the prospector induced
Mr. Nash to go out and inspect his
“ show.” At that time, however, tin
was even less popular than it undeservedly
is to-day.


Writing of the Press reporters who
visited these parts in the very early days,
I had almost omitted to mention that Mr.
J. C. F. Johnson, the ex-Minister of
Education in South Australia, passed
through this district over eight years ago for
the South Australian Advertiser. Of
course at that time Broken Hill was not
in existence, and Mr. Johnson, who rode
horseback from Terowie, only passed
through here on the way to Miount
Brown, which was then engrossing con-
siderable attention on account of the gold
finds reported from there. Mr. Johnson
had a very rough time of it, and has
chronicled his experiences in a little
volume, “Moses and I.” “Moses,” it
might be remarked, was the ex-Minister s
horse. The South Australian was prob-
ably, therefore, the first pressman who
wrote about this district.
A few articles back I briefly traced the
histories of the several newspapers on
the field. Perhaps it was an innate
modesty which I possess, and which I
deem the Miner also possesses, that
restrained me from saying anything of
the journal to which I write. But friends
have reminded me that Hamlet without
the ghost would hardly have been a
creditable production, ; and so, argue
they, the history of Broken Hill without
some mention of such an institution as
the Barrier Miner would be sadly want-
iim. Therefore at this point I hasten to
do that which heretofore that previously
mentioned modesty restrained me from
doing.
The Barrier Miner made its first bow
to the people of Broken Hill on February
28, 1888. Messrs. Fenton and Knight
were the original owners, and some 12
months ago Mr. Mills, of Sydney, bought
an interest in the paper. Mr. Knight
first arrived in Broken Hill from Sydney
with four printers ; but, owing to the
plant not arriving in time, they had for
some three weeks to cool or rather warm
their heels wandering about Argent-
street, alternately cursing the flies and
the dust, or worrying themselves half out
of their minds thinking they were getting
the fever, which was very bad just then.
But the plant arrived at last, and was put
together in one of a row of brick shops,
the first of such on Broken Hill, which
adjoined the site of the present palatial
Coffee Palace. The site of the latter
building (which in itself, oy the way,
would be a credit to either King William
or Collins streets) was then occupied by a
bouo-h shed, used as a cool drink shop.
***
Mr. Carden was the Miner’s first
editor. He was previously editing a
paper in Mudgee; and, from the start,
the Barrier Miner met with a very
favorable reception from all classes, not
only here but from all parts of the Bar-
rier and South Australia. Its first prin-
ciples are and always have been to cham-
pion the cause of the working man and to
burst up swindling mines. With two
such good causes at heart it has to a great
extent ignored the usual little pettifogging
tittle-tattle to be generally found in
country newspapers. If a new mine is
found with anything like a fair show on
it the Miner is only too willing to do all
in its power to help it along; but woe
betide anything in the shape of a swindle!
For “Smiler” “smiles upon it, and it
dies in beauty there. ” L fancy that every
right thinking mrr here agrees with me
in saying “a got a job, too. ’ It was
“ Smiler” who pm his foot down on the
Dainty Davie *busmess and dozens of
others of the same kidney, as witness h.s
late exposure of the Mystery country.
That last trip alone must have cost the
Miner close on £lOO. “Smiler” does
not pretend to be a great mining expert,
but what he sees he speaks the truth
about. The late Hugh Patterson, one of
the pioneers of the Barrier, said to no
one day-. “They can talk as much as
they like about mining experts, but give
me 1 Smiler’; for he is the only one of the
lot of them who is game to go down a
200 ft, shaft, hanging on to a rope, to see
for himself. And, what’s more, he will
insist on taking a pick with him also,
which makes it rather awkward for one if
he is running a ‘ doctored ’ show.” the
articles by “Wideawake which appear
from time to time in the Miner are
dignified and caustic
In Mr. Prior the Miner has for its
editor one of the youngest members of
the fourth estate in Australia ; but, like
Mr. Deakin, the present Chief Secretary


of Victoria, he has outrun a good many
editors more advanced in years, not only
in intelligence but in his far-seeing
advocacy of the rights of the working
man ; and it is owing to such writers as
Mr. Prior that to-day Australia has the
honor of being first amongst the countries
of the world to humble that flag “ that
braved a thousand years the battle and
the breeze. ” It was through such writings
that the working men of Australia have
been placed in a position not only to de-
mand and get justice done to themselves
but to help their starving brothers at
home. It was a great day for Australia
when its gallant young flag proudly waved
at the head of hundreds of thousands of
the best blood and bone of Old England.
***
Some months ago the Miner removed
from its old office, and took possession of
its present one, which is by far the largest
and best fitted newspaper office in Aus-
tralia out of any of the metropolitan
cities. In the two years it has been in
existence its staff has increased from 4 to
38 hands, exclusive of the proprietors ;
and, wonderful thougli the advancement of
Broken Hill may be, yet it has not left
the Barrier Miner far behind in go-
aheadness and in pluck. To-day the
residents of' Broken Hill wait with
impatience for the thrill yell of the pre-
cocious boy which advents the appearance
of the Miner.
***
I have been prospecting amongst my
old correspondence, and have come upon
a letter over which I have had a merry
laugh. It is from an intimate personal
friend, who dates his letter September
24, 1885—four years to a day before I
wrote these lines. My friend will. I am
sure, pardon me for reproducing here an
extract from a communication which was
never intended to see print. “ There
seems some likelihood of a boom in silver-
mining shares here,” he writes from
Sydney. ‘ ‘ There are the Sunny Corner
mines, you know, as well as Silverton
. . Russell has made a failure, it seems,
with one company he tried to float ; at
Last he has advertised that it is with-
drawn from the market and that the
money will be returned. It was called
the ‘ South Extended Broken Hill. ’
. . I have ten shares in the
original Broken Hill Co. I suppose those
are good enough to keep ? One good
point about them is that there is not
much liability for calls.” . . . “Lia-
bility for calls,” eh ? “ Good enough to
keep ! ” And that was only four years
ago.
***
Without doubt the Broken Hill Pro-
prietary mine has been the luckiest mine
on the Barrier, and everyone is always
glad to talk about it. But perhaps it may
be a little interesting to hear something
about the unluckiest mine on the Barrier.
A few days after Rasp had pegged out the
Broken Hill, Messrs. Herbert and Pat-
terson came over and pegged out the
present Sultan Company’s ground ; and
at that time they would not have
exchanged it for two Broken Hills. But
somehow or other something always
cropped up to retard it. Either the
broker who was “ fixing it ” went crooked
and bolted, or else some capitalist who
was going to buy it “ pegged out.” There
was always something wrong. At last I
floated it into a syndicate in Sydney
(about the worst place in Australia to have
the office). Then poor Herbert thought
he would take a holiday and go home to
Terowie to see his family. A few days
after he was found close to the South
Australian border, sitting in his trap,
stone dead. We could never sink a shaft in
the right place, and even if we did strike the
lode a flaw would come in and cut the ore
out. Then the secretary of the syndicate in
Sydney became considerably mixed in his
accounts, and left hurriedly for the north
of Queensland —“ to see a man about a
dog.” Then, when we were about to float
it into a company, bad luck still came along,
for the confounded boom burst the next
day, and we couldn’t sell a share at any
price.
After that Hugh Pafterson was taken
ill, and, in spite of all Mrs. Delamore’s
motherly attention and nursing, he suc-
ceeded in getting away into the bush,
where, like his old mate, Herbert, he was
found next day dead. Then old Mac. was
thrown outof a trap and was broken up, and
he is even now under the doctor’s hands
in Adelaide. Then the manager of the
mine got lead-poisoned in his face, and
was in the hospital here for months.


After that he' took; a trip to "Melbourne ior
n change. While there he went to see the
races, and sput every penny he had on a
“sure thing”-; but somehow or other
(this horse wots, like the man who fell out
of a baloon, not in it. The confounded
Sultan seemed to be a regular “Mascotte,”
that brought bad luck to -every one
who had anything to do with it.
Even about the first contractor on it was
sent to gaol “ for a-havin’ of it out with
his missus.” Mr. Hawson, a shareholder
in it, lost a large fortune in two weeks
during the boom in Adelaide. Then two
Sydney shareholders “ pegged out” with-
out giving any notice, and another went
out of his mind. It was only three weeks
ago since the late Hugh Seymour, a great
broad-chested giant of a man, who could
have felled an ox with his fist, and myself
were working on the mine, taking a black-
smith’s shop down and collecting all the
tools to prevent them from being stolen.
It was a very windy, cold day, and Sey-
mour complained of catching “ a slight
cold.” The next morning, on visiting the
mine, we found that some mean thief had
come in the night and stolen most of the
house and tools Sultan luck as usual.
That was on a Tuesday, and on the
following Tuesday Seymour was in iris
grave. The “ slight cold” had finished
him. And here I must say a few words
in praise of the kind-hearted conduct to
an old mate of Mr. and Mrs. Farrell, at
whose hotel Seymour lived. Had Sey-
mour been their only son they could not
save attended him better during his short
illness. Such was the luck of the Sultan.
It seems strange that one mine should
turn into gold and power everything it
had anything to do with, while another,
adjoining one, should bring nothing
but death and misery to its owners.
Truly the ways of He who times the
seasons are strange and unaccountable ; but-
who can question His ways 1- For all we
know, it would be better for us to be the
poorest man on Broken Hill than the
riehest silver king in the world !
' ***
How many a great change has taken
place here, even since the Sultan was first
pegged out. Then a camp of strong,
light-hearted men would sit around their
camp fire of an evening and talk about
good old times ahead, when they’d
strike it rich on the Saltan. Now most of
them are in their graves. Then we would
walk three miles along a dusty road in the
broiling sun, and pay a shilling for a
pannican full of hop beer, and drink it
sitting on an empty gin case in a bough
shed. If we dared even hint that the
pannican wasn’t too clean we would be
none too sweetly told that if we didn’t like it
we “could jolly well lump it.”
Perhaps if the shanty keeper knew us
we might be sometimes lucky enough
to get a few nobblers out of the bottle
hidden under the bed —the stuft, perhaps
the shantykeeper would inform you, |
“ what killed his father” ; the stuff that
sent so many a poor fellow to his grave
in the early clays ; the stuff that old
German Charley christened many a year
ago “ snake-juice.” Now we can taKe a
walk down the shady side of Argent-
street to meet a friend from Adelaide—to
meet him as he alights from a dashing
hansom cab in front of the “Grand,”
there to be received with all the attention
and politeness that is bestowed on an
English “ mi lor’ ” on his arrival at a Con-
tinental hotel. And then, in the cool of
the evening, lolling idly on a velvet-
cushioned armchair on the broad veran-
dah, we can sip iced claret and be lulled
to sleep by the sweet soul-moving strains
of the adjacent Salvation Army ; or, per-
chance, we may, for sleep not inclined,
listen to the “ hanny capting”holdingforth
in his charitable and holy inspiration,
telling his dear brothers and sisters all
about the “ poor little crippled girl of
seving whenever kno wed Jesus,” andwho,
of course, died and went straight to—
well, never mind. And then you may
hear the captain proudly telling them
that they only wanted three more shillings
thrown on the big drum to make a pound;
“ so, come along, brothers, for”— (chorus)
“ This is why we love Jesus” ” : a belief
that you could find no just cause to doubt,
***
Then we would sit on our bunks on
a Sunday and patch and repatch and
patch again our tattered old moles and
cotton shirts, and wait patiently for the
hawker’s van to come along to pay
255. for a 3s. 6d. pair of moleskins. Now
we can drop into Shierlaw’s plate glass-
fronted shop and be measured by a Bond-
I street educated cutter, who sends you


home next day a suit of clothes that
makes a gentleman of you —or, rather,
makes you look like one, and at a price,
that would turn even a poor half starved
Rundle-street tailor green with envy.
Then we hurried home from work to boil
the humble billy and to turn some flour
and water into the still more humble
johnny-cake or damper. Now Bricknells
brass-bound carts supply you with bread
as light and as white as the finest French
loaves to be got in either Melbourne or
Adelaide, and as cheap. Then a lay
preacher would come along once a month
and tell of a better life to come, while we,
bare-armed, sat around him on logs and
boxes, cutting up our tobacco. Now the
finest sight that catches one’s eye of an
evening in Broken Hill is the gas-lit
Wesleyan Church, that stands out with
all the solemnity and grandeur of an
English cathedral —a lasting monument
to the home training of our Cornish
friends.
.***
Talking of Cornishmen reminds me of a
peculiar incident at which I was present.
Captain Piper (who was then the mining
manager of the Big mine), and I
were standing one day near Rasp’s shaft,
when a young fellow came up and asked
for a job. Instead of answering him,
Piper asked the voung fellow if his name
wasn’t Oates. Fie seemed rather surprised,
but answered, “ Yes, it is.” “How did
you know my name, for I am a stranger
here, and only three weeks out from
home 1” “ Flow did I know you ?” the
captain said as he wrote out an order to a
shift boss to put the stranger on a job.
“ How did I know you 1 Why, by your
fingers.” And we turned and left the
young miner wondering. I said to Piper
a little while after—“ I can’t make out how
you knew that young fellow’s name by his
fingers. There was nothing strange about
his fingers that I could see, except that
they were remarkably short.” “Ah, there
you’ve hit it,” he said ; and then he told
me the following story.
About 150 years ago (said Captain Piper,
commencing his story of this strange
Oates family, several of whom were on
the Barrier) there lived on the north
coast of Cornwall a family named Oates,
who, instead of working industriously like
the fishermen of their village, thought
that it was a much more lucrative and
enjoyable occupation to lure on to the
rocks any unfortunate storm tossed vessel
that was driven their way, by tying a
lantern to a horse, and letting it wander
of its own free will along the top of the
cliffs. The deluded mariners, mistaking
the light for signals from the shore, would
guide their ship to certain destruction by
being dashed on the rock bound shore.
Sometimes by chance some of the crews
would manage to get a footing on the
rocks, but only to be brained and robbed
of anything they had on them, and then
thrown back into the sea by the Oates.
Oates’ eldest son, becoming tired of such
brutal work, resolved to run away and
leave behind him for ever the memory of
the past. He was missed one day by his
companions ; and, as no trace of him
could be found, he was given up in time
for dead by his family.
***.
A few years after this occurrence, that
part of the Cornish coast was visited by
one of the most dreadful storms within
the memory of its oldest inhabitants ;
and, whilst the simple-minded villagers
were huddled around their cottage fires,
listening with mingled fear and wonder to
the roar of the tempest, the bloodthirsty
wreckers were at their old posts, watch-
ing with hungry eyes the struggles of an
unfortunate ship as she was being driven
on to the rocks. Presently she struck,
and was almost instantly torn to pieces
by the angry waves ; and every man of
her crew found that night a watery grave.
All save one, who, by an almost super-
human strength, managed to get a footing
on the rocks. The Oates watched him,
as, step by step, he climbed up the face
of the cliff'; and, just as he reached the
top, the elder of the wreckers, with one
blow of his knife, cut off all the fingers
of the unfortunate fellow'’s right hand,
as he hung by it to the edge of the cliff.
The sailor fell, and was dashed to pieces
on the rocks below.
***
In a very few minutes after the Oates
had descended the rocks, and, when turn-
ing over the body to empty pockets,
the father was horrified to behold the face
of his eldest and favorite son. With a yell
of despair the old man threw himself into


the waves and was swallowed up by them.
The two remaining brothers, conscience-
stricken at their wickedness, soon after
left that part of Cornwall, and settled
down in Truro, where, after a time, they
were universally respected for the good-
dess of their lives. They were married
in Truro, and, in the fulness of time, had
each a numerous family. But from that
day to this every male child of the Oates
family is born with stunted fingers on his
right hand. This is as it was told me by
the captain. It may be true or it may
not be ; but I can vouch for the first part
about the young fellow’s name.
***
Now that Block 10 is causing such a
stir in the mining world, and, seeing that
there are thousands of feverish-minded
speculators in all parts of Australia
anxiously waiting for the electric spark
to bring them tidings of it, I think it
would be somewhat interesting to hear
what it was thought of some five years
ago. At that time it wasn’t thought of
at all, but was given over to the care of
Charles Yeller (better known to-day as
“ Maltese Charley ”) who held it for the
Proprietary Company until they could get
all their blocks registered into one com-
pany. He used to boundary-ride the
pegs once a day, and sometimes, to keep
himself warm, would do a little trenching
on it. He was doing so one day, not far
from the present road going to the Cen-
tral mine, "when he found embedded in
the mieissic rock, about two feet below
the surface, one of the handsomest speci-
mens I ever saw. It weighed about a
pound, and consisted of little columns of
manganese iron embedded in chlorides.
It was given to me, but unfortunately
some time after it was destroyed. “ Mal-
tese Charley ” made a careful search, but
could not succeed in finding another speck
of chloride on the claim. How the
specimen got where it was found is more
than I can say.
***
The whereabouts of the main Broken
Hill lode with regard to Block 10 is a
thing that is puzzling the heads of a good
many people at the present time. During
Mr. Jamieson’s management he made a
careful survey of the lode along the
Broken Hill line, and from the old
shaft and several costeens sunk by
him, showing a locle formation of
manganese iron, and still to be
seen, it is evident that he judged that the
lode was far to the east of the present
hungry quartzite outcrop that the shafts
are being sunk in. And the fact that the
South Company has sunk several shafts
on the same outcrop, some of them over
200 ft. deep, without getting anything else
but hungry quartz, confirms me in the
belief that lie wasn’t far out either. Later
on I was instructed by the Central mine
directors to make a survey of the main
outcrop going through the blocks adjacent f
to their mine, and, from the printed
plans of that survey, it will be seen that
my Survey exactly tallied with Jamieson s.
I was also instructed to carefully follow
the quartzite outcrop, which I did, and
found that it was first to be seen out-
cropping about the middle of Block 5.
From there it outcrops fully 60ft. wide
to within a few feet of the south boundary
of Block 7, of the South Company, where
it is lost in the alluvial. It is again found
west of and near the hauling shaft of the
South, though in places it is very much
disturbed and mixed with gneissic rock.
It can easily be traced from this place
going past the Central Company’s stack
on the top of the hill ; in fact, the stack
is built on it. From there it goes through
part of the Central, on into Block 10, and
into Block 11, passing within a few feet
to the west of McGregor’s shaft. From
this place it wends towards the north-
west corner peg of Block 11, but it is
lost in the alluvial for some five or six
chains before it reaches that peg.
This is exactly as I found this hungry
quartzite to be outcropping and passing
through Block 10. Whether there is a
lich lode under it or not is more than I
can say ; but I fancy not, especially when
I found out, on going down the underlay
shaft of the South, that at the 250 ft. level
a body of quartz (exactly similar to that
found in all the other shafts sunk on the
quartzite outcrop) had come in from the
west, and had forced the lode into an
easterly dip, though before it met the
quartz it was dipping west.
***
Still later I made an underground sur-
vey of the Central Company’s workings,
and, from a section of them I prepared


for my own information, I found that the
south shaft on Block 10 would have to be
sunk 1400 ft. before it would strike the
underlay of the lode, providing always
that the lode does dip, say, 1 in 5 towards
the west. But I am forgetting, this is
not of the “ Early Days,” so I must go
back. After the Broken Hill Company
was registered, work was stopped on
Block 10, and nothing was done with it
until it was floated into a separate
i company.
***
As soon as work was stopped on Block
10, “ Maltese Charley” started as the first
barber in Broken Hill. His shop w'as
just about w T here Honey’s timber yard
now stands. I well remember the sign
that stood over his tent:: —“Charlie
Yaller—Hare Kuter.” His saloon was
beautifully fitted up with the latesf im-
provements. For a chair he had an empty
brandy case, and the floor was carpeted
with flour bags. On the walls w r ere hung
several engravings cub from the Bulletin,
and stuck over the only mirror in the
establishment was the legend—“ No tek.”
Charley improved with practice ; but at
the outset, before his fame became
universal, new arrivals cften wondered
why the neighborhood of the barber’s
chair had such a fascination for a well-fed
magpie. At least, I’ve heard it said that
people wondered that way.
***
Some prominence has been given in
these sketches to the first hotelkeeper and
the first hotel in Broken Hill ; why
should not the first clergyman and the
first church also be mentioned in this
my concluding paragraph l The first
divine service conducted in Broken Bill
was held in a small iron hut, situate sonie-
wheie near Rasp’s shaft, and occupied by
Mr. Sleep, the first underground manager
of the broken Hill mine. The officiating
clergyman was the Rev. G. H. Paynter,
of the Bible Christian Church. This was
in June, 1885. Mr. Paynter was at that
time stationed in Silverton ; and, if I
mistake not, he has almost without in-
termission labored there ever since. Not
long after the first service was held the
Rev. J. Thorne, one of the leading lights
of the Bible Christian Church in South
Australia, visited these parts and con-
ducted a service. After June, ’B5,
religious services- were occasionally Held ;;
but it was not until January of the next
year that any attempt was made to
establish a Sunday school. That work
was then also undertaken by tlie Bible
Christians. In the following May, 1886,
the first church, still also belonging to the
same connexion, was opened, Mr.
Paynter continuing to be the moving spirit..
Indeed, that unassuming gentleman may
well claim to be the chief church pioneer
of the Barrier ; for though Mr. Riddel,
of the Presbyterian Church, was his con-
temporary in pioneer work, Mr. Payner
has done what Mr. Riddel never ap-
proached on the f arrier—he has been
mainly instrumental in building no less-
than six churches in the district. The
Wesleyan Church was the second in*
Broken Hill. The Rev. G. W. Clarke,
who was immensely popular here, being a
jolly fellow and an accomplished athlete,
as well as an earnest preacher, was the
first Wesleyan clergyman stationed in
Broken Hill.
My paper is exhausted. In these few
notes I have set down a few thoughts
which have occurred to one w r ho has
watched, and- sometimes wondered at, the
gigantic strides of a town and district
which has yet to make many such strides-
before it reach its zenith. Many
have written much on this subject before
me ; but perhaps I have put together a few
facts and a few incidents which may have
escaped those who have written histories
of the field, such as these notes do not
profess to be. These writers usually de-
scant upon the magnificent opportunities-
which were offered to us “old hands.”
We ought to have made fortunes, they
tell us. “ I wish I’d been here five years
ago. I’d have had a big interest in the
Broken Hill. Any fool could see that it
would be a big thing.” This is what I
fancy I hear them say. Still it is more
than likely that, even had they been here
five years ago, they would have been just
as blind as the best of us “ old ’uns”—in
fact, just as blind as most of them are at
present. How do they know that the
Broken Hill Extended No. 1 Round
Corner, for instance, is not a more
magnificent property than even the
Broken Hill!
Talking of the “old hands” and their


chances reminds me of a most original
and undoubtedly philosophical reply
which young Cox, the blacksmith, gave
me one day. He at one time held four
l-14ths in the Broken Hill, and was con-
sidered lucky when he sold out for about
£2OO. I was driving to the Rockwell
with him, and I said, somewhat sympa-
thetically “I wonder how you can stand
it ! Don’t you, as you work for 10s. a
day, get a fit of the blues every time you
look towards the big mine'?” “Well,
no,” he replied. “ Ton see already two
directors of the company have pegged out
then' last claim. If 1 had not sold out I
might have been one of those unlucky
creatures. Who knows that 1 vvouldn t
have sailed for England and fallen over-
board % After all, what’s the use of coin-
plaining 1 If luck’s down on you, don t
throw up the sponge, but have a suck at
the lemon, and at ’em again.” Arid that s-
the advice of an “ old ’un ” on the Barrier
to the newer arrivals as he thanks them
for having listened to him through the
medium of the Miner, than which, this
“ old ’un ” says, neither person nor thing
was ever more popular—and deservedly
so—on the Barrier.
TO-D AY
A Sequel to "In the Early Days."
By ARGENTUM
To my friend Mr. W. R. Thomas was
entrusted the not unpleasant task of deal-
ing, in that pleasant style which so well
becomes the pioneer, with the early days
of Broken Hill. To me has fallen the
work of supplying, as it were, a sequel to
his sketches, and, since my space is more
limited, figures must be almost solely em-
ployed in the task before me. Not
unnaturally the Broken Hill Proprietary
mine should claim first attention. “ The
proof of the pudding is in the eating” ;
and so the immense worth of the mine
cannot be better shown than by a state-
ment of what the property has so far
produced, though only an insignificant
slice has up to the present been taken
from the pudding. Prior to the half-year
ended November 25, 188(5, what smelting
of Broken Hill ore was done was per-
formed by the Barrier Ranges Company.
Therefrom the company possessed its own
smelters, conducted at first by Mr. Stearns,
andnowby Mr. Schlapp, thatgiantamongst
metallurgists as Mr. Patton, the present
general manager of the mine, is amongst
miners. And here, perhaps, a few words
mav be said about the furnaces. At
present the company has 10 smelting
furnaces, the last having been put in
blast only a week or two ago- Before
February 18, 1888, five 30-ton furnaces,,
now known as the “ old smelters, were
used. And it is quite probable that, since
the proportion of cost between running
the new and the old smelters is about 32'
to 36, the five old furnaces will before long
be replaced by new 80-tonners. The fol-
lowing table shows the amount of bullion
and silver produced up to September 20
from the Broken Hill mine :
Period.
Ore treated.
Bullion.
Silver.
Before local
furnaces were
blown in
June-Nov., ’86
-June, ’87
-Dec., ’87
-May, ’88
• -Nov. ’88
-May, ’89
Tons.
1,000
10,397
18,411
30,432
41,349
57,286
71,655
Tons.
900 :
2,017
2,861
6,550
6,823
9,955
11,499
Ounces.
180,209
871,665
835,526
1,267,699
1,633,737
2,290,455 •
2,677,686
Total
232,930
40,605
9,756,977
* Approximate.
Since May, 1889, the monthly returns
have been as follow
Month.
Ore.
Bullion.
Silver.
June
July
August
September..
Tons.
11,684
12,005
15,371
11,352
Tons.
1978
2179 '
2403
1879
Ounces.
461,646
490,623
644,121 .
533,983
Total
50,412
8439 1 2,130,373


The tables hereunder give an excelle
idea of the consistent but rapid advance
which the mine has made in its output
during that part of this year which has
passed :
Bate.
Ore
Treated.
Bullion.
Silver.
Tons.
Tons.
Ounces.
January 4 ..
2,097
362
73,102
11 .. ..
2,089
318
78,070
18 .. .,
2,640
384
94,600
•25 .. ..
2,529
434
89,406
Feb’&ry
1 .. ..
2,582
417
94,782
8 .. ..
2,592
366
96,547
u
15 .. ..
2.634
361
96,850
22 .. ..
2,522
405
98,507
March
1
2,460
424
105,169
8 .. ..
2,515
505
106,091
15 .. ..
2,625
424
111,573
22 .. ..
2,664
397
112,823
29 .. ..
2,739
453
114,091
April
5 .. ..
2,868
445
116,244
( s
12 .. ..
2,837
509
115.689
19 .. ..
2,997
611
115,049
26 .. ..
2,968
629
114,329
May
3 .. ..
3,084
605
115,780
10 .. ..
3,063
539
116,401
17 .. ..
2,887
484
113,858
24 .. ..
2,779
468
116,542
31 .. ..
2,890
407
114,103
June
7 .. ..
2,972
512
115,436
,,
14 .. ..
3,123
474
115,710
21 .. ..
2,776
491
113,512
,,
28 .. ..
2,813
501
116,988
July
5 .. ..
2,871
561
116,726
12 .. ..
2,971
615
120,405
19 .. ..
3,068
575
125,869
August
26 .. ..
3,095
428
127,623
2 .. ..
3,179
455
127,452
9 .. ..
3,282
450
127,447
16 .. ..
3,055
517
128,483
23 .. ..
2,964
485
129,144,
Sept,
30 .. ..
3,051
496
131,595
.6 .. ..
3,011
397
130,951
13 .. ..
2,898
456
132,552
,,
20 .. ..
2,854
494
134,664
27 .. ..
2,589
532
135,816
Oct.
4 .. ..
2,937
465
133,381
»
11 .. .
2,928
567
137,745
Totals .. ..
125,498
19,418
4,711,105
By adding the amount of bullion and
silver produced since May with that given
in the first table, it will be found that up
to the present the following has been
produced from the Broken Hill mine :
Tons of ore.
Tons of bullion.
Ounces of silver.
232,930
40,605
9,756,977
50,412
8439
2,130,370
283,342
49,044
11,887,350
Now as to the amount of money dis-
bursed as the result of the working of this
mine. On May 30 last there were 2127
men and boys employed on and in the
mine. Since then other smelting furnaces
have been blown in, so that at the present
time there cannot be less than 2300 em-
ployes, including clerks, &c. In works
of construction alone about £240,000 has
been expended by this one company, and
no more than £30,000 worth of these
works are away from Broken Hill. In
dividends (notto mention the cash bonuses
received by shareholders from the sale of
portions of the mine, which at the present
time includes 120 acres), £1,032,000 has
been paid since July 26, 1886. The pre-
sent market value of the property is about
£8,950,000, and the monthly dividend
at present is Bs. per 160,000 th share.
This amount is likely to be very
shortly increased. As to the quantity of
ore remaining, it is impossible to say any-
thing which will induce those who have
not seen the mine to appreciate how com-
paratively insignificant is the quantity
extracted. “The immense development
of high grade carbonate ore in M‘Gregor’s
(No. 1 shaft, Block 11), has added to the
reserves, notwithstanding the extraction of
over 67,000 tons during the last half year.’’
These are Mr. Patton’s words, and go to
show the extent of the mine.
In drawing distinction between the
Broken Hill of to-day and of that time of
which Mr. Thomas has written, attention
has hitherto been devoted to the Broken
Hill Proprietary mine alone. It is not
claimed even by the man who is most
proud of the present state of the Barrier
mining industry that the district contains
other properties of apparent equal qualify
and value ; but that there are almost a
score of mines which with moderate care
will prove payable within 18 months at
the most is now generally admitted.
Block 14 has already paid four eighteen-
penny dividends, and a fifth. is now
declared. The output from this mine has
been characterised by steadiness. Up to
the present two 80-ton smelters have been
in blast, but in a few days a third will be
in readiness. The ore, though not of high
quality, is consistent moderate grade,
and is not, on the whole, difficult of
treatment. The weekly output from the


mine since the blowing-in of the first
smelter has been as follows :
Date.
Ore
treated.
Bullion.
Silver.
Tons.
Tons.
Ounces.
iFeb’ary
8 .. ..
15 .. ..
380
350
77
63
9,482
10,279
"
22 .. ..
265
69
14,037
March
1 ..
8
241
327
63
92
10,432
10,363
**
15 .. ..
491
125
13,671
99
22 .. ..
685
169
22,044
M
29 .. ..
071
165
20,218
April
5
12 .. ..
626
613
147
159
16,449
15,616
19 .. ..
629
180
14,258
”
26 .. ..
620
174
14,738
May
3 .. ..
10 .. ..
678
610
185
202
15,227
14,691
17 .. • •
652
202
13,467
24 .. ..
669
202
13 197
31 .. ..
662
197
14,170
■ 'Tune
7 .. ..
652
181
14,275
14 .. ..
688
181
14,654
21 .. ..
694
158
15,629
28 .. ..
666
181
15,063
600
188
14,315
12 .. ..
575
147
14,724
”
10 . ..
605
160
15,088
99
26 . ..
691
170
14,916
613
141
13,509
9 .. . -
691
130
15,349
"
16 .. ..
23 .. ..
650
125
16,215
694
159
16,536
30 . • • •
635
159
17,688
Sept.
6 .
13 .. .
617
685
170
152
17,006
18,581
"
20 .. .
670
158
19,706
27 (2 days
221
84
9,466
Oct.
4* .. .
—
Totals .. .
19,807
5,115
505,172
Furnaces shut down for repairs.
In respect of these furnaces and of the
cost of running them there is little
further to be said than what has been said
regarding the Proprietary. The furnaces
■on both properties are under the same
superintendence ; and, since Mr. Schlapp
is that superintendent, it goes without
saying that both are economically and
well conducted.
The British Blocks unfortunately made
the mistake of erecting their three fur-
naces, each 60-tonners, at Port Pirie, in
South Australia. Experience is demon-
strating the inadvisableness of erecting
reducing plant for the Barrier mines else-
where than on the Barrier; but there is a
class of people who can only obtain ex-
perience at a dear price. The British
smelters are managed jointly by Messrs.
Green way and Board. Since the starting
of the works the following has been the
weekly output: — .
Ore.
Bullion, i
Silver. |
Lead.
July
4 .. ..
Tons.
234
Tons.
38
Ozs.
4,553
Tons.
37
11 .. ..
324
43
5,326
43
’*
18 .. ..
561
87
9,599
87
25 ..
1 .. ..
600
75
8,066
' 74
August
472
54
7,240
54
8 .. ..
479
47
6,685
47
7 t
16 .. ..
672
104
11,513
103
■
23 .. ..
692
95
10,322
94
Sept.
30 .. .-.
621
81
9,996
9,866
81
6 .. ..
620
77
76
13 .. ..
574
71
10,427
70
20 .. ..
650
95
13,005
94
27 .. ..
688
98
12,145
98
Oct.’
4 .. ..
756
121
14,324
120
11 .. ..
797
139
17,152
139
Totals
8,740
1,225
143,719
1,217
A better claps of ore will presently be
sent from this mine to the furnaces.
Concentrating works, which have been
erected on this property, under the
superintendence of Mr. Holly, will also
presently improve the output from these
smelters. It is also reported on good
authority that an addition will before
very long be made to the ore-reducing
power of this company.
At Port Pirie there are also almost
completed desilverising works, erected
by the Broken Hill Proprietary Company.
When these works are completed it is
hoped that a direct market will be opened
up for the sale of silver and lead in
Eastern Asia.
The Broken Hill Junction Company
is also having two furnaces erected at
Port Adelaide, and these will be ready for
work early in 1890.
Allowing that the ores from the pro-
perties named maintain their present
average value, and allowing, farther, that
no increase is made up to that time in the
ore-reducing power of the Proprietary
Company, it may be estimated that by
February, 1890, the output of silver from
these four mines will reach 190,000 ounces
per week.
Something has been said of the erection
of smelters at the Central mine. It is
known that Mr. F. F. Thomas, the
skilled American manager, favors the
erection of smelters on the Barrier ; and,
in view of the present appearance of the
mine, and the fact that tens of thousands
of tons are now ready for stoping, it can-
not be regarded as anything else than
certain that the Central Company will be


the next to proceed with the erection of
furnaces, and that within a few months’
time.
The ore from the South is being smelted
principally at Te Aroha, in New Zealand.
At the North mine concentrators «will
shortly be at work. No decision has yet
been arrived at in regard to the erection
of furnaces by this company. Work at
this mine for the past half-year resulted
in a profit of £lO,OOO.
The following weekly statement of the
exports of ore from Broken Hill, taken
quite haphazard from the September
weekly returns, wfill give a fair idea of the
average quantity of mineral products sent
away week by week :
tons cwt. qr. lb. Value.
Proprietary, 15,000 bars ar-
gentiferous lead .. .. 549 1 2 0 £35,414
Block 14, 4200 bars argentifer-
ous lead ore .. .. 158 1(5 1 0.. 4100
l)o., lead ore 03 4 3 0 .. 375
B. H. North, 29 trucks silver-
lead ore 174 17 3 0 .. 875
South, 1 truck silver-lead ore 4 18 3 0.. 25
Pinnacles Tribute, 4 trucks
silver-lead ore .. .. 21 17 1 0 .. 220
British, 140 trucks silver lead-
, ore .. 800 0 0 0 .. 4300
And in this return it will be noticed that
the Central does not have a place ; but
within the next week or two 1000 tons of
good grade ore will be sent from this
mine. In this statement the South mine
is also very much below r its average.
New South Wales is an alleged free-
trade country. Customs duties are
imposed upon a few articles ; and as
showing the consuming pow'er and conse-
quent commercial importance of the town
the following table of Customs returns
for this year will be interesting
For three-quarters ended September,
£47,442 14s. Id.
For quarter ended September, £16,285
Is. lOd. During the last quarter the
Customs collections were :
Spirits £4085 19 3
Perfumery 21 10 1
Wines 555 7 10
Ale (wood) 983 12 (i
Ale (bottle) 327 6 0
Tobacco .. .. .. .. 2123 9 6
Cigars, Cigarettes 578 11 11
Sugar 665 16 0
Bacon 192 8 6
Butter 527 0 0
Timber 2843 19 8
The extent of the country about Broken
Hill over which more or less mining is
being or has been done is amply shown
by the following return of the leases, Ac.,.,
applied for at Silverton and Broken Hill!
during 1888 :
Mineral lease applications .. .. 142(5
Gold-mining applications .. .. 12
Mineral licenses issued (i 32
Miners’ rights 982
Business icenses .. 1701
The revenue received by the Govern-
ment in fees, Ac., with these applications-
amounted in the 12 months to £24,970,
and an additional £1635 was remitted
from Broken Hill for survey fees on
mining tenements. The number of appli-
cations made to lease Crown lands through-
out the whole colony for mining purposes
during 1888 was 5982. Thus about one-
third of the applications for the whole
colony came from the Barrier. The pro-
portion of business licenses is even greater
than this.
As showing the revenue received by the
Government in other directions from the
Barrier, the following tables will be of'
interest:—
CUSTOMS.
Silverton. Broken Hill.
1884 .. .. £17,152 .. —
1885 .. .. 20,148 .. —
1886 .. .. 28,039 .. —
1887 .. .. 42,507 .. £3,818
1888 .. .. (abt.) 20,000 .. 04,857
1889 (to Sep. 30) „ 10,000 .. 47,442
£138,446 1! £116,117
* Part of year.
COURT REVENUE.
Silverton. Broken Hill.
1883
Warden’s.
1,774
Petty Ses. Warden’s. P. S.
.. 188 .. — .. —
1884
11,673
282 .. — .. —
1885
10,219
.. 875 .. — .. —
1880
3,878
.. 1050 .. — .. _
1S87
13,246
.. 1100 .. 1234*. .. 471
1888
20,376
.. 1528 .. 6080 .. 806
*
£61,166 ..£5,023 .. £7,314 .. £1,277
From September 1 to December 31.
Add to this that the post and telegraph
offices at Broken Hill have, up to the end
of last year, contributed £25,000, and it
will be found that the Government has
drawn something like £400,000 from
these parts in a little over four years. To
the end of August of this year £4,717
was received at the Broken Hill telegraph
office. Sydney, in the matter of tele-
graph revenue for that term, is first,
Broken Hill second, and Newcastle, with
£4,390, third. For stamps alone at the
Broken Hill post office £3,185 was re-
ceived during the first eight months Of
this year; and for the same perio^


352,897 letters were posted. The Warden’s
court and office fees were £2,132, and at
the police and petty debts court the fees
amounted to £698.
At the present time there are in Broken
Hill and at South Broken Hill (or Alma),
the latter the principal suburb of Broken
Hill, containing in itself about 1500
people, about 3200 buildings, the total
population being about 14,500.
In nothing, however, is the progress of
the town shown more tellingly than in
the number of new and substantial build-
ings recently erected, or in course of erec-
tion, by men who have the very best
means of gauging the true condition and
prospects of the place. During the past 12
months the value of the buildings erected
or in course of erection is £95,000. Of
this about £70,000 has been spent in
buildings in Argent-street alone. The
principal brick and stone hotels in this
street —the Grand, Australian Club, Royal,
Denver City, and Duke of Cornwall, all
of which, with one exception, were erected
over a year ago—cost of themselves
£60,000 ; and for the Coffee Palace in the
same street, immediately opposite the
Miner office, the contractors’ (Messrs.
Hewitt & Smethurst’s) price was approach-
ing £13,000. Again, less than three years
ago, the solitary newspaper of Broken
Hill, published once a week, Mr. Thomas
says, had a circulation of 650; the declared
circulation of the Miner alone now
amounts to but a little under 20,000 per
week. The branch of the Miners’ Asso-
ciation, founded so unostentatiously by-
Mr. Griffin four years ago, now numbers.
2800 members. And so right through
the bill. The nine principal mines, which
four or five years ago could have been
purchased for £SOOO at the most, have now
a market value of £13,000,000.
My space, too, is exhausted. In con-
cluding I cannot do better than repeat that
which appeared in a paper read a few days
ago before a mutual improvement society by
Mr. J. J. Williams, a gentleman who
was a member of the first progress com-
mittee in Broken Hill, and is a member
of the present municipal council. What
would Sturt, the explorer (who passed
over this country 45 years ago) say. he
asked, were he placed on that hill over-
looking the town ? What would he say
could he but see the thousands of houses,
the dozens of tall chimney-stacks, the
well laid-out town, the lines of tree-
guards, the magnificent hospital in the
distance, and the trains running right into
the principal mines? “In 10 or 20'
years,” the speaker said, “ Broken Hill,
which will then be but one of many
considerable towns on the Barrier, will
contain 100,000 people.” So mote it be !
So has it every prospect of being !


MCCULLOCH CARRYINC COMPANY, LIMITED,
HEAD OFFICE — Coliins-street, Melbourne. BRANCHES —Sydney, Adelaide, Port Adelaide, Port Pirie, Goolwa, Morgan,
Cockburn, Silverton, Broken Hill, and at all other towns throughout the colonies.
(GENERAL CARRIERS,
Forwarding, Shipping, Customs, Insurance, and General
Commission Agents.
Rates given for Removal of Goods from and to any place in the Colonies.
Wool, Shearing Supplies, Ore, and Mining Requisites receive our special attention, and as
we always have a good supply of Horse and Bullock Teams on hand, Clients can rely on speedy
transit and at low rates.
AGENTS ON THE BARRIER FOR:
Messrs. 7f right, Heaton, & Co., -Limited.
Messrs. Permewan, Wright, & Co., limited.


m 9
kqd ( l)er|tists.
' <t£
Patent Medicines of Every Description. A large assortment of Perfumery and
Toilet Requisites. Prescriptions accurately dispensed. Teeth Stopping, Scaling, and
Extracting a Speciality.
gent Street, 3 Doors H orn Theatre Royal.
WWWB* At f§MJIJII\
Family and Dispensing Chemist,
Argent Street, Droken Hill.
Horse, Cattle, and Patent Medicines. Teeth Carefully Extracted. Prescriptions
accurately prepared.
Sole Agent: G. X. and W. IS. Kirks’ Homoeopathic Medicines.
The best advertising medium and most popular paper on the
Barrier Silver Fields.
IT
Two Editions Daily-
Price— One Penny,
Registered Office : Argent-street, Broken Hill, New South Wales.
UNDERTAKERS,
Bromide-st.
RESPECTABILITY WITH
ECONOMY
GUARANTEED.
If
AGENTS FOR—
Hanson, Evans & Co.
Monumental Masons.
A Large Variety of
Tombstones, Railings,
Ac., to select from.
O IOWOK A CO. being rndcrinkew only. rt«vote tlieir whole lime to this Special


•* ■ '*»*Jf . •
CHARLES CHAPPLE
SHAREBROKER,
Customs and Forwarding Agent,
AND
GENERAL COMMISSION AGENT,
ARGENT STREET, BROKEN HILL


A
' A > m
A
w
r\
AUCTIONEER, SHAREBORKER,
Soujfe, l-aiul. kip pii\irp Sgegt,
ARGENT STREET, BROKEN HILL.
Capitalists and Investors desirous of purchasing Freehold Property in this rising town can
have a list of properties for sale, with prices attached, ported them.
Letters from any part of the colonies with reference to Mining or Land business promptly
replied to.
ALEXANDER AGfNEVY, Ai-g-eut-street, Broken plill.


vJ
r*i so
r* r •
Hwo-storey Stone House,
?? T\!
ARGENT STREET, BROKEN HILL.
~ o c
J 6
LARGE SAMPLE ROOMS.
6 N • ;
Suites of Rooms reserved on receipt of letter or teleg*
JAMES Froprieto
T
* 2
03
so
SO
04
O
LATE OF niORX AM) PORT AUGUSTA.


■'S” o 3Efc 3BBZ 3EZ OT 33 Xa,
Vow opei\ mitler Jvfew \lanag cn l el l*''
Lighted Throughout by Electricity 1
English and Loftiest, Coolest Bedrooms and Private Sitting
Booms on the Barrier.
Mrs. A. HARDT, Lessee.
Late of Adelaide and Melbourne Exhibitions.
W. R. THOMAS, G.g,
School of Mines, ‘Ballarat, and Bale Mining
Surveyor to the Broken Hill Proprietary Co.
>—
Plans of Underground Workings prepared.
Prompt and Careful Reports made on Mining Properties.
Having had 18 years’ practical experience amongst the gold mines ©f
Victoria, and over 6 years of the Barrier silver mines, intending investors wil?
do well to consult before investing.
Address —
W, It. THOMAS, C.E., Argent Street, Broken Hill.
Liberal Terms made with Syndicates and others to watch their interests o
the Barrier. Telegrams will receive immediate attention.
Bookseller, Stationer, General News an
Advertising Agfent.
Pianos, Organs, and all kinds of Musical Instruments. Booking for Thor
Cook and Son, Tourist and Passenger Agents. Tickets to all parts of the Colony *
the World.


o
0
&
c
£
*#■
s
V
♦
# %
&&
w
