

-
Net Proceeds in aid of “ Citizens’ War Chest Fund.”
Organization. Classification.
Decentralization.
i i ■■ ■
“IN TIME OF WAR”
The Recruiting Problem
"HELP OUR MATES.”
AN ADDRESS TO FELLOW AUSTRALIANS
BY
J. F. THOMAS,
NEW ENGLAND RECRUITING COMMITTEE
(Late Major N.S.VV. Citizens’ Bushmen).
TYRRELL’S LIMITED
99 Castlereagh Street, Sydney.


1
._ _ ?'''
I
* ■/ ■■•..' \ ' . . . ,’v
) ' ■ l ' ,.’ . • ' .; '
\ • . _


Net Proceeds in aid of " Citizens’ War Chest Fund.”
Organization.
Classification.
Decentralization.
“IN TIME OF WAR”
The Recruiting Problem
“HELP OUR MATES.”
AN ADDRESS TO FELLOW AUSTRALIANS
J. F. THOMAS,
NEW ENGLAND RECRUITING COMMITTEE
(Late Major N.S. VV. Citizens’ Bushmen),
TYRREEL’S LIMITED
99 Castlbreagh Street, Sydney.


THE DEFENCE ACT, 1903-1915.
Sec. 59. —All male inhabitants of Australia (excepting those
who are exempt from service in the Defence Force) who have
resided therein for six months, and are British subjects, and are
between the ages of eighteen and sixty years shall, in time of
war, be liable to serve in the Citizen Forces.
Sec. 60.—(1). In time of war it shall be lawful for the
Governor-General, by proclamation, to call upon all persons liable
to serve in the Citizen Forces to enlist and serve as prescribed.
(2). A proclamation under the last preceding sub-
section may call upon all persons liable to service in any military
district or sub-district, who are specified in any one or more of
the classes hereunder set out, so to enlist, but so that the persons
specified in that district or sub-district shall not be called upon
to enlist until all the persons in that district or sub-district who
are specified in the preceding classes are or have been called
upon.
s
i
(3). The classes referred to in this section are as
follows:
Class I.—All men of the age of eighteen years and upwards,
but under the age of thirty years, who are unmarried, or
widowers without children;
Class ll.—All men of the age of thirty-five years and up-
wards, but under forty-five years, who are unmarried, or
widowers without children;
Class lII.—All men of the age of eighteen years and up-
wards, but under thirty-five years, who are married, or widowers
without children;
Class IV.—All men of the age of thirty-five years and up-
wards, but under forty-five years, who are married, or widowers
with children; and


Class V.—All men of the age of forty-five years and up-
wards, but under sixty years.
(4). If the Parliament is not sitting at the date
of the issue of the proclamation it shall be summoned to meet
within ten days after that date.
See. 61. (1). The Governor-General may by Regulation
declare what persons shall be exempt from service in the Defence
Force. Provided that persons whom the doctrines of their
religion forbid to bear arras or perform military service shall be
exempt upon such conditions as may be prescribed.
(2). The burden of proving exemptions from
service in the Defence Force shall rest on the person claiming
exemption.
The above quoted sections comprise the whole of Part IV. of
the Commonwealth Defence Act 1903-1915, and this part is
headed “Liability to Serve in the Militia Forces in Time of War.”
The title of the Defence Act is “An act to provide for the Naval
and Military Defence and Protection of the Commonwealth, and
of the several States.” The former clearly indicates the object
of the act —to provide for the defence of Australia on sea, and
on land; and the latter what persons may be called upon to serve
in that defence in time of war. These sections are very simple
and clear. What was the object of embodying them in our
National Defence Act? The reason is obvious—that they might
be put into operation quickly in time of war, whether the Parlia-
ment might be sitting or in recess at the time. No further act of
Parliament, no regulations, no referendum, would be required to
do this; all that would be necessary would be a proclamation by
the Governor-General, acting upon the advice of the Executive
Council. “Time of War” is defined in the act as “Any time
during which a state of war actually exists,” and includes the
time between the issue of a proclamation of the existence of war,
or the danger thereof, and the issue of a proclamation declaring
that the war or danger thereof, declared in the prior proclama-
tion, no longer exists.
“War” is defined in the act as meaning “Any invasion or
apprehended invasion of, or attack or apprehended attack on the
Commonwealth, or any territory under the control of the Com-
monwealth by an enemy, or armed force.”


These definitions make the intention of our National Defence
Act still more clear—namely, that the citizens of this country
are not compellable by its defence law (whatever inherent
power the Imperial Government or Parliament may have in that
respect) to take part in Military Service outside of their own
territory. Those who enlist for service beyond seas do so as
volunteers. If the late referendum taught us nothing else, it
taught us that much. And the purpose of the referendum, of
course, was to obtain a mandate from the electors of the Com-
monwealth to the Federal Parliament that the Defence Act
should be amended, and extended, so as to make it compulsory
upon all its eligible male inhabitants to serve beyond our shores.
In other words, whilst our Defence Act already provided for
“Conscription” for home defence “in time of war,” the Prime
Minister, and his supporters, advocated an extended Conscrip-
tion for service with the Empire and its Allies, wherever our
men might be required in the wide theatre of the present war.
It was argued by the advocates of what was rather loosely
termed “Conscription” (but meaning compulsory military ser-
vice abroad) that the only difference between home service, and
service beyond the Commonwealth was that, in the latter case we
should be fighting our enemies on their own soil, or on that which
they had invaded, instead of on our own. And this was quite
true; but a large proportion, indeed the majority, of the democ-
racy of Australia, saw, or fancied they saw T , under the
referendum, Militarism in disguise. Being of British origin, we
have an inherent dislike to any suspicion of anything that
resembles Militarism—the very evil that we are fighting
against. “If we accede to compulsory military service abroad
in this war it may be expected that we will do the same in other
wars,” was the contention of the conscientious opponent of con-
scription for overseas service; “Let us go as volunteers if we
fight abroad —as free men, not as conscripts.”
No good purpose may be served by dilating upon the thread-
bare topic of conscription and anti-conscription, though there
are still advocates of the former, even at the present stage of the
war; in fact, the Federal Parliament, is, it appears, to be
petitioned to re-introduce the referendum with its renewal of
political strife.


May the writer briefly explain his own position and views.
The latter may be right or wrong—he cannot expect that all
will agree with him; but in the objective of this little, hastily-
compiled pamphlet all patriotic fellow Australans, all fellow
residents of the New England district (which sent the
Battalion of Volunteers to the front, and probably sufficient for
another battalion independently) will agree to help to (send
more volunteers to relieve and reinforce those volunteers who
have led the way to the front. That is the immediate objective.
The writer is a native-born Australian, of strong democratic
tendencies, a sympathiser with the best ideals of Labour, and of
pronounced anti-militarist views. Prom 1891 to 1903 he was
a volunteer officer of the mounted forces, first of New South
Wales, and after Federation, of the Commonwealth. In 1900 he
volunteered for service in the late Boer War, believing at the
time that the cause was right, and Avas accepted for a captaincy
in the New South Wales “Citizens’ Bushmen” (a regiment of
500 organized, equipped, and partly paid by the Citizens of this
State). He returned to this country in 1901 in command of
the regiment (or of what remained of it), which had been
relieved (after twelve months’ service, mark you). He returned
to South Africa shortly afterwards in company with a number
of men who volunteered for further service, and joined for a
time, one of the “Irregular Corps” which were organized during
the latter stages of that war.
For reasons not necessary here to explain, he resigned from
that Corps, but immediately afterwards found himself, by force
of circumstances, in the position of an “advocate,” and still with
the rank of major, before the series of court martiak which sat
at the town of Pietersburg, in the Northern Transvaal, during
many terrible days at the beginning of 1902, to try the officers
of that notable irregular corps known as “The Bushveldt Car-
bineers,” in which trials several Australian, and other officers
were involved. One of those officers (a young Australian) was
sentenced to life imprisonment, A strong defence committee was
formed to procure his release from the English prison AA'here he
was confined. This was after the present writer had returned
to Australia, in the early part of 1903. A huge petition was sent
to the Imperial Government that the officer in question might


be released. The request was refused. The defence committee
then appealed to his “advocate” to assist them in their object,
as certain facts connected with these cases were within his
knowledge. Being then on the reserve of Australian Officers
the advocate could not publish those facts except by permission
of the Australian Military Authorities. This permission was
refused, and he then resigned his commission with the intention
of publishing the facts, but the imprisoned officer, was shortly
afterwards set free. The experience of this war strengthened
the writer’s antipathy to militarism.
When the present war broke out he had no Australian com-
mission, and had passed military age. He, nevertheless, offered
his services in any capacity—and, in default of any other, as
voluntary drill instructor of Citizen Soldiers in his own district.
The offer was declined. Nothing, therefore, was left to be done
except to assist in recruiting under the present system (if such
it may be called), and other war service work, as an ordinary
civilian. (May the writer further say that, rightly or wrongly,
he has been a consistent conseriptionist as regards obligatory
home-training “In time of war,” and as consistent an anti-
conscriptionist as regard compulsory service abroad. At the
same time, had the latter been made the law at the beginning
of the present war, as it was in the United States of America,
instead of being proposed some twelve months after the volun-
tary system, pure and simple, had been in operation, there might
have been some argument in its favour.
For years an enthusiast in Citizen Soldiery (for defensive
purposes only), and with considerable experience of the advant-
ages of training young men in their patriotic duty—an experi-
ence largely attended by twelve months’ continuous service with
those ideal (if rightly understood) irregular soldiers, the Aus-
tralian Bushmen—the writer, as far back as September, 1915,
began earnestly to advocate that the above-quoted clauses of
our National Defence Act should be put into operation. The
object was that the men of this country, according to their pre-
scribed classes, should be called upon, seeing that their country
was involved in war which threatened its liberties, and very
existence, as a free and independent community, to undertake
the patriotic duty of fitting them for its defence. Surely if


there was any object in embodying these clauses in our Defence
Act (which was supported by the Australian Labour Party), this
unparalleled war justified that being put into operation, as
soon, at any rate, as it became evident that Australia would
have to exert herself in it to the umost. The correspondence
upon this topic would fill a small volume; but the sum and
substance of it all may be concentrated in an urgent telegram
which was sent to the Military Secretary on the Bth May, 1916:
“Organize the Commonwealth; classify and train eligible men;
and decentralize. ’’ There it is in three words:
ORGANIZATION—CLASSIFICATION-
DECENTRALIZATION.
As regards the last, the evil results of concentrating our volun-
teers in large numbers near the metropolis was urged against in
1915, and a District Battalion, including one for New England,
advocated a decentralized system, combined with obligatory
home-training, and local War Service Committees (acting with
adequate authority), would probably have solved the reinforce-
ment difficulty, now such a real one.
On 18th December, 1915, the writer was gratified at receiving
the following urgent telegram from the Military Secretary:
“Further re your telegram 10th instant. Scheme now adopted
providing for units being organized on territorial basis. After
further correspondence, the following letter was received from
District Headquarters, Sydney: “With reference to your letter
of the 24th ult., I have to inform you that under the new Terri-
torial Recruiting Scheme a battalion for the A.I.F, will be raised,
and maintained by the Arraidale District. Should your services
be required at a later date they will gladly be availed of.”
Well, the New Englanders very soon raised their battalion,
which was a credit to the district. But, what about the rein-
forcements for it when it got into action? What about the
reinforcements for all the other battalions ? Battalions make up
brigades, and brigades divisions. We have five divisions at the
front, and the wastages of war would have to be made up for
these as long as Australia could spare the men. If each battalion,
through its District War Service Committee, found its own rein-
forcements, the whole question would be solved. But it needed


systemization, which was only attainable by National Organiza-
tion” and ‘ * Classification, ’ * which were only possible by bringing
into operation those very clear clauses of our Defence/ Act.
Such action, with decentralization of administration, would have
solved the problem; would have rendered the late disastrous
referendum unnecessary; and would have prevented political
and industrial disruption. Every fit man, of military age,
according to his class, would then have been a citizen soldier,
upon whom rested a material, though only a moral obligation to
volunteer if he could do so, and go over and help his mates.
Those who could not go could be enrolled for home work, or
(and the writer here candidly admits that he advocated it)
should pay a reasonable personal tax of, say, five pounds. Under
such a system would not each battalion then find its volunteer
reinforcements? Most surely it would, for any reasonable length
of time. But if, in the end, the necessities of the war became
desperate, then, and not till then, could the objectionable method
of conscription for service abroad be resorted to upon the prin-
ciple that ‘‘Necessity knows no law,” or, more correctly, would
necessitate such a law. But it never would have come to that.
Make a man a citizen soldier; show him that the Nation values
him as such; appeal to his patriotism, to his comradeship; and
no man who could volunteer, and who was a man at all, would
hold back —especially from his own District Battalion.
The expense of such organization, classification, and training
has been objected to. But, as a matter of fact, local War Service
Committees, in 1916, gratuitously spent days and nights classi-
fying and tabulating the men of their various shires and dis-
tricts, and training so far as the inadequate method would
permit them. And as regards training, in almost every district
are to be found men who are qualified, or would soon have
qualified, to drill men in their own centres, at very little, or no
expense. Returned soldiers also would have been much more
useful thus employed than in haranguing crowds in public places,
or ferreting out men, armed with no legal authority for so doing,
and all at heavy expense to the country.
It is said the “Voluntary system has proved a failure.” Sir
Wm. Irvine, the apostle of conscription for service abroad, said
only a few days ago in urging another referendum: “Volun-


tary recruiting had been in force now for some time and it had
become apparent to every man, that was not perfectly blind, that
it was not only an absolute failure, but was turning into a
humiliating farce.” True, to a certain extent, assuming there
has been any workable voluntary recruiting “System” in opera-
tion since the war began. But there has not. Honorary Recruit-
ing Committees, and Salaried Organizers have been working
under no system at all—that is, under no system backed up and
supported by Government authority. These Committees and
Organizers have had to flounder along as best they could.
The results may in some respects have been “humiliating,”
but in other respects have been marvellous in face of the tre-
mendous odds. Not only have District Committees no powers
whatever in classifying men, hut they have been forbidden to
organize local funds for the men who have returned to their
districts disabled, or to raise District Memorials to those who
have fallen. Latterly, these Committees have largely been sup-
planted by a small army of paid Organizers (returned soldiers,
doing their best, but under like disabilities, and not always with
tact). Then, say the wiseacres, “Voluntaryism has proved a
failure; let us have compulsion.”
The war is not yet over, nor the end of it in sight. Is it
“too late,” even now, for Australia to organize and classify her
remaining man-power? “Better late than never,” perhaps. It
should have been done at least two years ago, since when much
water has run under the bridge, and much energy and enthu-
siasm wasted.
In October, 1915, the writer personally interviewed a mem-
ber of the Federal Parliament who, at a recruiting meeting,
threatened to advocate conscription if men did not enlist. Obli-
gatory home-training was urged instead. But the M.P. said:
“It is too late to urge that now.” A letter from another Federal
member, dated 11th November, 1915, referring to the same sub-
ject, remarks: “Your scheme would have worked well had it
been applied eighteen months ago. It is now too late.”
But is it still “too late?” The writer feels that the people
of Australia will respond, as they have ever responded, to every
call upon their patriotism, “Trust the people every time;” refer
the work of organising and classifying mainly to local com-


mittees, with authoritative executives; do away as much as
possible with paid officials, both civilian and military, employing
qualified returned soldiers mainly in the work of training; talk
bo more of “compulsion” and a “referendum,” A proclamation
and some necessary regulations should suffice.
Speaking in the Federal Parliament on 18th December,
1907, upon the Australian Defence Policy, the Hon. Alfred
Deakin said: ‘‘ No system can meet our necessities except one
that appeals to the people as a whole—that calls upon them in
the name of citizenship. We are a free people, with political
equality and sole authority in a country where all have the
opportunity to possess homes of their own. Our position as free
men in a free country casts on all the responsibility of under-
taking our own defence. We propose a system of universal
training in order to form a National Guard of defence.” It was
of this classic speech that the Hon. Andrew Fisher said: “I do
not think I have ever heard the Hon. Member to greater advant-
age. With such a subject and with such a speaker I have no
doubt that when the time comes for the people of this country
to defend themselves they will respond as he desires.” Good,
democratic Mr. Andrew Fisher! The time has come, it came
over three years ago, when the people of this free country were
called upon to defend it, and their freedom against the world’s
menace of militarism. Directly that menace took the terrific
shape of war we should have organized under our National
System. Had we done so, our young men and the whole democ-
racy of the country would have responded—as indeed they have
in large measure responded without it, and would not have
waited till the danger actually reached our shores, hut would
have gone forth to meet it. The danger is still there, over there
in Europe, and may be nearer to us in some form than we sup-
pose. It is not yet too late for us to organize.
These were, and are, the writer’s views, which he urged at
the recent State Recruiting Conference in Sydney—though for
some reason publicity on the subject seems to be tabooed.
This pamphlet has another and more immediate object. But,
New England! shall we stand still, waiting for something to turn
up, “Or for someone else to do something?” No, let us strike
out and see whether, in spite of the disadvantages under which


we are placed, in the matter of getting volunteers, we cannot
raise a relief contingent. Let us form strong civilian committees
in every centre, resolved to stir up again the fires of enthusiasm.
Let all classes assist, women and men, old and young. If a young
man cannot volunteer for service abroad let him volunteer to “do
his bit” at home. Those who have wealth can help with “the
sinews of war” (both for the Liberty Loan, and for local
organizing expenses). Let us, in short, have a grand “Revival”
and lead the way in a new movement.
To the young men of our district, indeed to all young men
of free Australia, may he who addresses you, and who, like Mr,
Lloyd George, is debarred by the age limit from active service,
quote the words of that democratic Statesman in a speech
delivered by him in London soon after the outbreak of the war:
“There is no man in this room who has always regarded the
prospect of engaging in a great war with greater reluctance than
I have done throughout the whole of my political life. There
is no man inside or outside this room, more convinced that we
could not have avoided it without national dishonour. National
honour is a reality, and any nation that disregards it, is doomed.
Why is our honour as a country involved in this war ? Because,
in the first instance, we are bound by honourable obligations to
defend the independence, the liberty, the integrity, of a small
neighbour that has always lived peaceably. She could not have
compelled us; she was weak; but the man who declines to dis-
charge his duty, because his creditor is too poor to enforce it, is
a blackguard.
“We entered into a treaty—a solemn treaty—two treaties —
to defend Belgium and her integrity. Our signatures are attached
to the document. Our signatures do not stand alone there. This
country was not the only country that undertook to defend the
integrity of Belgium. Russia, France, Austria, Prussia, they are
all there. Why are Austria, and Prussia, not fulfilling the obli-
gations of their bond?” And, after referring to the fact that in
1870, when his army was wedged up against the Belgium fron-
tier, the French Emperor, rather than break France’s bond
with Belgium “preferred ruin and humiliation” by the sur-
render of “100,000 gallant Frenchmen in arms,” the speaker
continued: “It is the interest of Prussia to break the treaty, and


she has done it. She avows it with cynical contempt for every
principle of justice. She says ‘treaties only bind when it is your
interest to keep them.’ ‘What is a treaty?’ says the German
Chancellor, ‘a scrap of paper.’ Have you any Treasury notes?
If you have, burn them; they are only scraps of paper! What
are they made of? Rags! What are they worth? The whole
credit of the British Empire!”
After stoutly advocating the rights of small Nations, and
after referring in no ungenerous terms to the qualities of the
German people, he added: “But they cannot understand a
great Empire pledging its resources, pledging its might, pledging
the lives of its children, pledging its very existence, to protect
a little nation that seeks to defend herself. God made man in his
own image, high of purpose, in the region of the spirit; German
civilization would re-create him in the image of a Diesel machine,
precise, accurate, powerful, but with no room for soul to operate.
Have you read the Kaiser’s speeches? They are full of the glitter
and bluster of German Militarism—‘mailed fist’ and ‘shining
armour’.” Mr. Lloyd George then referred to the spirit that
we have to fight, as illustrated in the Kaiser’s speech to his
soldiers on the way to the front: “Remember that the German
people are the chosen of God. On me, the German Emperor,
the spirit of God has descended. I am His sword, His weapon,
and His viee-gerent. Woe to the disobedient, and death to the
cowards and disbelievers.”
This is past history, but not so long past—and it is this hate-
ful, braggart spirit of militarism, that we are still facing and
fighting; and it is well to remember why we, of this peaceful
country, are involved in this fight, and why we are fighting. We
are warring against war. These further words of the same
statesman on the same occasion speak to all young men of the
Empire, to-day, as they did three years ago:—
“I envy you young people your opportunity. They have
put up the age limit for the army, but I am sorry to say I
have marched a good many years even beyond that. It is a
great opportunity, an opportunity that only comes once in many
centuries to the children of men. For most generations sacrifice
comes in drab and weariness of spirit. It comes to you to-day,
and it comes to us all, in the form of the glow and thrill of a great


movement for Liberty, that impels millions throughout Europe
(and now America) for the same noble end. It is a great war
for the emancipation of Europe from the thraldom of a military
caste which has thrown its shadows upon two generations of
men, and is now plunging the world into a welter of bloodshed
and death.
“Some have already given their lives. There are some who
have given more than their own lives, they have given the lives
of those dear to them. I honour their courage, and may God
be their comfort and their strength. But their reward is at
hand, those who have fallen have died consecrated deaths. They
have taken their part in the making of a new Europe—a new
world. I see the signs of its coming in the glare of the battle-
field.’ ’
And let our Social Reformers listen to this, and realize
what this war, shocking as it is, means to mankind: ‘ ‘ The people
will gain more by this struggle than they can comprehend at the
present moment. It is true they will be free of the greatest
menace to their freedom. That is not all. There is something
infinitely greater, and more enduring which is emerging already
out of this great conflict—a new patriotism, richer, nobler, and
more exalted than the old. I see amongst all classes, high and
low, shedding themselves of selfishness, a new recognition that
the honour of the country does not depend merely in the main-
tenance of its glory in the stricken field, but also in protecting
its homes from distress. It is bringing a new outlook for all
classes. The great flood of luxury and sloth which has sub-
merged the land is receding, and a new Britain is appearing.
We can see for the first time the fundamental things that matter
in life, and that have been obscured from our vision by the
tropical growth of prosperity,”
We have been living in a sheltered valley for generations,
we have been too comfortable, and too indulgent, many perhaps,
too selfish, and the stern hand of Fate has scourged us to an ele-
vation where we can see the great everlasting things that matter
for a Nation—the great peaks we had forgotten, of honour,
duty, patriotism, and, clad in glittering white, the great pin-
nacle of sacrifice pointing like a rugged finger to Heaven. We
shall descend into the valleys again, but, as long as the men


and women of this generation last, they will carry in their hearts
the image of those great mountain peaks whose foundations are
not shaken, though Europe rock and sway in the convulsions of
a great war. But we have to consider practical things as well
as noble theories, and speeches. Perhaps of late there has been
too much of theorising and speech making, and withal too much
that is paltry and selfish, so far as we Australians are concerned.
We are, fortunately, or unfortunately, remote from the actual
arena of war; we are having good seasons and many are growing
richer. The first glamour and romance of war have passed away,
and its stern realities have been brought home to many of us.
But we must keep the objectives steadily in view; this is a war
against war and militarism, a war to preserve and restore the
liberties of small nations, and of mankind. For these our fellow
Australians volunteered; for these thousands have died or have
been incapacitated; for these thousands more, with reduced
ranks, and sadly needing rest, are still fighting far from home.
The practical present needs are men to relieve them, and money
to supply them. To the young men of the country the former
appeal is made, but to the older, and richer men the other.
Will Australia start a new movement to,
HELP OUR MATES?
J. P. THOMAS,
Chairman of Tenterfield Recruiting Committee,
and Tenterfield Representative in the
New England Recruiting Committee.
(Late Major N.S.W. Citizen Bushmen.)
Tenterfield,
29th Otcober, 1917.
The people of Australia should start at once to raise a special
Belief Force of, say, 20,000 men, who could be sent away in drafts; and
New England should have the honour of starting it. A special badge
and banner might be devised; but, to succeed, the People as a whole
should take up the matter heartily, and the wealthy contribute towards
its funds. Backed up with a system of national training for our young
men, success would be still more assured.


Hm/s* '73
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by
Websdale, Shoosmith Ltd., Sydney.
. ■ . >. ■ *


' i[3
Advance, Australians!
Hark, Australians! Do ye hear,
Trumpet-like, the signal clear,
Sounding o’er your Country dear,
* ‘ Advance, Australians! ’ ’
Advance from fields unstained by blood;
Advance, a stalwai’t brotherhood,
Steeled by fire and drought and flood;
“Advance, Australians!”
Comrades on a far-off strand
Call you by their side to stand;
“Arms! to Arms!” the stern command;
“Advance, Australians!”
Advance, resolved the wrong to right;
Advance in Freedom’s cause* to fight;
Justice aye shall give you might;
“Advance, Australians!”
CHORUS.
Hark, Australians! do ye hear,
Trumpet-like the Signal clear,
Sounding o’er your Country dear,
‘ ‘ Advance, Australians! ’ ’
Leave the Land of Wattle Bloom;
Go where clouds of battle loom;
Better death than shameful doom;
“Advance, Australians!”
Advance, all hearts with zeal aflame;
Advance in Honour’s sacred name;
Midst the Empire’s proud acclaim,
“Advance, Australians!”
Come from mountain, bush and plain,
Speed across the Indian main,
Shouting still the bold refrain,
“Advance, Australians!”
Advance, nor fear your destiny;
Advance, yon standard waving free,
Star-inwrought, your hope shall be,
“Advance, Australians!”
Hark, Australians! do ye hear,
Trumpet-like the signal clear,
Sounding o’er your Country dear,
“Advance, Australians!”
