

INAUGURAL ADDRESS
THE THIRD SESSION
OF THE
of % of
* TUcSD/\y, 10j!| APRfU 1888. *
ALFRED BARRY, D.D., D.C.L.
LORD BISHOP OF SYDNEY,
metropolitan of new south wales, and primate of Australia and Tasmania,
Syditeij:
JOSEPH COOK & CO., PRINTERS, 490, KENT STREET,
CLOSE TO THE CATHEDRAL.
1888.




INAUGURAL ADDRESS
THE THIRD SESSION
OF THE
uf ik ptoctst- of
* Tu'CSDAy. 10tH 1888. *
“As one and the same Law Divine is unto all Christian Churches a
rule for the chiefest things ; by means whereof they all in that respect
make one Church, as having all but “ one Lord, one faith, one baptism,”
so the urgent necessity of mutual communion for preservation of our
unity in these things, as also for order in some other things convenient
to be every where uniformly kept, maketh it requisite that the Church
of God here on earth have her laws, by virtue whereof all Churches
may enjoy freely the use of those reverend, religious, and sacred con-
sultations which are termed Councils; a thing whereof God’s own
Blessed Spirit was the author; a thing practised by the Holy Apostles
themselves; a thing always afterward kept and observed throughout
the world; a thing never otherwise than most highly esteemed of, till
pride, ambition, and tyranny began by factious and vile endeavours to
abuse that divine invention unto the furtherance of wicked purposes.”
{Hooker's Ecclesiastical Polity, Book i, c. x. 14.)
My Beverend Brethren and My Brethren of the Laity, —We
meet to-day after a far shorter interval than usual, in order that I may
have the opportunity of presiding over this the last Session of the present
Synod, before I again visit England. Last year my visit was forced
upon me by grave domestic necessity and anxiety, now (I thank God,)
in great measure removed. This year’s visit is one of official duty, that
I may, as Primate, represent the Australian branch of our Church at
the great Lambeth Conference of the whole Anglican Communion, and
lay before it especially certain important topics, entrusted to me by the
General Synod.


(I.) The shortness of the interval prevents the necessity—
almost the practicability—of such historical notice of the ordinary
progress of the diocese, as it is usually my pleasure to furnish.
I do not know that I can add anything material to the account
—happily a satisfactory one—which last year I was enabled to
give of it, especially in respept of our educational institutions.
On some points of interest, moreover, in this direction, suggested
by our statistical returns, I shall have to touch in my Visitation
Charge of Thursday next; at which, though it is addressed to
the clergy, I need hardly say that we shall gladly welcome the
attendance of the lay members of the Synod.
Only one announcement under this head it is well that I should
make—that the council of the new Church Grammar School,
after many discussions and delays due to the extreme difficulty
of obtaining a wholly satisfactory site, have at last secured a fine
site on the North Shore known as Holterman’s Tower, of nearly
four acres of land, including a large house for the headmaster,
which with some alterations will provide accommodation for about
30 boarders, and a splendid playground of full two acres. They
have already obtained designs for the erection of school buildings,
which will provide in the first instance for 250 boys, with power
of extension so as to accommodate 500 ; and they trust to open
the school after the close of the ensuing Christmas vacation.
They are awai’e that at the present moment the position may
perhaps hardly be deemed sufficiently central; but, considering
the fineness of the site, and looking to the prospects of the future,
they believe that they have taken the best available course : and
I myself feel much confidence that, if the school be ably
worked, and worked, moreover, on broad but definite Church
principles for religious education, it will, without injury to good
existing institutions, soon draw to itself a full supply of scholars,
and enter under God’s blessing on the career of success and
usefulness, which we all desire for it. For lam convinced by
all that I see and hear, that public opinion, partly by a re-action
forced upon it by experience, is more and more inclined to a freer
recognition of the paramount importance - may I not say
necessity—of religion as an element of higher school education.
But this shortness of interval does not dispense me to-day
from the mournful task of chronicling serious Josses, sustained
since we last met in this place. In my dear friend, Mr, H. Edward
A. Allan, the Synod and the Church at large have lost one of the
most earnest, unobtrusive, and unselfish servants of God, in all
works likely in any way to conduce to the good of men, to the
2


advancement of the Church of which he dearly prized his mem-
bership, and to the service of the Master whom he loved. For
18 years he was a valued and respected member of this Synod.
I am sure that I should do injustice to your feelings as well as
my own, if I paid not now some slight tribute of respect, and
(I add) affection, to his memory. Nor, although he was not a
member of this particular Synod, can I omit here notice of the
loss to the whole community, and to our Church in particular,
by the death of Mr. George Knox, for some nine years a member
of our Synod, and often a valued adviser on Church law and
Church policy. Few men, 1 think, were more ably and enthusi-
astically in earnest in the promotion in every way of the higher
life—social, intellectual, moral, and religious—of the community,
in whose future he so confidently believed. Too early, as it
seems to us, his work is over. Deo editor visum. We should
desire in any case to pay our tribute to his memory also. But I
think I may believe that such desire is deepened by a wish to
offer our heartfelt sympathy to his respected father, who occupies,
as it seems to me, an almost unique place in the esteem and affec-
tion of all his fellow-citizens, and especially of his fellow-
churchmen. Another loss has come upon us, since I wrote this
Address, of one whom many of us followed to the grave to-day.
In Mr. Christopher Rolleston we have lost another old and
valued member of the Synod from the first —a man who had
many friends and few enemies, an able and faithful public
servant, an earnest Churchman, and a true Christian gentleman.
Such men as these we can ill afford to miss. May God raise up
those who shall take their places in His service !
One other presence, though not from this sad cause, we miss
with regret to-day—the presence of one of the oldest and ablest,
most genial and most useful, members of our Synod. Canon
Hxxlton King has had to leave us, just when he might have had
most leisure to serve us, because he has felt obliged to resign
parochial charge. Pardon me, if I take this opportunity of
expressing my hope, that in some way means may be found to
alter the preposterous regulation, which, in this case as in others,
tends to rob the Synod of invaluable service.
But let me here on the other hand —in my own name and I Return of the
am sure in yours,—welcome back in renewed health and strength Dean,
our respected Dean after his long sojourn in England. We are
all glad to see him again here in the Synod. I am glad to be
able with his consent to devolve upon him the office of Commis-
sary during my coming absence, from duty and yet on duty.


For seven years, lie tells me, in the aggregate he has discharged
that function already—many here know how ably and faithfully.
I trust that he will not find it too burdensome for a few months
more.
(II.) Two important subjects of Church legislation will be
brought before you at this Session of Synod. Both alike turn on
the necessity of adapting old Church laws to the recpiirements of
present Church life. The proposals may shock the spirit of
Conservatism among us, which I greatly respect, and not least in
respect of Church Constitution. But such adaptation is true
Conservatism. Just in proportion as we desire the continuity of
essential principles, we shall welcome needful modifications of
method and detail, by which alone it can be kept in vitality;
and—what is at least equally important—we shall resolve to have
freedom from needless external restrictions, with a view to future
modifications from time to time. In oirr Church I feel convinced
that we shall none of us ever desire to break the fundamental
unity in doctrine and worship, which binds us to the great old
Church at home. With whatever technical impropriety, we
mean to be in this new land essentially the Church of England
still. But some of our laws here —not, be it remembered, in
several important points in harmony with the old Church law —
we have fairly outgrown; and, now that we have on all points a
recognised legislative function, even in matters of property, we
onght not to be fettered by parliamentary regulations made in
days long gone by. The State cannot and does not desire it.
The Church has a right to claim freedom from it.
The first of these matters presents itself as an answer from the
Provincial Synod to a reference on the Church Act from this
Synod at its last session. In both houses of the Provincial Synod
by large majorities the following resolution was carried :—“ This
Synod resolves that it is expedient that the Act 8 William IV,,
No. 5, commonly called the Church Act, be repealed, careful
provision being made, by ordinance or otherwise, for the impor-
tant matters provided for therein, regarding the conservation of
Church property, the discipline and rights of the clergy, the
rights and duties of Churchwardens ; and that a Select Committee
be appointed, to consider in what way this can best be effected,
and be instructed to submit a plan to the Diocesan Synods for
consideration and adoption at their next Sessions, with a view to
its being submitted to, an extraordinary session of the Provincial
Synod.” In its labours the Select Committee has not had to
start de novo. It has had before it much old and valuable
4


material; partly in the reports of previous committees of the
Provincial Synod, partly in the schedule attached to the model
trust-deed of Mr. Alexander Gordon, carefully discussed in this
Synod, and only refused authoritative adoption at the last moment
by a small majority of one order. Out of these it has framed a
draft Ordinance, which will be submitted for consideration to this
and to other diocesan Synods, I do not indeed feel sure, that it
can as yet be discussed in detail in the Synod itself. Possibly it
may be the wisest, though the least expeditious, course simply to
accept, if it be approved, the resolution of the Provincial Synod
as to the general policy, and then to refer the Ordinance to a
Committee for criticism and report. But in any ease I trust that
the Synod may be pleased to take some decided step towards the
solution of a question too long delayed, and the extrication of the
authorities of the Church from a position of discredit and
difficulty.
On this matter, I trust, I may be pardoned for briefly repeating Necessity for
the opinion which I explained more at length to the Provincial L Tctfon! e
Synod :
“ Against the wisdom of the Act, as originally framed, I have
not a word to say. But it was made for a condition of things
now largely obsolete. It presupposes State aid; it makes no
provision for free and open churches ; it leaves the qualification of
other than pew holders dangerously vague ; it hampers the church
unnecessarily in dealing with glebe lands, and apparently in this
connection has no conception of the need of curates in our large
parishes; -it ties us too closely as to parochial organisation and
arrangement. On every side it introduces difficulty ; and that
difficulty would be far more serious, if we did not flee from it by
very undesirable paths. In churches under the Act its provisions
are often disregarded ; in this diocese, at any rate, a large number
of churches do not even profess to be placed under it, and thus,
for want of a proper Act, are in a position so legally anomalous,
that, when I am appealed to as Ordinary on points of law, I am
obliged either to give imperfect and tentative answers, or to
decline giving any answer at all. It is to me clear that this
condition of things ought not to continue. We Englishmen are
patient-sometimes wisely, sometimes foolishly, patient of prac-
tical anomaly—as unwilling, perhaps, to revise an old church law,
as to improve an ugly and inconvenient old church, to which, by
association, we have become attached. But it is not, I think,
prudent to wait till some serious legal controversy arises, as may
be the case at any moment. Let us deal with the matter, while
we can deal with it apart from all controversy and passion,”


It will be observed that the Provincial Synod has—l venture
to think most wisely—resolved to initiate discussion in the
diocesan Synods, and not to attempt to frame any measure, till
this discussion has completely sifted the whole subject. For my
own part, though I am not ustially an advocate for Particularism,
I can conceive that in matters of organisation the requirements
of various dioceses may well differ; that possibly some diocese or
dioceses may wish to retain the old Church Act, not feeling, as I
myself do, the difficulty of acting, or seeming to act, under it.
For such diocesan variation I hope scope will be left, as I think
it w T ell may be, under the Enabling Act, which must repeal the
old Act of some 50 years ago. Of such variation I have no fear;
for I have no passion for rigid uniformity. On all matters of
doctrine, on all matters of important Church principle, we are
and must be at one. What matters it, if we do vary on points of
detailed regulation ? Fundamental unity, with some freedom of
variety on secondary matters, seems the law of all human life,
as certainly it has been the law of the Church in its best and
most elastic days. But, after all, there would be a large con-
sensus in our diocesan regulations. We should still be realty
under one law; and the general unity of that law would be even
better secured, because there would be no temptation, as there is
now, to disregard the law, where it is in detail inconvenient or
impossible.
The other cognate question comes to us through the report of
the Standing Committee, to which it was referred last year to
consider the revision of the Constitutions. The Committee did
not hold it to be their duty to discuss the proposition, which has
been made from time to time, to pray Parliament to repeal
altogether the Act and the Constitutions which form its schedule,
and by an Enabling Act leave the Synods free to deal by
ordinances with the various subjects there regulated. They
have simply examined the points, on which it is found by
experience that the Constitutions need revision—mainly in the
direction of leaving both to the Diocesan and Provincial Synods
an unquestionable freedom to regulate their own Constitution,
and of extending in some respect their powers over ministers
and parishes. As will appear from the opinion of the learned
Chancellor of the Diocese, appended to their report, it is at least
doubtful whether the more important reforms can be carried out
without the consent of Parliament; and that consent could not,
of course, be obtained without some general agreement among
the diocesan Synods. Should the Synod be pleased to adopt as
6


desirable the recommendations of the report, it would be (I
venture to suggest) well to consider, whether they should not be
submitted at once to the consideration and criticism of other
diocesan Synods. The case is not so strong as that against the
Church Act; for the Constitutions are only 22 instead of 50 years
old, and the condition of the Church has far less materially
changed. But here also there is much pressure of difficulty,
with which I trust the Synod will not refuse to deal.
In both cases the method of procedure is undoubtedly cum-
brous. But this cumbrousness is inevitable, being due to the
anomaly of our ecclesiastical position, under which the diocesan
Synods have a virtual independence, and the power of our higher
Synods, Provincial and General, is narrowly limited. It is better
to proceed slowly, that we may proceed surely. All lam anxious
for is that we should proceed steadily, and that these two
important matters should not again be allowed to sleep.
Passing from these greater subjects, it may, perhaps, be
expected that I should glance briefly at one of the Ordinances,
which will be submitted to the Synod under the Powers conferred
upon it by the Church Property Act. I mean the Ordinance
which proposes that the Church of England Property Trust,
with the sanction of the Standing Committee and the consent of
the Bishop, shall be empowered to dispose, if they find a good
opportunity, of the estate of Bishopscourt, with a view to obtain
an episcopal residence in a more convenient and accessible
position. I may be allowed to say that I give my cordial adhesion
to that proposal distinctly on public grounds—of which every
day’s growth of Sydney, and of the business which has its centre
there, increases the cogency ; and I will add that in estimating
these I lay stress, not so much on the undoubted inconvenience,
loss of time, and waste of strength, which the distance of Bishops-
court from the city entails on the Bishop, as on the want of
proper accessibility, for social as well as ecclesiastical purposes,
to Churchmen generally. Personally, I have no desire to hurry
the matter; we can wait till a really favourable opportunity occurs;
and it would be wrong to be in any way careless in dealing with
the valuable property now in our hands. But it is, I feel con-
vinced, a matter of necessity, that the step should be taken
sooner or later; and I trust that the Synod will arm with the
necessary power- a body, by which they may feel sure that it will
not be rashly used.
I may perhaps here mention that, acting under powers con-
ferred upon me as trustee by Act of Parliament, I have, under
7


the advice of Messrs, Mills and Pile, sold for £60,000 —reserving
all minerals under the surface—the Moorebank Estate, which has
hitherto yielded something less than £3OO a year. By the original
deed a small portion of this, now valued at .£360, belongs as a
glebe to Holdsworthy ; another portion, valued at about £23,000
is assigned to the endowment of the Bishopric; and the largest
part, valued at about £36,500, to payment of stipends of clergy at
the absolute discretion of the Bishop. Some payments have yet
to be made for the compensations, authorised and enjoined by
the Act; but in a few months I hope that the income of the
estate will be available for its prescribed uses. Although the
apportionment of it is left to the Bishop, it is my intention to
invite the advice of a small council of clergy and laity as to its
disposal—with the exception of a small emergency fund (which
I think it well to keep as now for private use) —and to lay the
accounts annually on this table of the Synod. I will not anticipate
their advice ; but, unless it should tend strongly in some other
direction, I may say that in my present opinion the fund will
probably be most useful, if employed for the general diocesan
purposes, which now often languish, while the pressure of
necessity enforces the supply, complete or partial, of local wants.
Organisation is, I can see, of infinite consequence; and I think
that we may now see opportunity for doing much to supply it.
On a far graver subject bearing upon the past action of this
bynod I must briefly but emphatically touch. I mean the
present position of the Divorce Extension Bill. I need not here
dwell again upon the important religious and social grounds, on
which the earnest protests of all our Synods, as of the represen-
tative bodies of some other Churches, have been based. Dis-
regarded at the time by our legislative authorities and our
organs of public opinion, their reality and force will be, I fear, as
in some other points of public policy, recognised too late in the
light of unhappy experience. But I take the opportunity of
saying a few words on the present aspect of the question under
the action of the Home Government.
First, I feel it right to say once more publicly that the
imputations, which have been occasionally thrown out, of
“ ecclesiastical intrigues” and “indirect” (I believe the correct
phrase is “backstairs”) “influence,” are simply and abso-
lutely incorrect. I should know; for lam one of the chief
of the unfortunate “ ecclesiastical persons,” who, on this
subject have ventured to have opinions of their own, and to
show by action the courage of their opinions ; and I have been
8


the medium through which the petitions of our Synods,
Diocesan, Provincial, General, have been submitted to the Queen
—that of the General Synod directly, in a letter, expressly
marked as public, to the Secretary of State during my visit to
England; the others, as emanating from this colony, through his
Excellency the Governor. I can assert positively for our own
Church—nor can I doubt that the same is the case with other
Churches—that all our action, in respect both of our petitions
and the arguments on which they were based, has been public,
open, straightforward—only an exercise of that right of petition,
which belongs to the humblest individual, and much more to
important representative bodies of clergymen and laymen in the
Church of Christ. It is well, I think, that these things should be
known. In all discussions, however excited, the truth is the
truth; and, except by those who are willing to believe me guilty
of deliberate falsehood, I hope that these imputations will be
candidly put aside.
Next, as to the line taken by the Home Government. It does Action of the
not deal with the merits of the question, for which we mainly Govein
care ; for it obviously considers that these are to be weighed by
the Legislature here. It simply points out, that the matter is
one which affects the community, not merely in itself but as a
part of the British Empire, and one of a group of sister colonies ;
and urges that such a step should not be taken, without (if pos-
sible) some intercolonial agreement; without (if that cannot be)
an undoubted expression of decisive public opinion here ; without
some provision as to domicile, which will limit its operation to
bona-fide citizens of this colony. The Home Government has
not even advised the Queen to withhold her royal Assent. It
has adopted what is obviously intended to be a more courteous
expedient—-of delaying the submitting of the Bill to her Majesty,
till their suggestions have been accepted, or at least considered.
It is not the course for which we petitioned. Some of those who
feel most on the subject may wish that a more decided course had
been taken. But it is well to look the question of relation to the
old country dispassionately in the face. I can of course under-
stand, though I cannot for a moment sympathise with, the desire
to cut all connection with England and to establish Australia, or,
for aught I know, New South Wales, as an independent republic,
managing all its own affairs for itself. But I cannot understand
the unwillingness, so long as we remain apart of the great British
community, to recognise the obligations, which in matters of
grave social importance—likely by rapid inter-communication


to spread their effect beyond our own shores—are entailed upon
us by that connection; and to cry out indignantly because the
home authorities point out here some difficulties, and ask to be
quite sure that the colony is deliberately in earnest, on a Bill
which (as they see) was only carried by a majority of one vote in
the Legislative Council, and on which about half the members of
the Legislative Assembly declined to vote altogether.
the discussion 1 wisll > / atlier than hope, that what I hold to be a mistaken
jealousy for right independence could be put aside, and that the
opportunity could be taken of once more considering this
important subject, with gravity and earnestness, but without
passion and mutual recrimination. If the Bill is to be carried
again, I trust for the credit of the colony that it may be after a
discussion in tone and completeness worthy of the subject, and
that so many of our representatives will not again evade the
responsibility of recording their votes. To alter the law touch-
ing so sacred an institution as marriage, to place it in direct
opposition to the conscientious opinions of large bodies of
Christians, and in discordance with the present tenour of the
laws of England and her colonies in general, is no light matter.
It may be held that there is reason for doing it; and I have
never doubted that, if the colonyjs really in earnest about it,
and shows this by a strong preponderance of opinion, it will be
done. But certainly it is no evil —even in view of the exceptional
cases of hardship, which have, as I think, been allowed by the
advocates of the Bill to override considerations of general policy
—to have the fullest time for consideration on a matter of the
gravest moral and social importance. For my own part, in
spite of the vehemence, and what seems to me the intolerance,
with which our action has been assailed, I do not think that we
need be ashamed of having contributed in any degree to this
result. If the effect shall yet be to prevent, or even mitigate,
the serious evil, which it seems to us would be done by the Bill,
against our Christian faith and the moral and public welfare of
society, we shall thank God; if not, before Him, we shall at
least “ have delivered our souls.”
(III.) I turn now, as usual, to consider what subjects specially
press themselves upon our attention this year. Two naturally
present themselves at once—the Lambeth Conference and the
Centennial year. Both, different as they are in themselves, bear
upon one most weighty principle—the growing importance of
Church unity, not merely in itself but as expressed in ecclesiastical
Federation.


In the Church, as in society itself, I believe strongly in the Church unity,
growth of what I may call the unifying forces. How can it be
otherwise, when, under the providence of God, individuals and
communities are being daily brought, physically and mentally and
morally, into closer contact ? Barbarism is isolation ; civilisa-
tion, while it implies individual culture and freedom, is unity.
But the forces which draw men together are mainly two —
Empire and free Federation. In ecclesiastical matters—for I
will not now speak of civil—the former is the system of Rome ;
the latter undoubtedly that of the Church of England, as it is
also that of other Christian Churches. Under both the tendency
of the age is undoubtedly to larger aggregation. If, as has been
said, the day of small nationalities is past, the same is, I believe,
true in our religious relations—only that in the Church of Christ
the sacredness of individuality must be always preserved by the
vital doctrine of personal union with God in the Lord Jesus ,
Christ, and in our Church of England the rights of local self-
government are guarded with an almost excessive strictness by
our parochial system.
Now of the ecclesiastical federation of that Anglican Com- The Lambeth
munion, which was once depreciated as insular, but which now
by the very force of circumstances, losing its insularity, the
Lambeth Conference is the highest exemplification. Under the
quasi-patriarchal leadership of Canterbury, which we all gladly
acknowledge, it is an assembly, on terms of freedom and
equality, of the episcopal representatives of our Communion,
English, American, Colonial, Missionary. The modest desig-
nation, which has replaced the original title of the Pan-Anglican
Synod, may have been intended to signify that, like our own
General Synod, it has moral rather than legal authority. By
necessity, like the ancient Councils of the Church, it is composed
of bishops only. The ideal, floating before some minds, of an
assembly which should include, like our Synods, bishops, clergy
and laity, is but an ideal still. But even so, the moral authority
of such a conference must be immense. Without trenching for
a moment on the self-government of our Churches, and the legal
enforcements which at once strengthen and limit it, it can
clearly deal authoritatively with subjects which concern the
Anglican communion as a whole ; and so dealing, it brings out
(as I have said) most strikingly the strength of Church
11


Like many other English institutions, it grew up to supply a
need. It was felt that there were questions, which could not be
determined rightly, either by the Church at home, especially
under the conditions of Establishment, or by each colonial
diocese, or province, or group of provinces, for itself. Unity in
essence with variety of detail—continuity with elasticity of
development spiritual authority accepted and acted upon
everywhere—these are the necessary conditions of the vitality
and cohesion of what is now becoming a world-wide Communion.
How were these to be secured ? One means—one chief means
—was the meeting, in spite of distance, difficulty, loss of time
from diocesan duties, of this council of the bishops of the whole
Church, in trust that by the power of the Holy Spirit Christ
“ will be in the midst of them.” This is what the Lambeth
Conference has grown to be. For us Australasian Bishops the
difficulty of attendance, because the sacrifice of diocesan work
thereby, is of course greatest. Out of thirteen Australian bishops,
only three, (or possibly four) besides myself, will be your repre-
sentatives ; and I go, as you know, under special charge to
submit certain topics to the Conference in the name of the
General Synod. But I believe that the sacrifice is worth making,
not only for the sake of the subjects to be discussed, but for the
demonstration and promotion of Church unity.
Yet a glance at some of the subjects to be dealt with is enough
to show their importance, and (I may add) the great yet needful
responsibility of pronouncing upon them.
There is the question of internal organisation ; the mutual re-
lation of dioceses and branches of the Anglican Communion, now
numbering above 200 bishops at home and abroad; the formation
of provinces, and groups of provinces, under one primacy ; the
relation of all to the Metropolitan See of Canterbury ; even such
minor matters as one of those referred by our General Synod
—the use of the title of Archbishop, to mark the Metropolitan or
Primatial dignity. This is not exactly a vital matter ; it concerns
the framework rather than the life of the Church. But it needs
regulation, lest we drift into vagary and disunion. By such a
body as the Conference alone can regulations be rightly initiated.
There is the greater and far more vital question of “ authorita-
tive standards of doctrine and worship.” It clearly implies that
consideration of greater elasticity in the use of the Prayer Book,
and of Services supplementary to it, which our General Synod
has submitted. It may, as I trust, include the consideration of
some means of determination of these standards, which, being
12


accepted by all, may stop such chartered lawlessness as prevails
in some cases in England, and may at any time be reproduced
here. It will probably not shrunk from the consideration of what
variety (such as exists in the American Church, and is desired
for other branches of our Church, especially in India and Japan)
is in this matter consistent with fundamental unity.
Then follows the still larger question of the right attitude of
the Church of England towards other Christian bodies—“ the
Eastern Churches, the Scandinavian and other reformed churches,
the Old Catholics ; ” and the question, also submitted by our
General Synod, which, both at home and still more in the
colonies, is of more pressing urgency than all these put together
—what can be done, if anything, on the part of the Church of
England towards healing the breaches in our own English
Christianity, between those not fundamentally divided in
doctrine, which are our great hindrance and shame ? It is,
impossible to exaggerate the importance or the difficulty of this
subject. It depends, of course, not on the Church of England
alone ; and yet many reasons seems to lay on her the right and
the duty of some initiative on the matter. I trust that this great
Conference may be able at least to suggest such steps towards it.
Other questions there are —less vital but still grave questions—
forced upon the Anglican communion by its very expansion
Such are the vexed question of polygamy in heathen converts —
the attitude of the Church towards relaxation of the marriage tie
by increased facilities of divorce —the care of emigrants who leave
the old country, but should not leave the old Church.
Finally, not least in importance, though hardest, perhaps, to
bring to any practical conclusions, the questions, How shall the
Church better light against intemperance and impitrity, better
deal with the advancing power of Socialism in its various forms,
better teach the simple, definite substance of Christianity to
various classes, especially, I suppose, those most estranged from
it. Less necessarily, I think, do these belong to the Conference.
But yet upon these the united wisdom and varied experience of
its members may well qualify it to speak with authority.
All these problems, as you will at once see, present themselves Their eharacter
again and again, to those whose thoughts on Christian duty and and im P° rtance -
faith extend beyond the limits of their own daily work and
interests. There is about them a largeness and a boldness,
which are in themselves a refreshment to those who, like so
many of us, are often wearied by the pettiness of our every day
duty. Certainly they are subjects which will tax all the collec-


tive wisdom of the Church at large, and on which we may gladly
listen to the advice of the Conference of all its branches. My
only fear, I confess, is that they are too large and too varied, to
be grasped adequately in a month’s session. But even to open
them must be fruitful, directly or indirectly, of results. I pray,
and you will I know join in the prayer, that God will pour upon
us in the old palace at Lambeth the spirit of wisdom and truth,
and bless our consultations, both to bolder advance and closer
unity of our whole Church, in obedience to His high call.
[ The other special subject concerns ourselves here. But, though
in a lesser field, I cannot but think that it should read some of
the same lessons. The Centenary celebrations, to which we
looked forw’ard when we last met, have come and gone—not
unworthily of the colony, even though we still must feel some
regret, that the greatest international celebration of it has de-
volved upon a younger sister-colony, not by her obtrusion, but
by our timidity and negligence. About them, while naturally
the striking retrospect of the last century induced some boldness
of prognostication as to the next, there was, I think, little
unseemly boastfulness. There were, with only the exception
which made the rule more evident, a spirit of free loyalty to
the Queen and the old country, and a sense of the dignity and
responsibility of membership in a great time-honoured British
community. There was, I noted everywhere, a consciousness of
the need for true greatness of something more than material
treasure and even intellectual enlightenment. There was but
one thing which troubled it, of which we saw a sign in the
omission from the Centennial Banquet of that asking of God’s
blessing, which I never yet saw passed over in any great English
assembly. If it was not unpremeditated, and due to the embar-
rassment of what is called the last moment, it seems to have
argued on the part of those who were in authority an exaggerated
fear of a so-called religious difficulty, which could have been
easily met.* So it is, perhaps, significant of a tendency, which
I trace with deep regret in matters of graver religious conse-
quence, “to make a solitude and call it peace: through which, for
example, (varying in this respect from the practice even of the
great American Republic), our Legislative meetings are opened
without prayer, and the Lord’s Prayer and the simple hymns
are forbidden to hallow, as in England, the education of our
public schools. For it our unhappy religious dissensions are a
*lt lias been asked how this could have been done. I should answer, By singing
the grace, as is customary at great English banquets, or the saying of grace by the
Chairman.
14


ground more fancied than real. I trust that some day ere long
we shall be bold enough to look the supposed difficulty in the
face, and it will, I suspect, like other ghosts, vanish into thin air.
But although this grave defect was committed in official action, The Religious
yet the Centenary lacked not its substantial consecration. The
festival was—thank God ! —by free consent on all sides enthusi-
astically hallowed by contemporaneous religious Services, offered
with one mind, if not with one mouth; and on the part of
members of all branches of the Christian Church, save one, by
a united Service of worship of our common Lord for our common
country; which I shall never forget, and which (I know) told on
the imagination and the hearts, not only of our own people but
of the representatives of England and the other colonies. If
the occasion reminded us how our religious divisions play into
the hands of godlessness, it told us also that they have not
destroyed the vitality of Christian faith, or even the sense of some
underlying unity in the Lord Jesus Christ.
Certainly all thinking men must hope, all Christians must pray, Tiie needs of the
not without some grave anxiety, that the citizens of this colony
may prove themselves really able to rise to the great opportunity
and destiny, to which God’s Providence has called them. What
are our material resources to us, if we fail to draw them out and
treasure them, or misuse them to self-indulgence, indolence, and
money worship ? What our commerce, if it be the sphere of
constant strife between labour and capital, and if it be honey-
combed, as some will have us believe, with unsoundness and
dishonesty ? What is our liberty, personal and national, if we
cannot use it, thoughtfully and with self-sacrifice, as a means to
high unselfish ends ? What our representative institutions, if
they are recklessly disgraced or factiously abused and paralysed ?
What our knowledge and education, unless they light us to work,
duty, nobleness ? What our religious freedom and activity,
unless they can morally regenerate society, and show that the
law of evolution to higher forms holds in the sphere of morality,
working out the germ of the new life given in the Lord Jesus
Christ ? As age comes upon ourselves and upon human society,
these questions press more urgently, more painfully, upon us.
The bright, shallow optimism of youthful days is clouded. God
grant that by the power of deeper faith we may translate it into
a graver and stronger confidence in redeemed humanity and
God’s redeeming love ! God grant, we pray, that this still young
community may rise in the century to come, through weal and
woe, to the only true glory of righteousness—not for its own


sake only, or by its own strength, but for the sake of all humanity
and under the light of a real faith in God!
But I pass from the Centennial celebration as it concerns the
whole colony, to its special aspect as it concerns our own Church,
in which we can thankfully trace equal progress, and look on in
prayer to yet higher hope. Here, I trust, you will pardon me, if
I devote such time as remains to me to its connection with the
Centennial Fund.
Since we met only seven months ago, that fund has been
devised, organised, advanced ; and, so far, I think we may say
that it has been a great, and to some at least an unexpected,
success. One quarter of the Centennial year has passed, and
already we have achieved one quarter of what was thought the
splendid audacity of a visionary scheme. More than .£50,000
has already poured in, and this from only a. small portion of our
Church people.
From the first, as you all know, I have attached to the fund
more than a money value. As a thank-offering to God, it may
surely hope for His blessing. As a witness to the world of real
sacrifice, it bears not only on the reputation of our Church, but—
what is of infinitely more consequence—on its power, through
proved sincerity, to influence society for good. As a central
permanent agency for Church extension, it will go down, as we
trust, to our children’s children, always binding the present to
the past, always stimulating new energy and sacrifice. But not
least have I prized it, in the view already indicated, as a signal
expression and promotion of Church unity. In its original
scheme, while always allowing special and diocesan limitation,
it pressed-upon us objects widely general, extending over our
whole province. Its very idea was that our richer parishes
should help the poorer, our wealthier and more settled dioceses,
those still struggling with virtually missionary work. Surely
this was the true idea, as of Christian love, so of Church spirit.
Lately, in deference to strong pressure, the Centennial Board
-r stretching its powers with a boldness, for it must hereafter
ask indemnity—has agreed to include in the great Centennial
Fund contributions for more special and more local purposes,
only asking that these shall pay some tribute, great or small, to
the larger objects. I believe that it has under all the circum-
stances acted wisely. But I still earnestly trust that the power
of Localism which in all its forms I count as a serious danger
to our Church life here—will not be allowed to impair the
breadth and nobleness of our first idea. I know well the temp-
16


tation under strong pressure to think only of needs and duties
close at hand, and, by a slightly modified selfishness, to make
charity begin and end at home. But surely we can rise above
this ; and, if we do, I am profoundly convinced that we shall reap
the promised reward. The spirit of liberality, awakened for an
exceptional effort, which has about it some touch of grandeur,
will react for good on the supply even of the local needs. Yet,
even w’ere it not so, it would be worth some sacrifice to draw the
Church in this whole colony closer together. The Provincial
Synod, which originated the scheme, and the Board which carries
it out, represent here again a true ecclesiastical Federation for
the work of the whole. Let this be—rather, I should say, let it
continue to be —an effective reality.
I speak on this matter in all earnestness, because our most The work still to
arduous work still remains to be done, and because it can be done be d ° ne '
only by a resolute unselfishness and largeness of aim. What has
been done as yet is to gather in partially (for they are in fact, still
to come) the large contributions of the few—in this diocese, I
suppose, about the hundredth part of our Church people. What
is to be done now is the more difficult task of gathering the
smaller contributions—in this country they need not be very
small of the many. The complete success of the work depends
therefore, on a hearty co-operation. How is this to be obtained ?
I answer by ready local help in each parish to our Committee,
and its excellent Organising Secretary, from those who can rise
above mere parochialism. For that help I appeal, as your
bishop, to all my fellow-churchmen. But let me say that I
appeal this day especially to you—first to you, my brethren of the
clergy, not some but all; then to you, my brethren of the laity,
representatives of our parishes, and, therefore, commanding con-
fidence and respect there. If of the 300 members of the Synod
all who have not been active in the work would make it their
own for a few weeks.—not only giving it to it what they rightly
may, but bringing it before others—l believe that our dioceses
share of the work would be nearly done; and, before I leave to
represent you in England, I might have the happiness of know-
ing that success was virtually ours.
I am almost ashamed to have even to remind Churchmen that Superiority to
they should in works like this rise above all personal considera- SStionT'
tions. Yet I have little doubt that in a parish men will perversely
determine their course by the popularity or unpopularity of a
clergyman. I have seen it publicly suggested, that the Fund
may suffer —perhaps may reasonably suffer—because, acting as I


best can upon what seems to be my duty, I, as Bishop, have done
this, or have refrained from doing that. Now, I think you know
that Ido not presume to hold myself above criticism; though I
may feel that it is at its best, when it does not seek anonymous
irresponsibility, and when it expresses itself through regular
Church channels rather than through letters to the daily press. I
have said before that, if ever I lose the confidence of my fellow
churchmen here, I can no longer serve God and serve them with
advantage. But what has any action of mine to do with a great
general work like this ? The scheme is not properly mine ; the
management of the Fund will be in the hands of representa-
tives of the whole Church, freely chosen from time to time ; the
beneficent work will go on, as I trust, when I and all who hear
me have passed away. This must be seen by all who think. As
has been well said, “ What we give we give to God and to His
Church.” I believe that, on this matter and on others, the great
body of our people will rise, not only above personal considera-
tions, but even above all party strifes and anxieties. Let them
have confidence in the principles of their Church, as history has
tested and proved them, and in Him who has called it to a
special position in Christendom, and has surely in store for it
some not ignoble destiny.
(IV.) My brethren, I almost feel that I may weary you by laying
such frequent and urgent stress on the greatness of that Church
unity, of which this Centennial year should be a new realisation
and our Centennial Fund a humble instrument. Let it be my excuse
that, as Bishop, I have beyond all others, as one chief drawback
from the happiness of the work of God, the sad and wearisome
experience of petty strifes and misunderstandings, and of
divisions, which if not petty, at least fail grievously of true
conception of proportion in Christian truth. Do not think that
I undervalue strong religious individualism, on which vital
Christianity so largely depends. Do not think that lam blind
to the healthy and tonic influence of local self-government, in
Church as in State. But in our age and in our Church here
these things are absolutely safe. The danger is, not that they
should be overborne, but that they should usurp, and by ag-
gressive exaggeration splinter up unity.
Think of the conditions of the actual modern life, in which
God has cast our lot. Largeness of sweep and unity of con-
ception are the characteristics of all modern thought; closer
unity, either by voluntary aggregation or under deeper laws of
human nature, is equally characteristic of modern society ;
18


breadth and tremendous simplicity of issue mark the great
questions between morality and license, between Christianity
and unbelief. Under such conditions how can one help re-
membering, and humbly dwelling on, the prayer for all wdio
believe in Christ, “ That they all may be one; as Thou, Father,
art in Me and lin Thee, that they may be one in us.” In some
better realisation, both of the grander unity of the whole Church
of Christ, and of the lesser and closer unity of our own branch
of it in particular, must lie, under God, the one hope of really
leavening for Him a world thus pervaded with conceptions and
desires of breadth, simplicity, unity. Even isolations in the
army of God must paralyse it, and give it over to gradual defeat
in detail. What shall we say of internal strifes in the face of an
exultant enemy ? History and philosophy alike teach us, that,
in our days at any rate, living unity can never be the fruit of an
Absolutism which crushes variety and individuality; still less of
a desponding acquiescence in a universal haziness of uncertainty,
on all the higher and more mysterious elements of life and
thought. But the future of Christianity everywhere depends on
the realisation of free unity—of strong accordance in great funda-
mental truths, of real brotherly sympathy even in sense of
difference of thought and peculiarity of character, and of that
absolute self-sacrifice for Christ, which will show itself in
enthusiasm for the one common Gospel and for the work of the
whole Church of God.
I urge the thought on you to-day. We are, we know it, but a our own duty,
handful in the vastness of the Christian host; our work for God
only one contribution (which can claim even a shadow of great-
ness only by its future promise) to the manifold and world-wide
work of the whole Catholic Church, of past, present, and future ;
the utterances of our Synod only as one insignificant syllable in
the great unceasing witness of God’s truth. But we have still
our place and our duty. God grant that in our humble measure
we may better understand and obey this special call, which God’s
providence so vividly, yet so solemnly, makes to us ! For surely
He is calling us in Christ to realise in perfect harmony the
personal unity of the individual life with Him, and the Com-
munion of Saints, the mystic fellowship of all redeemed humanity,
hid with Christ in God.


