

Dr. George Sydney Arundale
M.A., LL.B., D.L., F.R. Hist. S.
PRESIDENT OF THEOSOPHICAL SOCIETY, 1934.




INAUGURATION OF THE
PRESIDENT, 1934.
On the evening of June 20th, 1934, the Recording
Secretary of the Theosophical Society called a session of
the Scrutineers appointed by the Executive Committee, viz.,
Miss Heather Kellett and Dr. Srinivasamurti, and later
reported that Dr. Arundale had received 15,604 votes for
the Presidency of the Society, and Mr. Wood 4,825.
THE Inaugural Ceremony took place in Headquar-
ters Hall the next morning at eight o’clock, and
was very simple. The audience was made up chiefly
of residents and employees of the Adyar Compound
and members from Madras; the newly elected President
and the President pro tem were seated on the platform.
The President pro tem rose and announced that the
duly scrutinized reports of the General Secretaries and
the Recording Secretary showed that Dr. George Sydney
Arundale had been duly elected by a large majority as
the President of the Society for the ensuing seven years
from June 21st, 1934. He then offered his congratula-
tions to Dr. Arundale on his successful candidature, and
said he hoped he would win even more widely the
affection and co-operation of the members all over the
world, and that his Presidency would be marked by
admirable stages of progress in the Society as yet un-


known. He said he believed the new President would
maintain in all their purity the great Principles on which
the Society was founded and that he would guard the
traditional liberties of individual membership. He also
congratulated Mrs. Rukmini Arundale on the high privi-
lege she now had of aiding her honoured husband in
his great mission. “Weil do I know and so does he
what it means for one to have the helping hand of a
devoted wife.” He then congraulated the membership
on their wise selection of a successor to Dr. Annie
Besant, whose relationship to the Society would always
stand out in bold relief. He said that it was the wish
of the late President, as expressed in her will, that the
seal ring which she wore should be worn by future
Presidents of the Society. It was the ring worn by H.
P. Blavatsky and at her passing it came to Colonel H.
S. Olcott. The President pro tem then presented it to
Dr. Arundale with the remark that he felt sure he would
honour it as she and the Founders had honoured it, and
that he would seek to pass it on to his successors un-
diminished in its power and deepened even in its har-
mony with the Inner Founders, whom we have the high
privilege of serving. He read a letter of congratulation
by Babu Hirendra Nath Datta, the Vice-President nomi-
nate, of the new administration. He closed by saying
that he could express no higher wish than that the
forthcoming administration might prove to be a special
blessing to the world.
Whereupon Dr. Arundale rose and spoke feelingly
of the honour that had been conferred upon him and
said:
MR. WARRINGTON AND BRETHREN:
As I am sure you fully realize, this is for me an occasion of
the most solemn moment. Yesterday I died to an old life. To-
day I am born to a new, and to responsibilities heavier than any


i have yet known; and I succeed two Presidents who have set
standards which unaided I cannot hope to reach, still less to
maintain.
I shall, however, according to the measure of my own wis-
dom and devotion, receive strength from three great sources.
First, from Those in whom our Society lives and moves and
has its being. I pray Their Blessing upon us all.
Second, from her in whom I have lived and moved and had
my being for over thirty years in this life, and in countless lives
gone by. I pray her Blessing upon us all.
Third, from my fellow-members of the Theosophical Society,
comrades in one of the greatest and most splendid adventures in
the world. I ‘pray from them generous understanding, friendly
support, and wise advice.
The President-Founder has said that the letters P.T.S. may
well be taken to mean Pariah, or outcaste, of the Theosophical
Society. But if so it is only that he may the better fill the func-
tion so finely described in the well-known phrase servus ser-
vorum Dei, servant of the servants of God. Your President may
from one point of view be your leader, but from another and
truer point of view he is the Society’s first servant, and what
honour is greater?
Our late revered President declared that “a Society such
as ours can only offer to its President a Crown of Thorns.”
But among these thorns, which doubtless I too shall find to be
many, I seem to discern many Roses and not a few Rosebuds, so
that in fact the President wears a Crown of Roses, even though
in their midst may lurk the thorns.
Foremost among the Roses I discern the Shamballa-scented
Rose of Power, the Rose which is Adyar, the Masters’ Home and
the Society’s Heart, the home of the President, wherein he dwells
amidst the most majestic influences, and no less, he hopes,
amidst the generous friendship of those who are similarly privi-
leged.
Only less beautiful is the Sandalwood-scented Rose of Bless-
ing, the Rose of the Blessing of his Elders. Already is this
Blessing his as he enters upon his new path. But as he treads
it wisely, unswervingly, greatly, so will the Rose of Blessing
grow in beauty and in power.
And then there is the glorious Bud of Opportunity, which
shall indeed blossom into splendour, if he rise equal to the
opportunities with which the path of every President is ever
richly strewn. And clustering about this Bud so full of promise,
are the innumerable little Buds of the world’s Needs. As he


helps to tend these with the Waters of Theosophy and to sprinkle
upon them the fragrance of the Roses, so shall they blossom
forth into Roses of Gratitude to the Society.
Is there not too the Attar-perfumed Rose of Friendship,
the goodwill of his fellow-members, and their hope that he may
prove worthy of their trust. The Rose of Friendship must needs
still be young. But if there be available the fructifying soil of
rectitude it will grow into wondrous glory.
True indeed it is that life is for most bestrewn with thorns,
but no less true, I think, that roses also are to be found upon
the way. Where there are thorns there are roses, where there
are roses there are thorns. But the prick of a thorn is surely
but a small price to pay for the wonder of a rose.
On resuming office I thank those whose votes have been
cast in my favour, and I thank no less those who have voted
against me. Each member has voted to ensure according to
his best judgment the well-being of the Society. I hope to
fulfil the expectations of those who have voted for me, and I
hope to be able to gain in due course the confidence of those
who have felt it their duty to vote against me. A common
dedication unites us our dedication to Theosophy and to the
Theosophical Society.
We all thank from our hearts Mr. and Mrs. Warrington,
who have so finely borne the Flag of Theosophy during the
period which has to elapse between the passing of one President
and the assumption of office by his successor. Their deep devo-
tion and warm friendship have endeared them to one and all.
The Theosophical Society will not forget them, Adyar will not
forget them. And we hope that some day they may return
to their Adyar home, less burdened with the cares of office,
but no less laden with our friendship. No less shall we miss
Mr. Frei, who is proceeding on a long tour and whose place as
Recording Secretary is being temporarily taken by Dr. Srinivasa-
murti. Mr. Frei has rendered very great service to the Society
in his own unassuming way, especially in the many matters of
business with which the Executive Committee has constantly
to deal. May I be permitted to express the hope that in due
course he may return to Adyar and once again in some official
capacity give the Society the benefit of his wise judgment and
experience ?
Mr. Hamerster has generously consented to continue in his
office as Treasurer at all events for the ensuing year, and for
the same period Miss Heather Kellett has kindly consented to
be my Private Secretary. She was a tower of strength to the
Australian Section as Assistant General Secretary, and until
recently gave devoted service to Bishop Leadbeater.


Thus, dear brethren, we now enter upon our new way
together. May we go down the years together in strong com-
radeship and in wise service. We shall miss our beloved elder
brethren who have so recently passed away from the physical
plane. But we must show our gratitude to them by doing our
utmost to carry on their work, as they so splendidly carried on
when H.P.B. and the Colonel in their turn passed onwards.
Fortunately, Mr. Jinarajadasa is with us, for the moment en-
gaged in the Master’s work in Brazil. His wisdom will be of
priceless value to us all. Let me also say how fortunate I am
in having, on this new and difficult way to which I have been
called, the wise comradeship and unique strength of Rukmini.
If I am able to be worthy of my great office it will be largely
because of her to whom I already owe so much.
Finally, may I in all reverence repeat to-day the great and
historic invocation spoken by our President for many years on
the occasion of the opening of each Convention:
MAY THOSE, WHO ARE THE EMBODIMENT OF LOVE
IMMORTAL. BLESS WITH THEIR PROTECTION THE
SOCIETY ESTABLISHED TO DO THEIR WILL ON EARTH;
MAY THEY EVER GUARD IT BY THEIR POWER. INSPIRE
IT WITH THEIR WISDOM, AND ENERGIZE IT WITH THEIR
ACTIVITY.




OUR NEW PRESIDENT.
By A. J. HAMERSTER.
WHEN our late Leader laid down the burden of her
Presidency, as the sun descended to the autumnal
equinox, nine months of preparation lay before us,
wherein to consider and decide on whom should fall
the heavy load of becoming her successor. That time
is now past. While the sun rose again to the heights
of the summer solstice, the choice was made, and there
now remains only the happy duty of hailing our new
Leader to his glorious task, of wishing him all success
in the Masters’ service, and of pledging him our loyal
co-operation in all his undertakings. Of course a num-
ber of votes have been cast against him, as many were
cast against Annie Besant when she first stood for the
Presidentship. In her case surely the majority of those
who voted against her were agreeably surprised to watch
her splendid leadership. I think I may make bold to
predict that many of those who have voted No to
George Arundale on this occasion may, in their turn,
discover that their misgivings have happily not materi-
alized, and that a different George Arundale has become
President from him whom they felt they had some reason
to mistrust. However, this may be, the future will ulti-
mately decide whether our choice has been wisely made
or not, but the sincerity of our votes and our new
President’s antecedents justify, I am sure, our choice
for the present. As to our sincerity, there is nothing
more to add than that it is the fruit of our devotion to
the Truth of Theosophy and to the Movement for the
spreading of that Truth; but as to our new President s


antecedents, this is the place to record some of them,
as a justification of our choice.
Among mystic and occult societies, in the East and
in the West, of olden times as well as of our own days,
great value has ever been attached to the “succession”
of a teacher or leader; that is to say, to his spiritual
parentage, as a guarantee for the “authority” or genuine-
ness of his inspiration. There is nothing to be compared
to intercourse with greater souls, for qualifying to be-
come a leader of souls. “Arise! Awake! Seek out the
Great Ones, and get understanding,” says the Upani-
shad. Therefore, more than on anything else, I will
lay stress, in this sketch of our new President’s life, on
his “associations” with the great leaders of the Theoso-
phical Movement, who have gone before him, and
whose rightful “successor,” in the spiritual sense of the
word, he can, from such associations, easily be deduced
to be. All other biographical matter will be treated
as the outer body, as it were, of which this direct and
lifelong contact with the great Theosophical heroes of
the past—for unfortunately they all now belong to the
past, till others take their places—is the heart and life-
blood.
George Sydney Arundale was born in a little
village in Surrey, England, on December Ist, 1878, the
youngest child of the Reverend John Kay, a Congrega-
tional Minister. His mother died in child-birth, leaving
the infant in the care of her sister. Miss Francesca Arun-
dale. And this devoted pupil of H. P. B. faithfully and
lovingly discharged the duties of mother, guardian and
friend to the lonely boy, as well as later to the grown-
up man, till her death on March 23rd, 1924. It was
at the Arundales’ house then, at 77 Elgin Crescent,
Netting Hill, London W.—where H. P. B. and Colonel


Olcott stayed for a while, the latter by special order
of the Master M. 1 during their visit to England in the
summer of 1884—that the little George made his first
acquaintance with the two great Founders of the Theo-
sophical Society. It was a momentous year in the his-
tory of the Society. Great things, good and bad, were
happening, and the boy, then six years of age, lived
and walked in the thick of them, though of course not
consciously. Who, however, believing in the unseen
worlds behind the visible, can doubt that these happen-
ings, acting' on and drawing reaction from the elders
around him, must have also strongly affected George
in his yet unconscious inner life? His adopted mother’s
house was made a centre of inner activity, a "power”-
house of the Masters’ force.
If you choose (the Master K. H. wrote to her) you may
make your home one of the most important centres of spirit-
ualising influence in all the world. The “power” is now con-
centrated there, and will remain—if you do not weaken or
repulse it remain to your blessing and advantage. 3
It was then that the little George for the first time
came to know what the Masters, who stood behind all
these goings-on, looked like; for during this time a
German Theosophist and well-known portrait painter,
Herr Hermann Schmiechen, who was domiciled in Lon-
don, “painted with M.’s hand on the artist’s head and
often on his arm, ” 3 the portraits of the two Masters who
were the hidden Founders of the Theosophical Society.
These portraits are now in the shrine-room of the E.
S. at Adyar.
X l'he Mahatma Letters, p. 350.
"My Guest — H. P. Blavatsky, by Francesca Arundale, p. 47. —The letter
was phenomenally received by Miss Arundale, in August of the same year,
when staying with the Gebhards at Elberfeld, together with “her little George,”
H. P. 8., Colonel Olcott and several other well-known Theosophists of those
days.
3 The Mahatma Letters, p. 349. See also Old Diary Leaves, Third Series,
p. 156.


Another important event was the founding by the
Arundales and other staunch supporters of the Masters’
work, of an “Inner Group,” as “the Adytum of the
London Lodge,” its “fundamental principle” being
implicit confidence in the Mahatmas and Their teachings,
and unswerving obedience to Their wishes. 1
Surely all these stirrings and searchings of heart
could not go on around the boy without having their
profound influence on him. The atmosphere of the
house was heavily laden with the perfume of the Mas-
ters’ presence. H, P. B. at the time was the special
vehicle of the Maha Chohan, 2 and it was under her and
the Masters’ strong exertion, that, for example, the
clairvoyant faculties of two chelas, an Eastern and a
Western pupil, were so awakened that in a little upper
room” of the house there came to birth that precursor
of a later namesake, Man ; Fragments of Forgotten His-
tory. 3
Could it be otherwise than that, amid such sur-
roundings in his very early youth, George seemed to be
foreordained to become what H. P. B, with prophetic
foresight called him in that well-known letter of hers
on his sixth birthday 4 —a chela ; that is a pupil of the
Masters, and a faithful worker in Their field? Both
Colonel Olcott and H.P.B. had a real affection for the
boy. The Colonel, in his correspondence with George’s
adopted mother, refers to him as the curly-headed
angel of Elgin Crescent” 6 ; and I remember George him-
self recently, in one of the Friday evening “roof” talks
here, telling us of a visit to the Zoological Gardens in
I Letters from the Masters of the Wisdom, First Series, p. 26.
2 My Guest — H. P. Blavatsky, p. 22.
s Loc. cit., p. 43.
*Loc. cit., p. 40.
b The Theosophist, April, 1933, p. 25.


London, with H. P. 8., who was then much of an invalid,
sitting in a bath-chair, and how when he tripped and
fell, H. P. 8., though only able to move with great
difficulty, almost hurled herself out of her chair to pick
him up and console him.
Before the two Founders left again for India,
George met still another personage at the Arundales’
house, who in the future was also going to play an im-
portant role in his life.
I remember Mr. Leadbeater as a visitor to our house (Miss
Arundale writes). I remember him in his clerical dress and his
general appearance of a distinguished English gentleman. He
quickly passed all barriers; the Master’s call found a willing
answer and it was evident from the very first that he “meant
business” . . . His position as a priest of the English Church,
the opinion of Society, of his family all were set at naught, and
at the Master’s bidding he joined H. P. B. and Theosophy at a
time when many were turning their backs on both. 1
This readiness to serve caused the Master to hail
Mr. Leadbeater, on the eve of his departure from Lon-
don, as “my new chela”. 2 For five years he devoted his
life to the cause of Theosophy in India. When he
returned to England in 1 889, George had him for some
time as his tutor, and A. P. Sinnett’s son Denny and
the young Jinarajadasa as his fellow-pupils. As a child
George was of rather delicate health. I well remember
how he also told us “on the roof,” in his own inimitable,
humorous way, that one of the things that stand out in
his memory from his childhood was the substantial way
Mr. Leadbeater saw to it that his boys were stuffed
with milk and porridge. Of equal if not of more im-
portance to his health was the fact that all through his
childhood and youth he wore a curious Indian silver
tube, which contained a lock of the hair of Master K.
Wy Guest — H. P. Blavatsky, p. 53.
2 Letters from the Masters of the Wisdom, First Series, p. 36.


H. It was given to him by Colonel Olcott at the Mas-
ter’s command, and after it had seen him through his
precarious youth, it was returned whence it had come.
George received his education not only in England,
but for some time also in Germany, and when younger
still he went to a little school in Rome, so that his
international education, preparing him in some way at
least for his future world-wide task, was begun even in
his very early childhood. When he was seventeen, Mr.
Sinnett admitted him as a member of the London Lodge,
meeting at Leinster Gardens; but this event happened
more as a matter of course than as implying the response
to a call that could not be resisted. The time for that
had apparently not yet come. The conscious awakening
to that needed the touch of another, a master-hand,
which came in 1902, when Annie Besant “delivered her
famous address on Theosophy and Imperialism’ in the
large Queen’s Hall in London.’’ I quote here what
others have written as to the effect on George of her
appeal for a World-Empire, “existing for the good of
all those whom it rules,” and “based on the Brother-
hood that nothing can destroy”:
Then and there, as the last notes of the splendid music of
her oratory died down, the resolve was made to follow her who
had brought to him the message from those secret recesses of
the Himalayas, where the Lords of Wisdom dwell. At the close
of the lecture he was introduced to Mrs. Besant, and he deter-
mined to offer himself to her service, and surely there is no one
in this world, more devoted, more loyal to his beloved leader.
With characteristic energy he did not lose any time in looking
for work. And we find the young graduate from Cambridge
(he had just taken his M.A. degree) commence his Theosophical
work by doing odd jobs in the Headquarters of the Theosophical
Society at 28 Albemarle Street, W., writing names in registers,
addressing envelopes, gumming stamps on to letters; and this
was done in the most joyful and cheerful manner. He was then
given the work of sub-editing The Theosophical Review under
Mr. G. R. S. Mead, and was appointed Assistant General Secre-
tary of the British Theosophical Society under Mr. Keightley.


Later on he officiated as General Secretary for a short time,
and so gradually drew closer into touch with the work of the
Theosophical Movement. 1
Yet the real thing, the entire absorption of his
whole being, had not even then yet come to George
Arundale. But the master-mind, that was then leading
the Theosophical Movement, knew where to look for
her and the Masters’ real servers, how to appeal to
their deepest desires, and what opportunities for work
and service to offer them. To Western members of these
later days it is probably not so well known what an
intrinsic part “India” played, and still plays in the
Masters’ scheme, when They launched the Theosophical
Society into the world. In one of the oldest letters,
we find the Maha Chohan, “to whom the future lies
like an open page,” exclaiming:
Oh! for the noble and unselfish man to help us effectively
in India in that divine task. All our knowledge, past and
present, would not be sufficient to repay him. 2
At last that noble soul, than whom was none better
on all the earth for this particular facet of the work,
was found, and she herself needed co-workers. She
was starting the Central Hindu College at Benares, and
now she offered to the young graduate a professorship
of English, and to his adopted mother plenty of work,
“if they would make their home in India for India’s
service.” Here evidently was the true call! Though
not without considerable difficulties, still they untied
the knots that bound them to their native soil; and also
separated themselves from Bru, the daughter of Jinara-
I George Sydney Arundale, His Life and Work in the Central Hindu
College, Benares (Adyar 1913), pp. 9-11. I can strongly recommend this much
too little known book of nearly 300 pages to all teachers and to all those who
are in any way concerned with or interested in the education of the young.
2 Letters from the Masters of the Wisdom, First Series, p. 11. The note
on p. 110, that the letter is from the Maha Chohan, is apparently to be under-
stood in the sense that it is a report by the Master K. H. of what the Maha
Chohan had said. See, The Early Teachings of the Masters, p. xvii.


jadasa’s famous cat Jil From now on began George
Arundale’s real apprenticeship in the Masters’ service.
For ten years it lasted, at first as a teacher of English
and fdistory, afterwards as Headmaster, Vice-Principal
and Principal of the College. Under Mrs. Besant’s
inspiration and guidance he did much to stir throughout
India keen enthusiasm for education based on the great
ancient Indian principles, of which the Western world
had largely lost sight. No wonder that at the end of
this period she, who had called him to this life of service
to humanity, paid him tribute for his achievements in
no small-hearted way:
Among the many Theosophists who have sacrificed life
and home for the dear service of India, none, 1 think, has met
with more misunderstanding and more ingratitude than George
S. Arundale. His power of leadership and of winning love and
trust are, as is so often the case, the reasons for dislike and
distrust among those who do not share that power. The com-
monplace is that which never gives offence; great natures arouse
great love and great hatred in those around them. It is said
that I have had the happiness of stimulating this life to service.
If so it be, great is the reward. For among my many sons and
pupils there is none of whom a mother and teacher may feel
more proud than of George S. Arundale.
Equally natural it was that the first trust being
honourably discharged*—the helping of India loyally
fulfilled —he had thereby earned the right for greater
service still, for a world-wide task now and in the future,
as the Maha Chohan’s promise implied. India, how-
ever, and its needs were never forgotten or even lost
sight of. It eventually became his second motherland,
as it had so become to Dr. Besant, his real home, where
some years later, in 1920 in fact, he also found the
companion of his life, in Shrimati N. Rukmini, now not
less known to us and loved by us than her husband,
because of the exquisite grace and charm of her woman-
hood, of her whole being in truth, outer and inner. But
I am running too fast into the future.


After leaving the Central Hindu College George
Arundale at first accompanied Mr. J. Krishnamurti and
his brother Nityananda to Europe to help them in their
education. Being found unfit for active service in the
War, he returned in 1916, at Mrs. Besant's request, to
India, and became associated with her and other national
leaders in the Home Rule for India campaign. His
educational work for young India was also taken up
again. He became the Principal of the former National
University in Madras, which for his services in the edu-
cational field conferred on him the degree of Doctor of
Letters honoris causa, his diploma being signed by Rab-
indranath Tagore.
After his marriage Dr. Arundale began his world-
wide task in earnest, by travelling extensively, accom-
panied by Mrs. Arundale, visiting Europe, Australia and
the United States, Java and New Zealand, and every-
where stirring up new hopes and new enthusiasms in a
world that seems decaying for want of new ideals and
new creative urges.
In 1920 he became the head of the Education De-
partment of the Holkar State and did much to spread
therein sound principles of education. He then returned
to work under Dr. Besant, and later under Bishop Lead-
beater in Australia,
In thus following Dr. Arundale from youth to full-
grown manhood, we have come gradually so near to
the present time that it does not seem necessary to revive
in our memory what most of us have only relatively
recently seen and known through more or less direct
contact with his work. But I cannot pass entirely some
other aspects of this work, namely his connection with
some of the ramifications from the one great Theoso-


phical Movement, the Co-Masonic Order and the Lib-
eral Catholic Church. The first is of very early date.
He joined Masonry in 1902 and has now temporarily
succeeded Dr. Besant as the Representative of the
Supreme Council for the British Empire. His relation
with the Church, on the other hand, is of very much
later date. In 1925 he was admitted to the priesthood
and the episcopate, in order, here also, to set in some
measure an example of a new attitude in Christianity.
Last, though not least, his books. Whoever reads
them, or comes under the spell of his eloquence, cannot
deny that considerable artistic ability, besides the more
prominent qualities of rousing enthusiasm, of power and
leadership, goes into the make-up of the man George
Arundale. In this connection it is interesting to note
that he comes of an artistic stock, two members of his
family having been Royal Academicians, and another
a noted explorer-artist, the author of some fine litera-
ture on Egypt, and who was for some time architect
to the Sultan of Turkey, and in that capacity was en-
gaged in the restoration of the famous Mosque of Omar
at Jerusalem. One of his Indian friends describes
George Arundale as “a person of torrential and inex-
haustible energy, always full of ideas, his mind a bub-
bling spring of ideas,” 1 as his lectures and writing prove
him to be. Here I will mention only his three principal
books: Thoughts on “At the Feet of the Master” ; Nir-
vana; Mount Everest; Its Spiritual Attainment; the first,
the outcome of his direct contact with Mr. Krishna-
murti, when helping him in his studies; the second, of
his awakening, under the powerful influence of C. W.
Leadbeater, to a higher life and consciousness than is
contacted by most men; the third, of his response to the
I N. Sri Ram in The Adyar Notes and News, December 6, 1928, p. 3.


strivings and longings in the hearts of the people of the
new world towards a new and better future.
Indeed a new future lies before us, a new note
will be struck by our new President, or rather a new
melody played to the old accompaniment of the Ancient
Wisdom, taught to him and learned by him at the feet
of our grand old leaders of the past, as I have here
endeavoured to show, H. P. Blavatsky, H. S. Olcott,
Annie Besant, C. W. Leadbeater, whose worthy suc-
cessor, I am sure, George S. Arundale, will prove to be,
to the satisfaction of us all, who have chosen him our
Leader, and given him the opportunity for guiding Theo-
sophy and the Theosophical Society “to ever greater
glory” in the realization of the Brotherhood of Human-
ity.




FOUR LETTERS FROM THE
PRESIDENT.
I.---To the Members of the
Theosophical Society.
Fellow-Members of the Theosophical Society:
BY electing me to succeed my beloved and revered
teacher, Dr. Besant, in the office of President of the
Theosophical Society, you have not only conferred upon
me the greatest honour in your power to bestow, but
also the greatest honour I could ever wish to possess.
I regard your selection of myself for the seven years
term of office less as a mark of confidence and more
as the gesture of an earnest expectation that I will stead-
fastly follow in the footsteps of those great brethren
who have preceded me in office.
I have, of course, yet to show that you have chosen
wisely, and to justify your hope that my close associa-
tion with our great leaders during the past forty years
will enable me in some degree to perpetuate their spirit
and to reflect their policies. All I can say is that I will
do my best.
You will, however, I am sure, agree that I am
assuming office in one of our Society’s most difficult
periods. Within less than six months we have lost the


two Theosophists who within recent decades have con-
tributed most brilliantly to the growth of the Society
and to our understanding of Theosophy, and who have
been steadying influences of priceless value amidst the
unrest which has been regrettably prevalent among some
of our members, causing some to suffer from doubt and
indecision and a few to resign their membership. I ask
for your patience and for a generous interpretation of
my efforts as I strive to find the path of wisdom. I
know these two great elder brethren will give their help.
Yet the responsibility will be mine, for the time will
come when you will rightly call upon me to render to
you an account of the trust you have reposed in me.
To those who did not vote for me may I be per-
mitted to say that I think I understand and appreciate
their reasons? Inevitably must there be both misgiving
and mistrust among many earnest and devoted members
of the Theosophical Society as it enters a new phase
of its existence. The future must needs seem uncertain.
It may appear that the immemorial landmarks and
policies of the Society are in danger of oblivion. One
or another of the potential Presidents may seem, to
judge by his record and by his pronouncements, to fall
lamentably short of those standards upon the mainten-
ance of which the well-being of our movement depends.
I would, however, point out that while it is one
thing to be a private member of the Society, with all the
freedom and comparative lack of special responsibility
each member rightly enjoys, it is quite another thing
to be its chief official, whose every word and action must
needs be weighed in innumerable Theosophical balances
using all sorts and conditions of weights, and whom the
outer world will of course use as an acid test for the
judgment it passes upon our Theosophical Society. I


have been elected neither to gain pre-eminence for any
specific interpretation of Theosophy, nor to incline the
Society as such along some specialised road, still less
to further any supposed Theosophical proclivities of my
own. I am elected to be all that the President of the
Theosophical Society should be, and I am rightly ex-
pected to turn down the old leaf of my private mem-
bership, turn over the new leaf of my public member-
ship, and radically adjust myself to those changes which
the turning over of a new leaf demands. This does not
mean, of course, that I am required to abandon my
individual freedom, but rather to ensure its due and
emphatic subordination to the interests of the Society
as a whole.
To make my position quite clear, I would refer you
to an address delivered by Dr. Besant at the Theoso-
phical World Congress at Chicago in 1929 and subse-
quently published as a leaflet under the title ‘‘The Open
Door,” I am of opinion that any other attitude than
that set forth in this address would gravely compromise
both the essential neutrality of the Society and the no
less essential freedom of the individual member.
What have you the right to expect, perhaps the
duty to expect, from your President?
First, that he will keep wide open the doors of the
Theosophical Society to all who accept the principle of
brotherhood in the terms of the First Object, and who
are prepared to do their best to live it. The Society is
in no way concerned with the beliefs or opinions of those
who seek membership, any more than it is concerned
with the beliefs and opinions of those who are already
members. These, whether private or public, are their
own affair exclusively. But the Society is surely con-
cerned that each member shall be a source of goodwill.


understanding and solidarity, and not a source of con-
stant discord. In the interests of its own self-preserva-
tion the Society has the duty to expect that members
will so live that all outer differences of belief and
opinion and mode of living, which naturally and rightly
separate them, shall tend to strengthen and not to
weaken the inner and indissoluble tie of the One Life
which all share, and which is the very heart itself both
of Theosophy and of the Theosophical Society. May I,
in this connection, venture to suggest that in “The
Golden Stairs” of H. P. Blavatsky we have a perfect
description of that solidarity amidst difference which
members of the Society should ever seek to maintain?
Second, that he will faithfully guard the Society
against its dominance by, or subordination to, any
dogma, doctrine or belief held by any individual member
or group of members, and constantly to ensure that the
Society and its various official expressions and activities
shall be kept clearly and emphatically dissociate from
all such beliefs and opinions and from any movements
which embody them.
Third, that he will stress the paramount importance,
both for the Society as a whole, for each Section, and
for every Lodge, of spreading far and wide the great
science of life given to the world in the beginning of
the final quarter of the last century by the Masters of
the Wisdom through Their Messenger H. P. Blavatsky
and those who succeeded her.
Fourth, that he will actively encourage through
the Theosophical Order of Service and in other suitable
ways the practical application, by members and groups
of members, of this science of life to the needs of the
world in all its various departments.


Fifth, that he will encourage in all possible ways
the youth of the world to perceive in Theosophy a high
road to Truth, to Freedom and to Happiness.
Sixth, that he will constantly remind members of
the Society of two great principles in their relation to
Theosophy: first, that Theosophy is a body of truth for
study, investigation and experiment, and that every
member has the right, and indeed the duty, to pursue
such study, investigation and experiment in the utmost
freedom, no matter whither these may lead him, just
as he has the duty to accord the same right to his fellow-
members in a spirit of sincere goodwill and under-
standing; second, that there is no effective search for
truth save as truth becomes the actual possession of its
seeker through his own personal experience. The author-
ity of another may help him on his way, may be a sign-
post pointing to him a short cut. Heart-felt belief may
help him on his way, as may also keen intellectual
appreciation. Yet neither authority, nor belief, nor
intellectual appreciation, are enough—they are but
means to the end. Truth is a matter for individual
experience. We must know for ourselves. Member-
ship of the Theosophical Society may help to point the
way to experience. Theosophy, its literature, its ex-
ponents, may help to point the way to the realization
of truth. But each one of us must in the long run tread
his own way, even though he may be able to profit
from much external assistance as he treads it.
Seventh, that he himself will personally strive so
to try to live and to work, so to conduct the business
of the Society, that our movement steadily increases in
honour and dignity and earns respectful consideration
from the outer world.


To all these duties I pledge myself, but I know full
well that the fulfilment of this pledge depends upon the
generous co-operation of you all, upon the sincerity of
my own eagerness, and most of all upon the gracious
help I pray I may grow worthy to receive from Those
Who brought our Society into existence, and under
Whose watchful care it lives.
Never must belief in Them become a condition of
membership of Their Society. Never must belief in
Them cause any to set themselves apart from others,
who do not so believe, in fancied superiority of spiritual
stature. Never must Their Names be used, or any sup-
posed association with Them be invoked, in order to
stimulate any form of blind acquiescence, no matter for
what purpose. Nevertheless, these Elder Brethren, the
original Founders of the Theosophical Society, are
indeed its heart and its life; and only as we deliberately
include within the all-embracing circle of brotherhood
not only those who come after us on the path of evolu-
tion, but also, in all reverence, Those Who have gone
before us and beckon us to follow after Them, do we
make that circle complete, and thus give full and un-
broken reality to our First Object.
Therefore, at this great moment of assuming the
office of President I ask for your kindly generosity and
for Their gracious blessing. For my own part, I offer
a very eager and heartfelt devotion to the splendid
Cause which unites us in comradeship, in seeking and
in service. May our motto be: TOGETHER, THOUGH
DIFFERENTLY!
Your fellow-worker,


II.---To the General Secretaries
Regarding a Campaign for 1935-6.
EAR GENERAL SECRETARY,
I write to ask you if your Section would feel dis-
posed to join in a series of world-wide campaigns de-
signed to give a co-ordinated and carefully-planned
impetus to various aspects of Theosophical activity in
the outer world, I feel that a number of such cam-
paigns—one succeeding another and each the subject
of concentrated effort on the part of the whole Society
—should substantially increase the interest of the general
public in Theosophy and the Theosophical Society and
thus add to our membership. It is, however, vital that
each campaign should be most carefully planned, so
that its subject may be presented both in form and in
substance in the manner best calculated to arrest the
interested attention of the public.
I have been giving much thought as to the nature
of the campaigns in which we might profitably engage,
and it has seemed to me that for the year 1935-1936
we could not do better than send forth into the world
a strong stream of what I may call straight Theosophy
—the Theosophy of H. P. Blavatsky, of Colonel Olcott,
of Annie Besant, the Theosophy our Society was estab-


lished to proclaim. Of late years there has arisen a
tendency for this Theosophy to be relegated to a subor-
dinate position, almost to be forgotten, and for all kinds
of other interests to take its place in the forefront of
the thoughts and energies of some of our members.
And here and there the dangerous practice of trying
to imprison Theosophy in the form of some new presen-
tation of life, or of some popular panacea for the ills
of the world, has caused an unfortunate diversion from
the real duty of every Theosophist—of placing in the
forefront of his service the spread of the Theosophy
given by the Masters to H. P. B. and to her successors
for the enlightenment of the world. There is a very
dangerous tendency on the part of some of our members
to imagine that this Theosophy is out of date, has had
its usefulness, and that its place must now be taken by
some other Theosophy negating, perhaps, the very fun-
damental principles themselves of that aspect of the
Eternal Wisdom disclosed by the Masters of the Wisdom
for the helping of that age of regeneration on the
threshold of which we now stand.
This Theosophy is not out of date. It cannot be
out of date, for it is eternal; and as for having ceased
its usefulness, the world as yet hardly knows it. We
are still at the beginning of the work entrusted to us,
and I do not hesitate to say that there is no duty more
urgent for any Theosophist anywhere than that of being
a constant and an ardent channel for the flow of the
fructifying waters of Theosophy into a world desert still
arid and starved for want of truth.
I therefore urge that our first campaign be of the
nature of an attractive and compelling display of the
great teachings of Theosophy in the forms most likely
to arouse notice and maintain interest.


I would suggest that in every section a small but
very efficient Campaign Committee be established to
plan the campaign on lines likely to be attractive to the
general public, stressing (1 ) the great principles of
Theosophy in simple and interesting language, (2)
relating these to the major problems confronting the
country—religious, political, industrial, educational,
social, individual, etc. Detailed syllabuses should be
prepared with the aid of individual members experi-
enced in presenting Theosophy to the public and scien-
tifically conversant with the country’s problems. Lodges
which have been particularly successful in dealing with
the public will, of course, be requested to give their
expert advice.
I would particularly urge that the principles which
are to be presented should be treated as freshly as
possible, not, perhaps, in the old language or in the old
forms. Can we not think out a change in our mode of
presenting Theosophy—retaining, of course, in all
scrupulousness its life? By remaining too long slaves
to words and to forms we are just as much apt to lose
contact with the inherent life as when we remain too
long slaves to beliefs, orthodoxies and other static
receptacles for life.
For this 1935-1936 Theosophy Campaign I should
like to see changes in the old forms, the old verbiage,
the old modes of presentation, and a garbing of the
eternal Theosophy in some mode of presentation re-
freshingly different and, it may be, striking. Thus would
both campaigner and campaignee profit—the former
because of a sense of a new life, the latter because of
the new vigour of the former.
If this suggestion of a series of campaigns be wel-
come and the idea of Campaign Committees be


approved, will the latter get to work—first to think out
different, even if not new, ways of presenting the old
and eternal truths: incisive ways, ways strongly appeal-
ing to individual and national temperaments, ways
which go to the roots of the average individual’s diffi-
culties, perplexities, worries, anxieties, ways which
somehow, seem to give just that at which conventional
religion, science, philosophy stops short, ways which
make life infinitely more worth while for all sorts and
conditions of people, ways which are intriguing in their
suggestiveness and thought-provoking form.
I am sure that in every section there are original
thinkers capable of dressing Theosophy in unconven-
tional forms, in forms which cleverly reflect the pre-
vailing mental and emotional outlook, so that even our
own members may have occasion to say: “Dear me,
how interesting. I had no idea the somewhat intricate
teachings of Theosophy could be given so simply and
so acceptably to the average individual’s way of looking
at things.”
Then there are surely also original workers who
have a flair for organizing such a campaign with a
minimum of expense and a maximum of publicity. There
are surely workers who have had years of experience
in successfully presenting Theosophy to the public so
that the meetings under their direction are always well
attended and command notice in the public press.
Perhaps there are also original artists, musicians,
dramatists, who could help in their own specialized
ways.
It is, of course, supremely important that there
should be available attractive Theosophical literature
and bright study classes in connection with the cam-


paign. lam afraid we are somewhat deficient in well-
planned literature, in literature adapted to every stage
of life from the cradle to the grave, to every mood
of life from joy to despair, to every mode of life from
king to kitchen-maid. I have noted the need of these,
and we must be busy about preparing the necessary
literature. In the meantime we must do the best we
can with what we have. Our literature should be very
carefully searched for books and pamphlets which will
as far as possible meet all needs.
As for study classes, i am told that we lose more
members from the lack of power to retain them in
membership after the first keen interest has died down
than in any other way. First, no doubt, if I may say so
without any offence, we must catch our members, but
then we must keep them. And there’s the rub. No
campaign can be of more than fleeting value which is
not followed up by very careful organisation for sus-
taining the interest of those who have newly joined.
They must be given something to study which will whet
their appetites for more, and something to do which
will give them a sense of creativeness. We are all
creators. Creativeness is the breath of life. And if in
Theosophy we do not find a stimulus to creative activity
then our Theosophy is dead.
Now I should be very glad if you will let me have
your reactions to all that I have written above. If
you are in general approval, then perhaps you will
get to work and keep me constantly informed as to the
way in which you are working, so that I may pass on
your own Sectional experience to other Sections for
their information and help. Do you know any particular
member whom you could put in charge of the necessary
organisation? Have you the people in mind who might


constitute the Campaign Committee? What help can
we give you from Headquarters? Is there anything which
I myself could do personally?
The question may arise as to whether this Theo-
sophy Campaign will suffice for the whole of the period.
I think it will. In the first place each month, let us say
from October, 1935, may be devoted to a principle,
including addresses of whatever nature, discussions,
questions and answers, special applications of the prin-
ciple to local circumstances where desirable. There will
be the very necessary advertising to start with, on a
very intensive scale, in order to focus public attention
on the meetings. Various attractions may be organized
in connection with the meetings music, short, provo-
cative playlets, etc. A little journal may be published
for the period of the campaign for distribution among
the audience. Funds will have to be collected for all
these purposes, though for a special effort of this kind
there should be little difficulty in obtaining the money
required; and it may be hoped that there will be a
certain return.
In the second place there is other work for the
Lodges apart altogether from the campaign activity, and
adequate time must be found for strengthening existing
Theosophical organization, upon the vitality of which
the success of the campaign ultimately depends. If at
the end of a well-conducted and inspiring campaign a
new member finds himself face to face with a dull and
lifeless Lodge in which the fire of Theosophy burns but
feebly, in which there is little if any enthusiasm and
only a disheartening repetition of sentences out of books,
not only will his membership soon cease, but he will
begin to be positively repelled by the remoteness of
practice from preaching, and Theosophy and the Theo-


sophical Society will have gained an enemy instead of
ensuring a friend. And if the campaign itself is to be
something in the nature of a triumph Lodges must see
to it that there are speakers able to hold the attention
and interest of audiences. This is more a matter of
practice than is sometimes thought, but not a little tech-
nique is needed to understand the complicated psycho-
logy of audiences and how to ring very necessary
changes on the modes of presenting the subject accord-
ing to the varying moods of those who come to hear.
And there js also the difficult matter of good titles,
effective manner and mannerisms, humour, illustration,
and, in these campaigns, the very careful avoidance of
the particular King Charles’ head or bee in the bonnet
from which the lecturer suffers. An impersonal address
is so much more useful than the address which is studded
with strong and often exaggeratedly expressed convic-
tions.
I am venturing to submit below an illustration of
my plea for the original dressing of Theosophy, or at
least for a different dressing. It may not itself appeal,
but it may at least stimulate original thinkers to produce
something very much better. In mitigation of condem-
nation I may add that this particular dressing was
recently used “over the air” in Australia by our Theo-
sophical Broadcasting Station and was found distinctly
effective.
This note has become somewhat long, but the im-
portance of its subject matter must be the excuse. And
I hope you will kindly share it with your principal col-
leagues, and honour me with your considered judgment.
Cordially and fraternally yours,


THEOSOPHY DECLARES
1. That all we perceive around us in no matter
what form are modes of the Life each one of us knows
himself to be. The Life each one of us knows himself
to be is universal, so far as our experience goes. It is
the Air, the Earth, the Fire, the Water. It is every
kingdom of nature. It is the universe and all the
heavens.
2. That this Life is One. In essential quality it is
the same everywhere, but its mode of appearance varies
almost infinitely.
3. That this Life is everywhere in process of un-
foldment at an almost infinite variety of stages. Hence
the differences in mode of appearance— e.g., in the
elements, in the kingdoms of nature.
4. That the unfoldment of this Life takes place
under immutable Law and Order.
(o) The Law of the Inner Government of the
worlds, whereby the Laws of the Unfolding
Life are administered by Beings Who em-
body such Laws.
( b ) The Law of Time or Readjustment, whereby
the process of evolution is a constant dip-
ping down into matter for gradual adjust-
ment to reality and for the acquirement of
an accurate sense of relative values. This
Law is sometimes called the Law of Rein-
carnation.
(c) The Law of Cause and Effect, whereby all
circumstances are perceived to be events
in an unbroken chain of sequential growth
—each circumstance both a heritage from


an infinitely distant past and a progenitor
of the future-to-be. This Law negatives
the conception of Chance, and proclaims
both the supremacy of perfect Justice and
the ultimate inevitability of the perfect End.
( d) The Law of Individuality, whereby the
Laws of Time and of Cause and Effect
operate to resolve the Universal Fire of
Life into its component sparks of individ-
ualities and causing each of these sparks
to unfold into Flames and into Fires in the
course of Time and under the friction of
Cause and Effect.
( e ) The Law of Adequacy, whereby each spark
is, in connection with its changing surround-
ings, self-sufficient as to its unfoldment. In
other words, each individuality is in fact
self-contained, has to the full the where-
withal to achieve the next stage on its way
of unfoldment. Life leaves no child of
Life bereft of one single atom of need for
the upward climb.
How these Principles and Laws actually work, how they
affect each one of us and the whole complicated process
of world-conditions, how they explain and justify all
that seems so inexplicable, how they demonstrate that
life for everyone is supremely worth living, no matter
how hopeless circumstances may outwardly appear: all
this is set forth in Theosophical literature in such detail
as we are at present able to comprehend. But it should
be remembered that the Theosophical knowledge we
possess is but a feeble shadow of the stupendous and
inconceivable Substance. We know but in infinitesimal
part, and even that which we “know” must needs change


in the light of the more to come. At least we know
enough to refrain from dogmatising and from declaring
that in any particular we have reached an ultimate.
We hold our knowledge lightly, for as we develop we
shall cease to need it as it is, but rather changed—per-
haps out of all present recognition.


III.---Special Questions to the General
Secretaries.
GENERAL SECRETARY.
I feel that my general letter to the members of the
Theosophical Society needs to be supplemented by a
special letter to you, to your Council, and to your mem-
bers, to order to request both information and guidance
regarding any special point of view from which you
would look upon the work of our Society in the
immediate future, having in mind the various circum-
stances peculiar to your country and to your member-
ship.
1. Is Theosophy, is the Theosophical Society,
looked upon in any special way, by the public generally?
Are there any special prejudices to overcome? Are
there certain presentations of 1 heosophy less acceptable
than others for public lectures? Are there any deep-
rooted attitudes which must not be ignored? Are there
any special tendencies which need to be combated?
2. Are the members generally interested along
certain special lines of Theosophical study, or of the


application of Theosophy to outer world problems?
Does Theosophy mean to a majority of your members
a very specific type of Theosophy—religious, philo-
sophic, economic, educational, national, etc. ? Are your
members as a whole interested in the Round Table or
the Theosophical Order of Service? If not, why not?
Are they interested in any special movements working
for Universal Brotherhood, such as Masonry, etc.?
3. In what ways, if any, do you consider that,
from the standpoint of your own particular country, the
conduct of the Society and the presentation of Theo-
sophy needs modification? In order that The Theoso-
phist may become an international organ of public
repute, presenting in a dignified way the science of
Theosophy, what suggestions have you to make (a)
as regards its general size and appearance, ( b ) as regards
the subject matter? Could you say to me: “Do not
publish articles of such and such a nature. Stress con-
stantly such and such an aspect of Theosophy. As
regards the admission of discussion in the pages of The
Theosophist maintain such and such an attitude”?
4. Have you any special advice to give to me as
President of the Theosophical Society, looking at the
movement and at Theosophy from your own national
point of view? Are the visits of international lecturers
acceptable? If so, under what definite conditions, both
as to general arrangements and as to the subject-matter
of their lectures? In this connection have you any
special guidance or warning to offer to them?
5. Is there any definite way in which 1, as President,
and Adyar as the Headquarters of the Society, can be
useful to your Section? Are there special needs we


might be able to meet? Is there any specific help you
need for your Sectional journal? Are there any special
problems which we might help to solve?
6. What do you consider to be the specific con-
tribution of your Section and of your members both to
the Theosophical Society and to the advancement of
Theosophy generally? Is there any special support you
can offer to the Society, either for Adyar or for the
general v/ork of our movement?
7. Have you sent copies of all your various pub-
lications to the Adyar Library—including pamphlets,
books, magazines, etc.? If not, will you be so good as
to do so with retrospective effect? Where necessary,
we shall gladly reimburse the postage. Have we at
Adyar photographs of your General Secretaries from
the beginning, and of some of your leading workers who
have been stalwarts in the cause of Theosophy? If not,
may we receive copies, preferably of cabinet size, at
your early convenience? We should like to have for
the 1934 Convention an exhibition of these photographs.
We should be glad to have good photographs of your
headquarters and of some of the principal Lodge build-
ings in your section; also of any activities in which your
members are specially interested.
8. Have you any special suggestions to offer
regarding the International Annual Conventions,
whereby they may become more inspiring and useful to
the Society at large? Are there any ways you can
suggest whereby Sections which cannot actually take
part in the Convention activities may yet exercise their
own special influence and have their needs definitely
represented, apart from any proxy representation they
may have for the General Council meetings? Would


you, for example, be in favour of having some special
subject of interest selected for consideration at each
International Convention, apart from the general Con-
vention lectures, giving the Sections time enough to send
in either official or individual contributions on such
subject? Can you think of some subject predominantly
in the public mind at the present time, and could that
subject be selected for international discussion during
the course of Convention? Have you any suggestions
to offer regarding the Annual Convention lectures?
9. Have you any constructive suggestions to offer
as regards the Theosophical Publishing House at Adyar
and the Vasanta Press? Detailed views would be greatly
appreciated. Have you any suggestions to offer regard-
ing the conduct of business as between the Headquarters
and your Section? What improvements in this con-
nection should be introduced so as to facilitate the
smooth conduct of business?
10. Are there any means whereby you could
arrange (a) for a periodic residence of one of your
members at Adyar for, say, six months or a year, so
that he (or she) could become a sort of liaison officer
between your Section and Adyar, changing the member
yearly or as convenient, ( b ) for a similar residence on
the part of some young member so that he might be
given an insight into the workings of Headquarters and
a certain amount of definite training while he is at
Adyar? Could a certain sum of money be allocated
annually towards one or both of these purposes?
Living at Adyar is comparatively cheap, and probably
special terms could be arranged for such representatives.
11. Have you or any of your members documents,
pictures, etc., of general Theosophical interest? Could


any of these be presented to Adyar, or photographed
for the Adyar museum? For the purposes of biographies
of Dr. Besant and Bishop Leadbeater could you or any
of your members furnish me with important material
—letters, articles, photographs, etc., dates and subjects
of tours in your country, etc.?
Fraternally,


IV.---LETTER TO THE GENERAL
PUBLIC
ON ASSUMING THE OFFICE OF
PRESIDENT OF THE
THEOSOPHICAL SOCIETY
I MAKE bold to presume that the Theosophical
Society, founded in New York in 1875 by H. P.
Blavatsky and Colonel Olcott, with Sections in 49 coun-
tries throughout the world and numbering well over
30,000 members speaking all the principal languages
and belonging to every great Faith and some to no Faith
at all, may be regarded as a by no means negligible
influence in world affairs, and as an international body
the policies and principles of which will therefore have
a certain public interest.
On assuming, therefore, the office of President, in
the vacancy caused by the deeply regretted death of
Dr. Annie Besant, by the votes of a large majority of
the members of the Society, I feel I am justified in calling
attention to these policies and principles—splendidly
set forth as they have been for close on sixty years by
three successive world-figures in H. P. Blavatsky, Colonel
H. S. Olcott and Dr. Annie Besant.


For what does the Theosophical Society stand?
It stands for three specific principles:
First, for the recognition of the truth that the
brotherhood of life is universal and all-inclusive, be the
differences in form or in growth what they may, and
for the putting of such recognition into increasingly
effective practice.
Second, for the free search for truth irrespective
of all inhibitions imposed by conventional dogmas,
doctrines and orthodoxies, and specifically to seek truth
in the great religions of the world so as to help to restore
to these their essential function of unifying and not of
disintegrating, into which error the ignorance of man
has led them.
Third, for adventuring forth into the unknown to
seek and find truth in hitherto unexplored regions of
consciousness.
Thus, the Theosophical Society stands for a positive
goodwill irrespective of all outer differences, be these of
faith, or race, or nationality, or custom, or opinion: for
an ardour for truth breaking asunder its many imprison-
ments and distortions born of man s ignorance: for a
spirit of venturesomeness into the unknown so that truth
may grow from more to more.
The greater leaders of the Theosophical Society
have ever been breakers of bondages and heralds of
freedom, not in the name of the Theosophical Society,
for the Society’s principle of all-inclusive brotherhood
does not permit it to be committed to any specific inter-
pretation of brotherhood or to any specific activity in
the name of brotherhood. But they worked and fought
as Theosophists, and under the inspiration of Theosophy.


H. P. Blavatsky helped to break the bondages of
materialism, both in science and in religion, and in her
masterpiece The Secret Doctrine lifted the whole con-
ception of life out of a narrow anthropomorphism into
a wondrous Plan of spiritual unfoldment moving for-
ward to unimaginable heights of glory. Colonel Olcott
stressed the practical application of the vistas disclosed
by his great colleague, and specifically aroused the then
lethargic Buddhist Faith into new life and self-respect.
Dr. Annie Besant brought the light of her own great
spiritual experience to bear upon the work of H. P.
Blavatsky and focussed the fruits in a very remarkable
series of books and pamphlets. Furthermore, she applied
her individual realization of Theosophy to the enfran-
chisement of life in many departments—in religion, in
education, in politics, in social life, compelling the
respectful attention of the world by her ceaseless devo-
tion, her insight and her fearlessness. Dr, Besant, like
H. P. Blavatsky and Colonel Olcott, has left upon her
generation the imperishable mark of the influence of
a great Theosophist, And no less a mark has been left
upon the world by her colleague C. W. Leadbeater—
one of those rare personages who from time to time
cause the light of hidden Truth to shine amidst the
almost impenetrable darkness of human blindness,
generally to their own relentless persecution and
intolerant rejection on the part of those who have neither
the ears to hear nor the eyes to see.
Any student of the achievements of members of
the Theosophical Society during the past sixty years,
and of the influence of the science of Theosophy upon
the world during the same period, is bound to concede
that Theosophy, the Theosophical Society, and many
of its members, have made a lasting impression upon


modern thought and movements. Because of these the
world is different, the world has grown, the world has
become more free.
What then is the work of Theosophists and of the
Theosophical Society in the world of to-day and of the
immediate future? To continue to spread the teachings
of H. P, Blavatsky and her pupils, more, I venture to
assert, in terms of their soul and spirit than in their
literal presentation. H. P, Blavatsky would have been
the last perso'n to expect any rigid subservience to the
letter of her pronouncements. She would have been
horrified to think that after her death she would become
to some a dogma, a creed, an acid test of Theosophical
orthodoxy, and that her books would be regarded as
ultimate and final revelations, as bibles, to doubt which
is nothing short of heresy and little short of blasphemy.
She gave as she heard from Those wiser than herself,
and as she knew from her own experience. And she
asked no more than that her statements should be
examined with an open and unprejudiced mind, and be
treated as marks on the chart of the mighty ocean of
life for the guidance of those who are eager to venture
forth upon it.
A great master mariner was H. P. Blavatsky, to
be heard with deep respect by all younger mariners.
Her writings indeed constitute the heart of Theosophy
as it exists in the outer world to-day. But other master
mariners are there who also have voyaged the ocean
of life, and whose charts most helpfully supplement and
elucidate that of the pioneer voyager herself.
Now what do these teachings tell us? What marks
does Theosophy make upon the chart of life?


1. That all life is essentially one and universal, be
its forms of manifestation what they may.
2. That the whole of life is within a great evolu-
tionary process whereby an infinite number and variety
of life-units move from lowliest unconsciousness, through
innumerable stages of unfoldment, to heights of self-
consciousness of ever-increasing splendour.
3. That this movement is ceaseless and irresistible,
under beneficent and immutable law, order and purpose.
4. That world and individual circumstances, pros-
perity and depression, war and peace, pleasure and
pain, joy and suffering, health and disease, good fortune
and ill fortune—all are signs of the evolutionary process
at work under such beneficent and immutable law, order
and purpose.
5. That each life-unit has the freedom to hasten
or to retard the movement of its own evolutionary
process: to hasten it by understanding and fulfilling the
law, to retard it by ignorance and by seeking to evade
the law.
In the greater Theosophical literature these funda-
mental principles are treated in all detail, so that the
struggles of life, the frustrations of life, the inexplica-
bilities of life, the seeming injustices of life, the apparent
aimlessness and futility of life, become intelligible,
reasonable, purposeful. Life becomes a great adventure.
Life becomes worth while. Life becomes wonderful
even in its drabness, its darkness, its apparent agonies
and despairs.
Surely, then, Theosophists and the Theosophical
Society must spread this precious key to life far and


wide; for the whole world, and every individual in it,
is face to face with problems, is hedged about with
problems, and seeks so vainly for the way out. And
there are two ways of spreading Theosophy—by demon-
strating in personal daily life the practical efficacy of
Theosophy, the way of example; by sending forth the
Truths of Theosophy garbed in forms congenial to those
who are desired to hear, the way of precept.
Theosophy is an expression of Truth Universal. It
has no exclusive appeal. It belongs alike to the votaries
of the various religions and no less to atheists and
agnostics. It has a message for the scientist, for the
philosopher, for the statesman, for the artist and
musician, for the worker, for the capitalist, for the priest,
for the teacher, for youth, for age. And very specially
has it hope for the hopeless, comfort for the afflicted,
strength for the weak. Theosophy has inspiration and
delight for every individual, no matter whether he be
young or old. And to the yoilng is offered a Theosophy
and a movement which will help them to express their
youth more happily because more wisely.
The Theosophical Society offers to the meditative
a Theosophy which will help to make their contempla-
tions deeper and more valuable. It offers to the active,
largely through the Theosophical Order of Service, a
Theosophy which will help to make their activity more
purposeful and vital. It offers to the devotee of a
Religion, of a Cause, or of a Person, a Theosophy which
will help to make his faith more real and glorious. It
offers to the worker a Theosophy which will help to
give him a sense of the noble worth of his work, and
to the capitalist a Theosophy which will help to give
him a sense of the magnificent power and sacredness of


his wealth. It offers to the artist a Theosophy which
will help him to ascend into ever-increasing heights of
artistic creativeness and insight. It offers to the states-
man and to the politician a Theosophy which will help
him to realize the fundamental nature of polity and the
essential principles governing all true statecraft and
political activity. It offers to the teacher a Theosophy
which will help him to realize what education really is
and the whence, how and whither of him who is
educated. It offers to the scientist a Theosophy which
will help him to realize the nature of that real and eternal
science whereby the worlds are formed and are ever
nourished and sustained.
And while Theosophy thus meets to serve all on
the many different roads on which they travel, yet is
it but one Theosophy, just as the different roads them-
selves converge upon one goal.
Is it not, then, worth your while to study this Theo-
sophy for which, perhaps, so much seems to be claimed,
yet which has brought happiness, peace, purpose, to
countless thousands throughout the world? And will
you approach it without prejudice, without preconcep-
tion derived from gossip or possible misrepresentation
in books and addresses? Theosophy comes to meet you
in no spirit of dogma, or of doctrine, or of creed, not
as some other religion or philosophy or science, not as
a setting forth of the imaginative vagaries of Blavatsky
or Besant or Leadbeater; but as an age-old science of
life rich in detailed application to life’s circumstances
and, if approached with a mind not cribbed, cabined or
confined by the orthodoxies and conventionalities of the
present age, almost uncannily effective in its simple
method of rendering the unintelligible clear and the
apparently useless clearly purposeful. It exchanges old


values for new, and thus makes life infinitely worth
living.
Theosophy asks you to examine, to study. It does
not ask you to believe or to accept on authority. But it
does ask you not to make up your mind in a hurry, nor
to assume that that which your mind does not conceive
nor understand cannot therefore be true. And it also
asks you to make up your mind for yourself, not to allow
it to be made up for you by somebody else, still less
by public opinion. Theosophy asks for fair play, for
then it will be able, in all probability, to give you won-
derful measure in return —by changing the whole of your
life for the better and for the happier.


Wholly Set up and Printed
in Australia by
W, J. CRYER & CO., LTD.,
Arnold Place - - Sydney




