

Inaugural Reunion.
OF MEMBBERS
PREVIOUS & PRESENT
OF THE
port phillip Pilots
FEBRUARY, 1918.


THE DEDICATION.
Hftcctionatelg Dedicated to all ersflMlots ot
tbc Service, wherever Cbeg mag be,
tail bo have left as tlbcir Memorial an
Enburlng IHamc tor jfearlesa Devotion
to Dutg anb personal Hlprisbtncss ; In
tbe ffervent Ibopc that tbc pilots of
tlobag, anb tbc pilots of will
Hinortbilg follow In tbelr jfootsteps.


THE FOREWORD.
The Idea of the Reunion has been “in the air’’ for
some years, and tentatively considered by various
secretaries and committees of the service without
any tangible result, due mainly to the conservative
ideas of the sailorman and dislike to innovation,
along with the natural diffidence of being associated
with a possible failure of the emprise, as, in the
event of success, all hands would have participated
in the resultant kudos; but if a frost occurred, the
consequent ridicule would be the lot and portion of
the organisers only.
It is well that the present General Committee ac-
cepted that risk; and that they seized the psycho-
logical moment Is evidenced by the fact that all avail-
able pilots, previous and present, cheerfully attended
the function, and were delighted with the success achieved
solely by their collective and enthusiastic co-operation.
The ’ matter was brought up In Committee by
Messrs. Fearon and Thomsett. and, after discussion,
was considered both feasible and highly desirable,
and a sub-committee, consisting of Messrs. Fearon,
Thomsett, and Robinson, was appointed to carry on.
So prompt and effective were their methods of
organisation that, within a week, the affair was a
matter of past history, and for the unqualified suc-
cess attained, the thanks of the Gentlemen of the
Service are due to the energetic committee for their
efficient organising powers, forethought, and atten-
tion to detail.
The meeting was presided over by Captain Mont Robin-
son, who, as the executive officer of the Service
occupied the honorable position of chairman, and,
owing to the complete harmony that prevailed, his
duties were very light; and, being ably supported
by vice-chairmen Captains A. F. Anthony and James
Fearon, the whole outfit went merrily from start to finish.
Aitkin and Rogers were in attendance (naturally),
and, while Charlie rove himself in as upstairs’ usher
of sorts, and the keeper of the collective hat and
coat of the mob, Tom took absolute charge of the
lower deck, and those who were privileged to witness
his masterly sweeping of ordinary traffic into the
lee scuppers, so as to preserve a clear gangway for
his own charges, and the loud and lordly announcings
of the various guests, considered this quite one of
the features of the evening.


THE COMMITTEE.
ARTHUR F. ANTHONY, Chairman.
WALTER McD. HIPGRAVB.
HAROLD W. C. THOMSETT.
ALEXANDER BREBNER.
JOHN PATERSON.
JAMES FBARON.
JAMES SMART.
WILLIAM FOULIS.
MONT. ROBINSON, Secretary.
SUB-COMMITTEE.
JAMES FEARON, Chairman.
HAROLD W. C. THOMSETT.
MONT. ROBINSON, Secretary.
THE INVITATION.
Williamstown, January 26, 1918.
Dear Old Friend, —
I am directed by the committee to write you to
attend a Reunion of Pilots, Previous and Present,
whereat the evergreen Past Masters of the Associa-
tion will be entertained at a quite informal dinner
by the present members'of the Service.
Pea soup is, of course a necessity, and, should
it be desired, a well-caulked round of salt horse will
also be provided, and there being none of the afore-
time burning questions or political items to discuss,
social harmony and good fellowship are assured.
Therefore, Brother, herein fail not, as no one but
your own good self can on this historic occasion fill
you bill.
Yours very sincerely,
The Secretary, Port Philip Pilots.


THE MUSTER.
Captain W. Dow
„ W. Liley
~ A. F. Anthony
„ A. Easton
„ W. McD. Hipgrave
~ M. Kol)inson
~ H. W. Thomsett
~ A. Brebner
„ J. Parry
„ J. Paterson
~ H. Joynt
„ D. Urquhart
„ F. Kendall
~ J. Fearon
„ J. Smart
~ J. McFerran
ON DUTY.
Captain G. Rose
~ C. Palmer
„ J. Rattey
~ J. Banks
„ W. Howard
~ B. R. Stewart
~ R. L. Instone
„ W. Foulis
„ A. Campbell
Commodore F. Tickell, C.M.G.
Captain J. Little
Jas. G. McKie, Esq.
Chas, F. Orr, Esq.
Geo. W. Lilley, Esq.
Captain J. H. Barber
~ C. J. Blanchard
~ L. Campbell
~ R. Dawes
~ D, Doughton
„ W. Bmmerson
„ J. Mitchell
„ H. Press
~ D. Russell
„ L. V. Schutt
„ J. L. Stalker
„ F. Strickland
„ R. Wills
ABSENT.
~ C. B. Blanchard
„ F. C. Burton
„ J, Craig
~ G. H. Dennis
„ A. McWilliam


THE MENU.
ALVINA SCOTCH BROTH.
“Rio Grande” and “Blow the Man Down.”
PEA SOUP A LA MAVIS.
“I Love to be a Sailor.”
BOILED SCHNAPPER ,OP THE RIP.
“Whisky for Me, Johnny” and “Shenandoah.’
SALT PIORSE EX-THE HAWK.
“The Captain of the Pinafore.”
SWANSPIT ROAST CHICKEN.
“Blow. Boys, Blow” and “Sally Brown.”
CORSAIR PICKLED PORK.
“Sailing, Sailing.”
VICTORIA SANDWICH.
“Ten Thousand Miles Away.”
SWASHWAV JELLY.
“When the Ship is Trim and Ready.”
LIGHTNING ICE CREAM,
“And the Land Lubbers Lying Down Below, Below.”
FRUIT. COFFEE.
“Just a Wee Deoch and Doris.”
THE TOAST.
The only toast arranged for was that of
“THE KING.”
The Chairman remarked in this connection that, as
loyal seamen one and all, and most of us members
of the Royal Navy, it was only fitting to thus pay
the customary honour to our King; but as for our-
selves, the pledging of healths was quite unnecessary,
as between colleagues and shipmates so long together
associated.


THE CHAIRMAN.
In opening the discussion after dinner, the Chair-
man, in the course of his remarks, said;
Gentlemen, —It is purely by the circumstance of
office that I find myself to-night occupying the proud
position of controlling this great and historic
gathering of the Brotherhood of Port Phillip Pilots.
The position is one of honour and responsibility,
and, as such, I recognise it, and will endeavour to
respond accordingly; and, as the Port Phillip pilots,
individually and collectively, have always been equal
to their obligations, so shall I to-night, with your
assistance, Gentlemen of The Service, endeavour to
fulfill the obligations devolving upon my exalted
position. (Hear, hear).
In the term, “Gentlemen of the Service,” I include
every pilot present here this evening—the man of
to day, the man of yesterday, or last week, or of any
time—ail on an equal footing, without any of the
ordinary distinctions as between guests and enter-
tainers, and by the authority of the chair, for this
evening, brothers all and “Gentlemen of The Service.”
(Applause).
Primarily, then, my brothers, is the obligation due
to our distinguished guests, whose presence here
to-night is an undoubted honour to The Service.
(Applause). At the same time, though perhaps in
a minor degree, it is also certain that each and every
individual guest is proud and happy in his long
association with and knowledge of the Port Phillip
Pilots. (Applause).
It is a tradition of the Service that we pilots are
all equal—equal in rank, equal in merit, and equal
also in privileges—without any individual or in-
vidious distinctions, other than, perhaps, a spasm of
early piety from an occasional brother—Captain
Strickland, to wit —(loud laughter), and to-night we
would enlarge that tradition, and extend to our
guests the courtesy of identifying them absolutely
with ourselves, and in place of any special recogni-
tion, rather would we allow them to “stand by” for
the early part of the watch, and when they have
absorbed the full flavour, the spirit and the tang of
this truly salt horse gathering, will they more
happily justify themselves and the occasion. (Applause).
We have now to consider the obligations due to
ourselves, which are so many that I can only touch


on one of them —the sentiment of this evening.
Here are we, a tried and proven body of experts,
men —every one of us —of mature age and sound
judgment, and perfectly well able to recognise and
appreciate the respective merits of each other and
ourselves; colleagues of many years association, who
have lived together, worked together, suffered
together, and, on supreme occasions, just as cheer-
fully quarrelled together—(laughter) —so that we do
nut require the proposing of toasts or the pledging of
healths to cement or emphasise in any way the bonds
of esteem and affection which exist amongst us —a
feeling ever present in The Service, but never so
manifest as it is this evening. (Applause). And
it may be, my brothers, in not earlier recognising
this sentiment we have been somewhat neglectful
of our common interest and obligation. (Hear, hear).
The composition and corporation of the Port
Phillip Pilot Service differs but little to day in usage
and practice from that of previous generations, and,
taking into consideration the changed conditions of
the Merchant Serviceyn general efficiency and value,
not at all. (Hear, hear). It has always been con-
sidered the blue riband of the Merchant Service, and
bears favourable comparison with the two aforetime
most exclusive and efficient pilot bodies in the world;
and these Mandarins of the Far Bast —the Taku
River pilots and the Bengal Rajahs of the Hugli—
have always been proud to recognise in their peers
the men of Port Phillip. (Applause).
In conclusion, Gentlemen of the Service, I would
remark that the pilots of the present day and genera-
tion have carefully preserved the traditions and
principles of the Service, and have faithfully and
well discharged the trust bequeathed by their pre-
decessors. While the watchword of previous generations
of pilots has ever been the honour and efficiency of
“The Service,” the men of the present who keep the
flag flying are equally zealous and watchful of those
interests, and I am happy in stating, and have every
confidence in the statement, that the self-same
honor and efficiency of The is to-day in
absolutely safe keeping in the charge of the present
generation of Port Phillip Pilots. (Applause).
I have much pleasure in calling upon the vice-
chairmen, Captains Anthony and Pearon, to support
my remarks.
THE CHAIRMAN.


CAPTAIN ANTHONY.
Mr. Chairman and Brothers of the Cloth, —I cannot
do belter than preface my remarks by quoting a few
words from the poet Longfellow—
“ Lives of great men all remind us
We can make our lives sublime,
And departing leave behind us
Footprints on the sands of time.”
Gentlemen, when I use this quotation, it is in-
tended to apply to the older pilots, whom we are
so pleased to see here this evening, and I believe
that I am making a perfectly true statement in
saying that the older pilots have left their footprints
on the sands of time. (Applause). Speaking for
the younger generation, I can say that the older
men have taught us, and that we have nothing to
learn further than they are capable of teaching.
(Hear, hear). They have taught us three things—do
.your take your turn, and face the music, what-
ever it is that comes along, and no one can teach
a pilot anything better than that. (Applause). I
feel proud to say that the present-day pilots will
see, as did the pilots in the past, that devotion to
duty is the main consideration, and that they will
faithfully and well observe it. (Hear, hear).
I deem it a great privilege to be here to personally
thank the older pilots for meeting us to-night,
although we know that they are always with us in
the spirit. Knowing the reputation that some of us
old birds have for being growlers and critics, I
wondered whether they would all be here to-night,
but am happy in stating that there was not one
refusal, hardly a criticism, and certainly no growl
from anyone. While on this subject, may I intro-
duce an old-time story that refers to the time when
our old friend, Captain Easton, and myself joined
the Service? Well do I remember him on this
occasion, smoking his old “gum-bucket”—'(laughter)
—under the lee of the weather cloth of the “Mavis.”
A certain senior pilot, whose name I shall not
mention, was in charge, and another senior came
on board and began to hand round remarks as to
the ability of the one in charge to do his job, and


criticised his various antecedents, with a very
vigorous opinion as to where he was ultimately
likely to go, but as soon as he got on board the first
thing he did was to shake hands in the most friendly
fashion; then they continued their previous remarks
some more. (Laughter).
Captain Easton remarked to me, “Do they always
do this?’’ and I replied, “It appears to be one of
their customs, but they are good friends all the
same.’’ (Laughter).
Of course, we pilots, past and present, have had
little differences at times, but we are delighted to
see the generous-hearted, noble response made by
our seniors to our invitation to-night; and I am sure
that I voice the opinion of every pilot when I say
that I sincerely hope that next year we shall all meet
again under equally pleasant conditions. (Applause).
CAPTAIN ANTHONY.


CAPTAIN FEARON.
Mr. Chairman, Brother Pilots and Visitors, —
Coming after two such elocutionists as the Chairman
and Captain Anthony, it is difficult for me to say-
very much beyond endorsing to the fullest extent
the previous sentiments.
Brother Anthony and I have had an occasional
row ourselves —(laughter)—but have always been
good friends before and after. No one is more
pleased than myself to see so many old comrades
round the festive board, and I do not think that
in any part of the British Empire, could be found
on the retired list a liner body of men —(applause)—
and I wonder why such good men should be
“scrapped” before their time. (Applause.) A ship-
owner will take the earnings of a ship as long as
the authorities give her a certificate. I do not see
why these men should not be allowed to continue
their work while they are able to do so. (Applause.)
You will not find better seamen in the whole Empire.
(Hear, hear.) Yet they are “scrapped” on account
of certain foolish regulations. I have watched those
old pilots from the time I entered the service. I
was looked upon as the baby when I joined I
learnt my points from them, and when one learns
all that they know, he is well-nigh perfect. (Ap-
plause.) I cannot do some of the things I have seen
the old hands do, and they are better men than some
of us who are in active service to-day. (Applause.)
Subsequent to the remarks of the Vice-Cha'rmen,
the Chairman stated that, having disposed of the
preliminaries, the decks were now cleared for action,
and they could “carry on” with the real business of
the evening. All being equal, it was difficult to de-
termine who should have the honor of firing the
first broadside, and, in according pride of place to
the juvenile patriarch on his right, Captain John
Henry Barber —(loud applause)—who was entitled
to be called the Father of the Service, all hands
would be delighted, as John Henry invariably had
the faculty of saying things well; and whether it
was “lee fore brace” on a dirty night, or any other
subject. It was always handled so well that there
was no room for subsequent argument. (Applause.)


CAPTAIN BARBER.
Capta : n Barber said : Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen, —Age
has its responsibilities. Age told mo some lime ago I had
to cease, and now age tells me I am responsible for
responding, on behalf of my comrades of the old
brigade, to this evening’s welcome. (Hear, hear.)
I would rather run a mile than make a speech; all
the same, I rise with pleasure to respond to the
many kind sentiments expressed with regard to the
old brigade. (Hear, hear.) I am in doubt as to
whether to make reply in the stereotyped fashion,
or run the risk of being charged with indulging in
levity that is not of the occasion.
Seriously, Gentlemen, I look upon this gathering as
one of the most epoch-making steps taken by the
Pilot Service since my knowledge of it. (Applause.)
It is a step that ought to live and grow, and I hope
to see it embodied in an annual function as long as
The Service remains. (Applause.)
I do not say anything about the fertile brain that
originated the scheme, but it is an honor, in which
we are all proud to participate. I think that an
Honor Board should be erected in the pilot office to
perpetuate the names of those who retire from The
Service, and I trust that those who are responsible
for this gathering will take the necessary action to
ensure the matter being carried into effect. (Hear,
hear.)
As the Chairman so well expressed it, we are old
comrades, brothers all. although in the past there
may have been some little differences of opinion,
and some estrangement between the older and the
younger pilots. I also once thought that the senior
men of my- time did not care too much for me;
then I became one of the old brigade myself, and
found the young ones on my back, as it were; then
they got on Easton’s back, and so it will go on to
the end. (Laughter and applause.)
But did any of you ever hear of a pilot receiving
a “send off”? Ido not know why it is. It is a case
of “The king is dead. Long live the king.” The
pilot is done, and out he goes—no further use and
little remembrance —and this condition of things
should not be, as, for one thing, it discourages the
retiring member from continuing his interest in The
Service. (Hear, hear.) I must also not forget that


we have a pensions’ fund, which the pilots who have
retired helped to build up, and are now living in
enjoyment of; and the -younger ones hope to also
share in that privilege by-and-bye. If you look
round you to-night, you will see abundant evidence
among the retired pilots of a vitality and mentality
which would make the old members of the Pilot
Board, who selected these men, rise up and shake
hands with themselves on their perspicacity in
choosing representatives of such vitality; and that
this diversified ability and virility is a power to
reckon with is plainly in evidence. Two retired
pilots are giving all their time to war service. (Hear,
hear.) Two others have entered into commercial
life in the city. Another has become an artist of
repute, and has done a great deal to embellish the
homes of those fortunate in securing his works.
Still another has joined the so-called world of sport,
and yet another became attached to the Bar —at any
rate, if it is not the bar, it Is justice. (Laughter.)
Shakespeare tells us about the stage, when the
man possesses “A fair, round belly, with good capon
lined.” (Laughter.) If some of you went to St.
Kilda, you would find old pilots answering to this
description, and there you would also get the “wise
saws” and “modern instances.” (Laughter and ap-
plause.) Everyone of these old pilots are worthy
of respect. About them one hears the remark: “They
were pilots.” “Well, pilots must be good fellows,”
is the usual comment. (Hear, hear.)
There is an old geometrical axiom that, if two
things are equal to a third, then they are equal to
each other. So we are all good fellows. That sen-
timent rules public opinion to a large extent. Now,
public opinion rules the Marine Board, and the
Marine Board rules the pilots. (Laughter.) So
the value of public opinion may be good for us.
Here I wish to speak, especially to the junior pilots,
about the discrepancy between the salaries and pen-
sions of pilots. If a pilot’s family has grown up
when he retires, it is not so bad, but if you are
bringing a boy up to a profession, you find that you
have to expend £IOO out of your £2OO pension on that
boy yearly. It means a very tight pinch. (Hear,
hear.) It behoves you to do your best to try and
increase that pension. (Applause.) lam not speak-
CAPTAIN BARBER.


ing from motives of self-interest, as, if the increase
comes, I shall then, no doubt, be numbered among
the slain. In the Government Service, a man classi-
fied equal to a pilot would receive a pension of £SOO
a year. (Hear, hear.) Now, in conclusion, I would
like to say how grateful I feel at the opportunity of
being present to-night, and to express the hope that
the kindness of our hosts will be reciprocated in
the best manner in which we can repay them.
(Applause.)
CAPTAIN LILEY.
Captain W. T. Liley, on being called upon by the
Chairman, said: Mr. Chairman and Old Comrades, —
I am very- pleased to associate myself with the re-
marks of our worthy old friend, Captain Barber. It
is very pleasant to me, and, no doubt, to the rest of
The Service, to have received this recognition to-
night. It was a happy inspiration on the part of the
Secretary and Committee, and I hope that, in the
future, we shall have a continuity of this gathering
of old pilots and old ship-mates, as are around the
table to-night. I have been associated with them
now for 26 years. I entered The Service as a
young man and worked with them. I know what
they have done in the past to hold The Service to-
gether, and what they have done to make The Ser-
vice what it is at present. lam sure that the newer
pilots are following in their footsteps, and doing
their best to hold The Service together. (Hear,
hear.) I know, as our worthy Chairman stated, that
the reputation we have among the Bengal and other
pilots is an excellent one. When I was in England,
I called upon the managers of the White Star Lines
and other shipping firms, and they all knew of the
high reputation of the Port Phillip pilots. (Hear,
hear.) These people held our men in great respect,
and I know that their reputation has extended to all
parts of the world. When we look around the board
and see so many old familiar faces, it makes one
feel glad that we are all here to-night. (Applause.)
I hope sincerely that we shall be here this time —or,
at least, some time —next year. I endorse all that
has been so ably said by the Chairman, the Vice-
Chairmen and my senior brother pilots. I thank you
very much indeed for the privilege extended to me
to-night. (Applause.)
CAPTAIN BARBER.


CAPTAIN MITCHELL.
In introducing Captain Mitchell, the Chairman
said: I wish to draw attention to the presence of
another distinguished brother, Captain James Mit-
chell. (Loud applause.) As you are aware, it is
not necessary to draw attention to this gentleman’s
presence. Whether it is here, or there, or elsewhere,
he is generally in evidence —(laughter)—and I would
specially remind you of that eventful period when
he controlled the destinies of The Service, and when
the word went forth through the city that the Honor-
able James was on the warpath, how the Cabinet of
the day disappeared into hiding, the Marine Board
held its breath, and the financial world sat up and
took notice, while this stormy petrel of r fhe Service
rampaged cheerlully alike through Acts of Parlia-
ment, Marine Board regulations, and financial law.
(Laughter and applause).
Captain Mitchell, on rising, said: Mr. Chairman
and Gentlemen, —I thought that I was highly com-
plimented on being asked to be present, but the
Chairman has overwhelmed me by giving more
credit in his humorous remarks than is really due
to me. I can only say that, in my day and genera-
tion as a pilot, I did what I could for The Service.
(Hear, hear.) I was simply one of twenty-four men
who constituted The Service at the time he refers to.
I found two companies in existence, each competing
with the other, although all good fellows. A reform
was, however, worked, and the Pilot Service is now
one. Other reforms were brought in, such as the
steam service in place of the sailing service; and
I had a little hand in these reforms, perhaps, but
alone could have brought about nothing. There
were differences of opinion in those days, too, and
there always will be among any body of men. lam
speaking of 33 years ago, and it is 18 years since I
left The Service; but my testimony is that, as a
whole, I have found the Port Phillip pilots a fine
body of men. (Hear, hear.) But we were largely
misunderstood for a long time. It meant solid ham-
mering away at the Marine Board, and as Mr. Lilley
knows, I was not afraid, as one of the pilots of that
day, to stand up in Collins-street and fight for The
Service. (Applause.) Though I'have been 18 years
out of The Service, I am still as eager as ever to


fight for it. lam no longer under any obligation to
any member of Parliament or any member of the
Marine Board, although they are my personal friends,
and know that I would not tell them anything un-
true or unreasonable about the Port Phillip pilots.
In the old days I never approached the late Mr.
James Service, or any other prominent man, without
a clean, true story to tell. I am glad, indeed, to be
the guest of those who place so much value on the
services of the old pilots, every one of whom had.
but one object in view, and that was that the Port
Phillip pilots should be known throughout the world
as true-goers. (Applause.) I join with Captain
Barber in urging the pilots of to-day to do all they
can to improve their pensions. I resigned my rights
when I went into business, but, for the sake of
others, I trust that, in due time, a reform will be
brought about. (Hear, hear.) There are one or
two burning questions to-day which should be looked
into, especially by the Marine Board members. Note
the effects of the war on the Port Phillip pilots. For
long years I worked to get the maximum remunera-
tion to pilots wiped out. It is high time that the
fees were based on the gross instead of the net
tonnage. This should be done without changing the
rate. (Hear, hear.) It is not too much to say that
the earnings of pilots should be doubled, as they
have been so seriously curtailed. Even in the days
of peace, the methods of trade and commerce on the
sea had already changed. Instead of two ships of,
say, 2000 tons coming to this port as formerly, one
vessel of, say, 4000 tons arrives, and the pilot gets
no more for the larger vessel. The steamer, Beltana,
of 11,000 tons, pays no more river pilotage than the
Glaucus, of 1500 tons. This question should be
taken up, and I would not cease the agitation until
the pilots received a much fairer deal than at
present. (Hear, hear.) Anything that I can do or
say to help the old Service, I shall gladly do. (Ap-
plause.) Many of our good men have gone on to
the warships and troopships to do their share for
the flag. We must all feel a great amount of esteem
for these men, because we find them running so
readily to do their duty. (Applause.) I could talk
about the old pilot service by the hour. I see Com.
modore F. Tickell and my old, esteemed friend, Mr.
CAPTAIN MITCHELL.


J. G. McKie, Secretary of the Marine Board, here
to-night. I have been associated with them for 30
years. My mind is filled with memories as I look
upon Captain Liley, Mr. Orr, Captain Little and
others. We are all growing old —(laughter)--but
still we are here to-night in good bodily health.
May it be God’s will to bless the Pilot Service, and
may we ail meet together again on another night
like this, (Loud applause.) I thank you very much
for year kind hospitality. (Applause.)
CAPTAIN EASTON.
On being called upon by the Chairman, Captain
Easton said: Friends, you all know I am not an
orator, and cannot say much when called on in this
quite unexpected manner. lam very pleased to
listen to the excellent and interesting speeches.
They are well meant; every word Is true. (Applause.)
I hope we shall all meet again some other night.
Thanks very much for your presence, and for giving
me the opportunity of being amongst you to-night.
(Applause.)
CAPTAIN MITCHELL.


CAPTAIN WILLS.
Introduced by Vice-Chairman Captain Anthony,
Captain R. Wills was received with applause, and,
on rising, said; You have not left anything for me
to say, and I shall at once proceed to say it.
(Laughter.) Captain Mitchell was very moderate
in everything he said referring to himself. (Hear,
hear.) He did not take half enough credit to him-
self for what he did on behalf of the Pilot Service.
I hope, Mr. Chairman, that a roster will be taken of
all persons present to-night, so that If this gathering
should be held annually we shall see who has passed
away and who remains. The history of the Pilot
Service is very wonderful reading. It would be
well if the pilots of to-day could get it from the
older pilots, and hand it down to posterity. It
commenced In 1841-42, when there were only six
pilots in The Service, and they used to board the
ships from inside the bay. The ships had to find
their way inside, and the pilots boarded them in
whale boats. After that they became licensed
pilots at an annual salary, and every man who
thought he could navigate a ship applied for a
licence. (Laughter.) About 30 or 40 men joined
The Service. It soon became plain that pilotage
was not paying. The Government was losing money,
and the pilots were forced into the resolve to buy
pilot schooners, and, as a sop to Cerberus, they were
given the entire pilotage of the port. They could
not make it pay, and it was thought that they would
be satisfied with all the fees. There were, I think,
seven or eight men interested in the schooners —The
Crossfire, The Corsair, The Rip, The Mavis and
others. When I joined in 1886 there were two com-
panies working, and each company was better than
the other. (Laughter.) The companies worked in
oppositioij, and much fun we had going out, I can
assure you. You would all have enjoyed the life
much better than the pilot’s life of to-day. Then it
was thought by some of the pilots, and a few agita-
tors in the commercial world, that we should enter
upon steam, and in 1898 it was suggested that we
should either build or buy steamers. There was
much difference of opinion among the pilots. All
sorts of old vessels were offered to us, but the pilots
took the advice of the nautical element of the
Marine Board, and, as we had refused to buy one


particular vessel, The Albert, we decided to build.
In 18S9 we began to put our money together. In
1900 we made a start, and the five best men in The
Service were selected as a building committee.
(Laughter.) I shall not name them, as some would
blush. (Laughter.)
A Voice: What about yourself?
Captain Wills: During that time the pilots put up
a record by holding 84 different meetings. (Laugh-
ter.) The steamer Victoria was built at a cost of
£23,800, or a little more. She was launched in 1901,
and we worked her in conjunction with one of the
schooners, but we found that we were worse off
than before, as the one steamer did all the work.
An agitation for a second steamer followed, and on
June 24th, 1903, the Alvina arrived from England,
with the late Captain Murray In charge. We pur-
chased her in England through an agency, and the
two pilot steamers have been working in conjunction
ever since. The old pilots just did their duty—the
best they could do —and they had a terrible uphill
fight. (Applause.) Everybody in the commercial
world thought that they were making too much
money, notwithstanding that their accounts were
before Parliament each year. It was thought that
the accounts were faked, and the Marine Board
thought so, too. There were Royal Commissions
and all sorts of different things, but when it was
laid down in pounds, shillings and pence, it was
found that the pilots had been telling the truth all
the time. As Captain Mitchell said, we had nothing
to hide. We were getting less than we were really
worth, and I say that now the pilots are getting less,
not only because it’s war time, but they were getting
less than they were worth before the war. Some-
times the work is very dangerous, and I say, without
fear of contradiction, that the Port Phillip sea pilots
should have £IOOO a year. (Applause.) The time
will come when the Marine Board and the commer-
cial world will see their full worth, and they will
get what they are entitled to. I am delighted to
be here to-night, as a member of the old Service, to
meet old pilots, because it tends to keep the old
comradeship up. (Applause.) It is a fine sight to
see Mr. McKie, Captain Orr, Captain Liley and
others united in making common cause, and much
CAPTAIN WILLS.


credit is due to those, from among whom the idea
of the gathering emanated.- Captain Press tried to
arrange such a gathering about two years ago, and
he got me to try and help. But now that others
have done it, I hope that it will be a regular annual
gathering.- I hope that you will-search'out the very
first records of the pilot service, and hand them
down for all time —(hear, hear) —and not take them
away, as many have done before you. You go into
a ready-made Service, with a ready-made superan-
nuation fund, with a good record, and you should
try and, leave it. as clean as you found it, and hand
down every historic document for the junior men
to pass along. (Hear, hear.) I shall be pleased
indeed to hand the records I possess of the pilot
Service from its inception, as I can, carry it down
very nearly until to-day. I thank you for the in-
vitation to come here to-night, and I trust that we
shall meet again on many occasions under equally
pleasant conditions. (Applause.)
CAPTAIN CAMPBELL.
On being introduced by Yice ; Chairman' Anthony,
who made cordial and affectionate reference to him,
Captain Campbell said: Mr. Chairman and Gentle-
men—Here’s another Scotsman. (Laughter.) I
wish to preface my remarks by saying that I am as
deaf as a doorpost. I haven’t heard a word you said-
to-night, but I endorse every sentence. (Loud laugh-
ter.) I have not been so pleased for many a day
as the day I got the invitation from my brother
pilots to attend here. This is a new reform, and
those who watch the signs of the times will say
that reforms for the - British seamen are coming
slowly, perhaps, but surely. The British sailor, from
the captain to the cabin boy, is coming into his own.
If we are true to ourselves and true to one another,
the grand old flag which has flown for a thousand
years, defying the battle arid the breeze, will fly for
a thousand years moref ’through the combined efforts
of the British merchant service and the old Navy.
(Applause.) I thank you for the kindly invitation
to be present to-night. It puts two or three years
on to my life to see those old gentlemen once again.
(Laughter.) I feel, with my black hair, when I see
CAPTAIN WILLS.


your grey beards, that I am still quite young. (Laugh-
ter.) As Robbie Burns said:—
“And there’s a hand, my trusty friend,
And gie’s a hand o’ thine,”
for it cheers me up to be here and meet you all
For Auld Lang Syne. (Applause.)
I am glad It is suggested that this gathering should
take place yearly. You see, I heard that. (Laugh-
ter.) I would like to throw out a suggestion that,
in twelve months’ time, if we are alive, the retired
pilots should return this compliment and entertain
the younger pilots.
The Younger Pilots: No! No!
Captain Campbell: I make the suggestion, and I
hope it will be considered.
And we’ll tak’ a right guld Willie Waught,
For Auld Lang Syne. (Applause.)
Let us also bear in mind these lines; —
“Life is mostly froth and bubble,
Two things stand like stone —
Kindness in another’s trouble.
Courage in your own.” (Applause.)
With these few remarks, I have much pleasure in
subscribing myself, yours truly. (Loud applause.)
CAPTAIN CAMPBELL.


CAPTAIN STRICKLAND.
Vice-Chairman Anthony, in introducing Captain
Strickland, said; We have known him for a long time
—known him well enough to have had rows with
him, and good times wth him as well —and we all
know what a good fellow he is in every department
of life. (Applause.)
Captain Strickland said: Mr. Chairman, —This re-
minds me of something. I was asked to speak at a
meeting six months ago, and as we were sitting round
the board, my neighbor remarked, audibly, “I sup-
pose that we shall have to listen to every fool
at the table.” (Laughter.) Well, you have asked
me to speak, and I shall do so. Every sailor tries
to do his best on every occasion. Sometimes he gets
there and sometimes he does not; but brotherly love
and good feeling encourage me to try and say some-
thing. Previous speakers have said all that there is
to say about the good days we have spent, past and
present. What is there to say except to touch on
sentiment? Sentiment is to-day keeping the grand
old flag flying in the old country, and many a good
man is laying down his life for it. (Applause).
Sentiment is the breathing odor of this meeting,
which, I hope, is the forerunner of many happy
gatherings, and I hope they will go on for years.
Let me give you one example of sentiment. I was
in the house of one of the old shellbacks, our dear
old friend, Davy Doughton—applause)—and the
room In which we stood was framed all round with
mementoes. He showed me all his service at sea,
neatly framed, and when I had gone through it all
I found that he had been everything from cabin boy
to captain, and that he can say:
For I am the cook and the captain bold.
And the mate of the Nancy brig;
The bo’sun tight and the midship mite,
And the crew of the captain’s gig.
(Laughter). I am sure that he deserves all the
success he has attained in after life. He put into
my hands a framed letter and said, “I value this
most of all.” It was a letter from your secretary. It
was a nice farewell. There was in it neither fulsome
flattery nor extravagant use of words, but such as
any man might accept with deep gratitude on going
out. (Applause). After I left the Service, after


being in it for 26 years, sometimes having the life of
every member in my hands, there was hot one mem-
ber who said, “Well, good-bye old Strickland. ’ You
were a sidy old devil' sometimes, but good luck to
you:'’ But I know now that you have repented.
(Hear, hear). In our day we did not do halt the
business you do. When you appoint a‘Secretary now
you have about 40 meetings, and there are three or
tour, candidates. When I had been in the Service for
about a fortnight two men got into an argument.
One, I think, was the then secretary. During, the
week a cab appeared outside the house door of the
secretary s opponent. It contained the-ark in which
-we kept the books of the Service. The cabman
bundled the ark on to that man’s verandah-, and so
he was appointed secretary. (Loud laughter). There
■was no such nonsense as voting.. (Laughter). I
remember that a .member of the Service was asked
to put. up for the secretaryship, A comrade said to
him,- ‘‘Do you know why they are asking you. to take
the position?” He replied, “I suppose it is because
some of the members wish me to be the secretary.”
“No,” was the answer. “It is because you are. the
biggest ■ fool'in the Service.”' (Loud laughter).
Gentlemen, I was that candidate. (Roars of laughter).
And the only man who came forward to help me was
the man who called me a fool. (Laughter).
You -will see that we had our happy moments in
those days. (Laughter). In those days a man would
bluff to get a ship, and be happy in doing it. If a
man, coming down on Sunday morning, was anxious
to get hack in the shortest possible time, he would
explain the matter to the next on turn, and the latter
would say, “Certainly, you deserve . the ship.”
(Laughter). And when there were nine men and
only seven bunks on the pilot ship, each would
politely offer the other a bunk, saying “If you
please!” (Laughter), They were good pilots in
those days. (Laughter). But all levity aside, I
thank you from the bottom of my heart. When a
man leaves the Pilot Service, he is sure to find
some old identity in the Marine Service who will
meet him and say, “Well, you have, I see, left the
Service. I am sorry to/see the Old men going out.”
You turn to. him and 'say, “I thank you for your
compliment, but I can say with every confidence,
that we have left better men behind.” (Applause).
CAPTAIN STRICKLAND.


The old pilots have done their duty, and I know that
those of the present day will do it in the future.
(Hear, hear). I endorse my friend’s suggestion that
the old pilots should give a return dinner, but I
would propose that it be in six months, so that this
annual gathering could go on. That would be better
still. As to increasing the pension for retired pilots,
Ido not know so much about it. You must remember
that, after this war, there are very strenuous times
ahead for us. We should conserve what reserves
we have, and look forward to the future, hoping that
all things will turn out well. (Loud applause).
CAPTAIN JOYNT.
Mr, Chairman, —This is most unexpected, and I
feel like a light draught “bluffer” in a heavy draught
ship, suddenly called on to take over unlooked-for
responsibilities. As one of the junior pilots in the
Service, I look upon this meeting with the older
pilots for the first time with great pleasure. I
recognise that we have learned a great deal from
them, and what they don’t know about the business
is not worth learning. (Hear, hear). We are carry-
ing the work along on their experience. (Hear,
hear). Captain Mitchell’s remarks should be taken
very much to heart, and the raising of pilotage rates
considered very carefully. Also the question of the
eyesight test should be brought to a head, other-
wise we are in for tribulation in reference to it. We
all have a strenuous annual eyesight test to go
through, and those who have had to undergo the
drops-in-the-eye business know this well. After this
operation the parting remark of the doctor is, “Avoid
trams or you may be run over, and don’t go to sea
for 24 hours.” Such remarks indicate the severity of
the test. When we join the Service, we enter with
good sight, and I consider that a much more
moderate test would meet all requirements. (Hear,
hear). I am also pleased that this great gathering
has at last taken place, and sincerely hope that it
will be held annually. (Applause).
CAPTAIN STRICKLAND.


CAPTAIN STALKER.
Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen, —I will just preface
my remarks by saying how pleased I am to see so
many old friends and to make acquaintance with so
many new ones. I am glad to think that, old and
young, we are all brothers. (Applause). I was
secretary of the Service when it was in companies.
(Applause). I was the first general secretary of the
Service, so that I can claim to know something of its
inward workings. I have served under one flag—
the British flag—all my life, and I served under the
pilot flag for 25 years. Long may these two flags
float. (Applause). I join in the hope that the Pilot
Service will always be able to keep its head above
water, financially and literally, and I thank you
yery much for the invitation to be present to-night.
(Applause).
CAPTAIN PRESS.
Admiral and Brother Officers, —I endorse every-
thing that has been said in praise of the Pilot Ser-
vice. I wish to say how very glad we old pilots are
to be here this evening, and I join in the hope that
this will be an annual gathering. I have talked
about such a gathering for four or five years, but
there seemed to be no response. I did not call the
younger pilots together, because I did not think that
oil and water would mix. lam very glad, however,
that it does. (Applause). After the eloquence which
has burst upo.n us to-night from the chairman and
others, it is difficult for me to say anything. I am
glad that I haven’t been in the company Strickland
has been keeping to learn such beautiful adjectives.
(Laughter). I remember one of my first experiences
in the Pilot Service. Stalker and I had to tramp the
banks of the Yarra, among a great many small
vessels, mostly Norwegian, with a petition to be
signed in favor of the Pilot Service. We met one
skipper who got fightable. He was anything but
complimentary. He was a big fellow, too, and could
have thrown us overboard. Fortunately, he under-
stood us at last. He thought that we were asking
him to sign a document against the Pilot Service.
This made him indignant, but when he understood
he would have taken us in his arms. I am glad that
the members of the Pilot Service do not work for a


living. A horse works for a living, but a man works
because it is bis duty to do so, and because God
intended him to work. (Hear, hear). And he bene-
fits other creatures in doing so. Sometimes, when
it is raining hard and blowing hard, and the only
thing I can do is to kneel down and pray for my
brother pilots who are nobly doing their duty,
thoughts come into my mind of Kipling’s great
poem:
When earth’s last picture is painted,
And the tubes are all twisted and dried;
W T hen the oldest colors have faded.
And the youngest critic has died,
We shall rest, and, faith, we shall need it —
Lie down for an aeon or two —
Till the Master of all good workmen
Shall put us to work anew;
And those that were good shall be happy,
They ’ shall sit in a golden chair,
They shall splash on a ten-league canvas,
With brushes of comet’s hair.
And they shall find real saints to draw from —
Magdalene, Peter and Paul;
And they shall work for an age at a sitting,
And never be tired at all.
And only the Master shall praise us,
And only the Master shall blame;
And no one shall work for money.
And no one shall work for fame;
But each for the joy of the working,
And each in his separate star.
Shall draw the Thing as he sees it,
For the God of Things as They are.
(Loud applause). Now, I take it that the Pilot
Service is working for the good of other people, for
the good of the community, and I am glad that, in
these days, they have no political battles to fight.
I remember when our friend. Wills, was before the
Pilot Board, and they were going to reduce our
salaries, and he showed them very conclusively that
we were not getting as much nett as they though we
did. 1 think it was the last time they wished to
reduce our salaries, and I am glad I was there to
assist in fighting for the rights of the pilots. (Hear,
hear). About three weeks ago, while turning over
some old papers, I came across the history of the
CAPTAIN PRESS.


Pilot Service, and I remembered that some were
put away in the cupboards of the. Service. These
are things which should be cherishtd. (Hear, hear).
When I first entered the Pilot Service—l believe
old Dan Organ was the first pilot of the lot —the
feelings between the pilots was not very good, and
I said that a better spirit should prevail. I tried
to get them together, but they said that it could not
be done. But they did come together, as we agreed
to amalgamate our finances, and we did so about two
years before the Pilot Board or the Marine Board
knew anything about it. I remember once seeing
with my mind’s eye a picture of an old hulk lying
on a mud bank. As I stood amid the scene of ruin
and decay, a beautiful bouquet of flowers dropped at
my feet. Another bunch of all colors fell, and still
another, until about a score fell. Suddenly they
burst into flames. Why were they sent there to be
destroyed? What did it portend? Suddenly I
descried a more beautiful bunch of flowers than all
the rest —white and pure—arise out of the ashes.
Then I heard a voice saying, “Those beautiful
flowers are the good deeds you have done. The bad
deeds are all destroyed.” It reminded me of the
pilots. We never really wrangled. We only said
what we thought of one another. (Laughter). My
sincere hope Is that the jewels of your lives —your
good deeds —will emerge from the fires of adversity,
and be, like the flowers I saw, white and pure, (Loud
applause).
CAPTAIN PRESS.


CAPTAIN THOMSETT.
Mr. Chairman, Seadogs All and Gentlemen—
(laughter),—As I look round the table, I feel that
mast of tire bold and worthy master mariners here
have a guilty conscience.
Voices: Whallor?
Captain T.homsett: Beacuse it’s a sure thing that all
pilots here at some time or other have stopped a
royal buntline with wire and rope yarns instead of
twine. (Laughter). When I went up for my
examination certificate, the late Captain Draper said
to me, “Well, young fellow, you have passed a very
good examination. You have passed the examina-
tion of the Port Phillip pilots. There is only one
thing for you to live up to, and that is, to.be. a real
pilot. (Hear, >hear). It was the proudest day of
my life when I was inade a pilot. I have lived a
Port. Phillip pilot, and I shall die a Port Phillip
pilot.” (Applause). Now, I consider that sentiment
very worthy: Once a pilot, always a pilot. , All I
would ask is that we, past, present.and future, will
retain that spirit of good fellowship—once a . pilot,
always, a pilot., (Applause).


ADMIRAL CRESSWELL.
At this juncture, the Chairman, in making allusion
to the guests and referring to absent shipmates, read
the following letter from Rear-Admiral Sir William
Creswell: —
Navy Office,
Melbourne, February 4, 1918.
Captain Mont. Robinson,
Williamstown.
My Dear Sir, —
Will you kindly express to the Pilots’ Association
my thanks for their very kind invitation to meet
them all to-night. I value it as a kind thought for
an old member of the sea profession, but perhaps
more so as evidence of that understanding, good
feeling and mutual dependence which this war has
shown exists between every branch of the sea world
under our flag.
I know that you will excuse my not being with
you to-night, for reasons too well known to need
stating here.
Hoping that you will have a very pleasant evening,
and wishing every success to your Association and
to pilots, past and present,
I remain, yours truly,
W. E. CRESWELL,
Rear Admiral.
The Chairman added that the absence of Sir William from
this gathering of old salts was a matter of regret to
us all, as he is an old and valued friend of the
Service, and, like ourselves, being a seaman of the
deep sea, we are naturally proud of his well-merited
honors and high administrative position on the
Naval Board. As you are all aware, it is by reason
of family bereavement that he is not present this
evening, and the Service to a man joins issue with
the admiral in his great sorrow.


CAPTAIN BLANCHARD.
The following letter was read from Capt. C. B.
Blanchard: —
Dawson-avenue, 4/2/18.
My Dear Robinson, —
I regret very much that I am prevented from meet-
ing my old comrades on this special occasion, the
reason being that my house has been flooded out by
yesterday’s storm, through the greater part of the
tiled roof being blown oway. As I said before, Xam
sorry to miss the chance of seeing my old ship-
mates, and ask you all to excuse my absence.
Always yours sincerely,
C. B. BLANCHARD.
The Chairman said; We regret very much the
absence of Charles Bickford, and condole with him
in his encounter with the recent southerly buster.
You are all aware of his varied abilities, which un-
doubtedly renders his absence a distinct loss to this
evening’s assembly.


The following two letters were received from
Captain F. C. Burton and Commander G, F. Dennis,
but too late for the meeting;
CAPTAIN BURTON.
“ Truong,”
Sandringham,
February 4, 1918.
Captain Robinson, Wiiliamstown.
Dear Sir,—
I regret exceedingly that I have been prevented
from accepting the kind invitation to the reunion
of old shipmates at Carlyon’s. Trusting you will
have a pleasant and enjoyable evening, and that you
all get safely under weigh.
Yours truly,
P. C. BURTON.
COMMANDER DENNIS.
“Bendigonia,”
Alfred Square, St, Hilda,
February 4, 1918,
Dear, Sirs, —
Owing to a recent bereavement in my family’s
connections, I deeply regret that I am unable to
accept your kind offer to join my old associates in
the proposed reunion.
However, please accept my thanks for your re-
membrance of an “old salt,” and feel assured that,
although I cannot be w'ith you in the flesh, I shall
be with you in spirit.
Trusting that the harmony and good fellowship
which is ever characteristic of our cult will pre-
dominate at your social gathering.
Yours fraternally,
GEORGE F. DENNIS.


COMMODORE TICKELL.
In the regrettable absence of the admiral, stated the
Chairman, the next in turn who might favor ns with
a few words is another old sea dog and firm friend.
Commodore Tickell —(applause) —whose aforetime
knowledge of the pilots has been increased since the
war, and by coming into closer touch with them in
Ms high administrative capacity In connection with
the Naval Board and the Examination Service, he
is in a position to recognise the value of their ser-
vices, and to realise (which the public does not) the
sacrifices the pilots have made tor the nation. (Hear,
hear).
Commodore Tickell said: Mr. Chairman, Brother
Seamen and Other Gentlemen, —Although I am not
a Port Phillip pilot, I can claim a close association
with that Service since my boyhood, and now that
I am passing into the sere and yellow leaf, I realise
more fully than ever what an honorable association
is that of the pilots. They are good seamen and
true men. But I never knew until to-night that they
included so many fine orators. (Hear, hear, and
laughter). One of the speakers said that sentiment
was a very great factor in our lives. So it Is.
(Hear, hear). But there is another factor which Is
equally good. That is tradition. (Hear, hear).
Tradition is largely guiding the Royal Navy to-day
in doing Its work, together with the Mercantile
Marine, (Applause). A gathering such as this Is
a step in the right direction, and I hove certainly heard
more to-night about the Pilot Service than ever I
knew before. It Is all most interesting to me. One
thing in particular connected with the Service has
been briefly alluded to by your chairman, and that
Is the work of the Pilot Service for the naval forces.
At the present time they are part of the naval
forces. (Loud applause). While we are sitting
hero, we are apt to forget, as all Melbourne probably
forgets, that the pilots are faithfully doing their
duty outside the Heads —keeping the enemy from
coming within our gates. (Applause). The pilots
have done this wmrk practically since the commence-
of the war without fee. It Is greatly to their
credit. It is of Immense assistance to the navy to
feel that we have men so competent to fill such an
important position. What man is so competent to
tell whether a ship Is friendly or hostile as a pilot?


I wish to bear testimony to the good work the Pilot
Service has done up to the present. (Hear, hear.)
I thank you very heartily for your kindness in in-
viting me here to-night. I came from the merchant
service, and you are all seamen of the merchant
service here to-night. I have been in the navy nearly
30 years, and am still proud to belong to the mer-
chant service. (Applause.) lam very glad to see
here to-night Captain Mitchell and Captain Liley,
old friends of the China seas, long before I thought
of going into the navy. As for Hr. McKle, I always
get a tremor when I look at him. The worst time
I ever passed was when I had to go before him to
get my certificate as second mate. (Laughter.)
Gentlemen, I thank you. (Applause.)
CAPTAIN HIPGRAVE.
On being introduced by the Chairman, Captain
Hipgrave was received with applause, and said: Mr.
Chairman and Gentlemen, —After all the eloquent
speeches we have heard to-night, there is very little
for me to say, except to refer to the remarks of
Captain Barber about the pension fund. If he had
been with us during the last few months, he would
have found that there was no earthly hope of in-
creasing payments to the fund at present. We have
been through a very unsatisfactory year fr >m that
point of view, but I am proud to say we have kept
the flag flying—(hear, hear) —and, although we may
have even more strenuous times ahead, we intend to
still keep it flying. (Applause.) As regards thii gather-
ing to-night, I have long maintained that there should
be some little recognition of the pilots when they
retire from The Service. They say “good-bye” as
they go down the gangway for the last time, and
perhaps we do not see them again for years. I
am proud to think that this gathering to-night is
one of the steps towards the recognition of a fact
we should never have lost sight of, and that is that
those who retire from The Service are not leaving
us forever. (Applause.) When I go out of The
Service, I certainly should like some little souvenir
handed to me that I can look upon when I am selling
peanuts in my old age. (Laughter.) I thank you
for the privilege of being here to-night, and I hope
that, this gathering together of the men of The Ser-
vice is but one of many to come. (Applause.)
COMMODORE TICKELL.


CAPTAIN EMMERSON.
Gentlemen,- —When I received the invitation to
come here to-night, I told Captain Robinson that I
thought it was a very good idea. One reason why
there were no reunions in the old days was because
there were no old pilots to ask. But within three or
four years many of us had retired, until in later
years there were no old pilots left in The Service.
Until this evening I had not seen Captain Campbell
since he retired from the active list. I have only
seen Captain Dawes once and Captain Press twice.
I meet some of them at the pensions’ office, which
is the scene of a big rush at the end of the month.
(Laughter.) lam very much obliged to you for the
invitation. I hope you will make this an annual
gathering, and that I shall live to be here again.
They told me a little while ago that I was going to
die, but, as you see, I am a long way from that, I
hope. (Applause.)
CAPTAIN DAWES.
Mr. Chairman, —I would like to say a few vords on
a subject I thought that somebody would say some-
thing about, in ‘connection with a body of men who
have greatly contributed to the past and present
prosperity of the Pilot Service, and to whom the
pilots are very much indebted. That body is re-
presented by Mr. McKie, its secretary, and I refer
to the Marine Board. (Applause.) Looking back
over the 32 years I was in The Service, I can honestly
say that the Pilot Service is very much indebted to
the Marine Board for the kindly and fatherly feeling
exhibited towards the pilots. I question very much
whether the Pilot Service would have been in its
present position of prosperity if it had not been
under the Marine Board, (Hear, hear.) I very
much doubt whether the changed control which is
contemplated would be of any advantage. I am
doubtful, if you are put under fresh government,
whether you won’t say; “We would rather have re-
mained as we were.” I have always had good treat-
ment from the members of the Marine Board. I
heartily reciprocate that kindly feeling towaids past
and present members, and I acknowledge the kind-
ness, assistance and benefit the pilots have received
from theta. (Applause.)


MR. McKIE.
In introducing Mr. McKie, the Chairman said that
the pilots, individually and collectively, owed a great
deal to the secretary of the Marine Board, whose
close acquaintance with The Service had been con-
tinuous lor so many years as to have become almost
legendary; and, whilst always watchful of their in-
terests, there is no doubt that he has always been
equally keen and prompt, departmentally, in dealing
with individual shortcomings. (Laughter.) And in
this - connection, and by virtue of office, he has the
distinction of being the only man in Australia privi-
leged to deal out stoush with impunity 'to the Port
Phillip pilots. (Laughter.) Apart from these
amenities, however, his advice and assistance, year
after year to the various secretaries in particular,
and The Service in general, constitute a debt of
gratitude which is fully recognised—'(hear, hear) —■
and when the secretary of the Marine Board does
retire from the honorable position ho has so long
and capably occupied, without doubt the “Gentlemen
of The Service,” previous and present, will arise
and accord him the honor that is his due. (Applause.)
Mr. McKie, in responding, said: Mr. Chairman and
Gentlemen, —I have but one regret to-night, and it is
that I do not possess the fluency of a Port Phillip
pilot with which to express myself. Therefore, I
pray that you will bear with me. I feel absolutely
embarrassed by the very kind remarks of our
worthy Chairman, but I wish you to accept my per-
sonal assurance that, in regard to any little services
I may have been able to render to the Port Phillip
pilots, individually or collectively, they have been
greatly exaggerated. I have been more or less
closely associated with the Port Phillip Pilot Service
from boyhood—actively for the last 30 years—and I
have grown up with its traditions, which I have al-
ways been as jealous of as any Individual member
of The Service. (Hear, hear.) Consequently, it has
always been “a labor of love” to in any way assist
pilots in the conduct of their business with the Board.
Your presence here to-night confirms the view that
it was a very happy inspiration which suggested a
reunion of previous and present pilots, and I can
only express the hope that the present occasion is
the precursor of others to follow. Personally, it


gives me the keenest pleasure to meet again those
who retired from The Service in earlier years, and,
though out of sight officially, they have not faded
from my memory. (Hear, hear.) There are others
whose retirement has been comparatively recent,
but one and all, with the exception of those physically
Incapacitated, would scorn any suggestion that they
could not perform pilotage duty to-day as well and
as skilfully as ever they did. (Hear, hear.) The
Port Phillip pilots, in the days of the pilot schooners,
built up a splendid reputation for skill and reliability,
and their proud boast was, I think, that thev would
always be found where they were wanted in all
weathers; and only those who know what it is to
pick up their pilot outside Port Phillip Heads on
a dirty night will fully appreciate all that means.
(Hear, hear.) So that every young member joining
The Service, whether it be the sea or harbor service,
has realised that he was under an obligation to main-
tain its traditions, and right well has he and his
successors done so. (Applause.) No matter what
changes may be looming ahead with regard to the
control of the Port Phillip Pilot Service, it is my
opinion that The Service will never be more efficient
than it is under the present system. (Hear, hear,
and applause.) One could dilate at length on many
interesting incidents in connection with The Service,
but, having respect for the behest that ’tis better
to be brief than tedious, I shall bring my remarks to
a close by reiterating the very great pleasure which
has been afforded me in meeting, In such happy as-
sociation, previous and present pilots, and for that
opportunity, Mr. Chairman, I thank you and your
brother pilots most sincerely. (Applause.)
CAPTAIN SMART.
Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen, —So much has
already been said that all I desire to add is that I
hope this will not be the last occasion on which we
shall meet together for such good purposes. My
wish to you all is; “Many happy returns of ♦he day.”
(Applause.)
MR. McKIE,


MR. ORR.
Mr. Orr said; My thanks are due to the Chairman
and members for their kind invitation. It is but an
additional instance of the kindness I have received
at the hands of the pilots since I was a boy. When
I was a youngster I spent my Christmas holidays on
the Corsair, and I can assure you it was a very
pleasant time. I was a continual visitor to the
pilots’ houses at all their festivities, and grew up
among the pilots’ families, so it is no wonder that
all my life, I have been interested in the Pilot Ser-
vice, Years before I was your representative on the
Board, no one fought harder for you than I did.
The arguments which I had with men in Melbourne
were innumerable, though I never expected then that
I would officially'have to represent you. I wish to
say also how very much Mr. McKie has supported
the interests of the Port Phillip Pilot Service in all
the troubles and controversies it has had. Pam per-
fectly certain that he has always been honest and
conscientious in his opinions; and when ,ie meets,
as he is doing to-night, the pilots, and hea v s what
their aspirations and aims are, and how they regard
their duty, he is enlightened. There is no question
in my mind but that his presence here to-night will
greatly help to smooth difficulties away on many a
future occasion. (Hear, hear.) You have heard
many good speeches to-night. I had no idea that
there was so much eloquence in the Pilot Service.
Reference has been made to the standard of the Port
Phillip Pilot Service. I ( do not look upon our old
friends here as the old pilots. I look beyond them
to those who have disappeared—those who laid the
foundations of the Pilot Service, and lifted it to a
standard which enabled the gentlemen pr isent to
step into the institutions they have stepped into.
(Applause.) I remember the old pilots, with bell
toppers and frock coats, going through Melbourne,
with as gentlemanly a manner and bearing as any
merchant in Melbourne. These were the men who
laid the foundations of the Port Phillip Pilot Service,
and when its history is recorded, a little credit should
be given to those grand old men who have passed
away. (Applause.)


CAPTAIN BREBNER.
lu supporting the remarks o£ Mr. Orr, Captain
Brebner said: Mr. Chairman, —My first voyage was
about 30 years ago, and one of my earliest recollec-
tions as a boy was of the pilot coming off from a
little schooner outside the Heads. I think it must
have been Captain Press and the old Plimsoll. I can-
not express the pleasure it affords me to meet you
here to-night under such pleasant circumstances, and
I hope we shall all meet again in the near future.
(Applause.)
CAPTAIN RUSSELL.
Captain Russell said: Mr. Chairman and Gentle-
men, —I felt that I would rather run than speak.
(Laughter.) lam in full agreement with what Cap-
tain Barber and others have said, and reiterate their
remarks. When I was asked what I thought of the
possibility of this reunion, I replied that it was a
splendid idea and worthy of everyone’s support, and
here I am in answer to your very kind inviration. I
have really enjoyed myself meeting all my old
friends, and I thank you very much for the pleasure
of being here to-night. (Applause.)


CAPTAIN LITTLE.
The Chairman said: We now come to Captain
Little, who, like ourselves, is an old salt, saturated
with the traditions of the sea, and being able to
understand the peculiar workings of the sailor’s
mind, is, therefore, a valued and trusty advocate in
his official position as a member of the Marine Board,
I had it in the back of my head to say something
further about Captain Little, but, as a member of the
Board, who, as it were, holds our destinies in the
hollow of his hands, perhaps it is better to permit
Captain Little to explain himself. (Laughter.)
Captain Little said: After all the eloquence we
have heard, Mr. Chairman, I thought I was going to
escape. (Laughter.) However, I can only ray what
the other speakers have enlarged upon, and expr«ss
the pleasure I feel at being here this evening, and
I cordially reiterate what has been said by Mr. Orr
and Mr. McKie, at the same time thanking jou most
heartily for giving me the opportunity to be hero to-
night. It is, in my opinion, a great idea to have
worked up a gathering like this, and a still greater
idea would be to hold it annually. (Applause.)


MR. LILLEY.
When calling upon Mr. Lilley, the Chairman said:
Among the last, but by no means least, of our valued
guests is Mr. G. W. Lilley—(applause)—one of the
oldest members of the Marine Board, and, by his
close association with the mercantile and financial
world, more particularly in underwriting, he has
been in a special position to follow the work of the
pilots and recognise the value of The Service. (Hear,
hear.) it is a distinct pleasure to me to mention
Mr. Lilley’s good offices, both as a member of the
Board publicly, and in his private capacity as a
founder and trustee of our reserve fund. (Hear,
hear.) He has been associated with pilots’ business
since the schooner days perhaps longer than he
can remember, and we are very glad indeed that he is
with us to-night. (Applause).
Mr. Lilley said: Mr. Chairman, —Like Captain
Russell, I do not claim to be a speaker. Personally,
I wish to thank you and the other members of the
Pilot Service for the compliment you have paid me in
asking me to be present to-night. I have been as-
sociated with the pilots for a great many years. 1
spent 15 years on the Marine Board, and my one
regret is that I retired. I wish that I had kept on it.
My association with my friends, the pilots, has been
of a very satisfactory nature. They are all picked
men, good and true, and The Service is constituted
of the best men in the mercantile marine. The
underwriters have the most implicit confidence in
the pilots of Victoria. We have always felt that our
interests are safe in their hands. (Applause.) We
have never considered what their remuneration
might be. The more they get the better we are
pleased. (Applause.) As long as we have the class
of men in the Pilot Service we have now, and have
had in the past, the interests of the underwriters
are in very safe hands. It is extremely pleasant for
me to see so many pilots of the past, as well as of
the present. lam especially pleased to see Captain
Wills, whom I knew when in my ’teens. As a cap-
tain he brought many vessels through strenuous
times. It has been a great pleasure to be associated
with such a man. I feel it an honor to be asked
here to-night to join in this gathering, and I hope


that it will be an annual one. We cannot be other-
wise than proud of our mercantile captains and our
mercantile service. In the whole of this great war
which is taking place, there has never been a cap-
tain or seaman who has refused to go to sea again
after their vessels have be'en torpedoed. (Applause.)
It show's that they represent one of the most honor-
able professions on the face of the earth. (Applause.)
CAPTAIN SCHUTT.
The Vice-Chairman called on Captain Schutt, wlm
said: Brother Pilots, —I am one of the oldest Vic-
torian pilots, as far as the Marine Board is con-
cerned, Captain Dow and myself being the first two
appointed, and to-day I could pass the examinations
just as I could 20 years ago. I hope that this gather-
ing will be held annually, and that we shall meet here
every year. I thank you very much. (Applause.)
CAPTAIN PATERSON.
Captain Paterson said: Mr. Chairman, —There is
really nothing left for me to say, and I can only en-
dorse the remarks already passed. I thank you all
for your presence, and I, too, hope that this will be
made an annual gathering. (Hear, hear.)
CAPTAIN BLANCHARD.
Gentlemen, —I am glad to be here to-night, al-
though I am one of the passed out brigade. I have
been all over the world as officer of a transport, but
they tell me my eyes are not good enough for work
in the river. I hope to meet you all again. (Ap-
plause.)
CAPTAIN KENDALL.
I think, Mr. Chairman, that, as I am only half a
pilot—'(laughter)—l am hardly privileged to speak
to so many seniors. I thank you for the invitation.
(Hear, hear.)
MR. LILLEY.


CAPTAIN MITCHELL.
The Chairman intimated at this stage that the
official business was concluded, hut that the Gentle-
men of The Service could carry on indefinitely if
they so chose, and Captain Mitchell brought forward
a fresh proposition, speaking to which he said:
Gentlemen, —I have a request to make, and this
inaugural meeting furnishes a fit and proper time
to make that request. Some pilots said to me a few
days ago; “It is a pity that, in the pilot office, there
are no photographs of the whole of the pilots, with
their names, together with the dates of entering and
leaving The Service.” I remarked that in Mrs.
Jaffert’s house there was a group photo, but of
pilots who had nearly all passed away. It might not
be of very much personal interest to the present
pilots, but it all forms part of the Pilot Service. I
think that I can appeal to all past pilots here to
make a beginning by presenting any photographs of
those who were in The Service prior to the present.
They would form a pleasing and valuable memento
of those who have gone from us. I feel sure that
Captain Press, Captain Barber, Captain Dawes and
others are in a position to obtain some photographs
of the pilots I allude to. I would like to see these
photographs placed in the pilot office. I gave Cap-
tain Anthony, the day before I left The Service,
enough history to write a dozen books. While we
have Captains Barber, Dawes, Stalker and others,
they will be glad to bring down the traditions of the
older men, and hand them as mementoes to the
younger men. I think that the pilots who have
gone out might make a beginning by presenting
their photographs to the Port Phillip Pilots’ Asso-
ciation. It will be hard to get all the photographs
we wish for now, but I know that a good few are
available. (Applause.)


Gentlemen—l rise to propose something which 1
think you will all be pleased to agree with. Every-
one has expressed himself pleased with this function,
and whoever originated it, we know who has carried
it out to such a successful issue. We know that
gentleman in his capacity as a pilot of experience
and knowledge, and we are glad to find him filling
another position ably, and to recognise him as a
fair sample of the men whom the Marine Board
have selected to fill the vacancies left by the out-
going pilots. The manner in which he has carried
out this function to-night entitles him to the best
wishes of everyone present, and I propose a vote of
thanks to our Chairman for the capable manner In
which he has organised this historic meeting and
carried it through. (Loud applause.)
THE AFTER-GLOW.
The remarks of Mr. Orr were endorsed by Vice-
Chairman Anthony, and the health of the Chairman
being metaphorically and musically honored, he made
a brief reply, in appreciation of the plaudits of the
Gentlemen of The Service, and the proceedings ter-
minated. The assembly subsequently broke up
into little mobs of mariners, indulging in old time
reminiscences and the final “Deoch and Doris”; but
long before eight bells everything was squared by
the lifts and braces, and all hands were under weigh
for home and beauty.
MR. ORR.


THE FLEET.
ANONYMA . . .. 1854
CORSAIR .. .. .. 1854
PROSPERING .. .. 1865
RIP .. .. .. 1867-
MAVIS .. .. .. 1874
HAWK .. .. .. 1889
VICTORIA .. .. 1901
ALVINA .. . . .. 1903


THE MEN.
Name. Date of Entry.
Caught, J. G. Jan. 24, 1851
Organ, D. Feb 1, 1851
Robertson, T. July 1, 1852
Draper, H. J. M. Sept. 1, 1852
McQueen, W. Oct. 30, 1852
Rich, R. J. Nov. 23, 1852
Kennedy, C. Dec. 2, 1852
Nicholson, J. Jan. 1, 1853
Hannah, T. Feb. 2, 1853
Nicholson, W. Feb. 5, 1853
Singleton, J. W. Feb. 5, 1853
Best, J. P. June 13, 1853
Evans, S. June 13, 1853
Williams, H. July 1, 1853
Redley, J. July 1, 1853
Leighton, J. G. July 1, 1853
Bower, G. M. July 20, 1853
Reed, H. July 21, 1853
Deane, J. Sept 1, 1853
Deane, F. W. Sept. 1, 1853
Neil, W, Sept. 1, 1853
Rockett, W. Sept. 1, 1853
Wauchope, A. Dec. 1, 1853
Jones, W. Feb. 15, 1854
Gaunsou, J. Mar. 11, 1854
Hansen, W. Mar. 11, 1854
Poole, J.
Cowley, C. C.
Tregurtha, J. B.
Liley, W. T.
Murrell, W.
MacPherson, J. May 12, 1859
MaoKenzie, J. Oct. 7, 1870
Rosevear, W.
Thomson, J. Feb. 13, 1869
Paxton, W. July 19, 1873
Gafford, T. Sept. 16, 1873
Loiseau, A. Sept. 16, 1873
Seal, T. E. Sept. 16, 1874
Barber, J. H. June 6, 1875
Blanchard, C. B. June 8, 1876
Maynard, J. B. Oct. 17, 1876
Devlin, C. R. Nov. 28, 1876
Dennis, G. F. Sept, 6. IS7S
Bevis, 6. Sept. 18, 1878
Dawes, R. Mar. 27, 1879
Liley, T, J. May 5, 1879
Neilson, F. J. June 28, 1880
Cairns, J. Feb. 1, 1881
Name. Date of Entry.
Stalker, J. L. July 18, 1881
Thurnall, E. Sept. 30, 1881
Press, H. June 1, 1883
Stewart, J. Dec. 21, 1883
Clayton, E. Jan. 28, 1884
Burton, F. C. Feb. 22, 1884
MoWilliam, A. June 6, 1884
Mclntosh, A. ' July 7, 1884
Craig, J. Feb. 16, 1885
Service, G. Mar. 6, 1885
Ashford, C. July 6, 1885
Mitchell, J. A. July 22, 1885
Emmerson, W. H. Ju1v23,1886
Wills, R. Aug. 28, 1886
Russell, D. Sept. 1 ', 1886
Bennett, J. Sept. 21, 1888
Dow, W. Oct 23, 1889
Schutt, L. J. D. Oct. 24, 1889
Strickland, F.W. Nov. 27, 1889
Stanford, F. H. Dec. 11, 1889
Doughton, D. Nov, 21, 1890
Campbell, L. B. April 8, 1892
Liley, W. T. July 8, 1892
Nicholson, H. July 9, 1892
Anthony, A. F. Oct. 30, 1900
Easton, A. Nov. 9, 1900
Fearon, J. Feb. 15, 1901
Bose, G. T. Sept. 25, 1902
Hipgrave, W. M. Oct. 2, 1902
Palmer, C. W, Feb. 28, 1905
Battey, J. Jan. 17, 1906
Robinson, M. May 6, 1907
Smart, J. June 24, 1907
McFerran, J. June 25, 1907
Blanchard, H. J. Aug. 1, 1907
Thomsett, H ,C. May 25, 1908
Brebner, A. M. May 25, 1909
Banks, J. July 28, 1909
Howard, W. E. Dec. 29, 1909
Parry, J. Jan. 24, 1910
Paterson, J. Sept. 8, 1910
Joynt, H. F. Nov. 7, 1910
Stewart, E. R. Dec. 29, 1910
Instone, R. L. Dec 30, 1910
Foulis, W. Feb. 21, 1911
Urquhart, D. K. Deo. 7, 1914
Campbell, A. July 27, 1916
Kendall, F. G. Mar. 14, 1917


THE SERVICE.
Although, of course, a Pilot Service of sorts existed
almost from the commencement of the colony’s
history, the year 1852 may be taken as the beginning
of the present organisation, known throughout the
deep sea as the Port Phillip Pilot Service.
During this year a staff of first-class pilots was
formed under Government supervision and salary,
with pension rights on retirement. However, in
1854 the Government of the day, becoming alarmed
at the loss entailed by the maintenance of the Ser-
vice under salaries, abolished that system, and com-
pelled the pilots to take over the plant and under-
take the business at their own risk and expense upon
the payment of pilotage fees alone. At this time
also the Pilot Board was formed, and the funds
placed under Government auditorship.
In lieu of the pensions promised under the previous
arrangement, power was also granted for the forma-
tion of a Sick and Superannuation Fund, which is
still in existence, and, like the Service, has also had
its vicissitudes and varying fortunes, perhaps its
most notable happening being the emWweiit of
a large sum of money—£9,ooo reported, and £14,000
suspected. Parliament some years later voted £4OOO
in partial compensation of the loss.
Somewhere Involved in this mystery was a well-
known Identity, who subsequently became a bitter
and unsparing critic of the Service; for by virtue
of its prestige and power there have always been
enemies and detractors in the offing, and the Service
has had some hard struggles at times in order to
preserve its rights and privileges; but invariably
emerged the man or men to deal with the
occasion, and so it will be to the end.
Also in our day and generation have we the per-
sistent enemy and unscrupulous detractor, who, for
several years past, has been quite busy in the futile
endeavor to bring the fair name and fame of the
Service into disrepute, and on this occasion the “foe
’within the gate” has Imparted a more than usual
bitterness to the debate by shooting at us, as it
were, with arrows feathered from our own quills.
Also in our day is the “Fund” in a parlous con-
dition, the heavy drain on its resources and meagre
payments causing it to be far from self-supporting.


which, in the near future, may render imperative a
re-adjustment of the polity of the corpus, and radical
alterations in payments and withdrawals.
To revert, however, to history. Rates in 1854 were
fixed at 1/3 per ton for sailing vessels, and 10U.
per ton for steamers, and the new regime, starting
with the “Anonyma” and “Corsair,” speedily won
its way in the estimation of shipmasters, and suc-
ceeded in establishing a reputation for vigilance and
efficiency second to none in the world, Port Phillip
being specially mentioned in the Admiralty records
and nautical publications of Europe and America as
a place where first-class pilots could always be
found.
In 1865 the “Anonyma” was totally lost whilst on
duty on the outside station, but fortunately without
loss of life.
The “Prosperine” succeeded, but being found un
suitable, gave way to the “Rip,” specially built at
St. Johns to the pilots’ orders. In 1873, the “Rip”
met with disaster whilst beating to sea in a heavy
gale, being struck by a heavy sea, and thrown on
her beam ends and dismasted, with the regrettable
loss of four lives, Pilot McKenzie and three seamen.
In 1874, the “Corsair,” whilst beating to sea to
take up the outside station, was driven ashore on
Point Nepean during a gale, and became a total
wreck, fortunately without any casualties.
The “Mavis” replaced the “Corsair,” and the two
companies “carried on” for some years longer under
their respective banners, amid keen rivalry, until
amalgamation was mooted. Again were the “M’s”
in evidence, and, primarily instigated by Mitchell,
aided and abetted by Mclntosh (which twain already
had arranged a financial pooling of sorts), when tho
Marine Board compelled the pilots jointly to commis-
sion a third schooner, the “Hawk,” the blend
and fusion became an accomplished fact, and The
Service settled down to a comparatively comfortable
and prosaic existence, prosaic by comparison with
the previous era of vim and excitement, when to
pirate openly on the high seas and shanghai one
another's ships had been the only “order of the
day.”
The next uproar was over the introduction of
steam, and, vide Captain Wills’ speech, the uproar
THE SERVICE.


continued during the 84 meetings considered neces-
sary by the pilots to evolve and commission the
“Victoria,” which was supplemented in 1903 by the
“Alvina,” and The Service bade a long and fond
farewell to the alleged “Good Old Schooner Days.”
The Pilot Board was abolished in 1888, and the
Pilot Service taken over by the Marine Board, under
whose beneficent control it has remained to the
present day, and long may It be so -for in the
opinion of the writer, the contemplated 7 change to
Government control would not be in the best in-
terests of The Service, as, sooner or later, the inert
policy of the majority of Government institutions
would inevitably ensue, and the morale and esprit
de corps which has ever been characteristic of The
Service would be submerged, and all individuality
lost in the common ruck of the Civil Service.
These fragmentary remarks, compiled from
various sources, merely indicate how, when amplified,
what an interesting history is that of The Service,
if related in its entirety, and it is a matter for sur-
prise tha.t someone or other of the versatile mem-
bers of the Old Brigade, duly conversant at first
hand with all its details, have not ere this taken
up the matter, and issued a comprehensive history
since its inception of the Port Phillip Pilot Service.
M.R., 1918.
THE SERVICE.


“For though from out our bourne of time and place.
The flood may hear me far;
I hope to meet my pilot face to face,
When I have crossed the bar.’’
Tennyson.
Bovver and Youn!r, Tv p.
