

INAUGURATION
of
Australian
War Memorial
at Canberra
Programme
ANZAC DAY, 1929


pOLLOWING the considered practice of the
Imperial War Graves Commission, which has
set the precedent for the Empire of not permitting
the name of any living person to appear on
memorials erected in honour of 'the sailors and
soldiers of the Empire who fell in the Great War,
the Board of Management of the Australian War
Memorial decided instead of having, as is customary
in connexion with the erection of public buildings
and monuments, a foundation stone, to substitute in
the War Memorial in Canberra a Commemorative
Stone.
This .Stone will, when the building is completed,
occupy a position at the entrance to the garden
court leading to the Hall of Memory, On it will
be inscribed the dates of inception and inauguration
and, later, of the completion of the Memorial.
The "ceremony with which the Memorial will
be inaugurated, while worthy of the occasion, will
be simpler and of less importance than that with
which the completion and opening of the Memorial
in a few years’ time will be celebrated.


Inauguration of the Australian War Memorial
at Canberra, Anzar Dag, 1929.
Programme.
(The ceremony will he broadcasted and amplified.)
10.40 a.m. —Boy Scouts, Girl Guides, Junior Red Cross, and
school-children in position.
10.43 a.m. —Royal Military College Guard of Honour with
Colour and Band, Royal Australian Naval Cadet-
Midshipmen, and R.M.C. Cadets not under arms
arrive. (March : “ R.M.C. March ” (Haydon).)
(As the Colour passes, men are requested to remove their hats.)
10.50 a.m. —Returned Soldiers (with four of their number in
uniform and armed, to act as sentries), led by
Canberra City Band, arrive. (March : “ Great Little
Army ” (Alford).*)
10.53 a.m. —Sentries posted at four corners of Commemorative
Stone. (Slow March : “ Scipio ” (Handel), Can-
berra City Band.) -
10.55 a.m. —Fantasia: “In Memoriam ” (Rimmer) (Canberra
City Band).
11.5 am.—His Excellency the Governor-General arrives.
Royal Salute.
His Excellency inspects the Guard of Honour,
Cadets, and Returned Soldiers. During the inspec-
tion the R.M.C. Band will play “ Duke of York.
* A march popular with the A.I.F. in France,


HYMN.
St. Anne. —C.M.
W. Croft, 1708.
“Lord, Thou hast been our refuge from one generation to another."
0 God, our help in ages past,
Our hope for years to come,
Our shelter from the stormy blast,
And our eternal home;
Beneath the shadow of Thy Throne
Thy Saints have dwelt secure ;
Sufficient is Thine Arm alone,
And our defence is sure.
Before the hills in order stood,
Or earth received her frame,
From everlasting Thou art God,
To endless years the Same.
A thousand ages in Thy sight
Are like an evening gone ;
Short as the watch that ends the night
Before the rising sun.
0 God, our help in ages past,
Our hope for years to come,
Be Thou our guard while troubles last,
And our eternal home. Amen.


11.10 a.m. —Hymn, “ 0 God, Our Help in Ages Past.”
The words and music are printed opposite. The opening bars wdl
be played over once by the Canberra City Band, after which the singing,
led by the Choir of the Canberra Musical Society, will commence.
Reading—Psalm 24.
The Chaplain-General, Methodist Denomination, Chaplain
(Ist Class) the Rev. A. T. Holden, C.8.E., 8.A., V.D.
Prayer for the Commemoration of the Fallen.
The Deputy for the Chaplain-General, Presbyterian Denomi-
nation, Chaplain (3rd Class) (Temp. Ist Class) the Rev.
D. Macrae Stewart.
0 Lord, Thou Lover of souls, Who through the mouth of Thy
Prophet of old hast declared that all souls are Thine : we thank Thee for
the brave and faithful dead, who have willingly laid down their lives on the
battlefields or succumbed to the perils of the deep or of the air. We bless
Thee for the dauntless courage of the sailors and soldiers of our Empire
who have fallen in the cause of truth and righteousness. In Thy Hands,
0 Father, we leave their departed spirits, for Thou hast redeemed them
through the blood of Thy dear Son. Grant us so to follow their good
example in faithfulness and endurance, even unto death, that we may
with them be found worthy of the crown of everlasting life, through the
merits of Jesus Christ, our Saviour, Amen.
The Lord’s Prayer —“ Our Father,” to be said by
all.
11.16 a.m. —The Right Honorable the Prime Minister invites
His Excellency to unveil the Commemorative Stone.
11.21 a.m. —His Excellency addresses the gathering and unveils
the Commemorative Stone.
11.27 a.m. —“ Stand Fast.”
“ Last Post.”
ONE MINUTE’S SILENCE.
“ Reveille.”
11.30 a.m. —His Excellency (as Commander-m-Chief) places a
wreath on the Stone.
The Federal President, R.5.5.1.L.A., on behalf of
the ex-service men and women of Australia, places
a wreath on the Stone.


11.31 a.m. —The Blessing.
The Deputy for the Chaplain-General, Anglican Denomina-
tion, Chaplain (4th Class) (Temp. Ist Class) the Right
Rev. the Bishop of Ballarat.
11.32 a.m. —National Anthem —to be sung by all.
“ God save our gracious King,
Long live our noble King,
God save the King !
Send him victorious,
Happy and glorious.
Long to reign over us :
God save the King ! ”
11.33 a.m. —His Excellency inspects the Boy Scouts, Girl
Guides and Junior Red Cross ; and departs.
11.33 a.m. —Guard of Honour and Cadets march off. (March :
“ R.M.C. March ” (Haydon).)
(As the Colour passes, men are requested to remove their hats.)
11.38 a.m. —Sentries withdrawn from Stone. (Slow March :
“ Scipio ” (Handel), Canberra City Band.)
11.40 a.m. —Returned Soldiers and Sentries march off, followed
by Boy Scouts, Girl Guides, and Junior Red
Cross. (March : “ Colonel Bogey ” (Alford),*
Canberra City Band.)
Inspection of Stone by the guests of the Common-
wealth Government, and by the public. Those
desirous of laying wreaths on the Stone may do so.
While the procession past the Stone is in progress,
the Canberra City Band will play “ Land of Hope
and Glory ” (Elgar).
“ They shall not grow old, as we that are left grow old ;
Age shall not weary them, nor the years condemn.
At the going down of the sun and in the morning
We will remember them.” — Laurence Binyon.
* A march popular with the A.I.F. in France.


THE AUSTRALIAN WAR MEMORIAL
AT CANBERRA.
The memorial of the Australians who died in the Great War consists by
Act of Parliament passed in 1925 of the collection of the war relics of the
Commonwealth, together with the building in which they will be preserved.
The relics include practically the whole of the documentary records of the
Australian forces which took part in the Great War, as well as the pictures,
photographs, models, and material relics in which the story of these Australians
is enshrined. The gathering of these relics at the front began early in 1917,
and the decision that this collection should form Australia’s war memorial was
[From a perspective drawing by E. L. Sodersteen.
AUSTRALIAN WAR MEMORIAL TO BE ERECTED
AT CANBERRA.
made by the Commonwealth Government on a suggestion from the front in
May, 1918, while the war was still in progress. Upon this decision being made
known to the troops, the building up of the collection in honour of their dead
comrades proceeded with great enthusiasm. Conceived on the actual battlefront,
born amid the thunder of the guns at Bullecourt, this memorial, raised by the
living members of the Australian forces to their fallen mates, grew with the
vicissitudes of battle in 1917 and 1918.
Since the war the Governments of Great Britain, sister-Dommions, and
the Allies have made valuable gifts. Great numbers of soldiers, and of wives,
parents, and others bereaved through the war, have also, as a tribute to the
dead, presented records and relics most precious to them and to the Australian
people.


The records will include a complete history not only of every unit, but also
of every man who served in the Australian forces, showing his period of service,
wounds, rank, promotion, and decorations.
This great collection is unique of its kind in that it constitutes not a general
museum portraying—much less glorifying—war, but a memorial conceived,
[From a perspective drawing by J. Crust.
The Garden Court looking towards the Hall of Memory, viewed from about the
position of the Commemorative Stone.
founded, and, from first to last, worked for by Australian sailors and soldiers
themselves in honour of their fallen comrades. The collection has in part been
displayed to the public, first in the Exhibition Building in Melbourne, where
in the course of two years it was seen by 800,000 visitors, and afterwards in
Sydney, where the attendances to date total one and a half million.


An architectural competition for a suitable design was launched in 1925.
Although a large number of excellent plans were submitted no award was made
as the adjudicators came to the conclusion that none of them could be carried
out for the sum allowed. Two of the competitors (Messrs. J. Crust and E. L.
Sodersteen, Ms.I.A.) who had shown great ability in handling the problem
were then invited to collaborate in preparing a fresh design capable of being
carried out for £250,000, the sum authorized by the Commonwealth Government.
An admirable scheme was in due course submitted by them and, after very
careful examination by the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works,
A SMALL-SCALE MODEL OF THE WAR MEMORIAL
BUILDING.
This view shows the Garden Court with reflecting pool, and the arcaded cloisters in
which will be inscribed the Roll of Honour.
guided by the advice of many experts, was accepted by the Federal Parliament.
The first instalment of the cost of the building was voted by Parliament In the
current financial year. The preparation of working drawings and other
preliminaries are now being undertaken, and It is expected the building will
be completed within three years.
The plan of the War Memorial building is so arranged that the visitor on
entering will receive a deep and lasting Impression. Immediately within the
entrance there will unfold itself a magnificent vista of the garden court rising in


tiers up to the Memorial’s crowning feature —the Hall of Memory—which will
be a finely-proportioned and dignified structure. The court will be flanked
on either side by the arcaded cloisters in which will be inscribed the names of
the dead. The garden court, containing ornamental trees, flowers, and shrubs,
will provide a suitable setting for the Australian Roll of Honour. Surrounding
this court will be grouped the galleries containing the memorial collection.
The Roll of Honour which will be inscribed on the walls of this sanctuary
will, it is estimated, comprise nearly 80,000 names. In determining who should
be included, the War Memorial Board has followed the very liberal interpretation
given by Parliament in the Repatriation Act to the term “ a member of the forces,”
and has also decided to include the names of Australians who died as a result
of enemy action while serving in the Merchant Navy. The Board will also
consider other individual cases which may come to its notice. The names will
be classified alphabetically under the towns or districts in Australia to which the
sailor or soldier belonged, and will be recorded without any addition whatsoever,
in order to mark the equal sacrifice made by every Australian who gave his life
for his country.
In the immortal words spoken 2,000 years ago over the dead soldiers of
another democracy —
“ They gave their lives. For that public gift they received a praise which
never ages and a tomb most glorious —not so much the tomb in which they lie,
but that in which their fame survives, to be remembered for ever when occasion
comes for word or deed. *
* From the Funeral Oration of Pericles.


These laid the world away; poured out the red
Sweet wine of youth; gave up the years to be
Of work and joy, and that unhoped serene,
That men call age; and those who would have been.
Their sons, they gave, their immortality.
-rßupert Brooks


