

INAUGURAL ADDRESS
TO THE
Royal Society of New South Wales
DELIVERED 9TH .JULY, 1867.
(WITH AH APPENDIX.)
BY
THE REV.W. B. CLARRE, M.A„ F.G.S., &c.,
("Fellow of Si. Paul's College, Sydney.)
VICE-PRESIDENT.
SYDNEY:
1 BTNTKJ3 BY T. WHITE, WILLIAM STBE'RT,
1868


INAUGURAL ADDRESS
TO THE
Royal Society of New South Wales
DELIVERED 9TH JULY, 1867.
(WITH AN APPENDIX.)
BY
THE REV. W. B. CLARKE, M.A, F.G.S, &c.,
(Fellow of St. Pawl’s College, Sydney ,)
TICE* PRESIDENT.
SYDNEY:
PEINTED BY T. WHITE, WILLIAM STEEET,
1868


INAUGURAL ADDRESS.
1867.
Inaugural Address to the 'Royal Society, delivered at its first
meeting, 9th July, 1867, by the Rev. W. B. Clarice, M. A.,
F.G.S., Sfc., Vice-President.
G-entlejien of the Eoyal Society of New South Wales, —Before
I enter upon the more important portion of the Address which
I have been requested to deliver to-night, it appears to me only
an act of propriety to explain the circumstances under which
I have been selected for the duty which has thus been laid
upon me.
Naturally, it was anticipated that we should have the privilege
of listening to the more legitimate counsels of our Bight
Honorable President. Por myself, I can only express regret
that we shall be deprived of that privilege. The highly
cultivated taste and learning, the tact and accomplishment
which mark the public addresses of his Excellency Sir John
Young, will find but a sorry substitute in the more humble style


and simpler expression of thought that can now he brought to
bear upon the subject before me.
I regret this the more, because we are indebted to his
Excellency’s courtesy and kindly zeal in our behalf, for having
obtained for us from the Queen her Majesty’s gracious sanction
and authority to carry on our future labours under the Royal
patronage. And, in expressing my own regret, I feel assured
that I only utter the united sentiments of all here present.
On learning that his Excellency was unable to accede to the
the desire of the Council, an application was then made to the
Senior Vice-President, requesting him to undertake the duty of
opening the business of this Session. But here, again, we have
had to suffer disappointment. The claims of the Legislature
and of the high office of Chancellor of the University prevent
us receiving the advantage which the scientific tastes and
readiness to assist in the progress of social institutions, evidenced
during many years by the Hon. E. Deas Thomson, would have
conferred on our present objects.
In this emergency, the Council did me the honour of asking
me to fill the place which I had hoped would have been so much
more satisfactorily occupied.
I cannot, however, but be fully aware, that there are other
members of this Society who could, more efficiently than myself,
undertake what is proposed, and the Council can testify that I
have not been anxious to occupy so prominent a position.
But, Gentlemen, as your favour has annually during a period
of nine years assigned to me the honourable rank which I hold
on the roll of the Society, it might seem, if I refused under a
condition such as the present, that I exhibited a coldness and
indifference to your interests, which would be in striking
contrast with the readiness and diligence which, I trust, have
always characterised my previous relations with you.
To claim your indulgence therefore, for what I may think it
right to address to you on this occasion, respecting some
important matters affecting our future career, as well as in
relation to the past, will, I am convinced, be to obtain it,
although I do not venture to consider you responsible for the
opinions which I may be led to express.


The first suggestions which I would make are in relation to the
change of designation from “ Philosophical” to “ Eoyal Society”
of .New South Wales.
Some persons may not see any advantage in this change:
others may impute to its projectors some trifling ambition in
propounding it, and may think that no true man of science or
letters would desire to seek such a method of advancement as
depends on an alteration of the kind. I am, however, quite
sure that the advocates for the change had no such views as that.
Many members of the Society had long considered (and it
must be confessed, I went with them) that we had been in the
habit of admitting topics for discussion which cannot be con-
sidered as coming under tbe head of Philosophy. In our
proceedings, both by act and by sanction, we have frequently
ignored the title of the Society.
Its original Constitution provided that “ our meetings will he
open for the reception of contributions and the discussion of subjects
of every kind,” if “in accordance ivith our fundamental rules and
by-laws:” and it is stated in those rules, that “ the object of the
Society is to receive at its stated meetings, original papers on subjects
of Science, Art, literature, and Philosophy.” Further, in the
new rules that have been framed since the change of title, you
will find that that there is added ; “ and especially on such subjects
as tend to develop the Physical character of the Colony, and illus-
trate its Natural history and Productions.
It is certain, therefore, that in neither class of rules have the
founders or supporters of the Society really intended what,
strictly speaking, the term “ Philosophical Society” implies.
Such a Society must be understood to imply an association of
Philosopiherg, or one for the advancement of Philosophy; whereas,
hitherto that department of enquiry has never received any
recognition from us, and, perhaps, never will.
It is, also, quite clear that, whatever was actually intended
was something not embraced by Science, Art, or Literature; for
Philosophy was admitted as only one of a number of subjects
and, apparently, as the least prominent among them.
It is not necessary to suppose from this conclusion, that it is
intended by me to treat with undeserved disrespect any of the
pursuits that may engage the faculties of mankind. But it is


one thing to admire what may he exalted in Philosophy, and
another to admit it as a subject for discussion. It is one thing
to respect the method by which a logical argument is to be
maintained, and another to defend the introduction of investi-
gations which, however interesting, are often based on conjecture,
and are altogether speculative. We ought to be labouring for the
development of the Physical character of the country we live in,
and the illustration of its Natural History and Productions, since
this appears to be now admitted as the especial object of our
researches.
The title, therefore, which this Society has hitherto borne
(as well as many others of like hind in Europe) is a misnomer.
Few who assemble here would, perhaps, claim the rank of
Philosophers. Already wearied with the necessary occupations
of their daily life, many would prefer the relaxation of their
minds in less aspiring pursuits than in refined and difficult
inquiries as to final causes, or the structure of the human mind.
Already, perhaps, the word “ Philosophical” has tended rather
to the decrease than to the increase of our supporters. A dis-
cussion on a question which is capable of general comprehension,
or which hears on the relations of Colonial Industry, is certainly
more likely to gratify the public taste, at this early period of
our history, than deep meditation on such a pursuit as Seneca
describes, when he says of Philosophy : “ Animum format et
fabricat, vitam disponit , aotiones reft, agenda et omittenda demon-
strate a work which, in these days, is reserved for the Pulpit
rather than for the Lecture-room.
Nor, if we seek in later times for a character of Philosophy,
shall we meet with one which carries with it any high conviction
of its usefulness. Locke himself tells us ; “ a man may find an
infinite number of propositions, reasonings and conclusions in
books of Metaphysical school-divinity, and some sort of Natural
Philosophy; and, after all, know as little of God, .spirits, or
bodies, as he did before he set out.”
And, if we consult Mr. Lewes, who has devoted his whole life
to the study of Philosophy and has written a very able and
searching Biographical history of all its systems from the
beginning to the present tine, we shall find him declaring that
Philosophy is “ a Desert, whose only semblance ot vegetation is


a mirage—the Desert without fruit, without flower, without
habitation, and without horizon ; arid, trackless, silent, but vast
awful, and fascinating * adding, that “if we understand by
Philosophy what all Philosophers consider it, Metaphysics, then to
attempt to construct a science of Metaphysics is an impossi-
bility.” f
There can be no question that since the time of Bacon, this
definition of Philosophy is the true one.
Surely, then, the title, “ Philosophical Society,” has been very
suitably dispensed with : and there is a growing dislike to assume
such a title in the formation of Scientific societies at home.
The former systems of what was called Philosophy have now
passed away. Intellectual inquiry is pursuing a different
direction. It is not now the employment of the Schools of
learning to ascertain by the processes of ‘Logic those invisible
things which are beyond the attainment of reason, but rather to
make discoveries in things visible, hoping thus to obtain an
insight into that which mere Philosophy can never reach.
What risk may be run in even this method, may be in some
degree perceived by a careful perusal of the chapters “On the
objects of Physcial Science” in “Brown’s Lectures on the
Philosophy of the Human Mind,” in which, by the way, he quotes
a very witty illustration of the subject fromDe Fontenelle in his
work entitled Entretiens sur la pluralite des monies, (p. 12). “All
Philosophy, I tell you, is founded only on two things, upon the
fact that wo possess an inquisitive mind and bad eyes. For, if
you had better eyes than you have, you would distinctly see
whether the stars are suns, illuminating so many worlds, or
whether they are not; and if, on the other hand, you were less
inquisitive you would not care to know, which would come to the
same thing : but people wish to know more than they see —there
is the difficulty. Even if that which they see, they saw correctly,
something would so far be known; but they see quite the con-
trary of what really is. Thus the true Philosophers pass their
lives in not believing what they see and in trying to guess at what
they do not see, and this condition as it appears to me is not
very desirable.”
* Yol. IX, Page 224. t Vol. 111, Page 4-G.


He then goes on to imagine an assemblage at the opera, of
Philosophers, such as Pythagoras, Plato, Aristotle and those
gentry that made such a noise in his days, who watch the
stage operations, and look in vain for the contrivances by which
they are carried on. He imagines Phaeton to be flying across,
and then they discuss the mode of his motion, one advancing one
theory and another another, so introducing all the various
Philosophical guesses at what could be clearly seen, if they could
only get at the back of the scenes. And then he says “to see
Nature as she is, is merely to see behind the scenes of a theatre.”
His pupil, a certain Marchioness, remarks, —“ At this rate
Philosophy has become very mechanical.” To which Poutenelle
replies;—“ So mechanical that I think they will be soon ashamed
of it.”
Whether our expounders of the nature of things in the present
day will ever be ashamed of their speculations on what they
cannot see, or their interpretations of what they do see, must be
left for the progress of development; but we may be sure of this
that no human processes will ever discover answers to the grand
questions : —Whence came the w r orld ? What is the nature of
Grod ? What is the nature of the human mind ? Why is the
universe formed as it is ?
But, certainly, there is more ground to apprehend what is
useful to man in his present state of existence, by observation
and experiment, than in wild speculations and oftentimes incorrect
propositions, which are found to end more commonly in sceptical
than in theistic opinions. The present tendency of intellectual
inquiry is an acknowledgment that the old modes of philoso-
phising have becu found insufficient for the attainment of truth.
And, although, wo may perceive even in the new method, that
there is as much danger as in the schemes of metaphysicians,
yet, if we keep in mind the fact that the visible universe is
the creation of One whose existence and essence the old
philosophers vainly sought to discover, though these will ever be
“ past finding out to perfectionwe may by examining its visible
phenomena, arrive at a useful acquaintance with “ parts of His
ways,” and come to a clearer comprehension of some of His
attributes.


The term “ Scientific Association” would, therefore, have been
a better designation than Philosophical Society, as more suitable
to the spirit of the age; and if, instead of one pursuit alone,
which is the characteristic of a Geological, a Geographical, or an
Entomological Society it is intended to permit investigations of
the whole round of Physical Sciences (as this Society professes),
then a more general and comprehensive designation, suitable on
account of its undefined vagueness is an advantage. We cannot,
assuredly, obtain a better than that which, at the same time, gives
a sanction honourable to those who accept it.
This opinion is in agreement with the Report of a Committee
appointed by the Council, and presented for adoption on the 26th
July, 1805, to consider the propriety of the change of title.
To such as object to change, it may be said, that it will not
prevent our cultivation of Science, Art, or Literature, in that
“ spirit of Philosophy” which a celebrated writer has said “is
even more valuable than any limited acquirement of philosophy.
It need not, however, be pointed out, that the spirit in which
truth is sometimes sought for in the present age is anything but
philosophical; for having east off the darkness of the past, men
are sometimes found shutting their eyes against the only light
of truth which they already possess.
There is, I hope, no need for apology in venturing to remark
that there appears to me to be only one true Philosophy, that
which is given to and not elaborated by man —“ revealed,” to use
the words of Mr. Lewes,* who is not particularly bigoted in
favour of the supernatural—“ because inaccessible to Reason,
revealed and accepted by Faith, because Reason is utterly incom-
petent nor will this proposition be disputed by any here, that
if a Revelation of any kind has been given by the Creator, it will
in the end be found not in contradiction to the works of His
hand. And, although men may now be occupied in studying
what are called the Laws of Nature, if the fallacies which are
often uttered in relation to them, being as they are only the
mode of creative action, are abjured, the Positive Philosopher
will be led to see, that those very laws are not in opposition to,
but the expression of creative will. We have not entertained as
• Yol. 11, Page 223.


yet, and I hope we shall not entertain, at our meetings, any
discussions on such abstruse questions as these.
We have, then, done well in following the example of the learned
Societies of the sister Colonies. Let us now trace the coinci-
dences. The Eoyal Society of Victoria sprang from the Philoso-
phical Institute. The Eoyal Society of Tasmania rose on the
pedestal of that useful Association, the Tasmanian Society, having
adopted, for the addition “ of Van Diemen’s Land,” the more
euphonious and correct designation by which it is now known.
As a humble Corresponding Member of the latter, I hail with
pleasure, in the person of our present Treasurer, a late I ellow of
the same.
The Eoyal Society of Victoria did not, however, advance so
rapidly, per saltum, as did the Tasmanian Society. It went
through three stages before it became full fledged. I'or, the
Victorian Institute, the Philosophical Society of Victoria, and
the Philosophical Institute of Victoria, all lent their aid towards
the completion of the Society as it now exists.
Our own Society has had its changes also. At first, in the year
1821, it commenced as the “ Philosophical Society of Australia,”
a very lofty title for its dozen founders and members. It then,
in 1850, after a long interval of silence and inactivity, came out
as the “Australian Philosophical Society,” till in 1856, still
contracting its territorial limits, it became represented by the
“Philosophical Society of New South Wales,” merging itself in
that which now represents it, on the Ist May, 1866.
It has been said (an imputation to which I alluded before) that
some of our members aspire to follow the example of the sister
Society, and to assume the distinctive letters P.E.S. If that is
our ambition, it is not one of a very high order. We must win
our spurs before we wear them, waiting for a charter to confer
that by right which ought not to be assumed without authority.
Such a privilege, if it be supposed to confer any distinction (and
without that it would be valueless), ought not to be made depen-
dent on sufferance or merely on the payment of a guinea annual
subscription.
We are, and have been hitherto, only a small Association.
May I venture to add that, being small, it would be well if our
little hive contained only working bees; though, perhaps, our


Treasurer -will assert, that philosophical drones cannot be dis-
pensed with, since they bring in as much material support in one
way, as do those who are foraging in the fields of research.
Nevertheless, it is incumbent on all to consider, that if we are
supposed to gain by Eoyal recognition, we ought to be more than
ever careful not to accumulate pabulum for the public use which
may make Royalty ashamed of its patronage. The watchfulness
of the Council will generally prevent mistake in this respect;
and hitherto it may be allowed there has been no reason for the
exercise of interference on that account.
So far as the Society has been the means by which facts of an
interesting and useful kind have been collected, —so far as it has
assisted in the advancement of local hnoviledge it has done its
duty ; and no contributor has had ground for complaint as to the
reception which his individual endeavours have met with at the
hands of the Council.
Here it may not be amiss to put in a word of warning by way
of providing against the possibility of mischance.
We have now become a publishing Society, and it may be pru-
dent to have a provision inserted in our By-laws by which the
publication of Memoirs read before the Society shall be regulated,
so as to do justice, on the one hand, to the authors, and on the
other to the Society itself. This need not interfere with the
discretion which the Council ought to possess as to the admission
of what is to be read and discussed. Nor is such a regulation
uncalled for on another ground.
So long as our funds are limited, it is needful that all due
economy should be exercised The Government patronises Schools
of Arts and Mechanics’ Institutes at considerable cost to the
revenue, and supports also the Australian Museum; hut this
Society which is patronised and upheld by the Governor and
some high Officers of the Colony, receives no rtipend, such as
the Royal Society of Victoria has received for publication of its
Transactions. We are thrown entirely on our annual subscrip-
tions. It is, therefore, possible that the Council may be com-
pelled occasionally to deny to authors of valuable contributions
that which their ambition or their merits may claim, the full
publication of those contributions to which the authors themselves
contribute nothing beyond the annual guinea. It is possible to
B


obviate in part a difficulty of this kind by allowing Abstracts to
be inserted, when a memoir is too long or of too impracticable a
character. But in such a case the author should be permitted to
draw up his own Abstract, which would prevent distortion of his
views and opinions.
The first volume of our Transactions, published last year, was,
in consequence of the cost of printing, deprived of illustrations
which were actually required. The funds of the Society did not
admit of them. A change of Title will not prevent even the
dissolution of any Society which is indifferent to the condition
of its exchequer.
If, therefore, we desire to make progress, we must endeavour
to adjust the means of progression.
Dry as this discussion may be considered, it will, I hope be not
found unprofitable. We must look, Gentlemen, to the conse-
quences of our own acts.
The publication of our Transactions involves further consider-
ations of a financial character. We profess to exchange our
publications with those of other Societies, and we engage also to
admit ad eundem gradum, or by honorary election, members of
such Societies into our own ranks.
This is desirable on many accounts, and it is to be hoped the
University will ere long act on the same principle.
But we cannot carry out this arrangement properly whilst we
dwell in nuhibus. We require provision for a “ local habitation,”
as well as a “ name.” As at present constituted, we have no
quarters of our own. Men who aspire to have an influence on
Society ought not to be like Tartars or Gipsies, without a fixed
habitation. We have not even a moveable tabernacle of our own.
We assemble in rooms hired for the occasion. Now, if one of
those eminent strangers from other lands, with whom we are
anxious to be in social communication, come to this city—if he
seek the house of the Society, or its Library, or, what it ought to
have, its Museum—whither is he to be directed ? If other
Societies send us their publications in exchange, where are they
to be found by our own Members ? There are many books and
memoirs at this moment belonging to us—where are they ? Some
are, I believe, in the charge of our Associate the Curator of the
Australian Museum, but there are no regulations (such as apply


to the use of books belonging to the Trustees of that institution)
by which they can be obtained without risk of 10.-. s, and we have
no right to lay on the Curator work which it is not his to perform.
They should be catalogued and placed where they can easily be
found. What would be the compliment of enrolling visitors in a
“nomade” institution, with no “ locus in quo ” —no spot of earth
that it can call its own ? This evil is just as great to ourselves as
to others. It would be well if some remedy could be found for
it. If, after all, we must patronise some sort of phdosophy we
had better not select that of Diogenes, even though he had a tub
of his own.
From these remarks respecting our present state and future
prospects, we have now to turn our attention to the past. It
will be proper to start ab ovo.
It appears then, that in the year 1821, a company of gentlemen
consisting of
Alexander Berry, Esq.
Henry Grattan Douglas, Esq., M.D.
Barron Field, Esq., Judge of the Supreme Court.
Major Goulburn, Colonial Secretary.
Patrick Hill, Esq., Colonial Surgeon.
Captain Irwin. XI. Bengal N.I.
Captain P.P. King, E.N.
John Oxley, Esq., Surveyor-General.
Charles Stargard liumker, Esq., Astronomer; and
Edward Wolstonecraft, Esq.,
formed themselves into the Philosophical Society of Australasia,
under the presidency of His Excellency Sir Thomas Brisbane,
K.C.8., F.E.S.L., and E.
The only survivor of this group is Alexander Berry, Esq., still
a member and the patriarch of our Society, and who yet retains,
after a long and eventful life, much of the bodily vigour and all
the intelligence that characterised him so long ago. It is an in-
teresting fact, that, “ per varies casus per tot discrimina rerum
this Society retains at least one link, to bind the present with
the past, and which enables us to connect the scientific zeal of
those days with that of our own.
This early union appears to have partaken rather of the character
of a Mutual Friendly Association, than of that of a more formal


body. It was, in other words, a Scientific Club. At that time,
there were no public libraries and scarcely a bookseller’s shop in
the Colony; but the members possessed books of their own;
these were catalogued and lent by one to another, so that the
use of them was reciprocal. The business of the Society was
transacted at the dwelling-houses of the members in succession,
where memoirs, prepared on an alternative of a fine of ten pounds
sterling, were read and discussed, the only refreshment allowed
being a cup of coffee and a biscuit, an arrangement still in vogue,
I believe in England, and which was followed here in later times
at the meetings of our Society in 1855-6.
I have not been able to discover more than four of the papers
read by members, and these were preserved as a portion only of
the Society’s Transactions and edited by Judge Field in his
“ Geographical Memoirs of New South Wales by various hands,’’
published by John Murray, of Albemarle Street, in the year 1825.
These papers were the following:—
1. “ On the Aborigines of New Holland and Yan Diemen’s
Land,” by Baron Field, Esq., read 2nd January, 1822.
2. “ On the Geology of part of the Coast of New South Wales,”
(from the Elver Hunter to the Clyde), read in the same year by
Alexander Berry, Esq.
3. “ On the Astronomy of the Southern Hemisphere,” by Dr.
Eumker, read on the 13th March, 1822 ; and
4. “On the Maritime Geography of Australia,” by Captain
Philip Parker King, E.N., read 2nd October, 1822.
In Mr. Field’s book, there are also papers by Mr. Oxley, and
meteorological notices by Major Goulburn and Sir Thomas
Brisbane. We have evidence, therefore, that at least seven of
the twelve were working members.
Mr. Allan Cunningham, the Botanist (whose death I recollect
at the Botanical Gardens shortly after my arrival in 1839), also
contributed two papers, the one describing his traverse from
Bathurst to Liverpool Plains, in 1823 ; the other, “ On the Botany
of the Blue Mountains,” as observed in November and December,
1822.
As these last papers do not appear to have been read before
the Society, it is probable Mr. Cunningham was not a member
of it, JBut, without doubt, the actual members did good service


to the Colony. Of only one of their memoirs do I venture to
form an opinion, and that is one which I expressed in 1860, in
my hook on the Southern Gold Fields, in the following words: —
“ In the year 1822, my respected friend, Alexander Berry, Esq.,
read a very interesting paper on the geology of the Clyde Eiver,
before the Philosophical Society of xiustralasia. At that early
period, Mr. Berry had successfully made out all the prominent
features of the district, as well as along the coast, and has pointed
out the vertical strata of schist, the quartz, the trap, and the sand-
stone, with their order of succession. It gives me great satisfac-
tion to mention this.” (p. 45.)
Some of our members may have been unaware of the high
claims which Mr. Berry, on account of his talents, enterprise,
and acquirements, has on the respect of our Society. Probably,
very few of ourselves will equal him in his years of membership,
now amounting to nearly half a century.
The Philosophical Society which thus commenced with flatter-
ing promises of future usefulness, was destined to only a brief
period of service. A question arose between the Government
and some of the members which led to estrangement. The
friendly meetings became fewer, and the fictitious variable value
assigned to the dollar (the coin then current) was the cause of
breaking up the little band who cultivated science for the love of it.
Judge Field thus speaks of that mishap, in connection with
the seven memoirs before mentioned: “Such of them” (i.e. of
the several documents in his book) as are parts of the Transactions
of the Philosophical Society of Australasia are printed by per-
mission of their respective authors ; for, I am sorry to add, that
the infant Society soon expired in the baneful atmosphere of
distracted politics, which unhappily clouded the short adminis-
tration of its President, the present” (i.e. the then) “ Governor
of New South Wales. Let me hope that it is only a case of
suspended animation, and that our little Society will be resusci-
tated by the new Colonial Government.”
This, Gentlemen, is all of much importance that I have been
able to learn, after search in the publications of the period, and
converse with my venerable friend Mr. Berry. My late friend
Admiral King, did, however, inform me, that there were some
other little grievances, besides the proceedings of Major Goulburn,


which prevented the early resuscitation spoken of by Judge
Field. And I know personally that, at the time when the
Australian Society was projected, there was such a difference
between the gallant Admiral and the former Secretary as to pre-
vent cordial working in behalf of that Society.
One other fact requires to be noticed here. The erection of
the tablet of brass, which is affixed to Cape Solander, the southern
head of Botany Bay, was the act of the Philosophical Society.
The members —headed by their President, Sir Thomas Brisbane,
—made an unsuccessful attempt to cross the Heads on the 13th
March, 1822, but succeeded completely on the 20th March, in
affixing the tablet 25 feet above the sea level against the rock on
which Captain James Cook and Sir Joseph Banks first landed in
1770. And in the inscription itself it is expressly stated that the
transaction occurred “in the first year of the Philosophical
Society of Australasia.”
It will be recollected, that this was discussed in the public
journals not very long ago in connection with the names of Mr.
Berry and Dr. Douglass, when an attempt was make to do further
honour to the memory of Cook by the erection of a statue.
May it be asked, whether it would be unworthy of the present
Society to assist in the completion of what was begun by its
predecessor forty-five years ago ? Perhaps, it might be more
properly deferred till the centenary shall be complete, i. e., if our
Society be then in existence, three years hence or in a. d. 1870.
Incidentally referring to Judge Field’s volume, I find in it
many traces of the accomplishments of its Editor. His own
labours were not confined to the more scientific memoirs, but he
gives a narrative of voyages between England and New South
Wales, to and fro; Journals of excursions to the Blue Moun-
tains and to the Illawarra; a selection of poems, the “ First
Fruits of Australian Poetryand a brief Glossary of natural
productions. In reading these, I came upon the mention of a
fact which just at this time, when the flood of last month, which
raised the Nepean or Hawkesbury sixty feet above its level, is so
fresh in our memory, may be of use to speculators on the char-
acter of that visitation. The writer says, “It is this river
whether we call it Hawkesbury or Nepean, that is the Nile of
Botany Bay; for the land on its banks owes its fertility to the


floods which come down from the Blue Mountains, and which have
been known to swell the waters nearly a hundred feet above their
usual level; and these floods are uncertain and often destructive
of the growing crops. I once thought that Government (if it is
to farm at all) had better have kept the whole of this precarious
garden in its own hands ; since it is only public foresight that
would provide against the loss of a harvest, and only public
wealth that could support it.”
This was written in October, 1822. Mr. Wentworth also states
that in the early days of colonial history, the Nepean lias risen
97 feet. I merely add to these notices, hoping to incorporate
them and others in a paper on the subject which I propose read-
ing at no distant day, that a deposit of drift pebbles, the work of
ancient floods, has been traced by me on the low grounds and
heights bordering the river, and for 80 miles, varying in level
from the river bed to upwards of 400 and 700 feet above the sea,
and these pebbles have been dispersed by more modern inunda-
tions. The present floods are, therefore, not in great excess of
any former inundations.
To return now to our main subject. The interval between
1822 and 1856 was marked by a partial resuscitation of the Philo-
sophical under the name of the Australian Philosophical Society,
which was formed in the beginning of 1850, “ for the encourage-
ment of Arts, Sciences, Commerce, (otherwith Manufactures), and
Agriculture in Australia.”
Of this his Excellency Sir Charles Eitz Roy was Patron ; the
Honorable E. Deas Thomson, E.L.S., President; the Honor-
able, now Sir Charles Nicholson, Bart, then Speaker of the Legis-
lative Council, Vice-President. A Council was also appointed,
consisting of the following members :
Arthur a'Beckett, Esq.
Alexander Berry, Esq.
William Bland, Esq.
Rev. W. B. Clarke, M.A., E.G.S.
Charles Cowper, Esq., M.C.
G. K. Holden, Esq.
Rev. R. L. King, B.A.
Francis Merewether, Esq., B.A.
Sir T. L. Mitchell, Knt., Surveyor-General.


Dr. Shanks, Head of the Army Medical Staff.
Samuel Stutchbury, Esq., Mineralogical and Geological Sur-
veyor.
Rev. G. E. Turner, L.L.B.
E. G. Want, Esq.; with
E. A. A. Morehead, Esq., as Treasurer; and
H. G. Douglass, Esq., M.D., as Honorary Secretary,
to whom was afterwards attached the late A. Myles, Esq., In-
spector of Police. Dr. Douglass ought to have the chief credit
of the revival, though Ido not know to what extent. I remem-
ber that I attended the first meeting, and several afterwards. But
as in 1851, ’2, ’3, I was in the wilderness, exploring, I have only a
general dim recollection of what took place during that period.
As Mr. Douglass and Mr. Myles are no more, and Mr. Morehead
is in Europe, I have not been able to obtain access to the official
records of the Society, but I am informed by our Assistant
Secretary that some time before the death of Dr. Douglass, appli-
cation was made to him in reference to the records and papers ;
but they were not then in his possession, nor did he know what
had become of them. Mr. Morehead’s papers have also been
searched for in vain. Since then, from Mr. Catlett’s further
search in the newspapers, at my request, a few data have been
gleaned, which enable me to put on record now some of the pro-
ceedings.
The proposal to form an Australian Philosophical Society was
made in January, 1850 ; on the 24th January the Herald news-
paper introduced it by a leading article. Mr. A ortou wrote an
intended oration, which he published on the 11th February.
On 17th June, a paper by Sir T. L. Mitchell, “ On the Un-
developed Resources of the County of Cumberland,” was rend In-
Dr, Douglass, and some discussion ensued on “ dye woods,” and
“ on the fossil bones of the New Zealand Moa,” in which, 1 find,
1 took a considerable part.
On sth September, papers were read by Sir T. L. Mitchell, on
the natural fruits and grasses of the colony ; by Mr. C. Lowe, on
the “ Argonauta, or Paper Nautilus”; on the Alpaca; and by
Mr. Gee, on Dyes.
On 20th October, Mr. Edwin Hickey read “ Observations on
the alleged scarcity of Cedar in New South Wales.”


On lltli January, 1831, Sir T. L. Mitchell read his paper on
the “Bomerang propeller’' ; and on 23rd May, another “On
the connection between Science and Art in a new colony” ; which
■was followed by one “ On the application of machinery as a means
of saving hand labour,” by Mr. Capper.
There are notices of gold medals offered, to be adjudged in
1851, for the production of Madder, growth of Cotton, Metals
from Colonial ore, and Sugar. Whether these medals were ever
adjudged, does not appear.
Hor is it shown what became of the Society, though it is probable
its decay, after a period of great activity and intended usefulness,
was brought about in the first instance by the excitement of the
first rush to the gold-fields. The results of the labours that I
undertook in consequence for the Government, do not form part
of the work of the Society, but have been recorded elsewhere.
We come now to the period in which the Philosophical Society
was restored in the year 185 G ; and it is but an act of justice to
give the then Governor-General, Sir William T.-Denison, credit
for a very active share in its revival.
His Excellency became President, and the Hon. Sir Charles
Hicholson, and the Hon. B. Deas Thomson, Vice-Presidents.
But the first impulse was felt among the members of the Austra-
lian Society, who mot at the Royal Hotel, on 30fch July, 1855,
and resolved to remodel the Society under the territorial title of
Hew South Wales. The members of the Australian Society
passed over without re-election, and the former Secretary and
Treasurer were retained. The first meeting of the Philosophical
Society was held in the Lecture-room of the School of Arts, on
Friday, 9th May, 185(5. Other meetings were hold in this Hall,
and in the Sydney Chamber of Commerce at the Exchange.
From its commencement a minute book has been kept, and the
business of the Committee and of the monthly general meetings
has been recorded.
On the 19th December, 1860, the Society presented a Farewell
Address to the Governor-General, who on the 15th May, 1861,
was succeeded by our present Governor, the Eight Hon. Sir
John Touug, Bart.
From the commencement of Sir William Denison’s presidency
c


to this date, no less than eighty-three Monthly meetings have
been held, besides an occasional Conversazione.
And in addition to brief notices, there have been read upwards
of one hundred papers, some of considerable extent, by forty-two
Contributors.
For the sake of convenience, I have classified ninety-six of
them under the following sixteen distinctive heads; —
On subjects connected with No of papers.
1. Agriculture 1
2. Anatomy 5
3. Antiquities 2
4. Arts and Scientific Processes 5
5. Astronomy 12
6. Botany 2
7. Chemistry 5
8. Engineering (including Bail way s,Eoads, , 7
Telegraphy, &c 3
9. Exploration 4
10. Geology and Mining 9
11. Magnetism 2
12. Manufactures (including Sydney Milk) * 3
13. Mathematics 5
14. Meteorology 7
15. Natural History 9
16. Statistics 8
This list proves very clearly that the design of the Society has
been generally kept in view, for we find that Science, Art, and
Literature, have been represented, though Philosophy itself as
such, does not assert its existence, leading us to believe that
“Philosophical Society” was really a “ lucus anon lucendo ”
designation after all.
It is usual on such occasions as this, for the Annual Address
to contain a kind of abstract of the work done in the previous
year or years, or a discussion on some prominent memoir; but
having myself taken part in the contributions of the last two
* This -was a very curious enquiry, to trace the source of the water employed
in the adulteration of milk sold in Sydney, by the animalculte found
in it.


years, and on various other occasions, I consider myself properly
restrained from entering on criticism.
Some of our papers have found a place in the Volume of Trans-
actions, edited by our late Secretary, W. J. Stephens, Esq., who,
in making his selecton did his best, finding it impossible from
want of sufficient means to do more, and this has consumed three-
fourths of the fund accumulated in former years.
The volume wants an Introduction and Index, and also what
would have been useful, such a brief account of the Monthly and
Committee meetings as would keep the members acquainted with
the Secretary’s and the Council’s proceedings. Many useful and
interesting facts, not of sufficient importance for a separate
memoir, would be thus recorded. On the whole, it must be ad-
mitted that this volume proves the Society to be in working order.
Of the twenty-six papers selected, half, at least, are dedicated to
subjects expressly leading to develop “ the resources of Australia
and to illustrate its Natural History and productions,” the very
condition inserted in the fundamental rules of the Eoyal Society.
It would occupy too much time to-night to digress from these
business-like details to a notice of the progress of Art, Science,
and Literature beyond our own limits, otherwise I would have
desired to make mention of the many public Engineering works
which have been advanced during the last year; —the progress
of the Entomological Society, which though standing aloof from
combination with ourselves is doing very good work within the
range of our pursuits; the exertions of the Acclimatisation
Society; and the various Scientific matters brought under public
notice by the N. S. W. Commissioners of the Intercolonial and
International Exhibitions of 1867.
If time will not permit of such a disgression, much less can I
glance even at the various interesting topics with which the
Scientific Journals of the other hemisphere abound, and in which
some of our active members would find more engaging subjects
than those on which I have been compelled to enter this evening.
Before I conclude it will be proper to revert to them once
more. Eecalling, then, the facts which belong to the history of
this Society—(creditable as they are to it)—it is but rational to
ask, Why is the Society not in a more prosperous condition ?
Why, if it is as useful as it has been represented to be, is it now
so feeble in its vitality ?


It would not be right to close our present meeting without a
moment’s reflection on these allegations. An answer to these
questions ought to he obtainable.
One of our most critical members—l mean Christopher
Holiest on, Esq.—in a most valuable paper read on the 12th
December, 1866, “ On the Condition and Resources of the Colony’’
has shown very conclusively that, notwithstanding the fluctuations
and interruptions of public prosperity, the mass of the people
have continued to follow up their long-accustomed pursuits of
costly enjoyment without diminution of expense. It must not,
therefore, be asserted that our numbers have diminished because
persons are unable to spend a guinea a year to support or to
encourage such a Society as this. It is, then, to the want of "Will
to do so, that we must, in part at least, if not altogether, impute
the languishing state of our affairs.
But why should there be this want of Will P The true solution
is, perhaps, a complicated one.
In the pecular habit of the people there may be something of
indifference to anything not of a visible or personally gratifying
nature. It is to thousands a far more amusing employment, as
also not exercising the powers of mind, to witness the extrava-
gancies of the Stage, or to take part in the hilarities of the Ball-
room, than to listen to the revelations of Science or to the descrip-
tions of Physical phenomena. Others may stand aloof, because
no material benefit is supposed to be derivable to themselves, or
because there is no sufficient motive. Perhaps there are always
comparatively few in any community who cultivate knowledge for
its own sake. The masses prefer ease of mind and bodily indul-
gence, or such advantages in life as may be agreeable to them, to
abstract studies which are wearisome and do not offer any appre-
ciable reward.
Even where material pecuniary profits are in prospect, there is
the same objection sometimes perceived.
This conclusion has been to a certain' extent tested by the fact,
that the “Australian Society” was devoted to “Commerce (or
Manufactures) and Agriculture” as well as to Science and Arts.
That, at least, had intimate relations with the profitable employ-
ments of our fellow-colonists. The failure of that Society cannot,
therefore, be exclusively attributable to the abstruseness of sub


jects discussed, nor to want of sympathy with the direct advance-
ment of the community. A new Society solely devoted to Pastoral
and Agricultural pursuits has now been announced, and we shall
see how far it will succeed. Probably, it will not fare better than
the “ Agricultural aud Horticultural Society” of 1833, which in
later years was succeeded by another of the same kind.
Of the officers of that first Agricultural as of the first Philoso-
phical Society, the only survivor is Alexander Berry, then Mem-
ber of Council.
It is certain that we must not anticipate success for ourselves
from persons whose leisure is generally given to the frivolities of
ephemeral excitement, or whose mental occupation is only exercised
by sensational novels or a railway literature. An excellent judge
of this question not long ago, in the hearing of some here present,
pointed out to the students of the University, that under the
effects of undue attraction in a wrong direction, the knowledge of
History, Poetry, and Polite Literature which formerly character-
ised the young people of our fatherland is rarely to he found
among the rising generation of the present day. Such being the
case, it becomes necessary to create a taste for these things and
for higher pursuits, before we can expect that support which our
lucubrations may deserve.
There may be also still another difficulty in our way. Mankind
is gregarious, and clans are not confined to Kelts alone. General
society in all nations is made up of clans, or “ sets.” This kind
of segregation, is well known even in our English Universities and
leading Associations at home ; and it would not, therefore, be
surprising to find this influence in any gathering of men from the
mixed aud amalgamated diversities of a Colonial population. But,
if this influence has operated within the bounds of our limited
horizon, it is probably owing rather to the diffidence of one class
than to the arrogance of another. There are many persons in
this community who could materially serve the objects of our
Society if they would only lay aside a want of confidence and tell
us what they have discovered in the way of mechanical or other
practical arts which they cultivate with success. We ought all
to be animated with a mutual desire to add as much as we can
(even if the much be really very little) to the common stock of
knowledge. DissociationcanneverservethepurposeofAssociation.


And, if really it is the case that any distinctions are kept up in
this room which militate against the well-being of the Society, it
would be better for them to be laid aside, especially as no men
are so little likely to forget the established relations of life as
those, of whatever class, whose habits of thought have been
nurtured by acquaintance with the order, distinctions, separate
relations and combinations observable in nature.
It is, however, only just to recollect, that a jealousy of this
kind has had no sanction from any proceedings which have come
under observation. We can point with great satisfaction to the
fact, that if not Patron, her Majesty’s Eepresentative has always
been the President of our Society; that one at least of those high
officers of State has worked in common with us and has submitted
to us his own opinions for discussion; and that our present
Governor has frequently attended meetings where he has not been
always supported by the presence of those who ought to have
attended him ; and what is most significant, not one single contri-
bution has been received from any member of the Society whose
skill in art or mechanical contrivance would have gained him a
hearty welcome, even if he be otherwise little known in social life.
It has been considered right to say so much on an unwelcome
topic, in order to remove, if possible, a similar prejudice to that
which once occasioned injury to the Institution in whose Hall we
are now assembled, and which, if not met in a fair and candid
way, may do injury to our cause.
This prejudice cannot, however, have any bearing on the reserve
and distance of those highly educated men who, Members of
of British Universities and of contemporaneous Associations, might
have been supposed to have already gathered around a Society
of this kind, as the friendly encouragers, if not the active instru-
ments of its success.
Leaving these differences to follow their own course, it is to be
feared, from the indications furnished to us, that unless a new
spirit be infused, we must resign ourselves to the inevitable
destiny of an unpopular Institution.
This ought, nevertheless, not to paralyse the exertions of our-
selves in endeavouring to extend our field of usefulness; nor should
it deprive those who are attached to our designs, of the pleasure
which they themselves have found in turning their thoughts,


occasionally, for a time, from the every-day labours of professional
employment to objects of a higher and more ennobling kind.
Let no worker in this Association ever forget the words of Milton,
which I once before quoted in this room on a less public occasion
than the present—“ Let me fit audience find, though few !”
If this Society, as constituted, is doomed to experience no
great patronage and no universal sympathy, if the mass of those
whose intelligence and capabilities, sagacity and acquirements,
would be useful to us, prefer to withdraw from our fellowship, we
must he content to remain a small, but we may still hope, a zealous
body, anxious to turn to account for the public good such oppor-
tunities as may be afforded us.
Whilst not “wise above what is written,” but humble searchers
into the ways of Providence, we must be content to contemplate
and examine the material things which we are allowed to explore ;
and, with an earnest wish to discharge the important duty which
every man owes to his brother, we must, so far as in us lies, en-
deavour to point out that he also has his assigned position in the
Universe, since every thing proves design and skill and universal
goodness in the Creator, and nothing that is created is without
an appropriate use and office.
Keeping this in mind, we shall not go far astray. The theories
of such Philosophers as tell us, that “ the material heavens do not
declare the glory of God, but only the glory of Hipparchus,
Kepler, and Newton,” (which is the assertion of that Philosopher
of the present day whose system is praised as perfect,) will have
no influence on such as believe that man is not descended from
brutes to whom reason was not given, but was “ formed in the image
of God,” and will warn us against endeavouring to prove God to be
only the image of ourselves. These will admit that all our merely
human inquiries must in the end be found insufficient and vain,
because no finite mind can comprehend the Infinite mind or find
out God to perfection.
This being the aim of Philosophy, let us content ourselves with
less presumptuous objects. Let us perform our own proper work,
not caring whether we ever arrive at complete knowledge of the
methods by which the Universe was formed and perfected—by
which light is produced —how solid matter has resulted from
gases—how attraction and repulsion are mutually balanced —how


elementary substances proportionably combine —how the marvels
of crystallisation are brought about—or what is that light-
ning which we compel to bear our messages, as fleet as time
through the air and under the ocean —because these things
are beyond our grasp, and we cannot fathom with our scanty line
of intellect the unfathomable depths of the All-providing and the
All-wise. Our province lies on the outer boundaries of the region
to which only partial success is permitted, but where there is yet
sufficient to exercise our faculties and to occupy our attention.
Nor need we vex ourselves with the disputings of those who
affirm that the works of the Creator contradict His word.
If human Philosophy, as is averred by those who know it best,
is itself vain, leading nowhere but to antagonism with Theistic
doctrine, it will be of little purpose to have pursued its logical
processes except as an exercise of the mind, or as schooling it for
higher enterprises than such doubtful disputations. Applied in
another way they might be enabled to declare what we may
firmly believe is truth, that there may be found in the works of na-
ture by those who seek for it, a Hew revelation concordant with the
Old. This is, no doubt, denied by some eminent writers of this
time; e. g. Sir \V. Hamilton, but we may, nevertheless, be per-
mitted to believe it possible. A flood of light is streaming in
upon us from every quarter —discoveries in all the branches of
Physical Science, crowd upon us without reserve ; and at the same
time Traditionary history, and the records in which Antiquity
found its consolation and hope, arc being canvassed with an un-
sparing criticism that frequently puts “darkness for light and
light for darkness,” The Laws of Hature, as they arc called, are
set up as infallible and unchanging. And in this way the practical
duties of religion, as well as the time-honoured belief of man-
kind are put in danger of extinction. But the study of the
Universe, though it expands out views, ought also to limit our
speculations respecting it. It should teach us to await with
patience still further revelations of things concealed in the abysses
of Creation. And, although it may seem unfair to some to seek
illustration from such a source, yet, if we go to the writings of
One who was more than a match for the Philosophers of Greece,
we shall find that he declares the things seen are manifestations of
the Lmsecn, and by them he refutes the doctrines of such as


denied the personal agency of One Universal First Cause. The
fallacious reasonings relating to the Laws of Nature must event-
ually give way to a better system of interpretation than now
widely prevails; for even the author of the “ Vestiges of Creation”
admits that they are but “ the mode of action of the ever present
and sustaining God,” and one day, we need not doubt, these laws
will be understood as the expression of His will.
In adopting these views, and in expressing these opinions, there
is no intention to ignore the minutest facts that are brought for-
ward by observers, nor the significaney of the testimonies that
are being daily disentombed from the sepulchral archives of Time
and Nature. The question is not of the existence of phenomena,
such as those for instance which are made to bear on the epoch
of man’s appearance on the earth, but of the application of them.
Nor is there objection to the statement of arguments relating to
the Origin of Species, or the observations on which these argu-
ments are based. Yet we ought not to be accused of nervousness
as to the fate of Scripture, if we would wait for further evidences
or for wider ranges of experiment. It may servo to express more
clearly what is intended by these remarks, if we refer to the
striking words of the present Dean of Canterbury : —“ Nor has
the Bible any reason to fear the utmost activity and the furthest
extension of such pursuits. ¥e have been, lam persuaded, too
timid and anxious in this matttor. Lot research and inquiry be
carried forward in every direction and in a fearless spirit; and
when their results are most completely established and firmly
assured to us, then will it most undeniably bo found, that Creation,
Providence, and Revelation are the work of the same God : —then
will the plainest light be thrown on the meaning of Holy Scrip-
ture, on all points on which such research and inquiry bear.”
Should -we meet with difficulties in such inquiry, let us remember
the words of the great English reasoner, Bishop Butler, who
urges that “he who believes the Scriptures to have proceeded
from Him who is the Author of Nature, may well expect to find
the same sort of difficulties in them as are found in the constitution
of Nature.”
If from these testimonies of logical theologians we turn once
more to that of the Historian of Mental Philosophy, we shall be
reminded that the state of Philosophy is very much akin in one
D


respect to the state of Sectarianism, each sect refusing to admit
the doctrines of the rest. “Look,” he says, “at the state of
Philosophy. There is noonephilosophyuniversallyaccepted: there
are as many philosophies as there are speculative critics, almost
as many as there are professors. The dogmas of G-ermany are
held as the dreams of alchemists in England and Scotland ; the
psychology of Scotland is laughed at in Germany, and neglected
in England and Prance. Besides this general dissidence we see,
in Prance and Germany at least, great opposition between
Eeligion and Philosophy pronounced or openly signalised.”
Now hear his final conclusion; “ This opposition is inevitable ;
it lies in the very nature of philosophy.”*
Gentlemen, I have, I hope, now justified to you all I said of
the little benefit it was to us to remain as a mere Philosophical
Society.
In conclusion, whilst offering my apology for the length to
which this Address has extended, I would crave your further
patience for a few practical remarks.
We have seen that our province is not in the mysterious
labyrinth of mental speculation. We need not, therefore, trouble
ourselves with any questions of that class. We have before us
in this Colony a vast region, much of which is still untrodden
ground. We have, as it were, a new heaven for Astronomy and
a new earth for Geology. We have climatical conditions of the
Atmosphere, which are not to be viewed by us merely as pheno-
mena interesting to the Meteorologist. We have facts to accu-
mulate relating to Droughts and Floods which have a deep
financial and social importance. We have a superficial area
which may engage the attention of Surveyors, Agriculturists,
and Engineers for years to come. We have unrevealed magazines
of mineral wealth in which Chemists and Miners may find
employment for ages after we shall all have mingled with our
parent earth.
All that we have to trouble ourselves with, is the right inter-
pretation and development of these physical riches, so bountifully
spread around and beneath us for our investigation and use.
In such investigations there are rules which we should observe
and follow.
*Biogr. Hist, of Phil., iy., 246


We must strive to discern clearly, understand fully, and report
faithfully; to love truth in things physical as iu things moral; to
abjure hasty theories and unsupported conjectures ; where we are
in doubt, not to he positive ; to give our brother observer the same
measure of credit we take to ourselves ; not striving for mastery,
but leaving time for the formation of the judgment which will
inevitably be given, whether for or against us, by those who come
after us ; contented if we are able to add but one grain to that
enduring pyramid which is now in course of erection as the testi-
mony of Nature to the truth of Revelation.
If in this spirit we make progress, in this way our own mental
enjoyment will be increased.
It is a work not only suitable to a Society of humble-minded
men who profess to unite for this very end ; but, if carried on
earnestly, charitably, with simplicity and faithfulness, is one worthy
not only of Royal Patronage, but of Universal Encouragement.
APPENDIX.
NOTE A. (p. 13.)
The stoiy, as I have heard it, is this: —At a time when the want of coin
began to be felt in the colony, Governor King received a supply of copper coin
to the amount of £2,000. The half-penny was reckoned as a penny, and the
penny as twopence.
About this time some Spanish vessels were taken off the coasts of Chili and
Peru, having on board a considerable amount of dollars. They were brought
out here at the value of four shillings and twopence. Governor Brisbane ap-
plied for a man-of-war from England. In her, Admiral Blackwood sent out
a freight of his dollars to the amount of 30,000 or to the value of £30,000, X
do not know which.
Governor Umnhmt: had a piece punched out of each, which was called a
dump and was valued at one shilling and threepence; the dollar being reckoned
as jive shillings. Mr. Goulburn, who had received orders from home to re-
duce the expenditure of the colony, paid himself and other civilians with the


same dollars, valued at four shillings—the soldiers with similar coin valued as
worth four shillings andAwspence ; —and the public with the same, at the
value of five shillings, twl of these fictitiously valued dollars being considered
equivalent to a bushel of wheat which was sometimes received in those days as
payment in the absence of money.
The Government also made payment by store orders. These they consoli-
dated by orders on the Treasury at home* reckoning 86 per ssnti diaoount'.
Directions afterwards came out from home to nednss'it to- poll eant.
Goulbum was re-called and the late Alexander Maoleay, Esq., was sent out
in his stead.
The annoyances occasioned by these irregularities produced the disarrange-
ment of local friendships, as most of the members of the Society were involved
in pecuniary relations with the Government.
NOTE B.
The preceding Address was subjected to criticism (on the whole by no
means unfavourable to me) by a friendly writer in a leading daily journal,
who could not, I think, have carefully read my remarks ; since he refers to
what is said (in par. 2, page 3, and in par. 4, page 8) by stating as intended *
by the Royal Society what is repudiated by it. Now, it may be well to repeat
that it was the wish of some influential members of the Society when the
change of title was contemplated to put ou record their unwillingness to as-
sume a title, which might be likely in the present state of things, to be applied
improperly in some instances, and whicb if not generally applied would be
invidious.
The same writer proceeds to notice what is said in relation to the change
of title of the Society, and the use I make in the Address, of the word
‘ Philosophy.’ He remarks as follows:
“Were we disposed to be critical, we should remark that the Inaugural
Address might, with adrantage, hare bee a shortened. In our opinion, the
objects of the Society are as well expressed in the old as in the new denomi-
nation. Mr. Clarke seems to assume that philosophy has to do merely with
speculative investigations —with inquiries that are based upon conjecture.
But this cannot be accepted as correct. Philosophy is a general term denoting
an explanation of the reasons of things, or an investigation of all phenomena,
both of mind and matter. It is applied to every department of knowledge,
and, when applied to any particular department, to denote the collection of
general laws or principles under which all the subordinate phenomena or facts
relating to that subject are comprehended. Thus, for instance, we have moral
philosophy, mental philosophy, natural philosophy, and are therefore far from
considering the denomination, “ Philosophical,” to be at all at variance with
the intention of the founders, who provided that “their meetings should be
open for the reception of contributions and the discussion of subjects of all
kinds,” or of those who have since added, “and especially on such subjects
as tend to develop the physical character of the colony, and illustrate its
natural history and productions.” If the term were confined in its applica-
tion to metaphysics, which it was by the Greeks, whose philosophy was essen-
tially metaphysical, we should agree with Mr. Clarke ; but seeing that since
that period “philosophy has enlarged its bounds so as to include all physical
sciences as its lawful subjects” —the words are Lewes’s —the change of name
can scarcely be defended on the ground of inappropriateness. A society
which should have confined itself to a priori speculations would certainly
♦ *' The members are no longer*distinguished as members of the defunct association, but
as fellows of the lloyal Society oftiew South Wales."— S.ld.ll., Ist July, ISG7.


have received little favour from, or rendered little service to, a practical com-
munity such as this. But a Philosophical Society of earnest and reflective
men, under the Baconian banner, will advance to the achievement of con-
quests by means of the inductive system that shall give them a title to rank
as the friends and benefactors of their species.
These observations wc find to be in singular accordance with what La. Place
has said in his System of the World respecting learned societies. “ The chief
advantage of learned societies is the philosophical spirit to which they may be
expected to give birth, and which they cannot fail to diffuse over all the
various pursuits of the nations among whom they are established. The insu-
lated scholar may without dread abandon himself to the spirit of system ; he
hears the voice of contradiction only from afar. Eut in a learned society, the
collision of systematic opinions soon terminates in their common destruction •
while the desire of mutual conviction creates among the members a tacit com-
pact to admit nothing but the results of observation, or the conclusions of
mathematical reasoning. Accordingly, experience has shown how much these
experiments have contributed, since their origin, to the spread of true philoso-
phy. By setting the example of submitting everything to the examination of
a severe logic, they have dissipated the prejudices which had too long reigned
in the sciences, and which the strongest minds of the preceding centuries had
not been able to resist. They have constantly opposed to empiricism a mass
of knowledge, against which the errors adopted by the vulgar, with an en-
thusiasm which in former times would have perpetuated their empire, have
spent their force in vain. In a word, it has been in their bosoms that those
grand theories have been conceived which, although far exalted by their
generality above the reach of the multitude, are for this very reason entitled
to special encouragement from their innumerable applications to the pheno-
mena of nature and to the practice of the arts.”
I trust I shall be pardoned for a further explanation of my views. The
Address was no doubt long and could easily have been shortened ; but it was
not sufficiently long to introduce some quotations which would have antici-
pated the objections of the reviewer, and have supported the statements ob-
jected to. The words cited by him from La Peace, as to the “ philosophical
spirit ” of learned Societies, and which he considers me to have totally ignored
may be met by reference to paragraph 3, page 7, wherein the ‘ spirit* in
question is distinctly mentioned. Probably, the overlooking of this fact in-
duced in the writer’s mind the idea that my views are not clear as to what
‘ Philosophy* is now held to be, although I have quoted definitions of it freely
enough (page 5) and, it appears to me, with the greatest advantage to those
from whom I am constrained to differ in the application which they would
make of the Science of Philosophy, It would be folly to shut our eyes to the
fact, that we are living in an age, when the powers of human reason are being
devoted, in a degree never witnessed before, to a search after truth, i.e. what
really is. But of philosophers who adopt Metaphysics with the Greeks, or
ignore it with Mr. Lewes, or use with Comte what is called Positivism,
though they may attain to so much truth as reason is capable of —it may still
be asked, as the Roman Oovemor asked, what is truth / And it is quite pos-
sible to reject, even allowing to reason its fullest triumphs, just so much truth
as will prevent the discoveries arrived at, becoming a revelation, so to speak,
of truth, because as Mr. Lewes has candidly admitted, all so-called philosophy
finds the full truth inaccessible to reason alone. This view is set lorth in
page 7. It is further discernible towards the close of the Address,
(p. 24, 26,) and my only justification for entertaining it on the occasion was a
desire to express my own dissent from the opinion (whilst admitting as I do,
that the study of nature by observation, where observers are competent and
honest, is more likely to lead to truth as to what can be known of the visible,


than metaphysical processes can ever teach respecting the invisible,) that
human philosophy of any kind will ever attain to what it professes to be in
search of. Hence, I dwelt on the possible meaning of the word Philosophy as
introduced among the objects of our Society ; and as its original purpose was
to receive papers on Subjects of Science, Art, Literature and Philosophy ;
thereby marking not the “ spirit of philosophy,” but philosophy as something
distinct from “ Science, Art, and Literature,” it seemed not unworthy to
dwell a little on the designation itself. It would bo satisfactory to know, that,
after this explanation, the reviewer could admit his opinion to have been as
hastily expressed, as my own may have been tediously expounded.
Undoubtedly, the terms “Moral Philosophy, Mental Philosophy, Natural
Philosophy,” may be included under the head of Philosophy considered as a
generic term, and Science, Art, and Literature, may be held as comprehending
many specific philosophies, but it cannot comprehend them in any scheme
while it is separately viewed as independent of them, which was the case under
the original Society.
The reviewer says —all this is “beside the mark and might have been con-
densed to the compass of a single sentence.” This is quite true so far as re-
gards brevity; but it would not have suited my own design, and no one, as
he will see, is made by me responsible for either but myself (par, 6, page 3) :
it was not, therefore, beside the mark, for it effectually reached it.
Mr. Lewes was purposely quoted by me in defence of my views, because his
admissions as to philosophy come with greater force, from the consideration
that he has no prejudices in favour of anything beyond the strict province of
reason, and has shown by indubitable evidence, that reason is incapable of
attaining to the aim of all philosophy, viz., the knowledge of truth. If my
previous quotations are unsatisfactory, it is hoped the following from the 'con-
clusion* of his work will be found less so.
“ Modern Philosophy opens with a method (Bacon) and ends with a method
(Comte ), and in each case this method leads to positive science and sets
metaphysics aside. Within these limits we have witnessed various efforts to
solve the problems of Philosophy, and all these efforts have ended in Scepticism.
• * * * Thus has philosophy completed its circle, and we are left in
this nineteenth century precisely at the point at which we were in the fifth * #
Modern Philosophy stated its pretensions on the one question: Have ive
any ideas independent of experience ? This was asking, in other words— Have
me any organum of philosophy ?’* “ The answer always ends in a negative.
If anyone, therefore, remain unshaken by the accumulated proofs that History
affords of the impossibility of philosophy, let him distinctly bear in mind that
the first problem he must solve is: Have we ideas independent of experience?
Let him solve that, ere he begins to speculate.” [ Biographical History of
Philosophy, vol. 4, 264.]
I may add one word more : Mr. Lewes states without any reserve that by
Philosophy, in his work, he everywhere understands Metaphysics. And he
says, in this sense, Paeon has no place with Philosophers of that class, (111.,
p. 5-6). Turning now 7 to the reviewer, we find him arguing, “if the term
were confined in its application to metaphysics, we should agree with Mr.
Clarke.” I assume, therefore, that, after all, when he says, “ Mr. Clarke
seems to assume that Philosophy has to do merely with speculative investi-
gations—with inquiries that are based upon conjecture. But this cannot be
accepted as correct”—he merely makes an objection, that a few lines lower
he was good enough to rc-callso that, on the whole, I am not dissatisfied
with his criticism, especially as he was courteous enough to say, that with the
exception of the ‘ defect’ he assumed, the “Address is admirable.”
Put I owe it to myself on the score of imputed misunderstanding of terms,
to explain the meaning I assigned to them ; and I owe it still more to my
own opinions respecting what is called ‘Modern Philosophy* or Positivism to


show wliat it is, and how it is regarded by other writers who view its objects
from different points of view.
The following passages from a recently published wort by Dr. Tulloch, will
be read with interest, as conclusive in respect to the insufficiency of the
Modern Philosophy, as Mr. Lewes’s arguments are as to the insufficiency of
the older systems. They will, moreover, support my statements in p. 23.
“On the whole we perceive everywhere among the celestial phenomena,
adaptations. Order meets us wherever we turn our gaze. The old atheistic
doctrine of chance has wholly disappeared before the discoveries of science.
Everywhere, therefore, in the course of our study the theistic conclusion is
impressively forced upon us.
“ The agency of the mighty mind, working in all His order is irresistibly
maintained. As of the old, "the heavens declare the glory of Q-od.” In the
language of Newton, £ J Elegantissima licbccb compayes soils, planetarum et
cometarum {et siellarum) non nisi concilia JEntis eujusdam potentis et intelli-
geniis oriri poiuit!
"In this conclusion, we might rest securely on the grounds already laid
down. It is irrefragable, ou our general basis of reason. In reference, how-
ever, to certain objections which have been specially urged against it in this
reason it deserves some further attention.
" Astronomy is the favourite sphere of the scientific materialist.
" Those same facts which to the reverent mind of Newton were so irresistibly
demonstrative of Divine power and wisdom, to the minds of others are only
indicative of a vast necessity, which, unintelligent in its character, is by no
means to be considered perfect in its working.
“ According to the modern school of scientific materialists, the planetary
and cosmical order is sufficiently explained by the law of gravity. It is simply
the necessary result of this law, beyond which, as an explanation of the uni-
verse, wc are not competent to go. This mode of explanation, if not dis-
tinctly announced by La Place himself has taught confirmation in the form
ef his reasoning in different parts of the Systeme du Monde , and especially in
his famous cosmogonic hypothesis. La Place certainly discarded all notion
of design in connection with the planetary mechanism as unphilosophical,
and even ventured to point out in one instance, in regard to the motion of
the moon, how it might have been, for the bestowal of light, more advanta-
geously arranged. {Systeme du Monde, llv. 4. cap. 5, p. 266.)
" M. Comte has, however, outstripped his master, and declares the incon-
sistency of astronomy not only with the doctrine of final causes, but with
every idea oi religion. (See supra, p, 24.) He ridicules the grand sentiment of
the Psalmist with which we set out, and pronounces that to minds "easily
familiarised with true philosophical astronomy, the heavens declare no other
glory than that of Hipparchus, of Kepler, of Newton, and of all those who
have aided in establishing their laws. (See p. 23.) "No science” he says,
" has given more terrible shocks to the doctrine of final causes than astronomy.
* * * All the theological philosophy, even the most perfect, has been
henceforth deprived of its principal intellectual function, the most regular
order being thence consigned as necessarily established and maintained in our
world, and even in the whole universe, by the simple gravity of its several
parts. (Comte), Philosophic Positive, tom. 2, p. 36 — 38.
" The grounds on which we rest the doctrine of final causes, and on which
we consider it wholly untouched by the discoveries of science, have already
been sufficiently explained. All, therefore, which demands our present at-
tention in this famous classical passage of atheism, is the assertion of the
necessity and explanatory sufficiency of the law of gravity. Have we any
right to regard this law as necessarily existent ? would it explain the pheno-
mena in question even if it were ?*•***#•*****#


“In truth and in conclusion, the Daplacian cosmogeny, while interesting as
a speculation and serving to point, as by a venturous aim, the truth of
knowledge beyond the existing order of tilings, is yet no less than any other
cosmogenic theory, wholly worthless as a final explanation of things.” *
As supplying testimony to the truth of Dr. Tulloch’s conclusions, and as
justifying what I have stated in the Address (page 24), a further extract from
Mr. Dewes’s work will be perhaps sufficient to show that no injustice has been
done bo the author of Positivism.
“ Astronomy is now in so positive a condition, that we need nothing but
the laws of dynamics and gravitation to explain all celestial phenomena 5 and
this explanation we know to be correct, as far as anything can be known,
because we can predict the return of a comet with the nicest accuracy, or can
enable a mariner to discover his latitude and find his way amidst “ the waste
of waters,” (Homer.) This is a positive science. But so far is meteorology
from such a condition, that prayers for dry or rainy weather are still offered
up in churches ; whereas if once the laws of these phenomena were traced
there would be no more prayers for rain than for the sun to rise at midnight.”
{Auguste Comics views in Laves, vol. 4, p. 254.)
M. Comte may be further allowed to speak for himself. He says : “ All
the theological philosophy, even the most perfect, has been henceforth deprived
of its principal intellectual function, the most regular order being thence con-
signed as necessarily established and maintained in our world, and even
in the whole universe by the simple mutual gravity of its parts.” {Comte,
Phil. 11. 36—38.
To point out still further how the modem reasoners deal with other grand
doctrines declared in the philosophy of the Sacred writings, we may take a
final quotation from another quarter. It comes from an English periodical
of considerable repute :
“ If the celebrated argument of design is to hold good as evidence in favour,
of it must hold equally good as evidence against the wisdom and beneficence of
the Creator, a startling proposition, and one we believe - never made before,
but one from which logic has no escape. When we point to the perfection
of organisation as evidence of wisdom, and to their manifold enjoyments as
evidence of goodness, you force the reflective mind to think of the imperfec-
tions and the misery so abundantly displayed.
“ Now, this is shocking j the mind refuses to accept such a conception, and
would be plunged in despair, did it not learn that wisdom, goodness, evil, are
but relative terms, and pertain to our human ; as finite conditions to infinite.
Yet, if men will persist in measuring the infinite according to their finite
standard, they must do so in one case as in the other. Theologians usually
escape this dilemma, by saying, when any case of manifest evil is propounded,
‘ God's ways are inscrutable * and they are right. But if inscrutable in one
direction, they are inscrutable in all. We do not understand evil nor do we
understand good ; the finite cannot understand the infinite.” ( Leader , No.
116, 12th July, 1852.)
In this passage confirming a doctrine acknowledged by the antient heathen,
by the Patriarchs, and by the whole Christian world, we are nevertheless
involved in a fallacy, viz., that of confounding relative good with absolute
good—that which is positive with that which is negative and presumptive,
with facts.
How much more philosophical would it have been to acknowledge with an
old heathen writer the truth as applied to the Creator, —“ From Thee, are all
things; in Thee, all things; for Thee, all things,”—than to limit logic to the
converse of a proposition which reason must allow, though that converse
cannot be allowed till the finite mind shall have been so enlarged as to be able
* Theism, by Rev. J. Tulloch, D.D., p. 99—101.


to comprehend more thoroughly—till wo shall behold the Creator “as He
iswhilst here we only see “ a part of His ways”—and that as “through
a glass” imperfectly.
The very fallacious argument introduced in the passage above quoted,
strengthens what has been said of the insufficiency of philosophy to attain to
perfect truth, which can be reached, only in part, whilst wo dwell in a con-
dition where faculties aro limited and the data for argument are partly
concealed.
I cannot omit quoting here a passage from Mr. Hardwick’s “ Christ
and other Masters" (a passage, however, which is handled roughly by Max
Muller, Chips from a German Workshop vol. 1, p. 53.) “The positive
‘ philosopher of the present day is, in every case, rejecting a religious system
‘ which has proved itself the mightiest of all civilizers, and the constant
' champion of the rights and dignity of men. He offers in the stead of
‘ Christianity, a specious phase of paganism, by which the nineteenth century
‘ after Christ, may be assimilated to the golden age of Mencius and Confucius;
‘ or, in other words, may consummate its religious freedom, and attain the
‘ highest pinnacle of human progress, by reverting to a state of childhood and
‘ of moral imbecility.”
Under the new method, that of Positivism, we may reach certain
truths by carefully observing and honestly reasoning on what is known,
whether in the natural heavens or in the earth (and this, truly, is a wiser
course than arguing from what is neither seen nor known); but we must not be
led away by the establishment of the truth of such laws as that which Comte
insists on, when for aught we know to the contrary, ‘ gravity ’ itself may be
capable of suspension without disarranging the intended order of creation,
because there may be appliances in the power of the Creator of which we
know nothing, counterbalances and corrections, so to speak, in the machinery
of the universe.
In the long and continuous progress of ages, there has been and will be
to the end of time, an unflinching contest between the interpreters of what is
known and what is merely supposed —and in the great struggle between “ a
race tired with logic and feeding the mind with chimeras, “ respecting what is
altogether unseen, and the soberer race who are willing to be told what they
cannot discover for themselves, it will at last be found by all alike, that Reve-
lation is a necessity and a law, as well as gravity or any other principle in the
maintenance of what is —and that it is no discredit to the Historian of Human
Philosophy to have been driven into the strong hold of the defenders of Divine
Philosophy, and to demand as he'openly does : what are “ Christian principles
but the Doctrines revealed to us through Christ; revealed because inaccessible
to Reason; revealed and accepted by Faith, because Reason is utterly incom-
petent ?” (foe. cit. p. 7.)
With this understanding, the whole universe is open to our investigation,
so far as we can see, i.e, so far as we are capable of knowing ; nor will what
may be Discovered contradict what is Revealed, for both are parts of one
economy j and hence the expression of belief at the close of the Address, that,
though the study of the world we dwell on, may, if wrongly pursued, tend to
doubt, the facts themselves can never contradict the Sacred Record which
when clearly understood must be in full accordance with what may be seen
and known. When Metaphysics and Positivism shall have done their ut-
most—the struggle will still be what it has always been,—between the ‘I
believe ' —and the 'ldo not believe, ’ and there is no middle course.


Yet this does not prevent the use of the faculties we may possess,—nor the
employment of these faculties in the investigation of ‘ parts of those ways ’
which the Creator has opened to us for the enjoyment of His works.
This is my own conviction —aud in pursuing it, I would endeavour not to
keep out of mind the inspiring words of our great bard;—
‘ what in me is dark
Illumine, ivhat is law raise and support ;
That to the height of this great argument
I may assert eternal Providence,
And justify the ways of God to man.’
