

INAUGURAL ADDRESS
TO THE
law ;(nstitutc of ;uw |
• c J 'iJ «J
Delivered at the Supreme Court, Sydney,
On MONDAY, 18 tk DECEMBER. 1871,
THE HON. JOHN FLETCHER HARGRAVE, Esq,
SENIOR PUISNE JUDGE.
G. W. ALLEN, Esq., M.L.A., President, in the Chair.
“Ye shall know them by their fruits. Do men gather grapes
of thorns, or figs of thistles.” —Matthp:w vii., 16.
SYDNEY :
PUBLISHED BY JOHN FERGUSON,
Publisher to the Council of Education,
426 George Sheet.




fio2jt
7/f/jr-
INAUGURAL ADDRESS
TO THE
|[a«] :jn.'itiluli' of :\fii jujuth
Delivered at the Supreme Court, Sydney,
On MONDAY, iStk DECEMBER, 1871,
THE HON. JOHN FLETCHER HARGRAVE, Esq.
SENIOR PUISNE JUDGE.
G. W. ALLEN, Esq., M.L.A., President, in the Chair.
“Ye shall know them by their fruits. Do men gather grapes
of thorns, or figs of thistles.”—Matthew vii., 16.
SYDNEY :
PUBLISHED BY JOHN FERGUSON,
Publisher to the Council of Education,
426 George Street.


In preparing this Address for publication, I have
to thank my esteemed friend and former pupil, Dr.
Paterson, for several valuable sugc and for
kindly relieving me from the labour of correcting the
press.
J. F. H.
Supreme Court, Sydney,
February 16 th, 1872.


Pi -*>3.S5/TIOXLI*>
U S .77
SUMMARY OF CONTENTS.
-ooi#;oo
Introductory Remarks —this address is chiefly to the younger
Attorneys and Law Clerks 5
Bacon’s Three Great Maxims applied to a Lawyer’s educa-
tion and studies 6
Unity of the Legal Profession —Division of Labour in the
Administration of the Law Professional esprit de corps
Cultivation of personal self-respect 9
Studies for Young Lawyers Importance of keeping pace with
the Intellectual Progress of the Age Self-education .... 11
Classics— Cicero’s Orations—Germania and Agricola of Tacitus —
Greek Testament 12
Mathematics —Euclid—Algebra—The best training in the Art
of Reasoning—Astronomy—Airy—Brewster—Herschell .... 14
Natural Sciences— Geology—Zoology—Physiology, &c 15
Applied Sciences Modem Discoveries and Inventions, their
effects on Progress and Civilization 16
History, See.— Macaulay—Hallam—Smyth—Books of Travels—
Kinglake’s Eothen 17
Poetry Milton Shakespere Epic and Lyric Poetry of the
Old Testament e , 19
Study of the Bible as a Divine Revelation 21
Cultivation' of Kindly Feelings— Character of Cicero—How
he employed his Leisure Hours 23
Moral,'Social, and Domestic Duties 25
Conclusion 27




LAW INSTITUTE.
INAUGURAL ADDRESS
“MR. PRESIDENT AND GENTLEMEN,—I ought perhaps
to apologise for addressing you from a written paper; but,
considering the many precedents for written lectures and
addresses of this kind, and considering also the importance of
the present occasion, I have thought it best to follow these
precedents; although my own inclinations would rather have
prompted me to express my present observations, at most
merely from written heads of discourse, than through the formal
sentences of a written composition.
In the first place, let me thank Mr, George Wigram Allen
and Mr. Deane, and the Council of the * Law Institute of
New South Wales,’ for the courteous invitation given to me to
inaugurate by this address the new system about to be introduced
into their operations. These gentlemen have authorised me to
communicate to the large audience of young lawyers I see before
me, the very pleasant news that the Council intend from this
date to make such reforms as will, while reducing the amount
of subscription fees, very widely enlarge the usefulness, without
in the least diminishing the great advantages, of the Law
Institute.
Under these agreeable circumstances (although my last year’s
work has made me very anxious to enjoy our long vacation), I
found it impossible to resist the kind request that I should on this
evening address some few remarks to the attorneys and articled
clerks who have come here to honour me with their attention.
As to the attorneys themselves, especially the many experienced
attorneys I recognise before me, I know I can have little
to offer them by way of advice or suggestion; though I do
trust that all I say this evening will find a responsive echo in


their intellects and hearts. But as to the younger attorneys and
the law clerks, it would be false modesty for one who, for the last
twelve years, has been so well known to you all, in public and
professional duty—it would, I say, be mere affectation for me
not to hope, that I could usefully address the younger attorneys
and law clerks of this colony; and give them some useful direc-
tions for study, some leading principles and information as to
their progress in mental culture, as members of our honourable
and learned profession.
Without further preface let me say, that to no class of students
do Lord Bacon’s three great rules of mental culture apply more
strictly than to all of us lawyers.
‘Beading,’ said Bacon, ‘makes the full scholar, writing makes
the accurate scholar, and speaking makes the ready scholar.’
So I adopt these great maxims for ourselves as lawyers, and say :
Reading makes the full lawyer —Writing makes the accurate
lawyer—and Speaking makes the ready lawyer.
And what, gentlemen, do I mean by these three words,
‘ Beading,’ ‘ Writing,’ ‘ Speaking ? ’
With regard to the first, —‘ Beading.’ Of course I cannot
attempt, in this address, to sketch out for you any course of law
reading; nor suggest any particular books for your study, on
any of the numerous branches of our laws ; but I can, I think,
give you some general advice as to the sort of law books you
should read or avoid, and some general directions as to the best
mode of reading law.
My first general advice to you is: Avoid all '■Popular' 1 law books
(as they are amusingly called') as utterly beneath your notice as
lawyers. Of course, Ido not mean you to avoid such books as
Lord St. Leonard’s ‘Handy Book on Beal Property Law,’ where you
will some day understand how every sentence reads like a decree
of that great lawyer, and how full of wisdom is the whole book
to every lawyer, from the highest Judge to the most youthful law
student. But Ido advise you not to read the numerous popular
elementary law books, as if they were standard authoritative
works. These popular law books are, at most, useful only as
giving their readers a chart or outline of each legal subject; but
I should strongly advise you, as soon as you have mastered, from
some authorized treatise, or from a legal friend or tutor, the precise
meaning of all the common legal terms, to proceed at once to read
the very highest standard treatise on each particular branch of law.


Thus, in ‘Real Property Law,’ as soon as you have mastered
the 2nd volume of Blackstone, and Williams on Real Property
Law, proceed at once to Sanders on Uses and Trusts; and
familiarize your minds from that book with the leading
principles of Real Property Conveyances, under the Statute of
Uses, and the origin and meaning of the division between legal
and equitable interests. Unless you fully comprehend these
foundations of all our Real Property Law, and of the equitable
jurisdiction over trusts, as distinguished from legal estates,
you will never obtain any accurate understanding of your duties,
either as conveyancing or equity clerks, or even as common law
clerks, so far as concerns Real Property Law.
I have mentioned the topic of Real Property Law as an illus-
tration of my first remark, as to your reading only standard law
books, but of course the same remark applies equally to every
other branch of law reading, and to all standard law books.
A second remark I would make as to your law reading is, to
advise you always to read your law books with a common-place
book by your side, in which you should write down a short clear
analysis —the product of your own brain. No matter how short
and condensed may be your analytical memoranda, be sure to
make them with your own handwriting, and by the process
of your own thinking. This labour will soon become very
easy, and, indeed, a familiar habit to your mind, as to all law
work of every kind. Keep your memoranda or common-place
books, of course, in your own private desk, as they will doubtless
be full of slight misunderstandings of the author’s text, and
certainly of no use to any one but yourselves.
In reading thus, and noting up your books thus, you are not
intending to write a law book by all this labour, but you are
acquiring the invaluable faculty of analysing, mentally and
pithily, and at a glance, every part of every other law book, and
every part of every legal document that subsequently may come
before you ; and, unless you do acquire this power while young,
you will never become a successful legal practitioner in any
branch of our profession. And, on the other hand, if you begin
your studies in the way I thus advise you, you will soon find the
great mental advantages you are acquiring, for in all your sub-
sequent law readings, of every kind, the substance of your books
will necessarily and immediately arrange themselves under their
proper mental divisions ; and all your law learning will thus be


accurately connected together, ready for practical use, and at all
times easy of larger extension and of almost unlimited expansion,
in every direction, wherever inclination or professional duty may
guide your future studies.
Thus then, gentlemen, you see that Lord Bacon’s first maxim,
as applied by us lawyers to our reading, necessarily includes the
deepest reflection upon what you read—the studying every word
of your author in such a complete manner that the result must
be, that his meaning shall become your mental property. This
is the only mode that I know of whereby you can acquire, by
your own industry, permanent and methodical legal knowledge
by way of books ; and, however limited may be your reading as
a young lawyer, I strongly advise you, while young, to adopt the
advice I have given you; and then this extra labour will be
amply repaid to you in all your future life as lawyers.
Let us now take Bacon’s second maxim : ‘ Writing makes the
accurate scholar; ’ and, as applied to us lawyers, I say to you,
‘Writing makes the accurate lawyer.’ By ‘writing,’ (as I here use
the term), I mean that you should, even as young law clerks,
study accuracy and correctness in all your law writing; not
merely as essential to the validity of the written document itself,
but also as a discipline to your own minds as young lawyers.
Everything written is supposed to be more deliberately composed
than mere oral sentences; and all your writings, even the most
trivial business letters, should be accurate and correct in all their
terms, wmrds, and figures, so as permanently to express the then
meaning of the writer. Of course, lam not reminding you as
lawyers, of the absolute necessity of accuracy to give legal
validity to all writings of an important class, as deeds, wills, and
other documents affecting your client’s property or his business
entrusted to your care. Unless there be strict accuracy and
correctness in all your legal writings, you all know you will be
utterly unfit for the legal profession. But lam now impressing
upon my youthful auditors the necessity of acquiring this fixed
habit of accuracy, in the very earliest period of their professional
life; by writing everything in the most accurate and appropriate
legal, but not pedantic language, suitable of course for each
particular writing, document or letter; and thus I hope you will
all become (and through this strict discipline in writing alone
can you become) ‘ sound and reliable lawyers,’


We now come to Bacon’s third rule: ‘ Speaking makes the
ready scholar; ’ and, as applied to us lawyers, I say to you,
‘ Speaking is, in my opinion, absolutely essential to make you a
ready lawyer,’ so as to give full effect to all your accuracy
required by writing correctly; and to all your fulness of know-
ledge, as acquired by reading sound and valuable Law Treatises,
in an industrious and reflecting manner. And what do I mean
by ‘ Speaking,' as applied to us lawyers? I include in this term,
all friendly discussions among yourselves and your superiors—
whether formal or informal, upon all the innumerable topics
of law and points of law, arising either in your readings or in
your daily business as young lawyers. If you carefully attend
to my advice as to your 1 speaking,’ you will insensibly acquire
a great amplitude of language accuracy in expressing
yourselves orally on matters of law—candour and respect towards
other lawyers’ opinions—and be training yourselves for those
special duties of your profession, which, whether in public life,
or only in consultations and conferences, form an inseparable
portion of every lawyer’s daily occupation, and often lead most
rapidly to legal eminence. Cultivate, therefore, this last maxim
of Bacon, as giving immeasurable value to whatever stores of
knowledge you may have acquired by a scrupulous attention to
all the various labours of your daily life.
Observe also, how, by careful and habitual attention to
Bacon’s three great maxims for all mental culture, each adds
vigour to the other two, when adopted and followed industriously
by the same individual; and how, under their combined influences,
you may each become an intellectual, as well as a sound lawyer,
ready prepared for that day (which comes at last in the life of
almost all lawyers), when you may have an opportunity of
distinguishing yourselves in the first ranks of your profession.
Let us now pass onward to far higher considerations than read
ing, writing, and speaking; though these practical considerations,
I hope, are fully acquiesced in by every one of my audience.
Gentlemen, we are assembled here this evening, drawn together
by our common sympathies as members of the great profession
of the law; and we have all one and the same common interest
in the honour and character of the legal profession. I think,
also, we lawyers possess in fact, and necessarily, a professional
esprit de corps, which binds us together more closely and more
like one intellectual being, than any other of the ‘ learned pro-


fessions,’ as they are called; though our several and respective
duties are, from their very arduous nature (especially in the
practical administration of justice) necessarily suh-divided
among the several branches of our profession forming a division
of labour altogether inapplicable to the other learned professions,
and perfectly unintelligible to the vulgar.
I think Babbage, in his ‘Economy of Manufactures,’ shows
how pin-making requires for each pin the labour of twelve differ-
ent human beings. lam sure that the proper administration of
justice requires from the human beings engaged therein, almost
an equal division of their labour. But yet great as is our division
of labour, because of our diversified duties in the administration
of justice; as regards plaintiffs, defendants, jurors, and witnesses,
as judges, barristers, attorneys, law clerks, and officials of the court,
let us ever remember that we are but one profession; and a pro-
fession, too, whose united labours but divided duties ought to make
our administration of justice famous throughout the civilized
world, by its sacred protection of all our liberties, and its strict
conformity with all the maxims of natural justice.
I am not going to dilate on the dignity of the law or the
historic honours of our profession ; nor indeed should I have
mentioned the topic at all, except as an incentive for the
honourable ambition of the young lawyers I see before me.
To you all—the ‘rising generation’ of our profession, I say, be
careful that you transmit this inheritance of honour, untarnished,
to your professional successors.
Next to cultivating this respect for the honour of our general
professional character, I would ask all young lawyers to cultivate
the most sensitive personal self-respect. By self-respect Ido not
mean self-assertion, which will only lead a man into presump-
tion and impertinence; but Ido mean that every member of the
legal profession should most carefully and especially maintain
that high-minded independence of heart, which Dr. Channiug
and other modern writers call ‘ self-respect.’ I do not myself
approve of the term self-respect, and prefer the term indepen-
dence of heart, because that term exactly expresses the feeling I
wish to be especially maintained by all members of the legal
profession.
You all know the great importance given in our constitutional law
to what is called the ‘ Independence of the Judges ;’ but although
the Judges hold their judicial commissions no longer durante ben


placito, but quamdiu se bene gesserint; still bistory tells us that
there may be external influences, which may become greater
tyrants than despotic kings;—and these influences, unless the
Judge has perfect independence of heart, may sway him into the
most absurd vagaries and the most unrighteous decrees.
Gentlemen, I am most anxious to impress upon all the younger
members of the legal profession, that they must be as indepen-
dent in heart as the Judges themselves; and this you may easily
become by cultivating a high-spirited feeling of conscientiousness
and uprightness of intention in all your daily duties; so that
while you use all courtesy towards your clients and brother-
professionals you will also firmly maintain your own indi-
vidual personal right to judge of your own conduct and duties by
a higher standard than the mere ‘ instructions ’ of your clients,
the opinions of ‘the public’ upon points they know nothing
about, or any other external standard of right or wrong.
Recollect, I repeat, that you are members of an honourable,
as well as of a learned profession; and that the great rule of the
barristers’ professional ethics, viz. : —that no gentleman has any
right to misrepresent the facts of a case, or to tell or act a lie —
merely because he has a vdg on his head, and a black gown on
his back —applies equally to all lawyers; and that no attorney or
solicitor has any right to act otherwise than as an honourable
gentleman, (one, &c.,) merely because he has been accredited as
such to the world by being admitted to the roll of our Supreme
Court.
Gentlemen, —Let me now remind you of another circumstance
of peculiar importance under the vast ‘ progress ’ of modern
society. You, the ‘ rising generation ’of youthful lawyers, must
keep pace with your fellow citizens in every branch of education,
in all mental culture, and in all intellectual improvement. There
must be no drawing of yourselves aside out of the present
general intellectual progress of society. You must at least
keep pace with all your educated fellow citizens ; or rather, why
should you not be in advance of them in understanding all
the vast discoveries, and promoting the intellectual progress we
see flourishing in every branch of science and literature ?
And yet, why should I doubt any of you ? None of you who
are law clerks now supposes seriously for an instant that your
education ceased on your being articled, or will hereafter cease
when you are admitted on the roll of attorneys at the Supreme


Court. No such treason against your own moral nature has ever
been taught you, I am sure, by any of your tutors or professors.
For myself, on the contrary, I recollect how carefully our
Cambridge tutors (especially at Trinity) used to impress on our
minds up to the last term of our residence at the University, that
all our University education was hut a short training for the self-
education which we must each carry on till the latest hour of our
lives; and lam glad to state, that in the various positions of life
in which I have come in contact with attorneys’ clerks and young
lawyers of the colony, I have seen no reason to think that any of
you will shrink from the further detailed education of your own
intellects in every branch of literature and philosophy.
Upon these topics I will now endeavour to offer you a few
practical observations—capable, I hope, of being adopted, more
or less, by all of you, in your own self-education, from the day o
being admitted to your articles.
In the first place, as to classics, let me advise you never to lose
or forget your classical acquirements, I will assume that you
are all able to translate Latin, and perhaps Greek also, gram-
matically and correctly. A great many of you have been
examined by me in translating forty lines of Virgil; and you
know how careful I am in not certifying for your competency to
be articled, if I detect the slightest ignorance of the Latin
grammar, or the slightest mistake in the English grammatical
construction of your translations. Of course, I can only say do
not lose, do not forget , your classical acquirements; because I
know that you will, for the first few years after admission, have
very little leisure to extend your classical readings. But you
must, at all events, keep up your habit of translation, and also
the invaluable philological learning derivable from the classics.
You must be able, at a glance, to apprehend the full force and
effect of every English word having a Latin or Greek root; and
the exact distinctions of meaning and value between all the
numerous expressions and words adopted from the Latin or
Greek into our own language.
True it is that, for admission to become an articled clerk to an
attorney, the Judges of the Supreme Court only require in classics
the translation of forty lines of Virgil, because we are very
desirous of making admission to this valuable branch of colonial
education as easy as possible to all the youth of the colony. But
I do most especially advise all the law clerks of the colony to


( keep up ’ even this small amount of classical knowledge ; I do
not say, by continuing to spell over your Virgil or even your
Horace, but by the continuous perusal and study of some one
Latin author, agreeable to yourselves as individual students.
In my opinion the best book for this continuation of your
Latin is Cicero’s Orations. They are the great standard of pure
Latinity; the subject matter of many of these orations will be
very interesting to you, and cognate to your other studies as law-
yers'; and their great beauties of composition, style, and language,
will soon become very delightful to you, if you will only
persevere in translating carefully one single oration, during
every half-year after your admission to your articles.
If you thus steadily persevere for two or three years in
translating Cicero’s Orations into good English, you will insen-
sibly acquire great fullness of style, and facility in all branches
of composition necessary for a lawyer. At the end of that time
I should advise you to add Tacitus to Cicero as a Latin Text Book.
The Germania and Agricola are the only Latin books I now care
to read, and you will find that the wonderful terseness of Tacitus
and his most expressive condensation of thought will be very
refreshing in contrast with Cicero’s expansive and ornamental
eloquence. Both authors will complete your appreciation of the
Latin language. The last and most beautiful chapter of the
Agricola will force you for the time to think in Latin while you
ponder over the eulogium of Agricola by his mourning friend.*
Of course, the Greek Testament will be carefully ‘ kept up ; ’
if you have had the good fortune to learn Greek before being
articled. If not, you must, like the elder Cato, leave Greek till
you are an old man of seventy.
*“ Si quis piorum manibus locus: si, ut sapientibus placet, non cum
corpore exstinguuntur magnse animse: placide quiescas, nosque, domum
tuam, ab infirmo desiderio, et muliebribus lamentis, ad contemplationem
virtutum tuarum voces, quas neque lugeri, neque plangi fas est: admiratione
te potius, temporalibus laudibus, et, si natura suppeditet, similitudine
decoremus. Is verus bonos, ea conjunctissimi cujusque pietas. Id filise
quoque uxorique prseceperim, sic patris, sic mariti memoriam venerari, ut
omnia facta dictaque ejus secum revolvant, famamque ac figuram animi
magis, quam corporis, complectantur : non quia intercedendum putem
imaginibus, quae marmore, aut sere finguntur: sed ut vultus hominum, ita
simulacra vultus imbecilla ac mortalia sunt, forma mentis aeterna: quam
tenere et exprimere non per alienam materiam et artem, sed tuis ipse moribus
possis. Quidquid ex Agricola amavimus, quidquid mirati sumus, manet,
mansurumque est in animis bominum, in seternitate temporum, fama rerum.
Ham multos veterum, velut inglorios, et ignobiles, oblivio obruet; Agricola,
posteritati narratus et traditus, superstes erit.”


Let us now pass on to mathematics. Here also I must
strongly advise you to keep up all your acquired knowledge of
mathematics —from Euclid and Algebra to the applied sciences and
astronomy. The propositions of Euclid are the best possible train-
ing, as strict logic. They alone will teach you the full force and
meaning of those all-important words because and therefore ;
while algebraic problems will nourish your ingenuity, and teach
you strict consecutive attention to your subject,—far better than
chess—and without the trouble of an adversary.
I am afraid I cannot hope that a great many of you will like,
after a hard day’s work in an attorney’s office, to take up Euclid
or Algebra, or the applied sciences, or astronomy, as a rest for
your wearied minds; but I would earnestly hope you will all
occasionally think over your old mathematical and scientific
acquirements; at least, sufficiently to understand and appre-
ciate the admirable monthly columns in the Sydney Morning
Herald and Empire as to the progress of the scientific world, and
thus at least keep up your position in your general scientific
education, on a level with your fellow-citizens.
With regard to astronomy and its peculiar recommendations
to the study of you all, I will read the following remarks by
Lord Mahon (now Earl Stanhope), when addressing the members
of the Manchester Athenseum in 1845. His Lordship says;
< I have always thought it a most noble and striking
thought of Cicero (in the first of those unrivalled essays of
philosophy, which derive their name from the Villa of
Tusculum, where he wrote them), that when a man is able
by the force of his own intellect to calculate the movements
of the great celestial bodies, and to decide in what orbits
they are about to run; he shows that his mind is of kin
in its immortal powers to that Almighty Being, by whom
those celestial bodies were fashioned and framed.’ ‘Surely,’
says Lord Mahon, ‘ that is a noble thought to come
from a heathen writer on whom the light of revelation had never
shone. But we, who know, in the words of unerring truth, that
‘God created man in His own image ,’ can affix to Cicero’s
thoughts a higher and holier meaning. Sure lam at least (says
Lord Mahon) that in no one pursuit does man elevate himself
more above his frail being here below, and manifest more clearly
the immortal spark within him, than in these studies of
astronomy which enable him—a mere atom in creation, living


on the surface of a world, which, after all, is but another atom
amidst the far greater worlds which surround him at almost
immeasureable distances —to calculate with unerring precision
the exact second of time when one of those celestial bodies will
appear to eclipse the other in the sky, or to foretell, three years
previously, the precise instant of time when one of those great
fixed stars will seem to shoot across the disc of the mariner’s
telescope, when the ship is at any given point of the ocean.
In recommending astronomy to your reflections, I repeat Sir
David Brewster’s remarks, that ‘ there is certainly no branch of
science better fitted to be made the leading subject of general
instruction than that which relates to the planetary and sidereal
universe.’ I hope you will read Airy’s ‘Gravitation,’ Sir
David Brewster’s works on Light, and Hersehel’s discoveries and
reasonings as to the comparative magnitude and distances of all
the members of our own planetary system, and the whole
arrangement of the sidereal firmanent, which are embodied in
language that brings within every mental grasp the most
invigorating sustenance.
Let us now pass onwards from the study of astronomy to
another branch of science peculiarly simple, but interesting
beyond all others in its marvellous discoveries of recent date; I
mean the natural sciences, as they are called, or those relating to
organic life as existing on the surface or in the bowels of our
globe itself; such as zoology, geology, physiology, mineralogy,
botany, &e., &c. You will find no difficulty, but rather intense
pleasure, in studying the natural sciences under such philosophers
as Cuvier, Humboldt, Buffon, Lyell, Sedgwick, or Blumenbach.
Every one of these writers will speak to your intellects in the
rich and powerful eloquence of true philosophy. They are also
all illustrative of the great argument of Paley’s Natural
Theology as to the infinite wisdom and beneficence of our
Creator.
Geology will be especially delightful to your intellectual
tastes, next after astronomy; for now the Christian philoso-
pher is no longer exposed to the bitter taunt which bigotry and
superstition conspired together to hurl at the head of Professor
Sedgwick, when he delivered his admirable lectures at Cambridge
in 1834-7; and when even candidates for holy orders were
warned ‘how they attended Sedgwick’s lectures; for he was
knocking down the first chapter of Genesis with bis geologizing


hammer.’ You will be delighted to find in this study, as now
known to the educated world, that not only is natural theology
beautifully illustrated by the fossil remains of extinct animal
and vegetable life; but that the truths of revealed religion may
also draw their brightest proofs from the exact successions and
orders of organic life, as now discovered in the various strata of
the earth.
Another large and important branch of your study should be
the applied sciences. In the present day, when ocean steamships
are bringing the populations of all civilized nations into regular
communication with each other; —when the electric telegraph wire
has put its girdle round our globe, bringing the fairy boast of
Puck into reality;—when the wondrous discoveries of photo-
graphic chemistry have enabled the family of every working man
in the colony to interchange the household faces of love with
their dear, bxit distant relatives in the villages of Old England;—
do I need to recommend to the consideration of anyone now
listening to me the study of the great principles of applied science,
and their vast area of modern discoveries; especially in rela-
tion to their effects upon the civilization and happiness of the
world during the last thirty years.
It seems but the other day when I was listening, in a committee
room of the House of Commons, to Mr. Fowler, now the head of
the civil engineers in England, battling for the then dreadful
ascending gradient of 1 in 36 for the last half-mile into the
Crystal Palace Railway terminus; and now only last week I see
by the admirable monthly resume of ‘ Science, and Art ’ in the
Sydney Morning Eerald, —that tourists and holiday folk may go
for miles up the side of Mount Eighi to the height of 4000
feet, by a railway, having a gradient of 25 in 100, or 1 in 4 (of
course by the new cogwheel and rail system) ; at which gradient
the line zig-zags to the upper terminus ; moreover, in one place
with a curve of only 180 metres radius.
Surely, gentlemen, we lawyers must ‘keep moving,’ or the
rest of the civilized world will be leaving us at the very bottom
of the dim valleys and dark gullies of our black-letter law books;
while all our friends and acquaintances are enjoying themselves
mentally, as well as bodily, with these delights of applied
science—with the theology of the natural sciences,—and with
the divine wisdom of astronomy. Why should not we lawyers
also in these studies find ‘pleasant and joyful discourse; ’ some-


thing like Christian and Hopeful, when conversing with the
shining ones, in ‘ the delectable land of Beulah ? ’
And yet, gentlemen, in thus especially recommending the
applied sciences to your consideration as sources of delightful
mental culture, I have two remarks to make by way of warning.
On the one hand, do not bewilder yourselves with the details,
and figures, and calculations of these sciences, but only study the
philosophical applications of their principles ; and on the other
hand, do not fancy, as some sceptical philosophers seem re-
cently to have boasted, that they have discovered the mysterious
connection of mind with matter, either in latent heat, —in the
voltaic battery,—or even in the chemical properties of solar
light.
But I must again hasten onwards and direct your attention to
the vast treasures of historic truth, which the last thirty years
have placed within every one’s reach by such writers as Hallam
and Macaulay. For any lawyer not to be fully acquainted with
Hallam’s * Constitutional History ’ and Macaulay’s ‘ History of
England ’ would be, in my opinion, disgraceful no less to his
professional character, than to his living thus unthankfully under
constitutional liberty. The calm philosophical impartiality of
Hallam is more especially invigorating to the lawyer’s intellect;
while Macaulay’s Eaphael-like painting of our old English
society and national condition, in centuries long gone by, will be
an intellectual banquet for many a weary hour in your evening’s
study.
Nor must I forget to refer you to Professor Smyth’s lectures
at Cambridge on History and on the French Revolution, annually
delivered there for about forty years; and which formed the pre-
sent character for political moderation in so many statesmen and
public men of the present age. The perusal of his volumes
will effectually guard your minds against the rampant demo-
cracy and silly sophistries of the present age, and imbue
you with the wisdom of our English ancestors, handed down
practically to us in our constitutional monarchy.
I trust that historic readings will never be laid aside by any
one now listening to me.
In connection with history, you will find much delight in books
of travel. I think we colonists from England take especial
delight in voyages and travels. Our Anglo-Saxon tendency to
colonization seems to have taken fresh energy from the wrench


with which we tore ourselves from Old England; and I
confess that I feel a sort of furor for every book of travels or
voyages relating to our Australian hemisphere, all of which I
read with intense pleasure and interest whenever within my
reach.
An an illustration of the wonderful advancement made during
the last thirty years in the literature of travels, let me remind
you of “ Kinglake’s Eothen,” a little work which I can never
take up without feeling refreshed by the perusal even of only a
few pages, and which, in some chapters, teems with the highest
philosophy. Take, for example, the following short 20th chapter
“ On the Sphinx of Egypt” :
“ Near the pyramids, more wondrous and more awful than all
else in the land of Egypt, there sits the lonely Sphinx. Comely
the creature is, but the comeliness is not of this world; the once
worshipped beast is a deformity and a monster to this generation.
* * * Laugh and mock if you will at the worship of stone
idols ; but mark ye this, ye breakers of images, that in one regard
the Sphinx, though a stone idol, hears awful semblance of Deity—
unchangefulness in the midst of change — the same seeming will —
intent—for ever and ever inexorable ! Upon ancient dynasties of
Ethiopian and Eyyptian kings, upon Creek and Roman, upon
Arab and Ottoman conquerors, upon Napoleon dreaming of an
Eastern Empire, upon battle and pestilence, upon the ceaseless
misery of the Egyptian race; upon keen-eyed travellers —
Herodotus yesterday, and Warburton to-day—upon all and more
this unworldly sphinx has watched, and , watched, like a
Providence —with the same earnest eyes and the same sad
tranquil mien. And we —we shall die, and Islam will wither
away, and the Englishman, —straining far over to hold his loved
India —will plant a firm foot on the banks of the Nile, and sit in
the seats of the faithful —and yet still that sleepless sphinx will
lie watching, and watching, the works of the new busy race;
with those same sad, earnest eyes, and the same tranquil mien—
everlasting. You dare not mock at the Sphinx.”
Well do I recollect the first publication of “ Eothen” —I think
in 1839 —and the warm admiration it excited amongst all men of
intellect and education in London. Well do I recollect how the
late Lord Justice Ciffard, whose taste and scholarship fully
equalled his great abilities as an Equity lawyer, saying to me,
after reading this noble chapter on the Sphinx, that ‘ ‘ he would


rather have written Kinglake’s 1 Eothen’ than all the travels and
voyages of the present century.” Gentlemen, I know of nothing
to prevent any of you from enjoying such books as Kinglake’s
“ Eothen,” after many a hard day’s work in court.
What can be more humorous than the quaint irony in Chapter
I. of the Dragoman’s supposed translation of the Dignities of
the English traveller in his interview with the Pasha? Where
will you find sounder metaphysics than in the IY. Chapter on
“ The Troad,” concluding with the ingenious demonstration of
Homer’s real presence there —by the discovery that the
mountains of Samothrace overtowered Imbros, so that
Neptune could have thence overlooked the plains of Troy
exactly as narrated in the Iliad ? What can be more graphic
and yet melancholy than the YIII. Chapter, giving Kinglake’s
account of his visit to Lady Hester Stanhope, the friend of his
mother’s childhood! The whole book is written in such scholarly
English, and is so full of condensed classical lore, while the
style is so deliciously jaunty, that the reader travels most
delightfully with the author, and this without the slightest
expense or fatigue. The work is an unsurpassable model for
all works of travel.
It is pleasant also for us lawyers to bear in mind that Mr.
Kinglake is a member of our profession. He practiced at the
Chancery bar for two or three years, just after the publication of
“Eothen,” but the breaking out of the Crimean war, and
Napoleon of the Second Empire, soon gave his brilliant intellect a
far more congenial occupation than drawing bills and answers in
Equity, or exceptions to a Master’s report; or even arguing the
“ thens” and “theres” of a demurrer.
Again, I must hasten onwards in my advice for your mental
culture as law students. Let Milton and Shakespere be, in
poetry, your constant companions. They are especially the
poets for all manly intellects; and each of them will always
be most invigorating to your mental energies. Other poetry,
of course, will often be read by you, as part of your lighter
reading; but you will find that the longer you live, the more
constant will be your return to these two poets alone.
I am never tired of recurring to L’Allegro and II Penseroso,
the Sonnet on the Albigenses, the Hymn on Christ’s Nativity, or
to Oomus. Paradise Lost is to me far more valuable than
Homer, together with all the Greek Tragedies that ever existed.


Probably this last remark will seem literary treason for an old
“Cambridge man” to utter; when the late Lord Derby and
the present Premier of England have given us splendid
translations of Homer. Nevertheless I will confess to greater
literary treasons than this, now that I am among my brother
lawyers only.
Dearly as I love old Homer (especially in Pope’s mellifluous
translation), I think there is a grand old book that contains
sublime poetry far superior to Homer or any Greek tragedy, and
records the deeds of far greater heroes than Achilles or Hector,
Agamemnon the king of men, the ponderous Ajax, or the wise
Ulysses.
I think there is within any one’s reach, and in constant use by
every witness, standing up in our Courts of Justice, a very old
book, containing many grander epics than the story of the Ten
Year’s Siege of Troy.
I confess that I am never tired of reading the grand old story
of the Exodus of the Hebrew shepherds from Egyptian tyranny
four centuries before the siege of Troy; led forth by those two
conquerors, legislators, and prophets —Moses and Aaron. Do our
classic histories, whether Greek or Roman, narrate such a
wondrous forty years in the world’s history, as the history of the
children of Israel, from the day when “ they took their journey
from Succoth, going up (in Faith) to possess the land that had
been promised”—(five centuries previously by Almighty God) —
“to Abraham and his seed for ever;” and whither “the Lord
went before them by day in a pillar of cloud to lead them the
way, and by night in a pillar of fire to give them light;”
—until those last sad days, when Moses' and Aaron and
Eleazar, his son, at God’s command, ascended mount Hor, and
Moses stripped Aaron of his priestly garments and put them on
his son Eleazar, and Aaron died there on mount Hor; —and
when shortly afterwards, Moses also, at God's command “with
unabated strength and undimned eye,” though 120 years old,
made his solitary journey up mount Nebo, and died there ; after
“seeing God and speaking with him face to face” for the last
time on earth; —and died there in solitary obedience, gazing
on the glories of the promised Land.
Gentlemen, if you would seek sublime poetry, read the last three
chapters of Deuteronomy, containing “Moses’ Song” commen-
cing thus Give ear, 0 ye Heavens and I will speak, and


hear, 0 Earth, the words of my mouth. My doctrine shall drop
as the rain—and my speech shall distil as the dew, —as the small
rain upon the tender herb—and as the showers upon the
grass,”—and then setting forth in the grandest imagery God’s
mercies to his chosen people, His vengeance on their idolatry,
and His promised blessings on their twelve tribes ; then ask
some learned Greek scholar to translate to you the A To? ’A idrjp
of Prometheus Yinctus or any other selected portions of iEschylus
or Homer, and say whether the Greek epic even approaches the
sublimity, the poetry, or the pathos of the Hebrew.
Further, I might here also compare the sublime poetry of the
whole Book of Psalms, as collected about 450 B. C., by Ezra, con-
temporaneously with the tragedies of CEschylus, Sophocles, and
Euripides ; and, in my opinion, sadly to the disadvantage of the
vaunted Greek classics. But I dismiss this topic with this only
remark, that two of the greatest English lawyers of the present
day, Lord Chancellor Hatherley and Sir Eoundell Palmer, have
each found leisure to pursue the Bible studies I am now recom-
mending to you as law students, and have published, the one a
valuable compilation, showing the continuity of Scripture
between the Old and New Testaments, —and the other “ A Book
of Praise,” one of the very best of our modern Books of
Psalmody.
Gentlemen, under the authority of these two high examples,
I feel no hesitation in recommending every young lawyer to
study all the books of the Old Testament, as containing the
sublime poetry, history, and laws of the Hebrew nation ; —and, if
you choose , so to study the Old Testament, independently of its
divine authority, and of all its religious influences, as containing
the recorded fulfilment of God’s promises to Abraham, and the
recorded prophesies of the Messiah, our Lord and Saviour.
But I was wrong in the last sentence, when I suggested the
possibility of your so studying the Old Testament, as if merely
containing the laws, history, and poetry of the Jewish nation, or
so as to exclude from consideration either the recorded fulfilment
of God’s promises to Abraham, or the recorded prophecies of the
Messiah, as long afterwards fulfilled in the person of our Lord
and Saviour Jesus Christ. If you were to attempt so to study
a single Book of the Old Testament you would soon find the
utter impossibility of the task I suggested ; for the voice of God
speaks to us from every line of that sacred volume, either in


divine precepts, in sacred praises of God’s attributes, in triumph-
ant songs of His faithfulness to His promises, or in glorious
predictions of the Messiah’s advent. Instead of suggesting any
such impossible studies, I ought rather to have advised you to
read the Old Testament as containing the Divine Revelation
of those matters which the wisest heathen philosophers only
“saw through a glass darkly.” You know well how, when
Socrates lay down calmly to die, surrounded by the Athenian
youth, the loving hearts of his pupils were perplexed with the
ignorance of the unknown world into which his immortal spirit
was about to enter; and how dark and cheerless and misty were
his best answers to their weeping enquiries.
In the glowing stanzas of Mrs. H. B. Stowe, the Athenian
youth asked Socrates—
“ What is this Life ? and what to us is Death ?
Whence came we ? Whither go ? And where are those
Who in a moment stricken from our side,
Passed to that land of Shadow and Repose ?
“ Are they all dust ? and dust must we become ?
Or are they living in some unknown clime ?
Shall we rejoin them in that far olf Home
And live anew, beyond the waves of time ?
“ Oh man divine, on thee our souls have hung,
Thou wast our teacher in these questions high;
But ah! this day divides thee from our side
And veils in dust thy kindly guiding eye.”
Study, if you will, all the noblest hopes of the Greek Philosophy
and what do they amount to but this—a doubting, dark distrust
even of a revived human existence, with those we loved as human
beings on this sorrowful earth. There is not a glimpse of “the
Resurrection of the Just made perfect
And, gentlemen, if you pursue your Biblical studies into the
New Testament, and reflect on the New Life and Immortality
which “ are brought to light by the Gospelwhat must be your
feelings when you read the xiv., xv., xvi., and xvii. Chapters
of St. John, which record the farewell Revelations of Jesus
Christ to His disciples; beginning thus—“ Let not your heart be
troubled. Ye believe in God, believe also in me. In my Father’s
House are many Mansions. I go to prepare a place for you.”
What a different picture from the Death Farewell of Socrates
to his disciples ! Do not the “ many mansions ” rise before you ?


“ The great white throne and Him that sat thereon.”—“The
Lamb’s Book of Life.”—“The Holy City.”—“ The Jasper
Wall.”—The “ Come ye Blessed ” ?
Gentlemen, —I would now add one general remark to all this
advice for the mental culture of young lawyers,—a remark
which I doubt not will be concurred in most heartily by every one
who hears me, as bearing especially on our friendly intercourse
with each other. Cultivate in all your professional intercourse
and conduct a spirit of kindliness and gentle thoughts of other
persons. The two best lines that Tennyson ever wrote are
these :
“ Kind words are more than coronets,
And gentle thoughts than Norman Blood.”
While I would never give up the least particle of truth and
right, nor permit you to have the slightest paltering with chi-
canery or pettifogging, I would still suggest that our small com-
munity would be much happier if there were no tittle-tattle
gossips in our social life, who never seem to open their lips
except for the purpose of insinuating some petty slaqder about
their neighbours.
Avoid all sneering, detracting conversation, as you are
gentlemen, as you are honourable men; and cultivate in your
every day life habits of gentle and kindly thought towards all
men, as you would hope to live happily among yourselves in
this world of toil and sorrow, but yet of great happiness, if
men would only choose and try to be happy.
On this point of gentle thoughts and kindly feelings, as
essential to a lawyer’s character, I recently met with a very
apposite illustration in a review of Mr. Forsyth’s Life of the
great Roman lawyer, Cicero ( Quarterly , January, 1864.) At pps.
103, 4, after a long criticism on Mr. Forsyth’s very interesting
work, and after examining the general characteristics of Cicero’s
eloquence, and noticing our universal appreciation of Cicero, the
reviewer traces the great secret of Cicero’s success as an orator,
to the circumstance of the large preponderance of gentle thoughts
and kind feeling in his general choice of oratorical topics and in
all his expressions and language. Upon this peculiar idio-
syncracy of Cicero’s as a public man and orator, even to the
undue preponderance of almost womanly sensibilities over all


manly firmness, the reviewer has the following beautiful
remarks :
“ Womanly was Cicero’s extreme excitability, his sudden and
vehement alternations of joy and sorrow, of hope and fear, of love
and loathing; the violent extremes to which these and all his
feelings were carried, —his dislike verging upon hate, his liking
was love—his love was idolatry,—his grief hot, —his scalding
tears. He wept when he went into exile, —he wept when he
heard that Pompey during the Civil war was shut up in Brun-
dusium by Caesar, —wept when he heard that his property was
lost, and almost died of grief when he heard that his daughter—
his ‘Tulliola’ —had died.” The Reviewer then almost ungal-
lantly proceeds thus:—
“Womanly was his extreme timidity in challenging the opinions
of the world, —his vulnerable thin-skinned nature, when exposed
to the light skirmishing of social gossip,—his utter inability to
face the heavier artillery of open and deliberate censures; —the
need he ever felt of some one whom he might look up to and
revere; —his tendency to give to appearances the precedence over
realities, —to shut his eyes and unconsciously deceive his judg-
ment on the real motives of his own conduct; his determination
always to have the last word, —and to mutter half audible retorts,
rather than be altogether mute, —his curiosity; the interest he
took in the tattle of a town, his weakness for indulging in light
raillery of others—his insatiable thirst for praise and flattery.”
The Reviewer then concludes as follows :
“Now the object of this parallel is this—that just as a woman
is and ever will be loveable, not only in spite of, but we had
almost said because of her faults, even so is the paradox in the
character of Cicero to be explained ; for the picture has another
side. If he had some of the frailties of woman, he had also
almost all her virtues; for womanly was that warm loving
heart,- that trusting guileless nature, —that instinctive purity
and innocence, which kept him free from stain, in an age
teeming with the grossest crimes, and drowned in the most
beastly sinks of sensuality.”
Q-entlemen, this is a beautiful and noble view of the great
Homan lawyer whose orations I have already advised every
young lawyer to keep as his Latin text book ; and the critique is,
in my opinion, as truthful and just as it is original.


Perhaps, gentlemen, you will say that all these extended
studies, which I have this evening suggested to you, require too
much time ; —that your duties as articled clerks and as young
attorneys leave you no leisure even to attempt the perusal of a
fourth part of the books which I have suggested to you. Gentle-
men, I fully approve of your most complete devotion to your
duties as young lawyers, for every hour of the day from 9 till 4,
5, or 6 o’clock, or even to any subsequent hour required for the
most liberal and the strictest demands of your professional duties,
either to your superiors or to your clients. But, gentlemen, are
there no hours you can take from what the world calls “ amuse-
ments ?” Hear what the great Roman lawyer said on this
subject in his oration —Pro Archia :
“ Q,uis tandem me reprehendat, aut quis mihi jure succenseat, si quantum
caeteris ad suas res obeundas, quantum ad festos dies ludorum celebrandos,
quantum ad alias voluptates, et ad ipsam requiem animi et corporis conceditur
temporis, quantum alii tribuunt tempestivis conviviis, quantum denique alese,
quantum pilas;—tantum mibi egomet ad bsec studia recolenda sumpsero.”
I will not detain you much longer from your homes. The
plan and object of this evening’s address was very simple, and I
hope I have accomplished my object satisfactorily to you all.
I now set before you the to Beov of the Greek philosophers; and
I tell you all that it is your bounden duty to make your mental
culture and intellectual improvement worthy of the high position
which your fellow-citizens rightfully accord to your profession.
I have done my bounden duty in showing you how you may be
acquiring scientific and other knowledge while your ordinary
occupations go on, day by day and week by week, as attorneys
and attorneys’ clerks —how you may relieve the severest toil, and
brighten your intellectual powers after your most wearisome
studies, by the ennobling, refining, and invigorating influences,
of philosophy, history, and poetry.
But, gentlemen, you are more than intellectual beings; you
have moral and social duties to perform, beyond being attorneys
and attorney’s clerks; you are not buried in cloisters or universities ;
and this address would be grievously incomplete if I left the topic
of our moral and social affections, untouched upon.
I find, however, my own views so well expressed by Henry
Glassford Bell, Esq., in his Address to the Working men of
Glasgow, on the 11th November, 1851, that I gladly adopt the


following beautiful language, with which I will conclude this
address. Mr. Bell says:—“A grander theme yet remains for
our consideration, but one which I can do little more than
indicate. I mean the cultivation of our moral nature—the puri-
fication of the heart and of all the heart’s affections ; and this
must be steadily kept in mind, in relation to your social and
especially to your domestic positions, with a view to making your
homes, your domestic circle, your home life, what it ought to
be —the fountain from which you w r ill each draw the holiest
draughts of earthly felicity.
“Abroad in the world, men may find respect and wealth and
worldly influence; but it is not till they cross the threshold of
their own homes, and feel how genuine and disinteref ted is the
love that awaits them there —and how faithfully and entirely they
can reciprocate such love —that the wearied spirit finds real
repose, and reaps a reward better than a mantle of purple or a
crown of gold.
“ Let it not be forgotten, however, by any one of us,” says Mr.
Bell —and I say especially let it not be forgotten by young
lawyers, “that the exquisite pleasure derivable from the endear-
ing ties and beautiful relations of domestic life can he experienced
only hy those ivho have a conscience at peace and a well regulated moral
nature. In the heyday of youth, before the passions have been
subject to control, or the worthlessness discovered of some of the
objects of most ardent pursuits, it is hardly to be expected that
this source of enjoyment should be acknowledged ; but thrice
happy is the young man who enjoys for his early manhood the
happiness of his boyhood’s homo, and who, in his riper yeai’S,
makes domestic happiness the first object of his daily toil.
“It is plainly the will of the Great Ruler of the Universe that
mankind should be divided into families ; and in the bosom of
their own family, be it large or be it small, most men spend the
greatest part of their existence. It is there that the relations
arise, of father, brother, son, husband, master, friend, com-
panion, mother, sister, wife. Shadowed with cares, as life must
always be, what a mine of happiness is each of these words
capable of suggesting.! To the highest and to the lowest belong
the affections. A palace would be a dungeon without the affec-
tions, and how beautiful is the cottage that is full of them. The


mightiest cannot command love, they must win it; and so may
the humblest—
Repining not to tread
The little sinuous path of early care,
By flowers embellished and by springs refreshed.’
“Let us then cherish the purifying affections of home life ;
let us, ' keep our hearts with all diligence, for out of them are the
issues of life ; ’ —let our sympathies be strong and far exten-
ded ; —let us avoid the too common error of feeling (on the one
hand) —something of envy or jealousy towards those who have
pressed on before us in the ranks of life; or of imagining (on the
other hand) that those who remain behind in the lower and
humbler paths do not possess wisdom and worth, entitling them
to all our admiration.”
“Above all,” concludes Mr. Bell, “whatever misfortunes or
afflictions overtake us, let us ever rejoice to know that we have
still a harbour of refuge in the divine truths of religion —in that
religion which strengthens love, which purifies ambition, which
tranquilises sorrow, and compensates a hundred-fold for any sacri-
fice it may call upon us to make of worldly objects of
allurement.”
Gentlemen, I say to you as Mr. Bell said to the working men of
Glasgow :—“lf in the imperfect observations I have this evening
made to you, I have suggested any useful thoughts; if I have
awakened any train of ideas that may lead you to meditate with
pleasant emotions on the duties and hopes that lie before you ;
if I have in any way aided in inducing you to return this
evening to your own homes with a more fervent desire for self-
improvement ; if I have suggested to your minds with any degree
of freshness this great truth, that while possessions vanish and
opinions change , and passions hold a fluctuating seat, duty for
ever exists, subject neither to eclipse nor wane, then 1 have
this evening done all I ever hoped, or even wished to
do.”
Gentlemen, —I do not doubt that, with God’s help, you will all
go on and prosper in the career which you have wisely begun by
becoming members of this institute ; —and that—
“ While tens of thousands falter in their path,
And sink 1 hrough utter want of cheering light;
For you the hours of labour will not flag,
For you each evening have its shining star,
And every Sabbath Day its golden Sun.”


"V.




