

Inauguration
of the
Castlemaine
Municipal
Council
By
James Martin
No. 3 in a short series of books dealing comprehensively
with Castlemaine History




FOREWORD
by Mr. R.
President of Castlemaine and District Tourist and Publicity
Association
I feel very honored and pleased
at the opportunity of writing a
foreword to Mr. James Martin c
book on “The Inauguration of
Castlemaine Municipal Council.
Mr. Martin has been known to
me over a very long period, par-
ticularly in connection with the
tourist work in Castlemaine. The
historical knowledge he has of the
town has been very helpful to
our organisation.
I take this opportunity of thanking him for his untiring
efforts in personally conducting tourist buses to places of historical
interest around the town and district.
The preparation of this book obviously reveals careful
records and study of the district and posterity will place a high value
-on his work.
My association extends our best wishes to the author and
congratulates him on his contribution to the publicity of the town.
November 9, 1930
R. J. LANGDON.


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Much of the material for this paper has been obtained from
Mr. Frank McKillop’s articles on early Castlemaine, which ap-
peared in the “Mail” of 1908. Mr. McKillop was an able jour-
nalist and a public-spirited man. He took an active part in every
movement that had for its object the advancement of this town,
and the moral and intellectual uplift of its residents. Castie-
itnaine owes much to Frank McKillop. He was one or the foun-
ders of the Art Gallery and a generous contributor to its funds.
His name is perpetuated in the McKillop Gallery. Not a native
of tne town —he was in middle age when he first saw it he
thought it “was a charming little spot.” although he was a man
who had travelled and doubtless saw many other “charming little
spots,” and in this town he spent the rest of his days. He fa--
came interested in its history, and after - six years of intense re-
search he accumulated sufficient data to compile a short history
of early Castlemaine.
The copies of the “Mail” in which that history appear
were presented to the. P. and O.R. Association by the late Mr,
Morton Van Huerck, where they will be carefully preserved. The
late Mr. Edward Taylor a few years before his death presented
to the writer similar copies, and in doing so expressed the
opinion that be would find them useful. It is from those copies
trat this paper has largely been compiled.
AUTHOR : A recent portrait cf
the author of this booklet, Mr.
James Martin, who enjoys the
reputation of being an authority
on the history of Castlemaine
generally.
He has already written ‘ Major
Mitchell and Castlemaine ” and he
plans to write and publish other
historical works dealing with
various phases of Castlemaine s
past, which has been so rich in
incident.


INAUGURATION
of the
CASTLEMAINE
MUNICIPAL COUNCIL
THE BIRTH AND DEVELOPMENT
OF THE CASTLEMAINE
MUNICIPALITY
By JAMES MARTIN, Castlemaine




PUBLIC MEETING HELD
TO FORM COUNCIL
A public meeting was held in Market Square at 3 p.m. on October 15th.
1855 for the purpose of considering the advisability of forming a muni-
cipal council and to inquire into the advantages and liabilities of a muni-
cipality in Castlemaine. There were about 60 present and Mr, A. », lamer
took the cart, for that vehicle served as a stage for the various speakers.
Mr Davis moved (Mr. Davis was one of the first councillors elected and
later became Castlemaine’s town clerk) and Mr. Saint seconded (Mr. Saint
was one of the “Mail” proprietary—Matthews and Saint—and also the
editor of that paper) that “ it is the opinion of this meeting that a municipal
government is desirable in Castlemaine, inasmuch as it will remove nuis-
ances, promote our local and domestic comforts, and advance the religious,
moral and political character of this town and its inhabitants.” The motion
was carried unanimously. _ .
It was decided that nine persons be appointed to inspect the existing
town boundary and consider it it could be altered to the advantage of the
municipality and to make the desired alterations, also to inquire into finan-
cial matters. Dr. Preshaw, Mr. E. Fitzgerald and others spoke in favor of
the establishment of a municipality, and the following were appointed t 3
carry out the foregoing resolutions : Messrs. Palmer, Andrews, Davis.
Wheeler, W T. Smith, Mitchell, Thorburn and Mills.
Mr E. F'itzgerald wa s one of the founders of the brewery of that name
He built and for many years resided in the building now used for and known
as the Ballarat private hospital.
Mr. Wheeler was one of the firm of Wheeler Bros., brewers, of Campbell s
Creek. They built those premises which later were known as the Standard
Brewery. Wheeler’s porter was a famous brew and well-known throughout
Victoria. , ,
The committee lost no time in getting their report ready, also a plan of
the proposed new boundaries which had been approved of by the District
Surveyor—a Government official —and provided for a municipality of nine
square miles, extending about a mile south of Market Square, about two
miles north, and about one-and-a-half miles east and west—in fact, the
present town boundaries.
In order to get the new boundaries gazetted, it was necessary to get 151
names to a petition to that effect. Mr. Waiter Smith volunteered to procure
the signatures. These he got, but only by the exercise of much discretion,
for there were many influential and wealthy residents who were opposed to
the formation of a council. They wanted no rates or taxes, and had they
been “ awake ” to the movement would probably ha ve “ scotched ” it. How-
ever, everything went alright and on March 16th, 1856, the new boundaries
were gazetted. . . ,
The old or provisional boundaries had been fixed by the Resident Chie,
Gold Commissioner, Captain Wright, and included that part of the town
from Forest street on the south to Wimble street on the north, and that
between Kennedy street on the west and Fletcher street on the east. The
above named streets were also included in the old boundary. the land
within those limits had been surveyed, the streets marked out by survey
pegs but not formed, although they had been named, most of them after
the camp officials and the squatter friends of the Commissioners, at whose
stations they wer 0 in the habit of spending their leisure hours. There they
were welcome guests and were given a good time.


DERIVATION OF STREET NAMES
As a result we now have Barker street, named after Dr. Barker, of Ml
Alexander station; Campbell street, after Hon. Win. Campbell, M.L.C.. of
Strathloddon station; Parker street, after Edward Parker of Mount Frank-
lin station; Hunter street, after William Morrison Hunter, of Park Hil’
station, Joyce’s Creek; and Kennedy street, named after Angus Kennedy
of Boughyards station, Guildford. Forest street was so named because il
ran in line with Forest creek for some distance, which creek was named by
the early diggers, because of the almost impenetrable forest through which
ic flowed. Hargrave street was named by the Goldfields Commissioner of
Castlemaine in honor of the first man to discover gold in Australia, who was
commissioned by th e New South Wales Government to inspect the Castle-
maine gold field During his stay here, Mr. Hargraves inspected the Quartz
Hill mine and pronounced it the richest mine in the world.
On Monday, January 21st, 1856, a meeting was held in the hall of Castle-
maine (now the site of the Castlemaine picture theatre). Dr. Preshaw pre-
sided. He said that under the Act a council could b e composed of three,,
five or seven members. It was decided that the number be seven.
The chairman said it rested with the meeting to decide whether coun-
cillors should be paid. Mr. Gingell proposed, and Mr. Walter Smith seconded,
that they be not paid and it was carried unanimously, (Mr. Gingell late-
became prominent in the civic and social life of the town, so we have our
Gingell street). Continuing, Dr. Preshaw said: “It will be your duty,
gentlemen, to elect seven of your fellow townsmen as councillors.’’ Sixteen
nominations were received in a few minutes.
Next day, Tuesday, January 22nd, 1856, the first Castlemaine council
election was held, and “ Although,” says Mr. McKlllop, “ there was much
argument and much excitement, th e proceedings generally were orderly.'
The result was : Alexander Stenson Palmer, 188; Thomas Andrews, 158;
Joseph Davis, 152; Hugh McMillan, 150; Walter Smith, 129; William B
Coilyns, 114, and Thomas Hinds, 106. Among the rejected was Thomas
Procmey (92 votes), who later came to the front. He served as a councillor
for many years and was three times its Mayor. Froomes street is named
after him. He carried on an extensive drapery business in the premises
now occupied by Frank Cocking, W. Barker and Searles, on the corner of
Barker and Mostyn streets, which then, and for many years after his death-
was known as “ Froomes’ Corner.”
At this first election two ladies insisted on voting, but their votes were
not included in the count, as the Act had made no provision for female
voting.
“And now,” says Mr. McKillop, “let the reader pause for awhile and
onsider the task before those seven councillors. They were strangers to
the country and comparative strangers to one another, with no knowledge of
municipal affairs or municipal procedure.. They were asked to lay the
foundation of a modern town in what in such a connection was mere than
a wilderness. The streets were in a state of nature, except for numerous
fallen trees and the great ruts caused by the wheels of heavily laden drays.
Buildings had been erected on hills and in valleys, with no thought of a
proper level.
“ The sanitation of the town itself was a task of great magnitude. These
inexperienced men and those who immediately followed them had to restore
order out of chaos, while every ratepayer, expecting the millenium to arrive


when tae council was formed, cried out for money to be spent, and in the
same breath cried out against paying rates. To form the streets, in which
vehicles were bogged every winter, to make footpaths, to light and drain the
town, to decide on permanent levels, and to attend to the one hundred
and one things coming within the province of the council was the work set
before these men, and they did their duty nobly and well. They fought and
suffered to advance Castlemaine’s interests and to make it a town to be
proud of.”
Ag to “ what manner of men ” were those seven councillors ? A search
through old records did not bring to light much information of a personal
nature, but from their business advertisements in the “ Mail ” and the “Min-
er’s Right ” we learr. a little about their activities.
Mr. Palmer was a member of the firm of Palmer and Beauchamp, mer-
chants, whose business premises stood on the corner of Barker and Forest
streets. In the “Mail” of 1556 is the following advt. :| —“Palmer and Beau-
champ have for sale oats, chaff, Indian corn, bar rod and sheet iron,
cast, blister, shear and spring steel, hand, sledge and quartz hammers, tue
irons, anvils and vyces, English and American bellows, 28in. to 34in.; coach
screws, bolts and nuts, cart boxes arid washers, raw and boiled oil, turpen-
tine, putty, litharge, patent dryers, lamp oil, camphine, white lead, paints,
varnish, galvanised 100 iron tiles, galvanised sheets, zinc and plumble sheets,
ridge, cay, guttering and down piping, crockery of all kinds, glass, gin. x lOin.
to 42in. x 38in., 30,000 feet American flooring, lin., 1 1-8 and IJin., 50,000
feet best Baltic weatherboard, Tin., 25,000 feet American dressed weather-
board, 50,000 feet pine quartering. 20,000 feet tongued, grooved and beaded
boards, 30,000 feet Din. lining boards, shelving of clean pine, IJin,., IJin. and
Him, Baltic cut deals, pine battens, 10,000 ft. pin e moulding in great variety,
5000 ft. pine architraves, 50,000 ft. cedar architraves in great variety, cedar,
iim, 3in., lin., liin. and 2in, hardwood assorted, Mt. Macedon shingles, 2ft
and 3ft., Mt. Macedon broad palings, sft., doors, panel, half moulded and full
moulded sashes and sash doors, 50 pairs Venetian shutters, assorted, French
casements, marble mantle pieces, locks, bolts, hinges, screws and a general
assortment of builders’ ironmongery. Mr. Palmer subsequently represented
Castlemaine in the Victorian Parliament. He topped th e poll—a popular
win.
DRESS AND DRAPERY
Mr. Andrew’s advertisement reads. “Thomas Andrews begs to apologise
to the ladies and the public of Castlemaine for having been unable for some
time to provide that comfort for them which he has desired, consequent
upon alterations. Having completed those alterations and effected extensive
improvements in his establishment, a large supply of spring goods have just
arrived and consist of the latest and most fashionable display of ladies’ re-
quirements in dress and drapery. He has also opened new and large prem-
ises in Forest street exclusively for glass, china and earthenware in which
ample room is provided for the wholesale and retail departments and will
endeavor to gratify purchases with proper attention and low prices. Thomas
Andrews, Market Square, and Forest street, Castlemaine.”
Mr. Joseph Davis had only a modest advt. in th e “ Mail,” which reads :
“ Joseph Davis, gunsmith, Barker street.” Mr, Davi s later on became town
clerk of the municipality.
Mr. Hugh McWilliams advt. reads : “ Timber and building materials of
every description, deals and lumber, weatherboard and quartering, shingles
and palings, table leaves and sofa rails, paints, oils, glass, putty, plaster,
cement, roofing iron, zinc, locks and hinges, etc.,” and conduces with •


•• Observe. —Entrance to the timber and iron yard opposite to the Bank of
AM S‘r! a w«iter Smith, then an auctioneer, was a '““menSd
an excellent one he proved to be. When Fitzgeralds
a. vr,. cmith hpcame its first brewer, and of all the stutt tnai is
f TT: 1 in the 70 odd pubs of the district, a couple of pints
happy—-so*the*”present Sr^who'cannot' plrsonaT experience.
~ **”£££ sscf-r s%T.r2. c s
lifer about f months at the council table, Mr. Colljns tendered his resigns-
S E -of Sollffsf e sLys C Mr «£n£ 'tTS.“SSC of
taars
poll declared as follows i-Payntcr 193, elected! Hersche 56, Proomes
10 ’ Pl , pavnter took his seat at the meeting on the 22nd April, and soon
became prominent ,n civic affairs. He had chambers In Lyttieton street
think the Electricity Commission now occupes part of the si eon - ‘
office then stood He was something of a personality in his day He was the
first lawyer on the goldfields, and the calico sign attached to his tent read :
“ I did not come her to dig for gold, but to see that every digger on
field °*etq justice.” He was known as the “ diggers lawyei. * L _
if any digger had a grievance he invariably consulted Mr. Paynter. He was
a gr” at boxing enthusiast and was credited with having walked from Forest
Creek to Melbourne to see a famous prize fight. He had been the ig
weight champion of his University, and to keep in form he had a punchi =
ball in front of his tent which he had a go at m hi s spare time. Often
the evenings a*crowd of diggers would roll up to watch Ihis pel J™ a^ e «
on his invitation some would have a friendly go. but few, I fftherea
from the talk of my elders in the 80‘s and 90’s, had a chance against Uttle
Pavnter” We lads used to look at him as he passed and, knowing his
boxing history, stood a little in awe, not unmixed with admiration, of Mr.
Pa 'Mr r 'McKillop says of him : “He was a short man with in cUnation
to stoutness; dark, with shaven chin and a cunning twinkle m his eye He
was a clever solicitor cute, better than great is the word to apply to him
He was a fine criminal lawyer and had a large practice, for those in trouble
ost no time In vending tor “little Faynter." He was the sohc.tor on
the field and remained here until his death in the early 80 s In pubhc life
he was able but dilatory; still he left his mark on th G public life of the
town. Whether in or out of the council, Mr. Paynter exercised a powerful
influence on its decisions in the first year of its existence.
COUNCIL’S FIRST CHAIRMAN
On Monday January 28th, 1856, the first meeting of the Castlemaine
Municipal Council was held in the survey office, which had been loaned by
the Government on the condition that the council should build rooms ot the.,
own al soon as funds permitted. This office building still stands at the
corner of Mostyn and Hargraves streets. Cr. Smith was voted to the chair
while the business of electing the chairman for the year was put through.
Cr Davis then moved that Cr. Palmer, who had topped the poll, be chairman.


.. , hnnnr is “ nwine to business reasons he would
ot the office sufficient attention » m c K,llop. "that the
Mr Andrews be appointed It « Cr Davis especially, who
ZmTl’Z Mr Andrews had taken no active part Infringing the council
said that Mr. An * s brought to bear on Cr. Palmer, who,
conduct of public business.”
It was the custom in the early days of the council to elect as chairman
the Cr UT pulmer 'havlug^topped^th^poth' refused the position Cr. Andrews
hein- second on the poll, secured it, Councillors under the Act were elected
fcr a term of three years if they topped the poll and two years if the
dW no. except of course In the first year when the last three on the poll
had to come before the electors again.
The first business to engage the attention of our first councillors was in-
troduced by Cr. Davis, who said they should at once obtain a list of tho
nersons liable to be rated, as it was absolutely necessary that they should
to carry ou the work of the council. During the discussion
it C was pointed out that it would be
list of ratepayers until the new municipal boundaries had been gazetted.
Mr. Davte moved and it was carried, "that the Cilonlal Secretary be written
to -it once and urged to gazette the new boundaries without delay.
A Cr DaX after agreeing to take the minutes of the meeting, suggested
that a seal be procured at the earliest opportunity, and that tie mo o e.
-Nostrum non terra sed ded est” (Our life is not of the earth but of GodV
This motion was carried, and. says, Mr. McKillop, ‘it is tne motto of the
council today and is likely to be as long as the municipality .asts. -
wag wrote to the ‘'Mail” a few days later and suggested as a more suitable
motto for the council. “Delir-anus interdem senes” (We old men sometimes
dote), but, needless to say, the council did not approve of the suggestion
The design and motto were sent to a Melbourne engraver but after the
lapse of some months and no word of any seal, Mr. Palmer, who was now
MLA for Castlemaine, was asked to attend to the matter. He wrote t a
the seal was not yet ready, and that of Ballarat, ordered some time pre-
viously, was still in the hands of the engraver. He suggested that the
council should withdraw t,he order and he would place it with another en-
graver.
The chairman said that Mr. Leviny of this town (father of ex-Cn
Leviny) would do the work, and the Council decided that if the Melbourne
engraver hau not commenced the work it should be taken from him and
given to -Mr. Leviny. The Melbourne man, however, had commenced the
work and promised to hurry on with it, and in about a coup e of months
finished and forwarded it, together with a bid of cost amounting to £3l/10/-,
which the council passed for payment, and so ends the st-.ry attached to
the Castlemaine Council seal.
CLERK AT £2 PER WEEK
At the second meeting ot the council, Cr. Palmer said it was absolutely
necessary to have a clerk of some kind, and moved that a clerk be appom ed
at £2 per week. Some councillors considered it would be better to appoint a
qualified legal man, “Which,” says Mr. McKillop. “was very necessary owing
to the vagueness of the Act and th e inexperience of counci lore, but the
suggestion, for financial reasons, was not adopted.” It was decided to ad-


vertise for a clerk to write minutes, correspondence, etc., applications tbe
left at Mr. Andrews’s store. Several applications were received, and Mr.
Edward Martin was appointed at £2 per week—a part-time job.
Mr. Palmer said they must have money for current expenses, and as
they couldn't levy a rate for several months, he moved that the Bank of
Victoria be applied to for a credit of £IOOO, on the joint personal security
of councillors, but councillors did not fancy the idea. Cr. Smith suggested
that a tax of 2/6 per cwt. on ail vegetables would help to keep things going.
Vegetables were sold under the trees in the Market Reserve every Wednes-
day and Saturday, and the stands were marked out by a little trench, and
later on small fees were charged for the privilege of having an open air
stall.
Cr. Hinds said they could derive a handsome income if stalls were
erected on the Market Reserve, especially on the line facing Hargreave
Street, but was silent when asked where the money to erect them w r as to
come from. Cr. Smith, with visions of a joint and several, suggested taxing
water carts and hawkers, saying he was opposed to borrowing on principle.
Cr. Smith’s suggestion was not adopted, but “The water carters,” says Mr.
McKillop, "a numerous body, hated Cr. Smith ever afterwards, but Cr.
Smith preferred their emnity to a joint and several.”
Eventually the Bank of New South Wales agreed to accommodate the
council, the credit not to exceed £IOOO. The conditions were noj; made
public.
PETITION FOR GRANT
The third meeting of the council was held on February 12th. At this
meeting CT. Davis, wito had a gift for composing official epistles and was
the scribe in chief of the council, read a lengthy memorial to the Governor
and the Legislative Council. The memorial, the first sent out by the
Castlemaine Council, is historically interesting, and also gves us some idea
of the difficulties facing the council and the prevaling opinion as to the
future of the town. With a few deletions not absolutely important, the
petition read as follows:-—“The Municipal Council of Castlemaine humbly
prays .... for an increased grant to this municipality, to be placed
on the present estimates, and desires to show what they believe you will
regai-d as a just foundation for this request.
“The principle of public grants being established and guaranteed, their
just apportionment must depend on the importance of the district, the sum
it has contributed to the general revenue, and the amount of expenditure
necessary for its social and public requirements. In each of these particu-
Situated in the centre of a number of the richest gold fields in the colony,
Situated in the centre of a number of the richest gold fields i \ the Colony,
already established as a depot of a vast district and the entrepot of one
stil] more considerable, Castlemaine seems destined to become the chief
provincial city.
“The material produced from this district has already equalled one-
fifth of that of the entire colony and still maintains, and promises to main-
tain, its superiority. Independently of its mineral wealth, its suburbs
abound with an unusually ruch alluvial soil, waiting only the hand of the
agriculturist to flourish vigorousy, and the neighbourhood of the Loddon is
famed for the exxcellence of its postrial capabilities . . . But. even irre-
spective of these, its great claim to extra assistance consists in the absolute
necessity of a vastly greater amount of expenditure than that demanded
by any muncnpality now existing, in order to place it industrially, socially
and sanitarily on a level with them. The physical difficulties of Castle-
ma.ne are great and peculiar. Geographically it is unfavorably circum-


stanced for the necessities of a large and important community. It was
only the alternative of relinquishing their businesses that compelled the
original inhabitants when the?.' were expelled from their premises near the
camp to locate themselves- on the site selected and sold by the Government
as the township. In almost every essential this site is seriously deficient.
“The present water supply from an intermittent creek, which for
some miles before it traverses Castlemaine, is the sole sewer for an ex-
tensive population, which office it has to perform here, and to which it
will hereafter be exclusively demoted. Means will have to be adopted at
■enormous expense for obtaining water from the Loddon or Alt. Alexandei
a distance of at least six miles. In another most important essential for
health and cleanliness —that is, sewerage and the conveyance of surface
water, the Government arrangement of the plan of Castlemaine, together
with the nature of the stratum it occupies, occasion unusual difficulties.
“Regardless of the natural formation of the locality which consists of
a series of hills and gullies, streets are laid out and ground sold at every
imaginable inclination on all sides for the sake of providing an uniformity
of five acre blocks. A natural drainage is hereby defeated, and the hard
rocky character of the ground at the shallowest depths will entail an ex-
traordinary outlay whatever plan of sewerage be adopted.
“Another demand upon tne funds of the municipality occurs in the
necessity which exists for altering the course of the creek, which at present
in its circuitous winding (ntirelj bisects Forest Creek (the chief Govern-
ment road) and entrenches upon the Market Square, entailing an artificial
road there to the prohibition of its legitimate and intended application.
This will probably require as a remedy th e excavation of a canal nearly a
juile in length and the filling up of its present course. Again, from the low
level of the swamp upon which some of the principal erections stand, it is
subject to inundations from the overflowing of the creek (one of which of a
serious nature we have just experienced). This will necessitate th e ex-
pense of a substantial bulwark along its banks —a disastrous flood had oc-
curred five days before, and many persons “lost consideably.” Moreover
the roads in this district are execrable to a degree, and no average expense
of road making will fairly estimate their cost,
“Many other sources of outlay might readily be enumerated, which,
like those already specified, are beyond the ordinary course of expecta-
tion, but we trust sufficient extra necessities and difficulties have been
indicated to establish our claim to an extra, allowance.
“The benefits which would accrue to the Government directly and in-
directly by the judicious improvement of Castlemaine are incalculable, but
the single item of the increased value of land, so much of which remains to
be sold in our neighbourhood, which increase will be proportioned to the
amount allowed and expended for Castlemaine improvements, renders the
granting of this prayer no less a matter of sound policy than of justice.
And your petitioners will ever pray, etc.”
RULES DRAWN UP
After some discussion by councillors, in which, among other things it
was said that the memorial was too long, that it was not altogether true,
that the town was described a« so miserable and so wretched that it
would cause the Government to withdraw the promised grant of £7,500, as
they would not consider such a place would become a leading town, the peti-
tion was ordered to be despatched, but the Government, says Mr. McKillop,
“did not see its way” to grant the £15,000, the sum suggested by Cr
Davis.
A sub-committee had been appointed to draft a set of rules for the


conduct of meetings, and at the fifth council meeting, Cr. Davis, who had
j,radically drafted them, read them o*er to the council, and they were re-
served to committee for consideration and eventually adopted. The chairman
then read a letter from a Mr. Harding, wh« requested permission to cut
down a tree in front of the “French and English" hotel, as he “wa s in want
of firewood." “This request," says Mr. McTCillop, was most indignantly
refused.”
At the sixth council meeting, February 26th, tenders were received for
making Castlemaine’s first assessment. There were seven tenders, one at
£7 per week, two at £BSO each, one at 5 per cent., one at 15/- per cent.,
one at I per cent., and one at I per cent, The tender of Mr. N. Binns at I
per cent was accepted, and when it became known next day there wa s a
howl of protest from the ratepayers, who claimed that Mr. Binns, in order
to make as much as possible out of the job, would make the assessments
very high. Councillors were condemned on all sides but they stuck to
Mr. Binns, who proved to be a conscientous and upright man—the right
man for tue job, and the first man to estimate the value of each property
in tne Municipality of Castlemaine.
At the seventh council meeting, six applications were received for the
position of surveyor at £IOO per year (a part-time job). An open vote was
taken, and as the exhaustive ballot was not in vogue, the candidate who on
the first show of hands got the most votes, got the job. Mr. Poeppel, a local
man, was elected. He scored two votes, one candidate got a “duck,” and
the others one each.
Mr. Poeppel Avas a German, and his knowledge of English very limited.
This caused son.e confusion. The council could not decipher hi s reports,
and be could not explain them in understandable English, and as he some-
times did not fully comprehend the council’s instructions, he Avas apt to
get on the Avrong job, so he did not last long, for we find in Mr. McKillop’s
review of the council meeting on 7th September—some six months later—
the following : “ The next business was to consider the applications for the
position of surveyor. To the great indignation of the ‘ Mail,’ who con-
sidered the thin end of the jobbery wedge Avas being inserted, th e appli-
cations were considered in committee.”
There were 13 applicants from all parts of the Colony, and a local man,
Mr. Price, was elected at a salary of £2OO per year and the right to practice
privately. Among the applicants was Mr. Poeppel, the retiring surveyor.
At the eighth council meeting the chairman announced that the esti-
mates being passed in Parliament, the grant of £7500 Avould now be avail-
able.
Mr. Palmer alluded to the incom-enient hour at which the council met,
saying there was just time to SAvallow a cup of tea after a hard day’s work
and rush off to the meetings. Six o’clock was not a suitable time, and it
should be fixed earlier or later. No action was taken, but some months
later the hour was altered to 3 p.m.,. much to th e indignation of many rate-
payers who were in hte habit of attending the council meetings and follow-
ing the proceeding:,, for to the business and working men 3 in the afternoon
v. as a- prohibitive hour.
“The attendance of the public,” says Mr. McKiTlop, “ \A r as unusually large,
as eA'ery one was interested in the doings of the council. Some wanted im-
provements in then localities, and others were anxious to know what tax
Avould be imposed on them for the luxury of a council. Many attended the
meetings as they regarded them as means of entertainment, and of course
the doings of the council were severely criticised in the streets, public houses
and Press.
At the council meeting on Bth April, a letter was received from Dr.
I’reshaw, requesting the presence of the councillors in the procession at the


ceremony o 1 laying- the foundation of the National School on the 15th inst.
The invitation was accepted.
“ The council,” writes Mr. McKillop, “ adjourned early, as most of them
no coubt wished to witness the first performance in Castlemaine’s new
theatre (not yet called Theatre Royal). The attraction was the beautiful
and notorious Lola Montez. in her marvellous spider dance, and during- the
performance there was something akin to a riot.”
On 15th April tenders were received for clearing the stumps from Mos-
tyn and Hargraves streets, but none were/ accepted, and the specifications
were amended by adding the following words ; “ That the holes be refilled
and rammed every 12 inches.” Several councillors complained of the un-
satisfactory way in which the Barker street stump moving contract had
been carried out. The specifications stated that holes should be well filled
and properly rammed, but all the ramming councillors could see was the
contractor’s man giving an occasional jump on the soil with his feet.
The matter of purchasing a saf e for the council’s books was left in the
hands of the chairman. Of course there was no town hall or town clerk’s
office. The town clerk did his work at his own home, and for the conveni-
ence of ratepayers, he was to be found at Cr. Andrews store, at the corner
of Forest and Barker streets from 3 to 5 every afternoon.
Special meetings of the council were frequently held, as the people were
clamoring for work to be done. The streets were like quagmires, and no
footpaths had yet been formed or system of drainage adopted. It was im-
possible for the council to get on to that work until the Government grant
came to hand, but the Government refused to hand over any money until a
rate was struck.
Mr. Binns, urged on by the council, was doing his best to finish the
assessment of the town, the total being £'51,220/10/-, and that he was doing
the suburban districts, which he expected to total £30,000.
ERECTION OF CATTLE YARDS
It was decided to petition the Government for the reservation of four
acres of land for municipal yards, and the surveyor was instructed to pre-
pare an estimate of the cost of erecting yards capable of holding from 200 to
300 head of cattle. It was considered “ cattle yards would bring in a con-
siderable revenue.”
The petition was favorably received ; 4 acres of ground situated at the
back of the gaol were selected by councillors. Tenders were called, but they
greatly exceeded the sum appropriated for that purpose, and it was re-
solved that two acres only should be fenced, such fence to be 7ft. high, and
that cattle and drafting yards be built, but that the slaughter houses be
delayed until a further grant of money could be obtained. £1,415 was spent
on the yards but the butchers said they were no good to them without
slaughter house facilities so the council spent another £SOO on a slaughter
house. However, by the time the slaughter house was completed the butch-
ers had built, each one, his own slaughter house, and the yards became a
total loss. This was the only financial slip made during the eight years in
which the town council functioned.
The ratepayers held indignation meetings at which petitions were signed
and sent to councillors, requesting them (all of them) to resign and so make
room for men who ‘‘would not so disgracefully waste the ratepayers money.”
Five of the seven wished to resign at once but further consideration, as-
sisted by the arguments put forth by the other two councillors resulted in
their “sitting tight.”
A s Mr. Martin, the first town clerk, intended to leave the district, Cr
McMillan gave notice of motion for the appointment of a town clerk at £3OO


i ~<cn+ mppfin°' Mr Henry Christophers, a local man,
was Appointed U applications from all parts of the colony
The council and prospective ratepayers were greatly concerned at the
attitude of the Government on the rating question. Barb m the > ear
Government had insisted on the Bast Collingwood Council imposing a rate
cm 1/- in the £1 on all property valued, and every ratepayer was up a»am. t
sLh a “tiff rate If the Government insisted on a 1/- rate the council saw
nothin'- for it but to get Mr. Binns to fare up to the situation and reduce his
The council wen, fully into the question, end after much cor-
respondence with the Government, and the influential assistance of Castle-
maine’“ two Parliamentary members (Messrs. Pike and Wheeler) received
th welcome news that it had been decided to allow the council to levy a
minimum rate of lid in the £l. This seemed satisfactory to
but the prospective ratepayers strongly resented the imposition of what
they considered to be an extortionate rate; 3d in the pound was their id
of a fair thin- but the council, having in view the Government’s opinion,
feetded to nx thefate at 6d, and for this, says Mr. McKiliop. they were
subject to much vilification.
lOn June 6th. it was decided on the otimon of Cr. Davis, to invite the
gratuitous services of a duly qualified resident Practitioner as officer o
health for the district.” Dr.Preshaw was appointed—the first to occupy that
office. There were several applicants.
FINE COUNCILLOR AND TOWNSMAN
The next meeting of the council (18th Juno) was mot attended by Cr
Davis who tendered his resignation in the following letter : Deal feir,
The experience I have now had satisfies me that I must either sacrifice my
rulvate obligations of neglect a due attention to the duties entrusted to me
as a member of vour council. My circumstances will not aftoid the first*
nor my conscience the last. I therefore with sincere regret, and only after
mature deliberation, feel bound to place in your hands my resignation a s a
member of the Municipal Council. Sir, your obedient servant, .Joseph
Davis.”
“It is doubtful,’ says Mr. McKiliop. “if Castlemaine has ever had a
more enthusiastic, hard-working and deep-thinking councillor than Mr.
Joseph Davis. He was the ablest councillor at tlh e table, and his services
W Caethmame cannot be over-estimated. He practically flxed the new
boundaries, he selected the site for the botanical gardens, he drafted- the
standing orders in fact he was a most energetic, far-seeing man, and one
whose services have not been adequately recognised, while his very exist-
ence is unknown to the great majority of ratepayers today.
If ever a Councillor deserved seme public acknowledgment it was Cr.
Davis yet we have no Davis street. We have a street named after a man
like Mostyn and non© after a man like Davis. (Mostyn was one of the Camp
Commissioners, and appears to have been such an arrogant and officious
character that he was “hated by the diggers”). Unfortunately, con-
tinues Mr McKiliop, “he was not too well endowed with this worlds goods
ana could not spare the time to attend to his council duties, for councillors
devoted three afternoons regularly, and sometimes more, to their du les,
und in addition it was a costly matter, as after every meeting an adjourn-
ment was made for refreshments, which occupied a considerable amount of
time and proved rather expensive.”
The council paid a high tribute to the worth of Mr. Davis, and his resig-
nation was received with sincere regret. The follow-ing motion appears in
the minutes: “That this council in accepting the resignation of Joseph
Pavis, Esq., a s a member of their body on the grounds stated by him. desire


to express their very great regret at losing so useful a member, and to re-
turn to him their earnest thanks for the valuable assistance he has so uni-
formly and zealously rendered to the council in all their proceedings.” (We
will meet Mr. Davis ag-ain as we proceed.)
On, the 27th July, 1856, .the ratepayers showed their appreciation of Mr.
Davis by banquctting him at the Freemason's Tavern, the chair being occu-
pied by Mr. J. A. Wheeler, M.L.C. The Freemason’s Tavern, vide advt. in
“ Mail," 29/2/57, stood at the corner of Mostyn and Union streets, and Mr.
Soady, the proprietor, begs to inform the public that he has secured the
services of a first class cook from London, High class meals and every
comfort. Best ales, wines and spirits.”
At the same meeting the chairman announced that the Government had
promised to erect a new gaol and would consult the council when select-
ing the site. Councillors considered that the hill to the west of the town was
a suitable site and the gaol, now the Reformatory prison, today stands on
that hill.
On June 24th, the chairman announced that he had interviewed Cap-
tain McMahon, Chief Commissioner of Police, who said he considered a
force of eight constables and two officers would be sufficient for the main
part of the town, as he had not many men to spare. The force would be at
the service of the council, but under the command and control of the In-
spector, and would be stationed in the populated part of the town, while the
comparatively uninhabited part would be looked after by the ordinary dis-
trict police. The council demurred at accepting such a small force, and
Cr. McMillan said they should be under the direct control of the council and
it was necessary to have more detectives. However, the council agreed and
very shortly the arrangement was carried into force.
The town clerk submitted a list of names of ratepayers, and it was
decided that the council should sit as a Revision Court to hear appeals and
applications on 4th July at 6 p.m., in order that the ratepayers’ roll might
be drawn up.
On :hc motion of the chairman, it was decided to apply to the Govern-
ment to apportion the several sites for public buildings on section 14, con-
sulting with the council in respect thereto. (Block 14. the square block be-
tween Lyttleton and Templeton, and Barker and Hargraves streets had,
when the town was surveyed, been set apart—to be used for the purposes
of the Government and municipality).
The question of a cemetery was discussed. Campbell’s Creek site was
considered too far away, and a motion was carried applying for the reserva-
tion of 20 acres of ground in the municipality. “ Councillors generally were
in favor of a cemetery on the site of the present North Castlemaine golf
links, and doubtless it would have been there today if the Government had
granted their application, but ” says Mr. McKillop, ‘This motion had not a.
favorable reception at headquarters.”
The surveyor was instructed to prepare specifications for levelling and
draining the streets.
Cr. Hinds moved that the district surveyor be asked to have all the
posts that were put in to make the line of streets cut down to the level of
the ground, and this motion was carried. The posts were several feet above
the ground, and proved an obstruction, especially at night time when persons
were ploughing home through the mud. There were no street lamps and
the majority of residents carried lanterns when moving about after dark.
RATING OF MINERS’ TENTS
On 4th July, 1856, at 6 p.m., the council sat as a revision court. The
roll was produced and contained twelve hundred names. There was a


f inHkmant ratepayers and the first to step forward and
good attendance Clugson He said, with a loud voice and in a
r sorrier;:
individual P^ st ;”“ McMiUan it scandal-
*Z KS.i’an MW ttot the 'law olßces held that the conncl! could rate tents.
TLhe ciax.ir. norncil’s powers followed, and eventually it was de-
ad'ourn so a sAo obtain the opinion of the Crown law offices as to
cided to adjourn so as erected on ground held under miners
the power of the council to text* £^m the Attorney General
bating that ’under 3 the 30th section of the Act, the council could rate all
contention that tents could be taxed and
the revision court composed of councillors again met and carried oi G
tirr^
by the simple device of pulling down then cents and w c< . i r-
them on land outside th e borough boundary evaded the rate
The-e were two nominations tor the seat vacated -by Mr. Davis, .
T ‘ 1 Al>■ Wheeler MIC. Mr. Love’s nomination described Mr. Lo\e
Pr °osSb n e Ma U rk e rSquare" without gettfng up to the knees in
impossible to get a be done so that ladies might not be
™L .“salty ,honey n. Cr. Hinds’ hoo. shop. (Cheers and
Sfmnds owned a boot shop In Market Square, and did a big trade In
long boots for men. In the mud of the streets the women, unable to.et 1 g
c • + - .na +>wniir smaller feet were at a disadvantage, ihis w
boots Of a size to fit then smaller leer were a services of a
nnied bv Mr Hinds who advertised that having secured trie
n^e^^rr^r-r^H^brio^qnest
° f lo vif m°ndl‘ whom Mr. McKillop remarks was a fiery tempered gentle-
r r
. ner sneakers condemned Mr Wilson for making the remarks he did. Tin
in favor of Mr Lowe, whereupon Mr. Wilson, on behalf of . . ’
demanded a pol' The chairman then announced that the poll would take
place th" next day at the theatre, commencing at 8 In the morning and
terminating at 4 in the afternoon.
YEAR 1856
in order to give an idea of the manner in which elections were oo n ‘
ducted, the following official report of this election, which was presen ed
the next council meeting, is worth reproduction. It read ;


“ At a public meeting duly called and held at the Theatre Royal or Hall
of Castlemaine on Thursday. 10th July. 1856. at 12 o’clock noon, the chair-
man of the council, Thomas Andrews, Esq., having taken the chair, pro-
ceeded to read the notice which had been given for the election of a coun-
cillor iix the place of Joseph Davis, Esq., who had resigned, and having
read the clause of the Act for the present proceedings the chairman called
upon the voters to elect two assessors to assist him. There were about 80
persons present. Mr. Wheeler proposed, and Mr. Froomes. Junr. seconded,
that Mr Lewis Sampson be an assessor. Mr. Hitchcock proposed, and Mr.
Cohen seconded, that Mr. John Ridley McEwen be an assessor. No other
person being proposed, the chairman put the names to the vote, which was
carried dem. con., whereupon Messrs. Sampson and McEwen took their
seats as assessors. The chairman then called for the nomination of candi-
dates, whereupon Mr. Trainor rose and proposed Samuel Love Esq. as a
fit and proper person for councillor. Mr. Bagshawe seconded, and Mr_Hitt-
cock supported Mr. Wilson then rose and proposed James Atkin Wheeler,
Esq. as a fit and proper person and Mr. Joshua seconded. No other candi-
date being proposed, the chairman and the assessors called for a show of
hands, but some of the voters wishing to hear the views of the candidates
first this was agreed to. and the chairman called on Mr. Love who ad-
dressed the meeting, and was followed by Mr. Wheeler to the latter various
ouestions being put. The chairman and assessors then took a show o
hands, first for Mr. Love, and next for Mr. Wheeler, and the chairman mad
a declaration thereof, viz., for Mr. Love 26, for Mr. Wheeler 12 Mr. W. W.
Wilson then demanded a poll on behalf of Mr. Wheeler which was ac-
corded and tb e chairman announced that tho poll would take place in
same building on the following day. and would be open from 8 a.m. to 4
p.m. Votes of thanks were then carried by acclamation to the chan man and
to the assessors, and the meeting closed.
“On Friday 11th July, at 8 a.m., the poll was opened in a room of the
Theatre Royal hotel, two poll clerks being engaged in taking down the
names of voters for the respective candidates, each clerk taking the names
for both and either candidate as the votes were given via voce, and the
chairman and the assessors attended during the day Several
were made as to the qualifications of voters on either side, and some
votes tendered were not allowed. In the latter part of the day, as voters
crowded in more, it was agreed by all parties that some objections should
stand over for decision after the close of the poll, the names of the otesr
objected to being taken down and noted, two persons on each side being
named as agents. At 4 o’clock the poll was closed. The numbers were
then found to be—for Mr. Wheeler 163, for Mr. Love 137 ’ The ro °™ . ei “®
cleared the chairman, assessors, candidates, Messrs. Hitchcock and
Smith for Mr. Love, and Messrs. Wilson and Cohen for Mr. Wheeler with
the poll clerks sat for half an hour and through ttie objections,
o' which three were allowed, and the names of J. WJhittaker, R. Laurie and
J Daniel were struck off as not qualified. The other objections vere dis-
allowed, among which only need be noted the following, viz., George Har-
nson and H N. L Kentish, Government officers residing on the Camp,
whose favor it was alleged that they paid rent tor their dwellings and were
thus bona fide householders of £IOO value; also Chu-a-luk, missionary, and
Ah Cry, lodginghouse keeper, both Chinamen, against whom it was put
that being specially taxed and treated different from all other peoples thev
l ad no status in the colony, but the objection was not pressed, and it was
ruled that the VAct did not exclude any foreigners. The chairman and as-
sessors then having settled the poll, adjourned with the other pa,ties to
the adjoining theatre,, where the public had congregated In unusual num-


bers, the pJace. being full and a great deal of cheering, etc., prevailing. The
chairman addressed the meeting, and said he was glad to see so much ordei
and such interest excited at the same time on this public matter, and he an-
nounced the final state of the poll to be—for Mr. Wheeler 160, for Mr. Love
137, majority for Mr. Wheeler 23 votes, and declared James Atkin Wheeler
Esq. to be duly elected a member of this council. Cheers and groans with
a. great noise followed, and on Mr. Wheeler being called on he could not
obtain a hearing, neither could Mr. Love, who followed, in trying it, nor
could other leading men who attempted to obtain silence, and failing in his
exertions to get order, the chairman dissolved the meeting without any
breach of the peace occurring, only a strong demonstration of party feeling,
closed with cheers for the chair.—Thomas Andrews chairman, L. Sampson
assessor, T. R. McEwen assessor. Council Room, Castlemaine, 12th July
1856. Henry Christophers, Town Clerk.”
This election brought the question of the assessment of the Camp offi-
cials to the front. When Mr. Binns made his assessment residents of the
Camp had been exempted, as the feeling still lingered that the Camp was
“sacred”. AH the military and Government officers resided there and
comprised a little select community of their own away from the towns-
people, but at election of Captain Harrison, P.M., and Mr. Kentish, clerk of
courts, came to the polling booth and vcted, despite the fact that they were
exempted from rates. This was noticed by Mr. Binns, who promptly drew
up a supplementary estimate comprising 26 householders on the Camp. He
presented this to the council, stating that the Camp people admitted their
right to assessment by voting. The Camp residents were very indignant
at this levelling process, and sighed for the good old days so that they
could make an example of Mr. Binns for his outrageous conduct. But as
the old days had gone, they interviewed councillors!, and expressed their in-
dignation. When it became before the council, Cr r Palmer moved and Cr.
Paynter seconded, that only those officers who voted at the last election be
rated, and the motion was carried. Cr. Smith wanted to rate the whole
Camp, but get no support.
BOER WAR VERSE
Mr. McKillop wrote in 1908, “Mr. Kentish is still with us today.” He
then resided in Doveton Street in the house now occupied by Mr. H. W.
Hague. Mr. Kentish frequtnely contributed verses of topical affairs
to the “Mail”. The present -writer has a small collection of
those verses, and in it are some lines written in January, 1900, entitled
“Our Boys at the Front.” The front at that time was on the South African
VeJdt during the Boer War 1899-1902. During the early part of the war, the
British suffered severely. Not knowing the country, and unused to the bush
type of fighting adopted by the Boers, whole battalions were wiped out by
surprise attacks when encamped by night. The Australian Government
sent out a call to her young men to enlist for service in South Africa, every
man to provide his own horse and equipment. In this way several mounted
“contingents,” composed of men, most of whom were good bushmen, were
raised and carried in troop ships to South Africa. This was the first time in
the history of Australia that her sons had fought side by side with seasoned
British soldiers, and there was a certain amount of anxiety as to how they
would acquit themselves. Mr. Kentish in the following lines has expressed
something of the feelings of all Australians when the news first crime
through to the effect that our boys had worthily upheld themselves in war.
The lines read:
The gallant few who’ve gone afar
To combat Britain’s foes,
Have bravely held themselves in war,


And clearly shown themselves to those
Who dared to doubt that scions ta’em
From British stock will e’er,
When grafted, their true growth maintain,
No matter when or where.
The blood which in their veins doth flow, »
With valor fills each heart,;
And clearly to the world doth show
That they are still a part
Of that great stream of British blood,
From whence there e’er hath run
Through British hearts, a mighty flood,
Wherever shines the sun.
YEAR 1856
The actuary of the Savings Bank wrote to the meeting on the 12th August
askin- for a site for the bank on Block 14, either in Hargreaves or Lyttle-
ton Streets. The council thought ah the frontages to these streets had
teen allotted and agreed to let the bank have an allotment facing Temple-
ton Street. Later on, however, a lot in Hargreaves Street was granted.
There was no Town Clerk’s office, a nd as that officer now had a con-
siderable amount of work to do and documents to take care of, it was de-
cided to advertise in the Press to see if a suitable office could be obtained
until the council was in a position to build \offices of its own. In reply five
offers were received, including one from Messrs. Matthews and Saint offer-
ing the lower front room lof the “Mail” office at £4 per week. Cr. McMillan
contended that they should keep to the present room as long as they could
and considered there was no necessity to spend £4 a week in this way. Cr,
Paynter said they should have a room to themselves, and moved that the
offer of Matthews and Saint be accepted. Cr. McMillan heatedly said that
£4 a week was an extortionate rent and he would let them have four or five
rooms for that amount. There being no seconder to Cr. Paynter’s motion,
Cr. Smith moved that the offer be accepted, but he also failed to get a
seconder. Cr. Palmer then said he would second Cr. Paynter’s motion, pro-
vided Messrs. Matthews and Saint put in a stove and rented the room by
the week. Cr. Paynter agreed to add this to his motion, and it was carried
by four votes to three. Matthews and Saint refused the conditions im-
posed, and therefore things went on as usual.
The tender of J. Morgan and Son at £45 was accepted for clearing the
stumps from Lyttleton Street, and that of Peter McCallum at £25 for re-
moving stumps from the Market Reserve.
At a special meeting on 17th July, specifications for draining and [e-
pairing with metal the principal streets was adopted, being , says Mr. Me-
Killop, “the first metal agreed to in the municipality and the first drainage.”
On the 22nd July a meeting of 400 diggers was held in the theatre, and
protested against the rating of diggers’ tents, and the council was spoken
of in very uncomplimentary terms.”
Cr. Wheeler took his seat on 29th July. The Commissioner of Public
Works wrote stating that a sum would be placed on the estimates (in re-
sponse to previous representations of the council) for altering the course
of Forest Creek, and councillors expressed their satisfaction.
At a previous meeting it was decided to invite applications for an In-
spector of Nuisances. There were 16 after the job, which went to “our old
friend, Mr. Joseph Davis.” The salary was fixed at £156 per annum,.
Under the Act the council had to prepare and publish a half-yearly re-
port and statement of accounts, and the Town Clerk said it had been pre-
pared and was ready for the consideration of the council.


CEMETERY IN TEMPLETON STREET
The chairman moved that public notice be given that the fencing and
palings be removed from the old cemetery in Templeton Street. This
motion gave rise to a discussion on the matter of cemeteries which was
not finalised until some four months later. From Mr. McKillop’s review
i.f these'discussions, supplemented by data collected by the Pioneers’ As-
sociation, the fo’lowing regarding the burial places of the 50’s has been
compiled;
About the latter part of November, 1851, Captain Wright, Chief Com-
missioner, then the controller of this Castlemaine goldfield, ordered that a
plot of giiound be reserved as a burial place. The land selected was all or
nearly all of that block lying between Campbell and Templeton Streets and
Darker and Hargreaves Streets (of course, there were no streets then).
“The main portion of the cemetery,” says Mr. McKillop,” “was in the Tower
land facing Templeton Street." At the end of January, 1853, the last inter-
ment was made in the cemetery.
There was another burial ground at Pennyweight Flat (about a mile or
so to the east lof the town), also a small plot of ground at Diamond Gully,
in which were interred a few bodies.
The late Mr. E. Taylor, in the booklet compiled by him on the occasion
of the 50th anniversary of the Castlemaine District Association of Pioneers
and Old Residents, refers to the Pennyweight Flat cemetery as the Chil-
dren’s Cemetery, and by that name it is generally known today.
“On April 27th, 1918,” writes Mr. Taylor, “the P. and O.R. Association
was gazetted trustees of an old burial place at Pennyweight Plat, and as the
fence around the place had fallen to pieces through old age, a joint com-
mittee of representatives of the Old Schoolboys and the Old Pioneers’ As-
sociations canvassed the town for funds in aid of refencing and renovating
this historic spot The Borough Council headed the list with £lO, the
Pioneers added £5/5/-, Mr. F. Ho donated £5, Messrs. McKillop and Wil-
liams (of the “Mail”) followed with £2/2/-. These sums, with public sub-
scriptions, provi ’ed enough to enable the committee to fence the old cemet-
ery with concrete posts with wires attached, and in addition, a handsome
memorial stone was erected in the enclosure, where repose the remains of
about 200 bodies, mostly children, whose constitutions succumbed to the
hard life on the goldfields.”
The memorial stone was unveiled by Mr. .Taylor, hon. secretary of
the Pioneers and Old Residents .Association on Sunday, January 26tb
1930, in the presence of a large gathering of people. The ground had been
put in order by working bees, and presented a clean and tidy appearance
and this spot with its numerous tombs has a history almost as early as
any other place in the district, as ome of the burials took place there in
1852. The memorial stone was a gift of Mr. George Ferries, and bears the
following inscription :
“ Pennyweight Flat Cemetery, 1852-1857. Restored and fenced 1930.
This stone was unveiled in honor of the Pioneers of the Forest Creek Gold-
field, January 26th, 19330. Erected by Public Subscription.”
This plot of ground, the last resting place of those children of the
50’s, has been looked after and kept in good order by the P. and O.R.
Association. It is periodically visited and inspected, and any necessary
cleaning up or repairs effected by a working bee of ther members, two or
three Saturday afternoons being voluntarily devoted to the job.
THE DIAMOND GULLY CEMETERY
In 1886 (I again quote Mr. Taylor), the Association applied to have
reserved a plot of ground at the foot of Diamond Gully, wherein were


interested several bodies of the early diggers, and to have- the land vested
in the Association. This request was granted.
The Association then fenced the land and planted it with Oxnamental
trees to mark the final resting place of the brave hearts who had left home
and kindred in the old country, had travelled thousands of miles, and who
had braved dangers and difficulties to seek their fortunes on the Victorian
goldfields.
In addition to fencing and improving this old burial place the Associa-
tion further marked the spot on September 28th, 1877, by erecting a sub-
stantial memorial stone, which was unveiled by Mr, Thomas Elliot, the
then Mayor. The stone bears the following inscription :
“ Erected by the Pioneers’ Association of the Castlemaine District in
Memory of the Early Residents interred here in the years 1852-54. Their
works live after them, 1887.”
This plot has also been well cared for by the Association. The sub-
stantial post and rail fence surrounding it is still in good condition, but the
ornamental trees, mostly vareties of pine, have grown to a considerable
height, and as it was feared that the roots would damage the memorial
stone, Mr. Charley Gaulton, the gardens curator, also an Association
member, volunteered to inspect them. He did so, and recommended their
removal, and this was done during the following summer. Members of
the association reg-ret that these 50 year-old trees have to go and it was
with great reluctance they decided to have them uprooted.
In Mr. Taylor’s booklet there are several interesting photographs of
old time personalities of the district, public buildings, memorials and
monuments, including the memoral stone in the old cemetery at Diamond
Gully taken before there was a tree planted upon it. A copy of this book-
let is given free to all new members, and may be purchased at cost price
by any reader interested, on application to the non. secretary, Mr. W.
Hodgson.
CAMPBELL’S CREEK SITE FOR CEMETERY
At the council meeting held on September 23rd, 1856, the chairman said
it was time the council came to a decision as to the site for a cemetery.
Cr. Smith said he favored the site at Campbell’s Creek, and that it was not
too far, and moved that the site at Campbell’s Creek be approved of as
the municipal cemetery. Cr. Paynter moved as an amendment that the
district surveyor accompany the chairman and Mr. Smith with a view to
marking out 30 or 40 acres for a new cemetery. Cr. Richards seconded the
amendment. He said he preferred to have the new cemetery within the
municipality and under the control of the council and that there was a
suitable site over the ranges to the east of the town and that a road might
be opened to it for £IOO, wdiereas for that at Campbell’s Creek a bridge was
required to be built. Cr. Smith, in reply, said the Government would be
asked to build the bridge, and urged that the Campbell’s Creek site w r as
mor e central and convenient to the township. The chairman retorted that
he would prefer the Government to make the road and fence in the new
cemetery. The amendment was carried.
At later meetings the council decided on the casting vote of the chair-
man, to ask the Government to grant the area on the east of the town but,
like a previous request for the site of the present golf course, the Govern-
ment refused to grant it as it was within the boundaries of the municipal-
ity, 'being,” says Mr. McKillop, “wiser than the councillors,” and eventu-
ally, after many unsuccessful attempts to overcame the Government’s
opposition, tne matter was dropped and Campbell’s Creek became the
municipal cemetery.


At a meeting held on November l&th, 1850, the council resolved “that
a contract be taken forthwith for the *emoval of ad bodies 01 of
bodies to be found in the Id cemetery in Templeton street to the new ceme-
tery at Campbell’s Creek, together with any palings, head boards oi any
other marks about the same, that separate graves be prepared for such as
be found separately interred, that all remains be placed in new coffins, and
that the whole thereof shall be conveyed to and interred in the new
cemetery with ail proper decency and order under the superintendence of
the Municipal Council.
REMOVAL OF REMAINS
At the council meeting held on 25th November, the tender of Mr. W.
Newbound, for the removal of the bodies from the Templeton street
cemetery to that of Campbell’s Creek, was accepted, the amount being £225,
which sum had Deen granted to the council to carry out the woik.
At the. next meeting, December 2nd., the town clerk informed the coun-
cil that Mr. Newbound would commence to remove the bodies on the Friday
evening at 8 o’clock. Mr. Paynter said the railings from the cemetery
should be used for fencing the old cemetery at Diamond Gully, for al-
though it was not intended to use the latter as a cemeterj, it was desiiatale
to protect the ground from intrusion by diggers and others. He moved to
that effect. The town clerk said that bodies were still being interred in
the cemetery at Pennyweight Flat, near Moonlight. The chairman (Mr.
Andrews) in opposing the motion, said that these old cemeteries were under
the charge and management of the Government and that the council
would be gjoing beyond its duty in interfering with them, and he moved an
amendment that the attention of the Warden be drawn to those old ceme-
teries with a view of preserving them from intrusion. Councillor McMillan
seconded the amendment, and said that digging was intruding close on
the Diamond Gully cemetery and that in the other in Pennweight, the
bodies were scarcely buried at all owing to its rocky nature. Cr. Paynter,
in reply, said that although the council might not have the power to
remove these cemeteries, still for the sake of public health it might pre-
serve that at Diamond Gully as proposed, mid he wished the council to
exercise its authority fully within the district and not allow these matters
to continue in the hands of th e Government officials at the Camp. How-
ever the amendment was carried and Mr. Paynter lodged a protest.
REMAINS DISINTERRED
The question of the hour at which the bodies should be removed was
discussed at length by the councillors. Some wanted the work to be done
late at night, some early in the morning, and some during the day, the
advocates of hte latter stating that the people would say that the bodies
were smuggled away if it were done at night. Eventually 6 p.m. on the
following Friday was fixed. The council acted in the matter of the re-
moval of the bodies with every consideration for the feelings of relatives
and the public, Three months’ notice had been given of the intention to
remove the bodies, and in a great many cases relatives of persons buried
in the cemetery had the bodies disinterred, plcaed in a hearse and conveyed
to the Campbell’s Creek cemetery. The proceedings in most cases were
in the nature of a funeral, with procession, church service, etc. The bodies
of those who had no relatives in the town were removed by Mr. Newbound
on the sth December, 1856, in tho presence of the councillors, ministers of
religion, Camp officials, health officer, etc. The bodies were placed on
drays and carted quietly through the streets to the Campbell’;- Creek ceme*


tery, and Mr. Now bound (who afterwards became a member of th e Borough
Council) received Ids £225 in due course. Dr. Preshaw (whose photograph
hangs in the library of the Mechanics’ Institute) felt himself
slighted through not being given control of the whole proceedings. Dr.
Preshaw was the municipal health officer, and some strong correspondence
passed between him and the council, but the trouble was amicably settled
without any one being hurt.
On August 19th, 1856, the first half yearly report of the council ap-
peared in the Press, and occupied fully three columns. It gave exhaustive
particulars as to the work completed, the number of meetings held, the
attendance of councillors, the dates of appointments and a full statement
of receipts and expenditure. The principal receipts were : Cash credit
with bank, £1000; police fines, £43/12/-; Government grant, £3750. The
expenditure showed £IOOO returned to the Bank of New South Wales, £3OO
on works, and about £3OOO on hand. It was stated that th e assessment
came to H 5.513.
At a previous meeting the chairman had alluded to a notification in the
Government Gazette appointing Kyneton as the place of nominations for
the election of members to the Legislative Council for the newly formed
M estern Province, and strongly condemned such a proceedings as ignoring
both the importance and locality of Castlemaine as the great centre of the
goldfields. He moved that a memorial be immediately forwarded to his
Excellency praying that Castlemaine be the place of nomination. Cr
Wheeler seconded the motion and warmly supported it. Cr. Paynter fol-
lowed, and said the position of Castlemaine must be resolutely maintained
by the council and the inhabitants. Other councillors spoke in the same
strain, and the motion was carried unanimously.
O n August 26th. 1856, a letter was received from the Government de-
clining to accede to the council’s request—or prayer. “ The letter got on
the nerves of the councillors.’ says Mr. McKillop, “who, being - adventurous
men of the world wr e particularly annoyed at being forced to play second
fiddle to sleepy but ancient Kyneton.” The feeling was that a strong indi-
cation of their disapproval should be given, and Cr. McMillan moved, and
Cr. Paynter seconded, that the letter be not received, and the motion was
carried.
NO STREET LIGHTS
There were 14 applicants for the position of collector at £2OO a year
and the first town clerk, Mr. E. Martin, who ha d returned to the distric*’
secured the appointment. On the motion of Cr. Smith, a by-law in re-
ference to the disposal of night soil was introduced, but a motion by the
same gentleman to erect a number of street lamps at the principal corners
was defeated. Some of the councillors in opposing the motion said it
was the wrong time to propose such a motion as the summer was coming
on to which Cr. Smith forcibly retorted that holes were equally as danger-
ous in summer as in winter. Cr. Smith had more success with his next
motion, that the police be instructed to prevent the breaking in of young
horses (by lounging or otherwise) within the immediate precincts of the
town, which was carried.
Cr. Palmer, on September 2nd, tendered his resignation as a member
of the council, owing to being unable to attend the meetings through infre-
quent absences in Melbourne, and his resignation was accepted with regret
and the election to fill the vacancy was fixed for the 26th instant. Cr
Palmer was in every way a good councillor, and laid the groundwork of
many good principles of municipal management. At the municipal confer-
ence he was the man of the hour, and in many ways Castlemaine is in-
debted to him. yet we have nothing to perpetuate his memory. We have a


Caroline street, tor instance, but no P» ! mer street, yet Mr. Palmer did
more for Castlemaine than Caroline did. whoever she may have been. Mr
Palmer in the following month topped the poll at the first Legislative As-
sembly election in the district, indicating the high opinion entertained
of him by his contemporaries.
His resignation navrng been accepted, Qr,. McMillan wanted some
action taken to check the numerous robberies in the town, but he couldn’t
suggest any means of preventing them, so no action was taken.
A motion by Cr. Smith that a by-law be passed prohibiting the keeping
of swine in th e main portion of the township was carried after vigorous
opposition by Crs. Hinds and McMillan.
On September 23rd, a letter was received from the Commissioner ot
Public Works, declining to erect a court house and lock-up, as same were
not required. Cr. Paynter said they should insist on the work being under-
taken, as both court house and lock-up were now on the Camp which was
very inconvenient, and the buildings were totally inadequate for xequiie-
ments. It was decided to again offer the request. Cr. Smith brought
up the repoit of the Public Works committee which was adopted. It con-
tained the following : “ A letter was received from the town surveyor, als«
present, seeking authority to employ two persons as chainmen to assist in
taking the levels of the township. He also pointed out the necesity for
these levels being taken at once for the advantage and convenience of the
citizens. It was resolved to recommend that the said levels through the
principal streets of the town be forthwith taken, and plans thereof be pre-
pared (the surveyor stating that the work might be done in a month oi
six weeks at the most) that the two men be employed as required, and
their wages be paid weekly by the town clerk.
Cr. Smith then moved that the surveyor prepare plans and estimates
for enclosing the Market Square. He considered a post and chain fence
should be erected in order to preserve the drains in the streets, w r hich were
being destroyed by vehicles passing over them into the Square. It would
also tend to a market being opened up which he considered would bring
in a revenue of £IOOO a year. Cr. Paynter seconded the motion, but Cr.
McMillan was against it, as he considered other works were more neces-
sary, and it would be time enough to fence it when the Government made
the road along the creek, for at present the roadway was through a por-
tion of the southern side of the Square. He moved as an amendment, thal
the matter be deferred for six months, but could get no seconder, and the
motion was carried, but it was a dead letter as it was a long time before
the Square was fenced.
MATTER OF BANK INTEREST
Cr. Paynter moved that the account of the council be removed from
the Bank of New' South Wales to the Colnial Bank of Australasia, and
supported his proposal on public grounds, as thereby interest would be
obtained on moneys deposited. Many ratepayers, he said, were sharehold-
ers in the new bank, and the council should support local institutions in
preference to other parts, and where and when needed they could have
equal advantages. Cr. Wheeler seconded the motion, holding that the
council were thereby merely doing their duty to the public. Cr. Hinds
was opposed to Cr. Paynter’s motion, and moved as an amendment that
it be considered that day three months. He contended that the proposed
step was too important to be taken without the actual presence of all the
councillors. The Bank of New South Wales had granted the council ac-
commodation without interest, and it should be asked if it would allow
Interest now that the council were in funds. Cr. Hinds, however, was as
one crying in the wilderness, for no one would second his amendment.


He, however, was full of fight, and further moved that the matter be post-
poned for a fortnight, and Cr. Smith seconded it in order that time might
be given in which to ask the Bank of New South Wales it interest would
te allowed on the current account. Cr. Paynter had counted heads, and
fcis motion was carried, Crs. Hinds and Smith voting against.
An application from the Volunteer Fire Brigade praying for an im-
mediate grant of £SO, otherwise they would die, was promptly deferred for
six months and, strange to say, the brigade didn’t die as promised.
Just before the meeting concluded the town clerk stated that he had
inquired of the Warden in reference to the powder magazine and ascer-
tained that the tenders had been sent to the Commissioner of Public Works
on 13th February last, since then nothing had transpired. There does not
appear to have been much alteration in the methods of the Public Works
Department since that period.
YEAR 1836
The first elections under the amended constitution were about to take
place, and the colony for the first time was to have a Legislative Assembly,
•fust before the elections a paragraph appeared in the “ Argus ” that the
proposed railway line from Melbourne to the Murray would not touch
Castlemaine. This paragraph caused the greatest consternation locally, and
a special meeting called to consider th e matter was held on Bth September.
The chairman said he had called the meeting to consider the reported in-
tended deviation of the grand trunk Melbourne to Murray railway away
from the township of Castlemaine. He urged the matter was of such
importance as to demand immediate action. The railroad must be made
to pass through Castlemaine as the great centre of the goldfields and it
should be demanded as a matter of right. Cr. Paynter said h e was doubt-
ul how a memorial would be received, and would prefer to wait for the
action of the new Legislature. In the meantime they must not allow the
Executive to carry out their plans,. They would have other men .-eon as
their representatives, competent to manage public affairs better, whilst
the present Government only sought to strengthen their falling party, and
would do anything to destroy the independent influence of Castlemaine.
Though the delay was bad, still he would demand that no steps be taken
by the Executive till the new Parliament met. Cr. McMillan said h e was
anxious that the railroad should be made as quickly as passible. It must
be from private interested motives that it was mow proposed to go from
Taradale to Harcourt, and that was not for the public good. He would
propose a memorial to be signed by the inhabitants of the district, and a
meeting be called to make a great demonstration to show the Governmen
that they would not tolerate any proposal but for the main line to pass
through the town.
Cr. Hinds, in supporting the previous speakers, referred to the insult
offered to Castlemaine by the Executive in fixing th e nomination place for
the province at Kyneton. Let the council bear the expense of getting up
a memorial and a meeting at once, but whatever step was taken let the
council be unanimous.
After the other councillors had spoken to a similar purpose, Cr. Smith
moved that this council are of opinion that the railway being made to pass
from Taradale to Harcourt direct would be a death-blow to the town of
Castlemaine, and requested that no further steps be taken for carrying out
the same until the new Parliament met, and that a memorial to that
effect be sent to His Excellency by this council. Cr. Paynter seconded
the motion.
Cr. McMillan moved as an amendment that the memorial contain a


request that the line be brought through this township without waiting
for the new Parliament. Cr. Hinds seconded the amendment, but after a
little discussion it was withdrawn and the motion was carried.
Cr. Wheeler said the Executive had no power to begin or carry out the
line from Melbourne to the Murray; they had merely power to complete
the Williamstown branch which th e Government had brought. The Sur-
veyor-General had told him and Mr. Pyke that the line was to pass as sur-
veyed from the Coiiban through Fryer’s Creek to this town, and on by
Barker’s Creek. He could not understand the article in the “ Argus,” ex-
cept that it was put out as a feeler of opinion in Castlemaine. It was
absurd to suppose a line should go to Bendigo and not pass through here.
The people, he thought, must express their opinion firmly and at once. He
moved that the chairman of the council do call a public meeting of the
inhabitants of Castlernaine and neighboring districts to take into consid-
eration the reported alteration of the main trunk line of the Melbourne
and Murray railroad away from Castlemaine by taking it from Tara dale
to Harcourt, and that the expenses of such meeting be paid by the council.
Cf. Hinds seconded the motion, which was carried. The public meeting
was duly held, and indignant speeches made, and a strong protest was
ordered to be sent to the Governor.
The ordinary council meeting was held on the 9th September, and a
recommendation by the Public Works Committee was adopted as follows;
“ That no more rubbish be deposited on the creek side of Market Square,
and that 12 notice boards be placed in different parts of the town, direct-
ing the public to the Manure Depot.” This depot was two acres in extent,
near the site of the cattle yards near where Farnsworth street now runs
and almost due west of Campbell street.
NEGRO AS COUNCIL CANDIDATE
The nomination of candidates in connection with the vacancy in the
council caused by the retirement of Cr. Palmer took place on 25th September
at the Theatre Royal. The attendance was large as what was regarded by
a considerable section as a huge joke was being perpetrated. Some of the
ratepayers had induced an American negro named Richard McMahon to offers
himself as a candidate. McMahon kept a boarding-house, and never for a
moment regarded his candidature as a joke, and canvassed in all seriousness.
When it became known that McMahon was a candidate, and thought
likely to secure the seat, there were mutterings among the councillors of
resigning if he were elected, and in consequence a section of the public
resented the attitude of the councillors, thus gaining sympathy for McMahon.
Before calling for nominations for the vacant seat, the chairman alluded
to the reports in circulation that he would resign hi s seat if Mr. McMahon
was elected. He denied having uttered such a remark, and added that with
Englishmen it was the same vdiether a man bad a black or white face.
(Assessors having been elected, nominations were invited. Mr. Lans-
dale proposed, and Mr. Symms seconded, that Mr. Richard McMahon was
a fit and proper person to be a member of the council; Mr. Joshua proposed,
and Mr. Kibble seconded, the nomination of Mr. W. H. Burgoyne; Mr. Byrne
proposed, and Mr. D. O. Preshaw seconded, the nomination of Mr. Samuel
Love.
The candidates then addressed the meeting. Mr. McMahon made a
long speech, and said though unable to sign his name he wa s in every way
qualified to carry out the duties of a councillor. He was very severe on
those councillors wdio said they would resign if he were elected. The other
candidates had a mixed reception. Mr. Hitchcock rose to speak, but the
chairman said he had no right to address the meeting, but Mr. Hitchcock


persisted, and eventually it was put to the meeting whether he shoffic
be heard, and the meeting answered ir the affirmative. Mr. Hitchcock said
in a democratic community it was scandalous that councillors should
threaten to resign if the, ratepayers chose a particular man to represent
them in the council. The question of a man’s suitability rested with the
ratepayers, not with the council. He then urged that the election should
be conducted by ballot, which system had proved very successful at the
recent election for the Legislative Council. This suggestion was very loudly
applauded, and the feeling was that the system should be adopted, but the
chairman pointed out that under the \ct there v/as no power to adopt
the ballot system. Mr. Hitchcock wanted to have it, Act or no Act, but the
chairman refused. The show of hands resulted as follows: McMahon 24;
Richards 20; Love 10; Burgoyne 6. The poll was ordered to take place next
clay in the large room at the hctel.Mr. Hitchcock again attempted to have
the ballot system introduced, and a general discussion ensued, but the
chairman adhered to bis formed ruling.
The election next day was fairly lively, although most of the ratepayers
were in a good humor for the word had gone round to those not previously
in the secret, that Mr. (McMahon’s candidature wa s a joke. The fact that
he had been hoaxed dav/ned on McMahon about midday, when he had only
polled six votes to 80 by Richards and 31 by Love, so he retired from the
contest in favor of Mr. Richards. The poll was declared at 4.30, the result
being; Richards 147; Love 68; Burgoyne, 25. Mr. Richards, who was a
member of the firm, of Cohen and Richards, (Richards Rd. is named after
this Councillor), auctioneers, was declared duly elected. The candidates
returned thanks, and then (Mr. McMahon mounted the platform, and in
very strong terms condemned those who had cheered him on, yet had
deserted him at the polling booth, and he was cheered to the echo. Several
persons supported Mr. McMahon, including Mr. Hitchcock, and a lot was
said about class interests, cliques, oligarchy, etc., and the meeting became
uproarious before terminating.
On October 21 Captain Bull wrote to the council seeking their con-
sideration and co-operation on the subject of buildings and tents now erect-
ing on Crown lands within the town boundary and the removal of occupiers
of such, particularly as to a weatherbord house, erected by a shop assistant
named Hill, opposite the Royal Mail Hotel, complained of by Mr. Pearson
Thompson. Captain Bull considered it unjust to interfere with Hill unless
he did so with all the others. Councillors considered it would be very
injurious to drive such people out of the town many of whom had erected
dwellings, considering they could do so by virtue of their miner’s rights.
They considered all who had erected buildings up to that time should be
entitled to compensation when the land was sold. The matter was deferred,
but before it came up again Mr. Hill had been given notice to remove hia
building. He appealed to the council, when the utmost indignation was
expressed. A' memorial was sent to the Government asking that the order
be withdrawn, and suggesting that steps should be taken to prevent any
further buildings being erected, but that compensation should be given to
those who had already erected buildings, should the land be sold. After
a lengthy correspondence the Government practically adopted the suggestion
of the council. During the time the trouble was on the council passed votes
of censure on Captain Bull, the Government, and everything opposed to
their views.
At the same meeting as Captain Bull’s letter wa s received, the Chief
Secretary acknowledged receipt of the by-law for removing the rails round
the old cemetery, and desired that another by-law be passed fo the removal
of the bodies and agreed to place £225 on the estimates for the work of re-


moval. The Chief Secretary further wrote declining to give his assent
to the by-law for the expenditure of the first moiety of the Government
grant till the plans and specifications of the proposed works were approved,
by the Commissioner of Works. These works included market building,
cattle yards, permanent levels, etc., and until the plans, etc., were approved
the Government declined to send on the second moiety of the grant, which
was badly wanted by the council. The council referred the letters to the
Legislative Committee for consideration and report, after saying some
nasty things about the Government.
MONEY FOR POLICE COURT
A motion was tabled by Cr. Paynter, asking the Government to place
a sum on the estimates for the erection of a police court in the town. The
motion contained a clause urging the members for the district to render
every assistance, and this was the first occasion in the history of the
council in which members for the district were requested to assist the
council it certainly was not the last. Messrs. Pike and Palmer attended
to the request, and the sum was placed on the next estimates. On the motion
of the chairman it w T as decided to get the provisions of the Lodging House
Act extended to Castlemaine, he stating that some of the lodging houses
in the town were disgraceful. He was not far out in his estimates for some
of them were lodging houses only in name, and were a disgrace to any
civilised community. Cr. Paynter said he considered it incumbent on the
council to have council chambers of its own, as at present the public were
put to great inconvenience through there not being a council room or town
clerk’s office. He moved that specifications, etc., for a small building be
drawn up, and submitted to the Public Works Committee for approval.
Cr. McMillan said any such buildings should form part of a large plan of a
town hu.ll suited to future times.
Tht- motion was carried, and the plan, etc., were presented to the
Public Works committee at its next meeting, the estimated cost being £450.
Cr. McMillan in committee, urged the necessity of plans for larger buildings
that would last 500 years, a part of wilich could be erected for present
purposes. However, the plan was adopted.
At the council meeting on November 11, Cr| Paynter obtained the
suspension of the standing orders and moved that tenders be called for
erecting a council room and offices in accordance with the plan and specifi-
cation approved of by the Public Works Committee, and his motion was
seonded by Cr. Wheeler.
Cr. Hinds, in opposing the motion, condemned the plan, and said his
present stables were superior to the building designed for a council
chamber.
Cr. McMillan also ridiculed the plan, and proposed as an amendment
that a new plan and specification be prepared, and it was promptly seconded
by the angry Cr. Hinds. The debate grew somewhat stormy, and as Cr.
Paynter was replying, a heavier gust of wind than usually put out all the
candles and the room was in darkness. This didn’t trouble Cr. Paynter, who
continued speaking while the surveyor -was relighting the candles. Even-
tually the motion was carried, and tenders for erecting Castlemaine’s first
town hall were called. ,
It may be stated that when Crs. Andrews and Smith, and the district
surveyor (Mr. Adair) conferred some time previously as to the sites of
public ouildings or. block 14, the present site of the town hall was reserved
for municipal purposes with a view to the erection of a town hall.
On November 4 a motion by Cr. Smith for the preparation of a by-law
for licensing carters, draymen, porters, etc. was carried. Cr. McMillan


then moved that plans and specifications be prepared for a market building
in the market place, the cost of such building not to exceed £I4OO.
He met with some technical opposition, as a by-law had been passed
for the erection of a market building and sent to the Chief Secretary, with
plans and specifications, but had not yet been approved by that official.
Cr Hinds, however, seconded the motion, and it was unanimously carried.
Cr! McMillan then abused the Road Board for not completing the formation
of Forest street, which he described as being in a disgraceful condition.
At this meeting it was decided that tenders be advertised for forming
a roadway 20ft wide across the gully between Campbell and Doveton
streets in Barker street.
BUNGLING METHODS
On 14th November, 1856, the first rate notices were issued to the rate-
payers and says Mr. McKillop. their appearance was not welcomed. The
notices were severely criticised by the “Mail.” ‘We view. ’ it said, “with
unmitigated censure, the loose bungling methods used in filling up the
notice papers v. hich, satisfied by addressing us by name, assuring us we
reside somewhere within the nine square miles of the Castlemaine muni-
cipality. and stating the assumed yearly valuations of our several properties
leaves us in most admirable confusion as to the specific purposes to which
they refer.” This was as nothing tc the curses loud and deep which were
showered on the head of Mr. Nathaniel “Half-a-Cent” Binns and on th®
council by the man in the street.
However, there was one consolation for the injured ratepayers, and
that was the Appeal Court, which took place in the survey office a day or two
after the issue of the first batch of notices. The Police Magistrate (Captain
Harrison) presided, and with him cn the bench were the chairman of the
council (Cr. (Andrews), R. Mackenzie and Dr Mears. When the proceedings
were opened the P.M. informed Cr. Andrews that being an interested per-
son he could sit on the bench, but would not be allowed to vote, which
snnouncement was not favorably received by the councillors in attendance.
Indignant ratepayers were present in large numbers, and there was an
army of solicitors. The town clerk (Mr. Christophers) represented the
council, and acted as a sort of prosecutor. Several ratepayers came forward
and said they hod only got their rate notices the previous day, and therefore
could not lodge their objections seven days prior to the holding of the
court as required by the Act.
As this v/as beyond dispute, it was agreed to waive the seven days’
notice, but the Town clerk claimed the right, to an adjournment in any case
where he had not the particulars. To this a bellicose ratepayer said he
had attended once before, and could not again be kept waiting, as he had
to walk 10 miles to attend the court. The cases were then taken, the appeals
being very numerous, and in some instances much amusement was caused
by the arguments put forth against the assessment.
In the majority of cases the assessment was upheld, and in some
reductions were made. In one case, Mr. W. W. Wilson, solicitor, stated
that a lot of buildings had been rated, which were not in existence when the
rate was struck, but the P.M. informed him that the bench had nothing
to do with that.
Captain Harrison on several occasions censured the levity which the
proceedings at times provoked. The town clerk and Mr. Wilson got at
cross purposes very frequently, and their language to each other was more
forcible than polite, and at last Mr. Wilson threatened that if he were


interrupted any more he would apply for the town clerk’s committal. The
town clerk thereupon expressed the opinion that Mr. Wilson was a very
nice young gentleman indeed.
A feature of the proceedings was an appeal against the assessment
on his property by Cr. Paynter, for whom Mr. King appeared. The P.-M.
said as Mr. Paynter as a councillor assented to the assessment in the council,
it precluded him from objecting now.
Mr. King submitted that a man might assess in his capacity as a
member of a corporate body which would not preclude him objecting as a
private individual. The P.M. decided to adjourn the case in order to obtain
the opinion of the Attorney-General, who replied in favor of Cr. Paynter.
After the court rose the assessment was fought out at street corners and
during the intervals of Mr. G. V. Brooke’s performance at the Theatre Royal
that night. G. V. Brooke was the foremost Shakesperian actor of his day,
and In returning to England, the ship “London” on which he, on returning
to England took passage was lost in the Bay of Biscay, when all on board
perished. iMr. Francis Fryer, Postmaster at Castlemaine was among those
drowned. Mr. Fryer was a prominent member of the local Baptist Church,
in which a tablet is erected to his memory. In its next issue the “Mail” gave
it as its opinion that “the assessment was begot in misery, and nurtured
in convulsions.”
At the meeting on 25th November, George Hancke, a resident of Win-
ter’s Fiat, wrote complaining that the residents there were compelled to
pay rates, yet no work was done by the council in that locality. This has
been a common complaint in every part of the borough ever since, and
it could not have been made before as the first rate' notices had just
been issued. Winter’s Flat has, however, the credit of being first off the
mark in regard to the complaint.
The chairman said the rates in that locality only came to £SO a year,
and although reasonable wants would be attended to, the council could
not undertake any large expenditure.
As it had been decided some time previously to connect Castlemaine
with Melbourne by telegraph, the work of erecting the poles was in hand
The contractor, acting on instructions from headquarters, had erected the
poles In the middle of footpaths, despite the protests of the chairman.
At a meeting on December 2, the chairman alluded to the matter, ,and
said that owing to the posts being erected in the middle of the footpaths,
and at the crossing places in some cases, he had written to the district
surveyor, that ail would be removed by the council that were not put ir
the proper place by the Government, the obstruction of the footpaths being
in contravention of the Town and Country Police Act. He then feelingly
described the ills that might happen to a man going home on a dark
night and blundering against these poles. The council approved of the
chairman’s letter.
On December 2, the surveyor presented the plans of the permanent
levels and gradients of the streets from Forest street to Hunter street,
also plans for a market building. They were considered during the week oy
the Public Works committee, who at the meeting on December 9, recom-
mended that the plans of the levels be submitted to the Government, with
a request that the district surveyor be allowed to test the accuracy of the
sections submitted by the town surveyor. Cr. Payner considered the recom-
mendation was tantamount to an expression of a want of confidence in the
surveyor, and questioned whether the district surveyor was competent
to check the work.
After a lengthy discussion diiring which it was stated that it was not
intended to cast a reflection on the surveyor, but that in such an important


matter it war necessary to make assurance doubly sure, it was decided
to adopt tne recommendation, with the proviso that the Government waa
to appoint a person to check the plans, who was thoroughly compe en, ant
who had no personal knowledge of or interest in the district. Messrs.
Poeppell, Shephard and Burgoyne, architects, wrote objecting to the sur-
veyor OMr. Price) acting as clerk of works for the Government, and t us
competing with private practice, also condemning some of the works of the
council.
Cr. Paynter severely criticised this letter, saying it had come from
rejected candidates, who were jealous of the surveyor. It was, he said
insulting to the council, and he moved that it be not received, and that
the council condemn and discountenance any such coming before it. The
motion was carried unanimously.
Six tenders were received for erecting the catle yards, and that of
Mr. Campbell at £606/4/- was accepted, the highest being £I6OO. At the
next meeting, however, Mr. Campbell wrote stating that in preparing his
tender he had made sundry miscalculations, and, therefore, declined to sign
the contract or go on with the work. The council was indigant, and ordered
new tenders to be called.
At the meeting on the 9th. Cr. McMillan brought forward a motion
for kerbing portions of certain streets with blue gum. He instanced the
progress of Prahan in this respect, and thought it better to borrow money
for such works than to allow time to pass away. This is the first occasion
in the history of the council that a municipal loan was advocated. The
motion was deferred until the permanent levels had received Government
approval.
MARKET PLANS ADOPTED
At a special meeting of the council on December 11, the plans of a
market building as drawn up by the surveyor were adopted, and for-
warded to the Government for approval. This step was forced on the council
as the erection of a market was included in the estimate of the first moiety
of the Government grant, and until plans for that work were received and
approved the Government stubbornly refused to pay over the second moiety
of the grant. From this fact, Castlemaine had a market building much
sooner than it otherwise would.
At the meeting on the 16th December it was decided on the motion of
Crs. Wheeler and Paynter, to petition the Government to hold County Court
sittings in Castlemaine every month, instead of quarterly, as in the past,
but the request was refused.
The inspector of nuisances (Mr. Davis) applied for a rearrangement of
his duties, and an increase of salary, and the application was referred to
the finance committee, as also was an account mounting to £3lB/8/, sent
in by (Mr. Nathaniel Binns, for making the assessment, being 10/- per cent
on a total assesssment of £63,683. The result was that Mr. Davis’ salary
was increased to £2OO per year, and that Mr. Binns was paid £2OO on
account, and notified that the balance would be paid over when the account
was properly checked.
The meeting on December 23 was a fairly lengthy one. Cr. Smith,
probably owing to the near approach of the annual election, being particu-
larly energetic. He moved that the Government be asked for a grant of
£3OO for the purpose of destroying the thistles in Forest Creek. Cr. Richards
seconded, though he declared that he did not know where any thistles
existed, and the motion was carried. On the motion of Cr. Smith it was
decided to apply for a grant of £3OOO for laying out and enclosing the Bo-
tanical Gardens. Cr. Smith next moved that the main road in the township


be improved between Campbell and Hunter streets. Cr. Paynter asked wnich
was the main road, and Cr. Smith replied that it was Kennedy street. Cr.
Paynter said that Barker street was now the main road, but Cr. Smith
indignantly denied it. The chairman said Kennedy street recently was the
main road, but the telegraph posts being erected in Barker street indicated
that that street was now the main road. Cr. Smith accepted this ruling with
a bad grace, and at once withdrew his motion.
He, however was still going strong, and moved that the Governor be
asked to grant the municipality the unsold lands lying between Kennedy
street on the east, and Barker’s Creek on the west, and running from
Mostyn street to Bull street, the same to be used as park lands, or for
other reserve purposes. Nowadays, this motion seems peculiar, but at that
period the creek ran much further west than at present, consequently there
was a nice strip of ground lying between it and Kennedy street. Cr. Paynter
seconded the motion, which was carried.
Cr. Smith, moved that a memorial be sent to the Government praying
for a grant of £20,000 for making and maintaining the main roads from
Castlemaine to Newstead, Maryborough! Dunclly and other goldfields. He
alluded to the dangerous state of the roads immediately outside of the
township and said he intended to move for £SOOO, but as Bendigo had got
£20,000 for the same class of work, he did not see why Castlemaine should
not get £20,000. Cr. Richards seconded the motion, which was carried, but
it met with a decided refusal from the powers that were.
JUGGLING WITH THOUSANDS
Cr. Paynter, who sat silently watching Cr. Smith juggling with thou-
sands of Government money, moved that a memorial be forwarded to the
Government urging the necessity of immediate steps being taken for carry-
ing out the construction of the railway to Castlemaine, stating that it would
be much better to build the line than go on wasting more money on the
main roads. Cr. Smith promptly seconded the motion, which was carried.
It was decided that tenders be invited for a weighbridge.
Cr. Paynter alluded to the necessity of a building act, and referred
to the danger of fires in the open air for washing, etc., such fires being
sometimes close to wood and canvas buildings. He said he would bring
in a by-law dealing with the matter, also to prevent the erection of an
inferior class of building. The meeting ended by the town clerk being ordered
to apply to the Government for the second moiety of the Government
grant, amounting to £3750, as all the necessary by-laws, estimates, etc.,
had been sent to the Chief Secretary.
The Christmas dinner of Castlemaine’s first councillors was no
doubt enjoyed, but the councillors were not altogether easy in their minds
for the newspapers were full of letters and articles, criticising in an irri
tatingly frank manner the deeds of the Municipal Parliament.
The ratepayers, after venting their grievances generally, concluded by
stating that they would know what to do at, and thanked God, for the
approaching election.
The last meeting in 1856 was on Tuesday, December 30, when there
were four tenders opened for building municipal offices, and that of Messrs,
Matthews and Baker at £668 was accepted, although J. Munroe and Go's,
tender, £644, and Hunter and Maynards, £613, were lower. They did not
acept the lowest tender at that time, neither was a cash deposit required;
all that was necessary was to submit the signatures of two sureties, and
if the signatories were satisfactory, that was sufficient.
The inspector of nuisances asked the council to supply him with a


quantity of lime to be strewn over the graves recently opened in Templeton
stree, and his request was complied with.
Cr McMillan, who was a strong advocate for the enclosure of th
Market Square moved that it be fenced with posts and chains. He pointy
r *VuL L street drains which the council had recently made were being
rlmlin till the
roads were metalled, whenever in the future that might be.
On the motion of Cr. Paynter, it was decided to forward an address
of welcome and congratulation to the new Governor (Sir Henry Barkley).
DISQUIETENING RUMOUR
At this period there was a rumor current that it was the intention of
the Government to vest the offices of Police Magistrate and Warden in on
uerson The rumor was very disquietening, as it practically meant the
establishment of a local dictator, tor both offices carried large powers bu
when 'there were two ojfflcers one held the other in check. The majority of
tte people hid a very Jively recollection of the evils of rule
and no one wished to again experience it, consequently there was g
public outcry at the proposed change.
Cr Paynter brought the matter forward, and moved that a memorial
nrotestine agaSst the proposal be forwarded to the members for the dis-
LOANS ADVOCATED
Mr Gibb advocated loans for public works, as he considered posterity
shou d bear a fair portion o' the burden of improving the town. Cr. Hinds
who cam" next claimed that the councillors had done fairly well considering
wlr'e In einexpersnced men, but, It he were not returned he would
submit to his fate. Cr. Paynter, cocky as ever, said he would work his gardes,
to get to the top of the poll, a s he considered he Had done his best for the
ratepayers and his presence in the council had benefited the P e °P le to 80 e
considerable extent. Not afraid to bringing his light from behind the bushel.
was Cr. Paynter.
James Chapman next stepped briskly forward. Take particular note of
bim, for we have met a remarkable man. Lightly made fair complexioned
nicely groomed, and natty, he looked as it he had Just stepped from the
n y -Z- , ri hrv Of a hi"hlv strung, nervous temperament, with strong
Srld mfn, ank a reSam lye, h/'is one of the most striking figures
fn the municipal and political history of Castlemaine. He was a hairdresser,
and occupied a shop opposite the “'Mail” office, next door to the Metropolitan
Sel which latter by the way, he built and owned. He did not, however,
occupy the hotel, and in regard to liquid refreshment he as one of the
most abstemious men of his time. It was this impulsive, ambitious, brain*


determined and somewhat pompous candidate who followed Cr. Paynter.
He opened by saying if it had required any extxraordinary ability or talent
to secure him the office of town councillor, he would not have come forward.
There nad, he continued, been something done by the council a certain
amount of mischief had been done. (Hear, hear.) He then proceeded to
criticise the doings of the council, and as he was a fluent and effective
speaker (but at times somewhat long winded) he gave the council a bad
time.
Cr. Smith, probably thinking o f th„ numerous motions he had brought
forward, to get money out of the Government, said he hoped his conduct
as a councillor had been satis.mactory. and if not he trusted they would
choose a better man. In reply to a question, he said if elected he intended to
bring in a notion asking the Government for £50,000 for the purpose
of supplying Castlemaine with water from Mount Alexander. Mr. narrower,
a particularly fiery timber merchant and contractor, said in commencing
his criticism of the counil, that he did not ome forward as a pompous fool
seeking pompous honors. His motto would be “Let Castlemaine Flurish ’’
Several of those nominated having announced their withdrawal, the
show of hands resulted: Gibb 12, Hinds 9, Paynter 30, Smith 26. Chapman
33, Harrower 9, Newbound 2, Wilson 8. Fitzgerald 5, McDonogh 15.
The polling was from 10 to 4 next day at the Theatre Royal, but only
six went to the poll Cr. Hinds withdrawing at the last moment.
,The result was Paynter 184, Smith 155, Chapman 146, Gibb 89, nar-
rower 67, McDonogh 1. The three first-named were elected, Cr. Paynter’s
wish to top the poll being handsomely fulfilled. The candidates returned
tranks, and then the chairman thanked the ratepayers for their kindness
and consideration during his term of office. Cr. Paynter, in proposing a
vote of thanks to Cr. Andrews, for presideing at the election, .said he roped
he would be re-elected chairman.
The motion was carried in face of a fiery protest by Ca. MoMillan.
POLICE PADDOCK PROJECT
The council decided to object to the reservation of 100 acres on the
west of the town as a police paddock, as it was considered too valuable
for that purpose. Messrs. Edward ay and Thomas Butterworth were ap-
pointed the municipal auditors for the year, for as previously stated, Govern-
ment auditors were unknowned.
On February 3rd. the Surveyor-General wrote stating that the Crown
land on the west of the town, lying between Mostyn and Bull streets, would
be granted to the municipality subject to the projeced railway line and
station.
Under the recently enacted by-law slaughtering houses had to be li-
censed, and tne council received three applications and they were granted
as follow: G. Morris. J. Russel, J. Day.
The chairman reported that the plans of the permanent levels had
been altered to suit the demands of the Government, and it was decided
to send them to Melbourne at once for approval. decided
A special meeting of the council was held on the 14th, when ordinary
business was transacted. The Public Works committee recommended rl
ga ding the application of the inspector of police for a site for a police


.. that a olot of 27 perches in Templeton street be
station on section 14, tl a P adopted
-mrrr -is-ara ms
to enter into a fight on the BUbiec. and those who
This terminated tne f- _ useful work w'as crammed
have foUowedtWs record vnlasree - that the councillors were new
work 8 and that the town when they were e.ected was practn
cally in a stab* of nature McKillop, it is doubtful if it
K
all this the ratepayers were grumbling.
COUNCIL’S FIRST NEW YEAR
The council and the people generally had a jolly time at the New Year,
if all accounts are to be relied on. It was the municipal council s first New
voL omi it is oleasimr to know that it was worthily celebrated.
On the following Friday, the first telegraph office was opened in CM-
4, • onri nt the next meeting of the council it was decided to ask
LTSovfrnmsn? to erectf time ball on the telegraph othce. as one had been
“ S by the Governor some time before. This question of a tan. bait
was mged for about a couple of years, but the Goversment was obdurate,
Ld at “last the matter dropped, and the Governor's promise has not been
rBdee Sme t rate h pavtrs y 'in the town sent a letter to this meeting'complaining
of the nuisance caused by a slaughter yard at the corner y of
Lyttleton streets, and the inspector was instructed to have the nuisa ca
abat The question of the main road was brought forward by the chairman,
who said the Bendigo road was being made through the Camp and by
Kennedy street which he considered was a great injustice, and he
be forwarded to the Governor to have the line of road
pass up Barger street, the main street of the town. R - hardg
At the first meeting of the year, on January 6, 1857. Cr. Richards
resigned owing to the pressure of private business. An estate a?ent and
auctioneer, Cr. Richards had only been in the council for four months and
savs Mr McKillop, had not much opportunity of showing his mettle, as a
councillor His resignation was received with regret. His name is per-
oetuated in our Richards road. ... j
As Mr. Wilson (a solicitor) had refused to pay rates, it was decided
to take legal advice before going to law. The result was that Mr. Wilson
paid his rates. Mr. Wilson had based his case on some legal point which he
had made public, consequently several ratepayers taking their cue fmm on
whom they considered an authority, also refused to pay up, but they very
soon followed Mr. Wilson’s lead and there was no further trouble about
the legality of the council’s power to levy rates on certain properties
hitherto considered by the owners to be exempt . t n
lOf Mi. Wilson, Mr. McKillop writes: “Poor fellow, he died in a London
hospital a few years ago is somewhat destitute circumstances.
On the notion of Mr. MoMillan, it was decided to ask the police to pre-
vent the discharge of firearms in the Borough on the Sabbath day, ,and
also to draw attention to the fact that a large bonfire had been kindled on
the previous Sunday on the top of a hill near the stockade.


Nominations for W first annua! election took place at the Theatre
Royal on 15th January, 1857 The retiring councillors were Crs. Paynter,
Smith and Hinds. There was a good attendance of ratepayers, and the
following 15 wore nominated in very quick time, viz, W. H. Gibb, R. Mf-
Mahon, W. Froomes, H. Trebble, W. New-bound, -W. W. Wilson, M. Prender-
gast, E. Fitzgerald. Collins and M. T. McDonogh, Hinds, Paynter, Smith,
Chapman and Korrower The bulk of these, however, were nominated
without their consent “just for a lark,” and at a later stage the chairman
roundly condemned such proceedings. In response to the popular clamor
several of the candidates addressed tne gathering, and amid the usual
interruptions, etc., they promised, as they do today, to convert the town into
a paradise.
The new Town Hall was just about finished and a long discussion on
the furnishing of the building took place. The town clerk had at the
previous meeting been instructed to prepare plans, etc., and to obtain esti-
mates for the furniture, but the proprietors of the furnishing shops, in-
stead of giving estimates, sent in tenders. The council was thus paice'd in
a peculiar position, owing to the fact that no tenders had been invited.
Some councillors wanted to open and deal with the tenders right away,
but others objected, and a long fight on red tape lines followed. At last a
sort of compromise, the town clerk was told to pocket the unopened ten-
ders md open them aftei the meeting and report at the next meeting.
The “Mail'' thus described Castlemaine’s first town hall; “A three-
roomed cottage without the remotest attempt at architectural beauty. We
regret to see so fine a site sc miserably sacrificed,”
As there was a desire to amalgamate some of the offices, a motion by
the chairman for a rate of 3d. in the £1 and the appointment of an asses-
sor was withdrav/n. This brought up the subject of unpaid rates, and Cr.
Chapman said Froomes wanted to give defaulters 20 days notices and then
to issue warrants, but they got no support, all that was done being to order
the collector to get in more money.
Cr. Smith alluded to the bad state of the Sheriff’s bridge, and moved
that the Central Road Board be written to at once asking that repairs be
effected. He condemned Mr. Wilks the Board’s engineer, a s either neglected
or incompetent. It w-as decided to erect a weighbridge in Market Square, and
also to ask the Government for a larger grant.
On the motion of Cr. McMillan it was decided to kerb, metal and pave
the drains in the principal streets as soon as the permanent levels had been
approved by the council, and Government. Cr. Smith moved that 30 wooden
lamp posts and lamps be erected at the corners of the principal streets in
the town, and his motion was carrried and in due course they were erected.
YEAR 1857
° n '- vlaJch there was a great shivoo in connection with the openin'*
of the Mechanics Institute, and some of the councillors, to put it mildly'
were slightly elevated when the council met in the evening. The Warden
wrote saying no more licences would be granted for mining within the
town boundary. b e
Cr. McMillan, who was in oad health, tendered his resignation and
it was accepted with regret. resignation, ana
The tender of Mr, Niebuhr for furnishing the town hall was accepted
Cr Smith *?ain condemned the Road Board, for the state of the Sheriff’s
bridge and on the matter of drainage in the town Crs. Chapman and Smfth
accused the surveyor of inattention to his duties, and proposed a votTo'
censure on him. The surveyor, who was present at the meeting
himself and denied his responsibility to Crs. Chapman and Smith ft which


the tv/o declared themselves grossly insulted, grew very heated, and at last
v/ere called to ord°r by the chairman.
The Sheriff bridge was the first of the bridges, and was opened late
in 1854. Previous to that time there were no bridges over the creeks, a
few logs, etc., doing duty in that respect. In May, 1854, a public meeting
was held on the Church of England hiil for the purpose of asking the Go-
vernment to look into the matter, and a resolution in favor of the immediate:
erection of several bridges at sites indicated was carried and forwarded to
the Lieut. j Governor.
“Contrary to general expectation but te the joy of all sa\s Mr. Mc-
Killop, “three bridges were shortly after being constructed one over
Forest creek about a couple of chains west of where Patterson’s bridge now
i« one over Campbell’s creek, afterwards known a s the Sheriff’s bridge
owing to the fact that the Sheriff, Mr. R. Colles, living close to it, and the
third in Forest street, which became known as the Governor's bridge as it
was just finished wner. Governor Hotham visited the town in 1854, having
taken a long time to complete. It was built of stone, and a writer of tnat
day said that it would remain to commemorate the wonderful times we
Sheriff Colics was a noticeable figure in the streets of the town in the
late eighties, especially is the hot weather of summer. A tall, greybeaided
old gentleman, dressed in a suit of light material known at that time as
Japanese silk, the coat long and flowing. In his hand he carried a horse’s
tail about eighteen inches in length which was attached to an ivory stock,
a handle which he metrodically woved backwards and forwards to keep
the flies away from his face or camping on his silk suit.
Mr. McKillop says of him; “He was a bosom friend of Robert O’Hara
Burke” (Mt. Colies of Queensland, so named by O’Hara Burke, perpetuates
this friendship.) The house in which Mr. Colies lived is still standing, and
outwardly seems to be in the same good order and condition as it was in.
1854. It is the first house one comes on when passing along Gingell street
northwards from the bridge towards the Camp reserve, situated on ftu
little rise on the western side of the street it is a conspicious landmark.
GOODBYE TO FUTURE GREATNESS
About this period there was a very strong probability that the pro-
posed railway line would not touch Castlemalne but would go direct from
Taradale to Harcourt Castlemalne was fighting hard to prevent this, but
Harcourt seemed to have the “pull”, and was as much elated as Castlemalne
were dejected. If this line did not touch Castlemalne it meant goodbye to
all its dreams of future grealness, and this was recognised by many of
the business men of Castlemalne, who went out to Harcourt and bought
building sites is Harcourt. The fate of Castlemalne, should it lose the line,
was predicted in the following sent to the '“Mail" by a Harcourt resident
on March 23, 1857, and purports to be a prediction of a copy of an adver-
tisement which would appear in a newspaper published at Harcourt eight
years later, and reads as follows.
Grand Raffle of Castlemaine (from the Harcourt “Daily Mail” and
Talbot '“Advertiser’. January 9. 1865).--
“To be raffled for in one thousand shares of £5 each—
“ The whole of the resumed lands, together with the buildings as they
now remain, within the limits of the once flourishing town of Castlemaine.
“Conditions—The highest thrower to take the land and house property
within the limits of the original township. The lowest to have all within
the municipality boundary outside the township.
“The raffle to come off next Friday night at the Railway Terminus
Hotel, Darbyshire street, Harcourt. Tickets procurable at all the principal


hotels along the main line between here and the city of Sandhurst.
“The Commissioners beg to remark that to any speculative individual
disposed to supply the Harcourt market the above chance offers a rare
opportunity of securing a splendid sheep and cattle run. The place
possesses many advantages—all the old civil engineering and other difficul-
ties are now effectively removed. With slight repairs the old flour mill
might be converted into an admirable woolshed with the convenience of
being near the weighing machine, which only requires a new index plate to
be in useful order. The eastern side of the old “Mail“ newspaper office stii f
stands, and might be made into commodious homestead. No objection now
exists to opening the old Camp ground for gold. The Government secures
to the lucky winner a perpetual right-of-way along the abandoned branch
line of railway; and a cart from this town visits the place one a week if
sufficient passengers and baggage are booked.”
Harcourt’s jubilation passed over to Castlemaine some months later,
when the present railway route was adopted. In the near future the full
story of how Castlemaine got its railway and of how or why the station
came to be erected on its present site will be told.
The election to fill the vacancy caused by Cr. McMillan's resignation
took place on March 27th, 1857. ’’There were two candidates,” says Mr
McKillop, “viz., the great Mr. W. Hitchcock and Mr. M. Prendergrast
(solicitor).” There was not much interest, as it was a foregone conclusion
that Mr. Hitchcock would win. Mr. Hitchcock polled 142, and Mr. Prender-
grast 64.
At the declaration of the poll there was a row. Mr. Gingell, who had
made a speech on nomination day, was aggrieved that no report of hip
speech appeared in the “tMail”, and after the deiaration of the poll he
mounted the stage, and pitched into the “Mail” right and left. Mr. Saint
(editor), “who,” says Mr. McKillop, “was a most pugnacious individual,’
contacted Mr. Gingell and a few personalities were indulged in. A rate-
payer who had been keeping the cold out, pulled off his coat in a dramatic
manner and made a rush at Mr. Saint, but managed to run into the arms ol
some friends, and was hustled, struggling and shouting frotn the hall.
A STRONG PERSONALITY
Mr. McKillop was a great admirer of Mr. Hitchcock, to whom he alludes
to as the “great.” Like most great men, he had a big idea of his own
opinions and a contempt for those' of others which, coupled with an arro-
gant manner in debate, earned for him the disfavour of the majority of his
fellow councillors, but his personality will be unfolded as we proceed. Mr,
McKillop says of him: “Mr. Hitchcock was undoubtedly the strongest per-
sonality in the early history of Castlemaine and many who knew him, affirm
that no public man in the town wielded such a dominating influence or was
so strong and able as Mr. Hitchcock. In politics he was a democrate of the
best type. His influence over his fellow citizens in the dark days of
commissioner rule was marvellous. For some time he resided at Muckleford,
and was well to do, but in ’56 and ’57 lost his all in a salted mine at Maldon.
In 1854, town and suburban lots were auctioned at South Muckleford;
it was thought that the creek side would provide an ideal site for week-
end residences for business people. The creek then was a fine clear
•stream, teeming with fish, and the bush, being alive with all sorts of game
assured good sport with rod and gun. The total receipts for the first sale
came to £11,352. Mr. Hitchcock was a large purchaser, as he had great
faith in the future of Muckleford. He built a fine residence and lived there
for over two years, and was the first to cultivate land for farming in that
district. He carried on his business of auctioneer in the town here at the
same time, driving between the two places in a stylish turn-out, buggy and


pair and was facetiously called the Duke of Muckleford. Mr. Hitchcock
conducted his business in the Hall of Castlemaine, a wood and canvas
tnilding, situated on the block now occupied by the Castlemaine picture
;The South Muckleford residence of Mr. Hitchcock, together with ths
land purchased by him, eventually came into the possession of Mr. Bogie,
father of Mr. Wm. Bogie, a well known business man of the town, who
informed me that the timber used in the building, with the exception of the
doors and windows, which were imported, was hewn from trees grown oi
the property, and is in a wonderful state of preservation, well season'
stringy bark stuff. In driving from Castlemaine to Maldon, the house may
be seen from the roadway. It lies to the north of the road, a whit
building, surrounded by farm lands, distant about half-a-mile after cross-
ing the bridge over the Muckleford creek.
Continuing his remarks re Mr. Hitchcock, Mr. McKillop wrote. He
was very liberal in money matters, and as one instance it may be state 1
that when the Congregationalists of the town were in search of a piece of
land on which to build a church he gave them half of that on which the
church is now erected.
‘‘He was somewhat reserved in public, but amongst personal friends
he was genial and entertaining. He was a man of strong will and excep-
tional ability—tall, fair, with pointed beard and high shoulders, and strongly
marked features. A masterful man who in other surroundings would have
been a nation builder. He hated cant and hyprocrisy with his whole soul
and did not spare it when he met it, and in consequence was not popular
with a considerable section of the community. He, however, was respected
by all, but as a public man he made many bitter enemies, as all able men
have. He was a leader in all public movements, and was chairman of the
Public Hospital Committee for some time.
The administration of the Government was, says Mr. McKillop, a pain
ful record of error, injustice, cruelty and corruption. A careful invest;
gation of the conditions on this field at that time reveals that the redeem-
ing features in its administration are microscopical. There were some hu
mane end honest men among the officials, but they were few in number an.
were powerless to prevent the gold-laced tyranny, which was backed up
by a callous and grasping Goevrnment. The commissioners and inspector
were, in the majority of cases, military men and were nearly always ir
uniform.
“The Commissioners had supreme control of the field; their orders were
law to every one on the field. They controlled and directed the polio
looked after the revenue collecting, and in many instances were Magis
trates and in that capacity interpreted the law in such a manner as would
make the leading lights of to-day stand aghast—either with honor or
admiration. Every day they could be seen riding about with swords jang-
ling and all the other trapping at that period necessary to the make-up of a
military officer. They and the other leading officials stood haughtily, even
offensively, aloof from the towns-people, among whom were well educated
men, barristers, solicitors, medical men, journalists, etc. If the Campites
went to church, a special place apart from th e common herd was set apart
for them. Their demeanor towards the professional and business men was
arrogant and overbearing, and bred a hatred and contempt for Campism,
which, however, they dared not openly show, for it was dangerous to a man’s
peace and comfort if the Campites looked coldly at him. If they patron-
ised an entertainment or a charity ball the best part of the hall was roped oft
for the use of tills in their own opinion separate and superior class


THE SACRED CAMP
The “Sacred Camp” was a common expression of contempt when the
camp was in its death throes, but no ore dared openly make such a remark.
A Commissioner with nis coat off, and wearing a large wide-awake hat, was
sitting under the shade of a tree on the camp one summer day reading a
paper, when a person of common clay rode past at a hard gallop on a
public track near at hand. ,The Commissioner at once sent a trooper after
the man and had him arrested for not walking his horse and not raising
his hat when passing the Commissioner. Such statements as here noted
would appear exaggerated, but they are supported by the testimony of such
reliable witnesses as Dr. Preshaw, Mr. Goudy, Mr. Hitchcock and others.”
Dr. Preshaw was standing in front of his tent when a trooper came up
and asked if he had a licence. “Yes,” said the Dr., “to sell physic in all
parts of her Majesty’s Dominions.” “Ah, but I mean to dig for gold.” “I
told him,” said the Dr., “that I had paid for 18 licences —for my family dur-
ing the last three months, and that as I was busy I sent my little son, who
asked the Commissioner for a licence for his father mentioning my
Christian and surname. The Commissioner said to him —“ Do you ever have
a try at dishing for gold like some of the other boys here?” “Oh yes, sir,”
said my little son. Then said the Commissioner, you must have a licence;
what’s your name? Give me the 30/-, here's your licence, and that happened
so recently tnat I had not yet had time to have the licence amended. I was
marched before two men with fixed bayonets to watchouse and my
name placed on the police sheet. I bailed myself out by depositing £5
with the watchouse keeper. Having only two pounds, I sent to my friend
Mr. Low, the Scotch minister, and borrowed £3.” The next morning the
Doctor attended the court and to his great surprise and indignation, was
fined SO/- and ordered tc take out a new licence at once. In reply to his
strong protest, the Magistrate said, “he did not make the law but adminis-
tered it.”
“iMr. A. Goudy, a man of probity and high sense of honor,” writes Mr.
McKillop, “will be the next witness.” |To many of the present time who
knew Mr. Goudy personally and how quick he was to resent an insult, his
experience as related by Mr. McKillop will have a somewhat humorous side
as well as showing the bribery and corruption which existed at that
time. Mr. McKillop does justice to Captain Wright, the Chief Commissioner,
whom he says “had little knowledge of the tactics of the officials, and
having a vast amount of administrative work to do had very little time to
ascertain what was being done, and he accepted the reports of his officers.”
Mr. Goudy resided in the town and district until his death in 1928 at
the great age of 95, and it was from him that Mr. McKillop heard the story:
“Mr. Goudy said that at the latter end of 1852 he was one of a party of
eight diggers who owned a horse and dray. He sold out his share to his
mates and joined with another digger. Some days after he met one of his
old mates, who said the horse had been stolen, and he asked Mr. Goudy
to let him know if he saw it about, and that gentleman said he would. A
few days later the man came to Mr. Goudy and informed him that they had
found the horse in the possession of a man who said he had bought it and
produced a receipt for it, the receipt being dated some time before. Mr.
Goudy sold his interest in the horse and cart. |The mates put the law in
motion for the recovery of the horse, and asked Mr. Goudy to appear at the
police court along with them as a witness that the horse had been in the
possession of the party and on the date of the man’s receipt. Mr. Goudy
readily consented, and was present at the court when the case was called
on. He was the first witness, and when he stepped forward to tender his


evidence the Sergeant of Police stopped him, and skid is
have every reason to believe that this mans evidence is umehable as
connected with a gang of horse-thieves. h rharee
Before Mr. Goudy could recover from his amazement at such a c' arg
he was scruffed by a constable, and not hustled out of the court, but
actually kicked out, and kicked hard. One can Imagine his fM'mga
was outside the court. He sat down on the edge of the half-finish d
verandah trying to collect his scattered thoughts, when a constable came out
it The'’doored walking to where .Mr. Goudy was sitting he few
curses and viciously kicked the present treasurer of the Castle,maine
Benevolent Asylum. Had he been a football the constable would have not-
ched a croal for it was a powerful, well-directed kick. Mr. Goudy limped
away which was the safest thing to do, for had he resented the accusation
of the Sergeant or the kick of the constable he would have been arrested
and a charge of horse-stealing would have been entered against him, a
there being scores ready to bear false witness, he would have been sent
to work on the roads for a few years. . .
When his mates got up to give evidence in the court, they were simi-
larlv treated, and bundled out of the court room. Of course they did not
get y their horse, and the man, with a receipt dated when the horse was in
their possession, retained the animal by order of the court. wa s cer-
tainly hard for Mr. Goudy and his friends to lose their horse and then to be
accused of being horse tnieves. The reader will naturally ask why they
wS treated so, but will understand when it is stated that the Sergeant of
Police was connected with the gang of thieves which stole the horse m
question. This fact was proved later on.
Numerous innocent men were sent to work on .he roads at t a
•period through trumped-up charges. If any mans presence was incon-
venient to an official that man was soon at work on the ™adsr Many a
young married couple were separated, that way on this and other fields.
CRUELTY AND INJUSTICE
Mr Hitchcock, on September 18th, 1856, commences his indictment ot
■Campiam by saying that some years previously he, along with his family,
visited an exhibition in Europe called a Diorama, and, after dwelling up -
the changing scenes presented, he enters on the following . Ringing con-
demnation, which was read by many of those he condemned So much
for a moving picture - but have we any Dioramas here? Yes; and real ones
too Ours are practical, natural consequent. Let me show you one: Assem-
ble your minds and look upon a Camp scene; this picture of real life
is approximate to Castlemaine in fact in the town, but in th e aliegement
of its rulers, out of the town, being a reserve not. in their estimation, be-
longing to the 'wasters. ..
“Those of you who looked upon this Camp scene a short time ago
beheld it revelling ir cruelty, dissipation, partiality, injustice and other
enormities. There was a bank there, and a church, too; all went on gai y.
The mess-room was the rallying, plotting and jolly chamber for only the
birds of a feather who flocked together; the a la mihtaire costume and
Hauteur- the studied distinctiveness of the gold-laced strutters from the
cordial associations and the gatherings of the citizens; the maze of prosecu-
tions the dismal and horridly thronged gaol; the batches of prisoners
arriving- viz, handcuffed unlicensed diggers; the chosen police, with officers
to match, whose daily and nightly duties were burning tents and all
nrooertv therein, destroying stores and other large establishments (upon a
perjured villain’s information) without inquiry or trial; ransacking private
rooms and turning the men and even the women from their beds at night


into the streets without shelter. Aye; and the sick man, too, he was compel-
led to tremblingly walk forth without food, or bed to lay his weak fevered
frame upon; these sad, these cruel, these doings of* the monsters strangely
blended with the jollities of the mess-room.
‘‘These were only a few of the incidents or real life at the Camp. But
whilst all this was ,goin on, and the Campites enjoying themselves to their
heart s content the Great Machinist who moves with His machinery was
constructing a Camp Diorama. The picture, though so ponderous, and
the work so unpleasant, has commenced to pass away watch it. See
it is nearly gone, and those acquainted with Dioramas can discover the
new scene breaking forth whilst the Campites are insensible to it. The
wnole place is disappearing; the inhabitants are being changed • the
whistle of the steam engine is heard, the rails are emerging from the
ground; the late buildings are touched as by a wand and now form pas
sengers’ waiting rooms, refreshment rooms, for the travellers the church
is gone to a holier spot; the bank ha s gone to dwell with'the people; the
post office cannot but be resolved along with the rest; all, all is now hurried
alarm is sounded; the last drum is beat, whilst the Campites are now mad
with remorse and despair; the last trumpet is sounded for retreat and
ail the gold-laced family are now extinct some betaking themselves to
assimilate their future to the Castlemanians, the latter receiving them
with welcome and forgetfulness of the past; the others too proud, too
ignorant, too long accustomed to be unrestrained, or declining to occupy
useful positions in the people’s administrations, run hither and thither,
not knowing where to go, and finally are lost falling and* falling to that
society whose acquaintance and company we ought ever to pray to be
preserved from.
GOODBYE TO THE CAMP
“Turning to the spot where so lately stood the Camp, we are electrified
at the glorious change; instead of the brainless orders of the Government
continually ordering former orders to be of no effect, and of imperious
notices to diggers we behold the special excursion train to the Murray
an excursion trip to the Murray at 8 o-clock a.m., from the Castlemaine
station, and leaving the Murray at 5 p.m., affording an opportunity to
attend the Regatta and the amusements of a piscatorial character. Fare,
including dinner for the day 21 shillings. Well, the Camp has gone. The
soldiers are in snug farms at Muckleford and married. The railway station
has replaced the Commissioner’s residence. A municipality has grown
healthy, powerful and inoustrious Let us all in unison thank God that our
change has been bloodless, but now a certain fact.”
“Mr. Hitchcock,” says Mr. McKillop, “has put the position very nicely,
and there was no one in a better position or more capable of studying
and summing up the camp. Considering that the railway had not even
been surveyed when he wrote the above, his allusions to the railways
are wonderfully accurate, especially as at that time it was semi-officially
declared that when the trunk line was constructed it would not touch
Castlemaine. but would go direct from Elphinstone to Harcourt.
The grounds for the accusation by Mr. Hitchcock regarding the
burning of tents, destroying of stores, etc., by the police are expfained
to be as hereunder by Mr. McKillop.—
Sly grog shops were everywhere, and as one writer put it “every
restaurant and every store had its illicit dram.” The penalty was a fine
of £SO, ha>f of which went to the informer, and here was a great source
of revenue to the Camp officials which they were not slow to avail them-
selves of. Sly grog shops were undoubtedly a curse to the field, and one


would applaud any honest endeavor to suppress them, as the liquor dis-
pensed was in nearly every case badly adulterated, and soon had the diggers
trailing their coats on the ground. The owners of these places resorted
to various and very ingenious methods in obtaining their supplies from
Melbourne, a favorite way being to get up a load of flour, and in each
bag was a jar of spirits. The law said that when a sly grog seller waa
convicted the liquor found in his possession was to be confiscated and
the tent and its other contents destroyed. The officials ignored the law,
and burned the tent when the owner was arrested, and before he was con-
victed.
The manner in which the officials grappled with this evil was on par
with their conduct generally, Informers were employed, villains and per-
jurors, and in the guise of diggers let loose among the community. Hence-
forth no man’s character and property were safe, as will be shown later on.
In many cases sly grog shops, known all over the field, carried on business
with the utmost freedom, by bribing the officials, and if a new chum in-
former reported these places to the Commissioner or Inspector, he was
promptly told that he would have to do his work with more ability, or he
would have to go.
In 1854, for some reason or other, probably out of revenge, an informer
lodged an information with the clerk of courts against the keeper of a
sly grog shop on the sacred Camp itself, where everyone knew it existed
but the case was struck off the list next day and was not mentioned in
court. That clerx of courts was transferred shortly afterwards.
The burning of cents and property on a villian’s word would fce bad
enough, if only sly grog shops were affected, taut when innocent people
had their homes and belongings destroyed, and were fined £SO it became
a very serious matter. And that is what very trequently happened. It
only wanted an official or an informer to say that a particular place
was a sly grog shop, and it was fired and the owner arrested and fined.
Frequently, not occasionally, an inspector and his men, late at night, would
force their way into a tent, and without a word of explanation turn every-
one outside, wet weather or dry, women and children, in their night clothing
sick people as well. They would search the place, tossing everything about,
and then would leave without a word of apology or regret. Under the law
each householder or tent holder was allow to have a stated quantity of
liquor on the premises, and sometimes after such a visit as just described,,
the astonished tent holder would be informed that he had over the quantity
of liquor allowed by law, although as a matter of fact he hadn’t; a match,
would be set to the tent, in defiance of the law, and in a few minutes the
home and property of an innocent man would be ashes his wife and family
without clothing or a place to lay their heads and himself arrested and
fined £SO, of which a perjured scoundrel got half, and usually divided with
his superiors.
Incidents are recorded where an informer disguised as a digger
would pretend to take very sick in front of some digger’s tent (always one
capable of paying the fine), and the digger, taking compassion on him,
would give him some spirits which the man, effusive in his gratitude, would
insist on paying for. The digger’s tent was burned down later on, and he
was fined £SO.
On one occasion in 1854 a drayman gave a lift to a limping pedestrian
between Melbourne and Castle,maine. As they travelled along, the digger,
who was very friendly, asked the drayman if he had any liquor, and was


given a drink of rum from a bottle in the carter’s possession. The digger
insisted on paying for the drink, much against the wish of the carter,
wno very reluctantly took the money almost forced into his hand. The
digger was an informer and the drayman was fined £SO. Defence against
the word cf an informer was regarded by the offcials as an offence equally
as gross as sly grog selling.
Despite continued public protests, in which Mr. Hitchcock was an
active participant, the Government took nc action, “because.” says Mr.
McKillop, “it had no desire to stamp out the evil as long as it contributed
to the Treasury.”
The nearest place a thirsty digger could buy a legal drink during
the first two years of the field was seven miles off, at Elphinstone, then
known as Sawpit Gully, at that time a flourishing little settlement containing
three hotels, stores, blacksmiths’ forges, butchers, bakers, etc. “Sawpit
Gully” owed its prosperity, also its name because in the gully grew a
forest of large trees, from which all the field obtained its sawn timber.
There then were no sawmills and the timber had to be sawn by man power.
For' this purpose a pit was dug, called a sawpit, the log to be sawn was
placed over the centre of the pit, and two men provided with a long saw
having at each end a handle, one standing on the log at the top of the
pit and the other down below, each alternately pulling the saw up and
down, cut the log into various sizes of timber required.
FIRST HOTEL LICENCE
The first licence in Castlemaine, says Mr. McKillop, was issued to an
American named Jennings Colliver, on 21st September. 1853, for the Victoria
hotel, situated on the west side of Urquhart street, about 50 yards north of
Forest street. It was a wooden building and for several years it was the
most popular house in the town and the business done was enormous
as all the coaches pulled up there.
The following is copied from the advertisement page of the “Miners’
Right and Castlemaine Advertiser” of January, 1856, and the statement
that the hotel was situated in the then centre of the township is correct.
Mr. Colliver having made his “pile,” sold out in 1854, and returned to his
native America, his successor being Mr. Jackson.
“Victoria Hotel, Castlemaine. Edmund Jackson, proprietor, begs
to return his thanks to the residents and visitors of Castlemaine and its
vicinity for the large measure of support hitherto awarded him, and to
assure them that the house, being entirely under his own superintendence,
nothing shall be wanting that can conduce to their comfort. The Victoria
is situate in the centre of the township, and for its convenience stands
unrivalled. The Royal Mail line of coaches to Melbourne start from this
house, also Foster’s American coaches to Simsons (now Maryborough
and Bendigo. Excellent stabling is attached to the house, and care taken
to secure the safety and comfort of horses.”
The second licence was issued at the same time to George Lovell
for the Albert Hotel (which was situated on the north side of Forest
street about midway between Urquhart and Union streets. This hotel did
not open until three weeks after the issue of the licence. The Victoria was
therefore the first on the field to be opened, and immediately was rushed
by thirsty diggers. “The volume of business done,” says Mr. McKillop,
“would make the publicans of to-day stare. It is safe to say that the takings
at either the Victoria or the Albert in on month exceeded the yearly takings


of any hotel at the present time (1908). There were no drinks less than 1/-
per glass, there was no draft beer, as there were no breweries at that
early period.”
Mr. George Lovell, probably having accumulated a fortune returned
to the old country, as was the custom of the successful business men of
those days, the hotel came into the possession of Mr. Jones, as we learn
from the following advt., also from the “Miners’ Right” of January, 1856.
"Albert Hotel. — Mr. Jones has the honor to return his most sincere
thanks to his friends and the public for their kind patronage and support
and begs leave to intimate that he has just received from Melbourne some
ales, wines, and spirits of a very superior description, which he can strongly
recommend, and will guarantee as being of the very best quality. N.B. —
The concert room will be open to the public at the usual time, free of
expense, with the exception of Thursdays, when it will be reserved for a
ball, if required by the public. Tickets 10/- each. A first-rate slate bagatelle
table is now added to the hotel.”
One Sunday afternoon I set out to locate the sites of those two hotels.
Reaching the corner of Forest and Urquhart streets and on stepping out
the “50 yards to the north” mentioned by Mr. McKillop, found myself
in front of an allotment which "looked the goods.” On it was a villa resi-
dence the street number of which I was after, was hidden from view by a.
tall hedge. After a little hesitation I decided to “butt in." On ringing the
bell, the lady of the house came to the door, and on hearing my reason for
enquiring the street number of her home, became interested and pointed
out a part of the lawn which at times showed a slight depression, the cause_
she said, probably being due to the fact that the old cellar of the Albert
hotel was under that piece of the lawn. This was welcome, indeed. The
number of the house I ascertained, is 11 Urquhart street, the residence of
Mr. and Mrs. Edsall.
Further investigation, guided by Mr. McfKillop’s description of its
situation, revealed that the allotment on which are now two comparatively
new residences, number 70 and 70a, seemed to be, by its size and situation,
the spot where stood Castlemaine’s second to be licensed hotel, the Albert.
With the hope that here as on the site of the Victoria, some indication
of the existence of a cellar may have been discovered when building these
residences presumptive evidence as to their site I rang the bell at No,
70. The door was opened by a lady who, on learning my mission, informed
me that the house No. 70, and the one next to it, 70a, had been built to the
order of her husband, the late Mr. R. Reilly, and that a large cellar had
been discovered during building operations. And before concluding this
story of my Sunday afternoon calls, I wish to tender my thanks for the
courtesy extended to me and the information received from Mrs. Edsall
and Mrs. Reilly.
DAY’S TAKINGS £640
There may be some readers to whom the above hotel history has
little or no interest and as a matter of fact, the present writer is very
little interested in present-day hotels, but these hotels live in our history
as being the first, and in all historical records from that of Adamgand Eve
in the Garden of Eden, down to Mr. McKillop’s record of the Victoria hotel,
first things have first mention.
H The next hotel to open,” says Mr. McKillop, “was the Criterion in
November, 1853, the licensees being Messrs. Dorman and Dawes. It was
a two-storey wooden structure on the site of the present Criterion.”
In 1908 Mr. Dorman, who was then living at Taradale, informed Mr.
McKillop that on the opening day the takings were £4OO, on the first Christ-


mas eve, £640, and on the following St. Patrick’s Day about £SOO. What must
have been the takings of the Albert and Victoria on their opening days.
£640 meant that nearly 14,000 drinks at 1/- each were sold on that Christ-
mas Eve at the Criterion.
Other hotels were soon opened and every licence was granted, the
Government perhaps considering that this was the best and surest way of
killing the sly grog trade, which it proved to be. This may be the explana-
tion why Castlemaine later had such a large number of hotels about
one to every 100 of the entire population.
The undermentioned Criterion hotel advts. are from the “Miners*
Right and Castlemaine Advertiser” of January 20th., 1856; —
Criterion Hotel, Market Square Castlemaine.—Dorman and Dawes in
returning thanks to the inhabitants of the Castlemaine District generally,
and their numerous friends from the surrounding goldfields and from Mel-
bourne, have respectfully to inform them that they are determined to spare
neither expense nor attention in making the Criterion one of the first-class
houses in the colony. Their wines, liquors, spirits, ales, porter, etc., are
selected of the best brands and no second-class article will be found in
their cellar. The table will be served in a manner which will challenge
competition with any hotel on the goldfields, and everything will be done
that can, to make the Criterion, as near as possible, a home to their guests.
Most superior accommodation will be found in their stables for the horses
of their friends and the public, and none but careful and civil ostlers kept.
One of the best billiard tables in the Colony; by Thurston and Co., of
London. Howard’s Line of Argus Coaches start for Melbourne, from their
hotel every morning at 5.30 and 9 a.m., arriving about 2.30 and 6 p.m.
Billiards, Billiards.— The billiard room of the Criterion Hotel is now
open.
Pool! Pool! At the Criterion Hotel billiard table, every evening.
This building was the scene of a sensational fire in 1883, which is thus
described in the “Mail” of May 22nd, 1883:—•
BURNING OF CRITERION HOTEL: DEVASTATING FIRE
A fire broke out at the Criterion hotel at 4 o’clock on Sunday morning,
and destroyed the building, and all that now remains of that old landmark
in which many wild and joyous scenes of prodigal revelry had been enacted
in the olden days are but a few charred uprights at the frontage of the
upper storeys, the weatherboards at the front under the vehandah, and a
small portion next to the building occupied by Mr. Wham .then a saddler’s
shop, now Duggan’s garage). All else was utterly consumed. The fire
was appallingly grand when at its greatest strength with the fierce flames
ascending from the mass of a large two storeyed wooden building, crack-
ling and belching forth in massy volumes. As the water wag played upon
it pieces of timber were driven about to a great distance. Such was the
intensity of the heat that panes of glass in the building of Mr. Warren’s, at
the opposite corner, were cracked and the residence of Mr. Odgers built
of weatherboards, was felt to be in danger, and water was played upon it
for safety. Three human beings, the sole inmates of the hotel, were on the
verge of being inundated in the flames, and only effected their escape
through the windows. The first to be aroused to her sense of danger was
the housemaid, who after repeated knockings at his door roused up Mr.
Tighe, and by shrieking and knocking at the door of the barmaid Miss
Ruth Jennings, also awakened her when scarcely a minute had to be lost.
Mr. Tighe and the housemaid, Miss Connor, escaped on to the verandah,
and by means of a ladder got on to the street, but no one thought of Miss
Jennings, or throwing out signals to her. Hurriedly putting on her gown,


she threw her box of clothing out of the window and attempted to make
hpr escape downstairs but no sooner had she opened the door of the
than the stifling smoke burst upon her and she fell unconscious to the
ground With a presence of peril, she suddenly gained consciousness, an
again flew to her bedroom, from which there was no escape save by the
window, and out of this she flung herself from a height of 13 feet and landed
on her bare feet unhurt, so at least she felt yesterday, but today when the
excitement is over, she may, like others after similar strains feel disagre -
abie consequences. IThe fire had raged furiously for ten minutes before the
fire bell was rung by the ostler, who was aroused from his sleep m the
next building. The fire brigade turned out with celerity, and having at their
command 1000 feet of hose and great pressure of water, they did splendid
duty. Constable Glendenning and Mr. Brigham did a brave part in rescuing
14 horses from the stable at no little peril to themselves, for the poor
animals were frightened at the flames, and had water played on theni as
they passed. Two of them were scorched and one had a leg broken. Two
buggies and two coaches, one a 14 passenger were entirely consumed. The
origin of the fire was not ascertained, but it was first seen to emerge from
the dining room at the rear of the hotel, and though there were three
jets of water playing upon it, it was not till 6 o’clock that the flames were
subdued. A' crowd of spectators were gathered together, looking on help-
lessly at the ruin. The hotel was the property of Mr. Purvs, barrister. The
furniture and stock were insured by Mr. Tigh e for £4OO. The Criterion
was originally the property of Dorman and Dawes, for whom it was built
in the year 1853. An immense trade was done there in the early days, as
much as £IOOO being taken in three days and in one day alone £7OO was
received. The price paid by Dorman and Dawes for the erection of the
building was £3OOO.
The destroyed building was soon replaced by a single storey brick
structure, and the licence taken over by Mr. E. Bartlett, who when the
present extra storey was added to the building, moved on to Maryborough,
and Mr. Rowley Corbett moved in, and he, after successfully conducting
the business for a period of 25 years, is now enjoying a well earned leisure.
This Criterion hotel is entitled to a little niche in the records of Castle-
maine’s history. It has survived its two predecessors and now ranks as the
oldest licensed house in the district.
SPORT AND ENTERTAINMENT
In course of time some of the hotels erected large music halls where
dramatic, operatic and variety companies .gave performances nightly, and
the great and gifted Madame Carandini (the Melba of that day) and her
company, appeared for a season in the Criterion hall.
.The “Miner’s Right’’ of December 10th., 1857, contained the following
advertisement:— _
Criterion Hall. — Great attraction and fun for Saturday Night: Miss
Julia Harland, Mr. Hancock, Mr. Sherwin Mr. Norman, Mr. Hancock, Mr.
Hoskins, Mr. Joyce, Mrs, Evans, Mr. Evans and Mr. Jones. First night of
the nautical and domestic melodrama of Black Eyed Susan, or All in the
Downs. From Shakespeare’s Tragedy of Macßeth, will be sung the whole
of the celebrated music by Mathew Locke. A new farce never acted before
by this company called “But However,’’ or the Cross-Barred Ineffables.
On Monday, December 14th., a grand Amateur Dramatic Performance at
the Red Hill Music Hall, supported by the Castlemaine Amateur Dramatic
Society, when will be performed Rob Roy and a Laughable Farce. Doors
open at half-past seven, to commence at Eight precisely. Front seats 5/-,
Back seats 2/6.


At many hotels also, sports meetings, wrestling matches quoit
matches, etc., were held on holidays, and at first those at the Cumberland
hotel, or inn, as it was then known, were held in Lyttleton street and says
Mr. McKillop, “a young man, Mr. John Bowe, of Maldon, who was a promi-
nent athlete, competed in and won several footraces in Lyttleton street
organised by the Messrs. Watson of the Cumberland Inn. The wrestling
matches were held at the rear of the hotel, and those at the Criterion on
the corner of the Market Reserve, immediately opposite that house.”
This corner of the reserve was the favorite auction place for selling
stock. The auctioneer standing in a dray, would extol the merits of the
ahimals, while his assistant was handling out cigars to all and sundry, and
nearly always there was an abundance of liquid refreshment. The test for
draught horses was made on the Criterion Hill (Moslyn street west), which
was much rougher and steeper than it is to-day, and the horse which pulled
a ton up that hill was considered good enough for any man’s money. It
didn’t matter to the auctioneer if the owner of a jibbing horse pulled the
lead up for the love of pulling or whether it pulled it up in order to get a
feed, was no business of the auctioneer; all he had to do was to sell it
Mr. Hitchcock was the principal auctioneer, and a splendid one at that
“And,” said Mr. McKillop when he wrote this in 1908, “old identities today
have fond recollections of his witty sallies and business acumen and regret
that they have never heard one like him since.”
Late in the year 1806, a discussion took place in the Legislative Assem-
bly on illicit drinking in hotels. Mr. Wheeler (the local member) in his
remarks said that he was in favor of limited Sunday trading, and instanced
Castlemaine, where six out of the seven hotels were available to the public
on Sundays. ‘‘When Mr. Wheeler’s remarks appeared in print.” says Mr.
McKillop, “the people of Castlemaine didn't feel horrified at the awful sin
going on in their midst neither did the hotelkeepers howl because their
representatives put the show away. All that interested the people was the
seventh hotel. Six which traded on Sunday could easily be found, but the
difficulty was to find the one which didn’t trade, and speculation was rife
as to which cne it was.
Wholly set up and printed by the Castlemaine “Mail” Prop. Ltd.
155 Barker Street, Castlemaine.




