

H
INAUGURAL ADDRESS
DELIVERED BEFORE THE
Iftcmters of tf)e Victorian institute,
FRIDAY, the 21st of SEPTEMBER, 1854,
HIS HONOR REDMOND BARRY,
ACTING CHIEF JUSTICE OF THE SUPREME COURT
OF THE
COLONY OF VICTORIA.
RRlbourne:
LUCAS BROTHERS, PRINTERS, COLLINS STREET, EAST.
MHCCCLIV.




INAUGURAL ADDRESS.
Ladies and Gentlemen, ?
The object for which we meet this evening is to inaugurate
? The Victorian Institute.?
We assemble in the vestibule of the temple of science,
many of us unacquainted one with the other, invited to en-
gage in a course of mutual improvement, and to assist in the
cause of general instruction.
The invitation is one which it does not become us to slight;
it holds out not only the certainty of much agreeable mental
recreation, but also the means, if duly employed, of attaining
and diffusing many substantial benefits. It affords an oppor-
tunity to those who become members of collecting materials
and interesting facts respecting the multitudinous subjects
which form topics for the rational inquirer, and to which care-
ful and well-regulated observation will attach an accredited
worth ; of arranging and collating them, so as to facilitate
investigation and attract the attention of those competent to
exercise thereon an enlightened judgment; of provoking
opinions or theories which may, at least, test the intrinsic merit
of'those heretofore current; and of recording in authentic
form the discoveries or speculations of those who have hither-
to individually in private prosecuted their unobtrusive studies
simply for the enjoyment yielded by the pursuit, and of those
who may now be stimulated to join in giving their thoughts
and views a public circulation.


The occasion appears to be propitious for the success of
such an institution. This is not an era which will tolerate
the division of acroatic* and exoteric learning, or recognise
barriers within which the uninitiated are not permitted to en-
croach. Men are no longer content that the search for know-
ledge should be delegated to the exclusive charge of any par-
ticular body, involved in the frivolous niceties of alchemical
empiricism, clouding in allegory, or shrouding in mystic
symbols the steps by which they, as they supposed, approached
the secrets of the philosopher?s stone, the elixir of life, or the
universal solvent; no longer amused with the acuminated
subtleties of metaphysical disquisitions, dogmatic theology,
or philological dissertations. Theories are not now dozed
over for a life time to pass away as idle dreams. We live in
an age in which the difficulties which arrested the profound-
est masters of antiquity?and drew forth desponding lamenta-
tions of the impossibility of their solution, or ambiguous pro-
pheciesf of the probability of their removal, have been subju-
gated by the ever strengthening arm of science : in which
tangible realities and practical demonstration, from what order
soever they emanate, are accepted and appreciated, and in
which each one who can add to the treasury and enrich it
with a new idea, or shed a ray of light upon any of the obscu-
* Aristotle classified his lectures as, ?Ist acroamatic, acroatic, or
esoteric; 2nd, exoteric. The latter, delivered in public, comprised logic,
rhetoric, politics and economics, &c. The former to which his select
disciples alone were admitted, related to the Deity, being nature, &c.
f Note?Vide Bacon, especially Nova Atlantis, Magnadia Naturae.
One of the least oracular and most poetical of these is that well-known
passage from Dr. Darwin ;
? Soon shall thy arm, unconquered steam, afar
Drag the slow barge, or drive the rapid car:
Or on wide waving wings expanded bear
The flying chariot through the fields of air.
Fair crews triumphant leaning from' above
Shall wave their fluttering kerchiefs as they move
Or warrior bauds alarm the gaping crowd
And armies shrink beneath the shadowy cloud.?


rities which deface the disk of learning will be acknowledged
as a benefactor, and hailed as a good and faithful servant in
the cause.
Moreover this is an age of which the tendency is not
as formerly to meet a novel proposition with a contempt-
uous denial, or its author with an accusation of atheism, in-
timacy with the father of Evil, or the yet more heinous offence
of heresy; and expose him to the hemlockj, the dungeon, or
the stake. The custom of denouncing and descrying innova-
tions, as such, no longer reigns despotic. We are no longer
oppressed by a bigoted veneration for ? the wisdom of our
ancestorsit is received with a deferential respect, and regard-
ed in relation to the lights by which they were illuminated.
New doctrines and inventions are submitted to dispassionate
investigation before they are wholly condemned ; if found to
bear the tests applied, they are readily approved and adopted,
if not in the land in which they originate, in some more con-
genial spot, amongst some more liberal spirits; and are made
fulcra on which a thousand anxious minds rest their levers to
propel into a fuller growth the germ from which they have
sprung.
The dignified modesty of true learning is conscious that
it is only by slow and painful steps that man has been
able to evolve and eliminate those portions of knowledge with
which he has been allowed to make himself acquainted; and
while it will not suffer the self-sufficiency of ignorance to dic-
tate that which reason must repel, it will not allow the arro-
gance of sciolism to assert that nothing has been left for the
present generation to acquire.
Not only on such abstract grounds, but for reasons of
a more particular nature is the occasion favourable. One
J Humanity must mourn, and the .Muse of History must blush, while
the names of Socrates, Galileo, Faust, More, Servctus, &c., stand on record;
and the persecutions of "the Christians by the fierce Nero, the cruel
Domitian, the virtuous Trajan, the just Adrian, the pious Antonine, tho
ambitious Severus, and the indiscriminate fury of Maximin, Decius,
Valerian, Diocletian, Maximinian, Galerius, &c., and of each other by .
But let not the wounded bleed afresh.


of the humblest races in the gradation of the human
family has yielded to us the possession of the vast territory
over which our people are now dispersed; and by an inscruta-
ble regulation of Providence is waning before the access of
civilization. By exertions, unassisted from without, cities and
towns have sprung up, of a class and with a rapidity which
challenge a parallel in former or contemporary history. The
events crowded into the last three years have wrought a
change, not merely in the actual condition, but in the imme-
diate prospects of our community, which as regards our social
and political state and the opening dawn of accelerated pro-
gression, must inspire consolation, confidence and hope. The
discovery of gold, happily postponed until our hills, plains,
and valleys were covered with flocks and herds, and until we
had emerged from dependence upon, to that of sisterly amity
with a province, has brought us into direct intercourse with
nations hitherto indifferent to, perhaps ignorant of the geo-
graphical position of this country, the keels of whose stately
vessels now furrow every sea to visit us ; who exchange with
us commodities, productions of every clime; and pour forth
their hardy sons, to reinforce our numbers, bearing with them
practised skill and restless avidity for the acquisition of wealth.
The enterprise of our great parent state, but languidly expand-
ing under pastoral occupations, has been caught up, and now
directing itself into innumerable fresh channels gives indica-
tion of highly vital force. Each new scientific application to
economise labour and time is brought within our reach,
opening new avenues to honourably earned riches, and una-
tended by any of the inconveniences, which, in crowded
communities occasionally arise from the substitution of ma-
chinery for manual labour before the classes affected thereby
have resorted to other employments; and we may be well
assured that there are amongst us many gifted men, of culti-
vated minds, fervid imagination, and intrepid temperament,
who, curbed and confined elsewhere by the pressure of sur-
rounding competition, have panted for a field in which their
talents may be allowed to expatiate, and have gladly turned
to this young country, ready to receive them with a gracious
welcome.


The construction, the features, the products, the deficien-
cies, the wants of this country demand, and must exact,
scientific innovation to suit, adapt, repair or supply it and
them ; and if within the recollection of some present, a Ful-
ton, unestimated in his native city, lived to see his baffled
projects ripened in a foreign land, and the waters of the
western hemisphere crowded with vessels incessantly propelled
by the impulse of a slighted mechanism and a distrusted
might, is it presumptuous to imagine that this genial southern
sun may hasten into birth some unrevealed combination of
forces, the rudiment of which, as yet, lies in the brain of one
amongst us ; hitherto unsmiled on by the favour of his own
compatriots, ungladdened by the approving voice of his own
countrymen ?
This is surely then a time when every effort to rivet atten-
tion on the culture of art and science should be heartily
seconded. A strong desire for knowledge is manifested in
the foundation of our University?the establishment of libra-
ries, and the formation of the numerous societies springing
up in our towns, their suburbs, and the more distant districts.
All this points to prove that the barren acquisition of money
does not satisfy the cravings of a people who possess a com-
prehension beyond that of the method of acquiring it; and
that if such appetite be once created that people will demand
something more than simple didactic information.
As to the benefits to be derived from the establishment of
this institution, they are incalculable, and an attempted enu-
meration of them would be alike unnecessary and incomplete.
What rather must they not be when an account of the natural
and physical resources of the country is untouched by any
hand we may strictly call our own ; when the different
branches which treat of the mineral stores hidden within the
earth, the vegetation which luxuriates, the insects, reptiles,
animals which move upon its surface, the fish which swim in
its waters, the fowls which float in its air, invoke especial
systematic notice ; when the annals of atmospheric and clim-
atic changes continue unnoted, and when a faithful narration
of the few but eventful years of the occupation of this soil by
Europeans is unwritten ?


It must, however, strike you obviously, as of no inconsider-
able moment, that an organised body should exist, round
which those ardent in the pursuit of science, and zealous in
unfolding its enlarged adaptation to the peculiar wants of
this country, should be able to group themselves ; in which
they could see the steadfast countenance of recognised autho-
rity ; in the archives of which they could find the large stores
which sagacity and unwearied diligence have laid up in hours
saved from tedious indolence or snatched from profitless self-
indulgence to quicken intelligence, and incite to that ambition
which extorts praise; and where they may encounter that
variety which will afford a chord on which each distinctive
mind may strike its ample tone ; lend a completeness to the
full diapason, and thereby enliven and relieve the exact and
monotonous uniformity.
One solid advantage to be reaped, were that the only one,
is that by the practice of original investigation the intellect
will become fertilised ; and as by ploughing and harrowing the
soil new elements of vegetation and reproduction are brought
to the surface, such exercises will embue the mind with an
elasticity and a capacity for analysis and induction, enlarged
as occasion presents new objects with which it is called on to
grapple.
This is by no means an unimportant consideration, while
the printing press is daily sending forth works written with
the fascination of what is termed a popular style, introducing
every species of scientific question, stripped of all severity of
demonstration. When readers once acquire a habit of peru-
sing such works hastily and without method, indiscrimi-
nately and without reflection, or the necessity for mental
exertion, they become prone to lean on the memory rather
than to rely on the understanding, thereby underrating and
necessarily impairing the higher powers of reason. Those
who are satisfied with a medium so acceptable to the indolent
may be displeased with what they may deem a depreciating
allusion to such books. It is not my desire to undervalue,
but to stamp a right value upon them. Many of them are of
considerable merit, and the authors of them have distributed
much useful instruction in quarters to which it had never


before been able to penetrate ; but in adverting to one of the
chief aims of this Institute, ? the elevation of the intellectual
condition of the community,? it is my wish to impress upon
its members that this is not to be accomplished by adopting
second-rate philosophy at second hand, but by enforcing the
necessity for primary research ; by creating a taste for inde-
pendent and thoughtful observation ; by fortifying the powers
of perception, while the attention is engaged and the curiosity
gratified ; by urging its members to strike out for themselves
a track different from that which can only lead to mediocrity;
by enlisting the active and strenuous, fostering in them a
vigorous and self-relying habit, and thus, by strengthening
the strong, arouse the listless and inattentive, and, having
kindled such a spirit, using every means to make it permeate
through every grade.
That such consequences may be looked for, is probable,
when we consider that labour, whether physical or intellec-
tual, is eminently social, and always most effective when
combined ?yet, that the achievements which human industry
has made conspicuous have been won not always by the com-
bination of many hands, but by the co-operation of many
minds and the accumulated experience of many men.
In the elaboration of each separate idea, a compensating
mutual relation with some other cognate idea is found, which
brings a fresh agency to bear upon, assimilate or clash with
it; such attrition, different from that which wastes and dimin-
ishes physical bodies, serving to sharpen and refine the mind>
correct, enlarge or perfect the idea. A mutual dependency
of powers, faculties and functions is also an interesting fea-
ture in labour, through which arises the reflection of itself
upon itself and the reaction of its votaries upon each other.
The philosopher would be helpless without the assistance of
the mechanic, who furnishes him wherewith to pierce through
space beyond the range of human ken ; to measure the hea-
vens as with a meteyard ; to trace the erratic course and
predict the occultation and reappearance of the comet; to
calculate with unerring certainty the effect of every perturba-
tion arising from the constant, yet change-producing influence


of gravitation; to weigh the invisible air and to note the
delicate organism of microscopic animalculse.
The navigator, the engineer, the chemist, are alike indebted
to him; while on the other hand, the useful arts would stand
still, the mechanic be no more than the primitive artificer
were it not for the successive substitutions or additions of
forces, economical or supplementary, to construct which
genius informs him; and his hand would be confined to the
repetition of that labour which has no excitement of novelty
and is unrelieved by the prospect of improvement.
Thus Science claims Art as its handmaiden; Art reverences
Science as her preceptor; each knit to the other with a bene *
volent sympathy.
In seeking to acquire an intimacy with the secrets of either*
even in the seemingly motiveless or injudicious *study of
them, some collateral or accidental good may be expected,
while from the neglect or unwise disregard of them nothing
can proceed but regret. Although the great truth may lie
beyond our reach, the honest and pains-taking search for it
may profit much. Although the investigator may fail to
reach the ultimate goal of his wishes, he may be entertained
by many a pleasing diversion on the way.
Discoveries the most memorable have arisen accidentally
and almost unbidden. The stain left on the lips of a dog
which had feasted on an insignificant shell-fish drew attention
to that dye* which tinctured the robes kings and conquerors
were proud to wear. We are told that some Phoenician
sailors, having, for want of other fuel wherewith to cook their
food on the sea shore, had recourse to some blocks of alkali
with which their vessel was laden, were astonished to behold
it, when acted on by heat, dissolve into translucent streams,
and assume with the sand the undesigned form of vitrification;
giving the first hints for the manufacture of glass, now so
indispensable an article of use, ornament, and luxury. The
* Purple.
Tyrioque ardebat murice loena
Domissa ex humeris. (i. e. of the Pius iEneas.)
Viro. .33n. TV. 263.


fatal efficacy of gunpowder as an agent for the destruction of
human life surprised the cloistered Bacon. The mirthful
disporting of the children of an obscure spectacle-maker of
Middleburg, who, by placing two pieces of glass one before
the other and looking through them, observed the weather-
cock on a neighbouring steeple to be magnified, drew the
notice of the father to the fact; who, struck by the singularity
of the effect, adjusted lenses on a hoard in brass rings, move-
able at pleasure,?the first rude attempt at the telescope, the
instrument which so effectually aided to establish the renown
of Newton, La Place, and Hers'chel. The spasmodic convul-
sion of the limbs of a dead frog, caused by the unpremiditated
contact with two plates of metal, exposed to Galvani the
premises on which, by a series of successful experiments, he
built up the principles of animal electricity. While many of
those by which chemistry has ministered so extensively to the
convenience and efficiency of medicines, by removing nauseat
ing or pernicious substances ; or to enobling the arts by dis-
closing previously unknown properties in vegetables, minerals,
acids,or alkalis; in fixing or liberating colours; in ascertaining
the composition and affinities of the different gases, have
almost, as it were, obtruded themselves obliquely, and the
unappropriated ideas which the surge of ever flowing time
casts upon its bosom have thus allowed themselves to be
drawn within the eddying verge of that circle which the
enquirer has disturbed.
But to turn anti view the subject in another light. There
is no slender enjoyment afforded by the ready concession
made by intellectual liberality to a demonstration, however
startling, which stands in direct contradiction to traditional
error, to the immature offspring of crude theories which we
have too readily accepted from others; or to the cherished
conclusions which we may have rashly drawn from ill-con-
sidered or assumed data; and the celerity with which after
the evidence has been understood and assent granted to the
new proposition, all pre-existing notions are displaced, and
the tenacity with which the belief clings to the latter doctrine,
by which the former has been supplanted, prove incontestably


the natural and indwelling love of truth which predominates
over every other impression on the heart and mind.
Are there not however other attractions, besides those
emphasised by utilitarian argument, capable of luring us to
such an enlightened species of amusement, to the devotion of
a portion of that leisure left after the performance of our
sterner duties to prepare us for the perception of a more
refined description of intellectual recreation than we have
had hitherto within our reach. It is too common to treat
science as ascetic and austere, and deny to her the ability of
unbending to animate and to please. You recollect the
enthusiastic apostrophe of the poet, who exclaims with a
greater generosity, to which I hope I hear an echo?
? How charming is divine Philosophy!
Not harsh and crahhed as dull fools suppose,
But musical as is Apollo?s lute,
And a perpetual feast of nectar 1 d sweets,
Where no crude surfeit reigns.?
Comus.
Who then is so impassive as not to feel delight in dwelling
on the vast design of nature, the order and beauty with which
it is maintained, and yearn for an insight into its great
arcana; ?whether we survey the celestial scheme which pre-
scribes to planets and their satellites stated revolutions, and
upholds all without dislocation of the marvellous
producing in the infinitely-diversified movements of its mem-
bers, by an all-wise counteraction of discordant discord, such
surprising harmony ; or whether we behold the terrific won-
ders of the atmosphere, torn by devastating hurricanes or
agitated by conflicting currents, laden with pestilence, dealing
death around; or its soothing airs breathing life and health ;
whether we study the structure of the solid globe and the
alterations it constantly undergoes by the agency of heat or
magnetism, or those subtil powers which generate the volcanic
shock, and work the perpetual transmutation of its compact
ingredients; ?or the properties of elementary substances,
their union and reciprocal action ; or the structure, develop-
ment and admirable adaptation of the vegetable and animal


kingdoms, ascending in unbroken series to man ; whether we
look around and behold the curious felicity of his inventive
genius, through Avhich he has gained a mastery over the
resisting elements, the stubborn earth, the treacherous ocean,
and made the explosive steam or the ? thwart flame? of the
? slant lightning? ministers obedient to his behests; or the
perseverance of his unremitted toil by which he has reared in
every zone monuments of his piety, his ambition, his ostenta-
tion ; or the fertility of his aspiring ingenuity, by which he
has increased his sources of comfort and encumbered the
field of enjoyment with the prodigality of his luxury; or,
finally, whether we cast our thoughts inward on ourselves,
and consider the constitution and operations of the mind, the
working of the passions, the sway of the affections, the facul-
ties of the understanding, the dominion of the reason ?
These afford themes which will for ever create fresh inter-
est, for ever yield new gratification, for ever mock the efforts
of the human race to exhaust them. From these, as the
elegant relaxations of our prudently-husbanded vacation, we
may harvest riches which neither birth nor fortune can con-
fer, which neither poverty nor the vicissitudes of adversity
can take away.
If it be necessary to adduce further reasons besides those
indicating the good results expected to follow on the esta-
blishment of this Institute, let me call your attention to what
is going on elsewhere, without the boundaries of our imme-
diate range of action ; amongst other nations with whom, in
the charities of art, and the catholicity of science, we may
claim kindred. Every department of philosophy is marching
onward with gigantic steps, each stride elongated beyond the
last! Every year teems with some new disclosure, respecting
the phenomena of nature and the laws by which they are
governed. While Humboldt, eminent for the remarkable
diversity of his matured knowledge, is endeavouring to pre-
pare his cosmical sketch of creation, he finds himself out-
stripped, and forced to pause that he may append by supple-
mental annotation to each part as it issues forth, the results
of that inductive reasoning which, carried on by simultaneous


yet independent study, has enabled a Le Vender and an
Adams to herald the existence of new worlds undetected by
the inquisitive astronomer, and of the patient meditations of
other men who have spread out before him unimagined won-
ders. Methods of treating abstruse topics are simplified ;
improvements in the instruments to assist philosophical inves-
tigation succeed each other to an extent which, while they
excite a just admiration, hold out a belief that we are hovering
on the threshold of more astounding discoveries than any
which have hitherto awed us by their sublimity or gratified us
by the practical xxsefulness which has tended so extensively
to the civilisation of mankind.
And is it for us to lag behind in the race in which the sages
of our time shew us such an example of diligence and acti-
vity ? Is it to be said of us, the tenants of a portion of one
of the grand divisions of the globe?a storehouse of unrevealed
mysteries?the theatre, we may presume, of future great
actions?that we have no ambition but to vegetate on its
surface, mere ? air plants, whose roots are the lungs,? (as
Novalis quaintly terms men) without even contributing our
quota of information respecting those things daily exposed to
the observing eye, or endeavouring to awaken an appreciation
of their concert, or aspiring to add a sign to the zodiac of
science ?
Are we to waste life in frivolity, or in occupations which,
when we perish, will leave no memorial of even our own
existence ; and allow our era to be cited as that of the Cim-
merian obscurity of the Southern Hemisphere ? Are we to
shrink from solving our portion of the great problem of truth,
or is it apprehended that the grandeur of the theme should
repulse us, that we should doubt our powers, distrust our
endurance, and be fearful for our success ?
Such timorous diffidence, such unworthy distrust is unbe-
coming, and ought not to be suffered to interpose the fluctu-
ation of a wavering instant; and even were there grounds to
apprehend a want of vigour to sustain this Institute, I would
say,
?Yet where an equal poise of hope and fear
Does arbitrate the event, my nature is
That I incline to hope and not to fear.?


It will not, I feel assured, have escaped the reflective
amongst this audience, that of such pursuits as those on which
we are about to engage ourselves the chief end should be,
not merely to extend our acquaintance with matters or things,
their qualities or accidents ; or to waste time, however sedu-
lously employed, if our efforts merely entitle us to the barren
praise of skilful compilers of dry and isolated facts, or unwea-
ried classifiers of characteristic peculiarities or attributes,
ingenious nomenclators, or editors who look on the volume
of nature as a dictionary ; but that our faith is to learn their
relative value in subordination to the comprehensive scheme
of Creation ; and by exalting the understanding waft it above
the cheerless sophistry which chains the soul to an empty
materialism, and warm the affections towards the Great
Author of being. When we acknowledge that to be the
needle which guides our speculations we will be perpetually
reminded of that infinite wisdom which governs and regulates
the orb in which we dwell?but one amidst the countless
myriads of worlds which divine intelligence holds within their
spheres ?and looking ? from nature up to nature?s God,?
muse with admiration and humility upon the system to which
we owe so many blessings, and the succession of those indis-
soluble links which connect us with immortality.
We may then, in sincere approbation of the sentiments
attributed to our first parents in the simplicity of their uncor-
rupted state, join in their enthusiastic exclamation ;
? These are thy glorious works, Parent of Good,
Almighty! thine this universal frame,
Thus wondrous fair ; thyself how wondrous then,
Unspeakable ! who sit?st above these heav?ns,
To us invisible, or dimly seen
In these thy lowest works ; yet these declare
Thy goodness beyond thought and power divine.?
Lucas Brothers, Printers, 72, Collins Street, East, Melbourne.


I \
.
