

.778*5
CS/tS
INAUGURAL ADDRESS
DELIVERED AT THE OPENING OF
THE THEOLOGICAL HALL
OF THE PEESBYTEEIAN CHUECH OE YICTOEIA,
2nd MAY. 1866,
BY THE REV. PRINCIPAL CAIRNS, D.D.
Published by Oudek of the Commission of the General Assembly.
A. J. SMITH, BOOKSELLER, &c., 30 SWANSTON STREET.
MDCCCLXVI.




INAUGURAL ADDRESS
DELIVERED AT THE OPENING OF
THE THEOLOGICAL HALL
OF THE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH OF VICTORIA,
MAY, 1866
BY THE REY. PRINCIPAL CAIRNS, D.D.
Pdblished by Order of the Commission of the General Assembly.
MELBOURNE:
A. J. SMITH, BOOKSELLER, &c., 30 SWANSTON STREET.
MDCCCLXVI.




INAUGURAL ADDRESS.
1. The present occasion has an interest and an importance peculiar
to itself, which may however, he easily overlooked and still
more easily depreciated by common observers. It seems a trivial
affair to commence a system of theological instruction for a few
young men, whose wisdom in desiring such instruction may
perhaps be questioned by friends the most anxious for their wel-
fare. It is, indeed, a day of small things with our Divinity Hall;
a small beginning with less of encouragement in some respects
than might have been expected. But little and insignificant as
it may appear to the eye of sense and the mere worldly mind, it
possesses a value and an importance which it is perhaps impos-
sible to exaggerate. It marks a great era in the history of the
Presbyterian Church in this colony. Its insignificance is seeming
—not real. In reality, this movement has an intrinsic weight
which no one can rightly estimate, as it contains the promise of
future and indefinite enlargement. All noble institutions and
grand successes have originated in some unambitious thought or
feeble effort, and have attained their illustrious distinction by
slow degrees and much-suffering patience. The law of physical
nature has its counterpart in the world of mind and in the
Kingdom of Grace. The acorn is a small matter, enclosing a
tiny seed. Planted in the soil, it sends forth after a season a
tender shoot, which the pressure of a finger would destroy. It
grows with slowness and difficulty. But it grows. It gradually
attains the form of a tree, it lives through summer’s heat and
winter’s cold, it lives through calm and tempest. The storms
that wreck the delicate exotic, harden its fibre, and root it more
firmly in the ground ; and after many years of climatic endurance,
this nursling of stern nature towers aloft the monarch of the
forest. So it is with the healthy development of the mental
faculties. At first they are as invisible, or as minute, as the
diminutive seed shut up in the brown acorn. By watchful care
and judicious training they are evoked and nurtured. They
acquire vigor by imperceptible degrees, and it is only by a long


continued process of well-considered discipline that they are
fully ripened and hear the mellow fruit of intellectual power.
If there he no royal road to learning or proficiency in any depart-
ment of mental exercise, neither is there any hope for indolence
or any promise to the self-indulgent spirit in the work of
salvation. Not without violence can the Kingdom of Heaven
be won. If conversion from sin to Hod be the result of the
crucifying process of repentance, so the growth of the converted
soul in the life of holiness is a ceaseless conflict with an armed
host of lusts of the flesh and powers of darkness who strive to
deceive us to our perdition. The experienced believer, who shines
like a star in the firmament and is a pillar in the house of Hod, has
acquired his enriching grace and his exemplary steadfastness only
by painful efforts, by self-sacrificing devotion, by the resolute
taking up ot his cross day by day, and so following Jesus in
the work of his own regeneration. A similar principle
regulates the history of every lasting institution, and
especially of an institution such as this, for the training
of ministers for the Church of Christ,—ministers quali-
fied to preach the gospel, and act the part of wise and
faithful stewards of the mysteries of redemption. No doubt it
would be pleasing to us to see our Theological Hall arise full
formed and fully equipped, complete and perfect, for the
glorious service to which it is consecrated ; to see it free and
unembarassed by a single defect in its organisation, or a single
want in its appliances ; to see it start on its sacred career with
its well chosen staff of professors, with its ample and wisely
selected library, and with all the subordinate helps and con-
veniences which could add to its efficiency or commend it to
popular favour. And Hod could have bestowed such a gift had
it pleased Him to do so. The silver and the gold are His, and He
who can turn the hearts of kings whethersoever He will even as
He turns the rivers of water, could have moved the wealthy of
the land to erect and endow our Theological College with the
liberality of munificence. But it has not pleased Him to do so,
and good is the will of the Lord. His will is wisdom and
goodness—is truth and lore. Let us only accept it with the
cheerfulness and alacrity of faith—that faith which works by
love, and we will have cause to praise Him for the very things
which our weak nature would lead us to deplore. It might be
that such prosperity at the commencement of our course would
foster our pride, cool down our zeal, and induce a tendency to
lean on an arm of flesh. Better to trust in Hod, better to
begin in faith and to exercise patience. Better to cast our
burden on the Lord, and to face the future with the courage and
hopefulness of a simple, child-like, but full-hearted reliance on


Him. If it be His will that our Hall should have a hard struggle
in its infancy, should be beset with trials, and subjected to pri-
vations which we would feign avoid, let us be assured that
the end will justify the wisdom of His providence, and that the
institution reared amid the inclemencies of a frigid or lukewarm
community, if such should be its fate, will attain a strength of
character, a purity of aim, a brightness of sanctity, an influence
for good, which will crown her with a glory expressive of the
Master’s presence, and a gracious manifestation of His love.
. O ur object is to provide the means for training a native 8
ministry. This work is plainly assigned us. We are called
to it. It is as clearly our present duty as it is to preach the
gospel to our fellow-men. The time has certainly come when
further delay in this great undertaking will infer a dereliction of
duty to our Lord, who has brought us here for the very purpose
of planting His Church _in this hemisphere ; and to our fellow
colonists ] to the families of our people \ to generations yet
unborn, who depend on us to provide a system of theological
education as one of the chief essentials to all well-doing
and well-being; as the fountain head or reservoir whence
are to flow the many streams of the waters of life. The
time for it has come, fully come. The home churches can
no longer be depended on for a supply of ministers
for our ever-growing wants. Already it is deficient and
unsatisfactory. We are compelled to look to ourselves, and
to strain every nerve to make adequate provision for our own
demands. And every day increases the desirableness of a native-
born and trained ministry. The colony is fast assuming the
bulk and the features of a distinct nation. !Nh observer can
doubt that there is forming an Australian mind, a mental tone
and complexion neither English, nor Scotch, nor Irish, but
Australian ; a character of a kind suited to the place, and caused
by circumstances which Gnd has chosen for the ends of His own
glory. We must, therefore, as wise men, yield to this call in the
providence of Grod, to found an institution for educating colonial
students for the colonial ministry; or, perhaps I should say, the
pious youth of Australia, for the work of an Australian Church.
3. This introduces the more important part of my subject, viz.,
the nature of the educational training incumbent on us to institute
—the primary objects we are to pursue and to realise, by means
of our Divinity Hall. Well; we are to do our utmost to provide
a succession of ministers thoroughly furnished for their momen-
tous work. Ministers who will adorn the doctrine they preach.
Shining lights, tongues of fire, messengers of peace, living
witnesses, full of the Holy Grhost, serving the Lord in love,
delighting in His service because they love Him, willing to spend
5


and be spent in winning precious souls, workmen who need
not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth. Our
desire is that our students be thoroughly furnished for their high
and holy vocation, for the Lord’s honorable work to be
workers together with Him in the vineyard of the Father. _ And,
as the first and vital element in this thorough preparation, we
ought to insist on personal piety—personal spiritual life, and
spiritual-mindedness in every student admitted to the College.
There are two particulars, each indispensable in this qualifi-
cation. The first is, —the fact of the student’s own conversion:
the second is,—the fact that Christ has called him to the office
and work of the ministry. It is not every converted man that is
called to be a preacher or a minister Not every one born from
above, truly a child of Hod, spiritual in mind, living and
walking in the spirit, is ordained by the Lord to leave his
position in society and devote himself to the ministry of the
gospel; no! else every believer would be an ordained minister of
Christ, hirst of all, there must be personal reconciliation with
Hod, there must be a genuine conversion, there must be the
new birth—the being born again, and so entering the Kingdom
of Heaven, there must be repentance unto life, faith in Jesus
Christ, that faith that justifies from sin, that gives peace with Hod
and assurance of victory over every foe. “We speak because we
“ believe —that which we have seen and heard declare we unto you”
“—i Jofin i. “O, taste and see that the Lord is good” —Psalms
“ xxxiv. 8. “We speak that we do know, and testify that we have
“ seen” —John hi. 11. “All things are of Hod, who hath reconciled
“ us to Himself, and hath given to ns the ministry of reconciliation.
“ Now, then, we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though Hod did
“ beseech you by us ” —2 Cor. v. Without ability to speak thus,
to make this confession,—in such terms as these to address the
guilty and the perishing, there is, and can be no fitness for the
work of the ministry. A personal knowledge of Christ as a
Saviour, a personal experience of the efficacy of His blood and
the all-sufficiency of His merits, a personal sense of the love of
Hod in Him, of the sweetness of the word, of the heavenly calm
of peace reigning in the heart, of the joy with which no
stranger intermeddles, the joy which love enkindles and hope
exalts, so that in its blessedness it becomes unspeakable and full
of glory, all this is essential to the office, as it is essential to the
comfort of the Christian Minister. For the want or absence of
this gracious endowment, there is no compensation to be found
in the most elaborate training of a Divinity Hall. Without this
spiritual fitness there is no foundation for the goodly superstruc-
ture of a thoroughly efficient ministry. Without this preparatory
work of Hod, our best exertions are nothing better than a vain


attempt to build a temple on the shifting sand, or rather to hang it
up in empty space. First of all, there must be a vital union with
Christ; there must be reconciliation with God ; there must be the
spirit of adoption, crying, Abba, Father; there must be a love to
the Lord, swaying heart and soul with sovereign influence, and
burning as the quenchless flame of the altar in a continual
offering of self-sacrifice or consecration. Intellect is vain without
this, learning is useless without this. The vital principle is
love to Christ. That central power both quickens and guides
every other power, sanctifies learning, and expands, refines,
ennobles, and sometimes glorifies, the intellectual faculties.
“ God,” says Pascal, “ has designed that Divine truths should
“ pass from the heart into the head, and not from the head into
“ the heart. So, as it is necessary to know human things in
“ order to love them, it is necessary to love Divine things in
“ order to know them.” This finding of a philosophic mind, is a
striking interpretation of the well-known beatitude, Blessed are
“ the pure in heart for they shall see God !” —they only—for if
“any man will do His will, he shall know of the doctrine
“whether it be of God.” I confess to a great anxiety on this
point. I regard personal and living godliness, the Divine life, and
the experience of the Divine life, as absolutely fundamental,
without which it is not only needless to proceed, but presump-
tuous. For what is our teaching in the absence of God s own
teaching, but a presumptuous attempt to supersede Him in His
own House, and to disregard alike His blessing and His dis-
pleasure ! Bear with me, therefore, while I state my opinion,
and express my earnest desire, that no applicant should be
received as a Student of Thology until the Church has obtained
from him reasonable evidence that he is converted to God ; that
he has passed from death to life; that he can speak from his own
heart of the power and glory of the cross of Christ;
and call upon sinners to believe in the Lamb that was slain, from
much experience of that blessedness which flows from and attests
acceptance. If it be right to ascertain the amount and character
of his literary attainments, surely it is right to ascertain, so far as
we can, the fact and the reality, at least, of his spiritual fight
and grace. If we are in duty bound to examine into the
theological knowledge and learning of our candidates for the
Holy Ministry, surely we are not less bound in duty to examine
into their spiritual gifts and virtues ; into the health anc
prospering of the soul that has beeiy born again, and has i s
conversation in heaven. We are solicitous that our Hall should
be of good repute as a school of learning. We should be stiff
more solicitous that its learning should be sanctified by the faith
of the scholars, that its fame, whether it be sounded far abroad,


or limited to a narrow sphere, should be identified with the
holiness of God, and the abounding fruits of the Spirit of Grace.
I know not a sadder sight in all the world than of a so-called
Minister of Christ preaching the Gospel from Sabbath to
Sabbath, himself a stranger to the salvation of which he speaks,
and utterly unacquainted with, and utterly blind to, the
glorious beauty of Him whose servant he professes to be.
What incongruity can compare with this ? What infatua-
tion so deep and woeful? We can form an idea of
the blind, leading the blind and of the inevitable result of conduct
so irrational. But we cannot conceive the enormity of the
sin committed by the man who sets himself forth as ordained
by the Lord to be the ambassador of His love to a fallen
world, who is not only ignorant of the Saviour, but the enemy of
the cross which is the very burthen of his message. The heinous-
ness of such an assumption is not the less that it is not
uncommon. But let us begin with the prayerful determination
that, God helping us, we shall never stain our consciences with
this pernicious offence; that our Divinity Hall shall never be
desecrated into a seminary of the self-seeking and froward.
The second element we mentioned in this spiritual fitness
for the Ministry is the call of God. Have I the call of God
to account for or to justify my wish to be a minister of Christ ?
It is no light matter to say, “ I regard myself as not only per-
mitted, but required, by the Lord to abandon my present position
—to abandon all my temporal prospects, and to devote myself to
the ministry of the Gospel of Christ.” Every candidate or
student should examine his motives with the most scrupulous
care, should be exceedingly jealous of himself in a matter
involving so vast a responsibility; for if his heart be not right with
God—if he has not been invited or called by the Lord to engage
in the work —he is influenced by improper feelings, and is acting
in a spirit of mistake and presumption. Of many who professed
to be His servants, and to bear His commission, the Lord spake
by Jeremiah : “ I have not sent these prophets, yet they ran ; I
have not spoken to them, yet they prophesied.” And I need not
remind my present audience of the terrible consequences of this
bold intrusion into a sacred office, that it was the main cause of that
fury which swept like a whirlwind over the head of the wicked —
Jerem. xxiii. 19-20. You know it is the prerogative of Christ,
as the Head and King, as the Lord and Lawgiver of His Church, to
give to some prophets or apostles, to some evangelists, to
some pastors or teachers, —for the perfecting of saints for the work
of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ. Ministers
are His gift—His royal gift, —the proof, as the effect, of His
exaltation to the right hand of Majesty, that He is indeed above


all, that He reigns on the Throne of Q-od, and provides for the
salvation of His people. Let each student put to himself the
questions—“ Am I sent of God ?Am I one given to this work by
the Lord who is exalted above all ? Have I indeed received from
Him a vocation to the Ministry, to deny or refuse which would
be inexcusable unfaithfulness to Him ? Is it the will of God, is
it the will of the Prince of Peace that I should set myself apart
as an evangelist, as a pastor or teacher, —that I should forsake
all, as the first disciples did, and follow Him in preaching the
glorious Gospel?” There is great need for strictness of self-
examination in this matter. In every case, perhaps, of real
conversion, and of consequent delight in God, there is a desire to
engage in the Saviour’s special service. Indeed, the first and most
natural impulse of a heart on fire with love, is to prefer the
calling of the ministry to every other kind of employment, as the
only one that is attractive or pleasing or worthy of a Christian’s
choice. But not every one that is called out of darkness
into a marvellous light—from the bondage of corruption into
the glorious liberty of the sons of God —is also called to the
work of the ministry in the sense of one ordained to the office;
and as mistake is possible here, and does sometimes occur to the
injury of the Church, it is necessary that we raise a warning voice
against it, as an error which, however amiable, may be productive
of serious evils. In his first epistle to the Church in Corinth,
the apostle, giving counsel to converts, writes; —“ Let every
man abide in the same calling wherein he was called”—l Cor. vii.
20. In this advice there is embodied a principle of Christian
duty of _ very great importance. The Lord determines
our place in His kingdom, no less' then He brings us into it.
He casts the earthly lot of every one of His people, fixes their
inheritance,prescribes its bounds,and says, there, occupy till I come.
Such is His service, that He is honored and glorified by every one
who abides at the post of duty and keeps the charge committed
to his trust; and if it would be an act of unfaithfulness, were one
called by Him to the Ministry, to refuse the call, preferring the
ease and irresponsibility of his private position, so it would be
an act of unfaithfulness in one not distinctly called to be a
preacher or minister, to abandon his private position, out
of a wish to occupy a more prominent or a more influential
place. How then are we to know when the Lord calls to this
sacred office ? When duty to Him, obedience to His will, lays
upon us this weighty obligation ?
I shall mention a few things which seem to me to constitute
a call , to devote one’s self to the work of the Ministry:—
The first ingredient in a Divine call is, of course, tie love of
Christ constraining us. Without this, all idea of a call is no


better than a fancy or a dream, the effect of mental
delusion, or tbe prompting of pride or wordliness, There
must be the basis of grace reigning in the heart; Christ loved
more than others ; the love of Christ influencing, impelling,
constraining.
The second ingredient in the call is—compassion for the souls
of sinners in danger of perishing for lack of knowledge. There
must be an ardent sympathy with the mind of the Lord in its
deep commiseration its yearning pity for those who are out
of the way, a passionate desire to instruct them in the
truth of the Grospel, to rescue them from their misery, and to
win them by the love of the Redeemer to be jewels in his
crown—and a willingness to endure any hardship, to make any
sacrifice, to undertake any service that Christ may be preached,
and that the guilty may be saved.
A third ingredient in the call is—such a providential arrange-
ment of all things concerning you as to shut you up to this
course as the path of duty. The Lord teaches by providence
as well as by His word, and it is the part of faith to interpret
the providence which controls our life, and regulates our con-
dition, to be understanding what the will of the Lord is, to
take nothing upon ourselves, to beware of precipitation, for
he that believeth will not make haste, to wait until it
appears manifest that Grod is leading you to give up your
present avocations that you may serve Him with your spirit in
the gospel of His Son.
And a fourth ingredient in the call is—an aptitude for the work.
He who is called must be apt to teach. “If a man desireth the
office of a Bishop, he desireth a good work ; he must be blame-
less, vigilant, sober, of good behaviour, and apt to teach." —l Tim.
hi. 2. To this element, or quality, I attachmuch importance. This
aptitude is as necessary as a sound understanding, or as a loving
heart. It is one of those gifts which proclaim the purpose of
Grod, and makes the preacher fruitful as a tree of rightousness,
awakening as a dayspring from on high. These four ingredients
combined, form, I think, a call to the office of the Ministry.
They constitute the seal of the Lord impressed on the fore-
head, a seal that devotes its possessor to the arduous, but
honorable work, of the sanctuary.
4. But, superinduced on this basis of personal piety, there
must be a becoming store of Scriptural, theological, literary,
and scientific accomplishment. The Minister cannot be
thoroughly furnished for his calling unless he is possessed of a
fair amount of the knowledge which is the distinction of his age,
and is at once the grace and strength of social intercourse. He is
not fully equipped if deficient in the intelligence which stamps


the civilization of the day, if in mind less cultivated than the
very highest class of educated minds in the country
which is the appointed scene of his services. The age
of miracles is past; we are left to the use of our natural
powers, adequately improved and wisely exercised. And we
hold it as a maxim, that the ministers of Christ who are inferior
in intellectual vigor and literary cultivation, to any class of
society, will lose that class, because they will be looked down
upon by it with feelings of pity and disdain. Let us be despised
for our faith, not for our ignorance. If the world hate us, let it
be for our devotion to the cross of Christ, and not for our
deficiency in useful information. It has been well said, —“ Thom
the Apostle Paul to Dr. Chalmers, God has always wrought the
greatest things in His Church, not by sanctified ignorance and
feebleness, but by sanctified learning and strength.”— Allan.
It has been, and is, the glory of our native land, that the
Christian Ministry has ever contained a phalanx of intellectual
celebrities, equal at least, to the most eminent names of secular
professions. Whatever has been the erudition, —whatever the
philosophy, whatever the mental talent displayed by laymen in
their chosen lines or departments, has not exceeded the measure
of excellence of a similar kind reached by Presbyterian Ministers
and consecrated by them to the cause of God. Assuredly, we
are bound to improve to the very utmost every gift we possess,
to store our minds with all knowledge, to the full extent of our
opportunities, not, however, to gratify pride of heart or to
nourish our self-esteem,butfromthehighermotive of love to Christ,
and with a single eye to the advancement of His cause. Know-
ledge of every kind will conduce to His glory and our own profit,
if subordinated to His w r ill, if laid upon His altar, if sanctified
by prayer, if a dedicated thing inscribed with holiness to the
Lord. Apart from this consideration knowledge puffieth up;
but, valued for the sake of God, as an instrument for the more
effectual promotion of His glory, it will prove a source of power
to the faithful minister, enriching his public services, and
widening the scope of his-usefulness.
To Christ our Lord, who loved us, and gave himself for
us; to Him, whose servants we are; we owe, assuredly
we owe, our best things, our most precious things, that
which is dearest to us, that which is most costly, and by
its costliness expresses best our gratitude and our love.
That is a false heart which grudges Him any effort or any
sacrifice, which proposes to engage in the Ministry with a view
to ease, to comfort, to indulgence, and without a decided and
determined purpose to give Him our all, every thought of the
mind —all its might, every pulse of the heart —all its affections,


every effort of the intellect—all its reasonings, every faculty of
the body—all its energies. Unless He is loved thus, He is not
loved at all, unless He is served in this spirit, we mock Him with
our vanity, and we really serve another Lord. "We must have
some ideal in our contemplation—some ideal which we hope and
pray and strive to realise in ourselves. I see Him, like Paul,
exclaiming, “to me to live is Christ.” I see Him like a tree
planted on the banks of that crystal river which flows from beneath
the Throne of God and of the Lamb—ever fruitful, ever beautiful,
laden with all manner of spiritual fruit—its very leaves for
the healing of the nations. I see Him, the very image of the
Lord—who sought not His own good, but the good of others,
who, being rich, for our sakes became poor, that we, by His
poverty, might be rich, whose zeal for His Lather’s house con-
sumed Him, who for our sakes endured the cross and despised
the shame. Take to your heart the truth; enshrine it in your
heart; love the truth; be you all for the Lord, as you believe
He is all for you; and adopt as your motto the exclamation of
Paul—“ To me to live it is Christ .”
5. Theology is the sublimest of all the studies that can interest
the thoughtful mind. Embracing in its compass the truth,
both as it _ concerns the highest glory of God, and the nature,
the condition, and the destiny ot man, it really comprehends
the whole _ circle of knowledge both natural and revealed.
Theology, in its strictest sense, means, of course, that system
of doctrine which is contained in the Bible, the testimony
of God, and is the essence of that Divine plan of salvation
which is concentrated, as it were, in the culminating fact
of Christ crucified. The grand object of our Hall is to instruct
the student so thoroughly in this marvellous system of
divine truth, this glorious plan of grace, as that he shall be
qualified to instruct _ others ; to preach it in all its fulness
and purity; to explain it to the apprehension of the simplest
mind; to adapt it to the case of the most unpromising; to use
it as a word in season to every soul to whom he may have access
as a minister of the Gospel. Our object is to prepare for the
efficient discharge of all the duties devolving on a servant of the
Lord, to give ability to teach the TVfird of Life, and to maintain
its cause, such proficiency as will empower the minister to set
forth the precious truth for the conversion of sinners, for the
building up of believers in their most holy faith, also to
protect the ark of the covenant from the assaults of enemies,
and to defend against every species of scepticism the faith once
delivered to the saints. In no age of the Church’s history has
the human _ mind been so vehemently excited, so energetically
impelled as in these days of ours. The present is emphatically a


time of unparalleled activity in every department of human
affairs. And in no field of speculation has dissatisfaction with
long established conclusions, and an insatiable craving after
something new, been more largely displayed than in the field of
Christian theology. The whole framework of society is heaving
with intense emotion. The license of free-thinking, formerly
confined to philosophic cliques or select coteries, now per-
vades the social system from head lo foot, and is working with
tremendous potency amongst every class and order and
degree of the people. Old objections are revived —new ones are
invented. The air teems with discordant voices, impugning the
doctrines of our faith, and the authority of our Scriptures. The
conflict deepens year by year, and no one can be blind to the fact
that we have a stormy battle to fight for the first principles of
religion, and for every one of the leading truths of the glorious
Gospel. This implies, of course, a vast increase of education, and
of the means of gratifying a taste for reading. The literature of
the day is a stupendous fact. ¥e never think of it without a
mixed feeling of admiration and of fear. The press is working
with a thousand hands, and putting a whole library of intelligence
into every man’s possession. Ministers of Christ have to fulfill
their mission, to prosecute their Master’s holy work in a com-
munity accustomed to mental stimulants—inquisitive, impulsive,
excitable —impatient of inefficiency, and of dulness—full of energy,
and eager for advancement. The qualification demanded by so
urgent a state of things appears to us to be two-fold. There is,
first, the preaching of the truth, Christ and Him crucified, the
whole counsels of God for the instruction of the ignorant,
and for the edifying of the body of Christ. There is, second,
defending the truth against the assaults of infidelity, and the
insidious concessions of an unscriptural and dangerous liberalism.
As to the first qualification, allow me to say, that the
style of handling the truth must be adapted to the intelligence of
our audience—must be equal, at least, in every respect to the
style of thinking and writing to which they are accustomed. It is
a miserable business, and a proof that the cause is a failure, when
the mental or literary incompetency of the preacher is excused or
defended on the ground of his personal goodness. This is to
befriend the man at the expense of his office, to compliment
his piety at the expense of his fitness for his work. The sum
and glory of preaching is no doubt the cross of Christ. And
in respect of this comprehensive subject, our Lord’s words are
clear and imperative : “ Every scribe who is instructed unto the
kingdom of Heaven is like unto a man that is an householder, who
bringeth forth out of his treasury things new and old ” —Mat. xiii.
52. Here we trust you will be trained in the knowledge of a


sound theology, taught the precise meaning of the various
doctrines of our faith and their relation to each other, taught to
distinguish between the truth and its counterfeits, between that
genuine orthodoxy which is the mind of the Spirit testifying of
Christ, and that simulated orthodoxy which under a fair pretence
of faith and love, deprives the sufferings of the Lord of their
atoning efficacy, and his righteousness of its justifying merit.
We hope and pray that from this Hall the Eiver of Life may issue
in a pure, ample, and salutary stream, making our Presbyterian
Church a well-watered garden of the Lord; in a sacred stream
widening and deepening as it rolls along, fertilising the barren
wilderness, making the desert to rejoice and blossom as the
rose.
Time will not permit me to meddle with the second part of our
system of training, viz., that which qualifies to defend the faith
against the objections of unbelief. On another occasion I may
take an opportunity of surveying, at leisure, this extensive field.
I restrain myself at present, because I could not possibly do
justice now to so interesting and manifold a subject.
6. In the providence of God we have secured the services, for a
time at least, of one of the most eminent of the younger ministers
of our native land. Under his tuition you, students, will enjoy a
rare advantage ; you will receive the instructions of one who is
not only distinguished for his theological attainments, hut also
for his ability to convey instruction, and the grace with which the
communication is made. Guided by him we will expect earnest
attention and substantial progress, a correct acquaintance with
the subjects of study, and a delight in the study itself—influenced,
if not inspired, by the ardent spirit of your Professor.
Once more, let me impress the necessity of spiritual life, and
growth, and fruitfulness. The servants of the Lord must he of
one mind with the Lord. General professions will not suffice,
respectability of character will not suffice, proficiency in
scholarship will not suffice. Luther’s remark was —“ three
things make a divine —prayer, meditation, and temptation.”
Prayer brings down the promises in showers of grace; _ medita-
tion fixes the truth in the heart, and makes fellowship with God
a perpetual feast; and temptation insures sanctified experience,
refines the heart which it grieves, strengthens the faith which it
tries, acquaints with Christ as a friend fitted for adversity, makes
the word of God more precious than fine gold and_ sweeter
than honey or the honeycomb. Your strength lies in secret
prayer. Well does the adversary know this. He will exert all
his subtlety to induce slackness or forgetfulness in this par-
ticular duty. He knows that success here is_ his triumph,
and your shame. Secret prayer neglected, or given up, your


eoul is like an army cut off from its resources, and which,
thus entrapped, must either surrender or perish. Your resources
all centre in the love of God, and will he found in loving com-
munion with Him. Cease from closet interviews, abandon
your daily fellowship with Him, and you doom your soul to
sterility as surely as if the heavens above you were brass, and
the earth beneath your feet was hard as iron. Listen to the
experience of one whose prayerful youth ripened, through
abundance of grace, into one of the most illustrious and
successful of Gospel ministries ; —“ Though generally greatly
favoured in the pulpit, it was often at the expence of much
soul conflict in private. The struggles of a corrupt nature
brought me very low. I found it easier to preach a hundred
sermons than to conquer one evil passion. He who seeks to
make his preaching and his practice correspond, will have many
sacrifices of carnal inclination to make. If he will not fight out
of the pulpit, he cannot reign in it. This conflict in my soul was
often very severe. When the Divine Spirit filled the temple of
the body with his influence, any sacrifice could easily be made,
but the great difficulty was to obtain this grace. It would not come
by cold wishes. It was to be had only at mercy’s door, at which
I must be often knocking, —in the field of God’s truth, where I
must be often digging —on the battle-grounds of life, where every
inch of spiritual progress had to be fought for. I often failed,
but I bless God that I was often also a conscious victor. How
blessed were many of these communings with God! What a
refreshment, vigour, elasticity, and composure they produced!
Let him who doubts try the process, and he will soon be con-
vinced. I bear my humble testimony that with the contrite
spirit God will dwell, reviving it and giving it courage and confi-
dence for every duty that he may call it to discharge.” — Sherman.
7. I cannot conclude without expressing my anxious hope, that
our Colonial Church having put her hand to the plough, will
persevere in her course, neither pausing nor turning back. We
begin in faith : it is the Lord’s work. We say this because we
know it. The setting up of this College for the training of the
sons of the prophets, to whom shall be assigned the honorable
task of maintaining the cause of salvation in this land, is surely
the doing of the Lord. We are His servants, and we are only
serving Him, i.e., giving effect to His will, gratifying His desire,
by providing, as we have done, for the wants and interests of His
Church. And, moved as faith inclines, He moves with us. The
smallness of our commencement is His choice for us this day.
But we will grieviously mistake His purpose, and undervalue His
blessing, if we do not go forward with a free and hopeful spirit, in
the course which we have begun. In man we may be disappointed,


in the Lord we are safe from loss and sure of support. Let us
do justice to the faith which we profess to hold; and in faith com-
plete our arrangements so far as the Lord enables us to do so.
It would be a lamentable error, I think, to suspend the existence
or the sufficiency of our Divinity Hall on anything so uncertain
as the favour of man. The best of all ways to make sure of the
respect or approval of right-minded men, is to show them that
we are confident in the help of the Lord, and will build up His
Church with such resources as He provides, however it may fare
wj b us in the estimation of worldly wisdom. The Church of our
God has a higher _ origin, a more blessed work, and a nobler
destiny than the imagination of the natural mind conceives ;
she will increase in spite of the world’s opposition—prosper in
spite of its contempt; she will survive alike the hatred and the
indifference of her despisers. I trust it shall never happen that
our own conduct will justify the suspicion, that we are willing
to compromise the independence, the liberty, the grace, the
holiness of our Zion, in order to secure the smiles, or to
escape the frowns of any class of people. Let the Psalmist’s
song be our chosen device :
“ The Lord grant thee according to thine own heart, and fulfil all thy
counsel.
“We will rejoice in Thy salvation, and in the name of our God will we
set up our banners.”— Ps. xx.
“ Now > 0 Lord > let Thy work appear unto Thy servants, and Thy glory
unto their children. J J
And let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon us ; establish Thou
the work of our hands upon us. Yea, the work of our hands
establish Thou it.”— Ps. xc.
WALKEE, MAY AND CO., PRINTERS, 99 BOURSE STREET WEST, MELBOURNE.
16




Four Shillings ; post free Sixpence extra,
THE APOSTLE OF THE NORTH;
The Life and Labours of the Rev. Dr. McDonald,
By Rev. JOHN KENNEDY,
Author of “ The Days of the Fathers in Ross-shire.”
One Shilling; post free Twopence extra,
PREACHING CHRIST CRUCIFIED:
A Sermon,
By the Rev. J. OSWALD DYKES, A.M.
One Shilling; post free Twopence extra,
INFANT BAPTISM,
By the Rev. PRINCIPAL CAIRNS, D.D.
Three Shillings ; post free Sixpence extra,
THE SERVICE OF PRAISE,
Edited by the Rev. J. H. WILSON, M.A.
BIBLE WAREHOUSE.
FAMILY BIBLES,
PEW, AND POCKET BIBLES,
In great variety.
PSALM BOOKS, CATECHISMS,
BATEMAN’S' HYMNS, CHILDREN’S PAPERS,
REWARD BOOKS, and TICKETS, &c., &c.,
A large assortment.
.A.. J. SMITH.
30 S WAN T O N-ST R E ET.
