

INAUGURATION
OF THE
CASTLEMAINE
MUNICIPAL
COUNCIL
Part 2
by James Martin
No. 4 in a short series of books dealing comprehensively
with Castlemaine History




INAUGURATION
OF THE
CASTLEMAINE
MUNICIPAL
COUNCIL
Part 2
THE BIRTH AND DEVELOPMENT
OF THE CASTLEMAINE
MUNICIPALITY
by James Martin


Acknowledgement
Much of the material for this
book has been obtained from Mr.
Frank McKillop’s articles on early
Castlemaine, which appeared in
the “Mail” of 1908. Mr. McKillop
was an able journalist and a pub-
lic-spirited man. He took an
active part in every movement
that had for its object the ad-
vancement of this town and the
moral and intellectual uplift of
its residents. Castlemaine owes
much to Frank McKillop. He
was one of the founders of the
Art Gallery and a generous con-
tributor to its funds.
His name is perpetual in the
McKiilop Gallery. Not a native
of the town he was in middle
age when he first saw it he
thought it “was a charming little
spot,” although he was a man
who had travelled and doubtless
saw many other “charming little
spots,” and in this town he spent
the rest of his days. He became
interested in its history, and after
six years of intense research he
accumulated sufficient data to
compile a short history of early
Castlemaine.
The copies of the “Mail” in
which that history appeared were
presented to the P. and O.R.
Association by the late Mr. Mor-
ton Van Huerck, where they will
be carefully preserved. The late
Mr. Edward Taylor a. few years
before his death presented to the
writer similar copies, and in doing
so expressed the opinion that he
would find them useful. It is
from those copies that this book
has largely been compiled.


ELECTION OF Mr. HITCHCOCK
And now returning to the history of the municipality, from which we
have somewhat digressed, and -where we had left the "great” Mr. Hitchcock
just at the moment when he was elected to the council. The chairman of the
council (vide report in "Miner’s Right” of March 29th, i£s7), in announcing
the result of the poll, said that many of them had known Mr. Hitchcock
for years and probably would have voted for him in preference to any other
man. The 64 votes therefore polled by Mr. Prendergrast (a barrister and
an able one) showed how much he was respected. (The voting was 142 to 64>.
Mr. Hitchcock thanked the electors. They had voted for him, believing
he mould he useful in the council, and he would endeavor not to disappoint
them. He said that when the Municipal Act was first proposed he had
objected to its being received. He had pointed out its defects and been
considered a false prophet. He had gone to Melbourne and interviewed the
Minister in charge of the Bill, and told him that the provisions of the Act
were unjust and did not place the country municipalities on the same foot-
ing as Melbourne and Geelong. The 42nd clause rendered the Bill inoperative.
When a requisition had been presented to him to stand for election on the
■occasion of the formation of the municipality he had refused on account
of that clause. When he stood as a Candidate he did not promise that be
would kerb and channel this street and that. He would now promise to go
into the state of the funds, for upon their management depended the car-
rying out of those improvements to our roads and streets which the rate-
payers so insistently demanded. Councillors had done some good work for
which they deserved praise, and some foolish things for which they deserved
blame. They had erected unnecessary and costly slaughteryards. They had
built a council chamber to be expensively furnished, while they might have
rented a room, and they had neglected to use an old phrase of his
"to oil the wheels of commerce.” He would hav e Ballarat Bendigo, and
Castlemaine go together to the Legislative Assembly and obtain such re-
foim of the Municipal Act, as would enable them really to govern themselves
and not be dependent on a system which centralisd the operation of all
power in Melbourne.
EDITOR EARNS DISPLEASURE
Mr. Hitchcock in alluding to the small number of ratepayers who
i ecorded their vote, said: All electors should on ail occasions exercise
their pri\ ilege, and vote for some one or another of the candidates. Why
should they say “Oh, Hitchcock is in, it’s no use going to vote for him.'* It
should oe the duty of electors to suprx)rt public men by voting for them
even if they think their return is secured. He moved a vote of thanks to
the chairman. Mr. moved an amendment, ‘that Mr, Saint (editor and
part proprietor of the 'Mail”) be called upon to explain the omission of
any notice of nomination from the ‘Mail’ that morning.” This was seconded.
The mover and seconder of the amendment had been nominated at a
meeting on the previous day, and took their places as candidates for
election. This was conducted by open voting, each voter writing his owr
name and the name of the candidate he desired to vote for on a slip of
paper and handing it to the returning officer. At intervals the progress
hopeless- position the opportunity of withdrawing from the contest, which
the poll was declared. This gave those candidates who were in ••
happened in the case of the mover and seconder of the amendment Mr A
and Mr. B.


On a show of hands, the amendment was carried. Mr. Saint said
that in deference to the opinion of the meeting he would state his reason
for acting as he had done. If he had published a report of the meeting at
all. it must have been a full,fair and faithful one, and he thought the
introduction of Mr. A. and Mr B. would be such a disgrace to Castlemaine
that he had burked the report altogether. (Cheers.)
The vote of thanks to the chairman was then carried, and the meeting
dispersed.
As che room .was being emptied, Mr. A., obviously in a state of great
excitement, took off his hat and coat, and began to roll up his sleeves, Mr.
Saint did not condescend to take the slightest notice of him or his demon-
stration, and some of the bystanders by stepping in between them, pre-
vented any mischief. Mr. B. also became belligerent, but he was also
taken care of.
One other candidate, Mr. Gingell, after hearing that only a very few
voles were coming his way. retired at an early hour, but his turn came
later on when he was many times elected a councillor.
On March 31st,„ Cr. Hitchcock was introduced. It may be here stated
that Crs. Hitchcock and Chapman always worked together, and being
the two ablest and most determined men in the council, the combination
made itself felt. The meeting was devoted principally to finance, Cr. Chapman
declaring that rhpneys had been wrongly and illegally spent, and in
support of Cr. Chapman, Cr. Hitchcock condemned the construction of
cattle yards, and, laid the money spent on them had been wasted, as the
yards were not worth a shilling to the council. This caused an uproar, Crs.
Chapman and Hitchcock denouncing past expenditure, and Crs. Paynter
and Smith defending it. The ‘VMail” in its next issue, came out with a
stinging article on the financial statement drawn up by the town clerk, and
at the next meeting of the council on April 7th, the town clerk (Mr.
Christophers ), resigned his position, and in his letter of resignation said
lie had taken this, step owing to “the wilfully malignant defamation and
sluis with which he, was most unjustly assailed by a senseless Press."
“Mr. Christophers,", says Mr. McKillop, “had proved a good town clerk,
though lather overbearing and hasty."
The present writer has some recollection of Mr. Christophers. In the
year 1871 he was a dapper little man, who evidently, to use a term in vogue
at that period, “fancied himself” not a little. He carried on a general
agency in Lyttleton street, on premises then situated on the site of the
present Art Gallery. His private residence was in Kennedy street. The
house was on that piece of laud lying to the south of Lyttleton street, and
adjoining the present tennis court on the north. Mr. Christophers wa«
a flower lover. In the spring his garden was a picture, with the many
colored blooms, and in those days a flower to have any appeal had to be
not only good to look at but sweet to smell, and the perfume from that
garden was noticeable to all who came within its vicinity; but time has
taken its toll of both garden and dv/elling, the latter has disappeared,
the perfume has banished, and the garden no longer “smiles" on Kennedy
street.
FORBIDDEN LITERATURE
Mr. Christophers had a son of about my own age. He and I were both
omnivorous readers and. unknown to our respective parents. sw r opped the
loan of books from the family bookcases. One day, Gus, for so was he
named, produced from under his pullover a leather bound edition de luxe
copy of Lawrence Stern’s “Tristam Shandy," said, ‘Here’s a good yarn


for you; it’s a bit hot here and there, but it’s alright.” After taking it
home, as I was having a secret go at it. I heard my father’s voice, ‘‘Where
did you get har expensive book?” The tale had to be told. Result Mr,
C’s book returned to him straight away. A good hiding for me, and hidings
of those days were “hard to take,” and freely given. “Spare the rod and
S P°H child” was the favorite motto of all, or nearly all, teachers,
preacnfeis and parents, and they put it into -practice. But, perhaps, had
it no- been for that hiding, I now would have no recollection of ever
having seen Castlcmaine’s first town clerk. And now, leaving Mr. Christ-
ophers for a time (we shall meet him again later) we will return to the
council meeting of April 7th, 1857.
Tlio question of the remuneration to the surveyor was then discussed,
and ■' was decided to pay him by fees, and not at a fixed salary. The
council considered money would be saved by this arrangement.
_r. Paynter, who was not at a]] satisfied with Cr. Hitchcock’s presence
at the table, and who, through the instrumentality of Crs. Hitchcock and
Chapman, had been defeated on several occasions when bringing motion*
before the (ymncil, tendered his resignation. chiefly, he said, "owing tO
pressure of business engagements. Continuing, he said he had another
reason and that w ( as .the useless manner in which the concerns of the
council had lately been conducted, as at six meetings of the council five
measures had been earned, all repeated, and two of them carried again.
he nT d ’ W ? S a /. wai!te of time ’ which he hoped would be avoided in
: The resignation was accepted with regret. (We will meet Cr
Paynter again.) . -
vr. Hitchcock alluded scathingly to the finances of the council and
blowhl nr n H emn i ed f imcom P etenc e of councillors, and breezes were
v., , f strongly for a time. He wanted to combine the offices of
I, m 1 f , tor and surveyor, but the council was against him, and it
was decided to Invite applications for the position of valuer.
hin‘ ‘ft "T e 01 S fOUr councillor3 Present on April Ith, Cr. Wheeler
b.m s ,n the chair. The surveyor (Mr. Price) resigned his position owing to
the new arrangement under which ho was paid in fees, and pot by salary
His resignation was accepted. y Baiars ' l
.. t th! f m€eting also the chairman, Cr. Andrews, resigned as he found
the duties too great a strain on his time. His resignation wal received S
---I le § r<t : H e had filled the position of chairman for the 15 months
n T exemp,ar> ' and had dev“tod h “
™ of t ? m l f to the duties. He was not what may be called an able
publr. ..,an, out he vva s most conscientious in the discharge of his duties
5? ™ .rSTa b C by councmo , rs and -•SEW lass
had no desire to retire aoupc.llors, via., Cr. Smith, who. however,
There wcre th ree applicants for the position of valuer viz T r'osiin^
iZXs
3SS
receiving two votes, whilst Binns got the other. Cr. Hitchcock Wn
part ,n the business, and opposed a proposal to give Mr Martin £lm'
ymr at addition to his salary.as collector, and moved that it be £fiO -°- ‘
voting v, as equal, but the chairman gave his casting vote fo,
As two solicitors in the town iMr. W Wilson mri ivr„ nmu
haa rotor blank refused to pay rates. Cr, Hitchcock, “ho ,


bust UP the council than have its laws defied, moved that summonses I*
issued against them at once. The motion was carried, and it brought the
defaulters to their senses, and they paid up.
The report of the legislative committee was submitted, showing -he
probable expenditure for the year to be £I6OO. Cr Hitchcock wanted to
know l ow the committee arrived at £I6OO, and Cr. Smith, who was chai
man of the committe, explained that the three members of the committee
had .ach fixed on a sum, and £I6OO proved to be the middle s-m
Hitchcock wanted to strike out the word “pro a-.lc, and to reanr!
expenditure to £I6OO. but he w r as defeated.
V In sending the usual returns to the''-Government of grants expended,
the (own clerk had included £230 for furniture for the next town hall, which
the department refused to pass, as the council had to pay for its own
furniture. Councillors, however, were men of resource, and a little matte
like that did not worrv them long, for they simply struck out the word
-furniture” and substituted the word “fittings.” and the department passed
Urn amount, and nothing more was heard of the matter: This is hew the
ccruncil obtained its first furniture. r
, The legislative committee recommended a rate of 6d. m the - •
F*K,m.a moved that the rate be 1/- in the ft and Cr. Wheeler seconded
the motion, both considering mere money was wanted, as the town was
in a disgraceful state. Cr. Hitchcock supported the sl * pen
strongly declaimed against the useless expenditure in the past, such as
cattle yards, and said a shilling rate was too heavy for those living on the
outskirts of the township, as it w-ould chiefly benefit those in the cer.tr.
o' the town. Cr. Smith supported Cr. Hitchcock, but the shilling rate was
carried on the casting vote of Cr, Froomes, who was in the chair. Is
there any man in the district at the present day who would hav-e the gni
to nvTL casting vote in favor of an increased rate? Cr. Hitchcock who
wa g a bom fighter, objected to the chairman giving his casting vote as
then- was not a full council present, but Cr. Wheeler reported tna. .here
only o™ as there were two vacancies, Cr. Smith gave notice
of motion for the appointment of a town clerk at a salary of £3OO.
YEAR 1857
The first meeting in the new' town hall was on April 21st, and the
attendance of the public, which was usually large, was exceptionally so
on this occasion. As a fitting christening gift, a cheque for was
received from the Government for public works, and councillors became
quite business-like. A new subject came up in the shape of a number or
applications to have cellar doors opening on the footpaths which oy thi
time w f ere being formed in the principal streets without kerbmg, and m
m&nv cases without gravel or channels. After a lot of discussion tne app
cations were granted, in face of the obstructionist tactics by Cr. Smith,
v.ko was opposed to the proposal. . ,
The Mecnanics’ Institute committee wrote asking for a grant 0., iwu.
. ’ for manv meetings this was the subject of stormy donates,
itchcook and Chapman opposing strongly, but eventually the money
v grunted. . ~
The council considered that the services of the first chairman of the
municipality (Cr. Andrews) could be recognised in a tangible form, and it
was decided to spend £lO on an address engrossed on vellum, to be presented
to Mr Andrews in full council, also that a copy of the address should be
hung in the council chambers as a historical document. It will he interest-
ing to watch the history of this address.


Cr Smith’s motion for tho appointment of a town clerk at a salary of
£3(X), was carried, though Cr. Hitchcock tried to get the salary increased
to £4OO in order to secure the services of a good men
A motion by Cr, Hitchcock (who was strong on a proper system of
sanitation) that public urinals be erected at all hotels was carried, and
then Cr. Chapman and Cr. Hitchcock furiously attacked the motion carried
at rh<‘ previous meeting hi. favor of a shilling rate. They contended that
it was illegally carried as only three had voted for it, and after a fight a
motion in favor of a sixpenny rate was carried. Cr. Hitchcock moved that
the police be instructed to stop persons from discharging firearms in the
streets, and also to take steps to abate the wandering dog nuisance, and
his ,motion was carried. It is a pity Cr. Hitchcock is not in the council- at
the present day, so that he could again chock the wandering dog nuisance,
says Mr. McKillop.
On April 23rd, ex-Cr. McMillan died at bis residence in Frederick
street, and the councillors attended his funeral in a body, tho interment
being at the Campbell’s Creek cemetery.
On Aprli 28th., the eternal subject of roads wms under discussion, and
Crs. Chapman and Smith indulged in a little recrimination, Cr. Chapman,
who was all nerves and hustle, had a poor opinion of Cr. Smith, who was
very stoat, had no nerves, and was slow of movement. They w’ere as oppos-
ite as poles in every way. as Cr. Chapman, who was noted for being hot-
headed and very plain spoken, did not try to disguise his opinion of the
portly Cr. Smith.
The tender of J. Peck and Co. at £360 for supplying and erecting
a weighbridge was accepted, although Cr. Hitchcock refused to vote,
contending that the council could have nothing to do with the matter, but
leave it to private enterprise. Cr. Hitchcock, who generally looked ahead
of him, and had great faith in the future of the town, brought up the
subject of tree planting in the streets and parks, and on bis motion it
v/aa decided to plant 500 young gum trees in the reserves and council
grounds. Cr. Smith said he knew a man who could plant the trees gratuit-
ously. and his promise to see this good-natured individual was most en-
thusiastically received, Cr. Hitchcock asked if a proper record in manu-
script had been* kept of all the council doings since its foundation, and
was answered in the affirmative. ,
On May 3rd, the old public clock on the Camp was ordered to be placed
in the town hall, permission to do so having been given to the Warden.
The tender of W. B. Rodgers at £192/10 was accepted for making and
erecting 22 lampposts and lamps. The town hall furniture only cost £230,
but it waa decided to insure it in the Victoria office for £3OO. Inspector
Lyttletoa wrote statihg that he had no objecion to the removal of the
watch-box at the east end of Mostyn street, as the hut in question had
been unoccupied for some time. He went on to say that he had applied
for £6OO to erect a lock-up and barracks, near the Supreme Court site.
Nominations for the vacancies in the council caused by the retirement
of Crs Andrews and Paynter, were publicly made in the Theatre Royal
on May 7th, and the show of hands resulted; — M. Prendergast 30, F. Gingell
12, Pearson Thompson 24. S Love 14. W. Johnston 3. Tho election next day
was fairly lively, Johnston, who was.a baker in what is now Johnston street,
did not, go to the poll, and tho result was: Prendergast (solicitor) 150,
Love (contractor) 144'. Thompson 20, Gingell 7. Tho two first-named were
declared elected, it being Mr. Love’s fourth attempt. The crowd then called
upon M sf-rs. Andrews and Paynter to state why they had resigned their
seats.
Mr. Andrews, who hat a good hearing, pleaded pressure of private


business. Mr. Paynter, whose antagonism to Cr. Hitchcock''had not in the
least abated, condemned the new blood in the council, and with a look at
,€r. Hitchcock, and with bitter emphasis designated one as an obstruction-
r ist. Cr. Hitchcock, who was slightly elevated, gave Mr. Paynter the lie
direct, and then the fun started. The partisans of each. side yelled en-
couragement, and the two principals glared and shouted defiance at each
Other. The meeting was soon out of hand, and the chairman left the chair
and the hall was idled with excited shouts and a most discordant din
• generally.
There was a full attendance at the next council meeting, and the
election of a permanent chairman was the first business. The custom after
annual elections was to elect the person who stood highest on the poll, and
'although the last -was an extraordinary election, Cr. Prendergast was
nominated. Cr. Smith was dying to get the position, and was a candidate,
as also was the temporary chairman, Cr. Wheeler. On every ground the
-feenor should have gone to Cr. Wheeler, but the voting was; Prendergast
; *« Smith 2, Wheeler 1. The spectacle was therefore witnessed of a councillor
being elected chairman on the first occasion on which, he had sat as a
councillor. Thank goodness they do things differently nowadays. The cause
was probably that Crs. Hitchcock and Chapman voted for Prendergast
for the double reason that they were strongly opposed to Crs. Smith and
Wheeler. There was a fair and somewhat noisy attendance of the rmblic
>at the meeting.
CONSTABLE KEEPS ORDER
Mr. F. Gingell. of the Theatre Royal, wrote objecting to the council
allowing Burton’s circus tent to be pitched on the north-east corner of
Market Square, and it was decided to take no action, some % councdlors
saying that Mr. Gingell was afraid the circus would spoil his own show A
disturbance then took place in the audience, in which a couple of inebriates
figured largely, and when order was at last restored the chairman inti-
mated that a constable would be in attendance in future to preserve order.
There were 10 applications for the position of town clerk, and fearing
another outburst from the audience, the council adjourned to another
room, where the applications and testimonials were considered, the result
itfeing the appointment of Mr. E. Hankins, who was the first publisher
of the “Mail” and was secretary to the Mechanics’ Institute. An attempt
by Crs. Wheeler and Froomes to allow the surveyor (Mr. Price) to continue
acting was heatedly opposed by Crs. Smith. Hitchcock and Chapman, who
carried the day. In reference to the erection of the new court house, the
Government had decided to erect it on Gaol Hill, near the gaol. Councillors,
headed by Cr. Hitchcock, condemned this proposal, and it was resolved
to convene a public meeting to protest against it, and to advocate the
Lyttleton street site. The meeting was held during the week, but the property
owners along Kennedy street, led by Mr. Pearson Thompson, packed the
meeting and carried a motion approving of the gaol site. The opposition,
however, got quietly to w r ork, pulled every possible string, and w r ere success-
ful in getting the court house erected on the present site, for which we of
today gratefully thank them.
At the meeting on May 19th, it was resolved to advertise for a surveyor
in succession to Mr. Price, at a salary of £350, although Crs, Hitchcock and
Chapman fought hard against it, as in their opinion a permanent surveyor
was not required, and that when one was needed the work could be done
by local men at the usual fee.
On May 26th, the first market committee, consisting of Crs. Premier-


gast, Smith, Froomes and Love was appointed.
, • Cr. Chapman, who had probably been annoyed by the din created by
-the bell-ringers, moved that a by-law be prepared for regulating the office
of bell-man and fixing a scale of fees for same. He said his object was
to suppress the nuisance of bell-ringing in the town, which had grown
to such an extent as to be intolerable. The motion was carried, and the
by-law was prepared and approved. Every auctioneer had a bellman, and
when they were out in the streets together, and slightly primed, one can
imagine Cr. Chapman’s annoyance at the din.
Cr. Froomes alluded to the many councillors resigning their seats, and
the consequent expense to the council, and moved that any councillor
resigning his seat De fined £5. Cr. Chapman roundly condemned gentlemen
coming in and going out almost immediately, and moved as an amendment
that the fine be £25. to be levied at the discretion of the. council. The motion
was carried.
The town clerk was ordered to apply to the Government for a grant
of £3,000, and the 10th June was fixed for hearing appeals against the
assessment.
APPOINTMENT OF SURVEYOR
On the 2nd. of Juno, 10 applicants were received for the position of
surveyor. Crs. Chapman and Hitchcock fouerht strenously to defer the
appointment for six months, but the others were obdurate and even refused
a week’s delay. Cr. Chapman, finding that the numbers were up against
him, said the council had disgraced itself, and neither he nor Cr. Hitchcock
would vote. As the ballot was about to be taken, Cr, Froomes objected to
Crs. Chapman and Hitchcock sitting at the able, and shirking their respon-
sibilities, which brought the pugnacious Cr. Chapman to his feet with a
bound. He excitedly defended his position, and finished up by saying he
was a free-born Briton, and an independent man, and didn’t care a rap for
any of them. Cr. Hitchcock quickly followed in the same strain, and accused
Cr, Wheeler of having a selfish interest in the appointment, which caused
a scene, in which “you’re a liar,” “you’re another,” were expressions
very frequently used. The result of the ballot was the appointment of
Mr. E. S. Spencer, of Melbourne.
-On 9th. June, the public works committee recommended the appoint-
ment of a messenger at (he town hall at a salary of £3 per week, probably
with a premonition of trouble. Cr. Hitchcock ogposed the recommendation
and called it rubbish, but it was carried, and at the next meeting, out of
18 applicants, Wm. Holl was elected to the position. A motion by Cr.
Chapman, seconded by Cr. Hitchcock, (hat £2,000 bo devoted to works
on the roads, and £l.OOO for the erection of markets was carried. It was
decided to ask the Government to establish a public pound in the town.
At the next meeting on June 16th, Cr. Hitchcock asked for information
as to the cost of the cattle yards, and was told that £1,415 had been spent
on them, and it was now necessary for their success to erect a slaughter
house, near them. Cr. Hitchcock condemned the whole concern, lock, stock,
and barrel, none the less vehemently because Cr. Paynting was one of
the principal movers in getting the yards. He said it was a disgraceful
waste of money that could have been profitably spent on a market house.
Councillors, however, considered it wise to make the best of a bad job,
and as the yards were useless without a slaughter house they decided to
spend another £5OO on the building.
Cr. Hitchcock then called attention to the Act, and said councils
should derive some revenue from the sale of Crown lands in the munici-


panties as it was greatly increased in value by the expenditure of the
ratepayers’ money. He, however, spoke to deaf ears, and got no supports
Cr. Chapman then said that a dray had been bogged in Forest street the
previous day, and on his motion it was decided to notify the Government
of the bad state of the street. The surveyor caused some consternation
by saying that the weighbridge was too narrow for many bullock drays*
and suggested alterations. The matter was referred to the public work#
committee, with “I told you so” from Cr. Hitchcock.
Mr. Martin, the valuer, submitted his valuation which showed the
capital value to be £85,499, an increase on that of 1856 of £20,186. Before
adjourning the council decided to draw Inspector Lyttleton’s attention
to “dead dog hole” on the Camp, which was a nuisance.
On June 23rd, Cr. Chapman got up and said the by-laws were ridicu-
lous. but had to withdraw the remark, on the demand of a scandalised’
council. Cr. Hitchcock advocated the construction of a tramway to Mary-
borough, and then went into the question of Government land sales, and
contended that the council should receive some part of the enhanced value
of Government land, but his eloquence was wasted, as the council would
do nothing. It is a pity that they didn’t follow Cr. Hitchcock’s advice, a#
an agitation at that period might have resulted in' councils receiving a
proportion of the money realised by the sale of Crown lands in the muni-
cipalities. Cr. Chapman then fook a hand and condemned the permanent
levels as not being worth the paper they were drawn on, but they had
been fixed by Mr. Price, and approved of by the Government, so the
council stuck to them, although many a time they wished they hadn't.
On June 30th, Cr. Smith, who objected “to any road work being done
till the permanent levels had been definitely fixed, opposed the opening
of tenders for the supply of blue metal, and w'hen he found himself in
the minority, alluded to “the infamous conduct of councillors.” Cr. Hitch-
cook was at him like a flash, whereupon Cr. Smith stamped out of the-
room in nigh dudgeon, and did not return that night.
At a special meeting of the council a few days later, Cr. Hitchcock
warmly advocated the construction of a tramway, from Castlemaine to
Carisbiook. and a motion to that effect was carried. Cr. Hitchcock then
explained his scheme for a direct acqueduct from near the Exchange hotel
(now Globe House) to higher up the creek, so as to bring a large tract
of land into use, and to provide for sewerage and water supply, and said
he considered an application for a Government grant of £20.000 for this
work very reasonable. So did all the councillors, but unfortunately the
Government didn’t sec it in the same light, and refused the request.
OPENING OF SLATE QUARRIES
During the meeting the chairman (Cr. Prcndergast) exhibited speci-
mens of slate, which he said had been discovered near Barker's Creek*
about five miles from the town. While the sample was being keenly In-
spected and approved by the councillors, the chairman stated that the
discoverer complained of the hardship of conditions imposed upon him
by the Government, viz., a conditional grant to use the land on his promis-
ing to pay the Government £5O a year if the quarry proved remunerative
The council appointed three of their number to inspect the quarry, and
power was given them if they considered it advisable to ask the Government
to modify the conditions. There is. however, no record whether they con-
sidered the discovery to be of any value, or if so, whether the Government
acceded to their demand for a modification of the conditions. The fact,
however, remains that the slate quarries of Barker’s Creek some years


later were in a flourishing condition, but unfortunately, have been closed
for the past few years.
At the following meeting it was decided, on the motion of Cr. Hitch-
cock, to invite tenders for leasing the cattle yards lor three years, as they
were proving a white elephant to the council. At the same meeting the
tender of Mr. Brown, at £lO, was accepted for painting the names of the
streets at the various street corners.
On July 14th there was a rumpus over the site of the court house.
The council had previously sanctioned the Lyttleton street site, although the
residents of Kennedy street were fighting hard for the Gaol Hill site. At
this meeting the Public Works Department wrote to the council alluding
to both sites, and as it did not appear to be a reply to the council’s letter
advocating the Lyttleton street site, Cr. Hitchcock said it seemed that
a letter had been sent to the Department in the name of the council without
authority of that body, and he asked if a letter had been sent different to
what wajs intended. The chairman appeared uncomfortable, and said
something evasively that if there were to be two court houses, he was of
the opinion that the site of the Criminal Court should be on Gaol Hill
and the court for civil business should be in Lyttleton street. Cr. Hitch-
cock, sniffing trouble, strongly disapproved of the chairman’s statement,
as the council had only sanctioned one site, and he was supported by other
councillors.
In compliance with the insistent demand of Cr. Hitchcock, the chair-
man at last, and with great reluctance, read the letter which had been sent
to the Department. It was signed toy the chairman, and recommended
the Gaol Hill site for a Criminal Court, and the Lyttleton street siet for
the Civil Court, as the latter site did not furnish sufficient space for a
Criminal Court., This letter took away the breath of councillors for a
time, as it was directly opposed to the resolution of the council.
Cr. Hitchcock was the first on his feet and he tore the conduct of
the chairman to shreds and censured him in strong terrhg for his presump-
tion in acting independently of the council. Others followed in a similai
strain. Eventually it was decided to writs to the Department and ask
which site had been selected, Cr. Hitchcock promising trouble if the Lyttle-
ton street site was not the chosen one.
OPPOSITION TO LAND BILL
The Land Bill, which was the political bone of contention at that
time, was next considered, and roundly condemned, and it was decided to
ask the Governor not to sign it, and also to request the members for the
district to oppose it. As showing the feeling in regard to the Bill, the
council also voted £l2 for the expenses of the chairman and Mr. J. Davis
to attend the convention being held in Melbourne on the subject.
Cr. Hitchcock reported on an interview he had had with the Postal
Inspector (Mr. Watts). He raid it was proposed to have receiving letter
boxes always open at Wilson’s shop in Market Square, at Barker’s Creek,
near Love's, and at Campbell’s Creek. It was also intended to have an
assistant letter carrier, and letters- would be delivered as far as the
National hotel, Gaffney’s, Bull street and Aberdeen’s bridge.
Cr. Chapman moved that plans be prepared for a market building,
to be erected at a cost of £1,400, and the plans, he considered, should
provide for a building that could be enlarged. The motion was carried.
Cr. Love, who had not been long in the council, but sufficiently long
to know that a lot of time was wasted by long speeches, moved that
speeches in the council be limited to five minutes, but his motion was


promptly ruled out of order and withdrawn it hadn’t much hope of get-
ting a seconder.
A very fierce and personal discussion followed on the permanent
levels a subject so fruitful of fights. The fight continued until 11 o’clock,
when Cr. Hitchcock stamped out of the room in disgust, followed shortly
afterwards by Cr. Chapman in a state of great dignity. The councillors
who remained ordered the suspension of all road works till the question
of the levels was settled, and the meeting adjourned at 11.15 a sitting
of 31 hours.
On July 21 a letter was received from the Board of Land and Works,
stating that the Supreme Court, County Court, Police Court and lock-up
would be erected on the Lyttleton street site, and Crs. Hitchcock and
Chapman smiled, and the chairman tried to appear unconcerned.
A cynical ratepayer wrote asking for the remission of his rates, as
there seemed to be no prospect of improvements being effected in his
locality, but the request was not acceded to.
Cr. Hitchcock then surprised the meeting by tendering his resignation
as a councillor. He made no comment, but it was known that he was
disgusted with the way the business of the council was conducted. Crs.
Smith and Froomes who were glad of the opportunity of getting rid of
him, moved the acceptance of the resignation, which was carried, and
Cr. Hitchcock left the room. A somewhat disgraceful scent followed. Cr.
Chapman, though his chief had gone, was as full as fight as ever, and he
thundered against the stoppage cf work ordered at the previous meeting,
and there were very few of his contemporaries who could be so cutting
and pitiless as Cr. Chapman when denouncing what he considered to be
wrong. He and Cr. Smith were almost coming to blows, but were prevented
by the other councillors.
Cr. Chapman dared the council to adopt the scheme of permanent
levels, but the others were against him, and road work was not resumed.
In reference to the levels the question, as will be readily understood, was
one of extreme difficulty. The majority of the council took what appears to
have been the right view, that the levels should be fixed for all time, no
matter what inconvenience might be caused thereby to some of the property-
holders. Crs. Hitchcock and Chapman on the other hand, contended that
things should go on for a few years before fixing permanent levels.
“MAIL” LEFT HIGH AND DRY
At the time when work was stopped Mostyn street was being formed on
the present level, and the hill in front of the “Mail” office was being cut
through with the result that the buildings on either side, were in some
instances left high and dry about 8 feet above the level of the street.
When work was ordered to be stopped the cutting had reached just
opposite the “Mail” office and in consequence traffic was impossible. The
“Miners Right,” contemporary and rival of the “Mail,” referring to the
above said: “We sympathise with our contemporary in having his founda-
tions laid bare. We have visions of steps to be removed, and it is said
that it may not be altogether improbable that ladders may be required by
the searchers of such human knowledge a s may be embodied in one
journal.”
On August 4th, Cr. Smith moved, and it was carried, that the Govern-
ment be asked to place £3OO a year on the estimates for a qualified medical
practioner to attend to the sick poor also £lOO for the relief of the distressed
of the district, as the country was very depressed at that period. For
-a considerable time past the council had been urging the Government to


gazette a site lor a public pound, and as an illustration of Departmental
methods, a letter came to hand from the Treasurer on August 10th, asking
if a site for a pound were granted, would the council contribute to the
support of the hospital. The council indignantly received the letter and
refused to answer it.
Nominations for the vacancy caused by the resignation of Cr. Hitch-
cock were to be made on August 19th, and only two candidates were in
the field, viz,, Itffessrs Ball and Wright, both from Winter’s Flat. It was
evident that no one in the town was desirous of entering the council in
the present unsatisfactory state of affairs. The chairman was absent in
Melbourne, and Cr. Smith had been appointed by him to act as Returning
jOfficcr. At S a.m. in accordance with the Act, Cr. Smith was in his place
at the Theatre Royal ready to proceed with the nomination ceremony. There
were only six persons present, and as one of the intending candidates wa s
not represented by a scrutineer, as provided by the Act, Cr. Smith
adjourned the meeting till 12 o’clock. In the meantime two or three citizens
had been putting their heads together, and, when the irritable Cr. Smith
hurried to the theatre a few minutes after the appointed time, two
solicitors, Messrs. McDonogh and Wilson, protested against the mode of
procedure, contending that it was illegal. Cr. Smith, who wasn’t certain
of the law, or the duties of a Returning Ofticer, was in a predicament,
especially when the solicitors argued that his appointment as Returning
Officer was not in order and that the election was not advertised in the
“Gazette,” as required by the Act. They heckled poor Cr. Smith till he
didn't know what he was doing, Cr. Froomes was at his elbow, and advised
him not to go on with fhe business, as if an election took place and it
proved to be illegal. Heaver knew what would happen.
Mr. Hanower, the fiery and plain spoken gentleman whom we met
as a candidate same time ago, and who considered his mission in earth
was to watch and find fault with the council, supported the views of Cr.
Froomes, and inveighed in very forcible terms against the council and
all its proceedings, and as a final flourish said their continuance in office
was an insult to the people. Cr. iSmith then adjourned the business for a
month in order to get everything in legal form.
ANOTHER COUNCILLOR WALKS OUT
At a special meeting on 23rd August, Mr. J. Davis was appointed
collector at 5 per cent, commission, instead of on salary as heretofore.
The dissatisfaction among the ratepayers ended in a public meeting
being held in the Criterion hall on the night of the 31st to consider the
misdeeds of the council. There was a large attendance, and Mr. Saint
was the principal speaker. The permanent levels, the cattle yards, the
broken promises re the erection of markets, the bad finance in diverting
money devoted to one purpose to another, and everything connected with
the council was raked up, and the meeting drew up a petition embodying
the sins of the council and added some comments equal to a demand
for every councillor’s resignation, and ordered it to be sent to the council.
The council met on the following night, when another stormy discus-
sion on the permanent levels took place. Cr. Wheeler, who was in the
chair, was defied several times by the hotheaded Cr. Chapman, and he
frequently threatened to leave the chair. Cr. Chapman heatedly objected
to the council cutting a canal up Mostyn street and injuring people’!
property. Continuing he said it was illegal and he dared the council ■ n
continue it. Then swerving aside for a moment, he complained that
officers were getting too much salary. The majority was against him when


it came to a vote, which further enraged ’ Vi. and he handed in his
resignation, saying as an honest man he could not carry on the business
of the municipality in opposition to the , handed together for
an ether purpose. Having delivered himself of this perilous stuff, he snatened
up b s hat and walked majestically from the room.
Cr. Chapman’s written resignation was read at the next meeting' on
September Bth, and the last clause, according to Cr. Wheeler, contained
a cowardly attack and unworthy imputation on the council. This clause
was not received, and the resignation was accepted.
The petition from the public meeting in the Criterion hall was Uien
read and consideration was adjourned for a week, much to the disgust
of the large audience. The chairman, however, said in face of the petition
they did not posses the confidence of the ratepayers, and therefore they
couid not go on to consider the plans for a market house until they had
been submitted for public inspection. Some of the councillors urged the
adoption of the- plans straight away, but the chairman said he was not
at the last meeting and had not yet seen the plans.
Some councillors raid that the chairman had seen them, whereupon
the chairman, in high dudgeon, accused the councillors and the town clerk
of trying to smuggle the plans through, the council without he or any of
the public seeing them.
To this charge the town clerk gave the chairman the lie direct, and
he was backed up by the wrathful Cr. Smith, and things were very willing
for a time. When quiet was restored it was decided to nail the plan s on
the wall of the council chamber for public inspection. This was the first
breeze in connection with the erection o: market buildings in Castlemaine.
The departure from the council of Messrs. Hitchcock and Chapman
added to the anger of the ratepayers, who were clamoring, for the blood
or total extinction of the councillors.
On September 12th, a meeting of ratepayers was held at which indig-
nation speeches condemning the council were delivered and a motion
proposed and seconded “that as the council have lost the confidence of the
ratepayers they be called upon to immediately resign all of them to
give place to better men.”
Mr ffm. Aberdeen jumped upon the platform to speak, but as he was
known to be a supporter of the absent councillors the crowd objected
to his having a say. The chairman, at the request of Mr. Aberdeen, called
for a show of hands on the question of hi bri— a’lo v-d to speak, and the
vote was against hearing him. This so enraged Mr. Aberdeen, who was a
most masterful man, having the strength of a horse and a voice like a
bull, that he turned on the audience and in stentorian tones lectured and
abused them. x , , ....
The audience tried hard to howl him down, but they had met their
natch, for he held his position and roared back at them, and when the
audience was tired and hoarse William’s voice was as strong as ever, and
h f . W as abusing them as forcibly as when he first started. The result was
that the meeting broke up in disorder without the motion being put.
Writing in 1908, Mr. Mc'Killop said: “The name of William Aberdeen
has a very familiar sound, as that gentleman is as well known today as
he was in the early sC’s. He resides at Yapeen and is the only man in the
district who was prominent through the whole of the early history of the
town. From the time the field was opened up to the early sixties he wa s one
public movement..”
of the best known figures in the district, being a participant in every
At the time of Mr. McKillop’s writing, Mr. Aberdeen was 89 years of
age and looked as if he would score his century. He got to within six


years of it, passing on at the age of £M. Many now living in the district
knew Mr. Aberdeen, and some, no doubt, could tell some entertaining
stories of his exploits, which would make good reading.
FIRST CRIMINAL COURT
On Wednesday, December Bth, 1852, His Honor, Judge Barry, who
later became Chief Justice of Victoria and as Sir Richard Barry acted
for some time as Lieut.-Governor of the Colony, accompanied by the Attor-
ney-General and other officials, visited Castlemaine and presided at the first
Criminal Court held in the township.
Mr. .Aberdeen was one of the jury empanelled. After the ,’ury had
elected their foreman, Mr. S. H Aitken, His Honor said, “Gentlemen of
the jury, we are assembled here under circumstancs so unusual, to perform
duties so important, that I feel I cannot bo justly accused of trespassing
upon your time by occupying your attention with come brief remarks
before we enter upon the business of the day. Fourteen months have not
vet elapsed since the place in which we now meet was a solitary wilderness,
v andered overly flocks and herds, and rarely trod by a casual shepherd
or huntsman unconscious of the stores of wealth scarcely concealed be-
neath his feet, and of the transition to which the surroundin'! hills and
valleys wore to be so soon subjected.”
His Honoi continued to address the court in the same strain at
considerablfe jerigth, and when he finished the trials were commenced.
There were 40 cases on the calendar, including murder, manslaughter,
-bashranging, burglary, stealing, larceny, assault, etc., and the court sat
lor four days from 10 a.m. to 6.30 p.m. The accused were in almost every
case found guilty, and the sentences were up to 12 years on the roads f° r
•bushranging and robbery, and up to 10 years f° r horsestealing.
At that time all prisoners were sentenced to work on the roads, as
Latrobe and his executive couldn’t see the force of keeping them idle
when they could be made use of; in some instances the prisoners were
sentenced to work in leg irons for as long as two years. When the court
concluded the prisoners were taken to Melbourne in drays, each one
'being ironed.
The juries in some instances had a very hazy idea of their duties,
and on one occasion brought in a verdict of guilty with a strong recom-
mendation to mercy. His Honor asked on v/hat ground (the case was one
of robbery y ' the jury based its recommendation, and the foreman replied
they they wore not quite sure the prironer committed the crime; The
jury room was a dismal little den, with not a scrap o' - furniture or fire,
and the,, jurymen had to stand while considering their verdict, which,
perhaps! was a good thing as they were generally anxious to get out of
thg room and lost no time in arriving at a decision
The first jury empanelled in the town consisted of the following
gentlemen;— Messrs. S. H. Aitken (foreman), Wm. Aberdeen. Wm. Anke-
te.ll, H. R. Cross. T. Cameron, S. Dorman. J. Bruce, Jas. Burns, R. Butter-
worth, G. H. Cambridge, H. Caapercon, Jas. Denton.
PETITIONS DEMAND RESIGNATION OF COUNCILLORS
After the fiasco wnich attended the last public meeting the malcontents
sent petitions, round for signature calling on the council to resign, and
something definite was expected to result from the next meeting of the
council on September 15.


The meeting opened in the usual way. Cr. Froomes brought forward
a suggestion that the public works committee consider the advisability of
planting trees round the Market Square, and that inquiries be made as
to the most suitable class of tree for the soil and climate. The chairman
(Cr. Prendergast) strongly supported the suggestion and condemned the
residents for cutting down trees in the town. He thought a double or treble
row of trees round the Square would add. much to the comfort, of the
inhab'tauls. The suggestion having been adopted, Cr. Froomes condemned
Forest and Barker streets as being dangerous, and advocated a determined
effort to have these two main roads improved, and he moved that the
Central Road Board be asked to immediately proceed with the formation
of these two streets, and his motion was carried.
The next business was rather unpleasant and consisted of the reading
of three petitions one from Castle,maine, one from Winter’s Flat, and
one from Wesley Hill signed by 160 ratepayers setting forth that the
councillors had lost the confidence of the people, and calling on them to
resign.
The chairman moved that they be received, and respectfully acknow-
ledged. He also gave notice of motion that in accordance with the expressed
wish of the gentlemen signing the memorial, the council at its next
meeting on Tuesday next resign in a body.
Cr. Wheeler suggested the suspension of standing orders so 'that the
whole position could be considered and dealt with, and he said he could
see no use in keeping the people in suspense. He then stated that no notice
had yet been issued to fill Cr. Chapman’s vacancy, and blamed the town
clerk for the omission, but that officer said it was owing to the chairman’s
absence in town* that nq notice had been issued.
The standing orders having been suspended the chairman moved
that as the council did not possess the confidence of the ratepayers, they
do now resign in a; body. He said that the 160 persons who had signed the
memorial in cold blood were entitled to have their demand complied with.
He defended the council, and said none of them was afraid to meet the
ratepayers. * .
Cr Froomes asked what the position would be if the council resigned,
and the chairman informed him that the municipality would then cease,
and the ratepayers would have to commence de novo by petitioning the
Governor to appoint a chairman •’or the initiation of proceedings. This
answer brought comfort to one or two souls at the table, especially Crs.
Smith and Love, who couldn’t see what personal advantage was to be
obtained by resigning, and had made up their minds that they wouldn’t
resign if there was any possible way of avoiding it.
Cr. Frocmes said he had no desire to retain his seat against the
wishes of the ratepayers, but the memorials were not expressive of the
wishes of the majority. The agitation was got up, he said, by one man
(Saint), who must not be allowed to override the whole municipality. Con-
sidering the circumstances and consequences the whole council should not
resign, as it vyquld fye too .great a sacrifice for the gratification of one man,
whose private interests stood in the way of a great permanent improvement.
Cr. Wheeler thought the best course would be for two councillors to
resign, as in a month there would then be four new members elected,
for successors to Messis Hitchcock asd Chapman would then be elected,
after that then? ; the balance of the present 1 councillors could resign. He
would not retain his seat after such memorials, and would resign his seat
at the conclusion of the meeting.
Cr. Smith doggedly declared that he would not resign, and that’s flat.
He was elected by a greater number than signed the memorials and two-
thirds of the people had refused to sign.


Cr. Love said nothing had been done to justify the resignation of
the council in toto and he could not reconcile it with his sense of honor
to resign under present circumstances, but as soon as he could see it was
■convenient he would resign.
The chairman’s motion that the council resign was not seconded.
Ors. Wheeler and Froomes said they would resign at the conclusion of
the meeting, the latter stating tnat it was not prompted by fear of the
“Mail” or anything, but from a sense of delicacy after what had been
said respecting the conduct of the council.
Cr. Smith, wffio wa s sitting puffing and boiling, said bluntly that he
would resign when he thought fit. The chairman said he would retain his
■seat till the new members were elected, and then he would resign. This closed
the discussion.
The resignations of Crs. Froomes and Wheeler were accepted, and
it is the last time we will meet the genial Cr. Wheeler, who, during his
term had proved himself a good councillor.
Nominations for the vacancy caused by the resignation of Cr. Hitch-
cock were fixed for September 21st, on which day the Governor, Sir
Hairy Barkly, arrived in the town to open the new Mechanics’ Institute.
There was a large gathering at the Theatre Royal at 8 a.m., but in view
of the Governor’s visit, and the fact that there were three other vacancies
to fill, the business was postponed till October Bth, on which day nominations
for the four vacancies would be received.
At the council meeting on October 6th, it was decided to stop the
practice of exposing goods for sale on the footpaths, and the inspector
was instructed to remove the nuisance in Barker street caused by dead
8 The health officer (Dr. Preshaw) reported vaccinating 1400 children
since taking office, but said the Government had now refused to pay for
vaccination, except in cases of poverty. The council decided to write to
the hard-hearted Government, and did so, but got no satisfaction.
POLL BRINGS LITTLE ALTERATION
Nominations for the four vacancies took place on October Bth, 1857,
,T*he chairman, after explaining the purpose of the meeting, announced
that the amended Municipal Act legalised the election of candidates in their
absence. He then called for nominations.
Mr. Brown then proposed Mr. Thomas Vincent, storekeeper of Graves
street. He said he had seen Mr. Vincent that morning and had asked him
to be a candidate, and Mr. Vincent had said “No” in such a way as to
mean “Yes.” He then proposed Mr. Vincent for three reasons first,
Campbell’s Creek had a right to have a representative; second, Mr.
Vincent was a good man of business, and had done well for himself;
third, because he was a Scotchman. (Laughter).
(Mr. George Jones proposed Mr Hitchcock, whom, he said, had been
struggling for the good of the town since 1852. Someone proposed Mr.
Andrews, and Mr. Froomes seconded.
Mr. Farnsworth nominated Mr. Froomes, speaking in high terms of
the candidate, as also did his seconder, Mr. Breading.
Mr. Hitchcock nominated Mr. James Chapman, whom, he said, was
an able man, straightforward and honest, with an ardent desire to do
all in his power to advance the progress of the township of Castlemaine.
.After 16 nominations, the chairman asked for a show of hands. Two
counters were appointed, and the chairman said the count showed in
favor of the election of Andrews, Froomes, Hitchcock and Chapman. A
poll was thereupon demanded, and fixed for the following day.


The chairman said the poll should take place at the council Chambers,
but this view did not find favor with the audience, and several said it was
inconvenient.
His bitterest enemy never accused Mr. Gingell, one time painter and
later licensee of the Theatre Royal Hotel, of not being keenly alive to his
own interest, and he was promptly on his feet, and said he had always
given the theatre free for the council elections, and considered the elections
should be held there as it would be of some advantage to him. That
settled the matter, and on a vote being taken the theatre was almost
unanimously chosen.
Mr. Saint announced that he had been nominated without his con-
sent, and would not be a candidate.
The chairman then said that the position on the poll would determine
the length of term of the successful candidates. Mr. Hitchcock, after con-
demning the council, said there should be 12 councillors, and the town
should be divided into wards.
The election next day was very interesting. Messrs. Andrews, Myring
and Burnett withdrew from the contest. At 4 p.m. the theatre was densely
packed, much interest being taken in the result which was announced
by the chairman, amidst the usual cheers and groans, as follows: W.
Froomes 158, W. Hitchcock 109, J. Chapman 107, T. Vincent 98, and these
four were declared duly elected. The position was practically unaltered, as
the only change in the personnel of the council was the substitution of
Cr. Vincent for Cr. Wheeler.
The council met on October 20th, and a letter was read from Messrs.
Paynter and Tompkins, pointing out that the permanent levels in Lyttle-
ton street was fixed 3i feet above the ground, and asking the council’s
intentions as people were desirous of building there. The councillors
couldn’t state their intentions so sent the letter to the public works com-
mittee, and it has stayed there till this day.
"KNEW HE WOULD BE KICKED OUT”
Mr. Payner was one of the audience at the meeting, and was asked
by the chairman to state the facts. Cr. Hitchcock vigorously protested
against this way of doing business, and said he would leave the room if
•Mr. Paynter spoke. .This got Mr. Faynter’s blood up, and he came forward
to state his case, whereupon Cr. Hitchcock jumped up and left the room,
but returned when Mr. Paynter, who held the position of treasurer to the
council, tendered his resignation from that office, and Cr. Hitchcock, in
moving the acceptance of the resignation, said Cr. Smith was not honest
in not resigning his seat when called upon to do so by the ratepayers.
Then turning to Cr. Froomes he said he had resigned the treasurership
because he knew he would be kicked out. Cr. Love was then appointed
the council treasurer.
The chairman (Cr. Prendergast) said when the no confidence memo-
rial was presented to vhe council he said he would resign when the election
was over. He thanked the council for the kindness extended to him, and
tendered his resignation.
Cr. Hitchcock moved the acceptance of the resignation, and hoped
Ors. Smith and Love would also do their duty and resign, as good men
would tiien be elected Cx\ Smith said nothing, but was breathing heavily;
the evidence was conclusive (o him that he was the ablest man in the
town to fill the position, so, therefore, there was no occasion to resign.
Cr Love was of a similar opinion.
Cr. Chapman moved as an amendment, that the chairman’s resigna-


tion be not accepted, tout the chairman seconded Cr. Hitchcock's motion,
.avid on being put to the meeting it was carried, and Cr. Prendergast left
the room, never to return. His term was short and merry, but he proved
himself a good, strong man, and his place would be hard to fill.
On the motion of Crs. Chapman and Vincent, Cr. Hitchcock was
-vdted to the chair pro tern. Cr. Smith, whose great ambition was to fill
the chair, and who considered he was entitled to it, being the oldest
councillor, strongly protested against Cr. Hitchcock being chosen even
pro tern, and in desperation moved that Cr. Vincent be temporary chair-
man, but Cr. Vincent declined. Cr. Smith was afraid of his powerful
enemy, and knew that if Cr. Hitchcock desired the chairmanship it would
toe' a difficclt matter to stop kirn.
The only other business was the consideration of an account for £lOO
from the caterer and others in connection with the recent visit of the
■Governor, which was considered too high, and it was decided to get full
details. The account was afterwards settled.
A TEMPORARY CHAIRMAN
The meeting on October 27th was attended by Crs. Hitchcock, Chap-
man and Vincent, and the former, although he had only been elected chair-
man for the previous meeting, calmly took the chair.
When business commenced, Crs. Froomes and Smith were among the
audience, which was very large that night, but did not take their seats at
the table, probably as a protest against Cr. Hitchcock’s conduct, because
It was known that he claimed to be the permanent chairman of the
council
At this period the wooden street lamps had been erected, and a
sperm oil tender had been accepted, as gas had not yet made its appearance
in the town. Cr. Chapman, in supporting a request for a lamp on Church
Hill, said the officers of the council were not carrying out their duties
as several lamps had been ordered, and not put up. The surveyor replied
that it would cost £3l to put a lamp in front of the council chamber, at
which announcement the council of three referred the matter of street
lighting to the public works committee.
Cr. Chapman, with a baleful glance at Crs. Froomes and Smith in the
audience, asked that a notice of motion in his name in reference to
building a market house be postponed till the members who were shirking
their duty were present, and his request was complied with.
COUNCILLORS MISS THE MEETING
Cr. Vincent moved that the Government be asked to put all the
Government roads in the municipality in a proper state of repair. Cr.
Ghapman seconded the motion, and, speaking at the two councillors in
the audience, heartily congratulated the council on the acquisition of
a member as courageous as Cr. Vincent. It was then decided to ask the
Government for a portion of the £25,000 voted for the Mount Alexander
road.
At this moment Crs. Smith and Froomes rose from among the
audience, and came to the council table with the object of taking their
seats. The town clerk said that was all the business of the meeting, and
just as Crs. (Smith and Froomes were about to sit down, Cr. Hitchcock
rose, and, while Cr. Smith was endeavoring to make some remarks, de-
cisively announced that the council was adjourned.
Crs. Chapman and Vincent at once left their seats. Cr. Smith, white


with passion loudly demanded a hearing, but Cr. Hitchcock blandly told
him that he should have arrived earlier as the council had adjourned, and
amidst laughter and applause from the audience Crs. Hitchcock, Chapman
and Vincent left the room, masters of the situation.
When they had departed, the fiery Mr. Horrower, who was in the
audience, rushed forward, and amidst much confusion, addressed those
present with great animation, declaring that the conduct of the council
in adjourning the meeting was humbugging and insulting to the ratepayers,
and could not be submitted to any longer. He warned councillors that the
heavily taxed (6d. in the £1) ratepayers would not submit to this kind of
thing many days. The messenger cut his harangue short by estinguishing
the candles. There was a rush for the door, and the battle was fought
over again outside.
LACKING A QUORUM
Public interest in the fight for the chair was very keen. On paper Cr,
Smith had the better chance of victory, as he was certain of the support
of Crs. Froomes and Love, and it was known that Cr. Vincent was not a
strong supporter of Cr. Hitchcock, and Cr. Smith and his friends did their
best to win his support. Crs. Hitchcock and Chapman, however, were not
to be played with, and even if in a minority their force of character was
such as to compel victory even against odds.
There was a very large audience at the next meeting in anticipation
of fun. Only Crs. Hitchcock and Chapman put in an appearance, which,
of course, was not a quorum. However, Cr. Hitchcock gravely took the
chair and Cr. Chapman as gravely took his seat at the table. Cr. Hitchcock
said he had sent a note to Cr. Froomes asking him to come to the meeting
and form a quorum, but Cr. Froomes had replied that he was not coming
to do business with a bare quorum.
The chairman then condemned councillors who flagrantly neglected
the business of the people. Cr. Chapman then had his say, and in his
vigorous, sledge-hammer style criticised the absent councillors for their
shameless disregard of the public interest. Cr. Hitchcock then adjourned
the meeting, and the audience departed without the expected fun, which,
however, they got with liberal interest at the next meeting.
The Smith party found that their tactics were strengthening the
position of the opposition, so they decided to come to a trial of strength,
and in consequence the next meeting on November 10th was a lively and
memorable one. Five councillors were present (Cr. Frendergast s vacancy
had not yet been filled), and a large audience had assembled.
Punctually at G o’clock Cr. Hitchcock walked in and took the chair.
Cr. Froomes immediately got up, and proposed that Cr. Smith take the
chair, and his motion was seconded by Cr. Love. The fight had started.
Cr. Hitchcock said he would refuse to put such a motion to the meeting,
and on Cr. Froomes asking for his reason, he said the motion was illegal,
as he was chairman of the council. Cr. Smith’s heart sank at this declara-
tion. Cr. Froomes asked that the minute appointing Cr. Hitchcock be
read, but that gentleman promptly ruled him out of order, and said as
soon as the town clerk arrived they would proceed with the business of
the meeting.
STRUGGLE FOR LIGHTS
The town clerk, who had just arrived, read the minutes of the
previous meeting, and Cr. Smith said that the previous meeting was an
illegal one, as Cr. Hitchcock had occupied the chair, without having any


right to do so, and he objected to the minutes being confirmed. Cr. Love
also objected, and Cr. Froomes and Chapman, who had been in and out
of the room during the readin,g of the minutes, came up to the table and
the former called upon the town clerk to close the meeting, and lock up the
chamber.
Cr. Chapman proceeded in his usual energetic way to blow out the
candles, and Cr. Smith, quivering for the safety of his seat as chairman,
called on the constable in attendance to prevent him. At this Cr. Hitchcock,
as a J.P., forbade the constable to interfere.
Dr. Preshaw, from the audience, said he was also a J.P., and he
could interfere. Cr. Hitchcock sternly said he was Dr. Preshaw’s superior,
and would prevent his orders being obeyed. Up to this point the audience
had remained fairly quiet, but the duel between the two Magistrates
elicited some manifestations of partisanship, and the place was in an up-
roar. The sight of Mr. Chapman blowing out candle after candle, the
white-capped constable following him. and with the aid of Crs. Froomes
and Love, relighting the candles at that on the reporter’s table, was
watched with great interest and caused peals of laughter.
Cr. Chapman was assisted in his task by Cr. Hitchcock, who used his
hat for the purpose of canale extinction, and the proceedings were further
enlivened by a series of altercations between Cr. Chapman and the other
councillors against whom he launched his denunciations and taunts, the
language on cither side not being remarkable for elegance.
Cr. iSmith, through it all, clung to the chair, and Cr. Chapman said
his proper place was at the bottom of the table, to which Cr. Froomes
retorted that Cr. Chapman’s proper place was in gaol, a retort that scored
a round of applause from the delighted audience. ,
Cr. Hitchcock, seizing an opportunity, suddenly snatched the minute
book from in front of the dismayed Cr. Smith, and carried it out of the
room. In the midst of the babel which followed, Cr. Froomes moved that in
consequence of the riotous conduct of Crs. Hitchcock and Chapman, the
meeting do adjourn.
The excitement had increased to feve r heat by this time, some stand-
ing on the seats and forms, others crowding round the council table, and
all” the time Cr. Smith clung doggedly to the chair. Cr v Chapman, at the
top of his voice, proceeded to make a speech. He ascribed all the trouble
to the non-resignation of their seats of Crs. Smith and Love when called
upon by the ratepayers to do so. and, working himself up to a high pitch,
he proceeded to denounce the offending councillors in four languages.
Cr. Smith was proceeding to defend himself against the rain of abuse
when Cr. Hitchcock, who had been out of the room, returned and roared
out that he had sent for Inspector Barclay and a bady of police to enforce
his orders. Cr. Froomes said in that case he would withdraw his motion
for an adjournment, although everyone had forgotten that he had moved
it. Crs. Hitchcock! Froomes and Chapman then had as lively a wordy
encounter as ever took place within the walls of a council chamber, each
using every opprobrious term he could think of.
The audience kept up a fitting accompaniment, and Cr. Smith stuck
to the chair. Then there was a tranquil few minutes. Councillors were
standing in various parts of the room, and the audience was in groups at
the table, and at the back of the room. There was only one candle alight,
and that was on the press table, and many of the audience lighted the r
pipes at it while the pressmen were busy writing first-class copy.
During the lull Dr. Preshaw tried to effect a compromise. He said Cr.
Smith was in the chair (which was perfectly true), and the business • f
the municipality might go on and Cr. Hitchcock’s claim could be SettLd


after:wards, but the audience was against the doctor.
Cr. Hitchcock gravely cautioned Dr. Preshaw as to his conduct, and
reminded him of his oath as a Magistrate. Cr. Chapman, who was nearly
bursting with indignation at the bare suggestion that Cr. Smith should
remain in the chair, said that Dr. Preshaw was inciting the people to
rebellion, a statement that caused the audience to laugh heartily; coun-
cillors were too serious to laugh.
The fiery Mr. Harrower had contained himself so far very well, but
at length gave vent to his feelings amid general confusion. He said, in his
customary dogmatic way, that every straightforward man knew that Cr.
Hitchcock had a right to the chair, and asked if it were possible the
ratepayers would submit to be insulted. No one answered his question, for
Inspector Barclay entered and said he had brought a body of police tc
clear the room if necessary.
Cr. Froomes asked by what authority Inspector Barclay was present?
The Inspector replied that Cr. Hitchcock, as Chief Magistrate and a
JP. had sent for him. He suggested that all who were not ’ councillors
should leave the room, but this proposal vcajs received with decided
symptons of disapprobation.
Dr. Preshaw' again attempted to speak, but was peremptorily ordered
by Cr. Hitchcock to desist. Several in the audience asked the Doctor to
come outside and address them, and there was a movement towards the
door. The Inspector jumped on the council table and announced that he
was present to prevent any breach of the peace, and he intended to do so.
The fiery Harrower, who was annoyed at Cr. Smith clinging to the
chair like a barnacle, asked that a show of hands be taken as to whether
Cr. Smith, in keeping the chair, wasn’t, committing a breach of the peace,
but before any action could be taken, Mr. Gingell, who had been standing
on the reporter’s form holding aloft the only candle for nearly an hour,
suggested that as the books had been taken possession of, qnd no work
could be done, that they ought to adjourn. In reply, Cr. Hitchcock said that
in a few minutes he would cause the light to be extinguished, and the
doors to be closed. He held the keys, he said, by legal authority and would
not give them up.
For another hour the wrangling, recrimination and confusion pre-
vailed, each side refusing a compromise, and each angry with the other.
There were several highly exciting scenes. The restless, indignant Cr.
Chapman was moving about like a caged tiger snapping at all and sundry,
and ready to spring on whoever presumed to differ with him. He was in
striking contrast to his chief, who stood calmly, keenly watchipg every move
of the opposition the most powerful personality in the room.
PERSONAL VIOLENCE AVERTED
Trie atmosphere grew warmer and warmer, and after a particularly
lively exchange of compliments between Crs. Chapman and Smith, the
former made a rush at the portly chair-holder, but was grasped by half-
r-dozen constables, who rushed into the roam at a signal from the Inspector.
Cr. Smith quickly seized the council poker, and dared Cr. Chapman to come
on, (but that worthy, almost beside himself with rage, was struggling with
the constables. Cr. iSmith retained the poker for the rest of the evening.
Inspector Barclay issued repeated warnings at this stage, for there
was every indication of a free fight taking place. Some of, the gentlemen
m the audience got to work, and at their solicitation the people slowly
and very reluctantly retured, leaving only the police and the excited
councillors on the field of battler


Cr. Hitchcock then blew out the remaining light, which compelled Cr.
Smith to drop the poker and, vacate the chair, and the police escorted
each councillor to the door, and a memorable and discreditable scene ended.
This account is not exaggerated, and is given exactly as it occurred.
ttono-s now rested with Crs. Hitchcock and Chapman, for although
in a minority, they had won the day. Cr. Vincent’s absence may or may not
have been pre-arranged, but that he should have been absent when it
was known that a trial of strength was to take place is significant. The
position was unchanged, and the next meeting was looked forward to
with great interest.
Naturally tne incidents at the meeting proved the main topic of
conversation for the next few days, and street corners and hotels rang
with it. The two newspapers were filled with letters and articles on the
subject; the ‘Mail” thundered against Crs. Hitchcock and Chapman, and
the "Miners’ Right” against Crs. Smith, Froomes and Love.
' showing the class of press criticism at that period, the following
is from a leading article in the “Mail” dealing with the council disturbance:
“If men like Hitchcock and Chapman were simply offensive and nsulting
to their neighbors, if the exhibition of their folly, ignorance, buffoonery and
intemperance was limited to the circle of their private friends, if they
would satisfy their craving fer an evil notoriety by grinning through a
horse collar in Market Square, or by blackening their faces and singing
Ethiopian melodies outside an hotel, we should not have a word to say
against them; perhaps we might have occasion to compliment them on
their proficiency. But when a municipal chamber becomes the arena for
the most discreditable exhibitions of audacious folly, unseemly brawls,
and disreputable controversies, when public business is suspended or neg-
lected, decency outraged and the fulfilment of grave and responsible
duties converted to a jest and turned into ridicule, we would be wanting in
our duty if we failed to denounce the offence and hold the offenders up to
scorn and reprobation. We know the men whose conduct we condemn are
inaccessible to shame and obdurate to reproach, and it would be In vain
to appeal to sentiments in their minds which do not exist. Are the rate-
payers content that the reputation of the town should be trailed in the
mud at the heels of an ignoble pair of councillors?”
On the other side, the “Miners’ Right” said practically the same
thing about Crs. Smith and Froomes.
Nominations for the vacancy in the council caused by Cr. Prender-
gast’s resignation were received on November 12th. The Theatre Royal was
destroyed by fire on the previous night, and the proceedings took place
at the Criterion hall at noon.
There was five nominations, and the show of hands were Gingell
57, Christophers 21, Prendergast 34, Christie 13, Harnett 2. The three
last-named were nominated without their consent, and did not go to the
poll. Messrs Gingell and Christophers were questioned by Mr. McDonogh as
to which councillor they would support as chairman, but it was a dangerous
question to answer on the eve of an election, and the candidates declined
to pledge themselves, ag they were unacquainted with the facts, etc. Mr.
Gingell was a very shrewd man of the world, and although he was nomin-
ated by Mr. Paynter it was noticeable that he had the support of Cr.
Hitchcock.


ELECTION OF MR. GINGELL
The election was as usual, very interesting, and Mr. Gingell had a lot
of public sympathy owing to his hotel and theatre being destroyed., There
was a large crowd at the declaration of the poll, which was announced
by Cr. Hitchcock a s follows: F. Gingell 160, H. Christophers 77. The
former "was declared elected, and we will see a lot of him before he leaves
us. In returning thanks he said he went in as an independent member,
bound to no party. Cr. HitchcoCk, in concluding the proceedings,- stated
that at a committee meeting of the council on the previous night the
councillors had shaken hands all round, and he hoped and believed every-
thin'? would go on harmoniously in the council in future. Despite this
state nent many had their doubts.
The next meeting was held on November 17, and there was a large
attendance of the public to witness the next stage in the fight for the
chair. It was generally understood that Cr. Vincent had been nobbled by
the Smith party, who now had an absolute majority, and were therefore
in a position to place C. Smith in the position he so much coveted.
Cr. Hitchcock was punctually in attendance and deliberately took
the chair as if he had a bundle of parchment in his pocket testifying to
his right to the position. He introduced Cr. Gingell in a most flattering
speech, which made even that hardened individual blush. The minutes
of the three previous meetings were read, and Cr. Smith, who felt that he
was safe for the chairmanship at last, insisted that Cr. Hitchcock
should sign the minutes as chairman pro tern, and that gentleman blandly
said that to oblige Cr. Smith he would put anything they liked after his
name. Harmony had prevailed so far, although it wasn’t visible in Cr.
Chapman’s eye.
The discord appeared as soon as the minutes were signed, when Cr.
Froomes stood up and read the following protest: “We the undersigned
members of the Municipal Council of Castlemainc hereby protest against
Cr. Hitchcock continuing to act as chairman of this council for the
following reasons;— (1) Because he was placed in the chair pro tem to
carry out the business of the evening until such time as the council ' could
conveniently proceed to the election of a chairman; (2) because it has
hitherto been the custom and is provided in the by-laws that all elections
to any office at the disposal of the council shall be by ballot, and Cr.
Hitchcock has not been so elected. Signed, Walter Smith, Thomas Vincent,
Samuel Love, Wm. Froomes.’’
That certainly did not look like shaking hands all round and working
in harmony. During the reading of this protest Cr. Hitchcock sat calmly
and as unconcernedly as if it were a letter asking for repairs to a drain •
but Cr. Chairman's eyes were blazing, and he was eager for the fray. Cr.
Froomes having fired his shot, sat down, and waited for the result.
Cr. Hitchcock coolly asked the town clerk to read the correspondence.
A masterly tactician was Cr. Hitchcock. His move flabbergasted the op-
position, Cr. Smith being palpably ill at ease. When the town clerk had
finished reading the first letter, Cr. Froomes returned to the charge, and
moved in accordance with his protest that Cr. Hitchcock do take the chair
pro tem, and Cr. Smith eagerly seconded it, but although the numbers
were against him, Cr. Hitchcock was equal to the emergency, and patronis-
ingly refused to put Ihe motion, as it w r as illegal.
Cr. Chapman could restrain himself no longer, and snapped out at Cr.
Froomes, that he was obstructing the business of the meeting, and a few
sharp exchanges took place between them. Cr. Hitchcock calmly ordered
the town clerk to read the next letter. The opposition was apparently


dished, and sat pondering over the next course of action while the business
-of the meeting went on.
The necessity of a municipal court was introduced by Cr. Hitchcock,
who moved that the Government be asked to establish one in Castlemaine.
Cr. Chapman warmly supported the proposal, and despite the opposition
of Cr. Froomes, it was carried.
PLANS FOR MARKET
The report of the market committee was read, and it was recommended
the immediate erection of a market building at a cost not exceeding £2,000,
and that advertisements be inserted in the local papers and the “Argus”
for plans of a building: capable of enlargement, and offering a premium
of £5O for the best plan, the successful tenderer to supervise the work at
21 per cent, commission. The report was adopted.
This being disposed of, Cr. Chapman stated that -the salaries of the
■council officers came to £1206 per year, and he demanded the amalgama-
tion of some of the offices in order to effect a reduction. After some
■discussion by Crs. Froomes and Smith, as to the mode of bringing such
a question forward, further discussion was adjourned for a fortnight.
The storm which had been brewing over the chairmanship ever since
<Cr. Hitchcock had squelched the protest now burst.
Cr. Smith, who had been on tenterhooks all the evening, at the
thought that he would lose the chair in spite of his two to one majority,
handed in a notice of motion for a call of the council to reconsider Cr.
Hitchcock’s election to the chair. The motion was in writing, and as Cr.
Smith was handing it to the town clerk, Cr. Hitchcock rose, and snatching
the paper from the hand of the astonished Cr. Smith said, “I am the
■chairman for tonight at any rate.” He then read the motion aloud, and
said, “This is how I treat it.” and deliberately tore it up in front of the
gasping Cr. Smith. “That is how I treat this,” and he threw the scraps
of paper contemptuously on the floor.
Cr. Smith sat blinking and puffing with rage and astonishment, the
other councillors sat speechless, while the large audience cherred loudly
Cr. Chapman was in the seventh heaven of delight, and expressed his
unbounding admiration of his chief’s action by saying, “Quite right, Mr.
Chairman. Any other insult I hope you will treat in the same way.” Cr.
Hitchcock. “I shall. I intend to,” and the crow’d again cheered him. They
feared him, but admired him.
The applause annoyed Cr. Froomes (Cr. Smith was too worried to
hear it), and he asked if the chairman was going to allow such noise?
“Noise?” said Cr. Hitchcock, raising his eyebrows. He was sitting in the
disputed chair the coolest man in the room, but keenly watching every
move. Cr. Froomes, finding he w r as not a match for the chairman, said he
-objected to people coming to the meetings to create a disturbance, and
considered the chairman should not allow it. The crowd kept interrupting
Cr. Froomes, and Cr. Chapman brusquely told him to sit down.
Cr. Hitchcock said they couldn’t expect the people to be deaf and
-dumb as such motions as Cr. Smith’s were of the most insulting character,
Cr. Smith, who had recovered from his stupor, jumped to his feet at this
taunt and thus unburdened himself “I say you have no right to that
chair, and I say so again. Neither had you a right to tear up that notice
•of motion. No .gentleman would have done it. The audience here had a
sally at Cr. Smith, who sat down bristling with anger.
Cr. Gingell, who at the election had heard the chairman allude to
"the handshaking and harmony, said he thought all this trouble had been


settled. He was satisfied that Cr. Hitchcock had conducted the meeting in
a most competent manner that night. Cr. Gingell, no doubt purposely,
didn’t see the point at issue. It was not Cr. Hitchcock’s ability, but hisr
right that was assailed.
Crs. Froomes and Hitchcock then had a few snaps as to the legality
of the latter’s position, during which Cr, Smith was again busy writing,
and when he had finished he got up and said he begged to give notice
of a call to the council to consider Cr. Hitchcock’s position as chairman*
It was the torn up motion over again
He was handing it to the town clerk when Cr. Hitchcock said, “I
will not take it,” and the audience cheered loudly. Cr. Smith: “I don’t
want you to. You have no right to receive it. I shall give it to the town
clerk,” offering it to that official.
Cr. Hitchcock (snatching the paper), ‘‘Yes, but with my leave."
‘There,” and he tore up the paper amid excited cheers. Cr. Smith was
blue in the face with despair and rage, and blurted out “I think that is
a blackguard thing.” Cr Hitchcock threw the torn paper on the floor,
laughing lightly, and added insult to injury by saying, “Won’t you take the
poker again?” alluding to the scene at the previous meeting, which caused
Cr. Smith to collapse and the audience to roar with laughter.
Cr. Hitchock, before the opposition could decide on the next move,
said. “I declare this meeting adjourned,” and leaving the chair, walked
through the applauding audience to the door. The opposition was taken
by surprise, and did not leave their seats, and Cr. Chapman remained to
watch over Cr. Hitchcock’s interests.
Cr. Froomes vehemently protested through the din against Cr. Hitch-
cock’s conduct in adjourning the meeting, and moved that Cr. Vincent
take the chair, and Cr. Smith, all activity and now hopeful, seconded
the motion. Cr. Vincent took the sacred chair, and was about to proceed
with the business, when Cr. Hitchcock stalked into the room, and snatching
a candle from the table said: “I will prevent this going on.”
•Mr. McDonogh, the town’s leading barrister, rose from his seat in the
audience and said, “Now. 1 will give my opinion.” Cr. Hitchcock cast a
withering glance on the intruder and said icily, “You will not, you will
cither keep quiet or go out this instant.” The crowd cheered, and Mc-
Donogh quietened on the instant and retired.
Crs. Froomes and Smith were in desperation, and the former as a
last resource tried to conciliate his resourceful opponent. In the lull Cr.
Chapman, seizing the psychological moment, moved that the chairman
resume his seat. Cr. Gingell seconded the motion, and Cr. Hitchcock
nonchalantly took the chair and called on the next business, and a few
minutes later the council adjourned, with Crs. Hitchcock and Chapman in
the ascendant.
That was the last time Cr. Hitchcock’s right to the chair was chal-
lenged, and to the end of his term reigned without molestation. It is
typical of the man that though he was in the minority and in the wrong
he broke down the opposition and came out triumphant. Cr. Smith was,
to put it mildly, very downhearted at the turn of events, as his whole
soul was centred in securing the chairmanship of the council. He had
the majority, yet couldn’t get the chair. It was certainly exasperating.
After the meeting, Cr. Smith wrote privately to the Crown Law office,
asking for an opinion on the legality of Cr. Hitchcock’s position, but
Cr. Hitchcock was known in the Law Office, as he had frequently, while
on the Bench, overruled the Resident Magistrate and had his way in
face of the opinions of the Law Department, therefore the officers of
that department had no wish to raise more trouble, so Cr. Smith’s reply


was to the effect that the council should have a solicitor to advise them
who would be cognisant of the facts, as the Crown was not in a position
to advise in the matter. 'That was enough for Cr. Smith. He never tried
for the chair while Cr. Hitchcock remained in the council.
On November 24th Cr. Hitchcock took the chair without opposition,
and a bonus of £lO/10/ was offered for the best scheme for supplying the
town with water, as the recent fire at the Theatre Royal had shown the
inadequacy of the water supply. ,‘The health of the town, sanitation, etc.,
were next discussed, and the opposition being so quiet Cr. Chapman had
to have a snap at the chairman just to keep himself in practice, and it
finished by the chairman saying that it would take an angel from Heaven
to govern Cr. Chapman.
RESIGNATION OF SECRETARY
At the meeting on December Ist, the town clerk (Mr. Hankins)
resigned, and his resignation was accepted.'A letter was read from Dr.
Preshaw, president of the Mechanics’ Institute committee, asking for the
appointment of a committee, to consider the means of paying the ex-
penses incurred during the Governor’s recent visit. The council considered
that the Governor came to the town at the invitation of the Mechanics’
Institute committee to open the institute, and as there was a reception
committee appointed the council was not liable, and on the motion of Cr.
Chapman, the letter was ordered to lie on the table for 12 months, but
later on a compromise was arrived at.
Cr. Gingell moved in the direction of restricting speakers to five
minutes, as he considered a lot of time was wasted at meetings. Cr. Chap-
man bounded out of his chair, and with great heat said the motion was
insulting. He was called to order and retracted, but continued to forcibly
condemn the proposal, ignoring the repeated cautions and entreaties of
the chairman. Cr. Gingell ultimately withdraw his motion, which saved
it from annihilation.
The next business was to fine Cr. Froomes 5/ for being ansent
without sending an apology. A long discussion, initiated by the chairman,„
look place on the question of amalgamating the duties of the officers. The
chairman wanted to dismiss the surveyor at once, as he considered he
was not inquired. Eventually the subject was postponed till February 4th,
so that it could be dealt with by the new council.
Cr. Gingell announced that he intended to his seat at the
end of -the year, but changed his jnjnd when the time for doing so arrived.
Plans for a water tank in Market Square for the fire brigade were
■aid on the table, and tenders ordered for foothooks, bell, ladders, etc., and
the meeting adjourned.
On December Bth further details regarding the proposed Market
building were discussed, during which the chairman moved that £IOO be
spent on erecting a temporary shed in the Market reserve to protect the
produce, 50 per cent, of which, he said, was destroyed at present. The
motion was carried, and at the following meeting, the tender of A. S.
Rust, at £l3O, was accepted.
On the motion of the chairman, it was decided to ask the Government
for £12,000 for the purpose of straightening Forest Creek, which wa?
daily more and more encroaching into the Market reserve, also to erect
posts and chains around three sides of the reserve. The balance of the
meeting was devoted to a heated discussion on the permanent levels,
the chairman and Cr. Chapman being bitterly opnosed to them.
At the meeting on December 22nd, 20 ratepayers wrote giving notice


of their intention to move at the annual election that the chairman of the
council be paid for his services. It was the custom at that period to
decide questions affecting the municipality at the annual election by a
show of hands. It didn’t matter whether there were 10 persons present
or 1000, or whether every person present was a ratepayer or not, the
majority of those in attendance decided the subject.
The trustees of the Mechanics’ Institute wrote, asking the council
for financial assistance as they couldn’t make it pay. The letter was refer-
red to the legislative committee. This subject cropped up at many meet-
ings and led to frequent wild scenes, the chairman and Cr. Chapman
strongly opposing any proposal to support the Mechanics’ Institute.
Cr. Smith alluded to the fact that Sandhurst and Ballarat had been
granted £15,000 each for the erection of new gaols, whereas only £6,500 had
been allotted to Castlemaine, and on hi s motion it was decided to ask
the Parliamentary representatives the reason why Castlemaine had been
so shabbily treated.
Christmas passed in the time honored way, and councillors recovered
in time to attend the meeting on the 29th. Cr. Smith moved that' the
council meet in future at 7 p.m., instead of 6 p.m. and his motion was
carried. ~
The matter of fire protection was discussed at some length, the
result being that £SO was voted to the Volunteer Fire Brigade, and on the
motion of the chairman it was decided to place barrels filled with water
in various parts of the town, and that persons owning water carts be
requested to keep them full of water at night in the Market reserve. The
Coliban system was not thought of at that time.
Cr. Smith thought the sanitary condition of the town should be in-
spected regularly, and such also was the opinion of the whole council who.
without more ado, appointed the surveyor (Mr. Spender) inspector of
nuisances. When this was done the zeal of the council went further, for it
was arranged that the councillors should meet at 10 a.m. on Mondays
and Fridays and accompany the inspector on his round of inspection. The
zeal did not last long, for it was not long before the inspector had to go
alone, and a little later he ceased to go at all.
New Year’s Day, and especially New Year’s Eve, being over, the
council met on January sth, 1858. Cr. Smith complained of a constable
in uniform insulting and following a respectable young girl in the street,
and stated that there were numerous complaints of a similar nature. The
council decided to write to the inspector regarding these amorous con-
♦
stables.
The competitive plans for the Market building were ordered to be
opened at 3 p.m. on Thursday, 7th January, in the presence of the cpuncil.
Press, and ratepayers, and this was duly done, and it may be mentioned
great interest was aroused in connection with the competition.
The chairman carried a motion in favor of asking the Government
to appoint half a dozen local Justices of the Peace, and intimated that he
was of opinion vhat all councillors should be appointed to that position.
On the 12th January the tender of Joseph Slee at £9B per year,, was
acepted for lighting the 20 odd street lamps, he being the first council
lamp lighter. When the applications v/ere being considered the chairman
said he had known Slee for four nr five years and was aware that he had
been brought up as a chemist, and consequently was acquainted with the
oil and color trade. The illuminant, it may be stated. w r as colza oil, and one
could usually smell the light before seeing it.
Cr. Chapman said thare were eight competitve plans sent in for the
design of the proposed Market building. He understood a letter had come


tc hand from the Chief Secretary regarding the proposed Market, and he
wanted to know y.iy it was not laid on tile tables The chairman said in
the: interests of the public it would be tetter to keep it back for a time;
In answer to a snort of dissent from Cr. Chapman, he asserted hia
right to keep bad: any document at his disrretion. He flatly refused to
produce it. Cr, Chapman couldn’t get on to his feet quick enough, and
forcibly condemned such a bad and injurious precedent, and insisted on
the letter being produced. The chairman (Crr Hitchcock) positively refused
to do so, and Cr. Chapman subsided with a bad grace, but inwardly
satisfied at having had a snap with sohie one, even if it was his chief.
NEW SFCRETARY APPOINTED .
Tacre were 17 applications for the position of town clerk. Crs. Froomes
and Gingell said the annual election ,would take place in less than a fort-
night and considered the appointment should be deferred so that the new
council could deal with it. Tne other councillors were, for deciding the
matter at once, as several applicants from Melbourne were present. The
council retired to read the applications and, testimonials, and at the end
cf 20 minutes they returned, and on a ballot being taken Mr. J. Larnach,
of Castlemaine, was appointed, and told to start on the 26th. inst.
Before concluding the business the town clerk was instructed to
exhibit the competitive plans and specifications for the Market building
in the council chamber next day 'or inspection by the ratepayers, Next
morning at 8 o’clock the council met at the newly erected temporary shed
on the Market reserve and allotted the stalls, which were given free.
The last meeting prior to the annual election was held on the ‘ 19th
January, and opened with Cr. Smith having a snap with che chairman,
who had ordered some small works without t,he authority of the council,
but, as usual, the chairman came out on top.
The fiery Mr. Harrower, who still entertained a lofty .contempt for
lawyers and storekeepers as councillors, wrote asking the council to ap-
point six competent men to report on the Market plans, but his request
was promptly refused. The plans were considered in committee, and
three were selected, and on a ballot being, taken that labelled “In publicum
regidi” was selected, and on the accompanying envelope being opened
it was found to be the work of Mr. F. Poeppel, the first surveyor, who had
been sacked by an indignant council. He was ordered to receive the bonus
of j£so conditionally that the plan and specification were in accordance
with the advertised conditions. It was resolved to call for tenders for
the erection of two-fifths of the building designed in the plan.
The council had now been in existence two years, and those who
have followed this record will admit that a lot o.f work was done. The
last year was undoubtedly full of incident and excitement, and is the most
stormy year in the history of the council. In two short years there were
10 elections. We are satisfied if we get two in that period nowadays. Only
one of the first councillors elected remained in the council, viz., Cr. Smith,
and altogether 16 different persons had been elected to the council. There
had been three surveyors and five town clerks, and all in the brief space
of two years.
The annual nominations took place at the Criterion hall on Jam" ry
21st. at noon. Cr. Hitchcock, as chairman of the council, was the Hetur ng
Officer, and the retiring councillors were Crs. Chapman, Love and Vim -\t,
neither of whom sought re-election. In the case of Crs. Love and Vin cat
they were satisfied that the game wasn’t worth the candle, and that it
was better for their comfort to be out of the bickering.


C . Chapman, on the other hand, retired tor more serious reasons.
He had become involved financially owing to his investments in property
proving unremunerative, and shortly afterwards he became insolvent.
Everyone who reads this will regret that such a brainy, active man should
have been compelled to leave the council for such a cause. However, we
will meet him again somewhat frequently, and perhaps hear more about
his financial affairs.
COUNCILLORS “PROMISE EVERYTHING
In opening the nomination proceedings, the chairman intimated that
it was intended to present the first municipal chairman (Mr. Andrews)
with a testimonial from the council, but as that gentleman was unwell
the presentation would have to be postponed, and possibly might be made
the next day.
The proceedings were fairly orderly, and there were eight nominations,
among them being ex-Crs. .Andrews and Paynter. The show of hands re-
sulted. T. Andrews 63, H. Christophers 51, Wm. Johnston 18, Owen Jones
47, .F. E. Paynter 24, Pearson Thompson 14, John Dale 3, Wm. Maloney 2.
The speeches by those candidates who were present were of the
usual promise-everything order, except Mr. Owen Jones, who said there
should be no barristers or lawyers in the council; there ought to be more
economical men there. In answer to questions he emphatically announced
that he was opposed to jobbery and the permanent levels.
Th gathering decided to adjourn the question of paying the chairman
for 12 months, a decision arrived at owing to the fact that every candidate
opposed the principle.
There was unusual interest in the election, canvassing being most
energetically indulged in. At 4 o’clock there was a very large and some-
what noisy crowd at the Criterion hall, and Cr. Hitchcock announced the
results as follows: T. Andrews 222, F. E. Paynter 175, W. Johnston 162, H.
Christophers 116, O. Jones 41, P. Thompson 24, W. Maloney 18. Mr. Dale
retired. The first three were declared elected, and the chairman insisted
that the lowest on the poll should speak first, and, putting it to the meeting,
he declared it was carried.
The speeches were brief owing to interruptions, until it came to
Mr. Johnston’s turn. He was a baker in what is now Johnston street,
whose character will develop as we go along. He said he had been a
councillor in the Old Country, and went on to give his views on municipal
matters in a long, windy and wearying speech. The audience tried to stop
him, but he droned on, amid cries of ‘‘Dry up,” j’Cut it short,” etc., until
a voice in the crowd said he would be as bad as Chapman in the council,
and this probably so startled Mr. Johnston that lie stopped instantly.
The crowd then called for Mr. Andrews, who was said to be unwell,
and was not present. Dr. Davies, tried to return thanks on his behalf,
but was not listened to, as the crowd wanted Mr. Andrews and no one
else. The chairman tried to explain that Mr. Andrews was not in a fit
slate of health to be present, but the crowd wouldn’t hear him, and a
me senger was despatched for Mr. Andrews, who soon appeared, and amidst
loud cheering, he returned thanks for his election. A vote of thanks was
carried to the Returning Officer, and then the sensation of the day, which
is well worth recording occurred.
When the vote of thanks tendered him for presided had been carried,
Cr. Hitchcock asked the audience to stay for a moment as he would now
make the presentation from the council to the first chairman (Mr. Andrews).
The audience, of course, didn’t move, and the councillors congregated on
the platform looking quite important
The testimonial took the form of a prettily illuminated address, with


drawings of the principal buildings in the town surrounding it. It was
signed by the councillors, and had the municipal seal stamped on it, and
was massively framed with cedar. There were two copies one for Mr.
Andrews, and one to hang in the council chamber.
The testimonial was in the charge of the collector (Mr. J. Davies),
and was handed by him with becoming reverence to the chairman, who
asked Mr. Andrews to step on to the platform, which the gentleman did,
amid cheers. Cr. Hitchcock, who was a fine speaker, in a really nice speech
eluorised Mr. Andrews, and said the present was from his colleagues to
the first municipal chairman in Castlemaine. He then read the address, and
said: “I hope, Mr. Andrews, you will live long to enjoy it, and that it
will be handed down to your family as a mark of our appreciation of
your public and private character.” (Much cheering).
Mr. Andrews, after a few preliminary words of thanks, and self de-
preciation, then made a most astounding speech. The present council, fen
said, was not composed altogether of those who were his colleagues, and
the testimonial had been rather long in arriving at maturity. It would
be admitted that when a testimonial had been kept in hand for 12 months
it lost some of its freshness.
Heedless of the interruptions which now burst from the astonished
audience, Mr. Andrews continued, and said If a single ratepayer had ob-
jected to it he would not have taken it; still he would like to know definitely
whether he was to accept this tesimonial from the council or the rate-
payers? At this stage something like uproar -msued, and cries of ‘‘From
the ratepayers,” “From the council,” resounded through the hall.
The councillors on the stage were uncomfortable. Cr. Smith was
gasping, and Mr. Chapman’s eyes were blazing, and he could hardly
retain his seat. Mr. Andrews again spoke, and said he considered it to
have been a present from the ratepayers through the council, still he wished
to know from Cr. Hitchcock if that were the case. Confusion now reigned
and the audience settled itself down for some good fun, and there were
cries of “Don’t take it Andrews,”
Cr. Hitchcock, who had some difficulty in obtaining a hearing, said
the testimonial was presented to Mr. Andrews by the council as represent-
ing the ratepayers. This answer intensified the confusion, and the coun-
cillors on the platform could be seen, but not heard, bawling out their
opinions.
The fiery Mr. Harrower was o: course, present, and from the body
of the hall shouted through the din that Cr. Hitchcok’s answer was insuffi-
cient. As the uproar increased, and as he wished to unburden himself of
something more, the fiery gentleman, amidst deafening uproar, marched
to and mounted the platform.
This was too much for the mercurial Cr. Chapman, who bounded to
the centre of the platform and jumped about with the activity o c an acro-
ibat, gesticulating and shouting, but it was impossible to catch what he
was aying.
It was some time before partial order was restored. The chairman,
who was the calmest man in the hall, induced the two cxcitables Chap-
man and Harrower to resume their seats, and Mr. Andews again spoke
and said. “Mr. Hitchcock has satisfied me that the council has presented
me with this in the name of tne ratepayers.” (Loud cheers). “If I had
received it from the council, as the representatives of nobody, I would
have taken it home and turned its front side to the wall.”
As might be expected, the disorder at this stage was indescribable,
and Cr. Chapman again bounded to his feet and roared out what appeared
tc be a violent denunciation of Mr. Andrews. The testimonial which was


the cause of all the trouble was in charge of Mr. J. Davis, who had
retreated with it to the back of the platform.
Cr. Hitchcock commanded the collector to “bring it up” and place
it on the table, in front of which Cr. Chapman was perched in a defiant
attitude and bristling with indignation. ;The collector, as if anxious for
the safety of the sacred scroll, hesitated to comply, but the command of
Cr. Hitchcock “1 am the municipal chairman yet,” was irresistible, and
Mr. Davis reluctantly placed the testimonial on the table in close proximity
to the effervescing Cr. Chapman. All this time the noise and confusion
was as if Bedlam had broken loose.
When the testimonial was placed on the table, Cr. Smith expressed
a wish “to smash the thing with the inkstand.” Mr. Andrews at iength
tried to address the meeting, but was greeted with shouts of “Oo you
appreciate the testimonial 7 ” etc., and had to resume his seat. Then Cr.
Chapman and Cr. Gingell simultaneously displayed a desire to air their
views and met in the centre of the platform. Neither would give way, and
the crowd applauded and shouted encouragement and enjoyed the fun
immensely.
TESTIMONIAL GOES WEST
Cr. Chapman, whose expression was anything but angelic, could make
no impression on his stolid opponent, and at last in a towering passion he
obeyed Cr. Hitchcock and descended from the platform, as also did Cr.
Gingell, to the great relief of the collector, for me testimonial had so far
escaped damage, and had not been touched by sacrilegous hands.
The meeting was now at boiling point, and fit for anything. Mr.
Andrews at intervals was heard t v o say that he did not wish to court
popularity, his object he said, being to benefit Castlemaine. In response
to cries of “Will you have the testimonial?” he replied, “Yes, if it comes
from the ratepayers.”
At this there were shouts, “Don’t take it, Andrews,” for the appetite
of the crowd had been whetted, and everyone was in a high state of
excitement, and looking for trouble. Cr. Hitchcock, in the momentary lull,
said, “We cannot take off what in written but if Mr. Andrews will not
receive it from the council I will draw a non through my name, and the
other councillors will do the same thing unless it is accepted in the spirit in
which it is proffered.” Cr. Hitchcock had behaved in a most dignified and
conciliatory manner throughout, and the audience cheered him to the
echo.
Mr. Andrews made another attempt to address the audience, but
being unable to obtain a hearing ho turned to leave the platform, but at
that moment the choleric Cr. Chapman flashed across the space between
the front seats and the platform, and seizing the testimonial he held it
high above his head, and with a shriek of triump he dashed it to the
ground.
A yell of dismay burst from the astonished audience, and a rush was
made to the scene of destruction. A score of hands were struggling to get
at the illuminated cardboard, when Cr. Smith rushed among them like a
madman, secured the address, vaulted to the low platform, dipped his
finger in the ink pot and blotted out his name on the address. Cr. Chapman
viciously did the same.
Then the unfortunate testimonial got into the hands of Cr. Hitchcock,
who adopted the same primitive method of obliterating his signature,
and then he tore the document into pieces and threw them into the hall,
where they became the objects of a general scramble. Pandemonium was
reigning during the whole of the scene.


Cr. Chapman next mounted the table and delivered himself of a furi-
ous tirade against Mr. Andrews, which, however, could not be heard in
the prevailing disorder. It was now 6 o’clock, and the excited audience
streamed out of the hall. Needless to say, the copy of the address was never
hung in the council chamber.
At the meeting on January 25th, Cr. Hitchcock took the chair, and
the new councillors were introduced. The first business was to elect the
chairman for the year. Cr. Smith, with memories of the last fight for the
chair, proposed that Cr. Johnston take the chair till the election was over,
but Cr. Hitchcock objected to leaving the chair as he was chairman of
the council till his successor was appointed. There was a pause, for all
know that when Cr. Hitchcock said he wouldn’t leave the chair it would
take a lot of work to shift him.
It was pointed out that he was a candidate, and should not in such
circumstances be in a position to give a casting vote. It was all to no
purpose, for he said he was perfectly within his rights and would not give
way.
The other candidates were Crs. Froames and Paynter, the latter
owing to the fact that he was second on the poll. Cr. Andrews was not
present at the meeting, consequently with three candidates out of six
councillors a casing vote was a most desirable thing for one of the candi-
dates to have.
Further argument followed, and Cr. Paynter thought to shift his
enemy by moving that the chairman leave the chair. Cr. Smith, thinking
that he would at last be equal with the usurper, promptly seconded the
motion. But Cr. Hitchcock was too old a tactician to be caught
napping, and with great dignity refused to put the motion.
Silence for a time, and then Cr. Paynter proposed that the matter
should be referred to the ratepayers for decision, or they should postpone
the election till a legal opinion was obtained as to the right of the chairman
to exercise two votes when he himself was a candidate. The case, he
said, would establish a precedent.
Some discussion on the aspect of the case followed. Cr. Hitchcock
remaining silent and wearing a sphinx-like expression. Cr. Smith was again
urging the advisability of Cr. Johnston taking the chair, but he met with
a hostile demonstration on the part of the audience, and Tie subsided.
NEW CHAIRMAN TAKES OVER
Cr. Hitchcock distinctly refused to leave the chair, but agreed to
waive his right to a casting vote, and the election proceeded by ballot, the
result being: Paynter 3, Hitchcock 2, Froomes 1. As Cr. Paynter took the
chair there was on outburst of disapproval from the audience.
The new chairman called for order, and said he did not seek the
position (Cr. Hitchcock: “Oh”). Cr. Hitchcock might say “Oh,” but it
was a fact. During his term he would insist on the maintenance of order.
The chairman having been elected, business was proceeded with. The
first letter was from Cr. Hitchcock as chairman of the annual election,
giving particulars of the presentation to Cr. Andrews, and of the causes
which led up to the destruction of the testimonial.
In reply to Cr. Froomes, Cr. Hitchcock said the language of Cr.
Andrews had been characterised by the leading literary authority of the
towm as too foul and offensive to be printed. The chairman (Cr. Paynter)
praised the deportment of Cr. Hitchcock during the incident, and said
never had an angry man done a wiser thing than Cr. Chapman in smashing
the testimonial.
The appointment of a treasurer was the next business, and Cr.


Hitchcock, after severely censuring all previous treasurers and one chair-
man, moved that the manager of the Colonial Bank be treasurer, but could
get no seconder, and vhe matter was deferred.
The chairman moved a hearty vote of thanks to the retiring chairman
(Cr. Hitchcock) for his assiduity both as chairman and magistrate. Cr.
Froomes seconded the motion, which was carried amid plaudits form the
audience. In acknowledging the vote, Cr. Hitchcock urged the necessity
of an amendment in* the Municipal Act in the direction of endowing muni'
cipalities with all Crown land within their boundaries.
The Andrews’ testimonial was again referred to. Cr. Hitchcock
moved, and Cr. Smith seconded, and it was carried, that this council, not-
withstanding the insulting language and conduct of Cr. Andrews at the
public meeting, do not proceed openly and vindictively to destroy the
duplicate of the testimonial, but that they do in the committee room erase
their several names, and also that of Cr. Andrews, and that it be hung up
in the committee room.
This was one instance of the feeling against Cr. Andrews by his
brother councillors, and he had only himself to thank for it. During the
stay in the council he was practically an alien, and received little con-
sideration.
On February 2nd, Cr. Hitchcock’s motion that the manager of the
Colonial Bank be the council’s treasurer was carried. It was decided that
nothing but colonial produce should be sold in the market, and that
Wednesdays and (Saturdays be the market days.
The tender of Mapperson and Cowling at £l4/10/-, for channelling
work in Templeton street, was accepted, and it was decided to advertise
for a valuer, collector and inspector, at a salary of £250 a year, and then
Cr. Hitchcock wanted all the by-laws collated and .revised, but failed.
At the following meeting (February 9th) Cr. Smith his
seat, and his resignation was accepted. He was one of the first seven
councillors elected in the municipality, his term extending for just over
two years, during which he had been a participant in many exciting
scenes. His object in resigning was to apply for the position of inspector,
etc., as his auctioneering business was not very profitable.
BETTER BREWER THAN COUNCILLOR
Shortly afterwards Mr. E. Fitzgerald opened a brewery at Winter’s
Flat, and Mr. Smith, who was a brewer by profession, became the first
brewer, and a first class one he proved to be. He was not a particularly
good councillor, but his part in the formation of the municipality and
his services generally are deserving of recognition.
It was a great disappointment, to him not to have been made chair-
man of the council. When his resignation had been accepted a letter was
read from Mr. Cuthbert Clarke, claiming £3 for illuminating the testimonial
to Cr. Andrews. The council promptly referred it to the finance committee
for crucifixion. It may be mentioned that Cr. Andrews was absent from
this meeting also.
The necessary steps for the proclamation of the Market Reserve
were ordered to be taken immediately, and it was decided to place col-
lection boxes for the relief of the destitute of India.
The surveyor estimated the expenditure for the year at £II,OOO, in-
cluding £3OO for the Market building. While a discussion was in progress
regarding the proposed market, expressions of derision came from the
audience, and the chairman peremptorily ordered the constable to remove
any persons making a noise.
Cr. Hitchcock then got up and roundly condemned the council’s


extravagance in the matter of offccrs, and contended that a .surveyor was
not necessary as an overseer of works, who would also be valuer, collector
and inspector was sufficient They' should also do away with the messenger
and get a married couple at £I.OO a year, the man to also do laboring work
in the town. The council was against him, and it was here that Cr.
Hitchcock missed the support of Ci. Chapman.
There were four applications for the combined position of valuer,
collector and inspector, one of whom w'as ex-Cr. Smith, and on a ballot
being taken Mr. Joseph Davies, the late collector, was reported, and the
applause from the audience showed that the selection was popular.
On the suggest ion of Cr. Hitchcock, it was decided to hold a
meeting to consider the question of the Government endowing the muni-
cipalities with all Crown lands within their boundaries.
Things were getting too monotonous for Cr. Hitchcock, who couldn’t
tolerate the happy family business, and no doubt he often sighed for
the presence of Cr. Chapman. He asked the chairman of it were true that
he had written to the Governor asking him to nominate certain gentlemen
as Justices of the Peace, and suggesting among others, Mr. Pearson
Thompson?
The chairman, looking guilty, said as no reply had been received
to the town clerk’s letter on the subject he had written nominating all
the principal citizens. Cr. Hitchcock, at great length fulminated against
the chairman for not submitting his lette~ to the council. The chairman
admitted his sin and the matter dropped.
VESTING OF CROWN LANDS IN COUNCIL
The special meeting to consider the endowment question was held
a couple of days later, and a motion by Cr. Hitchcock was carried to the
effect that all Crown land in the municipality be vested in the council.
Cr. Hitchcock always contended that there wa s no necessity to levy a
rate as if the council got what it was entitled to it would have ample money
to carry out all works without levying a rate.
His ideas on the subject are embodied in the following remarks by
him in the following May: “The area of the township proper is two square
miles, or 1280 acres; that of the entire municipality is nine square miles,
or 5760 acres. Of these 120 acres have been sold by the Government within
the township boundaries, which have realised about £20,000, an average
of £166 per acre. In the suburban districts, outside the township, the
Government has sold about 300 acres at £BOOO,, or £27 per acre. Allowing
160 acres for streets, etc., there remains 1000 acres within the township
to be disposed of which, on the overage of past sales, would realise
£166.000. And allowing 500 acres for suburban streets, etc., within the
municipality, there would remain 3680 acres, which at the average sale
price would realise £99,360. a grand total of £265,360.
“Of the £28,000 which the Government has already directly drawn
from us for land, the municipality has received in grants, about £12,000.
In the event of the sale of the entire land within the municipal boundaries
and the apportionment of Government grants on the same scale as now
obtains, it would take 60 years for the Government to return to us what
it had directly received from us in land sales alone. But it is highly
probable that the land, when sold, would realise fully 50 per cent, more
than the present average prices, and it would require a period of 90 years
to restore it to us, without considering interest.
“At the Government’s original upset price of £8 per acre the whole
of the township, including the streets and reserves, would amount to
£10,240, and the suburban districts, including streets, etc., at £4 per acres


would amout to £17,920 together 128,160, or just about what we have
already contributed in land payments.
“We have therefore paid for the entire municipality at the price the
Government put upon it originally, and it is time some respectable portion
of the unsold land were ceded to us in trust for the maintenance and
advancement o' the district and neighborhood. The unsold land within
the municipality, if leased for residences, cultivation, mining, quarrying,
or other purposes, at merely £1 per quarter acre per annum would at
present realise to the corporation £20,000* a year independently of taxation.”
Unfortunately, Cr. Hitchcock’s ideas were not carried into effect,
although at his instigation, a conference of municipalities was held in
Melbourne, and approved of the scheme, but the Government would not
countenance it. One can imagine the income the council would now be
receiving if the proposal had been adopted.
At the meeting on February 16th, Dr. Preshaw, the health officer,
sent a letter stating that the water in the town water casks was putrid, and
the surveyor was authorised to have the casks emptied and to use some
disinfecting substance. As previously stated, these casks were in various
parts of the town, and had been filled in case of fire.
The much abused and much discussed cattle yards were let to Messrs.
W. B. Adams and Co., at £IOO per year which was less than 5 per cent, on
the original outlay. During this meeting Cr. Andrews, who was present
for the first time since his election, and needless to say was not received
with open arms, protested against the chairman not standing when address
ing the council, as provided in the by-laws, which led to some hot words,
out of which Cr. Andrews came second best.
LEASING OF SCHOOL RESERVE
At this time there was considerable comment on the fact that portion
of the National School reserve had been let to Mr. Kelsall, and the council
protested against it, and at this meeting the Chief Secretary wrote to
the effect that the school trustees had no power to lease the land. The
council decided to obtain full particulars from Mr. Locke, secretary to
the trustees, and the town clerk was instructed to write to him.
A few minutes afterwards, Mr. Locke strolled into the council
chamber to see if there was any fun on, and some of the councillors sug-
gested they should discuss the matter personally with Mr. Locke instead
cf by letter.
Cr. Hitchcock strongly objected, and a long discussion followed as
to whether they should interrogate Mr. Locke or not. Cr. Hitchcock spoke
about ten times, and was very disorderly, aha indignantly said he would
speak 55 times if he chose. He characterised the conduct of the chairman
as tyrannical, and said he would not permit him to rule in the way he
was, but the council supported the chairman, and Mr. Locke was heard,
much to the disgust of Cr. Hitchcock.
Mr. Locke simply said that the trustees had not leased the reserve,
but he refused to say who did. To get even with Cr. Paynter, Cr. Hitchcock
demanded from him the production of the copy of the letter he had sent
to the Government regarding the appointment of J’s.P. Cr. Paynter re-
fused, and Cr. Hitchcock said he would submit a motion on the matter,
but he was ruled out of order.
The public works committee reported in favor of a good rotary action
pump for the market well, and disapproved of Mr. Poeppel’s plans for the
market building, which they held was provisionally accepted at a previous
meeting, as he had not complied with the conditions laid down in the
advertisement, and that on Monday evening next the council proceed to


consider the next best plan. This recommendation was adopted, but the
council had not by any means heard the last from Mr. Poeppel on the
subject.
The finance committee’s report was read by Cr. Hitchcock, and it
objected to pay £5 to Mr. Clarke for illuminating the Andrews testimonial,
and also recommended that the application of the Mechanics’ Institute
Committee for a grant of £3OC be refused.
Durinr; the discussion which followed it was shown that the clause
relating to the Mechanics’ Institute, as well as several other clauses, had
been inserted in the report by Cr. Hitchcock without the knowledge of
the other members of the committee, but with characterisic vigor Cr.
Hitchcock pushed the report through the council.
Cr Johnston moved, and Cr. Froomes seconded, that in future the
council meet at 3 p.m„ instead of 6 p.m. Strong opposition came from
Crs Hitchcock and Andrews, the former contending that it prohibited the
public from hearing the discussions, and it was a most inconvenient hour
for business men. However, the motion was carried, and Cr. Hitchcock
at once tendered his resignation, saying the hour of meeting prevented
him from attending and he left the room.
At the conclusion of the business a resolution was carried conveying
the thanks of the council to Cr. Hitchcock for his services as a councillor.
On February 23rd Mr. J. Davis, the valuer, was ordered to make the
assessment for the year. The council considered the market plans, but
were not in a position to come to a decision and the matter was further
adjourned. , „ . . , ,
On March Ist, Mr. Poeppel, whose market plan was first accepted and
then rejected, wrote claiming the £SO premium, and in very strong terms
condemned the council for accepting and then rejecting his plan, and
he threatened legal proceedings if he were not paid at once. The tone of
the letter was such that the council refused to receive it.
The legislative committee, in its report, estimated the expenditure
for the year at £9,106, including £1,106 salaries.
PLANS FOR MARKET
The most important report was that of the market committee, which
recommended that the plan of a market submitted by “Economicus Usus”
be adopted, if it complied with the conditions.
Cr Froomes opposed this recommendation, and pointed out numerous
defects in the plan.
It was folly, he said, to adopt such a plan, and he moved that the
recommendation be not adopted, and Cr. Gingell seconded his motion.
Those in favor of the plan sat tight, and said nothing, and Cr. Froomes
motion was defeated on the casting vote of the chairman Cr. Froomes got
angry and roundly condemned the policy of silehce when defects had
been pointed out. Cr. Johnston, who was of the hot-headed order of man-
kind, stoutly defended the plan, and the subject was dropped.
Cr. Froomes moved that the Governor be asked for a grant of £,5000
for the improvement of Forest street, and his motion was earned. They
were not afraid to ask for enough, these early councillors. Cr. Johnston
wanted 20 acres surveyed at Milkmaid’s Flat for a public cemetery, as
the approach to the Campbell’s Creek cemetery, he said, was dangerous,
and the fees were too high. However, the council deprecated haste in this
matter, and it was allowed to stand over for a time.
Before the meeting closed, Cr. Andrews wanted the council to meet
at 6 p.m. instead of 3 p.m., as was carried at the last meeting, and he
was supported by Cr Gingell, but they were in the minority, and 3 p.m.
was adhered to.


Nominations for Cr. Smith’s vacancy were received on March 4th,
and at noon there was a large crowd at the Criterion nail. Mr. Cherry
proposed Mr. H. Christophers, and Mr. Morris seconded. Mr Temple
proposed Mr Wm. Hay, of Wesley Hill, and Mr. Waterfall seconded.
No other nominations being forthcoming, the chairman (Cr. Paynter)
said he would wait 10 minutes longer, and intimated that in future all
elections would take place at the municipal chamber, an announcement
which was not favorably received.
Messrs. Christophers and Hay then addressed the gathering, both
condemning the alteration of the hour of meeting to 3 p.m., the latter
saying it was an aristocratic, base and unworthy movement. The show of
hands resulted. Hay 26. Christophers 20.
The election was fixed to take place at the council chamber next day.
At this the meeting got very disorderly, and vehemently protested against
the election being conducted at such an inconvenient place as the council
chamber, and Mr. iStagg moved that the polling take place at the Criterion
hall as usual, but the chairman refused to put the motion, and during the
uproar which followed he declared the meeting closed, and left the platform.
A lot of interest was* taken in the election next day (March sth.) the
Hitchcock ’party supporting Mr. Hay, and the Paynter party Mr. Christo-
phers. When the clock struck four there was a good crowd of voters in
the municipal chamber waiting their turn to vote.
The doors were locked, and those inside, who had mostly arrived
from Wesley Hill by coach, were allowed to vote. Wesley Hill was Mr.
Hay’s stronghold, and the friends of Mr. Christophers were very wrath at
any person being allowed to bote after 4 o’clock, and decided to protest
if Mr. Hay were elected.
Owing to the large crowd present it was decided to declare the poll
in the Mechanics' hall, which was packed to the doors. Cr. 'Paynter an-
nounced the result of the poll to be: Christophers 159, Hay 148, which
elicited cheers and groans.
WRONG MAN NAMED
Cr. Paynter then made a peculiar slip, as, after a few preliminary
remarks, he declared Mr. Hay duly elected, whereas he should have said
Mr. Christophers. His mistake evoked loud laughter and much confusion,
many of Mr. Hay’s suporters loudly declaring that as the chairman had
declared Mr. Hay elected he must be held to be so.
The excitement grew, as also did the confusion, and everyone appeared
to be shouting at the top of his voice. Prominent, very prominent was tne
highly strung Mr. Chapman, who was a warm supporter of Mr. Hay.
When the din was at its height he bounded on to the platform like a
kangaroo, and was against the chairman in a trice
That unfortunate being was roaring to Mr. Christophers to address
the meeting, when the highly excited Mr. Chapman clapped both his fists
in close proximity to the chairman’s face and insisted on the validity
of Mr. Hay’s election.
The chairman remonstrated with him, but in vain, and as it looked
as if the now maddened Mr, Chapman would inflict violence on the chair-
man, several of his friends interposed, but their counsels were scornfully
repelled, as nothing would satisfy Mr. Chapman but the chairman’s scalp.
Ultimately, amid a scene of the wildest disorder, Mr. Chapman was
seized by two stalwart constables, who removed him, protesting and
struggling, from the hall. When the audience quietened down Mr. Hay got
up and proceeded to thank the ratepayers, and especially the chairman, who
had declared him elected.


The chairman roared at him that he was not elected, and after rome
difficulty Mr. Hay was prevailed upon to give way to Mr. Christophers,
who returned thanks, but was frequently interrupted. Mr. Christophers
was for a time town clerk, and resigned owing to a severe criticism of
his balance sheet by the “Mail.” It was his fourth attempt to enter the
council.
At the meeting on March 9th, Cr. Paynter resigned his position as
chairman, and Cr. Froomes was elected to the position for the remainder
of the year. Cr. Christophers said the council should take steps to erect
gasworks in the township, as Kyneton had been lighted with gas, and
•surely Castlemaine should have it. The matter was referred to committee.
Cr. Andrews,who had only attended a few times since his election
in January, tendered his resignation as a councillor owing to the incon-
venient hour of meeting, and it was accepted without much regret.
Cr. Gingell asked if it was intended to impose the fine decided on by
the council in cases where councillors resigned after attending only one or
two meetings. The chairman said the council had certainly provided for
a fine in such cases as that of Cr. Andrews, but had no means of enforcing
it. The matter was then allowed to drop.
Cr. Andrews had taken very little part in the business since his
election. His conduct in refusing the council’s testimonial was not forgotten
by-the councillors, who sent him to Coventry, and there was a feeling
of satisfaction when he resigned. He was a good chairman in his first
term, and was a very popular man with the public, but was not a strong
man,’ and gained his popularity by bending to nearly every wind that blew,
and was too prone to shout with the largest crowd. He became bankrupt
not long afterwards, and like scores of other prominent men left the town
without a beat of drum, and it was not generally known where he took up
his abode. This docs not mean that he left the town clandestinely, or
because he had to go. Men in those days when their luck was out did not
howl from the housetops, but simply packed up their belongings and left
to try their luck elsewhere.
On March 18th nominations were received at the Criterion hall for
the vacancy caused by Cr. Hitchcock’s retirement. Messrs. Waterfall and
Jones proposed Mr. Hay, and Messrs. Brown and Lay proposed the fiery
Mr. narrower. These were the only nominations.
Mr. Hay made a very sensible speech in support of his candidature.
Mr. narrower, in his pugnacious manner, said he had come forward as
many things done in the council were objectionable, and instead of re-
ducing salaries they were increasing them, and if he were elected every
abuse would receive attention.
The show of hands was: Hay 22, narrower 10. Mr. Harrower was, no
so speak, municipal mad. He watched the council like a cat watches a
mouse, and anything done which did not accord with his views he took
as a personal insult and brooded over it. He firmly believed that he was
the only person in the community who knew what should be done, and
he almost as firmly believed that the public thought so too. Tn fact, he
felt that the public looked to him to see that the council did its duty.
The election next day was the quietest on record, the result being:
Hay 154. Harrower 93. Mr, Harrower, in returning thanks, delivered a
characteristic speech, amid mingled sounds of approbation and disappro-
bation. He said that he had be<n watching the proceedings out of doors
very closely, and he had seen moves going on that did not suit him.
(Laughter and groans). He had gone through the town the previous day
and had received such promises of support that he had been able to
reckon that morning on 150 certain votes.


There was something rotten in the State of Denmark. (Loud laughter).
He did not think Mr. Hay a suitable man for the council. (Interruption).
There was too much talking and quarrelling in the council, and there
must be a great change before long. He would never again stand, as a
candidate, and he would now tell the ratepayers it would be of no use
to send him requisitions. (Uproar).
Poor Mr. narrower, he was sincerity personified, and couldn’t under-
stand how pools could promise to vote for him and not do so. Other
candidates since then have had the same experience. He went determinedly
back to his timber yard and stuck there, and never stood for the council
ahy more, though he still kept a sharp eye on the doings of that body.
COURSE OF FOREST CREEK
On March 24th a very important motion by Cr. Christophers was
carried. It was to the effect that a memorial be sent to the Government
asking that a combined plan for cutting the creek course south of the
Market reserve be adopted, together with the construction of a bridge
from the south end of Barker street to connect the main Melbourne-Bepdigo,
Ballarat and Maryborough roads, and further that a grant of the present
Camp Reserve oe sought for public gardens or recreation ground,, with
liberty for mining on such parts thereof as might be found auriferous
and whereby no further expense would be needed for a long period on the
Governor’s and the Sheriff’s bridges. The motion was supported by. Cr.
Froomes.
It may be stated that from the earliest days of the township it was*
the desire of the residents to alter the course of the creek to its present
course, and thereby a considerable amount of land would be added to the
town proper, and the creek would then be better for drainage purposes,,
At that period Barker street did not extend any further south than
Forest street, and all traffic from the Ballarat side came over Sheriff’s
bridge, or over a bridge near the line of Hargraves street.
The allusion to the granting of the Camp reserve in Cr. Christophers’
motion is the first of a long series of attempts on the part of the council
to the ground from the Government officials, the majority of whom
resided on this historic ground, and to some extent retained the haughtiness
of the ancient regime. . .
It is worth watching this fight for the Camp, which, of course, in-
cluded all the area from'a line with Lyttleton street down to Campbell’s
Creek, and as far back as Bowden street.
At the same meeting the tender of E. C. Brown at £55 was accepted
for erecting Castlemaines first flrebell tower in the Market reserve.
Then a by-law was read a first time, the object of which was to exact
a fine of £2O from any councillor who should resign his seat, or vacate it
by absence for one month, within 12 months after election j also prohibiting
a councillor from having an interest in a council contract or becoming
surety for a contractor, under a penalty of £5O. This eventually
passed through all stages. The custom then was for a contractor not to
lodge a deposit as at present, but to have two approved sureties for the
proper fulfilment of the contract.
In response to a request by the council, Mr. Knight, architect, of
Melbourne, reported on the plans of the market building sent in by the
various persons, of which Mr. Poeppel’s had been accepted and then re-
jected, and a second one accepted. Mr. Knight reported that they were all
unsuitable, and recommended the council to invite fresh applications.
The council looked somewhat foolish when this report was read, and
decided to further consider the matter at next meeting. The permanent


levels had not been forgotten by council or public, and it was still the
main question.
A motion by Cr. Paynter, that granite kerbing be used in Mostyn
and Hargraves streets, was carried, after some mild squabbling, and;.the
tender of H. Baker, at £2.797, with £866 extra for granite kerbipg, was
accepted for the formation pf these two streets. This contract caused con-
siderable strife and heart-burning before it was finished.
Cr. Johnston wished the council to appoint a council solicitor,- but
Cr. Paynter and others objected, anc the'motion was withdrawn. ,
Cr. Hay, who represented Wesley Hill, tabled a motiop that a menaorial
be sent to the Governor praying for the formation of the roads at Forest
Creek, as that locality was called He pointed out that the roads to Eureka
and Specimen Hill were in a wretched state, and from these places. 30Q oz.
of gold per week was brought to Castlemaine, and the bad state of the
roads greatly increased the cost of conveying machinery, and was injurious
to health. • '•
After a long and severe fight £3OO was granted to the Mechanics’
Institute, and the meeting was adjourned. ,
.On April 6th the Chief Secretary wrote stating that the Market
reserve had been proclaimed, and forwarding the “Gazette” notice, which
read as follows: “29th March, 1858. A resolution in favor Of establishing
a market in the municipal district of Ckstlemaine having been adopted
at a public meeting of the inhabitants of the district convened in mariner
and form, as decided by the Act of Council 3, Victoria No. 19, His Excellency
the Governor, with the advice of the Executive Couricil has approved of
the establishment of such market, the site thereof to be as follows: Com-
mencing at a point on the southern side of'Mostyn street; 10 chains, thence-
sooth by the eastern side of Barker street 5 chains, thenbe by a line bearing
east 10 chains, and thence north by the western side of Hargraves street
5 chains to the commencing point. By His Excellency’s command. * Jbhn
O’Shannessy,”
At the same meeting a lengthy discussion took place on Mr. Knight’s,
report on the market plans, and eventually, in spite of strong opposition
from Cr. Paynter, the resolution accepting the plan of “Eaonomicus USPs”*
was rescinded. Numerous suggestions as to the next step to take Were
made, and at last Cr. Hay moved that the town surveyor be instructed to
prepare plans and specifications for a market building suitable to ' the
present requirements of the community, not to cost more than £2,600, 'rind
to be capable of extension. Cr. Johnston seconded this most important
resolution, and it was carried.
CR. HITCHCOCK GAINS A SUPPORTER
Nominations for the vacancy in the council caused by the resignation
Qjf Cr. Andrews were received on April Bth at the Mechanics Institute,
and the attendance was large. An attempt was made by the chairman/XCr.
Froomes) to stick closely to the Act and conduct the proceedings at 8 a.m.,
but strong objection came from Mr. Hitchcock and others, and the chair-
man was forced to follow the usual custom and adjourn the business till
noon. At that hour he read the advertisement and called for nominations.
Mr. McDonough proposed Mr. Hitchcock, and said that Mr. Hitchcock,
as a magistrate, had once decided against him on a point of law and
he had been very angry in consequence, and had opposed Mr. Hickcock’s
election and every prominence given to him in the town, but he was
now convince! that Mr. Hitchcock’s decision was due, not to personal bias,
but to a mistaken interpretation of the point of law involved. Mr. McDonough


who was a barrister, and a clever one, continuing, said that Mr. Hitchcock
had rendered great service to the town before, and since the advent of the
council, and h was the pi’oper man to send into the council to improve
the systefn now prevailing there. Mr. J. C. Goldsmith seconded the nomi-
nation.
Ex-Cr. Smith, who had never forgiven Mr. Hitchcock for keeping
him out of the chair, preposed Mr. E. W. Bagshawe, and said he expected
to see him at the head of the poll. Mr. Bagshawe, he said, had been long
resident in the town and knew it thoroughly, in fact he was the man
that laid it out. Mr. Carmichael seconded the nomination. Mr. Bagshawe,
it .may be stated, was a surveyor and auctioneer, and whs one of the staff
under Mr. Urquhart, who surveyed the town.
Mr. Mills stepped forward to propose Mr. Brown, of Winter’s Flat,
but was asked from all sides if he (Mr. Mills) was a ratepayer, and as
he couldn’t answer in the affirmative he stood down instantly. There
being no other nominations, the candidates expressed their views.
Mr. Hitchcock made a cutting speech at his nomination, and aaid
he considered he was under no obligation to Mr. McDonough for nominat-
ing him. Two respectable and honorable gentlemen had offered to propose
and second him, but Mr. McDonough was always very active.
At this stage, Mr. Mills interjected, “Mr. McDonough is in as good
:a position as you, Hitchcock.” Mr. Hitchcock at once appealed to the
chair to stop tuch'interruptions, as Mr. Milts was not a ratepayer, and if
the chairman would not make him keep silent, he (Mr. Hitchcock) soon
would. This led to some disorder, and when order was restored the candi-
date announced his views on municipal questions, and in reply to a
question he said he was opposed to all municipal rates, but if returned
he would support the lower rat*
Mr. Bagshawe said if he had known he would have to'meet such a
formidable opponent as Mr. Hitchcock he would not have come forward.
He pointed out that Mr. Hitchcock resigned from the council because the
hour of meeting was altered to 3 o’clock, and that hour was still observed;
liesides, Mr. Hitchcock was a tenant of the municipality and could not
legally take his seat. (He alluded to a statement that Mr. Hitchcock was
one of the partners of the firm of W. B. Adams and Co., the lessees of the
municipal cattle yards).
Mr. Hitchcock was called on by the audience to reply to this statement,
and said he could legally take his seat if elected. He declined to pledge
himself to remain in the council for the full term of three years. After
further remarks he keenly criticised the council for holding the meetings
at 3 o’clock ip .ordgr to .prevent the puolic from attending, and finally was
called to order by the chairman.
Mr. McDonough, who naturally was not at all pleased with Mr.
Hitchcock’s cutting reference to himself, then mousted the platform and
Hitchcock’s cutting reference to himself, then mounted the platform and
said he wished to withdraw his nomination of Mr. Hitchcock in consequence
■of his infamous language, but Mr. Maguire interjected that if Mr. McDonough
withdrew he would nominate Mr. Hitchcock. Mr. McDonough then left
the platform in anything but an amiable frame of mind, to the accompani-
ment of a running fire of sarcastic comments.
DEFEAT OF MR. HITCHCOCK
The show of hands resulted in favor of Mr. Hitchcock, and the election
was fixed for the following day at the Mechanics’ Institute. It was
very orderly, and Mr. Bagshawe was elected, polling 161 to Mr. Hitchcock’s
*59, •
It was Mr. Hitchcock’s first defeat, and, like the big souled man


he was, he took it well. In returning thanks he said he had taken no part
in the election, but had left it entirely to the ratepayers, but he regretted
the great apathy shown. Mr. Bagshawe, he continued, was an intimate
friend, and they both held the same principles, and he was very glad to
see him elected.
The reader may as well take a regretful leave of Mr. Hitchcock, and
although he will come in for brief mention again, he never again sat in
the council. Some months later he left quietly for the city, and it is
understood he returned to England and died there. He was a great man;
nothing paltry or mean spirited about him, somewhat arrogant and over-
bearing, if you will, but a strong able man. In private life a gentleman,
and in public life a leader. With all his failings, take him for aill in all,
we have not looked upon his like since.
“No such dominating personality, no such able public man has since
appeared in the public life of the district. His greatest services were ren-
dered when they were most wanted in the early days of the town, when the
military rode rough shod over the rights of the residents. He led the
crusade for the rights of the people, and the note he caused to be struck
in Castlemaine resounded through the colony, was taken up at Bendigo,
ahd then at Ballarat, and proved the death song of military and official
tyranny. There is no man in our history so deserving of recognition. His
defeat at this elections was due to his friends, who desired to keep him
away from public life and its temptations, and who stayed away from the
poll. Few men in Castlemaine have had such warm friends, and such
bijtter public enemies as Mr. Wm. I^itchcock.”
EXTENSION OF BARKER STREET
A special meeting of the council was held on the evening of the elec-
tion. It was called by the chairman, who stated that he had been informed
that Mr. Pearson Thompson had gone to Melbourne with a memorial
signed by several residents of Kennedy street, protesting against the
proposed southern extension of Barker street, and he thought it right to
call the council together in order that steps might be taken to counteract
this memorial.
Cr. Paynter considered a deputation should be sent to Melbourne to
state the full facts of the case. Cr. Christophers agreed with Cr. Paynter,
although he could not see that the council had much to fear from any
memorial presented by Mr. Pearson Thompson.. and pointed to Mr. Thomp-
son's memorial against the Supreme Court, being erected on the present
site, and against the proclamation of Barker street as the Government road
through the town, and.several other matters in which Mr. Thompson had
taken an active part
He proposed that the chairman and Cr. Gingell should proceed to
Melbourne ag a deputation on the subject, and his motion was carried, and
the .chairman and Cr. Gingell. who at this period had left hotelkeeping
and had joined the great army of agents and auctioneers, went to Melbourne
and succeeded in checkmating the Kennedy street rebels.
On March 13th, Mr. James Izitt (“Economicuu Usus”), whose plana
for the market had been accepted alter Mr. Poeppel’s had been rejected,
and which had also been rejected by the council, wrote through his solicitor
claiming the £SO premium, and, in the event of a refusal, threatening
legal proceedings. A similar letter had been received from Mr. Poeppel,
and the council decided to defend both actions
On the motion of Crs. Hay and Christophers, the surveyor was instructed
to select cemetery sites at Forest Creek and Barker’s Creek.
On the motion of Cr. Christophers the public works committee was


asked to report at next meeting on the subject of a temporary and perma-
nent, water supply to the town, but at the next meeting (April 20th) ( that
committee reported that, it refused to go into such an important question
as water supply, and suggested a special meeting of the council for the
purpose, and the suggestion was adopted.
At this meeting the surveyor reported that he had selected cemetery
•sites, but on asking the Government to reserve them the council was
Informed, that they were not necessary. The surveyor also reported that
he had completed his plan for a market building, and it was referred to
the public works committee.
T'he legislative committee recommended that Mr. J. C. Goldsmith
be asked to pay the rent due on the weighbridge within 24 hours, and the
recommendation was adopted. The tender of Geo. Hunter at £212 for
lighting the street lamps for a year was accepted, and on the motion of
Cr. Gingell, it was decided to form Hargraves street, from Mostyn street
to Forest street
The Campbell’s Creek cemetery site having been proclaimed by the
Government. Cr. Christophers objected to the council havihg any respon-
sibility in connection with the cemetery, but it wa s pointed out that the
Government would appoint trustees to look after the cemetery, and this
information proved satisfactory to Cr. Christophers.
EARLY VALUATIONS
The municipal valuer, Mr. Joseph Davis, of memorial tame, submitted
on Apiil 20th, » very lengthy report on the assessment, which commenced
with a congratulatory reference to himself on the success which attended
his efforts. The following appeared in the report:—
“The leading principles which directed me in making the assessment
have been the commercial or other value of the situation, the extent of
frontage and depth, the advanced value occasioned by surrounding im-
proved properties, the character of building or other improvements, the
position as peculiarly available by the proprietor or as otherwise generally
available by the public, and the certainty of its tenure. In frequent instances
1 have found the rent paid an unsure or inadequate exponent of value, and
have therefore discarded it as a necessary criterion in valuing.
“The assessment falls slightly short of last year, owing to last year’s
being too high, and owing to the settlement of the town, the demand for
large buildings is great, leaving the smaller ones of less value. Many
assessed tents have also been removed. I have not assessed the temporary
diggers’ tents on public land, but only those with chimneys or other signs
of their settled habitations. My experience of collecting has proved that
the fugitive and migratory habits of a large class of the outlying diggers
within the municipality render the collection of rates from them, on account
of the tents they just sleep under, in most cases impracticable. The entire
number of distinct properties assessed is 1,783, and of this number only
16 appealed against the assessment, and seven were reduced, totalling £l4O.
“The amended assessment is £79,471. The value of unassessable property
in the township is £54,777, and the annual value about £6,830, which, added
to the assessed annual value, would give £16,301. The total annual value
■of assessed properties is £9,471.’
A vote of thanks for his exhaustive report was passed to Mr. Davis,
but Cr. Christophers considered that all valuations should first come before
the council before going to the appeal court. The council was against
him, however, as they considered the valuation was of no use to them
until the appeals were decided
At a special meeting of the council on April 22nd. fo consider the


water supply question, it was decided to recommend the Government
to make a survey between the Coliban river and Castlemaine for a perma-
nent water supply. The facts which led up to this decision are interesting,
as the Government eventually adopted the Coliban scheme, and Castlemaine
and Bendigo are drawing their supply therefrom at the present time.
At the latter end of January (1858) two Italians, named respectively
Man son and Baptista, who had experience of water supply works in Cali-
fornia, being strongly impressed with the necessity of a permanent water
supply for Castlemaine and Forest Creek conceived the idea of surveying
the country between Castlemaine and the Coliban river with a view to
'Conveying the water by race.
They consulted the Warden (Captain Bull) as to whether any encour-
agement would be given them by the Government in the event of their
being able to prove ■ satisfactorily that the project was feasible and easy of
■execution. Having received a favorable reply from Captain Bull, they, without
more ado, commenced the survey, and after 11 weeks’ labor and the ex-
penditure of nearly ,£3OO they completed their task, and handed over their
plans and specifications to Captain Bull, who transmitted them to the
Government.
What the Italians proposed was to cut a race 25 miles long by a depth
and width of 4ft., commencing operations on the Coliban river at a point
three miles above Taradale, the elevation being 250 ft. above the level
of Forest Creek at Market Square, and to convey the water over the Fryers
dividing rnage at or near the Eureka reef. The whole of the ground was
pegged out at distances not exceeding six yards apart. The estimated cost
was £25,000, no provision, of course, being made for a storage reservoir.
In alluding to the matter, and especially to the cost, the "Mail”
said: “£25,000 is nothing, as Castlemaine raises 6,000 oz. of gold per week,
and the export duty alone on gold raised here during the past 18 months
gave £58,000.
Th er e was a lot of speculation at that period as to the best source
■of a water supply, Moonlight, Mount Alexander, Chewton i anges, and
■other places having strong advocates. ,
On April 21st a special meeting of the council was held to consider
the surveyor’s plan for the market building and the question of water
supply. In regard to the market plan the meeting approved of it, and the
■surveyor was instructed to prepare an estimate of the cost and present
it at the next council meeting, and if the estimate proved to be within the
£2,400 allotted for the purpose, the meeting recommended that the work be
carried out at once.
In considering the propriety of a temporary water supply the meeting
had two district propositions to recommend, viz., the erection of a tank
in Market Square to be supplied from the well by a powerful force pump,
and the sinking of wells at different parts of the town.
In reference to a permanent supply the meeting recommended that
the surveyor make a survey between Castlemaine and the Coliban river,
and at the same time to submit to the council supplies of the water there-
from, to be afterwards submitted to some experienced chemist for analysis,
and that the town clerk write to the Board of Works for the amended
and adopted tracings of sections of the various surveys of railway between
this place and Malmsbury in order to connect the two together.
The council adopted these recommendations, and in regard to the
temporary supply erected a tank over the well in Market Square in pre-
ference to sinking wells in various parts of the town.
At the council meeting on April 27th. James Izitt, “Economicus Usus,”
wrote a very impertinent letter to the council in connection with his claim


lor the premium of £SO for market plan, and the council indignantly re-
fused to receive it, and sincerely regretted their action in calling for de-
signs and their mistake in accepting the two designs, Izitt’s being accepted
in spite of the defects pointed out by Cr. Froomes. The council shortly
afterwards received summonses from the two aggrieved designers, and
decided to defend the cases.
,A few weeks before this meeting. Messrs Prendergast and Pearson
Thompson had been appointed by a public meeting to proceed to Melbourne
to urge the speedy construction of the Melbourne and Bendigo railway
now that the route had been decided upon and Harcourt’s claims squelched.
They wont to Melbourne, and estimated their expenses at £IOO, but who
was to pay it?
They were both members of the legal fraternity, and as a matter of
course knew how to charge and who to charge, so sent the bill to the
council, who promptly refused to pay it. Mr. Thompson was wise in his
generation, and before he left on his mission he went to Cr. Christophers
and got £24 from him until the money was passed by the council.
It will be remembered that Mr. Thompson, who held considerable
property in Kennedy street, opposed Barker street being the main road,
opposed the southern extension of Barker street, and the construction of
a bridge there, and also packed a meeting held to decide on a site for
the court house and carried the Gaol Hill site.
When in Melbourne on the railway matter he had gone to the De-
partment to prevent the Barker street extension, and this fact was inown
to the council, who point blank refused to pay the ,£IOO expenses, or the
£24 advanced by Cr. Christophers, although they agreed to refund the
£24 to Cr. Christophers out of their private pockets.
The surveyor on April 21st announced that he estimated 'the cost of
the market buildings according to his plan at £2,159, and being below the
maximum of £2,400 fixed by the council, the statement was received with
pleasure.
SIXPENNY RATE
It was the intention of the council to strike the annual rate that
night, but before the subject was reached a deputation from Grave street
and Winter’s Flat was introduced by Cr. Johnston.
The deputation stated that at a public meeting in their locality they
were deputed to wait on the council to oppose any increase of the sixpenny
Tate, as such increase would simply benefit the centre of the town and
not the outlying portions of the municipality.
When the deputation withdrew Cr. Paynter moved that the rate for
the coming year be one shilling in the pound. Cr. Froomes, in seconding
the motion, said with the Government grant the shilling rate would produce
£9,000 for the year.
Cr. Johnston, as the Grave street representative, said he had been
instructed by a public meeting to oppose a shilling rate tooth and nail,
and as an amendment he proposed sixpence, but got no seconder. Cr.
Gingell then proposed ninepence, which Cr. Johnston seconded.
Cr. Christophers wished to postpone a decision until he obtained more
information, but the vote was taken, and Castlemaine’s first shilling rate
was carried by 4 votes to 3, and it was ordered to be collected in two half-
yearly moieties, the first to be on Ist June. The council then decided to
again write to the Board of Works to straighten Forest Creek, and the
meeting adjourned.
The imposition of a shilling rate, a s might be expected, was not favor-
ably received by the bulk of the ratepayers, who all at once became very


much interested in the doings of the council. Ratepayers appear to be very
much alike- in all ages. • .
A meeting of ratepayers of Grave street, and Winter’s Flat was held a
few days later near the Sheriff’s bridge, and after fierce denunciations of
the council, a motion in favor of a sixpenny rate was carried by an over-
whelming majority.
At Castiemaine on May 3rd a crowded meeting was held in the Cri-
terion hall, ratepayers being present from every part of the borough.
It was lively from the start,Anthony (the bellman), who was a bit of a
wag, created a lot of fun at public meetings, especially when he had a
"few in,” and others doing their best to make it a fiasco. No one would
take the chair, but at last Cr. Froomes, the municipal chairman, and a
strong advocate of the shilling rate, was prevailed upon to preside, al-
though Mr. Hitchcock and others loudly protested, as they contended that
he was a partisan and should not preside.
Mr. Hitchcock v/as the first speaker, and advocated all Crown lands
being vested in the municipalities, and submitted a motion to that effect.
Cr. Paynter got up and very rightly said the motion had no connection with
the object of the meeting. Being the proposer of the shilling rate the crowd
would not let Cr. Poynter proceed, and howled him down.
Cr., Johnston, in a fiery speech, moved that a sixpenny rate be struck,
and his motion was seconded by Mr. O’Keefe, of Winter’s Flat. Cr, Paynter
again essayed to address the meeting, but was met with a storm of groans
and shouts of disapproval and had to sit down
The chairman vainly attempted to procure order, and at last called
on the redoubtable Anthony, who had been unusually noisy throughout
the evening, to keep qniet, saying it was a meeting of ratepayers called
for an important purpose and could not be disturbed by mountebanks.
Anthony, in a perfect hurricane of confusion, rushed up the hall and on to
the platform, and after demanding from the chairman the meaning of
such language, proceeded to take off his coat in a high state of excitement,
when someone neatly elbowed him off the platform on to the floor.
Encouraged by the shouts of the audience (at this time standing on
the forms to get a good view of the expected hostilities), Anthony returned
to the fray, but ran into the arms of a constable, and being given in charge
by the chairman, was removed struggling and threatening from the hall.
fThis incident led to indescribable disorder, and the hall seemed filled
with a crowd of shrieking, wrangling lunatics. The chairman had had
■enough and left the chair, and Mr. Hitchcock promptly took his place..
Things quietened down a little, and Cr. Paynter, amid frequent
interruptions, moved an amendment in favor of a shilling rate, and Mr.
Saint, without making a speech, seconded the amendment.
Mr. Hitchcock put the amendment to the audience, who, unfortunately
for themselves, were busy squabbling and were not taking much notice
of what was going on and were not aware of what they were voting for.
and as a consequence nearly every hand in the hall went up in favor of
the shilling amendment, which was therefore declared carried. The audience
then found out their mistake, and the disorder became so great that
everyone left the platform, and the angry crowd surged out, looking for
someone’s blood.
The council met the next night, and the collector reported collecting
rates to the amount of £1,450, out of £2,066 on the books.
1 A long .unimportant discussion took place on the tenders received for
a bridge over Forest creek and as no tender was in accordance with the
specifications the council decided not to accept any. On this decision
being arrived at, Cr. Hay, who was anxious for the bridge to be built.


stamped out of the room in a towering passion.
On May 11th, on the motion of Cr. Christophers, it was decided that
Mr Praagst, who had recently started the gasworks at Kyneton, should
meet the public works committee at its first meeting to discuss the quest-
ion of establishing gasworks in Castlemaine.
, On the second reading of the by-law imposing a shilling rate a
memorial from 161 ratepayers, was presested by Cr. Johnston, protesting
against the shilling rate, and urging a sixpenny ,
The of the memorial was described by Cr. Paynter as hig y
disrespectful, and he pointed out that in the first dozen names alone
six were not ratepayers, and a great many of the signatures were in the
same handwriting. Cr. Johnston defended the memorial, and moved as
an amendment that the rate be sixpence, but he got no seconder and
the second reading of the by-law was carried, and it was ordered to be
sent' to the Governor for his approval.
The council then went into committee, and had a long conversation
with the Coliban water supply prospectors, Messrs. Manson and Baptista
(they appear to have also been known as Borsa and Salvio, which were
probably the surnames). After going carefully into the subject, Crs. Bag-
shawe and Christophers were deputed to wait on the Chamber of Com-
merce and introduce the prospectors, and advocate the carrying out of
the meeting on May isth the Lands Department wrote to the
effect that the reservation of the Camp Reserve for Botanic Gardens and
the extension of Barker street would be postponed till the Chief Com-
missioner visited the district. The council instructed the town clerk to
reply asking when the Commissioner intended to make his visit, as they
did not wish the matter postponed indefinitely. _ . , o
At the previous meeting the surveyor was instructed t 6 select a
suitable site for a railway station when the railway was built, and e
now recommended a spot near the proposed Barker street .bridge. To
bring it up to date the site he selected was probably on th high ground
on* the Greenhill street side of the railway arch. The council adopted the
recommendation, and ordered tracings of the site to be sent to the Govern-
or Gingell then moved, and Cr. Christophers seconded, that tenders
be invited, according to the surveyor’s pians and specifications, for the
erection of a market building. Crs. Froomes and Christophers urged a
postponement for a week, but were in a minority, as the majority con-
sidered the work could be done more cheaply now than after the railway
works commenced, and the motion was carried.
GAS COMPANY FORMED
A' memorial was then read from the ratepayers asking that a public
meeting be called to consider the question of lighting the town with gas,
and when it was read the council heard Mr. Praagst, of Kyneton gasworks.
He submitted an offer to erect and start gasworks in Castlemaine
if a local company in 1,500 shares of £lO each were formed. He estimated
the cost per street light at 1/- per night, roughly equal to one penny per
hour for a light equal to eight candles.
In answer to questions, he said the local supply of gum leaves was
abundant, but if that failed wood could be used. The gas produced was
of excellent quality, as was proved at Kyneton aud Ballarat, and the use
of wood would leave valuable products. (Coal was out of the question
that period, as the Australian coal fields had not been discovered, and:,
even if they had been the price of carriage would have been prohibitive).


The council agreed to call a public meeting in a week’s time, and the
outcome, after the usual delays, was the formation of the present company
in less than 12 months afterwards. ' "
The council then resumed, and the tender of Tullis, Roberts and Co., at
£1,330, was accepted for the formation of Hargraves street, south of Mostyn
street. . >-• <'
On July 6th, Cr. Hay resigned his seat. He was not sufficiently long in
the council to prove his worth, but during his stay was a cofiricillor of
useful order. He had the distinction of being the first Wesley Hill Repre-
sentative in the council,
This vacancy brought up the question of voting by ballot, which had
been adopted at Parliamentary elections. The Municipal Act made no
provision for other than open voting, and the question arose : even if it
were advisable would it be legal? Cr. Christophers was a vefiy strong
advocate of the ballot system, and succeeded in passing a by-law through
all stages in favor of it. • I
MINING IN STREETS U
The council at this time was fighting hard to get control over mining
operations in streets, as miners were rooting up the streets and roads to
a great extent. The trouble was that under the Act the council couldn't
say whether it had power to stop mining in streets or not. Frequent memo-
rials were sent to the Government on the subject, and the reply was that
the subject would be properly dealt with in the Amended Mines Act when
it was brought in. ' ■ V ni *>
That brought little comfort to councillors; whose roads might all
be destroyed before the Amended Mines Acts became law. This Subject
caused the council more worry and annoyance than any other subject, not
excepting the permanent levels, and it was a long time before it was definite-
ly settled.
The winter of 1858 was a severe one and complaints regarding the
state of the streets were loud, long and angry. Some were crying but for
flagging on the footpaths, apd others wanted the roads attended to, some
wanted proper sreet lighting and others wanted drainage. The position
was certainly bad. . ' '
A lot of street forming contracts were in progress; heaps of earth
had been banked up to form the roads, and no metal having been spread
the place was practically a quagmire. The council was urging' the con
tractors to expedite the works, and there were 75 men engaged by Mr.
Baker on the Mostyn and Hargraves streets section.
On July 13th. the council considered a petition urging that the stall-
holders in the market should be allowed to sell other articles than firbduce.
but the request was refused, arid Cr. Christophers drew attention to the
great amount of iSunday trading in the shops in the town. By this time
a start had been made with the erection of the market building.
On July 20th the financial position was discussed, owing to popular
criticism, especially on the part of Mr. Hitchcock. Councillors admitted
that the financial outlook was not bright, and same of them hinted that
it might be necessary to raise a loan. However, a committee consisting
of the chairman. Crs. Gingell and Johnston, was appointed to report on
the financial position of the council. This committee met next day, and a
special meeting of the council was held on 23rd July. The result was that
the strictest economy was urged.
The item of £4OO for printing and advertising for the year was
criticised, and it was decided to call for tenders for printing, etc., but
the two local offices were alive to their own interests and the tenders:


■were. exactly the same in every particular, and none was accepted, the
council deciding to go on as usual, but to keep a sharp watch over this
item of exjenditure.
The Colonial Bank had refused to grant an overdraft, except on the
personal guarantee of the councillors. This was very naturally refused,
and the account was transferred to the Bank of Victoria, who advanced
the necessary money.
On the 27th July, Mr. F. Poeppel wrote through his solicitor, claiming
Hi per sent, commission, o nthe work he should have had if his accepted
market plan had not been afterwards rejected by the council. He pointed
out that he had bees awarded the £5O premium by the County Court, and
the premium carried with it the work of supervision at 2 1 per cent, ac-
cording to the council’s advertisement. The council silently received
the letter (thoughts were too deep for words in such a connection), but
firmly-refused to entertain the claim. Mr. Poeppel,,however,, thought his
■claim a genuine one, and he at once issued a County Court summons.
Several ratepayers wrote to the same meeting threatening actions
at law owing to their property being damaged through the work now being
•carried out under the permanent levels scheme. Councillors felt uncom-
fortable, v as they had got into enough trouble over Poeppel’s-law case and
Baker’s contract, but they considered the damage complained of to be
very light, and decided to defend the actions.
On top of threats of litigation came a memorial on 3rd August, signed
by 105 ratepayers, expressing indignation at the bad state of the finances,
and asking that a public meeting be held to consider the question. This
was mournfully referred to the finance committee, who at the next meeting
recommended that the ratepayers be informed that the helf-yearly statement
would shortly be published, and the the finances were in a healthy con-
dition and there was no need for alarm, as the bank was now treating
the council well.
The ratepayers, however, were not in a mood to keep quiet, what
with roads, etc., in a frightful state and no funds to repair them and ex-
pensive law suits pending, they were giving the council a very bad 'time
the fiery ’Mr. HarroWer was a s fiery as ever, and Mr. Hitchcock, Mr.
■Chapman and others were criticising the doings of the council in a most
uncomplimentary manner
Barker street was not formed, and the residents there were hysteric-
ally claraorins? for something to be done, and at the meeting on 3rd August,
Cr. Christophers supported their request and strongly condemned former
councils for neglecting Barker and Forest streets.
With a view to improving the financial position of the council, Cr.
Johnston moved that the amout allowed for refreshments at elections be
restricted to £2. At one election, he said, at which Mr. Hitchcock presided,
the money so spent was £5O, and “this is the man who is raising the
bombast’ about the council’s finances.”
The council thouht £2 much too little and made it £4, but needless
to sal, this limit was more honored in the breach than the observance,
for there were always “special circumstances’’ at each election to increase
the amount. Cr. Johnston, in agreeing to the £4, said in his blunt, gruff
way, if that sum had been fixed some time ago there would have been no
smashing of memorials on a memorable occasion.
EARLY IDEAS ON DECENTRALISATION
Cr. Christophers, in a long speech, moved that the council take steps
for the establishment of a colonial mint, to be situated in Castlemaine,
as the most central of the goldfields. Foreign invasion, he said, was »ot


an improbability, and in that event two frigates might carry all the
gold in Melbourne, but it would take 20,000 men to march to Castlemaine.
Continuing, he said half the gold in the colony went through Castle-
maine, and one-fifth of the total was produced here. Cr. Gingell seconded
the motion, which was carried, but unfortunately the Government took
the risk of a visit from the two frigates and established .the mint in
Melbourne.
In reply to Cr. Gingell, the chairman said he would visit and inspect
the boarding houses in the town.
At the beginning of August, Maldon was proclaimed a municipality.
On August 10th the specifications for forming Barker street were approved
of, and the manager of the Bank of Victoria wa s appointed treasurer of
the council.
Mr. J. C. Goldsmith, who had leased the municipal weighbridge, but
was failing to keep to his agreement, had some time previously been warned
that he would be required to give up possession. At this meeting the chair-
man reported that he and the town clerk had waited on Mr. Goldsmith
and had demanded possession of the weighbridge, but ho had violently
and positively refused to do so. and steps had now been taken to eject
him,.
Some discussion then took place over the surveyor engaging in
private practice and employing an assistant, who was being paid by the
council. Councillors first of all forcibly condemned the surveyor for engag-
ing in private practice, but at a later stage it was found that there was
nothing in his agreement with the council to prevent him doing so. Coun-
cillors then promptly sacked the surveyor’s assistant.
The half-yearly report vas submitted on August 18th, and showed
rates received £1.016, Government grant £2,175, market dues £124/10/-.
Cr. Christophers thought the report exhibited evidence of extravagance, but
the chairman denied the charge, and said they were very much more
economical than Sandhurst.
Crs. Johnston and Paynter were not present at the meeting, and as
a special call had been made they were each fined 5/-.
Some discussion ensued as to whether there should be celebrations
at the laying of the foundation stone of the market building or on the
opening day, and eventually the latter was agreed upon, and a sub-com-
mittee was appointed, to carry out the arrangements. Cr. Christophers
during the debate said the market was too costly, and wanted to amend
the plans, but got no support.
Cr. Paynter was present at the meeting on August 24th and paid the
fine of 5/- imposed on hint; for being absent at the : previous meeting.
The gas company had just been formed, and wrote asking the council’s
co-operation in getting a piece of land (present site) put up for sale, and
their request was granted.
Cr. Christophers moved that the Government be asked to send up
an inspector to report on the permanent levels, but it met with strong
opposition from Cr. Paynter, who thought it better to go as they were
father than have another alteration made in the levels, and the motion
was defeated.
INVESTMENTS UNSUCCESSFUL
Cr. Christophers next moved that no council cheque be signed for an
account until such. account was passed by the council, but the motion
was defeated on the casting vote of the chairman.. In this matter, Crs.
Paynter and Bagshawe. who usually worked together, opposed the motion,
slating that as all money was banked and a cheque had to be drawn to
get it out of the bank, all cheques drawn would be shown in the bank book.


Things are done differently nowadays in the council.
In reply to a question, the town clerk astonished the council by saying
that W. B Adams and Co. had not yet paid any rent for the cattle yards,
and ho was ordered to make a demand at once, and if no money, was
forthcoming to enter into possession. • • '=
The council was not having much success with its investments, as
a Countv Court action had been commenced to eject Mr. Goldsmith from
the weighbridge, and no rent was coming in from the cattle yards, which
originally cost close on. 1,500. No wonder councillors were annoyed, and
no wonder the ratepayers were critical. „ _ .
During the last week in August the County Court sat. and Mr. Poeppel
■claimed his 21 per cent, commission on the work he would have got had
not his accepted plan been afterwards rejected by the council. His Honor
non-suited Mr. Poeppel, holding that the action should have been part
•of the previous action for the recovery of the £SO premium. A fortunate
■error for the council, ,
The case of James Izitt against the council for the £SO premium also
•came on, but Izitt was non-suited and ordered to pay costs.
Cr. Christophers at the meeting on August 31st. considered a fitting
way to open the new market buildings would be to hold a bazaar in aid
of the Mechanics’ Institute and the Benevolent Asylum, the latter, he
said, being an institution very necessary in Castlemaine, and would probably
be an established fact very soon if the bazaar project -was adopted. The
council decided to leave the matter of the official opening entirely in vhe
hands of the market committee.
This being disposed of, Cr. Matthews asked how the council had
regained possession of the cattle yards during the past week. The chairman
said that the council had bean put to no expense in the matter, as Mr.
Maguire had bought Adams and Co’s, interest in the cattle yards for. 10/6,
and he < the chairman) on behalf of the council, had re-bought it from Mr.
Maguire for £2O, which was much cheaper than if the yards had to be
taken by the council from Adams and Co. by legal process.
It was certainly a keen piece of business, and decidedly more affective
and less annoying than going to law, but it did not suit Cr. Matthews, who
let himself loose and blackguarded the cattle yards from Dan to Beersheeba,
saying it cost the council £3O to advertise for tenders, only £5 deposit had
been received, and now the interest of Adams and Co. had cost anothei
£2O. It was an awful .state of things, according to Cr. Matthews, and Cr.
Paynter, the originator of the cattle yards, looked on smiling. The yards
were then relet to Mr. John Orr at £IOO a year.
On September 7th. Cr. Gingell said that he and Dr. Preshaw had in-
spected the Chinese lodging houses in the town, and some of them were
very filthy in the extreme and the stench awful, some of them being unfit
for dog kennels. The chairman endorsed Cr. Gingell’s remarks, and the
•council”instructed the inspector to insist on an improvement.
The extension'of Barker street and the road from Camp Hill to the
Butcher’s Arms hotel were discussed and the Government was asked
tor a grant of £7,000 for road work generally.
At the meeting on September 14th. it was decided to grant the use
of the market when it was finished for a bazaar in aid of the Benevolent
Asylum.
A “HAPPY FAMILY”
Not much business of any importance was done at the meeting at
This period owing to want of funds, and it was apparent that councillors
had degenerated into something akin to the happy family, and it badly
wanted a Chapman or a Hitchcock to liven them up. The attendance of


councillors at meetings Wais aiso irregular.
On September 28th. Cr. Christophers moved that the Government be
asked to survey all Crown land in the .municipality and submit it for sale
in order to encourage settlement. In opposition to thi s it was pointed out
that the council had consistently advocated the endowment of municipalities
with all Crown land, and it would be stultifying itself by passing the
resolution. Cr. Christophers consented to withdraw it, but at subsequent
meetings he returned to the charge, but always unsuccessfully.
The gas company had been formed, but there were still some shares
to place, and Cr. Christophers on (September 28th. moved that the council
purchase up to 500 shares in the company in order to assist in establishing
gasworks. He said the profit in time might pay for the gas consumed by
the council.
Cr. Gingcll, who was not quite so sanguine as Cr. Christophers,
seconded the motion, but the opposition was so great that the motion was
withdrawn on the understanding that the council would take 100 shares
when it was financially strong enough to do so. A very non-committal and
■convenient understanding.
The health officer (Dr. Preshaw) was present at the meeting, and
denied the accuracy of the return of births, deaths, etc., submitted at a
previous .meeting by the deputy registrar. He also asked the council to
define big powers in reference to Chinese, but the council couldn’t do so,
and a letter was ordered to be sent to the Chief Medical Officer of the
'Central Board asking him to supply the information.
The health report for the first half of the year was read at the above
meeting,' and appears to have been the first of its kind that had come before
the council. It stated: “By the kind protection of the Almighty Providence,
this district has been preserved from any grea calamiy from disease since
the formation of the local board.’’
It then went on to say that the population of the municipality was
7,600, the births for the half-year 74, and deaths 72. The lodging houses, it
averred, were in fair condition, but many’of those occupied by Chinese
H ire bad.
The necessity for a better water supply was alluded to, also the fact
that the board had offered a premium of £lO for the best treatise on a
water supply, and it was awarded to J. Anderson.
The report goes on; “The board have no means of stating accurately
the climate, but would remark that in general it is variable. The hospital,
it went on. was doing good work, and at present there were over 100 sub-
scribers of £1 each, and the average number of patients was 50. As people
■came to the hospital from all parts, said the report, the mortality was
high and added to that of Castlemaine. there being no distinction made
In the deputy-registrar’s returns of deaths in the institution.”
Regarding the “treatise on the subject of obtaining a water .supply
for the towmship, the following brief summary of the methods advocated by
the various writers, especially in the light of our present knowledge is
interesting.
Eight treatises were received, opened, and examined, at a special meet-
ing of the council called for the purpose. Two of them were exculded because
they bore the names of the authors.
On the ballot the treatise bearing the motto, “Water that I may drink,”
was declared the winner, and the envelope being opened showed that Mr.
George Anderson. Forest Creek was the author. The clerk was instructed
to return their treatises to the other competitors, and a vote of thanks was
.accorded to them.


“MAIL” IS DUBIOUS
In its sub-leader of March 29th„ 1858, the “Mail” said. “The treatise
to which the council has awarded the prise i s very voluminous and contains
a lot of information', but does not very much advance the solution of the,
Question. The writer says that he has been intimately connected with
drainage and water supply engineering in Great Britain. The L fvant,
Fiance, Turkey and America, and concludes that his opinions will be
practicable and useful. So long a disquisition from so accomplished a man
must surely be cheap at £lO. The author dilates on the value of a sufficient
water rrupply and points to the ruin and desolation of the great cities
of the East consequent on their apparatus for the supply of water falling
into a state of inefficiency ... Mr. Anderson thinks the character of the
country around Castlemaine promises a good supply from rain as the mean
annual rainfall is 27.94 inches, and describes what was done in ancient and
modern times by means of embankments.
“He considers the impermeability of the soil in the district as highly
favorably to the adoption of the system of rain collecting, and describes
the subjacant rock as also favorable for the collection of water from " the
surface into reservoirs. Mr. Anderson does not consider that much addi-
tion to the water collected may be reckoned on from springs, and shows
very clearly that while on the one hand no great supply of water can be
reckoned on at all. the probability is that which may be obtained will be
too strongly impregnated with chemical impurities to be fit for domestic
use ....
"The essayist stresses the necessity of filtration from the catchment
reservoirs, to be constructed at the foot of the higher lands surrounding
the district, to the neighborhood of the town ....
“Drawings and minute descriptions are given of the Croton aqueduct
by which New York is supplied, and of the dam across the Schukyll which
supplies Philadelphia with water, and the Paisley water works are also
diagrammed and described. He also announces in a great many words
that should the water in the reservoirs require to be raised to a higher
level, steam power would be found to be particularly applicable. In conclu-
sion he recommends the establishment of a joint stock company to raise
the necessary funds for the undertaking. He thinks the project would be
eagerly taken up by the people, and would prove a highly remunerative
one. as besides the ordinary demand for public and domestic use, the supply
of water would be in great request by our mining population, and mills
and factories could be established on artificial water courses where every
inch of fall from the reservoirs to the lowest level could be rendered
available.” k .
“Mr. Anderson.” says the “Mail,” “has written a very long treatise;
he has collected together a great deal of useful information, but after the
perusal of his elaborate production, one feels that any feasible plan for
the supply of Castlemaine is as much ‘in nubilus’ as ever, and the cry of
‘Water that I may drink,’ which Mr. Anderson adopts as his motto, has no
prospect' of a prompt or satisfactory answer.”
MORE LOGICAL IDEAS
lii a subsequent article, the “Mail” said: The treatises rejected by the
council are all much more practicable than that on which conferred the
prize. The writers indicate, clearly what they think ought to be done, and
how it may be done. They go straight to their object, and do not stop
to unfold page after page from Encyclopedias and Mechanics’ Magazines,


and .to marshal a long an ay of useful figures of imposing appearance.
proposes to bring the required water from Mt. Alexander. A
reservoir would, in hie opinion, secure the water pure and uncontaminated
as it falls from the granite rocks. The elevation is sufficiently great vo raise
the water at its outflow as high as any building in Castlemaine. ‘‘J.D.”
indicates a course by which the pipes might be brought into the township
without much expense, but thinks it necessary that there should be a
small steam engine-to raise the water over one range which interposes
between the proposed site of the reservoir and the tows.
thinks that the Coliban river is “vastly preferable’’ to all
-other schemes which he has investigated as a source of water supply.
He would construct a reservoir at Taradale, or even as far back as Malens-
bury, so as to throw back about 200 or 300 acres of good soft water. The
levels, he considers, are favorable. The great pressure derived would admit
of the water being turned to a variety o; uses, and Castlemaine would have
an abundant supply at a moderate cost.
"No. 10” proposes to construct a reservoir “partly on the flat bordering
on the bank of Campbell’s Creek, and partly on the rocky rise adjacent
to the Sheriff’s bridge, which should collect the waters of both the creeks,
Forest and Campbell, and the water from the reservoir would be forced
by two six-horse cowered pumping engines into basins situated one on
Church Hill and the other on the hill behind Mr. Wilson’s house. From
these eminences the water could be distributed after being filtered through
a mixture of quartz, sand, gravel, etc., into the basins thence through
pipes into the town. The cost of this is estimated at only £BOO.
The proposal of Captain Trewartha, notwithstanding the wide ex-
perience on which he founds his opinion, is of a character to which we
cannot subscribe. It is by no means certain that the shafts he proposes
to sink would furnish the quantity of water needed, and all the information
we possess as to the character of the water obtained leads us to expect
that it would be for all domestic purposes absolutely useless.
“Plenty” proposes to excavate and clean out the basin formed naturally
on the flat just above Aberdeen’s Ford,” Forest Creek, now spanned by
the bridge known as Patterson’s, and sink in the centre a shaft to aid the
supply of water, and to enclose the reservoir with a strong embankment of
great thickness. (Jn the top of the adjacent ironstone hill he would form
an immense tank by excavation into which the water would be lifted from
below, cither by a windmill or a steam engine. From this tank the water
would be supplied to the town through pipes. He estimates the cost at
£6,C00.
“We,” continues the “Mail” article, “are very unwilling to accept the
idea that Castlemaine can be supplied with no better water than the
brackish compound with which we are familiar in the creeks and most of
the wells; and yet nothing better is offered to us, and at a very high price,
too. by some of the competitors. The proposal to bring a supply from the
Coliban is the boldest and most original of all, and if it could be accomplished
for any available sum would be a truly magnificent work, and would prove
an incalculable benefit to the whole district.”
“Deltas” plan is less ambitious. We commend it to our readers for
attention as a practical and feasible one. Should the writer’s estimate
prove correct, his paper indicates a simple, effectual and economical plan
of obtaining a pure supply of the best water. This paper gives definiteness
to the vague generalities of Mr. Anderson, and is preferable to No. 10 and
others, inasmuch as the water supplied will be pure rain water, and not so
strongly impregnated with minerals as the water of the creek is.
“I propose that Pennyweight and Moonlight Flats and the surroend


inj catchment basins should be reserved for water supply, embracing an
area of about four square miles; that a reservoir should be placed at or
near the south-west corner of Pennyweight Flat, capable of containing
30 million gallons of water. From this reservoir water should be conducted
by pipes to large tanks opposite the market place. So first 1 propose that
the inhabitants should be supplied from these tanks by water carts, but
ultimately by piping along the street. The area requisite for such a reser-
voir would be about 15 acres of a depth of not less than eight feet, or 30
acres of a depth of not less than four feet. The probable cost tfo this plan
I estimate, would not exceed £15,000.
“The advantages it offers are.—l. An abundant supply of water; 2.
Should a larger supply be found requisite, the reservoir and catchment
area are both capable of being enlarged; 3. The water in the locality is-
well known to be the purest in the district, and by reserving the full water-
shed, it could be kept free from all deleterious matter; 4. An abundant
surplus would be available for the supply of machines, sluice heads, etc.;
5. A revenue of two thousand, three hundred pounds, I have calculated,
would be derivable annually, and will increase with the population; 6. A
constant and abundant supply will always be available in case of fire: 7.
Water carts should be charged 6d. per load, and allowed to retail it at
prices varying according to distances, from 1/6 to 3/- per load; 8. As a
further advantage in case of fire, cart sheds should be erected at the water
tanks, under which it should be compulsory for all carts’ plying for hire
to be left full every night, I remain, gentleman, your most obedient
servant, ‘Delta’,”
On October sth. the Gas Company wrote stating that 100 shares had
been allotted to the council, and intimating that the deposit must be paid
within 14 days. The council decided to interview the bank regarding the-
necessary cash, but the interview was not very satisfactory, as The deposit
was not paid and the council didn’t get the shares.
There were many complaints at the nuisance caused by circuses on
Market Square, some of which were here for weeks, and the councL
decided to charge each circus £25 per week for the use of the reserve, the
shrewd and calculating Cr. Gingall stating that two weeks’ rent would
purchase a clock for the market.
The tender of John Gardner at £lOO was accepted for the lease of
the weighbridge for 12 months.
OPENING OF MARKET
The council then resolved to spend £l5 on the opening of the new
market on the following Saturday, and made the necessary arrangements
for the ceremony, which, owing to financial considerations, was not to be
of an imposing nature.
The new market, since demolished, consisted of two plain brick
buildings, about the same size as the present market. They were known as
the eastrn which facd Hargraves street, and the Western with entrance
facing Barker street. The Eastern occupied part of the site of the High
School playground and the Western part of Victory Park, at the rear of
the Soldiers’ Memorial building.
Saturday, 9th. October, 1858, was a bitterly cold day, with a strong
wind blowing, and at 9 a.m., wnen the opening ceremony took place at
Castlemaine s first market buildings, it was particularly raw and miserable.
The public had been invited, and as they were early risers in those days,
despite late nights, there was a fair attendance.
At 9 o’clock the councillors and officers .met at the council chamber
and, followed by the crowd, marched to the market, which was just about
finished. They entered the eastern building, marched through it, and into-


the western, and on arriving at the end of that one, a halt was cried, and
the chairman, Cr. Froomes (who, by the way, had laid the foundation stones
without much ceremony), addressed those present, but as the piercing
wind was whizzing through the building he cut his remarks short and the
ceremony was ended.
The councillors and a number of prominent citizens then adjourned
to the Royal hotel, where every effort was made for the next hour or so
to cocnteract the effects of the cold. There were no fittings in the market®
that day, nor were there any doors the doors were an afterthought.
The collector (Mr. Davis) had been in attendance at the markets for
two days prior to the opening ceremony, and had let 48 out of the 50 stalls
at 4/- per week each.
The Port Curtis (S.A.) rush w'as on at that time, and a few days after
the markets were opened one coach took 39 persons from Castle,
which was claimed to be the record human freight by any vehicle leaving
this town. They were all bound for Port Curtis.
On October 12 Mr. Pearson Thompson asked the council to have Church
Hill in Mostyn street west cut down so that vehicular traffic would be-
possible between Barker street and Kennedy street, but councillors did
not love Mr. Thompson and the matter was deferred.
The tender of Messrs. Brown and Wheeler at £26/10- for the purchase
and removal of the old market shod, was accepted, and then the surveyor
was instructed to report on all works in progress and all works necessary
during the next six months.
Mr. Baker, the contractor for Hargraves and Mostyn streets, wrote-
complainis/T of the, loss of time occasioned by the recent stoppage of his
contract, and asking for compensation, and it was decided to give the
matter careful consideration in committee.
The public works committee recommended that the formation of the
road from Camp Hill to the Butcher’s Arms hotel, and the fixing of tanks
at the markets, stand over till next year owing to shortage of funds, and
the recommendation was adopted.
At the meeting on October 20th., Cr. Christophers moved that the
Government be asked to grant mining leases as companies would not
erect machinery without security of tenure. The chairman, in seconding
the motion, said it was ruinous to delay the system any longer. The Govern-
ment in its own time granted leases to mining companies.
The council then considered the Government estimates, which had
recently been announced. The sum provided under the headings of ‘'Castle-
maine district” was £12,950, which included £2,000 for a bridge at Caris-
brook. The council considered the amount allotted to this district much too
low, and reckoned Castlemaine had been scurvily treated, as no mention
was made of straightening Forest Creek or of building a bridge at the
southern extension of Barker street.
Cr. Christophers moved that a deputation consisting of the chairman,
Crs. Johnston and Christophers wait on the president of the Board of Land
and Works for the purpose of bringing under his notice the inadequacy
of the sum provided for this district The motion was carried.
At this meeting the tender of E. W. Cole (of Melbourne Book Arcade
fame) was accepted at £2OO for lighting the street lamps for six months. The
previous contractor, G. Hunter, tendered at £220. The council, before ad-
journing, decided not to pay any compensation to Mr. Baker for loss of
time on his contract, and Mr. Baker, on hearing this, made straight for
his lawyer.
On November 2nd., Mr. Baker, acting on advice, offered to submit
his claim to arbitration, but this was also refused. There had been


applications to the council for permission to sell summer drinks in the
markets, but as such a course would be in opposition to the by-law the
requests’ v - erc refused. In discussing the matter the blunt spoken Cr.
Johnston said they didn’t want to turn the markets into a ginger beer
shop, but he had heard that nobblers were also sold there.
The surveyor reported that, in company with the district surveyor,
he had surveyed three acres of land to the north of the hospital reserve
as a reserve for a benevolent asylum.
There were four tenders for painting the lamp losts in the municipa-
lity, and that of E. W. Cole at £ls was accepted.
CONSTRUCTION OF RAILWAY
On November 9th. a deputation from Kyneton waited on the council
and asked for assistance in the matter of the' proposed railway. The deputa-
tion pointed out that the surveyed line left ’Kyneton two miles away, whereas
a route could be had at no extra cost which would bring the line into
Kyneton. They stated that there was £500,000 capital invested in buildings
in Kyneton, which would be lost if the present railway route were not
altered.
The council, remembering that Kyneton had helped Castlemaine to
fight against the Harcourt route, decided to actively support the deputation,
and a letter was despatched to the members for the district on the subject.
On the motion of Crs. Gingell and Christophers, it was decided to
request the Government to proclaim the Camp as a reserve for the use
of the township, also four allotments at Wattle Flat for a similar purpose.
Cr. Gingell had all along been fighting to get the Camp reserved for the
people, whether from hatred of the officials or love of the people it would
be difficult to say. The fight was a long one, as the Carnpites bitterly
opposed that sacred ground being given over to the common people, and
having the ear of the Government they held a strong advantage.
Tho only business of any importance at the meeting on November 16th.
was in reference to the new courthouse, which was now ready for occupa-
tion, but Captain Harrison, P.M., refused to conduct business there until
some tables and a washstand had been supplied. The council condemned
Captain Harrison, and decided to write to the Attorney-General, asking
that business should be conducted in the new court-house without delay.
It was early in the following year, however, before the courts were held
there.
Captain Harrison and the other officers were all along opposed to
the court-house being removed from the Camp, and did everything in
their power to block it. At this period, it may be stated, the mining in
streets trouble was at its greatest, and the council tried every possible
way to regulate it.
On Sovember 23rd. the council decided to ask the Government to send
officers to the district to report on the best means of giving the Town
an adequate supply of water. At the request of Dr. Preshaw, councillors,
in the previous week, visited Eureka and Mount Alexander, where it
was stated good supplies could be obtained, but councillors wisely leaned
to the Cobban system. There was no thought at that period of supplying
.Bendigo from the Coliban, and of course, Castlemaine had to fight alone
for it, as Bendigo had enough to do to look after its own water supply.
Cn December 7th., the collector reported that he had collected £1,570
19/-, leaving £409/11/6 still due for rates. At the same meeting the tender
of John Stewart at £33 was accepted for makintr and fixing open-work
doors in the markets.


SUCCESSFUL BAZAAR
On December 14th. a bazaar in aid of the proposed new Benevolent
Asylum was held in the new market buildings, and netted £l,OOO.
Interested as to how this bazaar was so successful financially, I
turned up the ‘‘Mail” of that time, and found the following:— ‘‘December
17th.. 1858.—-Of all the events of the past year, the opening of the Benevo-
lent Asylum bazaar deserves the ‘pas,’ not only on the principle that the
ladies are always entitled to precedence but because the enterprise in Itself,
both in its immediate and permanent results, promises to be a brilliant
success. No one knows what women can accomplish when they work with
a will, and when they are called upon to exert themselves for the relief
of suffering or the supply of want, there is no degree of toil they will net
welcome, and no exertions they will not rejoice in.
‘ Of personal fatigue and petty but aggravating annoyances they seem
to have no consciousness. We do not suppose that every lady in the bazaar
in coaxing a gentleman into the purchase of a walking stick or a bottle
of perfume had an immediate consciousness of the grandeur and beauty
of the object for which she was exerting herself, and bringing into play
all the fascinations of her sex, but it was with a clear perception of it that
her task was undertaken, and notwithstanding discouragements and diffi-
culties, nobly has it been persevered in.
The bazaar, so far as it has gone, has surpassed the most sanguine
expectations of its promoters. On the day preceding its opening anyone
who said it would clear £3OO would be regarded as an enthusiast. !»
another column it will be seen that £350 was drawn the first day. No one
will be surprised, after the lirst day’s success, to find that the Castlemaine
ladies realise £1,000; and if they do, Castlemaine people may hold up their
heads anywhere, and say ‘look at what our ladies did.’
“Apart from the ultimate benefit of the contributions to the asylum,
which will flow in a continuous stream for generations, and the value of
which cannot be estimated by arithmetic, there is great position and imme-
diate advantage gained from such a combination and universal reunion.
In another column appears the names of the ladies who have undertaken
the more irksome part of the task, which, after all its toil, we are con-
vinced they will And its own sufficing reward. No one who has passed
through the bazaar, however he may have been ‘victimised,’ can forget
the gaiety, good humor and vivacity manifested by the ladies, and reflected
in the pleasant and happy faces of their visitors.
“Such an event is calculated to bring the different classes and circles
of our community more closely together and make them better understand
each other. This is ali that is needed to the increase of their mutual
esteem, affection and confidence. Under the influences of the bright glances
which fall on one from every stall and the persuasive accents which reach
him at every step, coldness is thawed, and estrangement and suspicion
dissipated, and all feel that they are indeed one community in their com-
munity of interest in this great and good object which, if successful, will
enable the committee to procure what has long been wanted here a
benevolent asylum.
•The opening of the bazaar was signalised by some formality. The
chairman of the council. Captain Bull, the committee of the bazaar, and
other gentlemen assembled in the Eastern Market house, and then walked
in procession to the western division, on entering which they were received
with cheers, and the strains from a local amateur brass band, playing
National Anthem. Having formed along the avenue dividing the stalls,
the chairman of the council. W. Proomes, esq., addressed the ladies who-


had charge of the stalls, and the public generally, in a neat little speech,
thanking the former for the generous manner in which they had come
forward in support of the benevolent enterprise, and expressing a hope' that
the latter wocld evince equal liberality. He then declared the bazaar open.
“The stalls are decorated with extreme taste and ingenuity, and the
: articles oxnosed for sale include every description of the useful and or nan. en
• tal. There is also a 'post office’ and a veritable 'gypsy’ has a cave set apart
'.in which the mystic lore of the Zingari is unfolded to all who are anxious
to learn the secret of futurity. We can not, however, refrain from especially
noticing Dr. Preshaw's museum, arid the ‘menagerie* which has been
chiefly furnished by Mr. Lawlor. The former includes a very valuable
geological collection, and specimens of national history and art, all the pro-
duct o" this district Tnc collection is well worth a visit. Mr. Lawler's
: me.nagerie comprises a couple of kangaroos, - two native bears, a wombat,
several opossums, flying squirrels, porcupines, a native companion, a young
emu, eagles, curlews, native cats, a laughing jackass, a mopoke and other
living illustrations of the zoology of the district of Castlemaine. • Both
those stalls are extremely interesting, and no one will begrudge the small
charge made for inspecting them.
“Subjoined are the names of the occupiers of the stalls, in their
order.— 27, Books and toys, Mrs. Clowes. Miss Hoxman and Miss Mowfrey;
29-31, general fancy goods. Mrs. Richards. Mrs. Saint, Mrs. Living and
Miss Richards; 33, printing, press, proprietors of ‘Miners’ Right’ and ’Cas-
tlemaine Advertiser’; 35, fancy goods, Mrs. Wilson and Mrs. Holmes; £7,
39, 41. Miss E. Harper and Miss Irons; 43, 45, 49, general fancy goods and
furniture, Mrs. Bull, Mrs. Harrison, Miss Heron, Miss Farron and Miss
Abbott; 49, 51, museum, Dr. Preshaw and Mr. Mathers; 50, 52, menagerie,
Mrs. Lawlor and Mr. Quin; 48, 46, furniture and fancy goods, Mrs. Lowe,
Airs. Curie, Airs. Taylor, Airs. Larnach. Airs. Wigton, Aliss MacMacking
and Mias Curie; gipsy tent, Airs. Taylor and Aliss Blevin; 42, fancy and
plated goods. Airs. Batey, Aliss Binns and Aliss Kibble; 42, fruit; 38, post
office; 36 fancy goods. Airs. Robinson, Aliss Harper, Aliss E. Day, Miss
Butterworth, Mrs. Preshaw, Airs. Blackwell and Aliss Wheeler; 34, fancy
goods, Mrs. Uphill, Airs. Burnet and Airs. Price; 32, 30, toys, Airs. Alien
and Aliss Allen; fancy goods, Aliss Alein and Aliss Hepburn.
“Yesterday’s receipts amounted to £350. This sum astonished eyen
the most sanguine supporters of the project. ‘Ah,’ they said, Tt is the
first day, and everybody who meant to be has come while they thought
everything would be fresh, and the bazaar would present its most agree-
able aspect.’ The result of Wednesday’s sale was as satisfactory as that
•of the opening day, when it is considered that there was no charm of
novelty to contribute to its success. The result was £272. The receipt*
for the third day was £220. To-day the bazaar will be closed and the ladies
will enjoy a much needed period of repose. On Saturday the bazaar, re-
plenished and re-ornamented,was re-opened. The takings amounted to £333.
making a total of £1145. The success of the project has been generally
regarded with delighted surprise.
“Some conversation has arisen as to the manner in which the money
thus raised, together with the prospective grant of £2,000 should be expended.
One proposal is to erect on the ground contiguous to the present hospital,
•a new building to be used as a hospital and to convert the present hospital
Into the asylum contemplated. The matter deserves serious consideration.
If the hospital would make a good asylum, and a better hospital could b**
erected, the course proposed should undoubtedly be taken,”
The council met on the same day that the bazaars was opened, and it
was announced that Air Tzitr, “Economicus Usus,” whose County Court


claim against the council for the £5O premium had been non-suited with
costs, had cleared out without paying the costs. The chairman also stated
that Messrs Paynter and Tomkin had applied to the council for the coats.
The council refused to pay, as it was known that: Izitt was with friends
at Prahan and should be made to pay. Izitt eventually pand.
On December 21st the surveyor reported that better metal than quartz
could be obtained from Bald Hill at a total cost of 22/6 per yard. The
council referred the matter to the public works committee, who ’inter
bh decided to visit the place and report to the council.
The chairman then said that the municipal water casks were falling
to pieces, and the water in them was in an offensive state and a nuisance.
After discussion it was agreed to sell the casks, and as a precaution in
time of fire it was resolved to give the first waterman at a fire £3, the
second £2, and the third *l. and the others a fair sum. The fire brigade
supplemented this by giving the first waterman £2 and the second £l-
- the end of the year, Robert O’Hara Burke arrived here from the
Ovens district and entered on his duties as Superintendent of Police.
YEAR 1859
On January nth., some residents of Hunter street wrote to the council
stating that the population in that part of the town was increasing, and
■owing to insufficient police protection robberies were of nightly occurrence.
Councillors each related tales of robberies which had come under their
notice, and decided to request Superintendent Burke to provide more police
protection, and he replied that ho would do so.
A letter was then read from Hastie and Co., offering to bore an arte-
sian water supply in Market Square or any other place the council might
••determine the cost to be £8 for the first 30 ft., £lO for the second 30ft.,
£l5 for the third, and £5 fer every 30 ft. up to 200 ft. This opened UP a
new phase of the water supply question, and the council promptly accepted
the offer, the boring to be done in the Market reserve.
Hastie and Co. soon got to work, and in the following March reported
that they had reach the stipulated depth, the total being 202 ft. 4in., tab
there was no sign of water. The council decided to go no farther in the
matter hut did as they should have done in the first instance; they wrote
to the Government Geologist, stating the facts, and he replied that there
was not the slightest chance of an artesian supply at any depth in Castle-
maine. That shattered all the fond hopes of an artesian water supply
At the same meeting (January 11) the surveyor reported in favor of
the Mount Alexander water scheme, as the Ooliban scheme would cost
£lOO,OOO, which the council could not afford. Cr. Froomes, however, thought
they might yet succeed in getting the latter scheme, and he moved that
Mr. W. B. Hull, railway engineer, etc., be asked to supply the council
with the levels from the Malmsbury viaduct to Castlemainc, and his motion
was carried.
One of the several wells for domestic use was near the Sheriff’s bridge,
and in reply to the council, Captain Bull said the pump had been damaged
by the public, and in addition the shaft sinking on the Camp had reduced
the water in the well. The council resolved to ask Captain Bull to leave
a sufficiently large aperture for people in the neighborhood to draw water
from the well, as at present it had been closed against the public by his
•order.
Cr. Paynter said the well was public property and should not be
reserved for the Camp officials. The other councillors were somewhat silent,
«s the old feeling still lingered that it was rank treason to criticise any
=acts of the Camp aristocrats. To this request Captain Bull replied that


so long as there was sufficieent water in the well for the Camp officials and
the prisoners in the gaol, the public could have the balance, and there the:
rested.
.. This meeting brought the third year of the council's existence to an
end. Three years is the period each councilloi now serves before again
facing the ratepayers; in fact, each councillor is elected for three years.
At the time we speak of it was also the longest term a councillor could
serve.
Those who have followed the fortunes of the infant council will agree
that a vast amount of useful work wa? done considering that the town-
was practically in a state of nature -when the council was formed. The
change in the appearance of the town was great but it was hardly co-
full of change as the personnel of the council and staff. Five town clerks-
and three surveyors had held office.
There had been sixteen elections; nowadays we are lucky if we get
three contested elections in three years. Not one of the original councillors
was in the council at the end of the three years. Altogether 22 separate
individuals had sat at the council table, and some of these had been elected'
twice and were out again. In no case had a candidate the privilege of a
walkover, and strange as it may seem, no retiring councillor seeking re-
election was defeated. One chairman had ruled during the first year, three
in the second year, and two in the third year.
There were five town clerics and three surveyors in the first three
years. Ic is beyond doubt that no three years in the council’s history
has been so full of change, so full of incident, so full of public interest,
30 .full of work, so full of stirring and sometimes discreditable scenes, or
so full of elections as the first term.
The annual election took place on 21st. January, and it'was the first
occasion in the council’s history that the ballot was used, and It has con-
tinued up to the present day. The retiring councillors were Crs. Froomes,.
Christophers and Matthews. The two first-named were again in the field,,
but Mr. Matthews was satisfied with his few months of honor and retired
into private life.
The nomination proceedings were at the Mechanics’ Institute, and
Cr. Johnston acted as returning officer, the chairman being one of the
candidates. There was a good attendance, and as usual some preliminary
wrangling occurred; some questioning the legality of any one but the
actual chairman of the council acting as returning officer. When this was
disposed of, and after Cr. Johnston ruled that candidates could be nomi-
nated in their absence, nominations were invited.
There was a pause of some duration, during which Anthony was
causing the usual merriment by his remarks. At length Mr. Maguire
nominated Mr. Jas. C. Goldsmith, of Goldsmith's Hotel, and of weighbridge
fame. Anthony promptly seconded the nomination. There was another
fair size pause.
Mr. Hitchcock then stepped forward and said he could have got a
proposer and seconder, but the Act recently passed allowed a ratepayer
to nominate himself, and he relied on his merits for election. He then went
into current topics, and his policy may prove interesting in a comparison
with oresent day candidates’ speeches.
A WIDE POLICY
, • He said he would advocate municipal reform; support the creek im-
provements. which lie claimed to have originated; would endeavor to secure
local water works and local representative justices; was in favor of a special
constabulary under the control of the municipality; simple registration-


-of deeds and a local insolvency jurisdiction; improvements in the accom-
modation of prisoners committed for officer within the municipality.
Hp was in favor of changing the hour of the council meeting to 6 p.m.,
as the presence of ratepayers was a check upon unnecessary expenditure.
He considered the expenses of managing the municipality could be reduced
to £7OO a year, and he would advocate the distribution of the mun>elp*l
i•avenue over the various localities in proportion to the amount c^tributed
by each. In conclusion he said ho would make a strict investigation into
the accounts, and would especially looks at the sundries. Mr. Moms
seconded Mr. Hitchcock’s nomination, ..
The fiery Mr. Harrower, with a very grave face, proposed Mr. P ani
Wallace, and the nomination was seconded by Dr. Montgomery.
Baker and Wilson proposed Mr. Froomes; Messrs Saint and
(proposed Mr. Christophers, and Mr. Eutterworth was proposed by l&r. W.
W. Wilson and a ratepayer whose name is not known. The nommaao -
txeln ” closed Messrs Harrower and Finnic wore elected scrutineers.
'"The candidates addressed the gathering, and in reply to a question
Mr Froomes said he would not support less than a shilling rate, and would
tax the Government officials on the Camp, who should pay for improvements
as well as anyone else. What a terrible revolutionary, this Mr Froomes
A few short years ago his life would have been made unbearable if h*
had uttered *uch awful sentiments regarding the Camp officials.
The show of hands was; Hitchcock 41, Froomes 33, Goidemitn 37,
•Christophers 14, Wallace 10, Eutterworth 1. A poll was demanded and the
•election took place at the council chambers next day. The ballot system
was popular and worked well. The only drawback was that it took mueb
longer than the old system to arrive at the result, and it was about 6
■o’clock when Cr. Johnston arrived at the Mechanics’ Institute and declared
the result to be; Froomes 197. Christophers 146, Wallace 105, Hitchcock
101, Goldsmith 46. Eutterworth 41. The three first-named were declared
Mr. Hitchcock, who for the second time had to thank hie friends
for his defeat, in returning thanks showed no feeling, but congratulated
the electors on the success of the ballot system, which he said w r as a great
progressive step. It was his last appearance as a candidate, and we will
meet him no more. Mr. Wallace, the new councillor, was a young man, an
auctioneer, and very popular. . , ,
At \he next meeting (January 25th.) Cr, Froomes was re-elected
■chairman without opposition. Captain Harrison, the P.M wrote to the
effect that the new court house would be opened on the 27th., and aftei
growling at the Captain’s cussedness in preventing it being opened earlier.
the council received the letter. .
A lengthy discussion followed on an application from the Wesleyan
Church for the use of the market on one night for the purpose of nolding
■ a soiree (we call it tea and public meeting now). Cr. Paynter strongly
■opposed the granting of such applications, contending that the market
should be kept for its leglmate purpose. Several councillors thougnt they
should grant the application and charge a very stiff fee. Cr. Glngell, the
ex-publican, and a shrewd, calculating man of the world, championed
the cause of the Wesleyans and fought hard to get the application granted
without a fee, and was at last successful.
THE CASTLEMAINE GAS WORKS
Mr. Downe, secretary of the Gas: Co., wrote inviting the cuairman
and councillors to be present next day at the laying of the foundation
stone of their building, and it was decided to accept the invjtatnor,-


Wednesday, 26th. January, 1H59, was the day appointed for laying
the ‘oundation stone of these works, but the weather proved very wet and
the ceremony had to be postponed. In the afternoon, however, the event
was celebrated by anticipation with a dinner at the Cumberland hotel, at
which about 60 persons assembled, including- the workmen, the directors
and some members of the council. The usual toasts were drunk, including
“Prosperity to the Gas Co.”
This ceremony was performed on Thursday. Several members of the
town council, of the directorate of the company, and also a numerous
body of townspeople, including a few ladies, were present on the ground,
and the weather proved highly auspicious. About 1 o’clock, the company
having been assembled, and the workmen being in attendance, Mr. Froomes
arrived and was received with general cheering. He then stepped down
into the excavatiort and deposited in a hole beneath the stone a bottle
containing the following description:— “Castlemaine Gas Works. This
stone was laid by W. Froomes, Esq., chairman of the Municipal Council
of Castlemaine on Thursday, January 37th, 1859. Directors of the company:
R. H Butterworth, chairman; W. B. Collyns, Geo. Isaacs, C. A. Smith, F.
Taylor, W. J. Uphill; consulting engineer, Alex K Smith; engineer and
secretary. W. B. Downe; solicitor, W. W. Wilson; contractors, Geo. White
and Co.”
The stone, a fine massive block, was then lowered into its place, and
Mr. Froomes proceeded dexteriously to apply the mortar; he then used
the level in duo fashion, and finally striking the stone with a mallet at
each corner, declared it “well and truly laid.” amidst the loud acclamations
of the spectators.
Mr. Froomes then addressed the assemblage: “Ladies and “gentlemen,
it was with great pleasure that I received an invitation from the directors
of the Castlemaine Gas Wonts to perform the ceremony of laying this
foundation stone, affording as it does to the whole colony a proof of the
rapid progress which Castlemaine is making. The very same elements
the spirit of British commerce and of British enterprise, which has caused
this work to be undertaken, arc those that have cleared the forests, raised
from the bowels of the earth treasures which are enriching ourselves and
the world, and making to bloom with cornfields, valleys which a short
time ago were trodden only by the black men. I congratulate you on the
tact that Castlemaine, in this particular enterprise has actually surpassed
Geelong and all the other goldfield towns except Ballarat. They yet have
no gas is Geelong, and I have heard it said that pipes were about to be
laid down from Ballarat in order to enlighten the poor darkened Geelongese.
(Laughter). I do not know how far the directors of this company may be
led in .he spirit of enterprise to extend their operations, but of this I
am certain, that to what extent soever they may go, you will this day ioin
with me in wishing them success. (Cheers).
We now have through their enterprise, got a prospect of obtaining
what we much needed, good gas lamps instead of poor oil ones, which can
never be made to give an efficient light to a town. A good gas lamp, it has
been said, is as much protection in a street as a policeman. (Hear, hear,
and a laugh). The street lamp is an institution which the burglar dreads
m ract, he likes the dark and loves the light not at all. (Laughter).
rom the energetic manner in which these works have been undertaken
and prosecuted by the directors, we may draw a favorable omen of the
uture. success dt the company a success' which must be hoped for bv
ail who desire the improved value of property in the town, a result sure
vi aCCOm f. hshed by works of this nature. The facility afforded by them
a operations m trade, combining utility with economy are certain, I


repeat, to increase the value of property in this neighborhood (Hear), i
cannot conclude without expressing the hope that the amicable feeling
the ceremonial concluded.
which now exists between the men and the contractors will continue,
and now I ask you to end the proceedings by giving three cheers for the
Casffemaine Gas Company.” The request was heartily complied with and
Cr. Christophers alluded to what he termed the villainous state of
the toads,.and moved that the Government be memorialised for fIO.OOO to
effect improvements, but the Government refused to accede to the modest
reqeeat.
On February Ist on the motion of Cr. Bagshawe, all outward corres-
pondence was ordered to be read at each council meeting, and the system
ha.# obtained ever since.
Cr. Froames alluded to the useless expenditure involved in the em-
ployment of a messenger at the town hall, and on his motion the messen-
ger's services were dispensed with and a married couple were ordered to
be engaged, the man to be the council laborer and the woman to look after
the town hall.
The question of procuring and breaking blue metal was then argued
out. and eventually a sub-committee was appointed to select a municipal
quarry site, and it was resolved, on the motion of Cr. Proome.s, to ask
.Deputy Sheriff Colies if prisoners could be employed breaking metal for
the council.
Cr. Paynter then moved that the Government be requested to provide
a police van to carry prisoners from the gaol to the court house and back,
but despite repeated applications the Government refused, and Castlemaine
had to do without a “Black Maria.”
WRIT AGAINST COUNCIL
On February Bth. Mr. Baker the contractor for forming Mostyn and
Hargraves streets, served a writ o the council claiming f175/15/5 damages
for . breach of contract caused by the council altering the specifications and
stopping the contract. The council began to be sorry it didn’t agree to Mr.
Baker’s offer of arbitration, but decided to defend the action, and to engage
the best legal talent in Melbourne. Cr. Paynter said nothing, hut when Mr.
Baker’s claim for compensation came first before the council he strongly
advised that legal opinion be obtained before coming to a decision, but,
headed by the obdurate Cr. Johnston, the council refused to take advice
or to pay compensation, hence the uncomfortable looking writ. It was the
following November before the case came off.
After this unpleasant business had been disposed of for the time
being, Cr. Christophers succeeded in getting a system of small committees
appointed, and it remained in existence for many years and proved satis-
factory.
The site for the railway station was a burning question at that time,
as it was considered it would tend to greatly increase the price of land
in the vicinity, .consequently landholders in each locality were advocating
a different site. The council at this meeting ordered a letter to be sent
to the Government asking that a site , for the railway station be not lixfid
without the council being first consulted.
The sludge question was also becoming daily more prominent as the
creeks were fast silting up, and the council wrote to the Chief Secretary
asking that a Sludge Commission be appointed for this district as the
watercourses were being silted up. The Chief Secretary, however, replied
thai there was no necessity for the appointment of a Commission, but he
would send an engineer to report.


Mr. Farran, secretary of the committee appointed for the purpose
of establishing a corn exchange, wrote to the meeting on April 12th„ asking
for a grant of £lOO, to be given as bonuses for the better encouragement
of farmers and others to bring grain and other products to Castlemaine
market for sale. Crs. Johnston and Paynter gave the application strong
support, and it was granted. Cr. Wallace opposed it, as he thought a corn
market premature, and he was right, for the project came to nothing.
The council then accepted the tender of Costig and Lahy at 13/ per
yard for the supply of 500 yards of rubble stone, and ordered the town
clerk to invite applications from persons willing to pay half cost of flagging
the footpaths in front of their premises.
The Roads and Bridges Office wrote to the meeting on April 19th.
approving- of the council’s plans for the extension of Barker street, south
from Forest street, but intimated that they could not include the cost of
cutting the creek in the £3.000 voted for the extension. The council didn’t
like the look of things so far as cutting was concerned, and Cr. Johnston
said it was a most stupid arrangement.
The Mechanics’ Institute Committee, which was in a chronic state
•of hard-upness .applied for another grant, this time £l5O, and it was
referred to the Finance Committee for slaughter.
The tender of J. H. Lawior at £4,158 was accepted for forming, chan-
nelling and kerbing Barker street, from Forest street to Doveton street,
and he w-as ordered to get to work as soon as possible. The fact that Moetyn
Hargraves, Forest and the lower part of Urquhart streets had been formed
before Barker street points to the fact that Barker street was not by any
means the principal street in the town. The main part of the town then
was in Mostyn and Hargraves streets.
Cr. Bagshawe, like several councillors before him, frequently attempted
to get the Market Reserve fenced, and at this meeting the council agreed
to have plans and specifications prepared. It also decided to advertise
in the local and Melbourne papers for a fireproof safe for the council’s
office, and in the Melbourne and Sydney papers for a lire engine.
On April 26th. Cr. Christophers sent in his resignation, saying he
couldn’t consent to any longer join in the council’s deliberations owing to
the manner in which business w-as conducted; no time was lost in accepting
the resignation. Cr. Christophers was undoubtedly one of the best of the
early councillors. He was earnest and capable, and was imbued with a very
sincere desire to advance the interests of the town. Few councillors have
been so attentive to their duties as Cr. Christophers not simply in the
matter of attendance at meetings, but he gave deep consideration to every
question affecting the welfare of the town.
Cr. Christophers was a distinct loss to the town when he retired from
the council. At the meeting which his resignation was accepted the assess-
ment for the year w-as submitted and showed the total to be £82,691, or
£3,220 more than the previous year. There had been 18 appeals, causing
a reduction on the original amount of £455.
The council then accepted the tender of Geo. Anderson at £3lO for
enclosing Eastern market; Cr. Paynter w-as fined £1 for being absent in
accordance with the motion he himself had proposed, and a genera' rate
of one shilling in the £1 was struck.
£2 PER 1000 FT. FOR GAS
Cr. Bagshawe alluded to the fact that the Gas Co. would be in a posi-
tion to supply next month, and he considered the council should decide
to light the town with gas. During the discussion which followed it was
stated that the company intended charging £2 per I.OOAft., as against 5/


per I,oooft. in the old country. The council decided to get a schedule of
charges, etc., from the company before committing itself. A large log
which was obstructing Lyttleton street was ordered to be removed and the
council adjourned.
A great many ratepayers were of opinion that a large clock should
be erected at the new post office by the council, as the Government refused
to go to the expense, and at the meeting on May 3rd. Dr. Merson wrote sug-
gesting that if the council erected a clock it should have a transparent
face and be a striking clock. '
The post office (not the present building) was just about finished on
the present site at this period, much to the satisfaction of the public, who
were put to great inconvenience through the post office being on the Camp.
Dr. Merson was thanked for his suggestion, which, needless to say, was
never carried out, and then the council considered a petition from the
residents of Grave street praying that the name of that street be altered
to one more suitable to the growing trade and imporance of that locality.
The petition was presented by Cr. Johnston, who said the residents were
not satisfied with the gloomy funeral name by which the street was known,
and the petition was forwarded to the Lands Department with a request
that the prayer of the petitioners be granted.
As the extension of Barker street south, the cutting of Forest creek,
and the erection of a bridge at the bottom of Barker street had not yet
commenced, the council ordered a letter be sent to the Public Works De-
partment urging that the works be immediately proceeded with, and that
£l,OOO be placed on the estimates for cutting the creek.
Cr. Bagshawe, who took a keen interest in the proposed Coliban water
supply scheme, moved that all the necessary engineering information,
together with an estimate of the cost in connection with a scheme for
bringing water from the Coliban river to Castlemaine be obtained by the
council, to be supplied to the Commission just appointed by the Government
Cr. Gingell seconded the motion, which was carried.
By this it will be seen that the Government had appointed a Commis-
sion to go into the question of water supply to the leading towns of the
IState, including Castlemaine.
Cr. Gingell said he was going to Melbourne in a day or two, and he
was instructed by the council to call at the Public Works Department and
urge that the Camp Reserve be proclaimed a recreation reserve, but at
the following meeting on May 10th. the Chief Secretary wrote stating that
when the Camp Reserve was no longer required for Government purposes
it would be proclaimed a public reserve. This did not suit the council at
all, and Cr. Gingell particularly was very wrath. It was evident that the
Campites were going to die hard.
The Gas Co. wrote that it would light the street lamps at £l4 each per
annum for six hours per night, except three nights before and after full
moon; or £24 per lamp for 12 hours per day, each light to be 4 2-5 candle
power. The council referred the matter to the committee.
Councillors got a bit of a shock when the surveyor (who had for a
brief period been paid on the percentage basis) sent in his small account
of £ll2, being 21 per cent, on the plans fqr the formation of Barker street.
He, however, generously intimated that he would accept £5O in full settle-
ment. Councillors silently condemned themselves, and everyone connected
with them, for their recent action in paying the surveyor by commission
instead of salary, as he had been coining money. The account was referred
to the finance committee, who agreed to pay the £5O, and in doing so, no
• doubt registered a vow they would never employ a surveyor on commission
again.


E. W. Cole was the only tenderer for trimming, lighting apd keeping
in repair the municipal lamps for six months, his price being £9O, and
his tender was accepted, as also was that of G. Green at £952 for forming a
portion of Urquhart street.
On May 27th. Cr. Gingell reported waiting on the president of the
ißoard of Land and Works, who stated that the Camp would be reserved
under the control of the council as soon as the buildings were vacated; the
president also agreed to spend £l,OOO on straightening Forest creek, and had
called for estimates for the work.
Cr. Gingell also said that he had also seen the Surveyor-General, who
had no objection to changing the name of Grave street, but the Postmaster-
General suggested that some other name than Commercial road be applied
as it might cause serious errors in the Postal Department, there being
so many Commercial roads in the colony. Cr. Gingell concluded by in-
forming the council that he had been treated with the utmost courtesy
and kindness.
Cr. Johnston said in reference to the change of name in Grave street,
that the majority of residents favored it being called the Great Western
road. Cr. Johnston kept the Great Western bakery, etc., in the premises
now occupied by Mr. Chapman in Grave street, near its junction with
Johnston.
Cr. Gingell considered Commercial street would be more suitable,
and he moved that the Government be requested to change the name of
Grave street to Commercial street, and his motion was carried, and the
Government was notified accordingly.
At this time there was a lot of trouble over the Barker street contract.
Earth mounds and excavations were everywhere, and being wet weather
the street was in a frightful state, and the people were almost in a state of
revolt. After discussing the matter the council decided to close the street
tc traffic for a week, and this decision was the signal for a further storm
of indignation from the ratepayers.
In the end Lawlor's contract was amended at his request, especially
in regard to the substitution of granite for bluestone pitchers in the chan-
nels, but when the council deducted 200 for this amendment, Mr. Lawlor
was mad, and threatened all sorts of things in a particularly unpleasant
manner, and mindful that Mr. Baker’s Supreme Court writ was issued under”
a somewhat similar set of circumstances the council decided to pay sooner
than go to law, as one case at a time was more than sufficient, for Mr.
Baker’s case was still pending
It was then decided to impound all straying cattle, and also to write
to Dr. Mueller, Government Botanist, inquiring as to the best class or
trees to plant in Market Square, councillors being thus early imbued with
a desire to beautify the town.




Wholly set up and printed by the
Castlemaine “Mail” Pty. Ltd.,
155 Barker Street, Cast’emaine.
