

INAUGURAL ADDRESSES
■mt i.
DELIVERED
ON THE OPENING
OF THE
UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY,
ON MONDAY,
OCTOBER 11, 1852,
THE HON. SIR CHARLES NICHOLSON,
; f • . I; ,
Speaker of the Legislative Council, Yice-Provost of the University.
y"i ♦
AND *
' THE REVEREND JOHN WOOLREY, D.C.L.
■e-j-. V , "• '
.Late Fellow of University College, Oxford, ’'Professor qf Classics- and President'of the Professorial
* . Y \ »Board of the University of Sydney.
' L ' ' V ’ ! i
.* % V ' < . «
Sgtrtteg:
PRINTED BY JOSEPH COOK,
NEXT TO THE SAVINGS BANK. *
i,;








INAUGURAL ADDRESSES
DELIVERED
ON THE OPENING
OF THE
UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY,
ON MONDAY, OCTOBER 11, 1852,
THE HON. SIR CHARLES NICHOLSON,
Speaker of the Legislative Council, Vice-Provost of the University.
THE REVEREND JOHN WOOLLEY, D.C.L
Late Fellow of University College, Oxford, Professor of Classics and President of the Professorial
Board of the University of Sydney.
PRINTED BY JOSEPH COOK,
NEXT TO THE SAVINGS BANK.




INAUGURATION OF THE UNIVERSITY.
The ceremony of Inauguration took place on
Monday, the 11th October, 1852, in the great hall of
the buildings at present occupied by the University, in
the presence of a crowded assembly.
At half-past Twelve o’clock the candidates for
Matriculation were introduced, and after their names
had been entered in the Album by the Registrar, took
their appointed places.
At One o’clock the procession entered the Hall,
marshalled by the Chamberlain, Dr. Greenup, in the
following order; —the Beadle, Vergers, the Professors,
the Fellows of the Senate, two and two, the Vice-
Provost, the Governor-General, attended by his staff;
the Chief-Justice Sir Alfred Stephen, and Mr. Justice
Dickinson, attended by their associates ; Lieutenant-
General Wynyard, Commander-in-Chief, and the
Honourable Campbell Riddell, Colonial-Treasurer;
the Staff-Officers of the Commander-in-Chief; Colonel
Bloomfield, and the Officers of the 11th Regiment;
Captain Gennys and the Officers of H. M. S. Fantome.
The procession was also accompanied by the principal
Ministers of Religion, of all denominations; by the
Members of the Bar, and by the Consuls of Foreign
Powers. All were habited in academical or full
dress official costume.
The Fellows present, were the Honourable Sir
Charles Nicholson, Vice-Provost, Speaker, L. C. The
Honourable E. Deas Thomson, Colonial-Secretary;
the Honourable J. H. Plunkett, Attorney-General;
r 1 ~ 7S TJq
J>9 -J -17


the Right Rev. Bishop Davis ; His Honour Mr. Jus-
tice Therry ; the Honourable F. L. S. Merewether,
B. A. (Cambridge) Auditor-General; W. C. Went-
worth, Esq., M. L. C.; B. O’Brien, Esq., M. D.,
T. C. D.; J. B. Darvall, Esq., M. A. (Cambridge)
M. L. C.; Edward Broadhurst, Esq., B. A. (Camb-
ridge) M. L. C.; S. A. Donaldson, Esq., M. L. C.
J. Macarthur, Esq., M. L, C.; Richard Greenup, Esq.,
M. D. (Cambridge) officiated as Chamberlain.
The following Fellows were prevented from attend-
ing:—The Provost, Edward Hamilton, Esq., M. A.
(Cambridge) and Alfred Denison, Esq., by distance;
the Rev. W. B. Boyce, by ill-health; the Rev. Wm.
Purves was absent in England.
The proceedings were opened by the following ad-
dress from the Honourable Sir Charles Nicholson,
Speaker, L. C., Vice-Provost of the University :
‘ln thus publicly declaring the commencement of the
first academic course in our University, I feel that a task has
been imposed upon me that would have been more appropriately
discharged by our learned Provost, —conscious as I am of his
superior ability to do justice in language adequate to the
occasion, to an event of so great, so solemn, and so interesting
a kind as that which we are this day called upon to celebrate.
For it would indeed be difficult to suggest any circumstance
connected with the social and intellectual growth of the colony
fraught with deeper or more enduring interest than that of the
inauguration of an Institution founded for the promotion of all
the higher branches of learning—an Institution whose compre-
hensive design and ample endowment are such as must enlist
in its favour the sympathies of every generous mind, and afford
a promise that the advantages which it holds forth may continue
to be dispensed to the future generations of this colony, to the
remotest period.


In the year 1850, the Legislative Council passed an Act to
incorporate and endow the University of Sydney. The
preamble to the Bill declares it expedient for the better
advancement of religion and morality, and the promotion of
useful knowledge, to hold forth to all classes and denominations
of her Majesty’s subjects resident in the colony of New South
Wales, without any distinction whatever, an encouragement
for pursuing a regular and liberal course of education. To
carry out these intentions, provision is made for the appointment
of a Senate, consisting of sixteen fellows, to whom are confided
the granting of degrees, honours, and rewards of merit and the
general conduct and management of the Institution. It can
require no argument with those conversant with the previous
condition or present state of the colony, or who appreciate the
advantages of that high intellectual cultivation which the
training of an University can alone afford, to establish the
necessity or appropriateness of such a measure. For notwith-
standing the extraordinary advances made by the colony in
population, wealth, and all material resources, during the last
few years—such as indeed have scarcely been paralleled in the
history of any other country —no means of education have been
open to our youth beyond those afforded by our ordinary
every-day schools, which, although conducted by zealous and
able teachers, from their nature and constitution cannot
undertake, or even pretend to deal with, those higher branches
of education which constitute the proper departments of
academic training. To a youth emulous of literary honour,
and the rewards of scholarship, no institution existed in the
colony in which he might meet with kindred spirits imbued
with the same love for letters, burning with the same desire for
distinction, and ready to join in the same intellectual race with
himself. In the ancient seats of learning in our native land
were these institutions alone to be found, which afforded the
means or incitements to high scholarship. The lengthened
voyage from hence to Europe, the absence from parental


control and the guardianship of friends, and the expense
attendant upon University education in England, presented
difficulties and dangers such as few persons solicitous for the
welfare of their children were willing, or, if willing, able to
encounter. If any further argument were required illustrative
of the necessity of such a foundation as our University, it is
afforded In the partial, if not entire failure of every attempt
hitherto made for the establishment of Collegiate Institutions
throughout the Australian Colonies. The want of success that
has attended all such efforts may reasonably be referred to three
several causes, —first, the absence of any sufficient endowment;
secondly, an incapacity to grant academic honours or degrees ;
and thirdly, their limitation to some particular religious com-
munion. I advert, without any invidious motive in so doing,
to these facts, because I believe that it is by their full recognition
that the University of Sydney has been placed upon a foundation
at once permanent and comprehensive. The experience of
all the nations of the old world has incontrovertibly proved,
that the foundations for the higher branches of learning can
only be maintained and perpetuated by permanent endowments.
In our native land the zeal and the piety of kings, nobles, and
statesmen have been testified for a long succession of ages, in
the princely endowments made to the two most ancient and
renowned seats of learning, Oxford and Cambridge. The
humbler, but scarcely less useful, institutions of Scotland have
owed their maintenance, and much of their efficiency, to the
endowments of former times. Even in the United States of
America, where the political temper and habitude of the
country is to regard with suspicion, if not dislike, prerogative
of every kind, whether founded on rank or fortune, the titular
distinctions accorded to letters are recognised; and for the
liberality and extent of her endowments of institutions destined
to the promotion of learning, America may vie with any country
in the world. It was, therefore, we consider, a wise provision
on the part of the Legislature, when establishing this University,


that, having regard to its permanent and efficient working,
they bestowed upon it the munificent endowment which it now
enjoys. Uninfluenced by causes of temporary depression and
decay, we may hope the institution thus founded may stand
secure and serene, whatever may be the perturbations of the
social or political atmosphere that surrounds it. Other institu-
tions, the creation of popular will, the embodiment and
expression of some temporary impulse, may rise and fall with
the influences to which they owe their origin; but the youth,
who for ages to come may issue from the portals of this
institution, will be the champions and guardians of rights and
privileges, the enjoyment of which has been secured to them
by the wisdom of their fathers. The second feature to which
I would advert as characteristic of the Sydney University is the
high privilege accorded to it by the local Legislature, ratified and
confirmed by a most marked expression of the Royal will, —of
granting degrees in the several faculties of Arts, Law, and
Medicine. When such distinctions are the genuine criterion
of proficiency in art or science, they possess no inconsiderable
value in the eyes of all reflecting persons. It may not be
irrelevant to add that my learned associates are deeply impressed
with the necessity of establishing such regulations for granting
degrees and enjoining the observance of such a course of study
as may make those who are the recipients of her honours
worthy of the distinctions accorded to them.
A third attribute upon which we would venture to augur
success to our infant institution is its comprehensive design
and character. Limited to no sect and confined to no class,
its sphere of action is calculated to embrace men of every creed
and of all ranks. Dispensing mere secular instruction, and
leaving the inculcation of religious truth to the spiritual
guardians of each denomination of religionists, the University
presents the widest possible area for all who are willing to come
within her precincts. It has indeed been urged by some
persons, as a fatal defect in its organization, that the Institution


is not associated with some one of the great leading divisions
of the Christian Church, and that the inculcation of dogmatic
Theology, and special religious training, are not made a part
of academic discipline. We would however reply, in answer
to those who take exceptions on such grounds, that to make
revealed religion a special element in our teaching would be at
once to destroy the catholic character of the institution, and
limit its influence merely to one single class of religionists.
Such a proposition would be totally inconsistent with the spirit
of an institution established and maintained from public funds,
to which all alike contribute, and in the benefits of which all
have a right to share. In thus abstaining from blending
secular and religious teaching, neither the legislature nor the
present conductors of the institution can permit it to be inferred
that such a separation is to be held as implying indifference on
their part to those higher objects of revealed truth, upon the
due perception and practical observance of which the happiness
of all, both here and hereafter, must depend. It is not because
we abstain from inculcating, that we ignore the existence of
dogmatic truth. Rejoicing in the blessing of religious freedom,
and believing that religious convictions are the most valuable
of all possessions, we leave the guardianship of them to parents
and teachers, whose special function it may be to assume and
to exercise such a trust. Whilst the University will not fail to
enforce, as far as her power extends, a correct deportment
amongst her alumni, parents and guardians, or those affiliated
institutions which we hope soon to see spring up, and with
whom the students may be domiciled, will more effectually
provide for their religious training and general behaviour. The
establishment of suffragan colleges by some of the great leading
denominations of Christians was an event contemplated by the
legislature, and would, in its realization, supply all that could
be wished in rendering our Academic system complete. In
the event of such affiliated institutions being called into exist-
ence, their action might be carried on simultaneously and in


perfect harmony with that of the University;—those multifarious
branches of secular instruction, which educated men of what-
ever creed must know, being communicated by the one
institution, the religious training and moral superintendance of
the student being entrusted to the other. The elements of
grammar, the principles of logic, the laws of physics, of
mathematical and chemical science, are universal in their nature,
and have no relation to those opinions respecting revealed
truth about which men so often differ. Much, it is apprehended,
might be urged in favour of a system by which men of different
and opposing creeds may be united in objects and pursuits
in which no difference can exist, —a system under the influence
of which a spirit of toleration, of mutual charity, and good
will, may be nourished and maintained. For we are persuaded
that those who in their early days have sat on the same benches,
imbibed from the same pure fountain the draughts of knowledge,
can never be actuated by that spirit of sectarian bitterness by
which society often is too unhappily divided and torn in other
countries. Indirectly, we believe, but in no small degree, will
the secular teaching of the University subserve the cause of
religion and of revealed truth. For it may safely be affirmed
that a mind disciplined and enlarged by habits of study, and
by the acquisition of knowledge, must be better prepared for
the reception of divine truth than one that is uncultivated and
uninformed. The undevout philosopher is generally the mere
sciolist. Whatever tends to enlarge the domain of thought, to
make us acquainted with the things that have gone before us,
and those that are beyond us, serves but to impress us
the more deeply with sentiments of humility and reverence for
the Great Author of all things.
There is one point further in connexion with the compre-
hensive character of our foundation to which I must refer. I
allude to the liberal provision which is made for the endowment
of eighteen scholarships, of the annual value of fifty pounds
each, tenable for three years. These are thrown open to the


competition of the youth of the whole colony. In our
Universities at home it is generally the practice to limit the
competition for presentations, to those educated in particular
foundations, or belonging to some particular county or parish.
No such restrictive rule is here applicable. Is there any youth
whose ear or whose eye these words may reach, now occupying
the forms of any of our schools, eager in all the ardour of
youth to acquire honorable distinction in letters, but with
whom the “ res angusta domi ” may be calculated to repress
such generous aspirations ? To the scholarships in this
University I would direct his gaze. Be he poor, or be he
friendless, here he may acquire a distinction, the reward of merit
only. Knowledge to him will here unfold her ample page,
all the spoils of time, all the treasures of thought, and all the
bright domain of a glorious future, may here become his. In
the fulness and fervour of a youthful spirit, he may realize the
dream of the poet, and exclaim—
juvat integros accedere fontes,
Atque haurire, juvatque novos decerpere flores,
Insignemque meo capiti petere inde coronam.
I should not have indulged in such a digression were it not
to meet an allegation that has, I believe, been made, to the
effect that the University has been founded as an institution
for the benefit, and as an exclusive possession, of the rich.
To meet such a statement it is only necessary to observe, that
scarcely any class can be indicated in this community destitute
of means for providing elementary education for their offspring,
or where, in a case of more than ordinary promise, the means
of educating to an extent sufficient to qualify for matriculation
do not exist. The terms of admission to our classes and the
scholarships we have founded are calculated to afford every
facility and encouragement to candidates of whatever degree,
who may be desirous of participating in the advantages which
are held out to them.


Having thus cursorily glanced at some of the peculiar
characteristics of our institution, and endeavoured to combat
objections that, in a spirit too often deficient in candour, have
been urged against it, I shall briefly detail the steps that have
been taken towards the establishment of the several professor-
ships, the duties of which will this day commence. No sooner
had the Fellows become invested with the important and
responsible functions entrusted to them, than they proceeded
to the establishment of chairs in those several branches of
literature and science, which are considered of fundamental
importance in every system of academic training. Professor-
ships were therefore instituted in Greek and Latin, in Mathe-
matics, and in Chemistry and Experimental Philosophy. To
secure the services of able and accomplished teachers was an
object of earnest solicitude on the part of the Senate. After
much and careful reflection, they resolved to entrust the
selection of their first professors to a committee of gentlemen
in England consisting of Sir John Herschell, Bart.; Professor
Airey, Astronomer Royal; Professor Malden, of University
College, London; and Henry Denison, Esq., formerly Fellow
of All-souls College, Oxford. The trust and duty imposed
upon these distinguished individuals were undertaken, and
have been discharged with a zeal and a cordiality that demand
our most grateful acknowledgments. After a most patient
and laborious examination of the credentials of the various
candidates who came forward, (and whose numbers amounted
to upwards of sixty,) the choice of the Committee was finally
fixed upon the Rev. J. Woolley, D. C.L., the Head Master
of King Edward the Sixth’s School, at Norwich, and
formerly Fellow of University College, Oxford, as Classical
Professor; on M. B. Pell, Esq., Bachelor of Arts, and
Fellow of St. John’s College, Cambridge, as Professor of
Mathematics ; and on John Smith, Esq., Doctor of Medicine,
Assistant Professor of Chemistry, Marischal College, Aberdeen,
as Professor of Chemistry and the Philosophy of Physics.


All of these gentlemen have acquired high academic distinc-
tion, have had considerable experience in teaching, and possess
in the most eminent degree all those high moral qualities
essential for the proper discharge of their several duties.
Simultaneously with the means adopted for the selection and
appointment of the Professors, steps were taken for obtaining
books and apparatus from England, for the foundation of a
library, and for the necessary illustration of the lectures in
Physical Science. The philosophical apparatus, selected by
Professor Smith, has already reached the colony, and our first
consignment of books, of the value of £SOO, is daily expected.
It is the intention of the Senate to appropriate a fixed sum
every year for the establishment and maintenance of a library.
The foundations of a system have thus been laid, susceptible
of expansion according to the growth and advancing require-
ments of the Institution. The union of the two chairs of
Greek and Latin, of Chemistry and the Philosophy of Physics,
is to be regarded as a temporary arrangement. Neither have
the Senate lost sight of the necessity of instituting Lectureships
on the various branches of Literature and Science, necessary
for forming a complete curriculum either in Arts, or the special
faculties of Law and Physic. It may be regarded as expedient
almost forthwith to supply some of the desiderata thus
presented, and the time is probably not far distant when
Lectures on Jurisprudence, and the several branches of
Medicine, might secure a sufficient number of attendants to
justify the institution of chairs in these several faculties. The
great and the paramount object to be achieved in any system
of academic training at the present moment is the raising the
standard of proficiency as regards classics and mathematics.
It would be quite out of place on such an occasion as the
present to vindicate a system in which the languages of classical
antiquity hold the most prominent place. To every educated
and reflecting mind the conclusion is irresistible, that no better
discipline for the intellect of the young can be found than that


which is afforded by a careful and thorough initiation into the
structure and forms of the Greek and Latin languages. Such
a process involves with the learner a practical acquaintance
with those fundamental principles of logic of which the
grammar of every language is more or less an exemplification.
To regard a knowledge of the ancient languages as a mere
futile exercise of memory is to betray an ignorance or a
perverseness which it is scarcely necessary to attempt either
to enlighten or to combat. If no other benefit were to accrue
from the cultivation of classical literature, this alone would be
more than sufficient to justify all that has been said in its
behalf, —that it affords an avenue, and gives familiar access
to the most glorious and most enduring monuments of human
genius. From whom can the poet, the orator, the statesman
d,raw such pure draughts of inspiration as from the immortal
literature of Greece and Rome ? As the majesty, the
unequalled grace, and unapproachable beauty of the Parthenon
have been the envy and admiration of all ages, so will the
works of Homer and .ZEschylus, of Demosthenes and Plato, be
regarded as the archetypes of all that is sublime in poetry,
eloquent in oratory, or profound and original in philosophy.
The circumstances and the occasion under which we are
now assembled are suggestive of reflections as connected with
those to whom the University owes its origin, as well as with
reference to those for whose especial benefit it has been
established, of the most deeply interesting kind. To the
Legislative Council of New South Wales, and to the adminis-
tration of His Excellency Sir Charles Fitz Roy, belong the
merit, and the proud distinction, of having originated a
measure fraught with so many great and noble ends. It may
be doubted whether in the enactment of laws having for their
object the general welfare of society, such as have regard to
the mere economic well-being of the state constitute the
exclusive, or ought to be regarded as the highest objects of
legislation. Material advancement, without a corresponding


progression in the moral and intellectual condition of a
community, is of small avail in promoting its real happiness or
ultimate greatness. Whilst therefore it is the duty of the State
to promote elementary education upon the most extended basis,
by the establishment of schools throughout the length and
breadth of the land, it is not less so to provide those higher
means of instruction by which men may be fitted to discharge
the duties and offices belonging to the higher grades in society ;
to enable her citizens to become enlightened statesmen, useful
magistrates, learned and able lawyers, judicious physicians;
to enable each, in fine, to discharge with credit and ability the
several duties belonging to the particular station in life in
which God’s providence has placed him. No epoch could
perhaps have been fixed upon more appropriate than the
termination of the fifth decade of the present century for the
foundation of an University. Already more than one generation
born beneath this Southern sky have lived and passed away,
leaving as an inheritance to their children a pride in, and a
love for, the land of their birth. To those of us whose
recollections are linked with that old ancestral land—the land
of so many glories, and of such imperishable renown —it may
indeed be difficult to realize the earnestness of the affection
which every Australian feels for his country. Such a feeling,
however, does exist in no slight degree, and every one must
admit, that a sentiment so praiseworthy, an impulse from
whence a spirit of the purest patriotism may arise, ought to be
cherished, and receive a right direction. At a moment, then,
when the colony in her onward progress was developing, with
unprecedented rapidity, a political and social organization,
and assimilating to herself day by day the lineaments of the
parent state; at a period when the necessity was becoming
more and more urgent for educating our youth to the duties
of the high citizenship many of them will soon be called upon
to exercise, was the measure entered upon for founding this
great seminary. I think I hear the voice of one honorable and


learned member, on witnessing the achievement of the great
design with which his name will be ever associated, saying to
the country of his birth, and to the land that will long own
him as the most gifted of her sons, * Behold an institution conse-
crated to the noblest of purposes, provided for you and your
children. Accept, preserve, defend the sacred trust. Kr/}/xa «£«,
let it be to you and to them an everlasting inheritance.’ And
let us carry the mind’s eye onward to a period when this
colony shall have acquired the form and the proportions of an
empire; when the events of this age shall have become
obscured by time, and circumstances which belong to our
history may have the same relation to the future, which those
of the heptarchy have to this era. Then, when all the busy
tumult that now agitates us shall have past away and become
obliterated in the great gulf of time, one event will stand forth
in bold relief signalizing the age and the men who now live.
As Oxford has been associated for a thousand years with the
name of Alfred, so may the names of our illustrious Sovereign,
and of her representative, be perpetuated, and remembered, and
honoured for ages to come in connexion with that of the
University of Sydney.
Lastly, with reference to those for whose especial benefit this
Institution has been founded I would say a few words. You,
my young friends, are the first to whom have been accorded
the advantages of University education in this colony. Prove
yourselves worthy of the high privilege you enjoy, by a
constant, sedulous, application to your studies. Consider that
the honour of this Institution, and its future character and
usefulness, will to some extent be determined by your conduct
and behaviour. I know that there are some amongst you who
are urged by the desire of acquiring honourable distinction in
the career upon which you are about to enter, and who are
wont to waste the midnight oil in studious labour. To such the
language of exhortation is not needed : * Macti estate virtute
Each of you, I hope, is influenced by a firm resolve to employ


his time and opportunity to the best advantage. Some there
may be amongst you, not destitute of capacity nor unqualified
to achieve honourable distinction, but who may be deficient
in those habits of application which are essential to success,
whatever be the objects aimed at. And there may be those
amongst you prone to habits of listlessness, and who think
that occasional and extraordinary exertion will compensate for
idleness and past neglect. Be assured that a disposition of
this kind will lead to unhappiness and disappointed hopes.
On the other hand, a steady application to your duties will
carry with it its own immediate reward. The pleasures and
advantages which flow from study are infinite. By it you are
brought into intimate communion with the greatest minds
that ever lived. The noblest creations of the human intellect
are the objects of your familiar contemplation. The pursuit
of these will open up to you higher objects of ambition than
those which captivate the multitude, —fame, not founded on
the vulgar attribute of wealth, or any other accidental dis-
tinction, —a satisfaction pure and ethereal in its character, the
highest reward of every true academician. Australia has no
past, but she has a future. Is that future to be one of
brightness and glory, or of darkness and humiliation ? Is she,
the degenerate daughter of an illustrious race, to live upon
the traditions of great names only,or is she ‘ patriae renascentis
perenne germen,’ to produce her Shakespere and Milton, her
Locke and her Newton —‘ hearts pregnant with celestial fire,
hands fitted to sway the rod of empire ? ’ With you, and with
that multitudinous band of young spirits who are to follow in
your track, must the solution of this question depend. You
and they are to be subjects, and the writers of her future
history. To give a tone and a character to that future, that
it may be distinguished by virtue, piety, moderation, humanity,
wisdom, is the object of this foundation. Ah! my young
friends, never did I so forcibly feel the want of power to give
expression to my feelings as I do at this moment. How


gladly would I bring before you that bright galaxy of great
names, of poets, orators, statesmen, philosophers, that have
illustrated the annals of that land from whence your fathers
sprang. How readily would I quote to you examples of merit
struggling with adversity, of triumphant genius, and of
immortal renown. Our time will not permit me to enlarge
on subjects so fertile of illustration. The circumstances of
this day must be of no small moment in your future lives, and
will carry with them recollections of pleasure or feelings of
remorse. Are you to receive, and, by receiving, to reflect
honour on your alma mater, who is this day about to adopt
you as her first and eldest sons ? Are the hopes of friends,
the aspirations of your countrymen, to be gratified or
humiliated in your career ? Are you prepared to sacrifice
the idle or vicious fancies of the hour for the lasting gratifi-
cation of intellectual labour? With you, to all these several
questions, must rest the answer. That answer, however, I
will anticipate. Full of youthful enthusiasm you will enter
upon your appointed career.
Et quasi cursores, vital lampada tradunt,
So will the sacred torch of learning and science confided to
you be cherished, and transmitted to those that are to succeed
you in the intellectual race upon which you have this day
entered.”
The students were then presented for matriculation.
Professor Pell officiating as Proctor, and Professor
Smith, as Dean.
The following oration was then delivered by the
Principal, Dr. Woolley:
‘ The ceremony which we have just witnessed is not to be
estimated by its impressiveness as a spectacle, nor by its im-
mediate importance, but rather by its moral significance, and
by the influence which it is destined to exercise upon the for-
tunes of this great and daily increasing nation. The past
two years have indeed come laden to Australia with the seeds


of vast and momentous change ; the tide which has swelled
so rapidly and so high during the last few months can scarcely
find a parallel in history. This lately too much neglected co-
lony has, by the special interposition of Providence, risen all
at once into the state and consideration of a well-nigh inde-
pendent people. And amidst the social and political revolution
which is going on before our eyes, fraught in many respects
with elements of anxiety and alarm, there is no circumstance
more suggestive to a patriotic mind of sober exultation and
rational hope, than the foundation in the bosom of our society,
by the unaided, unsuggested act of that society itself, of the
first colonial University in the British Empire. When I re-
flect on the multiform and far-extending interests which are
involved in the work we have begun to-day, when I anticipate
the glow of satisfaction or the recoil of disappointment with
which we shall in time to come look back upon these proceed-
ings, I shrink from the task imposed by my office, and most
reluctantly imperil, by my weakness and inadequacy of speech,
even the momentary success of an Institution so fateful to an
integral portion of the globe. In one respect alone I seem ap-
propriately to occupy this position : I stand as the representa-
tive not only of one of our ancient Universities, but of the
oldest collegiate corporation in Christendom, to congratulate
this far-off, youngest accession to the sacred sisterhood of learn-
ing and science. Nine hundred and eighty years have passed
since our glorious Alfred provided, amidst the fens and forests
of Oxford, a home of union and of refuge for the poor and scat-
tered scholars who were in those rude and uncertain times, with
toil and danger watching before the pale and glimmering lamp
of knowledge. What thoughts arose within the King’s heart
as he stood within his narrow and humble portal, you, sir, the
Founder of the University of Sydney, may, perhaps, most easily
and justly conceive. Did his prophetic eye discern, rising out
from the tangled and untrodden bush, the “ stream-like wan-
derings of that glorious street, ” glittering with piles of stately


palaces and venerable spires ? Did he behold in vision the long
array of saints and sages, of philosophers and patriots, who by
their wisdom and virtue should make their desert cells world-
famous to succeeding ages ? Did he anticipate, with a noble
pride, the Anglo-Saxon root which he had planted, not merely
after a thousand years living and undecayed, but casting off
the parasitical growth of prejudice and time, and bursting forth
in renewed beauty and more extended usefulness ? Did his
imagination dare her flight beyond the limits of his island-home,
and picture in the remotest corners of the earth the children of
his race, nurtured in his own institutions, bearing forth the
spirit and the forms which they loved into a yet wilder solitude,
and a more inaccessible wilderness ? Could this have been—
could he in thought have wandered amongst the groves of
Magdalen, beneath the shapely tower of Wolsey, or stood in
the hall of Christ Church or Trinity, or knelt in sainted
Henry’s matchless shrine, or in Sheldon’s magnificent theatre
have witnessed the concourse of the learned and the wise, have
seen its galleries crowded by the fairest and noblest of the land,
the heroes of thought and action revisiting with grave com-
placence the scenes of their early glory, and regarding with a
sympathising tenderness the image of their own youthful
emulation—could he thence have been transported into our
unambitious and unarchitectural building—could he have seen
in this assembly a nearer representation of that little company
which he gathered round his banners at Oxford for a struggle
more arduous than against the invading Dane, a conquest
more glorious than the subjugation of a kingdom—he would,
I am assured, have found in the triumphal commemoration of
his own university, a scene not more congenial to his spirit,
not more deserving of his sympathy and interest, than the
modest inauguration of ours.
I have invoked the spirit of Alfred; and I hope, without
presumption or exaggeration; it is in his spirit that the
founders of this University seek to be partakers of his success.


—in the spirit, first, I will boldly say of his religion; for true
religion and sound learning cannot brook to dwell apart; the
foundation of the faith can never be finally impaired by know-
ledge ; the effect of science if it be but deep, earnest, compre-
hensive, and therefore humble, cannot but be to awaken the
consciousness of our spiritual nature, the desire to satisfy our
spiritual longings, and to enter into our spiritual relations.
True, we may not in this place exercise the privilege of mani-
festing towards sacred truth the open homage which was per-
mitted to Alfred. The passions, but still more, the miscon-
ceptions of men have rent the bond of brotherhood asunder :
they that worship a common Lord may no longer kneel at a
common altar ; and in a national school of learning, theology
would now tyrannically usurp that pre-eminence which she
blamelessly enjoyed of old.
To require from the students of the liberal sciences a pledge
of unity in creed, to enforce upon all the religious convictions
of a part would be to widen the breach which separates us, to
aggravate our misunderstandings, to embitter the jealousy and
heartburnings which political differences sufficiently inflame.
This principle, however they may deplore its truth, the most
religious men must now consistently affirm; and in several
universities founded during the present century, it has been
admitted and in part realised ; but because in part, either
ineffectually or with offence. Dr. Arnold, excluding from his
pale of citizenship all who were not called Christians, at-
tempted to unite the various denominations and churches of
Christendom in the hollow treaty of a shadowy and unsub-
stantial formula; and the London University itself has made
an expiring effort to retain a religious element in her volun-
tary examinations upon the critical text of the New Testament.
It is a matter of just congratulation that in the Sydney Uni-
versity this enunciation has first been made unequivocally and
without reserve ; she has first distinctly marked the boundaries
of Education and Secular Instruction : She neither presumes


to distinguish from its accidents the essence of our common
faith, nor degrades theological study to the level of a merely
scholastic exercise, nor with profane foot intrudes into the
arcana of the sanctuary. Abdicating a function with which
she is conscious of her incompetency to deal, she pronounces
no judgement upon the place or importance of that function
in the general method of education ; and those who, as many
I trust here do, believe and act upon the belief that secular
instruction, unhallowed by the teaching, undisciplined by the
principle, unquickened by the motives of religion, is dangerous
and fatal in proportion to its scientific excellence and com-
pleteness, may, with undoubting conscience and sincere zeal,
co-operate in the work which we are this day commencing.
To those indeed who will for the present, perhaps always,
form the large majority of our undergraduates, the inhabitants
of the city and its neighbourhood, there is neither theoretical
nor practical disadvantage ; in the teaching, the discipline,
and above all in the influence and example of home, they
enjoy the purest and safest religious training, the most per-
suasive inducements to virtue and piety ; and the association
in our lecture halls of persons professing widely various
creeds, without appearance of compromise or temptation to
dispute, will, we may reasonably hope, engender and mature
a spirit, which all creeds alike inculcate, which all, chiefly
for want of mutual intercourse, fail to obtain, of toleration,
respect, and good-will towards those whom, however erroneous
we may deem their opinions, we have known to be animated
by the same truthfulness and honesty of purpose as ourselves.
One class, indeed, remains, whose interests require considera-
tion. Already some have left a home in the country to asso-
ciate themselves with our body ; and soon as the rapid
progress of civilization shall have peopled our waste and
silent prairies as thickly as an English shire, a continually in-
creasing number will seek admission into our walls from
agricultural districts. For students of this description the


University has made what provision she could, the same which
was originally made in Oxford and Cambridge, before pious
munificence had surrounded the public University with those
sumptuous private foundations which are the envy and the
admiration of Europe. She has done what she could, but
not the best that may be effected by others; the lodging house
or hostel, however faithfully governed or diligently visited,
can never fill up that void which the loss of home associations
has left in the imagination and the heart. There needs a
more constraining authority, more endearing sympathy, more
prevailing inducements than can be furnished by such a dwell-
ing and society. And may it be permitted to one who owes
whatever is most cherished in the past, or brightest in the
future, to an English College, to indulge the pleasing fancy,
that we may see reproduced amongst us the picture of that
discipline which the great and good schoolmaster, Thomas
Arnold, declared to be the one alone adapted to the nurture
of our British youth; that ere this generation has passed
away, the waters of the Parramatta river, or the quiet bays
of our beautiful harbour, will mirror in their crystal depths
many a reverend chapel, and pictured hall, and solemn cloister,
and pleasant garden, like those which gem the margin of the
Isis and the Cam ; whose memory, like some choice perfume,
revives the spirit fainting under the cares and business of life ;
like the rock-spring in the wilderness, follows our toilsome
march to freshen and renew those lofty hopes and bright
imaginings, the best inheritance of youth, which not by God’s
providence, but by man’s neglect, too often perish without
their appointed gratification, when the evening of our age
finds us, in the words of our own poet, like a stranded vessel
alone upon a dark shore, or in the true and expressive, but
melancholy phrase of Aristotle, TtTairuvMixsvovg {mb rov jSiov
* bowed down and humbled by the commerce of the world.’
And not less did our founders require the support of Alfred’s
faith and confidence in bis cause. Ours, indeed, are not the


same difficulties which the royal patriot had to encounter ; yet
they are, perhaps, neither fewer nor less formidable. His
were the hindrances of a vanquished and retiring barbarism,
which every additional facility of intercourse, every ameliora-
tion of the social relations, every approach towards settled
government tended constantly to mitigate or remove ; ours are
those of a rank and luxuriant civilization. The refinements
and comforts of life, with their attendant utilitarianism, the
general diffusion of information, with its desultory super-
ficial ism, are as real impediments to the advancement of science
as ignorance, insecurity, and oppression. Now, a University
is not the handmaid, but the nursing mother of literature; her
office is not to teach only, but to regulate and guide, some-
times encouraging that which is unduly depreciated, restraining
within limits that which is valued beyond its worth. To lay
firmly and broadly the foundations of such an Institution
requires a clear and unpartial view of education, and the
requirements of our own age, a forethought which ventures to
surrender a present advantage to a distant and prospective
good, a courage which, in seeking to convince and persuade,
shrinks not, if need be, from misunderstanding and reproach.
This wise moderation, neither neglecting nor blindly following
popular opinion, a slave neither to authority nor to theory, to
prescription nor to novelty, is above all required in those who,
like you, meditate the erection, not of a frail and perishable
theatre for the amusement of the multitude, but of a monument
to endure throughout all generations.
Such we may believe was the spirit which dictated the
course of study to which the teaching of the University is at
present confined. I can imagine the surprise, not unmixed
with disappointment, which this restriction may have occasioned.
Three Professors, with four subjects of instruction, are truly
inadequate to support the dignity of a University, far less to
emulate those home seminaries whose teachers are numbered
not by units but by tens. This natural feeling was, I doubt


not, anticipated and shared in by the framers of our constitu-
tion ; and to gratify it, had been an easy task. There are
living on our own shores men whose acquirements raise them
to the highest rank in various departments of knowledge, who
will not, we trust, in due time, refuse to be associated in any
undertaking for the public good. And the more honour is
due to those whose self-denial preferred the less imposing
substance to the tempting but as yet delusive shadow, and
is content to wait until circumstances prepare and justify the
extension of our boundaries. And whilst I also anxiously
desire the coming of that time, I look for it the more hopefully
and cheerfully, because it has not been anticipated prematurely
in a vain pageant. What has been done is our best security
for that which yet remains to do. Upon this subject I will
entreat your patience, if I offer further explanation.
“ The idea of a University, ” to adopt the words of a cele-
brated living authority*, “is two-fold; it is first, what its name
imports, a school of liberal and general knowledge, and, second-
ly a collection of special schools , devoted to the learned pro-
fessions. Of these the former is the University, properly so
called ; the second is complementary and ministerial. The for-
mer considers the learner as an end in and for himself, his
perfection as man simply being the object of his education.
The latter proposes an end out of and beyond the learner, his
dexterity, namely, as a professional man. ” The faculty of arts,
which assumes the province of general education,was accord-
ingly considered in the ancient universities as the mother of the
other faculties; in some instances, as in Oxford and Paris, it
subsisted for a considerable period alone, and still in the ma-
jority of learned bodies it occupies a predominant position.
Few, indeed, amongst modern Universities preserve unim-
* Sir William Hamilton. “ Discussions on Philosophy and Literature, Educa-
tion, and University Reform; collected from the Edinburgh Review.” Bvo. 1852'.
p> 672.


paired the two-fold type of their origin ; in some the special
schools have well nigh superseded the general; in others they
have practically disappeared themselves. Whilst either neglect
is deeply to be regretted, and if possible, repaired, we may yet
derive an instructive lesson from the comparative fortunes of
those Universities in which special or general teaching has pre-
vailed. Both have come short of their appointed purpose, but not
both equally. In the former, knowledge, however technically and
professionally accurate, has failed to preserve to the graduates
that estimation which a degree originally claimed, and, in course
of time, their narrow and partial requirements have been low-
ered to a continually decreasing standard. The graduates of the
latter, although unhappily compelled to seek their professional
education beyond the precincts of the mother University, have
yet secured almost a monopoly of credit and success. The
soundest lawyers come forth from schools in which law is never
taught; the most accomplished physicians are nurtured where
medicine is but a name. Neither of these examples will, we
hope, be followed by the University of Sydney; yet she has
done wisely in avoiding for the present the delusive appear-
ance of a perfect type ; and in establishing, after the ancient
pattern, first, the faculty of arts, she has consulted, as well for
the interest of those sciences which she is contented for a time
to want, as of those which she commences by professing. She
has escaped a similar disappointment to that which in England
has been experienced in the failure of Mechanics’ Institutes and
People’s Colleges. Those well-intended experiments have
owed their ill success not to any deficiency of zeal or experience
or ability in their governors or teachers, but to a radical and
inherent vice in their constitution, or to speak more justly, in
the mental condition of those to whom their advantages were
proffered, the absence that is, of a previous disciplinal train-
ing, and the consequent incapacity for continuous intellectual
exertion. The history of these institutions, is generally the
same ; their first erection excites attention interest, enthusiasm;


the classes are crowded with eager and delighted auditors ; it
is necessary rather to repress than to stimulate application.
But soon all is changed : when the intoxication of novelty and
the eclat of publicity is succeeded by the daily routine of ob-
scure and laborious diligence, few indeed are found to whom
the fruit of knowledge compensates for the bitterness of its
root; few who are able to devote to the silent laboratory of
thought that sustained attention which the mastery of the sim-
plest truth demands.
But, it may be asked, by what right do we arrogate to the
chairs already founded amongst us the proud title of the
faculty of arts ? By what authority do they claim an exclusive
or even pre-eminent value as the disciplinal method of
education ? To this question an answer must be returned.
It is not enough to plead the suffrage of philosophers and
educators throughout the civilized world : not even enough to
exhibit the result of these, in comparison with more novel and
popular systems. We acknowledge indeed, and accept our
position as the youngest daughter of the family of learning :
we are not rash to assay weapons other than those whose
temper has been proved in many a conflict with ignorance and
presumption : we hear with respect the counsels, and follow in
the footsteps, of those who have already won the height which
we are setting out to climb. But we follow neither implicitly
nor as unconvinced. The ceremonies of this day’s inaugura-
tion, so far as they are retained from ancient academic ritual,
the habits which we wear, our statutory and customary ob-
servances, are not adopted only because they preserve the
traditions of our fathers, because they link us to the venerable
procession of scholars in the days of old, because in them we
seem to claim the kindred and inherit the spirit of the mighty
dead ; but, also, because we believe that the God who, not in
vain, has clothed the soul with a body, and made the senses
interpreters and ministers of thought, and given to the out-
ward world its mysterious hold and mastery upon our fancy,


has designed and commanded us by the right use of material
symbols to bring our soujs and bodies into harmony, and at-
tune our faculties to the work in which they are engaged.
And thus we vindicate our proposed undergraduate course,
not more from authority than common sense ; and in the vin-
dication our only difficulty arises from the abundance and
multiplicity of our materials. To enter in detail upon a theme
so varied would ill become this place and occasion ; even to in-
dicate in passing the topics of the argument will exercise the
patience of my hearers. I will try to do so with all briefness.
I say then, generally, that the judgement of our founders in ap-
pointing for their disciplinal course the study of philology,
especially in the classical languages, with logic and mental phi-
losophy on the one hand, and on the other, mathematics and
the elements of physical science, is supported, were the evi-
dence of experience as doubtful as it is decisive, by the
reason of the case. A liberal education is one which cultivates
and developes in their due and harmonious proportion what the
Romans called “ humanitas,” all those faculties and powers
which distinguish man from the inferior creatures. This end
it accomplishes in two ways ; (1) by the appropriate and
healthful exercise of those faculties ; (2) by introducing them
to those objects, in the observation of which they will here-
after be engaged ; in other words, a good education must in-
duce a habit of patient, connected, vigorous, independent
thinking, and must afford a general prospect of the most im-
portant objects of thought, the world within us, and then
the world without, both in our relations to our fellow-
men, and the constitution of the physical creation. How
the second of these purposes, the opening, that is, of an
extensive and many-sided range of thought, is effected by the
studies you recommend, we need scarcely to be told. We
know that mathematical science is the queen and guardian of
all those pursuits which investigate or apply the laws of nature ;
the progress, nay even the continuance of the meanest among


the latter, ever keeps pace with the cultivation of the former.
And to take the lowest ground : the mechanical arts, those
which assuming scientific truths, deduce from them discoveries
which directly enhance the luxury of life, but indirectly are
most powerful agents in promoting the moral and social
progress of mankind; all these, in a thousand ways, are
indebted to the abstracted studies of the solitary recluse ; and
even the stability of moral and social relations depends not a
little upon a Galileo or a Newton. We know, again, that the
languages of Greece and Rome are the master-keys which
unlock the noblest modern tongues of Europe, and, with the
increased power of understanding our brethren’s speech, enlarge
our sympathies and realise our fraternity ; that as the disunion
of the nations was the consequence of misunderstanding, so
the growth of fellow-feeling, what the Greeks beautifully
call avyyvwni 7, the thinking with others, the identifying of our
minds with theirs, may prepare the restoration of “ concord
and unity.” We know that in their rich and graceful litera-
ture, the model of all most perfect since, they provide appro-
priate nutriment to the noblest faculties of our nature ; poets,
historians, philosophers, with their keen and delicate sense of
the beautiful, their vigorous and versatile intellect, their life
of intense activity and ceaseless energy of thought, not from
books and theoretic rules, but fresh from nature’s inspiration
and the school of experience, created those masterpieces in
every kind, to understand and emulate which is daily more
and more the noblest exercise of taste, of moral judgment,
even of scientific research. We have learnt lastly, that philo-
logy is the primary element of sciences, which, like ethnology,
trace back the stream of time to its fountain head, and dis-
close to our view the mysterious cradle of our race and the
history of our gradual alienation. These topics, however
important and interesting, I the more readily pass over because
in the works of one whose name is justly honoured in this
University they are doubtless familiar to many here. And


if we pass to the higher purpose of education, if we ask in
what manner philology and mathematics conduce to mental
vigour and self-relying thought, the reply is not more difficult.
Singly powerful, but partial and one-sided, they form, united,
a perfect discipline of reflexion. How, except through
mathematical habit, should we attain that power of abstraction,
of sustained attention, of patient reasoning long drawn out *,
every link in the chain so essential, that the slightest error
invalidates and breaks the whole? Mathematics is the disci-
pline of necessary reasoning; philology of the probable and
contingent. Speech is the vehicle and outward form of
thought, as the body to the soul; as in the features of the
face we love to read the character of the mind, so in the
analysis of speech is involved the observation of the facts of
thought; and in the marvellous languages of Greece and
Rome, with their minutely delicate inflexions, their profound
and subtle syntax, their all sufficing apparatus for expressing
the variations of ideas, we possess, as it were, an authentic
and stereotyped record of mental operations in the most
intellectually gifted peoples of the earth. Thus, whether we
analyse the formation of words, and, comparing the members
of a common family, or tracing the changes of meaning in a
single term, investigate the association and connexion of ideas,
or, in the laws of syntactical arrangement develope the fun-
damental principles of inward discourse, we are by healthy
but not painful effort practised to turn the mind back upon
itself, to learn the rudiments of our internal being, to place
our feet upon the threshold of that holy portal which bids us,
as the end of all knowledge, to make acquaintance with
ourselves.
Time would fail me in endeavouring to trace the connection
between philology and the philosophy of the mind. Of the
other crown of our academical career, the science of chemistry
and experimental physics, it would be equally superfluous and
presumptuous to enlarge in this assembly upon the practical


advantages ; upon its character, as an element of mental dis-
cipline, a character which the University of Sydney has been
the first to recognise, I will, in connexion with my subject,
take leave to make one observation. You will remark, that
metaphysical and physical philosophy are united at the close
of our under-graduate course ; united, not only as co-ordinate
applications of philological and mathematical science, but aa
presenting in their own nature a mutual check and counterpoise.
The science of the laws of thought, that faculty by which
alone man is distinguished, is of so plain and palpable an
importance, that despite the proverbial disinclination of our
English race to purely intellectual pursuits, an explanation
must be sought of its long-continued neglect and disrepute in
England. And in this explanation is involved the disciplinal
import of our experimental teaching. All sciences, as of the
outward world, so equally of that within us, can be rightly
and safely pursued only by the method of experiment and
induction ; not the knowledge of nature alone, but of language,
of reasoning, of metaphysical truth, must be equally and alike
attained by a careful analysis of observed phenomena. But
to subject to a real analysis the phenomena of consciousness
is of all tasks the most difficult; that partiality which is the
inherent vice of the human mind, aggravated by circumstances,
and inveterate association, presents a temptation from which
few can escape, to a one sided contemplation of our mental
states : nor do the conclusions which follow our hypothesis
avail to warn us of our error and guide us back to truth. Real
and important as is the influence of speculative opinion upon
the daily lives of men, it is neither direct nor immediate. Few
are the theorists who recognise the ultimate tendency of their
favourite principles; by a fortunate inconsistency we daily
reconcile practical soberness with theoretic falsehood: genera-
tions must elapse before the sensuisra of Locke and idealism
of Berkeley attain that developement which they always logically
involved. Even, therefore, those who acknowledge the indue-


tsve character of mental philosophy are in continual danger of
falsifying their profession by vague and arbitrary speculation :
and of this weakness what corrective can be found more
efficacious than the experimental observation of physical facts ?
The physical philosopher will not lightly build upon an
uncertain or incomplete induction ; he knows by the evidence
of his senses the necessity of a scrupulous and thorough
analysis ; he has learnt that the minutest error, the most trifling
addition, diminution, omission, is enough to render all his
labour vain; he has seen a variation in proportion alone
convert a wholesome nutriment into deadly poison, the change
of a single element entirely reverse the properties of a com-
pound body. Nor is this less true in mental facts ; not less
true, but less readily perceived, less clearly and unequivocally
recalled to our attention. Whilst I, therefore, on this occasion
pass by, for the time, the consideration of the independent
purposes, and intrinsic importance of this science, we cannot
but recognise the soundness of that decision which has included
in a comprehensive and balanced mental discipline, at least an
elementary acquaintance with physical experiment.
Subjected to such training, our undergraduates will not, in-
deed, embrace in their capacious and undiscriminating mem-
ory the whole encyclopaedia of literature and art. They will
not, like the Hippias of Plato, boast their skill to make their
own shoes, weave their own cloth, manufacture the ink and
the paper which is to record and perpetuate their own wisdom,
and heal alike the disorders of the body and the distempers of
the soul. But they will, we may reasonably hope, possess a
well-cultivated and vigorous understanding; they will have
formed the habit of thinking at once with modesty and inde-
pendence ; they will not be in danger of mistaking one branch
of science for the whole circle of knowledge ; nor of unduly
exaggerating the importance of those studies which they select
as their own. Above all, they will have attained the truest
and most useful result of human knowledge, the consciousness


and confession of their comparative ignorance. They will learn
in place of Hippies’ vaunt of omniscience to echo the excla-
mation “ Quam multa nescimus omnes ! ” and the humble but
not dejected conclusion of the Grecian sage : kivSwevh r)fitiv
ovSeig ovbkv KaXbv k’ ayaObv eiSkvcu"
ovSk dutch eibevcu. “ None of us is acquainted with truth ab-
solutely and in its own essence; and he is the wise man who
feels and acknowledges how imperfect and limited his know-
ledge is.”
And from this central teaching, too, will spring forth, we
trust, ere long schools of applied and professional science,
which shall distribute over the surface of society more than
their direct and immediate benefits. From these walls, we
will dare to hope, will go forth, statesmen, not merely of pre-
scription or expediency, but believing that the practice of life
may be regulated by fixed and eternal principles ; lawyers,
not merely indexes of a statutory code ; physicians, whose
knowledge is not confined to the constitution of the body and
the phenomena of disease ; scholars, finally, who will neither
neglect nor abuse the sacred gift which they have received ;
received not for their own pleasure or improvement, but for
the enlightening and instruction of all.
Such is the foundation upon which, ray dear young friends
and fellow-academicians, you are this day invited to erect,
each for himself, a superstructure of sound information and
sober thought. This call, lam persuaded, will not be made
in vain. The excitement of the hour will soon have passed
away ; the emotions which it may have enkindled, the desires
it may have awakened, must be tried hereafter in the balance
of calm, deliberate, self-understanding resolution. And
surely there are proposed to your ambition two motives most
constraining and effectual. The first is found in the interest
and sympathy manifested in your behalf by those who most
justly claim your respect. You cannot view unmoved the
gathering of this concourse to congratulate your entrance


upon your new and untried duties; you cannot look towards
yonder dignified circle, nor upon the kind and earnest faces
which all around beam with good wishes for your welfare and
success, without a hope that you may not disappoint their ex-
pectations, and embitter the memory of this joyous and hope-
ful festival. It is no passing interest, no languid and un-
practical sympathy of which you have been, and are the ob-
jects ; in the munificent rewards proposed to your emulation
you have a continual memorial of the thoughtful care which
not only sets before you the means of improvement, but
stimulates your exertions by the noblest of all inducements,
the public approval and encouragement of the wisest and the
best. Even now lam commissioned to announce a new act of
liberality from one whose claim upon our warmest gratitude is
second only to that of our noble Wentworth. The Vice-
Provost proposes to award two annual medals, each of the
value of £2O, for the best compositions in Greek lambic and
Latin Hexameter verse ; and I hope that this generous and
judiciously directed gift will restore to its proper consideration
amongst us, a mental discipline hitherto unduly neglected.
And if these distinctions were not enough ; if the conscious-
ness of duty well fulfilled, confirmed and sweetened by public
praise did not avail to arouse your diligence and sustain
your perseverance, yet surely you could not forget the special
and extraordinary claim which the University has upon you,
her first adopted children. You are not like those who throng
the halls of Cambridge or Oxford ; you cannot pass unnoticed
in the crowd; a whole community is concerned in your stead-
fastness and well-doing; of your degeneracy and failure the
injury would not be all your own. You are in a real and most
important sense associates in this noble undertaking ; you may
aspire to be honoured as joint founders of an Institution whose
reputation and usefulness, for a time at least, will mainly de-
pend upon your application of her instructions. Members of
an ancient and illustrious foundation may, not indeed with less


personal loss, but perhaps with less of public shame and wrong,
waste in lethargic idleness the precious and irretrievable seed-
time of their youth ; the vice and folly of a few cannot deface
the glorious blazonry which worthier sons have traced upon
her shield: our shield is yet uncharacterized by symbol of
honour, or mark of disgrace. We cannot shelter our own
worthlessness by the shadow of our fathers’ worth ; whatever
we desire of praise and glory we must attain by our own ex-
ertions. Onward, therefore, in the spirit and the power which
once nerved the hand and kindled in the eye of the young as-
pirant for knightly renown ! Onward, with your untarnished
but yet undecorated shield, in the proud and high resolve, that
whatever has already been achieved by your predecessors in
the field of glory, that, by God’s blessing, Sydney University
shall achieve.”
The ceremony was concluded by His Excellency the
Governor-General, Sir Charles A. Fitzroy, K. C. H. s
who in the name and on behalf of Her Majesty accorded
his assent to the proceedings,congratulated the assembly
on the auspicious occasion which had called them
together, and concluded by expressing the interest felt
by the Government in the usefulness and prosperity of
the University.




111 111 I 111 l II 111 I ill 111
3 1508 00323252 2
A:''' '
iA-T ' : 1
--V' , ,
