

INAUGURATION
OF THE
EAST WEST SERVICE
WEST AUSTRALIAN
June 1929




Foreword
—HE happy alliance of Aviation and Pro-
*") gress is brought home to the traveller
along the East-West Air Mail Route (of-
ficially opened on June 2nd, 1929) as the
"Hercules” air liner speeds over our vast Nulla-
bor Plain.
Forward the curveless lines of the Trans-
continental Railway grow dim at one point on
the unbroken horizon .... behind they
merge at another. Loneliness broods in the
sun’s unshadowed heat .... not a tree
to break the seemingly endless expanse of plain
. . here and there solitary growths of
mournful blue-bush and spinifex .... and
ragged breaks in a scanty covering of red soil
reveal the plain’s limestone formation. It would
seem as if Creation grew listless when its work
on the Nullabor Plain was just begun and de-
serted it for the fertile East and West . . . .
leaving behind in all its barrenness, a reminder
that not Time but man’s effort will bring the
ultimate development of our Continent.
Until now the railway was the only over-
land link between Adelaide and Perth. Now
the shadows of giant air liners as they speed
over their 1,453 mile journey—fall across its
lines. Now in the middle of the almost-
desert of the Nullabor Plain travellers spend
happy hours of rest and recreation at W.A.
Airways Hostel. Truly the shadows across the
plain —and the drone of engines above it —are
symbols of Achievement .... symbols
of the development of States whose future
means much to Australia s Progress.


Dedication
Service is dedicated to the progress
Aviation in Australia; to the citizens
of Australia whose faith in air travel has
helped to make it possible; to the need for
aerial highways to provide, for all time, a
means of transportation in keeping with our
country’s present and future development.
W. A. Airways
BRISTOL TOURER
1929
sTZILjf ARTOG, Tasman, Dampier, Cook, Bass and
JTJL Flinders—you intrepid explorers who first
sailed the byways of sea and ocean to "the Great
South Land.”
* * *
and records
illumine the pages of our country’s history—your
spirit of questing is with us yet. W.A. Airways now
links States around whose shores you sailed and
charted over a century ago\


rD “JOHN FORREST —you were the stout-hearted
W/ pioneer who blazed trails" across out: conting-
ent, your efforts made possible the Trans-Contin-:
ental Railway —furthered Australia’s progress. The
East-West Air Route is a fitting tribute to the spirit
of achievement you so ably fostered for us.
Progress
is measured by the development of means
and services for transportation and com-
munication. Not so many years have passed
since the steamship was the only link be-
tween Perth and Adelaide; then came the
railway. Now Progress has come into its
own —W.A. Airways already half encircles
the continent with its wings. The safe
speed of air liners gives a new significance
to "speedy travel.”
PERTH TO ADELAIDE
1 ram—3 Days
A * 07U
Air 27 Hours
(16 Hours Flying Time)


Flying Time Schedule
EASTWARDS
PERTH
Dep. 9-30 a.m. P.T.* Tuesday
KALGOORLIE
Arr. 1.00 p.m. P.T.* Tuesday
Dep. 1.30 p.m. P.T.* Tuesday
FORREST
Arr. 5.30 p.m. P.T.* Tuesday
6.15 p.m. C.T.f Tuesday
Dep. 5.15 a.m. C.T.f Wed.
6.00 a.m. A.T.f Wed.
CEDUNA
Arr. 9-35 a.m. A.T.f Wed.
Dep.lo.oo a.m. A.T.f Wed.
ADELAIDE
Arr. 1.30 p.m. A.T.f Wed.
*Perth Time
fCentral Time
Time
The Route
E Magic Carpet of to-day .... a story told
by endless panoramas as the miles unfold beneath
. by distance-conquering speed. Not more
romantic are pages from the Arabian Nights than the
experience of the Air Traveller. Seated in his cushioned
chair . in a snug, silent, weather-proof cabin
.... he knows the ultimate in travelling pleasure.
Outside, the music of whirling "props,” and wind-
plucked wires and roaring exhausts announce to the
Sky Gods that the East-West Air Mail passes by.
/fTAEPARTING from Perth at 9-30 a.m. the "Hercules” quickly
leaves the fast growing Capital of the West behind, and
crosses the great wheat belt that now extends for 200 miles. Pro-
gressive townships are passed at frequent intervals and railway
systems, woods and rivers stand out clearly below. Then a stretch
of undeveloped country follows, where evidence of the great
engineering achievement that resulted in supplying pure water
to the early mining pioneers can be observed by the regularly
spaced pumping stations that force, the Mundaring water through
the pipe line of nearly 4DO miles length. Then old Coolgardie
with its crumbling buildings and deserted mines is the signal for
passengers to look ahead and see the great pyramids that have
been built up by the extensive excavations of the mines on the
famous Golden,Mile at Kalgoorlie.
After refreshments at Kalgoorlie the passengers are again
aloft and as though travelling on a magic carpet they see the
great Australian continent unroll beneath them. Changing scenes
of timber, lake country, pastoral areas and then the Nullabor
Plain, stretching as far as the eye can see, across which the lines
of the trans-continental railway can be readily seen. At intervals
small railway stations and depots are seen, while the emergency
beacon search-lights of the Airway, with their ground letters
and numbers are passed one by one. Next, the stopping place at
Forrest is reached, and here the great aeroplane hangars, and
the Hostel, provide for the satisfactory working of the service
and the comfort of the passengers. Electric light and other ap-
pliances, refrigerators, sporting equipment, etc., enable the re-
mainder of the day to be spent in comfort. Brilliant illumination
yyyy yy
makes the whole aerodrome bright as day, and the early morning
start from Forrest brings with it a realisation that the night
spent in the desert has been both a novel and pleasant experi-
ence. As the sky in the East glows roseate with the coming
dawn, the big machine is away on its course.
Deviating from the railway line a direct course towards
Adelaide is now set, cutting across the coast-line at the head of
the Great Australian Bight. Soon wonderful coastal scenery ap-
pears, then the sheep-runs just inland, and later the wheat areas
leading to Ceduna.
A stay of half an hour is made at Ceduna, where refresh-
ments arc .served;' and already the passengers realise that their
journey is rapidly approaching its end, although less than 24
hours have elapsed since it commenced.
The final stage cuts along some beautiful bays and inlets,
and then the coast-line turns southwards while the aeroplane
crosses miles of wheat fields and a network of railway lines.
Then the gulf coast shows up and the great machine, with its
three powerful engines, crosses the Gulf and the Peninsula,
giving passengers a magnificent view of the vistas of landscape
and sea.
In what seems only a few minutes Adelaide can be observed
in the distance, and the fascination of beholding the beauties of
the setting of the Garden City of the South from above, coupled
with the realisation that the continent has been crossed in suclT
a short time sets most passengers thinking —"How soon can I
again enjoy such a journey as swift and safe as it is pleasant.”
Flying Time Schedule
WESTWARDS
ADELAIDE
Dep. 9.30 a.m. A.T.f Sunday
CEDUNA
Arr. 1.00 p.m. A.T.f Sunday
Dep. 1.25 p.m. A.T.f Sunday
FORREST
Arr. 5.00 p.m. A.T.f Sunday
4.15 p.m. C.T.f Sunday
Dep. 6.00 a.m. C.T.f Monday
5.15 a.m. P.T.* Monday
KALGOORLIE
Arr. 9.20 a.m. P.T.* Monday
Dep. 9.50 a.m. P.T.* Monday
PERTH
Arr. 1.20 p.m. P.T.* Monday
* Perth Time
fCentral Time
{Adelaide Time




The Realisation of an Ideal
JNTIL 1920 few appreciated the tremen-
dous service which aerial transport could
render in the development of Australia’s
inter-State commerce and communication.
In that year W.A. Airways demonstrated in
their first Mail Service —Perth to Derby, the
longest air mail route in the world at the
time—the safety and reliability of the aero-
plane. The success and growth of this air
line through service brought an opportunity
for greater service and the development of
an ideal—materialised in the new Perth to
Adelaide Air Mail Route.
Air Liners for the Service
De Havilland "Hercules” planes, powered
with three Bristol "Jupiter” engines, are to
be used. These planes and engines make
up England’s finest passenger-carrying air-
craft. They will be piloted by highly trained
and long experienced airmen. Skilled air-
craftsmen and exceptionally well equipped
aerodromes will ensure the highest mechani-
cal efficiency. The most exhaustive tests
were made in the selection of fuel and lub-
ricants. As perfect engine operation is an
absolute essential in an undertaking of this
kind, the result of these tests was the selec-
tion of the products of the Vacuum Oil
Company Pty. Ltd., namely, Plume Motor
Spirit and Gargoyle Mobiloil.
(AL)c\ HE Air Mail goes; A crescendo of sound from
mighty engines A ."A . shouting and waving of
farewells to passengers, and smoothly the giant "Her-
cules” takes off and speedily grows dim in the distance
, . . . carrying His Majesty’s mails and subjects
safely, swiftly on their journey. Australians can have
pardonable pride in the new East-West Air Mail Ser-
vice made possible by W.A. Airways.
<«uv


/T\OWN sinks the "Hercules” to the Hostel and
’Drome at Forrest —to be checked by mechanics
and refuelled. Here the Air Traveller finds a pleasant
interlude in his journey through the skies. Too soon
comes the just-before-dawn start . . the "Her-
cules” rises above the brilliantly lit aerodrome ....
and winging toward or away from him, greets old Sol
in the sky. *
Safety and Comfort
the East-West Route a chain of
a i r beacons and flood-lit landing
grounds make any necessary night flying
safe. The Hercules planes are equipped
with wing-tip head lamps and have special
braking on their landing wheels. Comfort
in the plane is provided by cushioned in-
dividual seats fitted with head rests. The
cabin accommodates fourteen people and its
temperature can be varied to meet changes
in weather.
The Forrest Hostel
At Forrest is the W.A. Airway’s Hostel-
equipped with electric light, refrigeration
and other modern conveniences. Tennis
Courts, a spacious Bridge Room, and most
comfortable sleeping accommodation will
make the travellers’ short stay at Forrest
enjoyable.
Future Development
Soon the development of great air lines
across the Commonwealth will mean the
erection of aerodrome buildings such as that
illustrated on this page. W.A. Airways
look forward to the future —determined that
the years will mean greater development of
the services they are offering the Australian
public. Pioneers to-day, they see a vision
of the future—a happy vision of Progress
and Aviation advancing hand in hand.


THE COMMONWEALTH
OF AUSTRALIA




G. W. Green A Sons Pty. Ltd..
438 Lonsdale Street. Melbourne.
