

COLOMIM, LIFE:
PROSE AND VERSE.
ELIZA D. RANDALL.
3|oiu Soit �ut ffilal g
ADELAIDE :
Feinted by Gall & Sheridan, 89, Kinq William Street.


/
?%
it > - dfl


�gOO!HEy> flJTO >
V v wt. Kit MRiriT .
,
Dear Deader ?
The following incidents have been
written not merely to amuse, but also in the
hope of gaining a little for a laudable object.
Trusting you will never miss the half-
crown this may cost you, whether considered
worth it or not,
I am, yours truly,
E. D. Randall.
Strangways? Terrace, April 29.




INCIDENTS IN COLONIAL LIFE.
RECOLLECTIONS OF MOUNT ELIZA?BAROSSA.
One fine morning (I do not care to say how long ago)
a party of ns, ten in number, including my baby and
nurse, started from House, Park, for
the District of Barossa, onr object being to select the
site for onr future residence, which was afterwards
named Glen Para.
My first amusing recollection of that day is that we
?who were supposed to be guiding some of our friends
who were ahead?lost ourselves, and soon discovered
we had been travelling in a circle; and at the end of
an hour or more were again on the spot from whence
we had started.
Soon after, while the whole party were travelling at
rather a brisk pace, the road being pretty good in that
part of the Rhine Ranges, we were all stbppcd rather
suddenly by hearing a noise very much like a cry of
distress. On turning back we saw the nursemaid, who
was on horseback, was caught in a tree by the skirt
of her habit, and her horse was moving on, leaving her
suspended from the branches. She, however, kept fast
hold of the bridle, and was soon rescued from her
uncomfortable position, with only a few scratches
and a torn habit. After lunching at our dairy
station, Mount _ Crawford, and having almost sump-
tuously regaled ourselves on eggs, bacon, fresh butter,


cheese, &c,, and tea, we again set out to see the
spot previously selected by my husband. We thought
it very beautiful, though rather too secluded, but the
proposition to open a view to a somewhat distant range
thickly wooded, by cutting down trees and thus making
an avenue, soon led to the decision that his selection
was a good one. Mrs. E., however, who was one of the
party on horseback, also Mr. A. and Mrs. J., proposed
that we should first ascend a romantic-looking hill close
by to see whether that would not be a still better place
for a residence. As we rode up Mrs. E. said to me this
hill must be called Mount Eliza, after you ; and so that
hill has retained the name ever since.
The view from the top of this mount was very fine
and very extensive, as it formed a complete panorama.
Many a project has been talked of for adding to
the beauty of the spot by erecting upon it, an octagon
tower for a summer house or arbour. This idea, it is
needless to say, was never carried out ?neither was the
suggestion of a well-known gentleman living not far
from Adelaide, that a wooden tower or resemblance to a
church steeple should be erected upon the trunk of a
large tree at the end of the avenue, the extent of which
then was about a mile and a half. It certainly would
have been a picturesque object amongst the noble trees.
To return to Mount Eliza. It was decided to plant
the whole of the south side of it?about seven acres??
with fruit trees of various kinds, mostly those that
would grow in England, such as apples, pears, plums,
damsons, &c., and in order to do so it was necessary to
cut down and take away a number of large gum trees
that were growing there.
One morning my husband gave particular orders
about the sawing up of a large tree, as it was one that
from the peculiar position of some of its larger limbs
required especial care to prevent accident. His orders
were not attended to, and the consequences, alas, were
dreadful. Eight or nine men were working and
drawing logs together with about twenty bullocks, I


well remember the particulars, because the shock was so
great to us all. A servant girl called us suddenly to
see from the terrace what could be the reason of the
noise and confusion, as if from some sudden alarm,
amongst the men on the Mount. Sad to relate, it was
caused by the falling of a limb upon the head of the
poor girl?s father, killing him instantaneously. The
screams of his poor wife and children who lived in a
cottage near might have been heard for half a mile.
B. was generally respected; a faithful and trustworthy
servant, and I believe a truly good man. This sad
event cast a gloom over the whole district.
The last incident of any interest connected with this
Mount or near the foot of it, was on the evening of
the day of Prince Alfred?s second visit to South Australia.
An immense bonfire was then lighted, and several tall
dead trees were set on fire to the very top, making as good
a substitute for fireworks as could have been desired.
I might amuse you with some news
About a sunny day,
When we set out, and thought about
A trip to Rapid Bay.
My mother and my mother?s son
(At least her son-in-law),
Who drove us tandem, bright and gay,
Sat in the seat before.
My husband much preferred to go
On horseback by our side,
And I, if I confess the truth,
Much envied him the ride.


But 1 was nervous, thinking all
Some caution would require,
Because the roads were had, and we
Might get into the mire.
My mother had not ever seen,
And therefore wished to sec,
The country there ?observing well,
Admired many a tree.
Our driver was inclined, of course,
To show, as best he might,
All that was beautiful and good,
Or novel to the sight.
It struck me, there was cause for fear.
As I sat just behind
Beside a governess, [who then
Was on the way to find
A homo- with them. Of her no more,
Tor here I could unfold
A tale so strange, romantic too,
But that it might be bold
To be communicative thus
Of lover?s wily snares,
? The world?s a stage, and all the men
And women merely players.?
Shakespeare was wise. But to return.
The foliage rich, not rare,
Attracted all so thoroughly
They had no time to fear.
Just as this happy point attained,
By some unlucky chance
The horses fell, the trap o'erturned,
Thus banishing romance.


So there we were upon the ground
Sooner than I can tell;
Though all were frightened, none were hurt,
So cleverly we fell.
A ? cooey? brought my husband back;
And much alarmed to see
All in such plight, the harness broke,
And horses kicking free.
So with rope traces, buckles tied,
And trap well smeared with mud,
Our dresses not the least improved,
And not a handsome stud
We reached Myponga. How we looked
We did not once enquire,
But thankful felt to find ourselves
Safe by a cheerful fire.
A LITTLE EXCLUSION.
One Saturday afternoon long years ago my sister and
I, who had promised to drive to Angastou, set out
with a German servant on horseback to show us the
way across the Rhine Ranges into Flaxman?s Yalley.
Just before we reached the head of that valley, how-
ever, I felt so confident that I knew the way, that I sent
the man back again, and we drove on by ourselves. We
talked away pleasantly and freely as sisters are very apt
to do when they have been separated for twelve mouths,
or nearly so, as we had then been. This led me to
forget my duty as driver, and in consequence, without
knowing it, I took a wrong road. On?on we went?
merrily chatting, and, I believe, singing, for we knew


there was no one to hear us except, perhaps, a wild
turkey or two, or the birds and opossums, when all in a
moment I was startled to find we were on a road I had
never seen before ; nor had I the slightest idea which
way we ought to go. For a few moments I felt
thoroughly alarmed, as it was getting near sundown,
and we were expected at L House by o o?clock.
Immediately it occurred to me?Oh! if we should be
really bewildered and lost as that poor young man was
who came out in the ship Templar with us. This young
man was a nephew of Mr. Bcddome?s, a well-known
minister in England, and soon after his arrival he took
a situation at a sheep-station in the country, and set out
alone to walk to it. Unfortunately he lost his way,
though not twenty miles from Adelaide, and getting
bewildered and alarmed?a state of mind I began to
think I understood at that moment?he walked in a
circle, constantly arriving at the spot from whence he
started when first he lost himself. The end of it was,
the poor fellow worn out with fatigue, hunger, and
thirst, lay down to rest, and was not discovered till a
long time after his death.
But to return to our own position. We soon re-
collected that the wisest plan was to follow the track
we were then on until we got to some station. We did
so, and soon our fears vanished as we could see signs of a
homestead, and on making it we were quickly guided
to the right road. This circumstance, however, led to
our being so late that we were given up for that
evening, and in consequence had to submit to a kind
but telling lecture on the impropriety of ladies
attempting to drive themselves through the bush without
some one to take care of them.
The next evening while we were all sitting round the
fire reading aloud in turn, a letter from Sir H. E. E.
Young was brought to Mr. A , asking if it would
be convenient to receive himself and suite the following
day. And so they all came, and the evening passed
away very pleasantly.


ABOUT A FAVOURITE DOG.
He started, turned, but could not see
A creature near. What could it be?
To him it was a mystery,
Eor he was only nine.
He searched, and soon the cause he found,
For lying near upon the ground
A starving puppy made the sound,
For it had lost its way.
He brought it home, and fed it well,
Soon could its sleek appearance tell,
That genial sympathy befel
The lost?or cast-away.
A noble handsome dog.
In colour and in form he grew
So nearly like to one we knew,
So very long, and valued, too,
Since one November fog.
One day when I out shopping went,
And with much care my money spent,
My thoughts engaged with this intent,
A stranger passing down
Noticed the dog. 1 saw too late
To stop him, and he followed straight,
Into a private door or gate,
And I was left alone.
One day my boy was going by
A field of corn then standing high,
When, lo! he heard a sudden cry,
Or, otherwise, a whine.


We advertised, but all in vain?
The dog was stolen, that was plain,
We ne?er set eyes on him again
For full six months or more.
About that time a stranger came
A letter introduced the same,
From our friend Jaques, or some such name,
And with him came our pet.
As least, one that resembled most
The dog we long ago had lost,
Suspecting truly he had cost
More than his value yet.
They called him Lion, but one word,
His name when he again had heard,
His pleasure really seemed absurd,
And showed him sharp and keen.
Nothing could stop him : he would play,
As if no time had passed away,
Or it had been but yesterday,
Since he had absent been.
A lawyer?s letter followed soon,
(At least, before another noon),
Assuring us it could be shown
To him we had no right?
But this was difficult to prove,
So wondrous is the power of love,
That could a faithful creature move,
And so the arbitrators saw,
To settle this no need for law.
The dog was ours for evermore,
Without the least dispute.


No need to say we all were glad,
Especially that precious lad?
To mention whom still makes me sad?
Who loved the faithful brute.
BUSHING IT.
One instance nut of many that might be enumerated of the difficulties
ladies in the country have to encounter in calling on their friends.
A middle-aged lady, living not a hundred miles from
the place where I am now writing, was determined to
show how independent she could be when she chose.
One morning about eleven o?clock this lady was un-
expectedly announced; and I shall not soon forget
how cheerful and well she looked. Her cheeks flushed
with excitement and unusual exertion.
She explained that the men servants were all bus} 7 ,
and she did not, therefore, wish to order one to drive
her, it being her wish to walk the distance (three miles)
alone, that we might have several hours of quiet chat
without the annoyance of knowing a servant was
waiting for her. She wished, however, to start early?
about three o?clock?to return home, as at that time
some of the children and their governess were to set out
to meet her, and thus she would have company half the
way home. We were most determined in our efforts to
persuade her to allow us to order a horse and trap to
send her home, but she would not yield to any persua-
sion in the matter. I walked part of the way myself,
and after I left, Airs. walked briskly on, though
the clouds looked very much like misty rain.
This incident,, if I remember right, occurred about
the beginning of June ?our Australian winter ?when


we had long nights and short days. About half-past
six or seven a man on horseback came with a note
enquiring whether Mrs. was staying all night,
as she had not returned home, and Mr. wished
to know that she was safe. Of course we were much
alarmed at this, and the man on being told that she had
gone would not wait for a note, but returned full
gallop. An hour after, to our astonishment, he again
returned, saying he had been galloping out of one
paddock into another, but it being so dark he could not
find the gate, so thus had an hour of much importance
been lost. One of our servants then went with him to
show him the way to the gate and into the public road,
hut by the time the man got home ? it was past ten
o?clock. Imagine for a moment this. Past ten o?clock
on a dark night, with drizzling rain, a lady with thin
boots out all alone in the bush! When the alarm was
given that she was missing no time was lost. Mr,
and several men-servants set out with lanterns in search
of her, making the well-known Australian cooey echo
through the valleys and surrounding hills. At last it
was answered by another cooey, and soon they all found
their way to the spot whence the sound had proceeded.
The first thing they saw was the smouldering remains
of a large fire, and on approaching it there stood the
lost lady as cool and collected as possible, but shivering
with cold. It seems it was this fire which had been
the cause of her missing her way, for, seeing a light in
the distance through the trees, she supposed it to be one
of the cottages near her own house, and without taking
the trouble to think, made her way to it. When she
got there she found it was a fire kindled under an
awning over a sawpit, the sawyers having gone home,
and left it burning. Knowing it would be impossible
to find her way home in the dark, she wisely decided on
staying there till morning. Mrs. reached home
about one o?clock in the morning wet and cold, and so
much upset that she did not recover from the effects of
it for several days.


REMINISCENCES OF ANOTHER FAVOURITE
HOC.
Twas on a bright and sunny morn,
Upon Guy Fawkes? day,
We set out for a pleasant trip,
To Einniss Yale, to stay
At least a fortnight with our friends,
"Who then were living there,
A visit they expected us,
To pay them once a year.
Soon a romantic toivn we reached,
Ry some the Horseshoe called ;
?Tis Noarlunga, where are seen
Hills that are far too bald.
?The dogs did bark?, the boys did shout,
As we were driving by
A bridge, near which they brought Guy
Fawkes,
To burn in effigy.
Then did old Trollop ? snort as he
Had heard a lion roar, ?
And trotted fast and faster still,
Than he had done before.
Willunga next we came to, where
We rested for the night,
Intending on our way to go,
As soon as it was light.
We rose at five, and soon I saw,
While waiting for the horse,
A noble looking dog come up,
I patted him of course.
He took encouragement from this,
And when upon our road;
We found that he had followed, since
He came to where I stood.


At Yankalilla next we stopped,
And here enjoyed much sport;
Out of the water he would bring,
Whatever he had caught.
I ought to mention we had not
Discovered yet his name;
A host of different ones we called,
To find the right our aim.
Xor did we know his name was Duke,
Till near to Rapid Bay,
Just as well worthy such a name
As any racehorse may.
So five and thirty miles he thus
Kept close behind our trap,
And when we reached our journey?s end,
My driver raised his cap.
1 Hurrah! for this courageous dog,
I?ll find out whence he came,
But well be kind, and feed him well,
And let him hunt for game.?
Opossum hunting chiefly there,
A few wild rabbits, too ;
?Tis hilly for an emu hunt ,
Or chasing kangaroo.
Returning home, we stopped again,
Where we had done before,
Thinking the faithful dog would stay,
And follow us no more.
But no, he would not leave us yet,
He trotted just behind:
To which we no objection had,
Still hoping we might find


Duke had no master; being fed
He might remain with us.
These thoughts were rather premature,
And hut of little use.
Two gentlemen upon the road,
Seeing the dog close by,
As to West Terrace we approached,
They rode up rather nigh.
And calling to the dog by name,
They quickly did alight:
Suiting the action to the word,
To us no pleasant sight,
Around his neck a whip they drew,
A collar made the thong
To hold, and guide him back with them,
Unwillingly along.
We turned to understand it all:
They readily explained,
Three months had passed since he was lost,
All searching had been vain.
Of course the owner was quite glad?
Grateful he seemed that day ;
But of reward or recompense,
He nothing found to say.
At this we were somewhat surprised,
And disappointed, too,
? But nothing venture, nothing have,?
It will be always so.
? Your thanks, kind sir, are not enough,?
Thought I, in moody cue.
? You said you?d other dogs like him,
So I shall write to you.?
And so I did ; and that same night
I posted him a note,
Showing our kindness should not be
Too readily forgot,


? Give us a puppy like this dog,?
I said, in language plain ;
To this he gave his quick consent
To send us one by train.
At last it came, and we were all
Of Duchess rather proud ;
When out with us, we often heard
Her beauty praised aloud.
She had her faults, and not a few,
But yet we can?t forget
That far too soon we had to part
With this our handsome pet.
You wish to know the reasons why?
Through mischief she had done,
By hunting calves, and chasing sheep,
Or catching one by one.
But seldom did she hurt them much.
Except perhaps through fright:
Still ?twas an irritating thing,
Occurring oft at night.
Why was she not secured you say
With collar and with chain?
She was, but always found a way
Of getting loose again.
And so the order came at last,
That secretly next day,
This gentle, handsome, noble dog,
Must now be put away.
I was an invalid just then,
And scarcely knew her doom,
Or probably she would have gone
To find another home.
All I can tell about her end
Is this?we knew she died,
Of how, and when, and where, not one
Of us was satisfied.


EARLY DAYS.
Recollections of a trip to the country in South Australia, in the
early days of the colony.
One morn we set out, without any doubt
Or thought of alloy, a trip to enjoy ;
With spirits elate, to see our estate,
And stay near awhile?many hours to beguile,
Was our wish and intention. Xor is it invention
To say we looked spruce, and the horse fit for use.
His name was Old Jack, but he was not a hack:
He was one who could boast of long pedigree, lost
To us only?for well, good sportsmen could tell
Of many a race, he had won with good grace.
He pricked up his ears, ne?er thinking of cares,
Such as climbing the hills, with consequent ills,
Of pulling and straining, no power of complaining,
Down many a steep, through waterholes deep.
Poor ignorant beast! so great was his haste
That morn to go thence, he jump?d over a fence,
A e?er throwing his rider, who was seldom a chider.
Bad roads, all the same, soon rendered him tame :
But the weather was fine, all things did combine
To make us content, and trouble prevent.
Our journey complete, we found it a treat
Mount Crawford to see, so quiet and free.
To me ?twas so new, and beautiful too,
That the time we could stay passed too quickly aAvay.
Our hostess ?now gone* ?by every one known,
Was gen?rous and kind, and never behind
In things to amuse, or in telling the news.
Her Scotch accent broad, to me made it hard
To answer her rightly, or even politely.
Her butter and cheese did everyone please,
And for goodness and size took m9,ny a prize.
* The late Mrs. Rankine.


At the end of a week, we all had to speak
Of the unsettled weather ?while heavy clouds gather.
Then, down came the rain, o?crflooding the plain.
The Para came dashing, and bubbling, and splashing,
And sparkling, and foaming?no fear of our roaming.
In two or three days there were bright cheering rays
Of an October sun. The clouds were all gone.
So with slight apprehension of further detention
We set out (near ten) on our journey again.
? 0 ! look, dear,? I said, as a little ahead
A wet-looking side I wished to avoid :
But scarce had I spoke (0, it was not a joke)
When down went the horse?we also, of course ?
In a bog so deep, no chance for a leap
To reach solid ground?none near it was found.
Lo! here was a riddle. Just into the middle
We had to descend. Alas ! no dear friend,
Or servant, or neighbour to lighten our labour.
Old Jack, pity him ; he could not move a limb,
So down on the bank his troubled head sank,
While he gave a deep groan, or piteous moan.
To describe every scheme were a tedious theme ;
Suffice it to say we got out that day,
Though we feared at first sight we might stay all night.
Tor several hours,* with threat?ning showers,
My husband stood in it, while every minute
I hoped help would come, and wished we were home.
But I had to assist in lifting, at least,
While trying to prove, ? ?twas a labour of love,?
To help him the while, and lighten his toil.
So there in the shade we a dressing-room made
(A bishop or lord could not better afford),
And many of us, have found it no use
To think of our station in this juvenile nation.
You may smile if you please, while you sit at your case,
But this I declare, if you had been there
You would have been vex?d at what I tell next.
* Slight exaggeration.


Just as our toilette was nearly complete,
Our trouble got through, and little to do,
A horseman rode by, and, hearing a sigh
Of relief, turned to know what there was he could do.
? You ought to regret that you are so late,
? ?Tis a pity I'm sure you were not here before,
? From our terrible plight, we are now nearly right
But the mud and the wet wo shall never forget.
Though strange it may seem, he after became
Our own overseer for more than a year.
His name was Snodgrass?poor Dickens, alas !
Is not here, or he?d seize some amusement from these,
My incidents true in a trip long ago.
?Well, and what became of poor Old Jack??
The last journey he ever, took was to Gumeracha.
The night after his return he got out of the stable
(which had thoughtlessly been left open), and found a
bag of corn, from which he ate too heartily, and in
three days he was dead. The afternoon before he died
he managed to get into the garden, and walking up the
laurel avenue, mounted up the terrace of the verandah
to the front door, as if intending to_ walk in. He was
evidently suffering much, and when petted leaned his
head against whoever did so in such a piteous manner
as to draw tears from every eye. Everything that could
be done was done in the hope of saving him, but all in
vain. The children wept over his grave.
Though we had a number of horses, Satirist was the
only one that seemed to take the place of poor Jack, and
we soon began to value him much. The children thought
him almost as good as the favourite they had lost. He had
this advantage over Old Jack ?he was a good and
trustworthy ladies? nag. Years rolled on, and he was
forgotten, when Satirist was ready for a gallop or
canter by the side of that noble horfee Prince. (But I
have something sad to tell about him presently).
One night Satirist became dissatisfied with the feed


in his paddock, so he tried to leap over a wire fence to
get at better grass. In doing so he caught his hoof in
the wire, and in endeavouring to extricate himself fell
down and rolled over and under the fence. His
struggles to get loose actually made the rich green
pasture as bare as though no blade of grass had ever
grown there.
Unfortunately it happened that the only man who
was living near in a cottage close by was deaf and
dumb, so the poor horse could not be heard, and in the
morning he was found dead, with the wire of the fence
coiled many times tightly round his hoof, and his leg
broken. Sad end this of another pet.
My tale about Prince is soon told. Being fleet and
enduring, and a very handsome horse, my husband
wished to ride him, and did so to Gawler and other
places occasionally. He was, however, too high spirited,
and on that account required more care and attention
than his master cared to give, therefore he was soon
given up to the use of the stockkeeper.
One day he was going out to hunt up stock and
bring in fresh cows to the dairy (we had at that time
about 100 cows milked there every day), and our dear
boy who had left school went with him. Sinclair (the
stockkeeper) was mounted on Prince, who was then
perfectly manageable, and Walter was on a little Timor
pony. lust as they started Sinclair said to his young
master, ? I?ll race you.?? ? Very well,? said he, and away
they wont. Soon the pony was ahead, and on Walter?s
turning in surprise to see how it could so happen, he
was shocked to see both horse and rider lying on the
ground. The man was bleeding from his ears and
mouth, in fact he had fallen on his head and nearly
broken his neck. Poor dear Walter: the shock was
terrible, and it was with difficulty he could make us
understand what had happened, so dreadfully did he feel
it. Sinclair lived a week or ten days with occasional
gleams of consciousness, and then died, leaving a young
wife and one child to lament their loss.


It was afterwards proved that neither man nor horse
were in the least to blame for this sad accident. Prince
struck his foot against a small perpendicular rock
hidden in the grass, and fell down, and the man was
thrown with his head against another similar rock, or it
is probable he would not have been much hurt.
As to the pony, that also lost its master, for dear
Walter died about twelve months afterwards. It is a
sad and melancholy story, and is referred to in the lines
on leaving Glen Para.
HOUGH TRAVELLING.
A few days before the consecration of the pretty little
church at W , the Bishop of and the
Misses promised to call at Glen Para. Mr.
and the three Misses were to accompany them.
At the time named we were disappointed in not
seeing them drive up, but instead, some old friends ?
Mr., Mrs,, and Miss from , near Adelaide.
This was an unexpected pleasure, while the expected
one did not then come, and some of the party never did.
Some hours afterwards a servant from our dairy
station, which was more than a mile from Glen Para,
came with a message to the effect that an accident of a
somewhat serious nature had happened, and prevented
them from coming.
?0 ! little do ye know
Who dwell at home at ease,?
the difficulties to be encountered in the bush.
The Lord Bishop, who was driving tandem, took a
track which he supposed to be the one leading to a gate
which unfortunately they had passed without observing.
It was, however, only a cattle track loading to the
dairy. In consequence of this mis,take they found
themselves surrounded by small rocks on each side, so
that they could not turn round easily to go back, but


must go over some rough-looking large rocks exactly
before them.
His Lordship drove over them safely, but Mr.
who followed, drove a little on one side, and his
trap turned completely over, throwing its inmates
heavily on the ground. Miss (a young lady
highly spoken of by all who knew her, and who died
some years ago)?was the only one who was much
hurt. She was taken home in a fainting condition, and
it was at first feared her injuries were of a serious
nature, she being obliged to have the help of a crutch
in walking when we next saw her. She was, however,
in a delicate state of health at the time, and her nerves
were too much shaken by this accident to allow of her
going out much after.
TEIAL HILL.
It will be long ere I forget that spot, and the terror I
felt when climbing it for the first time. There was no
made road, only a winding path over rocks and stones
up an almost perpendicular side of the hill. It was
with great difficulty a horse could be safely led up
drawing even a light empty trap. You should see it
now to understand what can be done where clear heads,
willing hands, and a full purse act in unison,
A clergyman, a friend of ours, who then lived near,
could give you a pathetic account of his first impressions
if you could only catch him when he is in the mood to
do so.
But I can tell you about an adventure connected
with a carriage and eight. I mean, as you already guess
?a dray drawn by eight bullocks. Fancy standing at
the foot of the hill described and seeing the heavy-laden
dray slowly wending its way up this unprotected road,
two ladies?(l beg pardon, not ladies but women; yet if
all ladies are women, is it not logic to say all women are
ladies?) ?upon the top of it. All at once you see, or


might have seen, the eight bullocks quietly continuing
their journey up the hill, while the dray and its valuable
load ran backwards down the hill with speed that increas-
ed every moment ?then down on the side of the precipice,
where there was no fence, no protection ot any kind.
One of the women jumped off almost as soon as she saw
what had happened. The other, though seeing the
danger, was very nearly half-way down the side of the
hill before she succeeded in getting off, which she at
last did, leaving half her dress, her bonnet, &c., behind,
and getting a few scratches and bruises. But the dray
continued its course, and at last reached the bottom,
when it turned completely over, smashing everything it
contained, and remained there a perfectly useless mass.
It belonged to us?the women and man who drove
were our servants. The dray contained crockery and
sundry useful articles, &c., &c., &c.; so have we not
reason to remember Trial Hill ?
about the DUKE OF EDIKBUEGH?S visit
TO SOUTH AUSTEALIA.
(Addressed to a Friend in England.)
My very dear Friend,
I am going to send
A few lines to amuse,
Though rather old news,
About the Duke?s visit;
And whoever sees it
Can?t think it is true
I have made ? Much ado
About nothing.?
Early that morn the welcome words,
? The Galatea is come,
The Eoyal Duke is here at last,?
Gave joy in many a home.


The bells did ring, the cannons fired,
The people were so glad ;
For hope deferred, the proverb saith,
Makes every heart feel sad.
For rumours long had been afloat,
?Twas far and near the same,
Attracting many from their homes
Before Prince Alfred came.
Bonfires, in honor of the Duke,
Were speedily alight?
Near forty miles they could be seen?
?Twas every one?s delight
To give a welcome! And in this
Mount Crawford must be named ;
The bonfire on Barossa hills
Was large, and should be famed.
The hill we called Point Alfred then?
And no one can dispute
The place is worthy of the name,
And will be in repute.
The view is most magnificent,
Including sea and laud ;
Bocks, hills and valleys, trees and flowers
Your eye can there command.
Until Glen Para we had left,
That place was our resort
Whenever we had visitors?
?Tis a romantic spot.
Within a hollow tree was placed
A bottle to enclose
Pencil and paper?there to write
Whatever any chose.
Of course their names were always signed,
And date, and place, and week,
In French and German, Latin, too,
And some, I think, in Greek.


(Excuse me, for I must diverge
A little now and then ;
And if my letter is too long,
AVhy put it down again
Until your humorous mood returns ?
For it is good to smile ?
As I have only written this
Spare moments to beguile.)
The first time here I saw the Prince
Was in King William Street,
As the procession passed the arch
Approaching Government Gate.
The day was warm and dusty too,
And I remember well
How dingy and begrimed were all?
Ko need was there to tell
The pleasure was a.little marred
Of those the ? Upper Ten? (?)
To know, though handsome they might
They were not handsome then.
The foremost carriages looked best,
And they escaped full well;
?Twas only those who followed them
On whom the favor fell
Of dust accumulating still
As the procession passed ;
So they were to be pitied most
W T ho were the very last.
The Illumination much deserved
Our praise, for all admired
The cleverness and skill displayed
By those with ardour fired
To show as much as possible,
That love and true regard
For our beloved' Queen and Prince
every one was shared.


It was a splendid moonlight night,
And all things did conspire
To make a fairy charming scene,
Of which one could not tire.
Some from the Gresham gallery,
And some from Sayings Bank;
We watched the promenading mass?
Plebeian and high rank.
The Levee should be mentioned next,
Por it took place next day ;
Of this I cannot tell you much,
I was not there to see.
My husband, father, brother, went
And something had to tell
Of naval, civil uniforms,
And how the Duke looked well.
Next let the General Post Oeeice
A little notice claim;
A noble building now it stands;
And well deserves the name
Victoria Tower. Thousands were there,
And we among the rest:
Prince Alfred laid foundation stone,
?Twas a complete success.
On this same spot with pleasure were
Four thousand children seen,
Singing most heartily the song
God bless our gracious Queen.
And now what shall I tell you more ?
Why this, that next we have
A long procession by torchlight,
Which real pleasure gave.
It was a very novel sight
The Government grounds looked grand,
Six hundred torches all alight;
And then the German band,


Always acknowledged to be good,
Had seldom honored been,
As now, to play before a Prince,
God bless onr noble Queen.
The Exhibition on Park Lands,
Drew thousands to the spot
(The Duke and suite attracted most),
Impatient they were not.
Although they had a little cause,
The Prince w 7 as rather late,
And being crushed as many were,
?Twas tiring there to w r ait.
Perhaps the timepieces were wrong,
And thus did many find
The people were before the time,
And not the Duke behind.
'Twas fortunate we had a place,
The best that could be found
To wait in?with police before,
To keep back those around.
For close by us the Duke would pass,
A path must be kept clear
For him?-so thus we saw him well,
As he approached us near.
But though we were close by the door
The Prince must pass that noon;
The crowd w 7 as so obstreperous,
We could not follow soon.
No prize had w T e, the chance to see
His lloyal Highness give,
So back w r e went the other way,
Quite glad of the reprieve.
For truly w r e w r ere prisoners,
Our limbs w r ere not our own,
At least we did not know their use,
So dense the crow T d had grown.


We staid awhile in hopes that it
Would pass?and let us near,
To look around?Alas, ?twas vain,
We gave up in despair.
The Exhibition as a whole
Good judges must admit,
Was well got up?much praise was due
To those who managed it.
The fifth November?well marked day;
A Grand Assembly Ball
In honour of the Duke was given,
?Twas at the new Town Hall.
So there again we saw the Prince,
He danced the Highland fling,
Perhaps we almost envied those
Within the favoured ring.
I do not mean a wedding ring,
Nor one of jewels rare;
But one composed of loving hearts,
All crowded round him there.
Perhaps I rather ought to say,
Numbers of persons stood,
Intent on seeing?caring not
To know if others could.
We could now tell of pleasant trip
Down to the Galatea,
And how some gained our true regard
The short time we were there.
This interest did not pass away,
Nor has it done so yet;
A correspondence was kept up
Which we do not regret.
My husband oft could not reply,
And I had this to do
Instead of him; but then we wrote
What all the world might know.


No need to say how we admired
H. M. S. Galatea,
And how her every requisite
Is fitted up with care.
The Grand Review on North Park Lands
We ought not to omit;
That also was a pleasant scene?
We well remember it.
We stood near Montefiore Hill;
The Prince rode slowly by?
His suite there, too?and all looked well,
But this no need to say.
A detachment of the 50th
(Queen?s Own) were there, of course;
Also the troops, and cavalry,
And Volunteer Force.
The ensigns soon advanced and knelt
Before the Royal Duke,
Who colors to the regiment gave,
Which they with pleasure took.
The colors Mrs. Fuller made
For the Rifle Volunteers,
(Called from this time ? Prince Alfred?s Own
Who gave the Mayor three cheers.
The Amateur Athletic Sports
Our notice next demand,
And all the usual course of feats
Upon the Cricket Ground.
My dearest father (now no more!)
Sat watching them with me ;
Feats of activity and skill
He always liked to see.
?Twas planned the Royal Duke and suite
Should a private visit pay
To our Botanic Gardens next
For planting there a tree,


Doubtless another reason still
Might here be given for this ?
These gardens are so beautiful
It could not be amiss.
To go almost alone to see,
For no one can deny
They are to South Australia
A credit any day.
Sir Dominick Daly gave a Ball
In honor of the Prince;
And our invites accepted were,
And well remembered since.
The long, close line of carriages
Made progress very slow,
Reminding me of similar scenes
In England years ago.
Arriving there, we bowed, passed on,
Sat down to watch entree
Of ladies splendidly attired,
Sufficient to convey
To any stranger the idea
(They would not yet confess)
Some daughters were of noble birth.
And wives admired no less.
We sat some time pleased and amused,
Then, mingling with the crowd,
Walked by the Governor?s dais again:
And to Sir Dominick bowed.
We thought him getting very thin,
And very very pale :
Yet still we hoped ere long to see
Him looking well and hale.
Long since?alas! ?he passed away:
One thought prevailed alone ?
Sincere regard, and deep regret.
And sorrow he was gone,


Again the Prince?s piper came ?
Again a ring they clear ;
The Royal Duke with favored few
Already dancing were.
This time I saw them very well,
I stood upon a seat;
As many ladies did the same,
I did not mind a bit.
To Gawler and Kapunda, too,
His lloyal Highness went;
A splendid railway carriage was
Prepared with this intent.
A similar scene to what had passed
The citizens among?
Imagine all, on smaller scale,
And you will not he wrong.
The Lakes were also visited ;
The rest if you would know,
Read narrative by J. I). Woods,
He published years ago.
Returning home, to my surprise,
My little girl had gone
Collecting grasses, ferns, and flowers,
With one idea alone.
She said, ? Mamma, it is my wish ?
To which Papa consents ?
That I should fill a box with them,
And send them to the Prince.'
? Of course, then, I shall not refuse,'
I said, and looked at them,
? They are not worth acceptance, dear?
They will not do for him.
But perseverance won success,
The box was sent away.
And soon a little letter came
From Mr. Yorke to say


Prince Alfred had accepted them.
E. 11. (then twelve years old)
Of course was pleased they were approved.
Soon after this we?re told
That Windsor Castle they had reached,
And were admired there,
And in the Princes? museum,
They were enclosed with care.
EXTRACT FROM A SECOND LETTER ABOUT
THE DUKE OF EDINBURGH?S SECOND VISIT TO
SOUTH AUSTRALIA AND OTHER INCIDENTS.
FEBRUARY 15th, 1869.
The second time the Royal Duke,
To South Australia came,
Great thankfulness pervaded all,
That he was well again.
For all were glad to see and know
He had recovered quite
From the assassin?s dread attack?
Of this I cannot write.
A splendid ball again took place;
A friend sat near that night,
Whose relative, Lord Beresford.
Was in the Prince?s suite.
My face was turned to speak to her,
And feeling rather warm,
I tried to get my fan again,
When something touched my arm.
On looking up, and quickly too,
A lady close I see;
Prince Alfred led her to my side,
And thus had startled me.


For I had not the least idea
That he was in the room ;
The time, I thought, had not arrived.
At which he was to come.
While promenading round the hall,
Many that we could name,
Looked noble, charming, beautiful,
And not a few looked vain.
One officer who sat alone,
With pleasant pensive air,
I thought him like a photograph
I?d surely seen somewhere!
Another claimed onr notice too,
And yet another still;
And many of this favoured land,
Did merit it a's well.
Prince Alfred laid foundation-stone
Of a Wesleyan College ;
May many a scholar rise to fame
And ? pluck the tree of knowledge
Sir James and Lady Pergusson
Were with the Loyal Duke,
With a long list of honoured names
Who pleasure therein took.
We were not there, though I admit
We gladly would have gone;
To crowded places ?tis not well
That ladies go alone.
* One gentleman went back with us
To our Glen Para home ;
The country he much wished to see,
Put verdure there was none,
Por everywhere the grass was white
Or brown instead of green,
Put the foliage of the trees in prime
Was worthy to be seen.
* i'rom H.M.S. ? Galatea.?


Tis pity he?s not here to write
A verse or two of this?
His visit to Barossa Hills?
For it did greatly please.
In every letter written since
Most clearly he has shown
?Twas one of the most pleasant days
That he had ever known.
There?s little more that T could tell
To int?rcst you or me,
But if His Highness comes again,
May you be here to see.
And now, my friend. I must conclude
This long and tedious letter ;
Be careful not to quiz it much,
Except you write a better.


ON LEAVING GLEN PAHA.
(Written while on a visit to Montura, January, 1872.J
? Farewell! a long farewell to all my greatness,?
If at Glen Para only it is found,
lor we have left it??tis no longer ours,
Still I like to sit in dreamy visions,
Dwelling on the past.
These pensive thoughts occurred to me
While walking up and down
Before Montura House, and I
A moment felt alone.
?Twas hut a moment, for the wind
Had roughly used my book?
The ? Cornhill??and a leaf was blown
Down in a cellar nook.
This roused me from my reverie;
And in a happier mood,
Complaining thoughts I drove away,
And dwelt upon the good.
At least I tried to do so?yet
About that pleasant home
I certainly could write until
Both tears and sadness come.
Glen Para was a charming place,
As any one would own,
Here, we may say? ? not knowing? it?
? Argues thyself unknown.?
My view may be a partial one,
But no one can deny
Nature had made it beautiful,
As seen from far or nigh.
Another reason why I love
The home that once was mine
Is that I planned and planted much.
And from my own design,


Aided by the superior skill
Of one I need not name,
Who, always willing, when required
His prompt assistance came.
So many a happy hour I?ve passed,
And many a walk enjoyed,
When probably I should have sat
Too closely occupied.
The avenue?s Tasmanian gum,
And horizontal pine ;
The lawn, enclosed with orange trees,
Hear fruits of every clime.
The rose of every kind and hue,
The olive and the oak?
(The emblem, too, of victory,
The laurel) ?quite a walk.
A sheltered pleasant winding walk,
With strawberries on each side
To form a border, making it
Refreshing oft beside.
Twas pleasant ?neath the trees to sit
In meditation sweet,
Forgetting life?s realities,
Or trying to forget.
The olive walk was shady, too,
Extending up a hill,
Hear which fine oaks and poplars grew,
I3y contrast looking well.
Hor must we pass the almond walk,
Hear never-failing spring
Of water ?ever clear and fresh ?
A good and useful thing.
As I sat reading near one day,
Under a spreading tree,
A shower made me quickly rise,
It came so suddenly.


The sparkling rain drops heavy fell,
A rainbow, too, appeared,
The finest one I ever saw ;
While many a warbling bird,
Chiefly the magpie, whose sweet note
Is music any hour,
Singing as if in gratitude
For this sunshiny shower.
I marked the date upon the tree,
For on that very spot,
Twelve years before, I stood to see
The first vines planted out.
The rainbow was so beautiful,
The shower was quite forgot,
Till finding I was getting wet,
I hasty shelter sought.
Just then a carriage ha'd arrived
With friends Avho came to stay,
Making a rather lonely place
Cheerful as merry May.
Games of croquet, trap, bat, and ball,
Playing at ? hide and seek,?
Opossum hunting by moonlight,
Passed many a pleasant week.
The vineyards should be mentioned, too,
Because the wines there made
Gained prizes and awards each time
They were exhibited.
In London, and in Paris, too,
And Melbourne ; also there
In Sydney, and in Adelaide
These wines did well compare.
Glen Para dates our children?s birth,
And many a tranquil hour ;
Nor time, nor place, from memory,
To banish has the power.


Then riding', reading, and duets
With those who understood,
And could discriminate between
The trivial and the good.
Then there were duties?pleasure, too,
With them did oft combine,
From picking fruit to gath?ring dowers,
And even making wine.
For their returns they?ve had to wait;
Wine-growers in the past
Have learnt the game of patience well,
And wealth should win at last.
Fnt mem?ries of that much-loved home
Are not uumixed with pain,
On earth no perfect happiness,
And so it will remain.
A moving panorama this,
? ?Tis change, for ever change
If nothing rose to trouble us,
We soon should think it strange.
. ? TT
' * The greatest trial we endured,
Would that we could forget;
Our dear?then only son?we lost,
With pain remembered yet.
Alas! my precious darling boy,
Hone knew how deep the love
We felt for him, and he for us ;
?Tis registered above.
Scarce seven weeks had passed away
Since he, dear boy, had gone
In health and buoyant spirits, too,
To see our cattle run.
* * *


I?ve tried, but cannot write of him,
He but returned to die,
In one short fortnight he had left
For brighter worlds on high.
I must pass over this sad tale,
And merely say how sure
We feel that he is happy now?
* Hot lost, but gone before.?
* *
* *
Most sacred thoughts must ever lie
Deep buried in the breast;
Ho eye but one can see or know
What cannot be expressed.
These clouds?these very heavy clouds
Have silver linings, too,
? And what we know hot now,? ?tis said,
?Hereafter we shall know.?
LIHES OH A SOFA
Unitor
?1 sing the sofa.? I who wrote
So late in loyal strain,
Of Royal visit to these shores,
How wish to write again
Upon another subject, yet
Though trivial I know r ,
Many would read with interest
Who saw it long ago.
I love my sofa! Well I may,
For few have better cause,
And that in this we may agree,
I?m telling how it was


That I became possessed of one,
That should be valued still,
Labour of love it might be called,
That name it merits well.
Pleasure to every one.
My sofa shows full many a rose,
But not one thorn is there,
Although they are not very fresh,
With scent beyond compare.
To this I no refusal got;
All readily replied
In the affirmative, and wrote
So pleasantly beside;
One only had they made before
Which equal credit shared.
' ; tr
With fine bouquets complete.


By chance, as if with one consent,
Except one square alone,
The donors all had chosen what
Has taste and beauty shown.
To make the whole an equal set,
With sofa cushion, too,
A Prince of Wales?feather?(l
Worked these myself)?although
I ought to call it ? Fleur-de-lis ,?
But let it pass this time,
For both are right, so neither wrong ;
(Excuse my doggerel rhyme.)
At last my sofa reached our home,
In distance many a mile:
Whoever saw admired much,
And always with a smile.
A few short months, alas! and then
Another journey lay
Before my sofa, and ?twas packed
Eor going far away
From dear old England. Many tears
Shall I confess, were shed,
Before again it saw the light
In dusty Adelaide.
I?ve said enough, or I might write
Of what the moth can do,
And how 4 Old Time? has done his part
To make it passee now.
Beauty will fade, and time will fly,
And changed may be our lot,
But this old sofa will ensure
Old friends are not forgot.
?


RAMBLING RECOLLECTIONS.
Written in the Botanic Gardens.
I?m sitting by a mystic bridge
Near to a tiny island ridge
Or mound?whate?er you like to 1 call?
Close by a mimic waterfall.
Cape lilies flourish all around,
And plants and various shrubs abound.
?Tis of this splendid garden now
I fain would write, but well I know
To do it justice were as vain
As to command sunshine or rain.
So I won?t try, but straight confess
To see is to believe in this.
My mind recurs ?why I don?t know ?
To pleasure grounds seen long ago
In England ; still I may forget
The where, and how, and when, as yet,
But of one garden I have read.
A humourous clever dog (?) has said,
? I am His Highness? dog at Kew?
Pray tell me, sir, whose dog are you ? ?
But here a clever dog (?) might say,
? Why don?t you let me in, I pray,
To walk, and for my mistress be
Cheerful and quiet company ??
Those English walks I can?t forget;
Hyde Park and Surrey thought of yet.
Then there was charming Kensington,
St, James? Park I know was one,
I often walked there?not alone.
We have a Kensington out here
In this new world Australia
(Of course ?tis yet beneath compare),
But now the contrast is as great
As possible since ? forty-eight.?


Then, or a year or so before
(The time exact I am not sure)
When driving there we crossed a creek,
And ere we thought to move or speak
A treach?rous sandbank let us down,
And we were in the water thrown.
My husband said, ? Be quick, I pray,?
For in the rippling current lay
The horse and trap with me. Alas !
He was so fixed he could not pass
To help me, so I had to creep
Along in water rather deep.
To me the fun (excuse my ink)
Was not so great as you may think;
For, though we were not hurt at all,
So gently did we chance to fall,
My whole attire ?new and complete?
(A handsome silk with mantle neat)
Were now so drenched you may be sure
I could not wear them anymore.
To keep appointment we had gone
At a naval captain?s home (well known),
Whose wife expected us that day,
But all in vain. Another way
We had unwillingly to go,
Both wet and cold, and chilly too.
But here one word I must recall,
Nor say ?unwillingly? at all,
For to my sister?s house we went
To see them, and with full intent
To change our clothes, enjoy the joke,
And say what might be freely spoke.
They laughed when first they took a peep
At us thus drenched. No use to weep?
Pity ?twas not?'tis great relief
To do so when you come to grief,
But to make light of troubles ever
Will sweeten life, and sadness sever.


ABOUT A LITTLE LOYE AFFAIR.
A kind-hearted woman servant many years in our
employ caused us some amusement. We will call her
Polly, although she did not always bear that name.
One morning, thinking her looking more grave than
usual, I said, ? What is the matter, Polly?? She replied,
� I wish to give notice to leave, ma?am.?
4 1 thought,? said I, 4 you promised never to leave us
except compelled to do so through illness. Are you
going to be married??
4 Perhaps I am, ma?am.?? 4 You do indeed surprise
me. Who is to be the happy man ? ?
4 Well ma?am, I?m not quite sure ; I can?t decide
exactly.?
4 Why, how is that? You ought to have known
before you gave me notice to leave, certainly.?
4 Well, ma?am, there is a tall young man as wants
me ; he is a sheepshearer, and there is an older man as
used to work here?he is better off; and he has asked
me, too; and I don?t know which I like best,? said Polly.
4 Then, why leave us at all at present??
4 0, I must,? said she, 4 but I am so sorry to go.?
Polly left at the time appointed, and went to stay
with a friend, she having no parents in the colony.
As weeks passed away, and I heard nothing of the
wedding, I determined to go and see her.
To my surprise she offered to return to our service,
saying she would not marry at all. She came back soon
after as we had not been well suited with a servant in
her place, but she did not seem either settled or happy
long. In less than twelve months she became the wife
of one of the two men before mentioned, the other
having previously married another girl.


MY MOTHER?S ROSE.
Lines written on the first rose that blossomed on a tree planted by
my mother.
? She had watched, but died the day it was full blown.?
That rose, alas ! it faded too soon;
I watched it with tender regret
That she who had planted and cherished the hud
Hid not see it expand, even yet
I remember the pang, as I plucked and took care
Of all that remained of that" rose,
While wishing e?en then I could understand here
If such thoughts a freed spirit e?er knows.
Small insects had caused premature decay,
It pained me to see their success :
Its leaves were all withered and spoiled in a day,
But yet, did I love it the less ?
0, no; for the hand that had planted was gone,
Her life passed as quickly from earth
As that rose. And alas, we shall sadly miss one
Long acknowledged of heavenly birth.
She has entered, I know, on her glorious rest;
I would not recall if I could,
For He who has taken away knew it best,
? Let him do as (it) seemeth him good.?
Saturday, November 2.


WRITTEN IN WELLINGTON SQUARE
I would I were a butterfly,
Or any creature free
Erom care and trouble : life?s a bubble,
As any one may see.
? Poor insect, what a little day
Of sunny bliss is thine,?
But oft I think it better far
Than such a life as mine.
Stay, murm?ring spirit, say no more,
Or soon thou may?st regret:
Remember all the mercy past,
And that expected yet.
Faith must not fail, nor hope expire,
Nor thoughts of goodness cease,
Nor may?st thou cherish stricken heart
Devoid of joy or peace.
Old Time is ever on the wing;
To-day the sun may hide
His cheering rays behind a cloud,
To-morrow long abide
Driving away both mist and gloom,
And causing much surprise,
That e?er we doubted Providence,
Or tears had dimmed our eyes.
I?m standing ?neath a shady tree,
With Fido at my feet,
Trying to catch a cheering thought,
Or new idea to meet.
Alas ! I try, but try in vain,
I?m in no happy mood
Or I might write of Wellington,
The noble and the good.


Gain courage from that famous Duke,
So fitted to command:
But that I cannot find a seat,
And am obliged to stand.
So I?ll return, and trust next time
I ramble in this square
There?ll be a seat, a good one too,
That others, too, may share.
ABOUT AN OLD SERVANT?S MISFORTUNE.
?Bold peasantry, their country?s pride.?? Goldsmith.
It is very difficult to get good servants, and when
obtained it is most unpleasant to have to part with
them. Many a trusty servant it has been our good
fortune to have, and amongst them I shall name one,
who may possibly be a little surprised at thus seeing
his name brought before the public, but I know he and
his good wife will readily forgive me.
P. M. was engaged from the ship he came out
in, and he and his family stayed seven years in our
employ ?(more than half the time P. was overseer)
?and our attachment to and respect for them was
constant and sincere. P. with all his family are still
living, and in prosperous circumstances now. While at
Mount Crawford, at our dairy station, their second son
fell from a horse, and broke his leg, and Mr. Randall
assisted a doctor in setting the limb. While the poor
boy was confined to the sofa through this accident, and
when all had gone to bed, one night the roof of the
cottage took fire. Being a thatched one it was soon in
a blaze, and it was with the greatest difficulty the
family escaped without being burnt?leaving almost
every article of -clothing and nearly all their little
furniture to the flames.


This poor boy with the broken leg had the presence
of mind in the confusion to throw himself off the sofa
on to the floor, and roll over and over till he got into
the middle of the road, and thus saved his life.
It was believed that the roof had been maliciously set
on fire.
The whole family were thus suddenly left entirely
destitute, but the prompt assistance of friends at Pcwsey
Yale, Springfield, and Angaston soon made them com-
fortable. and supplied their immediate wants, for which
they always appeared very grateful.
P. was ever ready at his post, and never known to
fail in any duty. Mrs. M. was also most kind,
attentive, and self-denying in any cases of sickness or
emergency.
One night about twelve or one o?clock I was surprised
to hear my name called by a female voice outside my
bedroom window. It was Mrs. M., who had walked a
mile and a half in the middle of the night in order that
she might get assistance for a sick neighbour. But if I
say any more about her I shall be considered blameable
for making invidious distinctions, because there are so
many self-denying people to be found, especially in the
country. Some old servants, named S. deserve especial
mention. This has been done already elsewhere.


A RUN-AWAY MATCH
Of rat her a novel character I shall not soon forget. It
came about in this way?
A young girl, one of the neatest, most orderly, and
best servants we ever had, requested one morning to be
allowed to go and see her friends, promising to return
home the following day.
Of course she had permission to go, but when the next
evening arrived, she was still absent, as also the day
after. On the morning of the third day a party of
friends from Moorooroo and Lyndoch came unex-
pectedly, and while we were at dinner one of the
subjects of conversation was the trials some mistresses
have to endure through independent-spirited servants.
Just then Tilla arrived, and I went to speak to her as
soon as possible, intending, of course, to reprimand her
rather severely for neglect of duty, when she surprised
me greatly by showing me a wedding ring upon her
finger.
? Why did you not tell me, Tilla, you were going to
be married ? ? said I, ? then I should have been spared
much trouble.? *
? 0 ma?am, because my friends intended to prevent me
having Jim, if possible.'
She then explained that she had been to Trinity
Church, Adelaide, with Jim, and they were married
there by licence. They rode on horseback to meet the
mail, and returned in the same manner ; and the whole
affair was managed cleverly and well.
They remained in our service seven or eight years
after that, and as far as I knew never regretted this
adventure.


A SINGULAR CHARACTER.
Another who caused us much fun. His name?o, I can?t
remember that; but he had five or six I was told, and
one I heard was Spanish. A clever fellow he was
without any doubt, and capable of doing anything he
chose to turn his hand to, good, bad, or indifferent;
but one of the worst things I ever knew him to do was
to steal the heart of one of ray servants ?a pretty
housemaid ?and tempt her to leave my service in the
expectation of being his wife. Rut they disagreed
about something?l don?t know what?and so he ran
away, and she married somebody else, and lived happy,
I ''suppose, ever after.
Rut I have begun at the end of my story, and
therefore must begin again.
One day, some months after H.M.S. Galatea had left
South Australia, a good-looking young man in a sailor?s
dress called at Glen Para, and asked for work.
He said ho had been a sailor on board the Galatea,
and was out on leave of absence, as he was getting tired
of a sailor?s life, but if ho chose to return he would be
again deceived on board one of H.M.S. vessels, he
having a good character with him. He had a very fine
voice, and a retentive memory, and used to sing to the
great amusement of the servants particularly who were
able to hear him. In the back kitchen, where the cook
usually spent the greater part of her time, there was a
square hole for a ventilator to prevent the chimney
from smoking. It was behind a plate-rack, so that no
one in the kitchen could observe it, but through this all
that was said or sung could be easily heard by any one
who chose to take the trouble to go near that ventilator.
This singing soon attracted some of the children to
that spot, and they were so pleased and so much
amused, that they induced me to go and hear him too.
He was singing a song composed by the boatswain
and some others on board the Galatea, and it could not
I think have less than thirty or forty verses in it. It


described in rhyme some of the incidents of interest at
every place visited by the Galatea, and had at the end
of every few verses a chorus. This song he said had
been added to time after time, and it was frequently
sung on deck, when Prince Alfred would good
humourcdly join them in singing the chorus. I was
wishful that my husband should hear him sing this
song, and therefore he was invited into the dining-
room one evening, when he deliberately sat down and
sang through the whole song, to the great amusement
of all.
A few days after this a party of friends from Pewsey
Yale called, and this man was sent for from his work
(wine-making) to come and sing this amusing song to
them, as they wished to hear it, after having heard so
much about it. Ho dressed himself neatly, and with a
light-blue cap in his hand, sat down and deliberately
went through the whole song, with a few slight
mistakes in the rhyme, doubtless from being a little
nervous.
He did his best to convert the cook, for he was a
staunch Homan Catholic, and his long speeches in Latin
used to puzzle her greatly. She was no match for him
in argument, though she was clever, very well-educated,
and not a very young girl.
He made himself so useful and so agreeable, for he
had also been a gentleman?s servant or valet, always
ready for any emergency, that by degrees he won the
regard of all the family, and was often allowed to take
the place of a man whose business it was to drive, or
accompany any of the family on horseback. This led
to a jealous feeling, and one morning he was unable to
make his appearance or attend to his duties. We soon
learnt that the reason was the men on the station had
been threatening to fight him, being determined, as they
said, ?to make the place too hot to hold him and he
being a very hasty temper, had fought, and in conse-
quence got two of the blackest eyes 1 ever saw.
He gave notice to leave; in fact ho could not have


V gvor J
stayed to be comfortable after this, and we never saw
him after.
I do not think I ought to omit mentioning that he
described most vividly that terrible storm encountered
by H.M.S. Galatea at the Cape, and spoke in the
highest terms of H.E.H.?s undaunted courage at that
time. He also said it was the opinion of all that they
would never weather that storm ; in fact they believed
they would be lost.
To me his account of this storm was exceedingly
interesting, because that very same night that it
happened I awoke in a terrible fright, having dreamt
that vessel was sinking, and that I saw the Duke of
Edinburgh standing on the bridge without his hat, his
hair blown by the wind, and one hand stretched out as
if to give the word of command. I dreamt I saw the
waves mountains high, and my impression of seeing
flashes of lightning was so strong that I got out of
bed and went to the window before I could be con-
vinced it was only a dream. It is more than five years
since I had that dream, yet I have it clearly in my
recollection with the idea given at the time, that a kind
Providence was watching over them.
