

Independeqt jSlafo-tfilifcing.
Biography, estimonjals
And Firess Ifotlcra
OF
FRED EVANS,
ftljc SSorlb-mtofancb Stnsitibt for
PSYCHOGRAPHY,
OR
Ssid@pmdiQiit State^"Writtag«
HJdbmmu:
PATER & KNAPTON, GENERAL PRINTERS,
290 J Little Collins Street.


The
his mec
of the (
has apj
bered t
by his 5
merits
manifei
sent us
the Mu
it was s
future.
Evans’
a copy
we hav
the art
He is
with p]
subject
>dium:
;ver since X
; columns*
his work
e remem-
anguages
;d on the
irdeal the
Ir. Evans
> print in
No doubt
ive in the-
:h of Mr.
r requestff
us, which
long with
9, 1862,
iearance.
He was
which
indicated ms meuiuimsuc nai’uie, uul cum,ciumg wmvh he then
had no knowledge.
At the age of thirteen he entered upon a seafaring life. He
was then a bright, active, muscular boy, quick to learn, and
perfectly fearless of danger. He soon became thoroughly familiar
with his duties. No old sea-dog could “ shin up ” a rope quite as
rapidly as Fred, and none was more ready to respond to every
call of duty.
This period of his life, from the age of thirteen to twenty-one,,
was one of unusual hardship and danger. His first venture was
upon the barque “ Loraine,” which was wrecked in the English
Channel, and our sailor boy barely escaped with his life. His
next venture was upon the steamship “ Teutonia,” which is
unmarked by any important event. His second voyage, by the
same steamer, was one of continued accident and danger. A
fearful gale was encountered off the coast of Spain, the vessel lost
her propeller, the sails were blown away, and for nine days the
ship drifted at the mercy of the wind and waves. In endeavoring
to land in small boats several of the crew lost their lives. A
harbor was finally reached, repairs made, and the ship set sail for
Havana. Before reaching its destination the propeller again
dropped out, an accident which our young sailor foretold, and
warned the captain to prepare for, but his warning was unheeded.
But without attempting to follow him in all his voyages, or
note the many important incidents in his seafaring career, we will
touch only upon the more important points.
In the voyage on the barque “ Cynosure ” from London to
Australia, the cook, who had been acting strangely for several
days, after preparing the evening meal ready for serving, jumped
overboard and was lost. Lots were cast to supply his place, and
Fred was elected. On entering the galley to serve up the food,


3' ' ■
M S OI
the dishes began to clatter and skip about in an unaccountable
manner, and he fled in dismay to the deck ; but he soon overcame
his fears and returned to his task, when he found everything quiet.
It was during this voyage, in a fearful storm, that a wave broke
over the ship washing bred overboard. A few moments after-
wards, by the lurch of the vessel, or possibly by the aid of those
powers which ever attend him, he found himself again on deck and
ln tact, he seems in his perils by sea, to have borne a
charmed life, as we ooubt not he did. The storm raged with
great fury for many days. During its progress, when the crew
were all on deek working for dear life to save the ship, he was
sent into the forecastle on an errand. The place was quite dark,,
but light enough for him to see a strange man standing there, who-
showed him a knife wound in his breast from which the blood was
flowing. Fred noted his dress and appearance, but did not stop
long to make his acquaintance. He told his shipmates what he
had seen, and the following day he was sent for by the captain and
requested to recount his experience. He was informed that his
description tallied exactly with that of a Spaniard who was stabbed
and killed in a personal affray during a former voyage, and con-
cerning which young Evans knew nothing.
This voyage lasted eighteen months, and was a series of
accidents from first to last. He was warned by the invisibles not
to ship in the vessel again, and although the captain, who had
treated him very kindly urged him to do so, he refused. In her
next voyage the ship w T as wrecked off Cape Horn and all on board
lost.
Our young sailor’s next voyage was on the “ Shatamuc ” to
New York. This vessel was water-logged, and for eleven days
the crew were obliged to sleep in the rigging, where they subsisted
on a cracker a day to each man, and a little water which they had
been able to secure.
Evans is an expert swimmer, strong of limb, and perectly cool
in time of danger, qualities which have enabled him to rescue
several persons from drowning. In March 1881, a laborer fell in
the Bramley Moore Dock, Liverpool, and would have drowned but
for the timely assistance of Evans, who sprang into the ice cold
water and bore him to the shore. A few days later a man fell
from the Huskisson Dock, Liverpool, whom he also saved
from drowning in like manner. But the most noteworthy incident
of this kind occurred in April of the same year. Mr. Evans was a
w passenger on a steamer on an excursion trip on the river Mersey.
There was a crowd of young people on board, who, on the return
trip, and when nearing the wharf, became quite boisterous. One
of the gangway fenders became displaced in their rovstering, and a
young lady was crowded overboard. Mr. Evans, who was standing
in another part of the boat, on hearing the cry, “A man over-
board ! was suddenly impelled by a mighty impulse to leap to
her rescue. He did so, notwithstanding he was encumbered
with heavy clothing. Seeing a white object floating near, he
seized it. It was the form of the woman, who fortunately for the
brave swimmer was insensible. It was 10 o’clock in the evening,
and the night was very dark. All was confusion on board, the
boat was stopped, and an effort made for their rescue. But they
were lost in the darkness, and it was supposed that both were
drowned. Evans bore up the fainting woman, and manfully struck
out for the shore, which he reached in safety. For this act the


Liverpool Shipwreck and Humane Society voted him the thanks
of the Society for his bravery, with a present of £2. The Society’s
certificate, which he has framed, is one of his most cherished
treasures.
Mr. Evans’ next venture was in an old barque in the cotton-
carrying trade which was wrecked in the mouth of the Mississippi
river. Next in the position of Quartermaster, on board the steam- A
ship “ Arabic,” he made a voyage from Liverpool, via the Suez ™
Canal, to India, thence to China and Japan, and thence to San
Francisco, where he was honorably discharged. He was after-
wards engaged for two years as Quartermaster on various steamers
in the coasting service, running to Victoria and other ports, and
making two trips to Alaska, This ends his nautical career, which
is quite enough for a young man then only twenty-two. He has
some eight or ten honorable discharge papers, with several
personal cards of merit, which he highly prizes..
In 1884 he commenced the investigation of Spiritualism, his
first experience being at one of Mrs. Foye’s public test
given at Washington Hall, on Eddy Street, in this city. Venturing
in there one evening, from curiosity, with a shipmate, his com-
panion was dumfounded by hearing a name given, known to no one
present but himself, with a descripton of the manner of his demise,
when, where, etc. Evans became much interested. He visited
several mediums, all of whom assured him that he would be a
powerful medium himself, if he would only sit for development. He
finally concluded to do so, and after sitting every evening for about
three months, and when about to abandon the effort in disgust, he
received the gift of independent slate-writing, together with that of
clairvoyance, clairaudience, and other phases.
In February, 1885, he gave his first professional seance, since
which time he has been constantly employed. At that time his
means were exhausted, and it became necessary that he should
receive pay for the exercise of his gifts.
On the 21st of June, 1886, Mr. Evans went before the Society
of Progressive Spiritualists, where his guide, “John Gray,” pro-
duced over thirty messages between a pair of sealed slates in the
hands of a committee chosen by the audience.
In March last, the editor of this journal went with him before
a large and intelligent audience in the city of San Jose, where,
under crucial test conditions, he produced about eighty messages
upon five slates—the slates being prepared and held by a sceptical iff
committee. A few weeks later the writer accompanied him to
San Diego, Los Angeles and Santa Barbara, in each of which
places, before critical audiences, and in like manner as at San
Jose, he never failed to produce from four to six slatesful of mes-
sages, including several pictures of prominent deceased Spiritualists.
[A full account of the public meetings held, appeared in these
columns at the time ; hence we will not repeat it here.]
We have held many experimental seances with this medium,
and have obtained through his guides some of the most remarkable
manifestations. We have received as many as nine slatesful of
writing at a single seance, and on other occasions some excellent
sketches and pictures, all of which have been produced in-
dependently, and under conditions to satisfy the most sceptical
mind of their genuineness.
In these seances we have diligently sought to solve the mys-
tery of the power that works through him, or in his presence. His


psychographic control, “ John Gray,” has demonstrated himself
to us as a living personality, distinct and separate from the medium.
He gives us a history of his life, when and where he passed on to
the other life, the nature of the work in which he is engaged, etc.
He tells us that he has controlled various mediums, finding his
present medium a better instrument than any he has heretofore
used. “ Stanley St. Clare,” who first came at one of our private
experimental seances, is also a living personality to us. He says
r he was an artist in earth life, and his work, independently, upon
the slates, bears out his claim.
Mr. Evans’ future work will no doubt bring him prominently
before the public, in other parts of the world, as he is the only
medium of which we have any knowledge who can perform such
wonders in the presence of a promiscuous audience, and under like
conditions.
(The Mail, Stockton, March 28, 18S8.)
Medium Evans.
Wonderful Feats in Independent Slate-Writing, And How He
a “ Mail” Sceptic Who Had a Sitting With Him Yesterday.
dhe Mail’s anti-spiritualism reporter has seen a good many
alledged manifestations by spirits ; but they were all such trans-
parent frauds that his unbelief was made stronger than ever—not
quite all, either,, for there was one medium who performed certain
tricks which the reporter could not fathom ; but he was caught up
so many times in the seance, and fell into so many little traps
laid for him, that the interviewer regarded his performance as all
of a piece throughout. The readers of the Mail have had reports
by the ante-spiritism man from time to time, the articles on sit-
tings, slate-writings, lectures and circles (except that published
last Monday) having been written by him.
It was, therefore, with a foregone conclusion that he would dis-
cover another fraud that the reporter took a “ detail ” yesterday,
and accompanied by a friend named Farnoll, wrapped at the door
of No. 81 in the Yo Semite house and called for .Medium Fred
Evans. A young man wearing a love of a smoking jacket res-
ponded. He had made an engagement for 4 o’clock he said, and
as it lacked but a few minutes of that hour the visitors would have
to wait a while ; if the party of the second part to the engagement
did not show up, the interviewers would be accommodated with a
sitting. During a fifteen minutes general chat which followed, the
reporter studied Mr. Evans’ face. The medium is apparently an
Englishman, about twenty-five years old, rather dark complexioned,
and has a pleasing expression and a kind, frank manner. He is
somewhat good-looking and has features indicative of a noble spirit
in other words, he looks like a newspaper reporter.
SEALED SLATES.
After it had become apparent that the former engagement was
not to be kept, Mr. Evans invited the two visitors into his seance
room. They took seats at one side of a writing desk, Mr. Farnoll
occupying a chair near a corner of it, and the medium sat at the
opposite side. The reporter produced two small slates which he
had just bought, and, as he thought they might perhaps leave his
hands, sealed them together with slips of paper on which some
name had been printed to his order. He argued that as the medium
could not have duplicates of the slips, it would be impossible to
open the seals without detection, even should the slates be taken


into another room. The precaution, however, proved to be need-
less ; for the slates did not leave his hands.
This test was not very satisfactory. When the slates were
opened by the interviewer at the close of the sitting no writing was
found within. There was, however, a rude profile sketch of a face,
about as large as the half of a silver dollar piece. During the con-
versation before the sitting, Mr. Evans had said that he could not
assure his visitors of the success of the sealed slate-test which they
proposed ; and that, as they were newspaper representatives he did ”
not care to undertake it, for a failure would be interpreted as a
negative evidence of fraud on his part. But on being informed that
they desired that particular test he assented.
INDEPENDENT WRITING.
While the reporter held the pair of slates Mr. Evans picked
up two five-cent school slates, wiped them clean with a sponge, ex-
hibited both sides of each, and handed them to Farnoll. The re-
porter watched this proceeding carefully to be sure that neither of
the slates went below the table, for in that case it would have been
an easy matter to substitute for it one that had already been writfa
ten upon. But the slates were held a foot above the table—or
writing desk—and were exhibited on both sides at the instant they
were handed to Farnoll. He held them in his hands twenty minutes
or so, and upon opening them found a closely-written message,
covering one side, signed by a dead relative.
During the twenty minutes that the last-described manifesta-
tion was being awaited, the medium performed another test. He
cleaned a slate, displayed both sides and laid it down on the carpet
at Mr. Farnoll’s feet. In doing so, it passed for an instant behind
a corner of the desk, so that this test in itself might not be con-
sidered at all satisfactory (inasmuch as there was a slight chance
for substitution of slates) were it not for the other instances in
which the slates were held above the table and in which there was
not a ghost of a show for fraud. Farnoll placed one foot upon the
slate, and after a few minutes picked the tablet up and found upon
it a message from an aunt of his who died in the East, and whose
name had never been mentioned by him, even in his family.
TELLING NAMES.
In the interim from time to time, while awaiting messages on
the slates, Mr. Evans gave some remarkable performances. To
the reporter he said a spirit was present giving a name which, he
said, he could catch exactly. He repeated three or four names,
all similar to the reporter’s but not identical with it. The reporter W
said he knew of no such person. Taking a slip of paper, the in-
terviewer then wrote two names, folded them up and placed them
on his sealed slates. There was a bureau and its mirror at one end
of the table, and, although the medium sat with his back to it and
his side to the writer, the latter thought it best to avoid any possible
reflection by shading the paper from observation with his hand
while he wrote As soon as the names had been written and held
beneath his thumbs on the slate, Mr. Evans remarked that he could
then give the name which he had been unable to pronounce before,
and he spoke it. It was one of the names on the slip. He next
wrote that cognomen in full, together with the spirit’s two Chris-
tian names. The second name on the slip was also given.
A like manifestation was given to Mr. Farnoll. The signatures
of the messages which he received were the names he had written
on a billet of paper which he held in his hand.


THE CLOSING TEST.
But the last test was the most striking of all. Mr. Evans
picked up a slate from a corner of the table and, remarking that
the reporter might be so sceptical as to think that there was a
message already written upon it and that it was simply concealed
from his sight by some wonderful chemical process, he scratched
both sides of it pretty well with his pencil, spat on in and rubbed
, the marks out. He then held it near the reporter’s face and turned
' both sides of it to prove that they were clean. He next placed the
■slate down on the centre of the desk, with a bit of pencil under it.
The reporter laid his hand upon the slate for a few moments—five
or ten seconds —and then picked it up. He found upon it a
message directed to himself and signed by a dead relative.
This closed the seance.
WRITTEN IN COLORS.
Another Mail man visited Mr. Evans before the performance
described in the foregoing had been given. The manifestations he
Received were somewhat similar, but in two instances there were
differences. A clean slate was laid on the carpet, and
upon being picked up a message was found on it written in various
oolors, one running into another. The medium pointed out that
they were the colors of the carpet where the slate had been laid.
He then cleaned a slate and with his pencil drew two diagonal
ilines across one side. The slate was tossed on the carpet with
that side down. The interviewer took it up a few minutes after-
wards and found another message in colors upon it ; and an
.examination showed that the writing was over the diagonal lines.
This interviewer secured, also, an instantaneous message,
'closely written, covering the whole side of one of the slates.
THE reporter’s OPINION.
“ Well,” queried Medium Evans, at the conclusion of the
sitting, “ what do you think now ?”
“ I think it is genuine,” was the honest response.
“ I'm sorry you couldn’t get a message on your sealed slates,
but may be you’ll be more successful next time.”
“ Oh, it wouldn’t have been a bit more conclusive if I had.”
“ No, I don’t think so myself; but you know a good many
/people won’t be satisfied unless they get just what they are
looking for, no matter if another is just as conclusive or not. It’s
.a hard thing to make people believe in mediums.”
“ I don’t blame them, judging from my own experience ; no
sensible man could see the average manifestations without tumbling
to the tricks. You are the first and the only one who has offered
'Convincing proof of the truth of spiritualism, or ‘ odyc ’ force, or
any other unknown power that you might call it.”
St. Helena Star, Cal., May 7, 1886.
Slate Writing.
We have no theory to advance regarding this so-called spiritual
phenomena. We give it to our readers as it has come to our
notice, believing that it will prove of interest. Therefore there is
3i mystery connected with this slate writing which will, at least,
furnish food for thought and study. If the letters given above are
mot spirit messages, what are they ? We give it up.


(San Francisco Examiner, April 15, 1888.)
Slate Writing* Tests.—Tests not in the Dark.
Medium Evans recently exhibited his powers as a psycho-
graphic medium to an Examiner man, and did not demand a dark
room as one of the necessary conditions. Mediums say the s pints
do not work in the dark as much as they did, because they have
become better acquainted with the natural laws which govern them.
Evans sat at one side of a small table and the newspaper man
at the other in a brilliantly lighted room. On the floor near the
medium was a pile of small school slates. Evans took one of the
slates and exhibited both sides. No writing could be seen on it.
He moistened it with saliva and wiped it with a sponge, placed it
upon the table and told the sitter to put his hands on the slate.
A few faint raps under the table indicated that the spirit of John Gray
was present and getting in his work on the slate. After ten
minutes, during which time the sitter had not removed his hand
from the slate, the slate was turned over and found to be covered
with writing, which was signed by John Gray. Another slate,
treated in the same mannei, turned up with a recognizable
of U.S. Grant and a message signed by the General. Eight
were used during the seance, and writing was produced upon all
of them. None of the messages were written by Evans, whose
hands were otherwise employed all the time. Whatever may be
the method of producing the messages, it is certain that the slates,
after being washed, were not out of the newspaper man’s hands
for an instant.
(The Richmond Democrat, Ray Co. Mo.)
Jim G. Anderson, editor of Richmond Democrat: I consider the
tests you have given me on slates the most remarkable I ever heard
of. The test is in the name of C. P. Anderson, being a fac simile of
my father’s hand-writing, and easily recognized by my foreman
who worked for my father.
( Eastern Star, Glenburne, Maine.)
C. M. Brown, editor of the Eastern Star, says, at the close of a
long account of seance by proxy with Fred. Evans : The messages
which we fully recognise is sufficient to indorse the wonderful
mediumship of Fred. Evans.
{Erectbought, San Francisco, May 12, 1888.)
I Attend a Seance.
The mysterious thing about the affair is how the medium,
Evans, got between the slates to do the writing. At the time the
slates were put in my possession I had written no names and had
thought of no names. I did not know I was expected to write
them. But the truth is that one of the names written by me
appeared on the slate, which no one but myself touched between
the time I wrote the name on the paper and the times the slates were
opened. Ido not know, how it was done, yet I state but the facts.
{Golden Gate, San Francisco.)
A Strong Endorsement.
Our trip was a triumph of the spirit world. The medium,.
Fred. Evans, whose wonderful psychographic powers we sought to-
demonstrate before the public, excelled our highest expectations.
In private seances, with sharp-eyed reporters for the press, as well
as upon the public rostrum and under the keenest scrutiny of


sceptical committees, selected from the audience, his guides never
failed once to produce messages from the unseen world. In public
never less than four, and in one instance six slatesfull of messages
were obtained, including in nearly every instance a sketch of some
prominent spiritualist passed to the other life, and all written under
conditions that forbid any honest suspicion of unfairness. There
were never, at his public seances, less than forty, and in some in-
u stances as many as sixty messages written to persons in the
audience. In coming closely into the life of this medium, as we
have, we have learned to esteem him highly as a man, and for the
many excellent traits of character that reveal themselves only upon
close acquaintanceship. His mediumistic powers, as an indepen-
dent slate-writer, have never been equalled.
Testimonial from Brisbane
(Phychological Society, Brisbane, Queensland, January 2, 1889.)
TO MR. AND MRS. EVANS, OF SAN FRANCISCO.
Sir and Madam.
We cannot permit your present visit amongst us to come to a
close without expressing to you our earnest wishes for your future
happiness and prosperity. We sincerely regret that, owing to your
late unfortunate accident, and the depressing atmosphere of the
hot summer months, conditions have not been entirely favorable
to the highest manifestation of your psychic gifts, but many of us
have witnessed more than enough to assure us that psychological
students have in you superior instruments through whom they may
obtain phenomena of the greatest importance to mankind. With-
out desiring to detract from the pleasure of others in Australia
who are desirous to welcome you, we hope the time will not be
long before you may be permitted to again visit us, when you may
depend upon the reception always accorded to honest workers in
the cause of truth by the liberal thinkers of Brisbane. But
wherever you travel, or in whatever part of the world your lot
may be cast, you will be followed by the heartfelt wishes for your
highest happiness of the many friends who have derived pleasure
and enlightenment from your visit. We also request your accep-
tance of the accompanying purse of sovereigns, contribnted by a
few friends on the eve of your departure for Melbourne, as some
slight recompense for losses occasioned by the before-mentioned
accident. With renewed assurances, believe us to be, dear sir and
madame,
Very sincerely yours,
(Signed) William Widdop, Chairman.
George Smith, Hon. Sec.
On behalf of the meeting.
Professor Wallace’s Seance with Fred Evans
Prof. Alfred R. Wallace, F.G.S., after a seance with Fred
Evans, says over his own signature: It is one of the most remark-
able and convincing seances I have ever attended. I have never
on any occasion witnessed phenomena of so wonderful a character
appear with such rapidity, and in a manner so entirely free from
suspicion.
(Signed) Alfred R. Wallace, F.G.S.
I agree with the above remarks of my brother. John Wallace.


I entirely agree with Professor Wallace in his estimate of the
phenomena, and the perfect freedom from any suspicion of fraud in
their production. D. Wooster, M.D. & M.A.S.
{Southern World, Queensland, Oct. 3, 1888.)
Tests in Psychography.
Investigation alone can solve the vexed and intricate problem.
Those who are contented to pose as if only able to see this pheno-
mena from the standpoint of materialism and the gross trickery of
legerdemain simply write them down by so doing as “ fools and
blind,” or —to use the very expressive words of the medium —Mr.
Evans, as “ durned idiots for everything is done by this medium
so plain and unmistakably above board, without any pretence or
effort whatever to disguise or conceal, that it is actually impossible
to account for the phenomena, save by some of the obscure and
mostly ignored laws of the occult world, that is by psychology.
Such as consent to view it pretensively otherwise let themselves
down immensely by so doing, and not at all those they are making
a show of criticising.
(Gooma Express, N.S.W., July 5, 1889.)
Independent Slate Writing.
I am satisfied as to the genuineness of Mr. Evans as an in-
strument through whom the so-called dead can communicate. I
am sure everyone, whether spiritualists or not, who visit Mr.
Evans, will find a sitting with him especially interesting. It was
the first independent slate-writing I ever witnessed, and I am more
than pleased.
{Psychic Notes , Brisbane, October 27, 1888.)
From the facts we and others have observed, we maintain
that the phenomena of psychography occurring here in the presence
of Fred Evans have been thoroughly proved.
(San Jose Mercury, Cal., March 13, 1887.)
An Invitation Seance.
Fred Evans, the Independent Slate-Writing Medium.
Fred Evans, the independent slate-writing medium, who will
give a public exhibition of his gifts at the California Theatre this
evening, was visited, per invitation, at his room in the Lick House
last evening by a number of the representatives of the local press.
He gave a slate-writing seance without conditions and succeeded
in mystifying all present. The slates used were washed and dried,
and placed, not under the table, but where everyone could see
them. Two slates were placed together and held by one of the
party. After a while they were opened and upon the inner side of
one appeared a communication signed by “H. B. Norton.”
Another slate was thrown upon the floor, and on being lifted up a
few moments later, a communication, written in pencil like the
other, and signed “John Gray,” was disclosed. The Mercury
gives it up. Another slate, held by another of the party, contained
five communications, the interested parties with one exception
being present. Each slate was washed and wiped by the medium
before being used. There was no chance for sleight-of-hand, and


nothing of the kind was attempted. The trick, if trick it was,
could not be satisfactorily explained by the witnesses.
(The Daily San Diegan, San Diego, Cal., April 7, 1887.)
An Evening 1 with Spirits.
Colonel G. J. Owen, editor of the Golden Gate, San Francisco,
and Mr. Fred Evans, the noted slate-writing medium, invited the
press of the city to be present last evening at a test in the line of
slate-writing. At eight o’clock, each press in the city was repre-
sented, and a few minutes after the time, the medium made ready
to commence his seance. It was not a dark seance, but what
transpired was in the light. During the evening the tests were
produced with two slates, well sealed and placed on the table with
the hands of the staffs there to “ catch on ” touching them. One
was carelessly thrown oft in one corner of the room, and another
lodged on the mantelpiece some distance from the table, all having
first been washed and rubbed clean and dry. In a little time the
all contained writings—messages to those present, some in
plain white words or lines, and some variegated between white,
red and blue. A message, signed by H. B. Norton, directed to all
as “ Dear friends,” congratulated them on being present to examine
this mysterious what-ever-it-is, but declaring as true the “ grand
truth of spiritualism,” and intimated the difficulties in so doing.
We watched as close as we could but detected no sort of trick.
Out of dozens of messages it is useless to more than allude to
them, omitting names. Go to-night and see Mr. Evans and
catch him if you can.
(Santa Barbara Press, Cal., April 26, 1887
Slate-Writing.
A Private Seance to Four Newspaper Reporters.
At seven o’clock Sunday night, by special invitation of Mr. J.
J. Owen, a party of four newspaper reporters met in a private room
in the Morris House, to witness a series of so-called spiritual
manifestation by slate-writing given by Fred Evans, the professed
medium. The room was the private apartment of Mr, Evans, and
besides the usual bedroom furniture was provided with a common
table, borrowed from the diningroom for the purpose, around
which were seated the visitors and the medium. There were two
large lighted lamps on the table, and what transpired was plain as
in broad daylight. The medium brought forth several small
school slates which he washed with a sponge and water, and
which were also carefully washed and wiped by one of the news-
paper men present. The medium then picked out a small piece of
broken slate pencil, threw it on one of the slates and placed
another slate on top of it, bound the two together by a rubber
band and sealed them with common sealing wax. The slates were
then laid on the table and all four of the reporters asked to place
their fingers on them. It was some little time before the medium
informed the sceptical scribes that he heard the spirits writing,
but finally he requested that one pair of the slates be broken apart.
When this was done one of the slates contained a closely written
communication signed W. W. Hollister.
The most singular of the demonstrations was a communication
signed the “ Guide Spirit,” written in three different colors, after


the slate had been thoroughly washed and six white lines drawn
across it from the corner and through the centre, the colored lines
showing plainly over the white ones.
The visitors, as mentioned before, were all sceptics before the
seance, but unanimously decided that there was something very
remarkable about this slate-writing business. The test was about
all that could be desired by those present.
(Evening Express, Los Angeles, April 18, 1887.)
The Spirit World.
A Clever Exhibition of Ghostly Skill.
Seance With Sceptical Reporters.—They Go Home Mystified,—
Entertainment at the Grand Opera House.
At 9 o’clock, Mr. Berry, a Herald representative, and Mr. J.
W. Maddrill, of the Tribune , entered. Evans announced that he
would proceed with the seance, and then directed the “
pushers ’ to arrange themselves about the pine table, and they did -
so. Colonel Owen, himself, took a seat next the Express repre-
sentative, Mr. Maddrill sat to his left, and Mr. Berry next. Evans’
seat was directly opposite his audience, across the table. Then,
at the medium’s request, a most minute examination was made of
four common school slates, about 4x6 inches in size, framed with
pine wood, usually used in slate manufacture. After the slates
had been inspected, Evans took from a box a slate pencil and
scratched the surfaces over with it He then spat upon them,
cleaned them off, and then handed them again to the newspaper
men. They were as of yore. Taking two of them and placing
them together, Evans dropped a bit of pencil between them, and
then sealed them together with common red sealing wax. The
same performance was gone through with the other two slates, and
laying one pair above the other on the table, the medium directed
all four persons to place their fingers upon them “ and arrange a
battery,”
Then the little party sat in silence and awaited coming events,
Evans assumed an easy position in his chair, and very shortly signs
of his laboring under a severe mental struggle were made apparent.
He writhed and twisted his fingers, and finally grasped a pencil
and commenced writing, upside down, with lightning-like rapidity.
“He has heard them,” whispered Colonel Owens, as Evans f
finished.
Turning the paper about, one could readily decipher the
writing. It was in words as follows :
“Yes, I will write on the slates to the press.”
“ John Gray.”
“Who’s John Gray?” Was the simultaneous inquiry of the
newspaper men.
He is Mr. Evans’ ‘ psycographic control ’ as it is called:
More properly speaking, the medium’s guide to the spirit world,”
was the whispered response of Col. Owen.
At this moment the grating of the bit of pencil between the
two uppermost slates could be distinctly heard in a moment Evans
had ordered hands removed. He picked up the slates and handed
them to Mr. Maddrill, at the same time requesting him to force the
slates apart. Maddrill did so and on the top slate of the two were


written in excellent chirography the following messages which are
here given verbatim : * * *
One of the slates was then thoroughly washed in water, all
present had first tasted and found pure, was placed on the table and
between it and the table-board was placed a bit of pencil that had
been used on the slate just examined. On this single slate the party
placed their fingers. The same mental struggle in Evans was ap-
w parent alter a moment, and he quickly inquired in hollow tones ;
“Is that you Johnny ?’ With one accord the trio of reporters
glanced at Col. Owens. “He is asking for his spirit control,” was
his response. “Is that you ?” continued Evans. “ Well, will you
show the reporters that what we believe is truth by writing on this
single slate, alter I mark it with a cross, by writing cross and over
the cross I place on it, will you ?”
Then Evans grasped a pencil, and in the same way he did
before, wrote a few words. Inverted they read Yes ! I will.”
Evans then quickly picked up the little slate and with the bit of
pencil drew two lines, crossing each other, obliquely over its surface,
it was then replaced and the scribes’ fingers, with those of Col.
Owens, were soon upon it. In a remarkably short space of
time the grating noise was heard, Evans, when it ceased, ordered
the slate lifted and to the intense wonder of his audience, there
upon its surface was a message, its letters written in colors of
purple, red, green, blue and white, over the cross Evans had placed
upon it. So much were they amazed that nothing but “ Ohs! and
Ohs !” were re-uttered for several moments.
“That I consider my best demonstration of the proof that
spiritual power exists,” said Mr. Evans, as well he might, tri-
umphantly. The message in parti colored writing, read as follows :
After the most minute examination of the table, the furniture
in the room, its walls, ceilings and windows the party gave up the
solution of what they thought a problem, when Mr. Evans said he
would if possible, endeavour to communicate withjhe artist-spirit
STANLEY ST. CLAIR.
At once the party returned to their seats. The Express reporter
cleared off a slate, and it was placed as had been the one on which
was the cross. Hands were then laid on it and in less than three
minutes Mr. Evans had a communication with St. Clair, his artistic
spirit. He wrote upon a paper what St. Clair had to say. The
unseen delienator said he would, for the press, draw a picture on
the slate, and m a few minutes Evans lifted the slate from the
table. Engraved upon it in slate pencil was a likeness of John
B. Pierpoint, the poet, an artistic bit of work. About the portrait,
in legible hand, was written the following:
Dear friends of Los Angeles—You who have it in your power
to spread this knowledge of spiritual truth, I have drawn this
picture of John Pierpoint for your benefit and at the request of
the press, and if you will speak of it as you see it, you will amply
repay yours in spirit, artist.
Stanley St. Clair.
Evans’ auditors were thoroughly mystified. It was inexpli-
cable, unfathomable. Evans, as the party retired, smilingly bade
them good night, and asked specially that they attend his per-
formance which took place at the Opera House last evening.


AT THE OPERA HOUSE.
Four hundred people gathered in the Opera House last night
to witness Evans go through his slate-writing manifestations. Ex-
Mayor Spence, Mr. Jesse Yarnell and Mr, O. H. Bliss were chosen
a committee to scrutinise his work The manner of preparation
was exactly the same as used at the reporters’ seance, detailed
above, and, of course, the committee left the stage more mystified
and as ignorant of Evans’ modus operandi as they were when they H
went upon it.
(Table Talk , Melbourne, Australia, February i, 1889.)
A Strange Phenomena.
I was one of a party of thirty who were invited to witness
certain phenomena which occurred through the agency of Mr.
Evans, a “ psychograph.” These phenomena were so remarkable
as to deserve description, although I cannot pretend to explain
them ; and I am bound to add that, although I approached
in a somewhat suspicious and sceptical frame of mind, I could not?*
by the most vigilant observation detect even the shadow of trickery
or delusion. Mr. Evans stood before us at a table containing
several small slates such as are used in schools. He carefully
washed and wiped eight of these, and immediately placed four pairs
of these face to face, with a morsel of slate pencil, about half the
size of a threepenny piece between each two. One of these pairs
he gave to a lady to hold. They were bound together by a band
of india-rubber, and were held in full view of the audience. The
other three pairs were laid on the floor at our feet. In a few seconds
a faint sound of scratching was heard, and the slates held by the
lady were opened, and upon one of them was found a message to
the audience signed “ William Denton,” the signature resembling
that of the American geologist, well-known in this city, who died
in New Guinea. Two pairs of slates, lying on the floor, contained
nothing. The third was placed in my own hand, and, on opening
them, I found one covered with hand-writing in various hands, two
of them in red characters and one blue. There were fifteen at all,
and each was addressed to some member of the company, the sig-
nature in every instance purporting to be that ofa deceased relative,
while the message itself was couched in terms of endearment. The
caligraphy was delicate and feminine in some instances, bold and
strong in others, and possessing an individual character in all. Not
more than two or three minutes elapsed between my seeing the
slate as a tabula rasa and my finding it covered with these fifteen
messages, which, under ordinary circumstances, could not have
been written in much less than as many minutes. Mr. Evans, I
should add, who was a perfect stranger to four-fifths of the persons
present, is a new arrival, and unacquainted with the family history
of the company present. It was my first experience of such strange
phenomena, which I most frankly acknowledge my inability to ac-
count for and so I leave them.
(Gympie Times, Queensland, October 6, 1888).
1 have been present at one of Mr. Evans’ seances, and I am
bound to say it was different to the usual run of spiritualistic affairs.
Every thing was done in open day-light, and the slate-writing was
not doae under a table or by personal contact of the medium.


(The Soul, Boston, February, 1888).
An Interesting: Experiment With Mr. Fred Evans.
For a long time we have been very much interested in the
accounts of the independent drawings and writings that have been
published in The Golden Gate, of San Francisco, Cal. These have
shown great spirit power through the fine mediumship of Mr.
Fred Evans, enterprize and ability to receive on the part of our
A esteemed friend and co-laborer, Mr. J. J. Owen, the editor of the
above-named valuable journal.
Some weeks ago we asked Mr. Owen if he would conduct a
seance with Mr. Evans for The Soul. Mr. Owen consented, and
the slates were forwarded to us. Amongst the messages are those
from H. Whitlock, our brother who passed to spirit life about forty
years ago, when a small child. We occasionally hear from him,
and believe he could not have been known to any person present.
The others of our name, especially father and sister, are recognized.
(The Sower, Detroit, Michigan, Dec. 14, 1889.)
We are pleased to learn that Bro. Fred. Evans, the wonderful
Medium, has returned from a successful tour in Aus-
tralia and is now located at Haight St., San Francisco, Cal.
We regard him as the most remarkable Test Slate-Writing medium
in the world.
(Ladies Home Journal, San Francisco, July 1886.)
A Problem for Scientists to Solve.
A very peculiar phase of modern spiritualism is independent
slate-writing. The best medium for this demonstration is Mr.
Fred. Evans, of this city. In a recent interview with him, we were
given two clean, new slates ; their faces joined closely together,
with two crumbs of pencil between, which we were told to hold
independently of Mr. Evans. Another slate was put, face down-
ward, on the carpet, a crumb of pencil underneath, several feet
from Mr. Evans or ourselves. In a few moments a gentle scratching
was heard on the slates we held in our hands, also on the one on
the floor. Then three knocks were given, and Mr. Evans requested
us to open the slates, held in our hand. They were found covered
with writing and signed with the name of a deceased friend. We
then, at Mr. Evans request, picked up the slate from the floor,
which was also found covered with writing, signed with the
name of a deceased father. Let some of our scientists solve this
problem.
(The Telegraph, Brisbane, Oct. 1, 1888
The Slate-Writing Medium.
Although it has been my lot in the course of a somewhat
chequered and varied career to encounter men of many callings, it
yet remained for me to meet a spirit medium. I have always
regarded the ordinary seances as so much waste of time for a busy
man, and the Slade exposures did not prepossess me in favor of
slate-writing mediums in general. However, as several of my
personal friends—including some of the best known and respected
men in the city—had contributed to the expense of bringing over
Mr. and Mrs. Fred Evans from San Francisco, I readily
undertook the duty laid npon me to represent the Telegraph


at Mr. Evans’ Press seances on Saturday. I entered Mr. Evans’
operating room after the two visitors, who have described
their experiences above. Seating myself opposite to Mr.
Evans, hebegan by taking up a slate from an apparently inexhaust-
ible store on the floor, at his left hand. This he spat upon and
rubbed with a cloth on both sides, explaining that he used spittle
for magnetising purposes. At his request I held a slate upright,
pressing my fingers against each side. Mr. Evans did likewise for ;
a few moments, and then repeated the process with another slate.
I was, however, careful to keep an eye on the first slate during the
magnetising of the second. This over, Mr. Evans produced from
a small box on the table an india-rubber band and a small pellet of
pencil. The pencil was dropped onthefirst slate, the second slate was
laid on top of the other, and the india-rubber band placed over
both. This was done fairly over the middle of the table, and if
any sleight-of-hand work took place it was much smarter than any-
thing of the kind I have seen, and I have seen a good deal. The
slates thus joined, I held them between the forefinger and thumb
of each hand. Conversation on spirit matters was carried on freely*,
and Mr. Evans stated that he was very tired, and as he had
out of practice for two months, the exertions of the day had told
upon him. During the conversation I tilted up the slates in my
hand and distinctly heard the little pellet of pencil roll to the lower
edge of the frame. Thenceforth I kept it there. When the slates
were subsequently opened, the following message was written in
crayon colours: * * * *
(Brisbane Courier , Oct. 25, 1888).
Seances Before the Psychological Society.
A special meeting of the members of the Psychological Society
was held last night in the Courier Hall, for the purpose of holding
a slate-writing seance with Mr. Evans. Mr. P. R. Gordon, vice-
president, occupied the chair, and called upon Henry Burton to
make a few prefatory remarks, and to introduce Mr. Evans to the
audience. About forty members were present, and great interest
was taken in the proceedings. Mr. A. Ranniger and Mr. Phippard
were chosen as a committee to scrutinize and impose test con-
ditions on behalf of the sitters. Four small slates were cleaned
by Mr. Evans, and examined by these gentlemen, after which
they held them in pairs, and sealed them together. Mr.
Phippard held one pair, and Mr. Ranniger the other, each 9
of them standing on one side of Mr Evans. All the sitters
were then requested to join hands. This was done, and about
fifteen minutes afterwards the order was given to loose hands, when
the seals were broken and the slates opened. It was found that
one of the slates contained thirty closely-written messages, and the
other six messages, done in colors round the edges of the slate, and
a portrait drawn in the middle. The members appeared highly sat-
isfied with the results, and the name attached to nearly every
message was recognised by some individual present.
(Religo, Philosophical Journal).
JOHN ALLYN.
I had many seances with independent slate-writing mediums
where a single slate was held under the table, and had used every


effort to detect trickery, but without success. Still doubts would
come in spite of apparent facts. Determining to test the matter
beyond all cavil, I purchased two slates, with my pocket knife, I
cut one initial in each frame, in a rude manner. I then took them
to Fred Evans. He sat opposite me by a plain pine table, in
broad daylight. He took them and tied them together with strong
twine, and sealed them in five places. A bit of pencil had been
placed between them. All this was done immediately, without
leaving his seat. He then handed them to me. I held them
between the thumbs and forefingers of both hands. Evans
occasionally touched them with the fingers of the right hand.
Soon the table seemed to be charged with some invisible force, as
there was a fusillade of small raps. Soon I heard the writing"
between the sealed slates for a short time, and then three ticks to
signify that the writing was finished. Mr. Evans asked how many
letters there were inside of the slates, and there were four ticks. I
then put the slates in my grip-sack and took them to my home
sixty miles away, and after calling in some neighbours, and the
editor of the Weekly Star, I cut the cords, and there were three
characteristic letters from deceased relatives, and one signed
Swedenborg, which closed with these words:
“ Millions and millions of ages shall roll,
Progression ever the theme of your soul ;
By beauty and grandeur your soul shall be led,
And worlds without number your spirits shall tread.”
That was the Waterloo of my skepticism as to the fact that
intelligence could manifest without a brain, which upsets the theory
of the materialist. This was in May, 1886. Ihe slates and
writing are now in my drawer.
(Stockton Independent , Cal., March 31, 1888)
SLATE-WRITiNG.
Letters purporting to come from Spirit Land.
Manifestations that are Interesting, to Say the Least—A Reporter's-
Experience.
Mr. Evans took two of the slates, put a piece of slate-pencil
about one-eighth of an inch long on one of them, and then placed
the two slates together, enveloping them with a rubber band. The
reporter was instructed to write the names of some departed
friends on a slip of paper, fold the same up, place it underneath
the rubber band, and then hold the slates in his hand. Other
slates were laid on the table, and the medium leaned comfortably
back in his chair and chatted away with his visitor on various topics.
“ Do you not feel a twitching in your fingers ? ” he asked.
“ No.”
“ But you will when the spirit begins to write.” There came
a succession of raps on the table. The medium leaned forward in
his chair as if listening. His eyes closed, and the muscles of his
face began to twitch. Recovering himself soon, he asked : “Do
you know William S ?” mentioning the name of an old school-
mate of the reporter.
“ Yes.”
“ He met his death an accident, did’nt he ? ”
“ Yes.”
“ Well, he’s writing on feiie slate.”


It began to grow interesting. Sure enough there was the
.'twitching of the fingers that the medium had predicted. Will, as
before stated, was a schoolmate of the reporter, and had accident-
ally shot himself while hunting. Suddenly the twitching ceased.
“ Are you through writing ? ” asked the medium.
Rap, rap, rap—the spirit answer yes.
“You will find his communication on the slate.”
The reporter removed the rubber band, and glancing at one of
the slates, was electrified to find it covered with writing in the
peculiar back slope and well-known hand of his old chum. The
words were characteristic of the writer. They read :
Hello ! This is a treat to be able to write a few lines to you.
I have found all “ O K ” here, and want to tell you that you will
receive news in a few weeks that will benefit you in many ways.
I have nothing further to write now, but will surprise you at your
home soon by manifesting for you. Don’t be scared.
William S
“ Now look at that slate,” said the medium, pointing to a slate
that had been lying on the table within a couple of inches of the
reporter’s hand. It contained the following :
God bless you, , my friend for wanting to hear from me.
I can assure you that spiritualism is a glorious truth, and my only
regret is in leaving loved ones behind. But I feel happy in
knowing that we are not parted for ever, but will meet again to
part no more. I can see a bright future before you, and will do
all I can to make you happy. Your friend,
The name appended to the communication was one well
known to the reporter. Two other communications were received
in a like manner as the foregoing. “ And now,” said the medium,
“if the spirits are willing, I will give you my greatest test.” He
began by washing a slate in schoolboy style.
“ You will observe that I always use saliva.”
“ Why is that ? ”
“ Because then the slate will retain my magnetism even
should it pass through others’ hands.”
The reporter examined the slate closely, and it was then laid
on the carpet. The medium relapsed into a trance and held
•communion with a spirit friend, asking him if he would assist any
spirit in writing on the slate, who might wish to communicate with
his visitor. Receiving favorable replies—the regulation three raps
—he next asked if the spirit in writing would reproduce on the
slate the colors of the carpet whereon the slate lay. This inquiry
was also answered in the affirmative. The reporter kept one eye
on the slate and the other on the medium, and awaited develop-
ments. They came soon. The medium continued the conversation
with the spirits and presently asked, “Is that all—have you
nothing more to communicate at this time ? ” Three decisive
raps followed the question.
The reporter picked up the slate. Wonder of wonders and
unexplained mysteries ; the slate was filled with writing in light
and dark blue, red, purple and gray colors, corresponding to the
shade of the carpet. It purported to be a letter from a near
relative, and read as follows :
Well, my dear boy, I am glad to see you here, for now I can
give you some evidence that spiritualism is true, and that I am
here to prove it. I know it is a little hard to believe, but it is true
all the same, and the truth must predominate, you know. I hope


that ere long I will be able to give these manifestations at home ,
then I can tell you all and give you more proof of my identity.
(Daily Times, San Jose, Cal., March 13, 1887).
A Strange Power.
We have complied with the requisite of the spirit boss to speak
■of it “as you find it and not as you think ; and our readers can do
their own thinking on the subject to suit themselves. We have
given the facts, and will only remark that any one having seen these
phenomena who should honestly attribute it to jugglery ought to
be placed in a “ Home for the Feeble-Minded,” provided there was
such an institution for adults. .
There is to be a meeting to-night in the California 1 heater
where similar phenomena are expected to transpire on the platiorm
in the presence of a committee to be chosen by the audience. Mr.
Evans may, perhaps, be induced to stay over Monday and give a
few private sittings. . f
In the words of Paul, “ we speak that we do know and testity
that we have seen.” Those who have not seen and would not dare
•to see may know more about it (in their own opinion) than we claim
to know ; but facts are facts and each is at liberty to theorize on
the subject to their heart’s desire. We merely give the news.
(The Stockton Press, Cal., March 29, 1888).
SLATE-WRITING.
Convincing Proof of Spirit Return.
Fred Evans the Remarkable Medium in this City Throngs Visit His
Rooms—Slates Written Upon in the Light While Lying Upon the
Floor Untouched—Messages Written in Five Bright Colors.
At another interview which a member of the management of
this paper had with Mr, Fred Evans, prior the above account, two
•slates were written full with messages from the father and long
deceased sister of the gentleman, and then layings slate upon the
carpet, Mr. Evans said, “ I think they will give you a message
written in colors, put your foot upon the slate.” When the slate
was lifted from the floor it contained a letter written by a brother
Andrew, in the same colors, line for line, as were seen in the carpet.
There was no coloured pencils to produce such an effect, and if, as
some claim, it is chemicals on the slate, the mixture which produced
one shade would destroy the other. No hand touched it while it
lay there. If it was not spirit power, pray, what is it ? Let some
of the wise ones enlighten us on the subject.
These pictures and slates can be seen at this office, by any one
who think they can explain the mystery, and tell what the power
is that produces the writing on the slates that no human hand
touches as they lay upon the floor, and why are lead pencil lines
and portraits on the paper, and a message written with a slate
pencil upon the slate, at the same time, while the paper is strapped
within the two slates ? If it is not spirits power, what is it ? Let
those, who can, explain.
(The San Jose Herald, Cal., March 14, 1887).
Slate-Writing Seances.
Fred Evans, a San Francisco medium, gave a seance to re-
porters on Saturday evening and a public exhibition at the Cali-


fornia Theater last evening. He was introduced last evening by
J, J. Owen, editor of the Golden Gate. A committee was chosen by
the audience, composed of S. A. Bishop, James T. Murphy, and
Mr. Wolcott, and upon the table at which they sat wdth the medium
a number of slates were laid in pairs, after having been thoroughly
cleansed. After the lapse ot perhaps a quarter of an hour the slates
were taken up and scores of messages were read from writing that
appeared on each side. A man named Zepf, a San Francisco cigar-
maker, brought his own slates, screwed together, and after sitting on
the stage for a time he opened them and found several messages.
(San Diego Daily Sun, April 7, 1887).
SLATE-WRITING.
Remarkable Performance at a Test Seance Last Evening.
A private test seance was given last evening by Fred Evans,,
the slate-writing medium, at which representatives ot the press were
present by special invitation. Many mysteries mankind may never
solve, or at least be able to satisfactorily explain, and the perfor-,
mance of Mr. Evans last evening may fairly be classed among them..
The slates used were thoroughly wiped dry, and placed in various
parts of the room. Four slates were sealed together in pairs and
placed upon a table in the centre of the room, and given in charge
of five newspaper men. The following messages were written
upon the slates: * * *
Those present at the seance were Messrs. Rogers and Hildreth
of the Union; Messrs. Bacon and Julian, of the San Diegan ; Col.
N. L. Vestal and E. N. Sullivan, of the Sun; Herr Wagner and
wife, of the Golden Era ; J. J. Owen, Mrs. Clara S. Foltz, Mr. Clink-
scales and C, Y. Benjamin. Whatever trickery there may have
been it was not evident —no one present could detect it. Mr. Evans
will give a public seance at Leach’s Opera House this evening,,
when his psychographic control (spirit of John Gray) will undertake
to produce messages from the spirits of departed friends, between
sealed slates prepared by a committee chosen from the audience.
(San Diego Daily Bee, April 8, 1887).
The Spirit Land—Exhibition of Slate Writing.
The committee declared themselves unable to account for the
phenomena, and Col. Welden stated that, having had considerable
experience as a sleight-of-hand performer and had studied the ex-
hibitions of the greatest magicians he had seen nothing like this..
He explained a trick with slates performed by himself and showed
how different it was from Mr. Evans’ tests. Mr. Evans will give
another exhibition this evening on which occasion our citizens-
would do well to turn out and witness his wonderful manifestations
of occult power as this may be the last chance of seeing this
wonderful medium.
(The Daily Union, San Diego, April 7, 1887).
Mysterious Manuscript.
Fred Evans, the noted slate-writing medium, gave a seance
to the representatives of the press last evening. Whatever may be
believed of the cause of these manifestations of power of some kind,
they were certainly wonderful. The utmost alertness was unavailing
to detect any trickery. Mr. Evans even made crosses on the slates,
and these were found to be written over instead of under, as would


have been the case had there been any chemicals or invisible
writing upon the slates. An unusually sharp lot of eyes watched
the proceedings and found no cause of complaint; it is certainly
worth seeing, to say the least.
(The Tribune , Los Angeles, April 17, 1887).
A Special Seance.
S ‘ The scribes placed themselves around an ordinary table and
carefully watched the preparation of the slates, which were
thoroughly cleaned and firmly sealed together with wax. Then the
scribes put their hands upon them and waited. Presently the faint
marking of the pencil was heard; the slates were taken up and the
seals broken; and a message in several colors was perceptible. Prob-
ably the most satisfactory test was that of the deceased artist, Stanley
St. Clair, who drew a very fine lead pencil sketch of John Pierpont on
the inside of the slates.
(Daily Herald , Los Angeles, April 17, 1887).
Odic Forces.
Odic Forces.
* The representatives of the press saw all the movements of a
mechanical nature, but not the movements of the hand that wrote
the communications and made the artistic representations. Mr.
Evans is a very pleasant gentleman of graceful manners, slight
physique and a powerful medium for the unseen forces that act
with such terrible energy on the humane mind.
(Sydney, N.S.W., Australia, September 1, 1889).
Farewell Address to Mr, Fred Evans.
The following address was presented to Mr. Evans at a
Farewell Social tendered to him and Mrs. Evans by a committee
of his friends and admirers, and held on Wednesday last, at the
residence of Mrs. Peryman, L’Avenall, Newtown, Sydney;
To Fred Evans, Esq., of San Francisco, Cal., U.S.A.
Dear Sir and Friend,
We, the undersigned, have great pleasure in bearing testimony
to your thorough genuineness as a medium for Independent Slate-
Writing. We are satisfied that the manisfestations of spirit or
direct writing witnessed by us through your mediumship were
beyond the possibility of fraud or deception. Indeed, words cannot
express a too firm conviction on our part in your honesty, integrity
and uprightness of character, and this we say in face of the libels of
the Brisbane Telegraph, and the utterly false and reckless statements
of unscrupulous persons respecting yourself. We look upon you,
esteemed friend, as a great light in the diffusion of the grand and
glorious truths of Spiritualism. That you may long remain in this
sphere of existence to perform your noble mission of convincing
thousands of the practicability of communion with the so-called
dead, is our earest wish.
We regret that your stay in Sydney will probably not exceed
three months, but we trust that at some future time you will make
another visit to our city. We assure you that you and your
respected lady will carry away, on your departure from Australia,
the hearty good wishes of a large circle of friends. With kind
regards we beg to subscribe ourselves,
Yours faithfully and fraternally,
+ James Kingsbury, M.D., Church-st., Newtown, Sydney, N.S.W.
* Alfred Edwards, Colonial Architect’s Office, ~ ~
-f A. Tucker, Gov. Insp. of Post and Telegraph Offices, „


X 1 • J v J ll L y X XXX U n J X A LX XXL L/ X vj X X XXX J
A. Firth, Secretary North Shore Gas Co.
jy
yy
yy
* Alfred Gale, Postmaster, Paddington,
yy
* E. P. Atwater, M.D., Newtown,
* A. T. Munro, Pres. N.S.W. Spiritualist Association,
* H. Chappel, Real Estate & Mining, 52 Sydney Arcade
yy
* W. H, Murrell, Tea Merchant, 409 Kent-street,
* J. H. Smith, Merchant, 302 George-street,
y *
y y
* Charles Coghill, Builder and Contractor, Oxford-st.
i S. Kingsbury, Church-street, Newtown,
yy
yy
Henry Gale, Post Office, Paddington,
yy
yy
Thomas Peters, Merchant Draper, William-street
* A. Horsepool, 66 Edith-street, Leichardt,
yy
* R. M. O’Connell, 8 Lonsdale Terrace, John-street
J A. H. Hatfield, Land and Commission Agent, 106
yy
yy
Abercrombie-street,
* E. James, 145 Victoria-street,
* E. Hansen, Glebe,
■}■ F. E. S. Hewison, 93 Morehead-street,
yy
yy
John Victor, Justice of Peace, Sydney, N.S.W,
* N. Joubert, Alderman, Hunter’s Hill, „ „
A. Firth, Secretary North Shore Gas Co. ~ ~
Notes. * Obtained satisfactory writing upon their own slates,
■f Obtained ,, „ upon corded slate*.
} Obtained „ „ upon screwed slates.
(Melbourne, Victoria, Australia, May 8, i88g).
Testimonial from Melbourne.
We, the undersigned, do hereby testify that we and each of us
have investigated the phenomena of Independent Slate-Writing,
occurring through the mediumship of Fred Evans, of San Francisco,
Cal., U.S.A., and have obtained writing on the inner surfaces of
slates that we and each of us furnished ourselves, and which were
not for one moment permitted to leave our sight. The messages
appearing thereon were always signed by the names of our departed
relatives and friends, and information given that we are sure the
medium could not have had any previous knowledge of whatever.
Whilst many of us are not Spiritualists, yet we and each of us
agree that the messages appearing between our slates were placed
there by some invisible intelligent power independent of the medium.
John Williams, Grain Dealer, Stock Street, Coburg, Victoria.
Edwin Gill, Justice of Peace, Balaclava, ~
James T. Praagst, Government Land Office, E. Melbourne, ~
R. Stewart. Esq,, Bourke Street, Melbourne, ~
Charles C. Bell, Esq., 4 Gordon Terrace, St. Kilda, ~
John Carson, Esq., Kew, , r
W. B. Rodier, Justice of Peace, “ Rougemont,” Hawthorn, ~
John Henshaw, Manufacturer, Council Street, Clifton Hill, ~
Thomas Martin, Manufacturer, 122 Rokeby St., Collingwood, ~
Richard Bond, Builder, Carpenter Street, Middle Brighton, ~
William Overton, Esq., Melbourne, ~
John Melville, Accountant, 24 Shiel Street, N. Melbourne, „
William Jackson, Builder, Armadale, ~
E. Sharpe, Illawarra Road, Hawthorn, ~
Daniel Clay, Esq., 33 Michael Street, N. Fitzroy, ~
M. Bond, Middle Brighton, ~
William Brown, 47 Napier Street, East Melbourne, ~
E. L. Melville, Sheil Street, North Melbourne, „
E. Overton, Melbourne. „


Strong Endorsement for Fred Evans.
The following testimonial from Thos. W. Stanford, of Mel-
bourne, Australia (brother of our Senator Stanford), is a strong
card for Fred Evans, our independent slate-writer.
Mr. Fred Evans —Dear Sir: As you are about to depart from
our shores and return to the land from whence I too, came, I have
thought a few lines from me might be of service to you, as well as
p a pleasing memento of my personal friendship and appreciation of
your straightforward conduct in this city.
I have much pleasure in stating, and with much emphasis, to
whom it may concern (and you are at liberty to use this letter as
you please), that I have had several professional “ sittings ” with
you, and that without asking for special test conditions you have
given me the best possible proof of writing within closed slates
without physical contact with yourself.
I would advise those who take an interest in occult force, either
in connection with, or apart altogether from spiritualism, to have
one or more “ sittings ” with you, to note the result carefully, and
1 1f then put their wits to solve the mystery (?)
Trusting yourself and Mrs, Evans may have a pleasant voyage
home, and retain pleasant memories of your visit to Australia. I
remain sincerely yours,
Melbourne, May n, 1889. Thos. W. Stanford.
(The Carrier Dove , Oakland, Cal., February 1886).
A Sitting with Fred Evans.
We can cheerfully endorse Mr. Evans’ mediumship as being'
the most satisfactory phase of slate-writing we have ever witnessed,.
and above suspicion.
(The Carrier Dove , February 1887).
ln every particular, during this seance, strictly test conditions
were observed. The possibility of deception was out of the
question. That the writing was not done by Mr. Evans we
positively know, and it must therefore have been done through the
agency of spirits, as any honest investigator would be obliged'to
admit who witnessed similar manifestations.
(The Harbinger of Light, Melbourne, Australia, May 1889).
We watched Mr. Evans’ career for some time before he came
to these colonies, and had great expectations of him. These have
been fully realised since he has been amongst us. We have not
only found him an excellent medium, open and straightforward in
his proceedings, but a kindly liberal man, putting principle before
pocket, and making the advancement of Spiritualism his primary
consideration.
(The Harbinger of Light, Australia, April 1889).
Evans’ whole seance was of a clear and decisive character,
and transcended anything of the kind ever seen here.
(Ihe Ballarat Courier, Australia, January 28, 1889).
Slates were cleaned and either held by the company present,
or thrown upon the floor. When picked up, to our astonishment
they were filled with writing. The names, attached to the messages,
were all recognised by the persons who were entire strangers to
Mr. Evans.


(Religo Philosophical Journal , Chicago, December 7, 1889).
Evans’ Success in Brisbane.
(From the Harbinger of Light.)
A recent number of this Australian journal gives an interesting
.account of a visit of Fred Evans, the Californian slate writing
medium, to Brisbane, where he arrived Ist August, and on the
following day he “ announced that on Sunday evening he would
offer his services free for experiments in phycology in the Cent-
tennial Hall, It was a wet and stormy night, the rain coming
down in torrents ; nevertheless, an intelligent and representative
audience of nearly 300 attended. Mr. Evans requested the audience
to select a committee to conduct the experiments, when Mr. P. R.
Gordon, Government Inspector of sheep; Mr. Tolston, Mrs. Judd,
Mr. Ranninger, and Mrs. Castles, were chosen. A bucket of water
was placed at the front of the platform, and the slates to be used
were placed in the bucket in full view of the audience. These were
separately washed and dried, the chairman placing a piece of pencil
between each pair of them and handing them to a committee to
hold. After holding them for a considerable time, one of the com-
mittee said he heard writing going on between his slates, then Mr.
Ranninger and Mr. Widdop also heard the same, and on the slates
being opened, twelve messages were found on them, the signature
to the messages being, in several instances, recognised by persons
in the audience. Mr. Evans challenged anyone to test the wiitings
for chemicals. A simple experiment in this direction was made by
washing off part of the writing on one of the slates to see whether
it would reappear when dry, as it would if chemically produced, but
it did not. The experiments were highly satisfactory in every
particular, and Mr. Evans was frequently applauded. The Courier
and Observer report the proceedings fairly, but the Telegraph is silent,
which is significant. On the afternoon of 6th August, Mr. Evans
was surprised to receive, at his room, a visit from four of the com-
mittee who conducted the experiments of the previous Sunday.
They informed him that as soon as he left, it was the intention ot a
Mr. Patterson to take exception to the conclusiveness of the tests
then obtained, on the ground that Mr. Evans had furnished the
slates, and requested him to give them a seance there and then,
and obtain writing on two slates they had brought with them. At
first the medium declined, but seeing that their motive was a good
one he assented. The whole party retired to an empty room , and the
four members of the committee holding the two slates in their own
hands obtained several messages on them signed by relatives of the
persons holding them. The room did not contain one particle of
furniture, and the slates brought by the committee never left their
sight from the time of their arrival till the completion of the
messages. No more complete test than the above could possibly
be given. The Pattersonian expose vanishes before it into thin air.”
Hundreds of other testimonies can be furnished of Mr. Evans’
remarkable mediumship ; but at a later date we intend to offer to
the public a complete history of Mr. Evans’ lite and work. 1 his
book will contain more reliable testimony to the genuineness of
spiritual phenomena than any book now before the public.
