

“I n A X . The Pivot of ! the
mUla Empire”
Oliver Bainbridge
Scinde Valley
Sydney r
The Empire Literature Society




EMPIRE LITERATURE
SOCIETY
Patrons:
His Excellency Sir Ronald Munro Ferguson, K.C.M.G.
Governor-General
His Excellency Sir Walter Davidson, K.C.M.G.
Governor of New South Wales
The Hon. Sir William Cullen, K.C.M.G.
Chief Justice. Chancellor of the University of Sydney
President:
The Hon. George Earp, M.L.C.
Committee:
Major General G. L. Lee, C.M.G.. D.S.O.
The State Commandant
His Honour Judge Backhouse
Sir Thomas Anderson Stuart
Dean of the Faculty of Medicine, University of Sydney
Colonel J. Lamrock, C. 8., V.D.
Camp Commandant, Liverpool
Colonel R. E. Roth, C.M.G., D. 5.0., V.D.
The Hon. Sir Thos. Hughes. M.L.C.
Major J. H. Strong, V.D
Captain Chaplain Colwell
Mrs. W. A. Holman.
Professor W. E. Cooke, M.A
Government Astronomer
Mrs. George Earp
Mr. John Sulman
Mrs. G. L. Lee
Mr. William Gillanders, B.A.
Gen. Sec. Y.M.C.A.
Mrs. W. McMurray
Mrs. John Waugh
Captain H. G. Grace, V.D.
Mr. H. C. Macfie, F.C.P.A.
Professor J. T. Wilson, M. 8., F.R.S.
Hon. Secretary:
Major J. H. Strong
Asssistant Secretaries:
Miss M. E. Hannah Mr. L. P. Curnow


EMPIRE LITERATURE SOCIETY
India, the Pivot of the Empire
ADDRESS BY
Oliver Bambndge
Author of
“India To-day, “Rambles in Thoughtland,” “The Truth
about Britain in India,” “The Balkan Tangle,” “The
Heart of China,” ‘‘John Strange Winter, “War
Letters,” “The Coming Struggle,” “The
Lesson of the Anglo-American Peace
Centenary,” etc., etc.
To Members of the Empire Literature Society
On Monday, 24th March, 1919
The Hon. G. F. EARP, M.L.C., In the chair


TfTe longer one lives, observes and thinks, the more deeply
does he feel there is no community on (he face of the earth
which suffers less from political evils and more from self-
inflicted, or self-accepted, or self-created, and, therefore,
avoidable evils, than the Hindu Community.
Raja Sir T. MAD HA VA RAO,
K.CS.T,


TlTe Indian mind stands in need, before everything
else, of stricter criteria of truth:'
Sir H. S. JfCAINE




H. H. The Maharana of Udaipur, G.C.5.1., G.C.I.E.


India, the Pivot of the Empire
Address by Oliver Bainbridge, to members of the
Empire Literature Society, on Monday,
March 24th, 1919
The Hon. G. F. Earp, m.1.c., in the chair
When Germany forced this atrocious war upon the
world, she thought she could destroy England and her
Empire, but now that England is awakened from the som-
nolence of the past and to the immense issues involved,
Germany might as well try to pull the moon out of its
orbit. lam afraid that this Savage Incendiary, who en-
deavored to cheat the Devil by the very thoroughness
with which she abandoned herself to His Infernal
Majesty, has had a rude awakening to the stern reality
of the strength and unity of the British Empire.
Our old statesmen never dreamed of such a triumph
as is exposed by the response from every corner of the
mpire, and I confess to having been thrilled by this
ract, which withers the detractors of England, more than
o the greatest victories that were ever won. If the
reeks had known of such a story —if they had known
or a countless multitude of men of every hue and creed
ruled, aided, educated, protected by a few thousand men
of a dominant race—they would have founded an impos-
ing myth upon it, and our students would now be learn-
ing the Hellenic symbolism in our colleges.
Generations of hard-thinking, hard-working British-
<i s have made the Empire and left it as the most sacred
inheritance to their sons and daughters, whose duty it is
to dedicate their energies to its maintenance and pro-
gress. It is indeed a great honour to serve the British
Empire, for it is one of the Trustees of Civilisation—one


of the fearless Advocates of Liberty. Look through the
whole of history, not excepting the brightest days of re-
publican freedom at Athens and Rome, and 1 know you
will not find one single period in which the measure of
liberty accorded to each individual was larger than it is
at present throughout the length and breadth of the
British Empire. And that is the reason when the news
of the outbreak of war reached India His Highness the
Maharaja of Rewa sent this telegram to His Excellency
the Viceroy, “What orders for me and my army?” That
was the response also of the 600 Princes and the
320,000,000 of peoples inhabiting that mysterious and
fascinating land. What a shock for those evil designing
Germans! What a surprise for the traitors within the
Empire!
There is a very grave reason why India should par-
ticipate in all Imperial matters, for without her the Empire
could not continue to exist. Through her geographical
position she has exercised a tremendous influence in
every movement of the British Empire. I often wonder
how many Britons realise that three out of every four of
the King s subjects reside within the borders of India.
Lord Curzon has pointed out that but for this great
country Lord Beaconsfield would not have bought the
shares in the Suez Canal; and but for the Suez Canal,
we should not now be in Egypt. The historic rivalry
and struggles with Russia for nearly a century sprang
from the supposed necessity of keeping her far away
from the frontiers of India.
Had it not been for India, we should never have
seized the Cape or begun that career of South African
expansion that has lately entered upon so remarkable
and pregnant a phase. But for India, we should not have
been able to incarcerate the mighty spirit of Napoleon in
the rocky prison of St. Helena; Mauritius would not now
be ours; nor should we have acquired a predominant
position in Mesopotamia, or have controlled the Persian
Gulf.






India compelled us to lay hold of Aden, a position of
incomparable importance, and to establish a protectorate
over the neighbouring parts of Arabia. India started
us on that career of territorial conquest which was only
arrested by the snowy ramparts of the Himalayas, and
which converted us from a small island with trading and
maritime interests into the greatest Land Power of the
world. It was through India that we established those
connections with the Straits Settlements (formerly under
the rule of the Governor-General of India) and with
China and Japan that were the foundation of our once
Unchallenged and still powerful position in the Far East.
India took us to the foolishly surrendered possession of
Java.
Even now consider what India means, in the nar-
rowest geographical sense. When a Viceroy sets out for
India or returns from thence, the first and last place
where he touches Indian soil is Aden. Aden involved
the acquisition of Perim, the Kuria Muria Islands, the
Protectorate of Socotra, and also the Somali Protectorate,
for many years administered from India, but now trans-
ferred to the Foreign Office. The Laccadive and
Andaman and Nicobar Islands are part of the Indian
dominion. It is a mere accident that Ceylon, which is
physically a part of the Indian peninsula, and is culti-
vated by Indian coolies, is administered by the Colonial
Office.
India includes Burma, which, in physical features,
population, and creed, might be a part of another con-
tinent. It is obvious, indeed, that the master of India
must, under modern conditions, be the greatest power
in the Asiatic Continent, and therefore, it may be added,
in the world. The central position of India, its magnifi-
cent resources, its teeming multitude of men, its great
trading harbours, its reserves of military strength,
supplying an army always in a high state of efficiency
and capable of being hurled at a moment’s notice upon
any point, either of Asia or Africa, all these are assets
of precious value.


On the west, India must exercise a predominant
influence over the destinies of Persia and Afghanistan;
on the north it can veto any rival in Tibet; on the north-
east and east it can exert great pressure upon China,
and is one of the guardians of the autonomous exis-
tence of Siam, On the high seas it commands the routes
to Australia and the China Seas. Before any of these
extensions had been achieved, the supreme value of
India as the centre and secret of Imperial dominion was
apprehended by the eagle-eye of Napoleon. It was the
remark of De Tocqueville that the conquest and govern-
ment of India were really the achievements that had
given to England her place in the eyes of the world.
If we glance at the figures of the British Empire
we will find that one-tenth of the entire trade passes
through the seaports of India, and this sea-borne trade
is more than one-third of the trade of the Empire out-
side the United It is greater than that of
Australia and Canada combined, and, within the Empire,
Indian sea-borne trade is second only to that of the
United Kingdom. India has become the largest pro-
ducer of food and raw material in the Empire and the
principal granary of Great Britain, the imports into the
United Kingdom of wheat, meal, and flour from India
exceeding those of Canada and being double those of
Australia. At the same time India is the largest pur-
chaser of British produce and manufactures, and notably
of cotton goods.
It must be remembered that the whole of the ap-
pliances by which this great trade has been built up —
the roads, railroads, canals, harbours, docks, telegraphs,
posts, etc. —have been created during the period of
British rule and largely by capital supplied from Britain.
Indeed, the amount of British capital invested in the
development of India (including the employment of its
people) is estimated as at least £350,000,000. These
facts show clearly the interests of Great Britain and India
are mutual, and that the progress and happiness of both


depend upon a correct understanding of one another
and unity of effort.
The Indian troops enjoy the unique distinction and
honor of having provided units for a larger number of
the theatres of war than any others. They have been
in Egypt, Mesopotamia, the Cameroons, Togoland,
Aden, Gallipoli and Flanders.
The first contingent that arrived in Europe was
under the Command of Lieut.-General His Highness, the
Maharaja Sir Pertab Singh, who is a close personal friend
of His Majesty the King-Emperor. His Highness is a
distinguished member of that noble race of warriors
which has come to be regarded as the beau ideal in India
of dauntless courage and of stainless honor, the very
essence of Eastern chivalry. The Rajputs have always
been our friends.
The Sikhs, whose home is in the Punjab, are men of
good physique, whom we can respect and admire for
their bravery and sterling virtues. The British have
fought against them and found them worthy foemen;
they have fought with them and proved them loyal
comrades.
The Gourkhas, have been fighting for the Empire
by permission of His Highness the Maharaja of Nepaul
and His Excellency the Viceroy of India. These sturdy
little men live in the Himalayas which stretch across
India like the dorsal fin of some extinct monster. The
leading feature, of this range is its colossal proportions;
it contains the loftiest summits in the world, but the
breadth of the range and the massiveness of the ascend-
ing terraces have the effect of dwarfing to the eye the
culminating points. Mount Everest, which reaches
29,000 feet in height, is the most enchanted region in
the world.
Kanchenjunga, the second in point of height
of the Himalaya range, towers up to 28,000 feet.


It is here one often sees some glorious snow avalanches.
They come thundering down on all sides, making a
peculiar hissing noise, and on reaching the glacier, burst
into clouds of dazzling whiteness, which here and there
are transformed into myriads of colours by the rising
sun. Siniolchu, the most beautiful snow peak of the
Himalayas, is nearly always blotted out by mist.
While we are in these lofty regions let us visit Tibet,
the Roof of the World, for a moment and see His Holi-
ness the Dalai Lama, the Pope of Buddhism, who offered
an army to England to show his appreciation of the many
kindnesses he has received at her hands.
The Tibetans firmly believe that the Dalai Lamas
are continuous reincarnations of the Lord Buddha, and
that when they leave their earthly box they enter the
other world for a little while and reappear in children
whose bodies they have occupied from conception.
In olden times, the Dalai Lamas, before “passing
over,” were gracious enough to give the name and
address of the family in which they would reappear; but
for some unknown reason they have ceased to do this.
When a Dalai Lama of the present day “crosses over,”
a list is made of all the boys born at the time by the
Lamas, and sent to the Great Monastery. The Nome-
Khan* selects three whose names he writes on
pieces of paper and places them in a golden urn.
For six days the Lamas fast and pray, and on the
morning of the seventh day, in the presence of the Nomo-
Khan, the Head Lama places his hand in the urn and takes
out one of the pieces of paper, which reveals the name of
the new Dalai Lama. The Council of Lamas then ask
for the clothes and sacred utensils of the departed Dalai
Lama to be brought into the chamber, and after mixing
them with others send for the child, who proves his
indentity by immediately recognising them. He is then
installed as the re-born Dalai Lama, and conducted with
great pomp to the Grand Palace.
*A permanent official, selected from among the chief Tibetan Lamas
the Chinese Government.


The Dalai Lama wears a robe of yellow and red,
and can only be approached by persons of rank, who are
permitted to touch his hand. He sits on an altar throne
when receiving pilgrims, who do not speak, for he knows
their thoughts by supernatural intuition.
The Dalai Lama rules his 6,500,000 subjects
through the Nomo-Khan, who is assisted by five
ministers.
The Tibetan women have attained the Suffragettes
Nirvana— ‘ a latch-key and no chaperon. They have
pushed their way into all spheres of work, and claim more
attention as the greater fraction of the race. They have
several husbands for “women need three or four men to
help them.” One woman said: “If I had only one hus-
band and he died, I should be a widow.”
The difficulties which arise from this system of
polyandry are settled by an ingenious code of laws which
has been in use for many centuries. The “emanci-
pated” women agree with Solomon’s five hundredth wife
that men want not that woman which needeth them,
but that one which seems to have everything she needeth.
The short-legged Yak—or grunting ox, is the
strangest animal in Tibet. It lives at the highest altitudes
and is as. sure-footed as a goat. After one gets ac-
customed to the grunting noise they make, which sends
a curious vibration through one, they are not uncomfort-
able mounts. The yak is used principally as a beast of
burden and will cover from twenty to twenty-four miles
a day with a heavy load.
Darjeeling, wdiich rests on the crests and slopes of
the Himalayas, where the mind is possessed and absorbed
by all the awful magnificence of their scenery and
character, is known as the “children’s paradise.” This
ideal Hill station and pleasure resort is fifteen hours’
journey from Calcutta, the second city of the British
Empire. \Ylien the little band of British merchants first
settled in Calcutta it consisted of a few mud huts on the
Hugh. To-day it has a population of a million and a


quarter, and its many palaces are owned by Indians
whose rent roll is something enormous. Sir William
Hunter says there is more accumulated wealth held by
natives in two cities of British India, Calcutta and Bom-
bay, cities which a couple of centuries ago were mud
hamlets, than all the treasures of the Imperial and local
courts under the Moghul Empire.
Impartial inquiry demonstrates the fact that, under
British rule, the peoples of India are much richer than in
any stage of their existence. When the British rule com-
menced there was not a single good road in the country,
nor a mile of railway. To-day there are 33,000 miles of
railroad, of which the State owns 23,000, realising a
profit of over £2,000,000 which is devoted to the relief of
taxation. The railways, which carried 375,000,000 pas-
sengers in 1910, give employment to 525,000 persons of
whom 508,000 are Indians,
Britain is taxed twenty-five times more than India
which has the lowest taxation in the world. Whitaker
says the cost of government to each native in India is not
half what it is to the native of Japan. The “drain” at
which the seditionists howl so much exists in their
imagination only, for India pays no tribute to England.
A careful survey of all payments will show that they are
for interest on money loaned, services rendered, and
materials supplied.
There was no regular postal system in India before
the arrival of the British. To-day there is a system which
employs a staff of 93,000 persons, practically all of
whom are Indians, dealing with 700,000,000 letters
annually.
The British have transformed barren wastes of
territory to a market value of £300,000,000.
The enemies of England say that the peoples of India
have no voice whatever in the management of their own
affairs, but this statement, like all their others, is as absurd
as it is untrue. There are 1,400,000 Indians engaged at
the present moment in the service of the State. The 750


municipalities and the District Boards, which number
about a thousand, are composed principally of Indian
members, one half of whom are elected by the people.
It is no exaggeration to say that the major portion of the
administration work of the country is entrusted to the
natives. It will no doubt surprise a great many to know
that 70,000,000 Indians are governed by native Rulers.
The enemies of England very conveniently forget
the “Jagia” (capitation tax) which every Hindu was
ESmpelled to pay for the privilege of exercising his re*
ligion, by all the Rulers of India with the exceptions of
Akbar, and the British who pride themselves on their
neutrality towards caste and religious questions.
Benares is the Mecca of Hinduism. The forty-seven
bathing ghats, palaces, shrines, tombs and temples of this
city are very imposing in the distance, but, as you draw
closer, they grow less attractive, especially the Golden
Temple, upon which the Maharaja Ranjit Singh, ruler
of the Punjab, lavished crores of rupees, very few of
which were converted into the precious metal from which
it derives its name. Pilgrims come hundreds of miles on
foot to bow before the God of this temple (Siva) with the
last atom of remaining strength, for they often drop dead
from sheer fatigue and starvation as they polish their
foreheads on the ground in reverent salutation.
The Monkey Temple is the companion of the
Golden Temple for it is dedicated to Kali, Siva’s wife, who
must have inspired Kipling to write “The female of the
species is more deadly than the male.’’ Kali, “The Sweet
Terrible One,’’ must be propitiated with rice and other
foods, as well as the daintiest flowers sprinkled with the
blood of young goats slain in sacrifice every morning.
As many as three hundred goats have been offered to this
gluttonous goddess in one day. Kali’s thirst can be
quenched with the blood of a tiger for 100 years, and
that of a man for 1,000 years.


In Benares every caste is represented by fakirs, who
are exceedingly numerous and possess an almost super-
natural power over vast multitudes of their country-
men. It is impossible to enumerate the fiendish tortures
through which these holy men go to prepare for that
sphere of ecstatic bliss to which it is their ultimate hope
to attain. One lanky haggard wretch never sits or lies
down, but stands day after day and year after year telling
the experiences he encountered during his wanderings
among the hills; another will drive a spike through his
arm and roll in the ashes; others will slit their tongues
and place little wriggling snakes in the dripping wound
and gesticulate madly to the open mouthed mob; others
sit and recline on beds of spikes; others hang head down-
wards over roasting fires in order that the great god may
have some material evidence of their sincerity and devo-
tion. But the most remarkable feature of all Indian
fakirdom is the peculiar attitudes which they take and
through sheer force of will maintain them until the limbs
become perfectly rigid. Some fakirs will sit on their
haunches, clench their fists, and hold their arms above
their heads, and never move them from that moment.
Upon examining the arms of one of these men, I found
them to be very much wasted away. The skin felt like
parchment, and the finger nails had attained a pheno-
menal length. He said that he had remained in the same
position for twelve years.
These holy men explained that their object is to
bring about the blending of their souls with the Divine
world-soul. The soul is merely attached to the body,
and the one great aim is to obliterate all bodily, all earthly
desires as it is only possible to attain perfection and the
ethereal re-union by making the soul independent of its
prison-house of clay. After this has been accomplished
and the holy men have attained command over all earthly
substance they can make themselves lighter than the
lightest substance, heavier than the heaviest; can become
as vast or as minute as they please, can traverse all space,
can animate any dead bodies by transferring their spirits




A Fakir
WHO NEVER SITS OR LIES DOWN
A Fakir
WITH RIGID ARMS


into them from their own frame, can render themselves
invisible, can attain all objects, become equally
acquainted with the past, present, and future, finally
united with Brahma, and consequently exempted from
being born again upon earth.
It was in Benares that I came across a member of
that most revolting sect known as the Paramahansa
(Cannibal Sadhus), who feast upon the bodies that are
to be found along the Ganges. They say that nothing is
unclean, for everything in existence is only a manifesta-
tlBß of the Universal Soul.
These cannibals do not commit murder in order to
obtain their feast, but buy or steal the bodies of the
poor, as they require them. They are not fierce, but, on
the contrary, rather timid, and .they consider themselves
high caste.
Cannibalism is sanctioned by the god Siva, who
gained his strength and wisdom in this manner. They
believe that magical power can only be acquired by eat-
ing human flesh.
The caste marks of the Hindus which they paint
upon their foreheads after they have taken their purifi-
cation bath each morning, represent nearly three thou-
sand religious differences and the rules which govern
each dot, line and curve, are complex and severe.
It is in governing India without disturbing the
fgligious differences, and the mutual jealousies of the
peoples that England has shone to conspicuous advan-
tage. * 11
It is impossible to say which city in India is the
oldest, but Delhi, rebuilt by Shah Jehan in 1640, is the
most historic. The Hindu chroniclers go back as far
as 1400, B.C. It seems that the Hindus successfully
occupied Delhi until 1200 A.D., when a Moham-
medan Viceroy, Kutub-ud-Din, wrenched it from them
and was crowned Emperor at Lahore in 1 206 A.D. In
order that the world might know something of his


victory the Emperor built the Kutub Minar, the tallest
minaret in the world, which stands 238 feet high.
The city walls are six miles around and there are
ten gates, the best known of which is the Cashmere,
for that was the point at which the most daring deed of
the world was done. The city was in the hands of 40,000
well-armed fanatical Sepoys, who were protected on
three sides by a strong wall, on top of which were 114
guns, and, on the fourth, by the river Jumna. Nicholson,
the immortal general, with 1,200 unprotected British
soldiers, swore that he would take the city, and he did.
But imagine the fearful odds! When I first saw the
Cashmere gate I trembled with emotion, for its history
became a living, moving tale. 1 saw Lieutenants
Salkeld and Home and Sergeants Burgess, Carmichael
and Smith, make a desperate rush with bags of powder
to the foot of the gate—a flash—and heard the ex-
plosion that shook the earth for miles around, and tore
that part of the gate and those heroes to a thousand un-
recognisable pieces. I saw a little army rush through
the smouldering hole, to an encounter which lasted
six days, and proved one of the greatest victories ever
recorded to British arms.
I was enthralled as I wandered through the palace
of the Moghuls, with its Audience Hall, a dream in
marble and colour, from which the Persians stole the pea-
cock throne valued at £6,000,000, by the exquisite little
pearl mosque and by the Jumma Musjid, planned by the
same man who planned the Taj Mahal, the largest and
most beautiful mosque in India, which I reached while
the Mohammedans were at prayer; there was no wild
music, no beating of tom-toms, but a weird mournful
sound like the drowsy hum of bees filled the air as they
knelt and bowed to Allah “to whom we shall all be
gathered.”
The story of Lahore is one of the most engaging
interest, for it was the camping ground of the early
Aryans, the seat of the holy singers of the \/edic hymns,
and occupied a prominent place in the Mohammedan


dynasties. Lahore suffered more in the century preced-
ing Sikh supremacy, than any other city in India, owing
to its conspicuous position on the North-Western frontier.
It was here that Kipling spent his childhood and found
‘Kim,” one of the most fascinating of eastern characters.
This city contains the tomb of Nur Jahan (“The Light of
the Harem.” “The Light of the World,” the heroine of
Moore’s “ Lalla Rookh”). She was the daughter of a
heheran noble who, through a confluence of untoward
circumstances, was forced to emigrate with his wife and
children to India. Nur Jahan, lovely without heroics,
became the Queen of the East, which she adorned with
her virtues and wisdom.
History shows that the women of India are not lack-
ing in their patriotism, heroism, and statecraft, which is
an overwhelming argument in favor of equal oppor-
tunity with the men in such branches of human activity
as will be conducive to the general prosperity of the
country. It is a difficult matter for the women of India,
as a whole, to exercise any valuable influence while they
are subjected to the unnatural and degrading custom of
seclusion which is entirely a foreign custom and is not
sanctioned by antiquity.
The moral and intellectual future of India depends
more upon her women than the men, for the destiny of
nations is with the mothers. Only great women can give
[8 th§ world great sons. As long as woman is down
India will be down, for no nation was ever elevated except
through the elevation of women. Prior to the Moham-
medan conquest men and women mingled quite freely
and Kings introduced their Queens in Society. The
Begum of Bhopal, the only ruling Princess in India, the
Maharani of Cooch-Behar, the Rani of Gondal, the
Maharani of Baroda, the Maharani of Bhavnagar, and
other Princesses are doing excellent work for their
country by showing that Nature has made the under-
standing of women capable of better and higher things.
If the education of women were improved, the
education of men would be improved also.


The ignorance of the people is the greatest danger
to which the Indian Empire is exposed, and it is to be
hoped that the Government will be successful in destroy-
ing this evil by promoting a correct system of education,
instead of the imitations to be met with at the present
day.
The problem to be solved is the adaptation of an
educational system to open out the undeveloped nature
of the peoples of India; to bring out their faculties
and impart skill in their use; to set the seeds of many
powers growing; to teach as large and as varied a know-
ledge of human nature, both their own and that of the
world about them, as possible; to give them, according
to their circumstances, the largest practicable acquaint-
ance with life, what it is composed of, morally, intellec-
tually, and materially, and how to deal with it.
One of the most magnificent enterprises of benevo-
ence ever projected by a woman’s brain is the National
Association for supplying Female Medical Aid to the
Women of India, founded by the Dowager Marchioness
of Dufferm and Ava (mother of Lady Helen
Munro-Ferguson), who says: “There is no doubt
whatever that the lives of thousands of women
and infants are yearly sacrificed and that a still
larger number of women are condemned to bar-
renness and to a life of ill-health and suffering by
the violence and by the aggressive character of the treat-
ment they are subjected to, when, in nine cases out of
ten, gentleness, patience, fresh air, cleanliness, and quiet
would be sufficient to bring them safely through a com
mon experience of womankind.” And in summing up
the leading characteristics common to most parts of
India she says: “There is the unhealthy room, remark-
able for the insanitary nature of its arrangements. There
are the charcoal fire, the absolute lack of ventilation, and
the crowd of spectators. There is the extreme and ac-
cumulating dirt, for in very many places nothing what-
ever is brought out of the sick room while the mother
remains there, and, added to all this, is the further danger


attending the ministrations of the ignorant, or the care-
less, or the vicious Dhai (native midwife). Tetanus apd
puerperal fever, permanent delicacy, and death, are the
too frequent results of such a system.
Nor can we, in the case of Indian women, com-
fort ourselves, as we are apt to do, with the idea that they
lead a more natural life than Europeans, and therefore
suffer little at child-birth. The very contrary is the case;
the lives led by all but the very poor are most unnatural,
in our sense of the term, and as they marry unnaturally
young, they suffer more at the time and are much more
liable than older women would be to injuries causing life-
long suffering." The atrocious system of early mar-
riages did not exist in the times of the Vedas, while to-
day, there are 9,000,000 girl wives between the ages of
one and fifteen, of whom 2,500,000 are under eleven, and
there are 400,000 girl widows forbidden to marry, in fact
every fifth female in the country is a widow. Recently a
few widows of high caste have been re-married, which
goes to show that there is a disposition to remove the un-
natural barrier.
An old account of the Bombay Marriage Treaty
says: “The train of circumstances which ended in
the establishment of the English in Bombay is certainly
as wonderful as anything on record. A group of grey-
headed sinners living in London, and another group living
in Lisbon, decree, that the island of Bombay shall con-
stitute part of the dowry of a Portuguese girl, who shall
Charles 11., King of England. The island is I 2,000
miles away, and none of them have seen it except on the
map. It does not matter. The deed is done, and as sayeth
the clown in the circus—“ Here we are!” Little
did Charles 11. dream that the Bombay ceded to him
by the Portuguese as a marriage gift, and which he
in turn transferred to the East India Company for an
annual rent of £ 1 0 in gold, would become the pride of
every Britisher. I enjoyed to the full my visit to the city
of Bombay, built like Venice on a number of small
islands, with its imposing buildings—great structures of
intelligence—which are a complete expression of British


energy and force. What a delight it is to drive from the
Apollo Bunder to Malabar Point, and take in the pano-
rama, which unfolds itself—the joint work of Nature
and Man.
If the enemies of the British Government were to
visit Bombay—they need not go further—and study it,
what a number of strange and interesting things they
would discover, and what a lot of cherished beliefs they
would have to throw overboard.
Nowhere in India will you find such variation of
design, as reveals itself in the secretariat, the University
Library, the University Hall, the Victoria Station of the
G.I.P. Railway, which is the handsomest station in the
world—and in many other buildings.
It is a liberal education in Eastern Physiognomy
and dress to drive through the principal streets of the
native quarters, where forty languages are habitually
spoken, and where you inhale an assortment of smells,
such as India alone can produce.
I have often seen men from Peshawar, and the
Kyber Pass, at the market in Bombay, and what a contrast
they are to the city shopkeepers! It was these Sons of the
Mountain, who cost the British Government £2,000,000
a year until Lord Curzon (the most brilliant Viceroy
England has ever sent to India) met their Chieftains, and
made them his brothers. To-day it costs the Government
£200,000 to maintain order on the North-Western From
tier, which is only one of the many good things Lord
Curzon has done for the Empire over which His Majesty
George V., the model King and Emperor, rules with such
wisdom. His Majesty, who spent a number of years in
the Navy, has travelled throughout the length and breadth
of the Empire, and knows more about it than the majority
of his Statesmen. Whenever I look at a picture of King
George these lines always come to my mind.
“One race, one flag, one fleet, one throne.
Britons, hold your own/’
A vote of thanks was accorded the lecturer, on the
motion of His Honor Judge Backhouse, M.A., seconded
by Mr. John Sulman, F.R.1.8.A.


The Metal Worker


Siva’s Bull, carved out of solid rock on the side of
CharmANDi Hill, Mysore
The Golden Throne, Mysore


Dancing Girls who were sent by the Gaekwar of Baroda
to entertain the Lecturer while a Guest in the State


A Sikh Infanthyman


<
H
H
D
U
J
<
O
txf
C
Q
X
CQ
13
o
o
X


’
•
Banyan Tree, Botanical Gardens, Calcutta, 146 Years Old
WHICH ONCE GAVE SHELTER TO AN ARMY




A Bridal Pair




ifillj i -L
tmM a 1 flPipl!
■f y Iff, |
Victoria Terminus, G.LP. Railway, Bombay


Figures in Relief on one of the Temples of Madura


Waiting for the Signal to Pull the Juggernaut Car


“India To-day”
“Mr. Bainbridge’s book, which has the merit of dealing with India
in rather a different way from the conventional tone of travel, contains
L grit deal of valuable information, and offers a splendid testimonial
to British Rule.” —The Rt. Hon. Earl Curzon, of Kedleston, G.C.5.1..
G.C.I.E.
“It is the best book on India of the current moment known to me
The castigation which Mr. Bainbridge has given those Indians, and yet
baser reprobate Englishmen, who make market of the spiritual and moral
of he rising generation of Hindus for political and other similar
sordid purposes, should earn him the esteem and regard of every.English-
manwho knows India and the full worth of the British Raj to India. -Sir
George Birdwood, K.C.5.1., M.A., M.D.
“A volume which should prove of distinct interest to all Enghs
readers who have not had the opportunity of visiting our great eastern
dependency.”—7 he Globe, London,
“Mr Bainbridge explains in his preface that his object is to serve
the cause of justice by setting right the minds of those who labour under
an erroneous impression in relation to the Indian Empire.
“He does not seek to present an exhaustive account of that eighty
and complex organism, or to drown his subjects in detail. Thus, with the
help T a graphic style, quick intelligence and inquiring mind he well
succeeds in the end he sets before himself, and exposes much of the
false and fallacious stock-in-trade of the agitator against VO
his dupes among British politicians. —Sir J. D. Rees, K.L.i.U.., u.v.u.,
M P., in the Daily Express, London.
“An outspoken book, which is as full of sound criticism as it is of
useful information.” —Newcastle Chronicle.
“India To-day is certainly up-to-date in its delineations of T " d ' a - a "
of the life of its people.”—The Rt. Hon. Lord Lammgton, G.C.M.G.,
GC I E
“Mr. Bainbridge writes about India with admirable fullness of know-
ledge ” — The Daily Mirror, London.
' “I have read India To-day with great pleasure. It gives in a short
and readable form many facts about India which one is glad to have
hand.” —Hariot, Dowager Marchioness of Duffenn and Ava.
«T have had very much interest in reading India To-day. The
longer I live the more I realise how much there is to know and to under-
stand about India. Mr. Bainbridge puts it all so plainly, and with sue
Thackeray). . „ . ~ T
“It certainly shows a wide knowledge of Indian affairs. —James
Walter Smith (Chief Editor, Cassell & Co., Ltd.).
“A very elaborate study enshrined in a very handsome volume. Mr.
Bainbridge has covered his ground well.”—The Liverpool Daily Mercury.
<<r r- Tn-Jnv interested me very much, and it comes at a moment
when it can and will, I feel, do much good, clearing minds of
and all manner of false sentiment founded on ignorance, —Lucas Malet.
“A most useful and informing work.”—Sir William Evans Gordon.


“Mr. Bainbridge writes with a wide knowledge and careful grasp of
his subject, and in some exceedingly thoughtful pages he impresses upon
the reader the difficulties that beset the daily path of the Indian civil
servant, and the absolute necessity that India should be governed by
gentlemen.”— The Sunday Times, London.
“As a record of chases vues by an intelligent observer whose criticisms
are always acute and helpful, the present volume is most timely. It is
written in a most interesting fashion. The illustrations are numerous and
exceptionally good. ' —The Manchester Courier.
“In this comprehensive survey of Indian life, the author has much to
say that is of interest about religion and caste/' — Lloyd’s Newspaper,
London.
“The best chapter is on the Indian magicians, for Mr. Bainbridge is
one of the very few people who have seen the ladder trick’ performed.
The many illustrations are well produced.” — The Yorkshire Post.
“Mr. Bainbridge’s fluent and plentifully illustrated volume gives a
rapid account of its author’s personal impressions of the historical changes
that have taken place since European ideas began to penetrate the country
under British rule, and of the educational system, and its weaknesses in
answering to the requirements of the natives.”— The Scotsman, Edinburgh.
“The Truth about Britain in India”
With a Foreword by
Sir George Birdwood, K.C.1.E., C. 5.1., M.D., LL.D.
“I trust that your pamphlet, The Truth About Britain in India has
been widely read. It puts the case for British rule very clearly, and the
response from India in this trying time shows that India appreciates its
general justice and efficiency.”—Lord Napier, of Magdala.
“I thank you for your pamphlet on ‘The Truth About Britain in
India,’ which should do good.”—Sir Louis Dane.
“A valuable pamphlet which I have read with great interest.”—Sir
Guildford Molesworth.
“An interesting pamphlet.”—Lord Inchcape.
“I have read your pamphlet with much interest. In showing up to
Americans the falsehood of the statements made against British rule in
India, you are doing a real service to the country.”-—Sir Henry Mortimer
Durand.
Tt is an excellent pamphlet.”—Sir Alexander Pedler.
T have read your pamphlet with much interest.”—Sir James Wilson.
‘An admirable pamphlet.”—Sir Henry Blake.
“I hope The Truth About Britain in India will serve its purpose.”—
Sir James Thomson.
“I have read The Truth About Britain in India with interest.” —Sir
Richard Temple.
“I have read your pamphlet with much interest.” —Sir David Barnes.


SYDNEY:
Vale & Pearson, Printers
2 Castlereagh Street
1919
