

The “ WOOLLA HIIA HEEMIT ’’—contributions from whose pen have from time to time appeared in the
—proposes to publish
ENTITLED,
INDIVIDUALITY;
A HISTOEICAL SKETCH OF THE MIND OF AN HONEST MAN, STEIJGGLING TO OTJNT
EELIGIOUS, POLITICAL, AND LITEKARY OBSTACLES.
The following original Lines are designed as its Introduction, as expressive of the General
of the Book and temperament of the author :
INTRODUCTORY LINES.
How grand are the conceptions of well ordered minds that I I court no smiles, and fear no frowns ■ but a] it -itted
s . hi £ e . stand,
On prejudices as men do their dreams when they awake, | Alike unnoticed and unknown—a stranger in the land •
And soar from types and symbols to sublimities that lie | Mankind are wretchedly deceived, and if they martyrize
Above the dim old sounding shades of this world’s history I ! The bard that dares to tell them so, I brave the sacrifice '
Disburthened of the sacerdotal mummeries of yore, I Away with pseudo titles which in mystery began— ’
1 hey learn, what books have failed to teach the nations,— 1 turn my back on teachers that disgrace the name of man »
What have they all achieved? What will their prowess
And Nature s God is pleased to see His creature, man, up- yet perform ?
™ I ? se , . . .. . Ask questions inlaijd-driven, like gulls before an ocean-
From shadows to investigate Divine Realities ! 1 storm !
But ignorance of intellect and impotence of power AH honest hearts recoil from the pollution which appeal's
Are traceable throughout the race unto the present hour: Behind the stage-effect of scenes that Public Folly cheers »
Old refuges of lies are still the popular conceit, DegenTate times ! one man, at least, defies your bonds of
While Superstition sits enthron’d, with empires at her feet! shame,
Political adventurers, like most of pious name, * And looks to’ future ages for an honorable fame !
"?•' 0 Lmmna which only shine with phosphorescent flame ; Thus having soul to stand alone in sov’reiguty of thought
Ihe patriotic boast is but a ruse to gain some end, Amid opposing legions, he is not a thing of nought •
And Blackest Purpose often claims to be “ The People’s No ! he is self-esteemed ! What more could independence
Low Cunning, with its brazen face and rotten heart, pre- That smiles in scorn of tinsel called superiority ?
-nj, _ vail ® . ... _. x „ A , The sentiment now his shall be the sentiment of rule.
Where modest wealth of intellect and moral grandeur fails. When Human Nature grows ashamed of bein°- knave or
Mere mental pigmies, who have learned the art of tricks, fool:
control Then histories of council-creeds will only be the laugh
Conventionalities, alas, too destitute of soul! Of Playboys making merry rhymes by w ay of epitaph.
Gigantic mind, preferring peace, must miserably yield ’Tis heav’nward knowledge self to know, when the expand-
All right to thmk, or keep its thoughts in cowardice con- ing soul 1
ceal d; _ Seeks to fulfil its destiny, as cycles onward roll:
Outspoken Truth is Treason, and attempts to know* the Within lies true philosophy wrapp’d up in spirit-things
, y Surpassing School-scientise or Church-imaginings. >
And wherefore of a dogma, are suppress d by hue and cry ! I know no other Temple than the Universe, wherein
Ah . where is Moral Courage, that we scarcely see its signs To offer prayer and praise, or seek deliverance from sin—
Among the noted ones of earth, your statesmen and divines? Neither to any ritual my pure devotion bends
Tis hooted by monopolists, and fugitive would be Other than daily need demands, and Reason recommends.
But for the hiding-place it seeks in man’s futurity 1 Clothed with infinity, I kneel upon a speck of time
My spirit cannot stoop so ignominiously low Adoring the Eternal, and absorbed in thought sublime 1
As to acknowledge etiquette thus based on human woe.
The Work will contain 144 Pages 12mos price Five Shillings per copy. The author will not feel justified
m incurring The expenses of publication until Five Hundred (Spies shall have been ordered by bona fide Subscribers
G entlemen to whom this Prospectus is forwarded will confer a favour by acting pro tern, as Honorary Agents. Should
New South Wales withhold the patronage claimed by its Hermit, n’importe, he will find it elsewhere. A list of
subscribers, &c., to be published with the Volume.
All Subscription Papers returnable to Messrs. Clarson, Shallard, & Co., Publishers, &c., at the earliest con-
venxence of Honorary Agents. ’ ’ ’
NAME ' RESIDENCE. 1 NO. OF COPIES ORDERED.
in % U*l/( ///v £h- I r
