

it>/y.aq
COURT OF INDUSTRIAL ARBITRATION OF
NEW SOUTH WALES.
INDUSTRIAL BOARDS
AND
THE WAR.
JUDGMENT OF MR. JUSTICE HEYDON
30th NOVEMBER. 1914.
sVdneV:
\V. A. GIJLLICK, government PRINTER*
1 9 1 4*
* 16223


(


* 16823
COURT OF INDUSTRIAL ARBITRATION OF
NEW SOUTH WALES.
INDUSTRIAL BOARDS
AND
THE WAR.
JUDGMENT OF MR. JUSTICE HEYDON
30th NOVEMBER, 1914.
SYDNEY:
W. A. GULLICK, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
I 9H-


[ln the Court of Industrial Arbitration rtf New South Wales.]
I
(Before Mr. Justice Heydon.)
Monday, 30th November, 1914.
Re PROFESSIONAL AND SHOPWORKERS’ GROUP, No. 3 BOARD.
(Application by Shop Assistants’ Union for Directions.)
Re IRON AND SHIPBUILDING TRADES GROUP, No. 5 BOARD.
(Submissions by Chairman.)
Re SHIPJOINERS AND SHIPWRIGHTS DEMARCATION BOARD.
Re GOVERNMENT RAILWAYS GROUP, Nos. 7 and 11 BOARDS.
Re FOOD SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION (No. 2) GROUP, Nos. 1,4, and
8 BOARDS.
(Submissions by Chairman.)
Re MANUFACTURING (No. 2) GROUP, No. 5 BOARD.
(Application by Cycle and Motor and Electroplating Employers’
Association for consent to Appeal.)
JUDGMENT.
His Honor : In the first of the above matters, the shop assistants had been,
before the war, taking evidence in an application for a new award. When the war
broke out the Board adjourned, and ultimately, after certain discussions, declined to sit
while the present uncertainty exists as to what the conditions of employment will be.
This was done, as the Chairman, Mr. Curlewis, explained, for the purpose of enabling
application to he made to the Court for some pronouncement on the question whether
Boards should, at the present time, consider applications for increases of wages. Both
sides agreed to waive technicalities, and the matter is now before me in the form of an
application to the Court to take over and hear the claims.
In the second matter the Cycle and Motor Cycle Board began, after the outbreak
of the war, to hear an application for a new award. During the hearing, the employers
submitted that the consideration of the claims of the Union should be suspended, in
view of the conditions brought about by the war in the industry. Evidence was taken
in support of this, and the Chairman (Mr. Newbery) finally ruled that the evidence
showed that the Board was not, at that time, in a position to make an award which
would be effective and just for any length of time, and he adjoun ed the Board until the
end of November, subject to the result of any inquiry by the Court. On objection to
this he submitted the question to the Court under section 35 (3) of the Act, whether he
had any such power.
The third matter is a submission by the Chairman (Mr. G. S. Beeby) of the
Shipjoiners and Shipwrights’ Demarcation Board of the question whether or not, in view
of the existence of the war, the Board is justified in proceeding with the applications
submitted to it.
The fourth and fifth matters are submissions by the Chairman (Mr. G S. Beeby)
of the Railway Engineers’ Board, the Railway Coach makers’ Board, the Aerated Waters
Board, the Cold Storage Board, and the Milk Carters and Dairymen’s Board, of the
question whether the Boards are justified at present in considering applications for
•improved industrial conditions —(a) if the industry is not affected by the war; (b) if


the conditions of the industry have been improved owing to the war ; and (c) if the
conditions of the industry have declined owing to the war. In some of these ca«es
applications were made since the war, and in others were made and partly heard before
the war. In one of them the objection to proceeding was specifically limited to applica-
tions for increased wages or reduced hours. The form of these submissions is not to be
found in the Act, but they were made in consequence of the judgment of the Court on
the 18th September in the appeal against the award of the No. 8 Board (rolling-stock)
of the Leather Trades Group.
The sixth matter is merely an appeal which awaits the result of this hearing.
On the outbreak of the war, several Chairmen held that their Boards should for
the time cease to deal with applications to regulate wages. Other Chairmen went on as
usual. Such a situation could not continue. In the judgment in the rolling-stock appeal
mentioned above it was partly dealt with, and the Court held that, so far at any rate as
public servants, and workers in the same position as public servants, were concerned,
applications for increases of wages ought not at present to be entertained. The case of
workers outside the Service was not dealt with ; and in the hearing of the present appli-
cation the case of public servants themselves was reopened, with the consent of the
Court.
The whole question, therefore, now to be considered is, whether at the present
time Boards ought to refuse to consider any, or (if any) what, applications for increased
wages, or reduced hours; and, if they should so suspend their functions, for how long
they should do so.
Though there is no direct provision in the act empowering the Court to give such
general directions to the Boards as are now requested, I think the appellate jurisdiction
of the Court justifies it. I, therefore, entered upon the question, and as it was one of
considerable importance to the industrial world, I thought it best, instead of taking only
one of the cases submitted, and hearing the parties to that, to take them all together,
and invite a general representation through one counsel on each side.
Accordingly, Mr. Connington appeared for the employees, and represented,
directly or indirectly,—
Some fifty-four labour organisations.
The Sydney Labour Council and its legal department.
The Shop Assistants and Warehouse Employees’ Association.
The Railway Workers and General Labourers’ Association.
The Card-board and Paper-box Employees’ Union.
The Tent, Tarpaulin, Oilskin, and Flag-makers’ Union.
The Amalgamated Railway and Tramway Service Association.
The Amalgamated Society of Engineers.
The Amalgamated Coachmakers’ Society.
The Federated House and Ship Painters’ Union,
The Ship Joiners and Carpenters’ Union.
Mr. Rolin appeared for the employers and represented, directly or indirectly,—
The Master Retailers’ Association.
The N.S.W. Sheet Metal Employers’ Association.
The Metropolitan and Suburban Dairymen’s Association.
The Iron Trades Employers’Association.
The Master Bakers’Association of New South Wales.
The Drug Manufacturers’ Association.
The Aerated Waters Manufacturers’Association of N.S.W.
The Crystal Ice Company.
The Employers under the No 4 Board of the Food Supply and Distribution,
No. 2 Group.
The Cycle and Motor and Electroplating Employers’ Association.


Mr. Bavin appeared for the Minister.
The arguments continued during four days.
Mr. Connington submitted that the work of the Boards should go on just as usual,
and urged some very strong and legitimate considerations in support of that view. ,
He pointed out that when the arbitration system first began in this State, and
for a year or two after, New South Wales was far less prosperous than at the outbreak of
the war, or than even now, and yet no one then thought of suggesting that the Court
should suspend work. He placed before the Court a number of facts bearing that out.
Apart from those, however, from my own recollection of the state of Australia towards
the end of the great drought. I feel no doubt at all that when the first Court began in
May, 1902, the country was suffering severely, and I am sure it will be universally
admitted that in July of this year, just before the war, we were in a state of extra-
ordinary prosperity, and had accumulated much wealth during a succession of good
seasons.
Two additional considerations, however, suggest .themselves :
(1 ) At that time, in consequence of the utter failure of the great maritime strike,
followed subsequently by the great drought, wages had fallen very low and the
workers required protection. Since then the operations of the Court, the good
seasons, and the shortage of labour, have brought wages into a much more
satisfactory condition.
(2.) Disastrous as bad seasons are, we know all about them, and they are local, and’
attick simply our prosperity. There is somewhat the same difference between
them and such a war as the present as there would be between a severe business
loss and an attack by a formidable gang of incendiaries, murderers, and
robbers.
He also asserted that the Commonwealth Court, and the arbitration systems in
several of the other States, were apparently continuing their work. He cited facts
which appeared to show this, and he submitted that we had no more ground for stopping
than they. I should much like to have more detailed knowledge on this subject. The
circumstance, for instance, that a Victorian Board has recently made an award does not
prove that other Boards may not have refused to sit or to increase wages. .That has been
the case here. In the Sydney Morning Herald of the 27th October, 19i 4, T see that
Mr. Justice Powers, after expressing his gratification that the four plaints following the
one which he was hearing were “ under existing circumstances ” to be postponed till the
new year, went on to refer to the “ present unsettled state of affairs,” and added :
“ Possibly the Public Service would see its way to delay, for the present,
pressing their claims for increases, when so many of the public were pleased, for the
time being, to receive something less than what they were receiving before the war.
It would necessarily be very difficult for the Court to determine what should be
recommended to Parliament as fair and reasonable under the circumstances.”
These words are very significant and seem to me to go, really, as far as the judgment of
this Court, referred to above, in the Leather Trades appeal.
As a circumstance of similar character and significance, Mr. Connington submitted
that the employers had shown indifference to the question, and were only slightly
represented before the Court. Certainly, th:;ugh the bodies of employers for whom Mr,
Bolin appeared are in themselves important, very many mox*e were unrepresented.
However, I think this is not of quite so much importance as, under other circumstances,
it might be. Many employers must be under awards with years to run; a general
question can be submitted by one employer as well as by fifty ; and employers do not
seem to have the same machinery for watching the business of the Court and industrial
movements as have the Unions. Still, Mr. Connington’s criticism has much force.


He referred to two utterances of the Court, one by the Judge and one by the
additional Judge, in both of which it was assumed that, during the war, applications for
awards or suspensions would be dealt with on their merits, and in neither was reference
made to any broad ground common to all. (See Industrial. Gazette , September, 1914,
pp. 638-640).
He urged that the work under the Act should not be stopped for any cause
short of a great national crisis, such as had not yet shown itself. It must be admitted,
I think, that the Act being in existence, and the machinery created under it being all in
full working order, and there being nothing in the Act referring to cases in which there
maybe a suspension of its operations, the onus of justifying such a step undoubtedly
rests on those asking for it. If it is going too far to demand the existence of a great
national crisis, it seems clear at least that no insignificant cause can justify such an
effect. On the other hand Ido not think it can be denied that Boards and the Court
may take into account general as well as special circumstances, and if a fact affects all
industries to that extent they must all be dealt with in the same way, and this
uniformity can only be secured by the action of the Court on appeal —that is, by some
such declaration as is now asked.
His other arguments were of a more detailed character. He submitted that
though at first the outlook had seemed very black, confidence had to some extent
recovered; unemployment had not been so very serious ; values of stocks and properties
might have shrunk but had not collapsed ; and generally matters were improving and
hope was reviving.
Finally he went through reports which he had obtained from a number of unions,
and pointed out, amongst other things, various circumstances of particular hardship
which he submitted would justify many exceptions even if the general rule was conceded.
Mr. Rolin, beyond criticising many of Mr. Connington’s facts and arguments,
relied mainly on the effects of the war already visible upon the conditions of employment
and upon our trade and commerce.
Mr. Bavin submitted that no general rule should be laid down, however
advisable the Court might think it to intimate to the Boards that they should pay the
fullest attention to the economic effects of the war. Cases could still be dealt with on
their own special facts, and no increases refused unless it appeared to be in the public
interest to do so.
It appears to me that if special circumstances give rise to an abnormal condition
in the economic life of the community, they may be considered by the Boards in hearing
claims, and by the Court in hearing appeals. If then, on the hearing of an appeal, any
such circumstance is shown to exist, and that it affects, not only the case then being
dealt with, but many or all other cases, I can see no reason why the Court should not
point out and act upon the general application of the facts which it finds to be established.
In other words, upon sufficient grounds being shown, the Court may lay down general
rules with or without exceptions, and call the attention of the Boards to them. All this,
I think, is within the Act. It is not introducing extraordinary powers but applying the
ordinary powers under extraordinary circumstances. This, I think, was in principle
admitted by Mr. Connington, who, however, pitched the case very high when he said it
should only be done in a national crisis. What the nature of any such general actum
might be ; whether it should be of a slight or a drastic character ; for how long it should
prevail; and whether any exceptions, and, if so, what should be allowed, all depend on
the state of things, economically and industrially, in the present and the immediate
future, in this state.
First, as part of the Commonwealth and of the Empire, we are at war. It is no
ordinary war : it is not the Boer war. It involves probably the largest part of the area,
the population, and the wealth of the globe. In Europe the nations not at war are


“ The financial phenomena of the last t vo months cannot have failed to
impress upon the minds of the people of the United Kingdom the fact that the
war of 1914 is destined to exercise a profound and permanent influence upon the
economic life of every inhabitant of these islands, and of almost every country in
the world. There is no parallel in history to the strain which will be placed upon
the international financial system before and after the conclusion of this stupendous
conflict. At the present time there are at least 20,000,000 men under arms, or in
course of mobilisation, and the daily expenditure on this vast host cannot be less
than £10,000,000. The very flower of the industrial manhood of Europe has been
withdrawn from the production of foodstuffs and manufactures, and actively
engagfd in the greatest campaign of destruction of human life and wealth that the
world has ever witnessed. The aggregate population of the eight belligerents amoun • s
to 432,000,000 ; and, if we add their colonial possessions, the aggregate population
directly concerned exceeds 883,000,000. The foreign trade of the British Empire
and the other seven powers involved amounted in 1913 to over £4,854,000,000, and
they owned in the same year 32,000,000 tons of shipping out of the world’s total
of 47,000,000 tons. ... In respect of the destruction of life and wealth the
war of 1914 cannot fail to eclipse any war that has taken place in the history of
the world, because six out of the seven great monetary centres of the world are
involved It is already evident that, if the war is unduly prolonged,
it will strain to the uttermost the financial resources of this country. It is further
evident that finance is destined to play a vital part in the war. We must therefore
make the burden upon the financial and trading portion of the community as light
as possible. . . . We dare not take on any fresh expenditure of a purely social
character while we are fighting for our existence.”
relatively of minor importance. Except China, almost the whole of Asia is drawn in ;
with the most insignificent exceptions, the whole of Africa : and absolutely the whole of
Australasia. America alone is only slightly engaged, though it is severely suffering.
\ Roughly it may be said that except China, the United States and South America, the
whole world is at war. The nations concerned, with the single exception of the United
States, are the most highly civilized and the most powerful of all; they are the nations
which possess the earth. It is by far the greatest war of history; and the efforts being
put forth, in the expenditure of lives and wealth, are beyond imagination, immense.
As a summary of the features of this astounding event, a high financial
expert, looking out on the world from the high central watch-tower of London, I quote
the following from the “ Quarterly Review ” :
We do not wish to be the first British community to be conquered and to have torn
from it its country, its history, its traditions, and its ideals of freedom. We do not wish to
be cut down in our own streets by insolent Prussian officers, as was the lame shoemaker
of Zabern ; to be shot down for putting the Union Jack above the Black Eagle; or to
have our nationality trampled out of us Well, if we do not wish these things, we must
fight. We are protected by the Mother Country and it is not our place to la? behind
her. She is preparing an army of three millions of her best men. Taking her total
population at forty millions, we must, if we are to equal her proportion, raise an army of
over 350,000 from the flower cf our manhood of all classes, and send them to the other
side of the world. We must equip them, provide them with arms and horses, maintain
them, and reinforce them. The Old Country’s first year’s expenditure is to be 450
millions sterling. To equal that, on the same population basis, we must find not less than
50 millions in our first year. Do we realise the immensity of these taxes on our re-
sources? Mr. Fisher has said that we must fight to the last man and the last shilling.
Do we stop to think and bring home to ourselves what those most weighty words really
mean 1


We wish to keep for ourselves this great wonderful country of ours —for which
we never can be grateful enough to our old Mother —on the outside of the woxdd, who
found it, took it, and gave it to us. For the present, what keeps it for us is the British
Fleet in the North Sea, in which there is not a single Australian ship. We know that
our enemy, a most war-like nation of vast strength and science and intelligence, is
preparing to make on that Fleet, at the moment most favourable to itself, a concerted
attack with warships, newly armed with very formidable guns, with a cloud of
Zeppelins, and with a large force of submarine s . It will not make that attack unless
therp is some chance in its favour, and that chance may come off. What would the
position of the Empire then be, and what efforts should we not be called upon to make ?
The duration of the war is uncertain, but it has been caused in the main by the
extreme pride and arrogance and domineering ambition which have taken possession of
the German race. With such feelings, can they be expected to submit to any such
terms as will make their neighbours safe, till they have been absolutely beaten to their
knees ? What state must they be reduced to before they will surrender Alsace-Lorraine ?
Their Frederick the Great, with only a small Prussia to draw upon, fought for seven
years against Europe to keep Silesia, and kept it. At what stage may we hope that
will fall short of his example ? To me it seems that all the omens point to a
protracted struggle.
The sending away of so many of our productive worker-', the heavy expenditure,
the impoverishment of the world, and the loss of our markets, must limit our produc-
tion of wealth and paralyse many of our industries. Our borrowing must become more
difficult, and our taxes must continually grow to pay the higher rates of interest on a
rapidly increasing debt. We see the serious view which Mr. Lloyd George, with the
wisest financial heads in the world to advise him, takes of the result, even if we win.
Unemployment is already serious. The Department of Labour and Industry
began on Ist September to take records of the numbers wholly or partly out of work.
On the first day, four weeks after the outbreak of the war, the total was about 20,000.
On the 30th October that had grown to about 33,000. Some changes in the methods of
compilation were then made, and those enlisted in the Defence Forces were observed, and
on the 19th November, 1911, the wholly and partially unemployed were given as near’y
30,000, of whom nearly 10,000 had enlisted. I have inquired as to the method of
gathering this information, and, as to much of it, it seems to me that whilst it is correct
as a minimum, there is no guarantee that it is correct as a maximum ; there may lie
further unemployment which there is no means of ascei tabling. However, it is a striking
fact that though nearly 10,000 men, most of them wage-earners of various kinds, have
gone to the war, there are still nearly 20,000 others wholly or pamally idle. Things do
not seem to be improving. The papers tell us that on the South Coast the m'ners are
now beginning to feel the pinch and to lose much of their work, and the Premier has said
that though, thanks to assistance which has been given to the States, we shall have loan
money this year to spend, he cannot answer for next year, and will not be able even now
to put the Public Works employees on full time; there are nearly 12,000 of them only
partially employed. The Railways and the Water and Sewerage Board have put their
employees more or less on short time, and the Harbour Trust is thinking of doing the
same; and now in the world of private employment, permission has been given to the
shop assistants’ employers to shorten time and to lower wages, so long as they do not
dismiss any of their employees.
No doubt Mr. Connington was perfectly right in his contention that at the time
the war broke out we were in a wonderfully prosperous condition, and had been accumu-
lating wealth during a series of bountiful seasons. That has created a habit of lavish
expenditure, and, in addition, has provided us with capital of our own for many profit-
making enterprises. Still, the question is, will our income from all sources shrink?


Imports.
August, 1913 ...
£2,660,299 August, 1914
£2,819,146, Inc.
September, 1913
... 3,080,492 September. 1914 ...
2.088,007, Dec.
October, 1913 ...
2,638,289 October, 1914 ...
2,202,579, Dec.
Exports.
August, 1913 ,..
£2,162,957 August, 1914 ,..
£1,141,257, Dec.
September, 1913
... 2,849,388 September, 1914 ...
1,682,667, Dec.
October, 1913
4,519,520 October, J9H
3,356,157, Dec.
We live on the wealth we produce, and on the loan moneys we borrow, and if
they fall off there must be trouble. On this point Mr. Eolin’s argument seemed to be
very strong. Examining the figures supplied by Mr. Trivett, the State Statistician, and
by the Auditor-General, he set the income of the State in 1913 at millions from the
product of our industries, and 8 millions from borrowings in London, or roughly at
about £86,000,000 in all. Looking then at the share which wheat, wool, and metals
had in that, and at the contraction in all these caused by the war and also (as to wheat)
by the drought, he contended that there would be, this year, a total shrinkage of nearly
20 millions, a reduction of over 20 per cent. It is true that as to the wool it is not
destroyed but remains in store, but when, and under what conditions, and at what price,
it can be sold is very uncertain. It’s owners, instead of receiving the full value to
spend on themselves or to invest as capital, in both cases employing labour, can at best
borrow part of the value at a high rate of interest. As to the minerals, Mr. Connington
contended that if not extracted from the soil they still remained as part of the wealth
of the country. This is true, but as part of the income of the country they disappear,
and I think it would be even more difficult for the owner of the minerals in the soil to
borrow upon them, than for the owner of unsaleable bales of wool to borrow upon them.
Without going into detail, it does seem clear that we shall have to face a very large
diminution of income, and therefore of expenditure, and therefore of employment of
labour, as a consequence of the war, supplemented to some extent by the drought.
If we look at our largest employer of labour, viz., the Government, we see at
once how serious is the position. Even if it had acted only as an employer, it seems
that it could not, even with the assistance it has received, have kept its employees on full
time. But feeling bound, as the Government of the State, to help wherever it could, it
has taken in unemployed from outside, with the result that it has now some 12,000
workers only partially employed. And this in early times, when, as it seems to me, the
effects of the war have only begun to make themselves felt. What interest will have to
be paid for the loan is not yet known. Last year the average rate of interest on the
whole State debt was 3 - 64 per cent. We have lately renewed some million and a half of
our debt at \\ per cent., and are now, if we can trust the papers, borrowing at 4*75 per
cent., a great increase to our unproductive expenditure. The Commonwealth must
borrow very largely for the war, and the rates of interest must harden as the enormous
destruction of wealth makes itself felt.
No doubt Mr. Connington was right in saying that after the first feeling of alarm
and uncertainty a reaction took place, and that the subsequent course of events has, to
some extent, further calmed the public mind. But that has not altered the essential
seriousness of the situation. Germany, so far, has kept nearly the whole of the fighting
outside her borders, and there is no sign whatever that the end is in sight.
Mr. Bolin referred also to the figures for the imports and exports of the State for
the months of August and September, and compared them with those of last year, and
Mr. Connington produced a favourable newspaper comment on those for October. As
they are now all available I put them in tabulated form.


1913
£9,531,865
1914
5,180,081
Decrease
£4,351,784
The imports could not, of course, fall off instantaneously, but the exports could,
and the figures are striking. Our exports for the three months of the war compare with
the same three months of 1913 as follows :
But, after all, this only shows what must be quite evident without it, that with the
complete closing of such very large markets as Germany and Austria, and the partial
closing of France and Belgium, and the necessary shrinkage in the consuming and
producing power of other countries, our buying and selling— i.e., our exchange of commo-
dities, our trade, and the wealtu derived from it—must be less.
These things are only what were foreseen. At the outbreak of the war the Hon.
W. M. Hughes, in a very striking communication to the daily press, pointed out that
in trade and commerce the world is now one, and that the violent and sudden breakages
and dislocations of trade consequent on such an unprecedented war must be appalling in
their consequences.
Our own Premier, the Hon. W. A Holman, saw at once the far-reaching
industrial effects which must show themselves, and foreshadowed the possible necessity
of suspending the industrial law and the awards in certain details. His words are
worth repeating. After referring to the gravity of the situation, he said :
“ We have all to co-operate at such a time for the general good, and no
one section in the community must be too persistent in its claims at the expense
of others.”
This Court then pointed out that its powers would enable it to deal with any
troubles as they arose, and the matter was left at that. Quite recently again, speaking
of the present and future financial difficulties of the Government, the Premier has
repeated that: —
“ We must go on bearing one another’s burdens to the best of our ability.”
In other ways the action of the Commonwealth and State Governments has
shown that the position is abnormal. An addition to the income tax in this State, if
not a war tax, is, at any rate, a war-time tax, and must be followed by additional
taxation by the Commonwealth, probably very heavy, if we are to keep pace with the
sacrifices of the Mother Country. The unemployed have to be cared for. Nothing can
possibly be more just than that those upon whom the war, of which they are absolutely
innocent, falls the most heavily should be assisted by the rest of the community, and
this entails sacrifice and special Government action. Then the creation of the Necessary
Commodities Commission, with the appioval of both sides in Parliament, is an act
absolutely extraordinary. Only on very special occasions are the familiar and everyday
liberties of citizens to sell their own property at their own price interfered with.
Further, we find the Government driven, in the public interest, to propose the forcible
buying of the whole of the coming New South Wales wheat crop at a price per bushel
some 23 per cent, less, it would appear, than that at which the growers could, in
consequence of the shortage of the harvest, have sold it in the general Australian
market. Extraordinary cases require extraordinary remedies and, conversely, extra-
ordinary remedies imply extraordinary cases. The very fact that our own responsible
Government, exercising its duty of vigilantly watching and unflinchingly protecting the
public interest, finds that the position resulting from the war calls for action such as
this, is the strongest evidence that we are in an abnormal position, and that the jog trot
constitutional and statutory rights and safeguards are no longer to be observed as a
matter of course, but must undergo close scrutiny, and, if necessary, be suspended.


Action of a similar kind is that of the Commonwealth Government forbidding
the export of sugar, and (if lam not mistaken) of wheat, of wool, and of coal. Such
measures, which in ordinary times would be regarded as intolerable, stand for their
justification upon the war, the conditions which it has created, and the worse conditions
which it may create, and proclaim that we are passing through a time in which the
freedom, the property, and the income of whole classes of producers must be subordinated
to the welfare of the general community.
Besides this, the State and the Commonwealth have adopted an attitude towards
awards which shows that they consider they need no longer be strictly observed.
Thus the State Government, which, before the war, I understand, always conformed
to the conditions of awards, besides putting many men on half time, had announced that
holidays would no longer be paid for, on the ground that “ when every penny available
is required to pay men when they do work, the Governnent do not feel justified in making
payment for days when no work is done.”
Referring to complaints made by some of the Departmental wage-earners, of being
put on short time, the Minister for Works is reported to have said : “It is not quite
clear to me how any man can consider a dimimution of his hours of employment, made
in the interests of his fellow-men under the present exceptional circumstances, as
victimisation.” And to show how unreasonable he thought the complaints he added that
any man leaving would have his name noted.
It has also, since the war, been announced that in the same Department non-
unionists would not be paid award rates.
Similarly the Commonwealth Government has, in the public interest, ignored the
State awards as to overtime of a number of mechanics at the Naval dockyards.
These things show, I think, that the Governments consider the existing state of
things to be such as to justify them in setting aside the industrial law and the strict
rights of workers thereunder.
Then some of the workers themselves and some of the Industrial Boards have shown
in various ways that they recognise the exceptional character of the situation. When
Mr. Beeby, on the outbreak of the war, announced that he would not hear claims for
improved conditions during war time, it was said that the unions concerned assented to
his action; and not long afUr I noticed that Mr. Corish, an official of the Amalgamated
Railway and Tramway Service Association, speaking at Lithgow, said that u at present
no reasonable man could expect an increase of wages.”
I saw also in the Press that the Rural Workers Union stated publicly that they
would make no demands at this time for improved conditions.
The Cabinetmakers consented before their board to the suspension of casual rates
for three months from September, 1914.
The New South Wales Typographical Association was to apply on the ’2nd
November for an extension of their interim award for three months from the 18th
November.
The Women and Girls Printing Trades Union has decided that it is in the best
interests of the employees in their particular section not to have the rates of wages
increased during the war.
Claims by the Costume Makers were, on the 29th July, adjourned on account of
the war.
In a claim by the Saddlers an increased wage was determined upon but held over
for four months.
In the Meat Industry it would seem that the sittings of the Board have been
suspended.


The Jewellery Manufacturing Board suspended'a clause of the award for a month
to allow of employment by the day.
The Printing Trades Country Board suspended the operation of their award,
made after the outbreak of the war, and continued the old award till the Ist May, 1915,
with power to the parties to apply at any earlier date.
The Letterpress Machinists Board also continued the former award till November,
1915, without prejudice to the rights of the parties to make application at any time
should circumstances warrant it.
The Jam Industry Board continued the old award till the 13th March, 1915
giving only one increase of 3s. per week to one class of adult males.
In a number of cases Boards are held up, and in others employers have strongly
objected to the hearing of claims during the war.
The Chief Commissioner for Railways and Tramways has, “owing to the decrease
in railway and tramway receipts,” been obliged to put over 10,000 of his employees on
short time.
The Metropolitan Board of Water Supply and Sewerage were compelled for a time
to reduce all employees on the works to four days a week, and still reduce their casuals
to 40 hours per week.
On the general situation, I have noticed that Mr. Rosser, a gentleman prominent
in the industrial world, and who set forth views in the press which seemed to me to be
well worthy of notice, said not long ago that “unemployment is increasing and that
that was only what was expected,” and that “in timber and sleeper-cutting industries
men are being dismissed in thousands.”
Items have appeared from time to time in the papers indicating the spread of
trouble in the country parts, distress on the mine fields, unemployment of teamsters, and
dismissals by country municipalities.
A piece of evidence which to me is of great value is supplied by the Industrial
Unions Committee, a body whose experience and inside knowledge must give weight to
their opinions on questions of fact in the industrial world. In an important and
temperately worded manifesto recently issued by them, they say explicity that :
“ Many of the affiliated unions have not yet been touched by the war, but they will
be later on, as every union in the State will be affected.”
The attendance at the Melbourne Cup Carnival this year was said in the papers
to have fallen to 133,000 from 185,000 last year. This is a small, but to my mind
significant, fact.
Taking all these things into consideration, I have come to the conclusion: First, that
the judgment given in the leather trades case, supported as it now is by the opinion of
Mr. Justice Powers, should stand, and that Government employees and workers in the
position of Government employees must not look at present for higher wages ; second,
even as to other workers, the presumption is against any claims for increases. That
presumption may be displaced in special cases, but the burden lies upon the applicants
for higher rates or shorter hours to do so. The main ground upon which they must base
it is that suggested by Mr. Bavin, —viz., can the increase asked for be given without
detriment to the public interest? Applying that, I think it very probable that the cold
storage case might be heard. I can see no reason why Demarcation Boards should not
sit, unless it could be shown that in some way they would increase the burdens in the
industry. As to the other cases, I suggest that the special circumstances relied on as
creating an exception should be laid before the Chairman and by him submitted to me,
I cannot now forecast all possible cases, and it will be best to deal with them as they
arise.


I would point out that the mere fact that the stoppage would appear to be a
hardship will not necessarily be enough. The war itself is a hardship. The unions
which got awards shortly before the war had good luck ; those which did not may think it
very hard, but they must take their bad luck. In tlieir case the Kaiser was very
inconsiderate. We must hope that things will develop favourably. It may be that ift
a short time, perhaps a very short time, the present rule may be relaxed (it should
certainly be relaxed at the earliest possible moment), or it may be that the skies may
darken, and we may have applications for suspensions of awards or for reductions of
wages. I suggest to Boards that for the present they should renew existing awards for
a short time, with the right to the parties to apply even within that short time if
circumstances should justify it.
I need hardly say that the rule does not apply to all the variations of other
conditions laying no extra burden on the industry or the community.
In the Living Wage judgment I, after finding the living wage, laid down that in
times of prosperity all workers should get more than the living Wage, and I fixed certain
higher minimum rates. As the present, unfortunately, is not a time of prosperity, that
part of ray judgment must, for the time, fall into abeyance.
All Mr. Beeby’s inquiries are answered by what has been said, but as to one of
them the question may be asked : Why are improved conditions not to be granted even
in industries which have been improved owing to the war ? The answer is, that claims
for improved conditions should certainly be heard if what we were considering was the
condition created in the industry by the war, and not the condition created in the com-
munity by the war. If an industry is prospering the employees get plenty of work and
the employers plenty of business, and both benefit, while in other industries work is dull
and both suffer; but if any out-put at all is loaded with heavier expenses, those
expenses must be borne by the community. It might very well be that to increase the
out-put cost in a prosperous industry would hit the public harder than to increase it in a
depressed industry. Perhaps a case in which an industry is prospering, not through
mere increased consumption of the product at the same price, but through higher prices
being demanded for the product simply because the war has made it specially
necessary, might be an exception. There the employer himself lays a burden on
the community, and if the principle of the Necessary Commodities Act is sound,
could rightly, (luring war time, be prohibited from doing so, and if not so pro-
hibited, might, perhaps, fairly be taken before the Board to answer claims, i am
saying nothing as to the soundness of the principle which Mr. Hall tells us has governed
the Commission, viz., that “ in time of war no section of the community should be entitled
to make larger profits because of the existence of war,” a principle which, he added, he
most heartily approved of. But, unquestionably, if it is sound, it can receive a wider
application. It will be seen, however, that the object of the Proclamations under the
Necessary Commodities Act, and of the Bill for purchasing the coming harvest of wheat
at 5/- per bushel, is to lessen the burdens of the general community by limiting the pr ices
charged by the producer : not to add to the burdens of the general community by adding to
the expenses of the producer. However, I am very much inclined to think that if it
could be shown that a producer was taking advantage of conditions, other than extra
expenses to himself, created by the war, and not by any natural cause, such as a short
crop, to raise prices on the community, his employees would have a right to take him
before a Wage Board, though it certainly might be objected, on the principles of the
Necessary Commodities Act, that they were asking to share an improper profit.
The unions which have refused to ask for better conditions at the present time,
have, I think, not only been moved by the public spirit of which the industrial world
has given such fine evidence, but they have realised that increases of wages would lead
to unemployment, and they have preferred to adopt the course which, while it might be
worse for some, would be better for all, which woqld distribute the trouble over many


shoulders instead of concentrating it on some. I must say that I agree with them that
that is the really wise course just now. It is our duty to co-operate to limit unemploy-
ment as much as possible—not only total unemployment, though that, of course, is the
greatest evil—but even the cruel half-time which gives men such a wretched pittance.
Half a loaf is better than no bread, and that is about all that can be said for it.
In this connection I would point to the recent action of the Shop Assistants’
Board as showing the workers how the Act can help them even in time of depression
and absolutely unavoidable reduction. The permissions there given to reduce, in certain
ways, wages and hours (though it may be that the employers could have acted without
them), left the living wage untouched, and safe-guarded the employees from dismissal. I
trust that both employers and the Boards will look to this precedent, and aim, whatever
trouble may come upon us, to secure those two invaluable boons to the worker.
Taking in detail the cases submitted, I find -
1. That the Professional and Shop-workers’ Group, No. 3 Board, was right in not
going on with the application before it.
2. That the Chairman of the Iron and Ship-building Trades’ Group, No. 5 Board,
was, in the circumstances, right in postponing the sittings of the Board, and
submitting the question to the Court.
3. That the Ship-joiners and Shipwrights Demarcation Board should sit subject
only to such an improbable contingency as is above-mentioned.
4. That the other Boards, of which Mr. Beeby is chairman, should act according to
the directions hereinbefore given.
5. That the new award in the Manufacturing No. 2 Group, No. 5 Board, should for
the present remain in abeyance, and the former award be followed unless the
case can be shown to have features making it an exception to the rule.
I have laid this judgment before my colleague, Mr. Justice Edmunds, who
authorises me to say that he concurs in it
It will apply, of course, to appeals now before the Court for increases of wages,
as well as to claims before Boards,
Sydney : William Applegate Gnlliek, Government Printer.—l9l4.


ff
:■?
r *.k
■ $
I s
■ r
v. ,. •“* •'
• r*- * ’ ,v
f
•* t
