

Telegraphic Address: " CO-PARTNERSHIP , LONDON."
Labour Association
FOR PROMOTING
Co-operative Production based on the Co-partnership of the Workers.
Established 1884.
Central Office: 15, Southampton Row, Holborn, London, W.C.
Publishers of “ Labour Co-partnership." Monthly, id.; 1/6 per year, post free.
President; THOMAS BURT, M.P. Hon. Treasurer: ANEURIN WILLIAMS.
Hon. Legal Adviser: J. M. LULDOW, C.B. Secretary: HENRY VIVIAN.
Editor of Labour Co-partnership : Miss S. GURNEY.
“INDUSTRIAL EFFICIENCY.”
RALPH NEVILLE, K.C.
The exhaustion of the great liberal movement in the direction of
political freedom and equality (its work to a great extent accomplished),
and the disappointment resulting from the realisation of the fact, that
political reform is of little value except as a means to an end; coupled
with the perplexity arising from the conflicting views of what that end
should be, afford, perhaps, sufficient explanation of the fact that the
19th Century closed during a period of profound reaction; from which
no sign of recovery is as yet discernable. Yet that the Century which
produced Charles Darwin, the great exponent of the laws of evolution,
should close in reaction is remarkable.
One would have expected the knowledge he imparted to have given
a mighty impulse to reform, and stimulus to endeavour ; but up to the
present we seem quite unable to rise to the occasion.
The persistance of ideas, and the conventions giving effect to them,
long after the disappearance of the basis upon which they rested, and
the benefits arising from them, may however be recognised as a familiar
historical fact; not indeed to be wondered at, for the ideas of most men
are the ideas of their parents, repeated from generation to generation.
Now, I am far from underrating the sound conservatism which lays
store by experience, and refuses recklessly “to fly from evils that we
know to others that we know not of.” At the same time a dogged
determination to retain conditions of life, unsuited to the present;
because they have proved more or less suitable to a totally different
state of affairs in the past, seems to me to influence our conduct at the
present time to an undesirable extent.


The present is peculiarly one of those periods presaging reformation ;
when the frank enjoyment of existence has disappeared ; not because
life is not worth living, but because we consciously accept an existence,
and submit to social conditions which we know to be unworthy. Our
knowledge has for the moment far outstripped our performance. The
last great social movement came from the middle class, the next may
be expected from the working class. Hence the importance of our
subject, for could we find the conditions which would ensure the
complete efficiency of labour, I do not think it is too much to say
that we should have found the conditions upon which the solution of
the social problem depends.
Complete efficiency of labour can only exist where sufficient induce-
ment is offered to obtain from each member of the community the best
work he is capable of rendering, and such inducement can only be found
where each man is rewarded in proportion to the services he renders,
and equal opportunity is afforded to all; but the conditions which
ensures from each his best, by equality of opportunity and proportionate
reward, are the only conditions necessary for the creation of the ideal
industrial community; so we see that the conditions essential for
the highest efficiency of labour are the same as those necessary for the
creation of the ideal state.
It may perhaps be asked what have the laws of evolution to do with
all this ? I answer they have much, if not everything to do with it, for
they have disclosed to us the lines upon which alone progress can be
made.
The idea of development as the immediate object of creation, teaches
us the paramount importance of so ordering our social life, as to ensure
the development of the individual, physical, intellectual, moral.
Since in an industrial community like our own, production is, and
must long continue to be, of the first importance, it is to the conditions
under which production takes place that we must look for the oppor-
tunity of individual development. From the laws of evolution we may
also infer (an inference amply confirmed by experience) that man must
rely for happiness, as well as improvement, upon the energetic exercise
of his faculties; for use is the fundamental necessity for development,
while happiness depends upon the harmonious relation between man
and the laws which govern his existence.
The efficiency of labour will thus be seen to affect the welfare of
society as much from the ethical side as from the more general and
obvious standpoint of the commercial prosperity of the nation. How,
then, does our existing method of production stand in relation to the
promotion of the efficiency of labour ? To enable us to examine this
question we must bear in mind the following facts established by


experience, that men are in the main actuated by self-interest; that
the only effective inducement to exertion is the expectation of reward
and that the prospect of advantage, if too remote, fails to incite the
majority of men to exertion. We know that under the present system
the remuneration of labour is by weekly wage, the rate of which is
independent of the amount of exertion expended by the individual upon
his work, so that under the wage system there is no direct inducement
to exertion beyond that which is necessary to secure the wage. Unless,’
therefore, the employer is in a position to enforce a high standard of
efficiency, he is not likely to secure from his employees the exercise of
their full ability. He cannot enforce such a standard unless the supply
of labour exceeds the demand, and he is free to deal with his employees
individually. His liberty in this respect is restricted by the combi-
nation of labour. The necessity of combination for the protection of
labour is so generally recognised, that we may for the present treat
the wage system as necessarily involving trades unionism. Under this
system the employer has little or no power to fix the standard of
efficiency in labour, and that standard will be fixed in the main by the
employees themselves, who, under the wage system, have, as we have
seen, no inducement to exert themselves beyond the extent necessary
to secure the wage. In addition to this it must be remembered that
at the root of combination must be the endeavour to enforce equality
of payment, while equality of payment involves equality in the return
given for it. From the point of view of a trades union, evidently a
day’s work must not exceed that which can readily be performed by
all, the incompetent as well as the competent. The trades union
standard, therefore, must be limited to the capacity of the least
efficient, while there is no positive advantage to labour in maintaining
it even at this level. It will thus be seen that the tendency of the
wage system is to lower the efficiency of the most competent down to
the level of the least competent.
To the importance of the energetic exercise of our faculties, from a
moral point of view, reference has been already made. Our work is
our life. In it we must find the opportunity for the formation
of character and the development of our powers. The man who
performs his daily work inefficiently has missed the purpose of
existence, and the system which encourages him to do so stands
self-condemned.
But apart from its influence upon the individual, efficiency of labour
is of the first importance in connection with our commercial position.
We have been so long accustomed to hold the first place in all
matters industrial and commercial, that we are hard to convince of any
decline of our position in relation to our rivals. Yet the plainest
evidence of it exists. The decrease in our exports during the last ten


years, contrasting as it does with a great increase on the part of the
United States and Germany, cannot be reasonably explained, except
upon the hypothesis, that we are losing our hold upon external markets.
The significance of this fact may be minimised by ingenious theorists,
and consolation afforded to some minds by the dexterous manipulation
of figures; but the broad fact remains. It is not suggested" that the
prosperity of our neighbours need necessarily spell adversity to
ourselves, but it is disquieting to learn that we are being beaten in
external markets ; for if this be so we must either mend our ways, or
eventually be driven out of them, while it is from them that our food
supplies are drawn. It is, moreover, not reassuring to hear that even
Government orders have been placed elsewhere, because English firms
cannot, or will not, execute them in a reasonable time. It indicates at
least a diminution in enterprise and power of expansion, however
satisfactory it may be to know that orders are, at present, plentiful. It
seems to me the true and patriotic course not to disregard the
warnings given us, nor to exercise our ingenuity in explaining them
away, but to bestir ourselves to avert the danger.
We are too ready to assume that because we have been first in the
past, our pre-eminence was the result of inate superiority which is
bound to reassert itself without any particular effort on our part;
whereas, without in the least disparaging our race, it is only fair to our
rivals to remember, that we got an enormous start in the industrial
contest, owing to conditions which no longer exist, or no longer exist to
the same extent; and that as soon as we were brought face to face
with competition on even terms, that competition proved itself
astonishingly effective. As labour forms a very important part in
production, it is evident that if the efficiency of labour can be increased,
the success of production would be promoted, and a great step would
have been made towards resuming what I hold to be our proper
position.
Something no doubt may be and is being done towards this end by
technical education, and the importance of increasing the knowledge
and capacity of the artizan is beyond question; but it must be
remembered that although education may greatly increase his capacity,
it does not compel him to use it. The motive power is still to be
sought, while without it he may prove as useless as a locomotive with
the fires out.
We want, if we can obtain it, some stronger incentive to exertion
than is afforded by the wage system, and orie, if possible, which will at
the same time reconcile the interests of capital and labour.
Production evidently to reach the highest point of efficiency should
secure the undivided concentration of effort on the part of all concerned
in it. Under the present system the conflict between capital and


labour causes each side to seek to give as little, and get as much
in return as possible, occasioning a waste of energy, and making
it impossible- for production to proceed in the most favourable
manner.
This waste of energy is a serious matter, for labour can only seek to
enforce its terms upon capital by strikes and the fear of strikes, and
while fully recognising the right and duty of labour to protect its own
interests by the only means available, we should not blind ourselves
to the fact that strikes and the fear of strikes, have a very injurious
effect upon industry. Were trade internal only, foreign competition
being out of the way, this would chiefly affect the consumer, and him but
temporarily; but where production is competitive, strikes must always
mean loss of business, and very possibly permanent loss of markets. If,
therefore, a system could be devised, under which the interests of
capital and labour could be harmonised, an increase in the efficiency of
production would take place, which should secure the command of the
market, to the goods produced under it.
It seems to me, however, that regarded as factors in production, the
interests of capital and labour are inherently antagonistic ; and that
in spite of all attempts to smooth over and adjust differences between
them, antagonistic they will always remain. There remains, therefore,
but one way to end the conflict, and that is by uniting these interests
in the same hands. It is obvious that capital cannot perform its own
labour, and, therefore, the union cannot take place by the absorption of
labour by the capitalist. The alternative is that labour should provide
its own capital, and absorb the interest of the capitalist, in the profits
of production. The advantages of this solution, if it be possible, are
obvious. It goes to the root of the evil, which we have seen to be
involved in the wage system. It enables the working man to work for
himself; thus affording him the highest inducement to exertion. It
terminates the conflict between the factors of production ; and ensures
complete concentration of effort upon the business in hand. The
reform then would be radical; is it practicable in a business sense ?
The most formidable objections taken to it, so far as I know, are the
following:—
1. —Where is the capital to come from ?
2. —How is a substitute to be found for the personal supervision
of the capitalist ?
3. —ls it conceivable that the working man will ever be induced
to exercise the requisite prudence and foresight ?
The first objection raises an initial difficulty. No doubt at first
those businesses should be selected for co-operative enterprise, in
which the proportion of the cost of labour to the cost of production is


greatest. The artizan gets as good wages when he starts in life as he
does later on. He can save the money necessary to purchase a share
in a co-operative company or society, if he chooses. Moreover, when
once co-operative productive societies are seen to be sound industrial
concerns, capital will flow in. There are the accumulations of other
co-operative societies to be invested, and in addition an unexpected
supply may be tapped, in the savings of the professional and other
classes, not able to apply their capital in their own businesses.
Co-operative societies paying a fixed return of say 5 per cent, on
borrowed capital ought to prove more attractive to investors of this
class than the present joint stock companies, with their watered
capital, incompetent boards, and, too often, fraudulent promoters.
The second objection loses sight of the fact that a large proportion
of the business undertakings carried on to-day are conducted by paid
managers, the true captains of industry. Their services are as open
to combinations of working men as they are to individual capitalists.
If their assistance is required it is only a question of paying the price
for it. I have been told that among working men the necessity for
paying high remuneration to specially qualified persons is not fully
recognised. It is otherwise in the United States, where we hear
nowadays of salaries reckoned by hundreds of thousands of pounds
yearly. Our American cousins have been quick to grasp the fact that
the skilled manager is worth practically his own price, and I hope that
we shall not lag behind them in intelligence. In this business world
co-operation can succeed only when it is conducted on business prin-
ciples; and the world will remain a business world so long, at all
events, as any of us here present are interested in it.
With regard to the third objection, the exercise of some prudence
and self-denial is no doubt demanded of the artizan who would obtain
the means to become a co-operative producer. He must not marry in
his teens, and he must limit his indulgence in luxuries; but after all the
demand is no greater than is satisfied readily by men who have to make
their way in business or profession. Is there any reasonable ground
for supposing that there is such air inherent difference in the character
of working men as to make such self-denial unattainable ? I submit
not. Men born of the same stock, in the same country, and at the
same period, exhibit substantially the same characteristics. Class
distinctions are the result of early training and surroundings, and there
is little or nothing hereditary about them. The difference in social
conditions has not endured long enough to produce permanent
modification of character, transmissible to the offspring. The tendency
to revert to the normal still asserts itself. Strong corroboration of this
view is found in the fact that many of our most successful men in all
branches of activity have risen from the ranks. There is, I venture


to think, no reason to fear that working men will not be able
to display the very moderate self-control required as soon as they
realise the advantages to be gained by it. Productive co-operation,
already upon its feet, should find recruits among the working class in
rapidly increasing numbers, as the real character of the movement
becomes more generally appreciated. I have elsewhere pointed out
that the wage-earning class need have no fear that the loss of
co-operators from their ranks will injuriously affect their interests;
they may rest assured that it will substantially strengthen the position
of labour.
The considerations which I have submitted to you lead me to the
following conclusions: —
1. —That the adoption of some means of increasing the efficiency
of labour is demanded alike by the exigencies of our commercial
position and the requirements of social progress.
2. —That to increase the efficiency of labour, a more adequate
incentive to exertion than that which the wage system affords, is
essential.
3. —That co-operative production furnishes the necessary
incentive, and is a practical scheme for the gradual solution of
the labour question.
The following better appeared in “ Labour Co-partnership ” in reply
to the discussion on the above paper:—
To the Editor of Labour Co-partnership.
Sir. — l was sorry to be compelled to leave the Conference on the Bth inst. before
I had an opportunity of saying a word or two in reply to the criticisms on my paper.
First, by way of personal explanation, I should like to say that I used *‘ liberal ” and
“ conservative ” in their natural sense, and with no reference to either political
party. The criticisms which attracted my attention were briefly to the following
effect:—
1. That “ Business ” was a dangerous term to apply to co-operation, unless used
with limitations.
2. That working men had not, and could not acquire, the necessary capital for
productive co-operation.
3. That they prefer to keep their savings in a savings bank, or invest them in
railways.
4. That men are not in the main actuated by self interest.
To deal with the above seriatim :
1. The necessary limitations were not defined, but they must involve production
by co-operators upon,lines, however nearly, yet not quite business lines. Since co-
operative producers must be prepared to compete with actual business men, that is
with men who devote themselves exclusively to the problem of how to produce their
goods as cheaply as possible and how to dispose of them to the best advantage, it
may be safely inferred that co-operators accepting this view, however nearly they
may succeed, will not quite do so.


2. If a man of twenty years of age can earn the wages, upon which a man of forty
can support himself and wife and family of, say, six children, it is obvious that the
younger man can, if he chooses, save the cost of maintaining a wife and six children,
which cannot be less than £i per week. At this rate a man in two years would have
a capital of £lOO, and by the time he was twenty-five, a capital of £250. If you
reckon the saving at half the above rate, it would probably be sufficient. I think,
therefore, this objection cannot be sustained.
3. The third contribution is, of course, to some extent, destructive of the first, for
it recognises the fact that working men both can and do save. lam not sure that
the criticism was directed to a true co-operative society (in which the members
provide all the capital which is not borrowed), but that it rather referred to invest-
ment in co-operative societies without any further concern in the business. If,
however, it is meant that working men will not take the risk of being their own
employers, with the prospect of making, say, 20 per cent, on their capital, unless and
until they are convinced that co-operative societies are as safe as savings banks with
their return of 2 per cent., then, indeed, there is an end of co-operative production.
Nobody will make a present of the necessary capital, or lend it without security.
Nor, indeed, would it be of any use if they did, for if the member is freed from all
risk,’ the better half of the stimulus to exertion, upon which the success of co-operation
depends would be gone. If this objection holds good, the wage system must have
crushed all commercial pluck and enterprise out of the working man, and the
reasoning which led me to an opposite conclusion must be fallacious. I find it,
however, very hard to believe. We are not as a nation easily frightened by risks,
and the risk the co-operator runs is much less than that incurred by business men
who have no trade to fall back upon. If a co-operative business fails, the members
lose the capital invested in it it is true, and their ambition is for the moment
disappointed, but their social status, and their means of livelihood remain precisely
as they were before they embarked in the business. The returns on capital vary
with the risks run. It is quite useless to expect a return of 10 per cent, or 20 per
cent, with the security of a 2 per cent, investment.
4. That “ men are in the main actuated by self interest,” is really as much beyond
controversy as that two and two make four ; but I think the proposition is sometimes
mistaken for This, that “ all men are actuated by self interest alone.” This would
be far from the truth. If all men were identical with the average man, I suppose the
progress of mankind would be impossible, but however numerous and brilliant the
exceptions, what we are concerned with is the rule ; and it is the failure to accept
this rule, and its consequences, which has wrecked, and still wrecks ninety-nine per
cent, of social endeavour. Social improvement can only take place by the change
of social conditions ; and in the main men can only be induced to change the
conditions under which they live, by a direct appeal to their self interest. The
exceptional altruism or benevolence, which is undoubtedly exhibited by many men, is
all to the good, and affords additional security for the success of any scheme for the
advancement of social welfare, which is based upon the recognition of the motives
underlying the actions of the average man. To expect improvement, however slight,
in the life or habits of men in the mass, to precede a change in the conditions under
which they live, is to mistake the effect for the cause, to put the cart before the
horse. With regard to my contention that combination tends to reduce (not does
reduce observe !) the standard of work to the capacity of the least efficient, I admit
that where men are paid, not by a fixed weekly wage, but for the work they have
actually done, the tendency does not operate in the direction of reducing the quantity
of work performed, it is in the quality of the work that the tendency is then likely to
show itself.
Thanking you for the opportunity of putting myself right with my hearers,
I remain, sir, yours faithfully.
RALPH NEVILLE.
June 10 th, 1901.
