

INDUSTRIAL PEACE UNION
OF THE BRITISH EMPIRE
Organiser for Australia : Adela Pankhurst Walsh
Sydney Headquarters:
fi/u Jlf 0
Wingello House, Angel Place, Sydney
WHAT IS THE INDUSTRIAL PEACE UNION?
The I.P.U. is a branch of the Industrial Peace Union
of the British Empire. Its object is to establish a basis
of co-operation between Workers and Employers, so that
industry may develop and employment be increased, and
Australia become a greater and more prosperous nation.
It is non-political and non-Sectarian, and in no way
opposed to Trade Unionism.
The first work of the I.P.U. will be to open the eyes
of the workers to the fact that the Trade Union Move-
ment is being White-Anted by Revolutionaries under
various names.
(1) The Communist Party is definitely pro Russian,
and follows on the line laid down by the Third Inter-
national to capture the Trade Union and Political Labour
Movement; to increase misery and unrest by means of
strikes, and when the time is ripe organise a Red Army
and establish a Dictatorship.
(2) The Minority Movement or the Trades Union
Educational League supports this plan, and seeks to in-
crease discontent by spreading the Marxian Doctrines
that the workers are robbed.
(3) Trade Unionists and others in sympathy with, or
in the employ of, the Red International of Labour Pinions
who work to make the Trade Unions of Australia a part
of the Red International Movement, the* objects and
methods of which are the same as those of the Communist
Party.
(4) Ex-I.W.W. members, Left Wingers, Socialists
and militants unattached to any “Revolutionary” Party
who have secured membership and official position in the
Trade Unions and the A.L.P. All these people combine to
cause industrial unrest, in order to destroy Australian
Industry, and drive the Workers to revolt and support
the Communists.




The I.P.U. declares that Communism is a fraud, and
that the Communists destroyed the industries of Russia,
which were, befere the Revolution, among the best or-
ganised and up-to-date in the world; also that they have
almost destroyed agriculture in Russia and wiped out
100 years of progress, putting the Russian peasantry back
to the conditions of 1850; that they haAm failed to pro-
vide food, clothes or shelter, education or medical care to
the people in anything like the degree of other civilised
Governments.
The I.P.U. challenges the Militants of any party to
put forward any scheme for Socialized Industry, to be
openly examined by the workers, and asserts that, if they
can formulate any plan by which the working class can
be made more prosperous and happy, it can be adopted by
Constitutional means, and there is no need for Industrial
strife or Revolutionary action.
The I.P.U. warns the workers that they will be in-
finitely worse off after the Revolution than to-day.
Taking the income from Australian Industry as a
whole, under the present system -we find that ownership
draws 20 per cent., managers and salaried officers draw
20 per cent., and the wage earners take 60 per cent. Some
of the owners’ 20 per cent, is, of course, saved to provide
capital for industrial expansion.
Thus, even if we exchanged private ownership for
state ownership, the wage earners would have to share the
product with experts, managers and the State, and ex-
perience of State management in all countries, especially
in Russia, has proved that the State as OAvner takes a far
bigger share of industrial production than private owner-
ship.
The I.P.U. exists to place before the workers the
economic loss due to strikes, and to rouse the victims of
the Reds, who have been continually brought out on strike
by the actions of individuals, and who have, therefore, been
plunged into poverty and wretchedness, to the fact that
these industrial upheavals have been engineered by Com-
munists and Communist agents, and that they can be
prevented when the rank and file, especially the wives
of Unionists, who suffer most, insist that the Labour
Unions of Australia stand for Industrial Peace.
JOIN AND WORK FOR THE INDUSTRIAL PEACE
UNION.
Pallamana Press, Printers, Sydney


1508
02250148
