

Pern i-'prnT)
• * w ". _ / ' '7,10-1
& P 5
INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE |f
H RELIEVED AND INCREASED |j
JBY MEANS OF IAI
FREE TRADE H
m
I DIRECT TAXATION. I
il p
J‘‘ My name may perhaps be execrated by monopolists who clamour for Protection, because iU*
they seek some benefit for themselves, but lam not without hopes that I shall leave a name vACj
perhaps remembered with kindly feelings in the abode of those whose lot is to labour, and
[XifcA V lO c - a ™ the E dail y bread b 7 tbe sweat of their brow, and who will henceforth eat a more
V V abundant meal of imtaxed food, sweeter because it is not leavened by Injustice t” Str,
Robert Peel’s Speech in 1846. ' y« 'J:
r\V “ Commerce has higher and nobler aims than the mere increase of wealth ;it carries with
fo) ] it whithersoever it goes a mission of peace, and is destined to be a bond of moral and social [(A
J union to mankind, as well as the means of increasing our command over material enjoy- v'
Xr incuts. The experience of past years sufficiently establishes the fact, that in freedom of o'?
industry lies the best hope of guarding against unseen disasters and of preserving and w
I*6 Bicreasrag our national prosperity.”—RiGHl Honorable Me. Gladstone’s Speech at Q>)
Chester.
Wi “il
FRED? A. BELL, Esa.,
%) SECRETARY OF THE NEW SOUTH WALES FREE TRADE (W
g ASSOCIATION. b
I - |
SECOND EDITION- Enlarged.
W&) ■ TfcQ
SYDNEY: * lyf
fen WILLIAM MADDOCK, 383 GEORGE STREET.
jo GEORGE ROBERTSON, MELBOURNE ; WALCH & SONS, TASMANIA ;V)
\p W. C. RIGBY, ADELAIDE; GEORGE SLATER, BRISBANE. g>)
M IST ■ ft
n : . .
PRICE, SIXPENCE.




INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE
BELIEVED AND INCEEASED
MEANS OF
FREE TRADE
DIRECT TAXATION
“ My name may perhaps be execrated by monopolists who clamour for Protection, because
they seek some benefit for themselves, but I am not without hopes that I shall leave a name
perhaps remembered with kindly feelings in the abode of those whose lot is to labour, and
who earn their daily bread by the sweat of their brow, and who will henceforth eat a more
abundant meal of untaxed food, sweeter because it is not leavened by Injustice !” — Sir
Egbert Peel’s Speech in 1846.
“ Commerce has higher and nobler aims than the mere increase of wealth ; it carries with
it whithersoever it goes a mission of peace, and is destined to be a bond of moral and social
union to mankind, as well as the means of increasing our command over material enjoy*
ments. —The experience of past years sufficiently establishes the fact, that in freedom of
industry lies the best hope of guarding against unseen disasters and of preserving and
increasing our national prosperity.”— Eight Honorable Mr. Gladstone’s Speech at
Chester. •
PEED? A. BELL, Esa.,
SECRETARY OF THE NEW SOUTH WALES FREE TRADE
ASSOCIATION.
SECOND EDITION Enlarged.
SYDNEY:
WILLIAM HADDOCK, 383 GEORGE STREET.
GEORGE ROBERTSON, MELBOURNE ; WALCH & SONS, TASMANIA;
W. C. RIGBY, ADELAIDE; GEORGE SLATER, BRISBANE.
PRICE, SIXPENCE.




Introduction .. .. .. • • • • • •
New South Wales Free Trade Association .. • • •• °
Free trade catechism .. .. • • • • * • " q
Free Trade Association in abeyance .. .. ■ • • *• 9
Direct taxation defined.. .. '* ** 10
Glance at European governments —Adam Smith’s maxims ..
The merits and demerits of direct and indirect taxation ~ .• •
Sugar, tea, spirits, and tobacco produce nearly all the revenue received.
from customs .. .. • • • • • • **.. „
John Stuart Mill on what should not he taxed.. .. • •
Effects of customs and excise duties .. .. • • • •
House tax .. .. . • • • • • • • .
Our members of Parliament .. • • • • • • *
The ancient poll tax .. .. • • • • • •
The policy of the late and present Ministry .. • • • •
Opinions of eminent British statesmen • • •• *• __
The objects of this pamphlet .. .. • • • • • •
Clear off the custom house .. .. • .* • . • • ,
62f per cent, added to the true cost of merchandize, which is ±2 10s. «d.
on every soul of our population of 400,000 • • ; •
Opinions of Brougham, Parnell, and Storch on commercial treaties .. -
Netherlands chamber of commerce .. .. •• ••
Searching enquiry as to taxation .. • • • • ' •
Mr. Gladstone’s opinions and mode of relieving the country from the
burden of taxation .. • • • • • • •*„ "t
Increasing wealth to be judged of by comparisons only.. ••
The greatest politcal question is finance .. .. . • • •
The peoples’ exertions must force the wholesome change ..
The old system of taxing .. • • • • • • ■ •
The effects of direct and indirect taxation
The wealth of the young free ports of Singapore and St. Thomas com-
pared with the old one of New South Wales
Colbert’s pernicious principles .. .. ■ • ■ • • •
The House of Assembly of New South Wales .. .. ••
The immense convenience and advantages of free ports to merchants
and shipowners .. .. • • _ •• 42
Free ports will give to New South Wales a population of 1,200,000 in
four years .. .. .. .... • • 43
Injury to commerce by constant changes of the tariff .. ..
Observations on ancient systems of taxation and municipalities .. 44
The origin of England’s wealth ~ .. .. •• ••
Sydney Chamber of Commerce .. •. • • • • 46-47
The Hon. Mr. Martin, Premier of New South Wales, and the
Ministry .. .. .. • •
Uncertainty in commercial legislation very injurious to shipping and
commerce .. .. .. •• • •
The lethargy of the government to encourage native productions .. 48 49
Acclimatisation Society ..
Sorghum and imphee sugar and distillation
What agriculturlists should do .. .. •• •• 49


INDEX
The Hon. Geoffrey Eagar, the Treasurer, —expectations of his ad-
ministration .. .. .. .. .. 49
Ad valorem duties .. .. .. .. .. .. 50
Sydney Herald's correct opiuion of these pernicious taxes .. 50
Hon. Mr. Parkes the friend of Oohden .. .. .. .. 50
Mr. Oowper, the introducer of advalorem duties to New South Wales 50
The present Ministry continuing this iniquitous tax ~ .. 50
What is wanted in Treasurers .. .. .. .. 51
The appointment of Under-Secretaries, —what they should do and be 51
Talented youths of the colony .. .. .. .. 52
Mr. McPherson, M. L. A., (the Big Child), versus the Hon. Mr.
Gladstone .. .. .. .. .. .. 52
The construction of the Government of England .. ~ ~ 52
Mr. Smart, M. L. A., as a Minister .. .. .. .. 52
The state hank, —Mr. Parkes and Mr. Eager .. .. .. 52
The farce of smashing the hanks, —new silver and copper coinage,—
banks, —mint-notes ~ .. .. ~ 53
Mr. Oowper and Mr. Smart two years ago .. .. .. 53
The Hon. Mr. Byrnes, Minister of Works, to be pitied.. .. 53
Protective duties and the consequences .. .. .. .. 53
A coast guard service costing £150,000 per annum .. .. 54
A proposed Act .. .. .. .. .. .. 55
Sir Robert Peel’s speech on property and income tax .. 55
Mr. Montefiore’s speech at the Exchange.. .. .. ~ 57
Translation from the Journal des JDebats on free trade .. .. 67
The Hon. Mr. Gladstone’s speech on the French treaty,—the Emperor
and Mr. Cobden .. .. .. .. .. 58
The objections to income tax not insuperable .. .. .. 58
John Stuart Mill on taxation and duties .. .. .. 59
The necessity for a graduated scale .. .. .. .. 60
Organization of municipalities to collect taxes .. .. .. 63
A working board on taxation proposed .. .. ~ .. 63
Trade to be flourishing and prosperous must be free from restrictions 64
Java and Singapore,—partial free trade in England, its effects .. 65
Sydney as a free port .. .. .. ~ .. 66
Retrenchment —direct taxation, income, property, and house tax .. 66
Computed wealth of the colony .. .. .. ~ 67
Derivable revenue .. .. .. .. .. .. 68


INTRODUCTION.
This brochure was in part published in the Sydney Empibe in 1868
at a time when protection principles were threatening to overwhelm
the colony. And it was considered necessary to curb such by stating
definitely 7 the benefits to be derived from free trade and direct
the New South Wales Free Trade Association was
formed, and the first tract issued by them was their catechism
which I will copy in extenso , as it states the axioms advocated in
th Many W pcop^e g had taken up certain notions in regard to the
necessity of encouraging native productions, and a great cry was
raised that the imports were draining the gold from the country,
and that protection would be the means of producing exports, which
they asserted to be the true signs of prosperity, and this by some
was called u the balance of trade. . , . .1 .
A system founded on the opinion of those who maintain that a
nation can only enrich itself, by importing gold and silver or keeping
its native gold to itself, and exporting other merchandise, if they had
it and as a corollary they decree thus, —The more 5, nation exports
the more it is enriched; the more it imports the more it is impo-
verished, which is certainly contrary to the fact.
writer of this age on political economy, did not go about the bush,
but has disposed of this fallacy in a few words. _He says, He w
gives fifteen to receive ten, loses five. Here is the system of the
balance of trade reduced to its fundamental terms. ~
Imports represent labour as well as exports. According to t e
axiom of Say, productions are paid for with productions.
What is it that we export? Productions. What do we im P ■
Productions. Now, the productions imported and consumed in the
country represent the productions exported; and as all productions
suppose labour , seeing that they do not create themselves, whether
these productions are consumed directly or indirectly, by exchange
for others, it is always the colonial labour that they represent.
All tnxos on l&konr ctnd skill, me #
Bastiat aaysmost admirably: “By labour the actmn of man ;s com-
bined with the action of nature. Utility results fiom that co op
tion Each man receives a share of the general utility, proportioned
to the value he has created ; that is to say, to the services he has
rendered; in other words, to the utility he has himself produced.


wiix anfeZbitS!.? zz ‘„° f b z
6ts g s o^Ttuflcoul* -“- f wouU
had“ d in S b r ; *i if ,r
X«s g *„^r y ** ks s
«fen e L;„Z« 8 to h od llUeSt Gdd aS -I “ labour a"d / al U e,” which are
ttbtr !?'r’d bU %f'« h he“ n htatl
SfbetTh 1 ™- S ° 7 * u
thelpXr ftHalto^r 1 de * t l of J ersons 40 . ex ' ha ”ga
exchanged. So that if there wp l ” 6 W j S f hmg for wblcb jt was
change their ft, W a®. 11 ? desire bet ween persons to ex-
evidently supported" w’ t TOW ? e This doctrine is
economist Bastiat, and M'Leod. J> M , “ y ’ tbe great Prericll
aeJ^an7riSi,f o La° ofte " 7* •** "«■ »on-
when a thine is wanted’ 7 alue 18 . 0 n y attaine<J where and
Of minds are, and valued to * P ° pulatlon where two sort s
Vf rCC *'
tectionisis took np the idea of keepin/ttoS t„ ,h. pr °;
and all others on the coasts of the colony P ‘° f Sydney
undeT p“LT„n l S rt”oaus“ felets taTt f *
and sugar, and less of other necessaries of IlfeTn thHottr’y f
woollen, tmd silk! L° fabrics ? b6 'theTbetteTwa '^'d 68 ! linCn ’
supply of tools and machinery ? ’ °° Pper? because there is
if he “ 08 with


What if he do? Man is not fed with money, he is not clothed
with gold, nor warmed with silver. What matter whether there be
more or less of money in the country, if there be more bread in the
cupboard, more meat in the larder, more linen in the press, and
more coal and wood in the cellar ?
DECLARATION OF THE NEW SOUTH WALES FREE TRADE ASSOCIATION.
1. That all laws -which restrict legitimate commerce are wrong in principle and injurious
to the interest of the community. 2. That the fiscal policy of this country should tend to the
decrease rather than the increase of the number of articles subject to Customs duties; and the
imposition of a system of Direct Taxation in the event of any augmentation of revenue being
required. 3. That every colonist should contribute to the necessities of the State in propor-
tion to his means and the advantages he enjoys; and that Taxation should be considered a
just debt not to be repudiated or evaded by any honest man, 4. That Taxation should take
and keep out of the pockets of the people as little as possible beyond what it yields to the
Public Exchequer. 5. That Taxation should be imposed in such a manner that no honest in-
dustry should be restricted, but every man left at perfect liberty to conduct his lawful busi-
ness in the way he thinks best for his own interests ; and to exchange the produce of his
labour, skill, or capital, with persons in any part of the world. 6. That protective duties of
any nature or kind whatever, are taxes upon the earnings of the many to increase the pro-
fits of the few, and are a sacrifice of the consumer to the exclusive benefit of the producer. 7.
That the abolition of restrictions on commerce, as a means of cheapening the cost of living to
the working classes, is the only legitimate method by which the Legislature can assist in-
dustry and foster manufactures. 8. That to encourage manufactures at the expense of the
industry at present engaged in the development of our commerce and natural resources,
would be unjust, impolitic, destructive to our prosperity, and fatal to our advancement as a
people. 9. The Association view the fiscal measures now before the Legislature as likely to
be ruinous to the colony ; and they therefore call upon the community at large to assist in
arresting that downward progress which must ensue if these measures are allowed to be em-
bodied in our legislation. FREDERICK A. BELL, Secretaiy. Sydney, 2nd February, 1864
THE EEEE TRADE CATECHISM.
{Published in the “ Empire,” Jan, 25, 1864.)
Question. —What is meant by free trade ?
Answer. —Free trade means liberty to purchase what you want from those
who will sell it cheapest; and to sell what you wish to dispose of to those who
will pay most for it.
Q. What is meant by protection P
A. Protection means the reverse of free trade. It means that the labourer
shall not he at liberty to dispose of his labour to the best advantage ; or to
buy with the fruits of his labour what he pleases and as much as he can get.
It means, in fact, the robbery of the many for the benefit of the few.
Q,. Do the protectionists themselves attach such a meaning to the word ?
_A. Some do ; but many of them really believe that the adoption of their
views will be beneficial to the community. The others —that is, the more de-
signing ones—know that the taxes imposed under the pretence of benefiting
the public will, in reality, flow into their pockets.
Q. In what way do the protectionists propose to carry out their plans P
A. Their design is to get the Legislature to compel people to buy of them
at their own price, instead of procuring food, drink, furniture, and clothes
from where they can be got cheapest.
Q. Would they notallow me to spend my hard-earned wages with whom I
please, and on what I please ?
A. No, they would not. If your brother in Melbourne, your cousin in
Adelaide, or your father in England, could sell you a bushel of wheat for five
shillings, a pair of shoes for ten, or a coat for twenty, they would not allow
you to buy of them. They would force you to pay twice the price to the pro-
tectionists themselves.
Q. But suppose I had not sufficient money to pay the protectionists the ex-
orbitant prices demanded by them for flour, or shoes, or clothes ?


A. Then you would have to go hungry, barefoot, and naked.
Q. What reasons do they give when asking the Legislature to allow them
thus to roh their neighbours ?
A. They say they would spend the money thus obtained in the colony, so as
to benefit trade.
Q. But if they did not rob me of the extra money which they compelled me
to pay for my flour, my shoes, and my coat, I should have spent it in the
colony too; and would not my spending it benefit trade quite as much as if it
went into their pockets ?
A. Just so. You would, probably, have spent it on the butcher, the baker,
the grocer, or the schoolmaster, to their benefit, as well as that of your chil-
dren and your own.
Q. If spending in the colony what is wrongfully obtained is a valid excuse
for depriving me of my money, could not the same argument be advanced by
Gardiner, Gilbert, and their followers in defence of bushranging ?
A. Precisely. There is no moral difference in the two cases. If the pro-
tectionists get the laws altered to suit their schemes, they will be legally justi-
fied in putting their hands into your pockets; but no act of Parliament can
make wrong right, or morally justify the depriving one man of his property
for the benefit, or supposed benefit, of another.
Q. But do they propose to offer me no advantage for thus forcibly depriving
me of my scanty means ? lam a gold digger. How do they propose to re-
quite me for the loss they would inflict P
A. They do not propose to offer you the slightest compensation or advantage,
and they could not if they would. You will have to pay dearer for every-
thing you eat, drink, wear, and make use of, while the price of the article you
produce cannot be increased in value. An ounce of gold will not procure you
so much food or clothing, by probably fifty per cent., after the passage of a
protective tariff as if does now. You will have to pay dearer for your boots,
your clothes, your candles, your tools, your drink, and your food.
Q,. What proportion of the population could possibly benefit by protection.
A. Certainly not more than ten persons in a hundred, even under the
fairest and most comprehensive system which could be framed. All the others
would be the victims, while the few lucky or cunning ones would share the
spoils.
Q. Then protection is a system which would reverse what should be the
legitimate end and aim of all Governments—that is, the greatest good of the
greatest number.
A. Yes. The effect of protective laws is to confer the least good on the
smallest number ?
Q. Are not certain countries and climates especially fitted for the pro-
duction of particular articles and commodities, suited to the supply of human
wants ?
A. Yes, certainly. One country produces rice and sugar, another tea and
silk, and a third coal, and wool, and gold.
Q. But would the protectionists really endeavour to prevent the free inter-
change of the gifts of the good God ?
A. That is what they propose to do. They appear to think that they know
better than their Maker what is good for His creatures.
Q. Does not their conduct amount to practical atheism P
A. Protectionist arguments, carried to their legitimate extent, would cer-
tainly aim at counteracting the manifest intentions of Providence. They
would prevent the abundance of one country from being applied to the relief
of the deficiencies of another.
Q. Then protection is almost as much a religious as a political question ?
A. It is much more so. No man who really understands the subject can be
a protectionist, and, at the same time a believer in an overruling and benefi-
cent Providence.
Q. Would not the words, “ Give us this day our daily bread,” be a mockery
in the mouth of a man who endeavoured to deprive the widow, the fatherless,
and the poor of their food, by rendering it scarcer and dearer ?
A. I think so, The effect of protective laws must of course be to produce


ah artificial scarcity in particular countries, and a waste, by reason of super-
abundance, in others.
Q. Can any theory be possibly correct, however plausible it may appear i
which aims at counteracting natural laws ?
A. No, certainly not. But protectionists seem, for the most part, incapable
of understanding the consequences of their own acts or the bearings of their
own arguments.
Q. Then I understand you to say that nature having conferred on the dif-
ferent countries of the world, peculiar qualities of soil and climate, to fit them
for the production of articles needful or suitable to man, you take it as a self-
evident truth that any attempt to control the supply, or prevent the free inter-
change of these things, is an act of impiety as well as of foolishness ?
A. Yes, its wickedness is even greater than its absurdity.
Q. If an article cannot bo produced here as cheaply as it can be imported,
is not that a proof which ought to convince any sane man that there is in this
colony some more profitable occupation for our skill and industry ?
A. Yes. If our people were not engaged in some more profitable occupa-
tion, they would of course be able to make it or grow it as cheap as it could
be imported.
Q. Then the effect of protection would inevitably be to compel people to
leave profitable pursuits for unprofitable ones, so far as the whole community
is concerned ?
A. Precisely. They would be employed in producing things at a loss to
the whole community, although perhaps at a profit to themselves. But that
profit would come out of the pockets of their neighbours.
Q. It is certain, is it not, if duties are placed on the importation of any
article in order to make its manufacture profitable to those engaged in its
production here, that the increased price thus obtained must come out of the
pockets of those who consume it ?
A. Yes, certainly ; and there can be no possible addition to the wealth oi
the community by the process of transferring the- extra price thus obtained
for an article from the pockets of one class of persons to those of others.
Q. Then the money thus unfairly obtained by the protectionists goes into
their own pockets, and not into the public exchequer P
A, Yes ; they deprive the great mass of the community of part of their
means, not for the benefit of the State, but for their own profit.
Q. What is your trade or profession, and how will protection affect you P
A. I am a schoolmaster, and protection will affect me and the to
which I belong most injuriously. Considering our duties and responsibilities,
we are very badly paid now. But if the protectionists should carry their
measures our position will be one of insupportable hardship. r l hose of us who
have families could not live; many would leave their present calling or
emigrate to some other country, where common honesty and common sense
were not quite extinct, or altogether overlooked or forgotten in the short-
sighted selfishness and abominable wickedness of that kind of class ligislation
miscalled protection.
Thus the advocate of restrictive laws is reduced to this dilemma.
Either he admits that he causes a want of the most necessary things
of life; or, he does not admit it. If he admit it, that is an avowal
that he commits the greatest evil which it is possible for him to
commit against the people. If he do not admit it, then he denies
that he has limited the supply, raised the price, and consequently
he denies that he has favored the home producer. He is, therefore,
unfortunate or inefficient.
He cannot be useful.


This Association is in abeyance according to the minutes passed
at the last meeting, wherein it is stated that if the political state
of the colony should require it, they are ready to start into active
operation again; and should they do so, undoubtedly it will be to
seek a much greater extent of commercial freedom than the present
Government (as yet) appear to grant or encourage.
FREDERICK A. BELL.
Burwood, 28th September, 1866.


FREE TRADE AND DIRECT TAXATION:
Freedom of commerce and of industry is a consequence which
flows from and never can be separated from direct taxation. I
do not mean freedom of commerce while taxed for revenue from
prohibitions and discriminating duties, but that freedom which
faciliates the exchange of commodities with the view of enhancing
the value of land and property from which a revenue should be
drawn. The burdening of the exchange of commodities for the sake of
revenue must be detrimental to commerce, besides being the most
expensive way of raising it, which I will hereafter show.
Direct taxation is admirably simple and powerfully efficient; and
so well adapted, so natural, and so just, that every community not
reduced to slavery by corruption and oppression might be expected
to adopt it. In pleading for direct taxation it is well to state —
Ist. That taxation falling on the amount of property, the Govern-
ment has a direct and sensible interest in the general prosperity,
and there is no organised body of collectors to whisper in its ear new
modes of taxation or measures of increased severity.
2nd That a Government raising its revenue by direct taxation on
property, income, and stamps, has no motive or pretext for favouring
any class to introduce privileges or monopolies.
3rd. It has no motive or pretext for the protection of its revenue
or for facilitating the collection, to introduce restrictions or prohibi-
tions, or generally to legislate in financial matters so as to interfere
with commerce.
4th. That the general effects of the system of direct taxation are to
take from the people only the amount which the Government re-
ceives • consequentlv, that it does not indirectly augment prices.
sth. That it falls on wealth realised, not on the means of production.
That, consequently, it falls equally on all, and gives a constant in-
terest to the rich and powerful to control expenditure. Both rich
and poor will be more moderately taxed than they are by indirect
taxation; at the same time—taxing income has many serious ob-
jections which the wisdom of debate could modify and lead to wise
conclusions ; and
6th. That all articles which constitute a large and necessary portion
of the food of the community, or minister to the profitable employ-
ment of the people, are unfit objects of taxation in anv way or degree.
“ I admire—l am filled with astonishment at the individual in-
struction and intelligence spread through every class of the British'


population, at the perfection of your industry and perseverance, at
your useful works and wonderful scientific inventions, at the dis-
cipline of your ships and troops, at the fixed subordination of your
civil officers, and at the strict and truly admirable execution of your
laws ; but—cannot you raise your revenue direct without embarrassing
your commerce ?” This was asked by an intelligent Tunisian, an
envoy from that state to France, disposed enthusiastically to admire
the progress of Europe in every branch of science, though unable to
conceive the advantages of our indirect taxation which the statesmen
of England have been for years and are still struggling to decrease,
for certainly it is the most important political question which agitates
practically, even when not avowedly, the whole of Europe.
A superficial glance at the governments of Europe shows an ad-
ministration constantly employed in adjusting burthens, in shifting
them from one shoulder to another, exciting discontent and resistance,
even by its most impartial measures; a people ever dissatisfied with,
and more impatient of the weight of the burthens than of the mode
of imposition ; and a penal code, the major part of which little co-
incides with public opinion, containing a numerous catalogue of
punishments for crimes created ly fiscal measures. Is it, therefore,
surprising that this complicated and embarrassing legislation, this
individual resistance’ of each separate interest which becomes general
resistance on the part of the people, and the infliction of severe
punishments for crimes which are infractions of no moral law (I
allude merely to direct and tangible effects of the system), appear
to those whose experience is confined to Europe alone, unfortunate
but necessary conditions of the existence of a government? No one
can deny that the efficiency of a government would be immensely
increased, its character elevated, the resistance, opposition, and dis-
content of the people prevented, and that the penal code, losing half
its cruelty, would gain double efficacy, by not placing morality and
law in opposition, if the revenue were raised by direct taxation,
without legislative interference with commerce.
The first of the four celebrated maxims enunciated by Adam
Smith with respect to taxation declares that “ the subjects of every
State ought to contribute towards the support of the Government as
nearly as possible in proportion to their means.” There cannot be
the least doubt that this simple statement forms the fundamental
principle of all wisely directed taxation. It is obvious that common
justice requires it. The greatest difficulty encountered in the work
of governing a people is no doubt the difficulty of providing for the
expense of government. But, whatever schemes may be proposed
to meet this difficulty, none can be entitled to our approbation which
does not embody the principle I have mentioned. It must be
confessed, however, that, even in the present day, many instances
conclusively show that this principle is too often entirely laid aside.
And this arises from the fact, not that any one is found to question
its truth, but that it is deliberately sacrificed for the sake of another
principle which is entirely of a secondary character. “ Every tax
ought to be levied at the time or in the manner most likely to be


convenient for the contributor to pay it.” Such is the third of the
four maxims I have alluded to; and the truth and justice it
expresses are as palpable as the truth and justice of the first.
The two principles ought to be combined, but we have contrived to
separate them. Because we have hit upon a method of raising a
large revenue without exciting strong marks of popular disapproba-
tion, we conceive ourselves justified in defrauding the people under
the shadow of its authority. By its means we contrive to fill the coffers
of the Treasury by levying heavy taxes on industry, and at the same
time to escape the uproar and indignation which such a scheme
might be supposed to involve. This, indeed, is the cursed beauty
of indirect taxation.
That loudly vaunted system enables us to boldly perpetrate an
injustice which otherwise we should hardly dare to dream of. No
man would deny that cceteris paribus, a tax indirectly levied
would be infinitely more palatable than a tax directly levied.
The process which enables us to perform the duties of citi-
zens in this unpleasant particular, without feeling the slightest
pain in the operation, is decidedly a boon. It is political
chloroform. But when we come to learn that this is by no means
an unmixed good ; that, on the contrary, it directly involves a gross
and unwarrantable injustice, which strikes at the root of all
philosophy in the matter, the value of the discovery is materially
lessened. The chloroform which sometimes enables us to avoid
pain sometimes cheats us into death. The duties which are levied
in this country on articles of daily consumption among the industrial
classes are justified on the ground that they are indirect duties, and
are, therefore, unfelt and unwinced at by those who pay them.
If the sole question at issue were, how to tax industry, we might
recognise this portion of our financial system as an eminently
judicious one. This, however, as 1 have already said, is only a
secondary matter. The real point for our consideration is the
adjustment of taxation, not the method of its collection. This
consideration renders the fallacy of indirect taxation obvious, unless
we are prepared to deny the necessity for any adjustment at all.
The greater portion of our revenue is contributed by the working
population, leaving the wealthy to contribute the comparatively
trifling balance. Tea, sugar, and spirits, on which the Coloxial
Treasurer bends his steadfast gaze, are consumed in infinitely
greater proportion by the working classes than they are b} r the rich
section of society.
They who impose these taxes would never contend that a
labourer should contribute to the revenue in the same pro-
portion as a rich man. How, then, can they reconcile the
inconsistency exhibited in the tax ? The principle of adjustment is
wholly abrogated by such a scheme. This is the point on which I
feel compelled to lay some stress. When it is clearly proved that
the fundamental principle of all taxation is lost sight of in any
particular system, nothing farther is required to condemn it.
The obvious injustice which such a system cannot fail to work, in


curtailing the enjoyments of the mass of the people, while scarcely
affecting the luxuries of the rich, is but a minor evil in comparison.
I do not contend, as the learned author of certain “ Reminis-
cences ” would infer, that the poor have any right to be wholly
relieved from the duty of providing for the expense of government,
merely because they are poor. What I insist upon is, that all
classes of society should be called upon to contribute in proportion
to their means ; and I emphatically deny that this principle is
observed in the taxes levied on the necessaries of life. The sacrifice
which we make in order to render taxation pleasant, wholly
neutralises the good we derive from it.
The most just and the most equitable of all taxes is an income and
property tax, because it bears a direct proportion to the abilities of
the tax payers. Such a proposal, however, can hardly he
uttered in the presence of some men without giving rise to
a prolonged growl on the horrors of direct taxation. We are
reminded of the iniquity of compelling men to disclose the
state of their affairs, and of the barbarity of collecting revenue
individually and personally. If an income tax is not a pleasant
tax, it is a just one ; and the justice of our taxation is the primary
consideration.
It is not the province of the Legislature to consult the
supposed likes and dislikes of certain classes, but to consult the
welfare of the country, and also the eternal principles of truth
and justice, in the laws it imposes upon society. “ The first
duty of high-minded men should be to contrive a good, rather
than a palatable system of taxation; and if the good system
is not palatable, the effort should be to awaken the public to
higher feelings of morality and intelligence, not to debase a beneficial
system in order to humour a people suffering from mistaken notions
of what is just and what is expedient. The extravagant eulogiums
current with respect to indirect taxation, seem to imply a very low
state of national intelligence, and an equally low state of national
morality • inasmuch as they suppose the public to be ignorant of
the commonest principles, and to be mainly instigated by a desire
to shift that portion of taxation which ought equitably to be borne
by themselves upon others who ought not to bear it.
The consideration of the relative merits of direct and indirect
taxation is attended with considerable difficulty. It is easy to urge
arguments in favour of each system. There can he little doubt but
that indirect taxation is looked upon by a large majority with a
vastly more favourable eye than the rival system ; but when we
have analysed the reasons which have led to this conclusion, we
shall admit that they reflect but little credit on it. Some men
prefer that system of medical treatment which is called horacepathy,
not because they are logically satisfied of its scientific truth, but
simply because it dispenses with nauseous drugs and nasty opera-
tions ; but they never think of it scientifically, they merely
think it causes no trouble, it inflicts no pain, it works no harm.
It is a very similar process of thought which leads others to pro-


claim themselves disciples of indirect taxation. If told that this
system is obviously founded on a negation of all justice, they reply
that it works well and that no one grumbles at it. And unfor-
tunately those classes who are most interested in the matter, who
bear all the evil and suffer all the injustice, are precisely those who
are least competent to discuss the question. But if ignorance and
prejudice constitute the sole defence of an unjust system among the
community, we have a right to look for higher principles among
our legislators. To them at least the laws of political economy
should be as household words. Our legislators, however, seem but
to act as reflecting glasses for the fallacies of the outside world.
To those who will take the trouble to examine the statistical
register, and learn from which sources the revenue of the colony is
derived, it will appear surprising that such a system as is there
revealed should nave been endured so long.
The greater part of the Customs revenue is derived from
duties on articles mainly consumed by the poorer classes—
tea, sugar, spirits, and tobacco. No less than £555,175 6s.
7d. was received by the Treasury from these articles alone,
during the year 1862, the whole Customs revenue for that
year amounting to £609,372 15s. lid. Side by side with
these heavily taxed commodities, the reader will find a lengthly
catalogue of articles of luxury which are not taxed at all.
Carriages and pianos, silks and satins, jewellery and furniture, and
a number of others, are admitted duty free. If commodities must be
taxed alike, or that if any distinction were to be made, those
which are regarded as luxuries would be more heavily taxed
than those which are regarded as necessaries. The fact
is just the reverse with us. We select for taxation precisely
those commodities which no man, however limited his means,
can well do without, and allow everything else to pass. The only
justification offered for this extraordinary procedure is this, that it
enables us to raise a large revenue ivith little trouble , although at
a greater expense. They who insist upon this methodised
injustice involve themselves in the dilemma of being either
ignorant of the laws of political economy, or else deter-
mined to set those laws aside for the sake of furthering class
interests. Taxes upon the necessaries of life are condemned
by the political economists of every country, and the reasons of
their condemnation may be gathered on the surface. The oracle of
the present day, J. S. Mill, says :—“ There are some forms of in-
direct taxation which must be peremptorily excluded. All taxes
on the necessaries of life, or on the materials or instruments employed
in producing those necessaries, must be excluded. Such taxes are
always liable to encroach on what is left untaxed, the incomes barely
sufficient for healthful existence; and on the most favourable sup-
position, namely, that wages rise to compensate the labourers for
the tax; it operates as a peculiar tax on profits, which is at once
unjust and detrimental to national wealth.” This short sentence
sufficiently indicates the fallacy as well as the injusfiqe of such


taxation. These taxes were imposed upon us by a Government
which never felt itself bound to consider the interests of that class
which would be most effected by them. But how is it that they
have been so patiently submitted to and endured for so many years
after the advent of Besponsible Government? If we are to levy
Customs duties, let it be on a just principle. We should
then be showing some regard to the claims of ordinary justice,
as well as adding largely to our annual receipts. The policy of
levying Customs duties 1 regard as a very questionable one, and I
have more than once expressed my belief that their total abolition
would give an unequalled impetus to the commercial prosperity of
the colony.
Were Port Jackson declared a free port, it would concen-
trate in itself nearly all the trade of the Australias. Nor would
it be a difficult matter to compensate ourselves for the loss of revenue
we should thus at first incur. This difficulty, however, is not
the sole point to be considered in connection with this topic. It is
undeniable that Customs and Excise duties inflict a very considerable
amount of injury on the mercantile interest. To borrow 7 the language
of an authority—“ Customs and Excise duties imply prohibitions
and impediments to the ordinary arrangements for production and
interchange. They also bring with them, in proportion to the
magnitude of the duties, temptations to adulterate, to manufacture
surreptitiously, and to smuggle. To counteract such devices for
the evasion of duties, a preventive service should surround the coast,
and an army of excise officers be spread over the land ” To the
thoughtful man, how suggestive must all this be of consequent con-
flict and disorder, of bribery and fraud, of misapplication of labour,
of waste of resources, of habitual infraction of the law, reverence and
obedience of which are so indispensable to social progress, and of
constant incentives of crime to the poor, the ignorant, and the ill-
trained.” Solemn consequences of this nature may not be found in
active operation in our infant society, but if we have not yet reaped the
whirlwind, we have at any rate sown the seed which will produce
it. The Murray border duties have already grown into a standing
topic of complaint with our sister colony. Whatever indignation we
may have improperly indulged in at the degraded state of the moral
perceptions in Victoria, we are bound to admit that what we
call rascality is only a natural incident of Customs duties. If we
persist in offering other men temptations to cheat us, what right
have we to grumble when we find ourselves actually cheated ? as
many of our colonists assert with or without truth.
Let us compare now a system of direct taxation with these absurd,
unjust, and withal unprofitable taxes, and we may confidently chal-
lenge the arguments of their most inveterate admirers. Supposing
that the public could be induced, by w r ay of experiment, to be honest
and intelligent for once, and voluntarily to submit to an
income tax of twopence in the pound by way of trial, in what
material interest would it suffer? We are told that merchants
and traders would object to disclose the state of their affairs at


critical periods. This assertion implies that, under an income
tax, the private affairs of merchants and traders would be
necessarily exposed and published for the information of the world
at larjje. This is an exaggeration , and a gross misrepresentation
as well. No publication of private affairs would take place at all.
The great objection to such a tax is, that it relies too much on the
honesty of those who have to pay it, by leaving it to them to state
the measure of their incomes; and the tax should be assessed and
collected in the municipality in which they reside. There is thus an
open door left for the express accommodation of every man whose
conscience holds no sway over his actions. No one can deny that
the income tax is open to many objections, but at the same time no
one can deny that these objections may be and have been obviated
without much difficulty. All incomes, lor instance, cannot be
taxed alike, and no income should be taxed at all that is not
enough to procure “ the necessaries of healthful existence.”
These difficulties are trivial, and may be removed with ease.
There is another method of levying a direct and equitable tax,
which is not open to these objections, and that is, a house
tax. No better average indication of a man’s means could
be desired than the house in which he resides. The rent he
considers himself able to pay affords a certain index to his in-
come. In so far as it falls on the occupier, if justly propor-
tioned to the value of the house, it is one of the fairest and most
unobjectionable of all taxes. No part of a person’s expenditure is
a better criterion of his means, or bears, on the whole, more nearly
the same proportion to them. A house tax is a nearer approach to
a fair income tax than a direct assessment on income can easily
be; having the great advantage that it makes spontaneously all
the allowances which it is so difficult to make, and so impracticable
to make exactly, in assessing an income tax; for if what a person
pays in house rent is a test of anything, it is a test not of what he
possesses, but of what he thinks he can afford to spend.
The fabric of the future greatness of our colony, and its importance
to us, is a visionary dream, unless a foundation fit for its support be
now laid. This colony is young, and not, as Europe, entrammelled
with ancient corrupt customs of patronage settled by royal gifts and
charters. The colony is not irretrievably immersed in debt, far from it;
but new sources of revenue can be opened and the old ones dried up
without detriment or damage to trade; but, op the contrary,
conferring great and lasting benefits to commerce. The mass of the
people of this colony do not comprehend our fiscal system under
indirect taxation , where great ingenuity is everted to cover up and
hide heavy imposts on the people by an insiduous appearance of
moderation. Men are more conversant with principles than details,
with names than with things. Names are necessary for the Press,
for society ; and they often clog curiosity, which, but for them,
would apply itself to facts. Facts, by our complications, are difficult
of access, and the reference of effects to causes too fatiguing for
common attention. A labourer cannot be expected to calculate in


the price of a pound of tea or sugar, how much he contributes to
the support of the Government—how much he pays for the
collection of customs, how much to the tea-grower or sugar-planter,
and how much to the merchant importer (how much to the retail
grocer), who has advanced his capital to pay the Government
duties on the tea and sugar which the labourer buys. Consequently
he cannot trace to their sources the influences that affect him, and
if he complains it is of mysterious wrongs for which he himself
can suggest no remedy, and often neither can his uneducated and
unreflecting representative whom he has sent to parliament to
redress them; for one of the disgraceful evils of this colony is that
of sending to parliament men whose birth, antecedents, and
education shew them to be unfit for their high and impartial duties.
The labourer, and multitudes of others, until they are
educated to think otherwise will grumble at a direct tax, the
justice of which every one can judge, whilst they will enter
the grocer’s shop and pay for taxed tea and sugar, night after night
and day after day, and never reflect what amount of taxes in a
year have been taken from him imperceptibly in this way—never
reflecting that by this enormously expensive system of taxation he
is paying nearly 70 per cent on his Income, ivhereas by direct taxation
it ivould never reach twenty. Let us suppose that there were four
open windows into which a buyer had to pay—No. 1, the actual cost
of the necessaries of life; No. 2, the profits of importers, the
commission and interest for advancing the duties ; a commission to
pay for loss of weight and expenses of the customs in weighing,
storing, indrake, &c.; No. 3, his proportion of the customs and
excise duties advanced by the importer on what he has consumed in
the year; and No. 4, his proportion of the salaries of the customs
and excise officials. He then would come to know by facts what he
actually did contribute to the Government, to the officers collecting
the duties, and to profits of merchants advancing the indirect
custom and excise duties ; but as such is impossible, he exists in
this damning mist, and the perceptions of his representative are
equally obscured, from want of capacity to think and judge.
The system of indirect taxation, after a period of seventy-five
years, has now so deeply rooted itself amongst us, so overspread us
with its chill and blighting shadow, that even our reflection and
vision is intercepted.
Monsieur Turgot, in his essay on taxation, begins by enumerating
three different forms of taxation, viz.:—
1. Direct taxes on property.
2. Direct taxes on persons.
3. Indirect taxation ; or, taxes on articles of consumption.
After some observations about the latter, he undertakes to show
that, in whatever form they may be levied, they fall, eventually,
on the land-owners.
He further arrives at the opinion that, between augmented expense
of collection, and diminution of the value of property, the owner of
the soil is, in reality, mulcted much more severely, by indirect


taxation than he would be if the whole of the net revenue thus
raised were taken directly from his property.
He then specifies the following reasons for preferring direct to
indirect taxation :
First.—Because the owners of property alone are holders for the
service of the state.
Secondly.—Because direct taxation being levied at the least expense,
the owner of the soil, who, under any system, eventually pays
all, saves thereby the amount of the expense of collection, and
the diminished gains of surveyors of inland revenue, managers,
and farmers of taxes,
Thirdly.—Because indirect taxation imposes a multitude of restrict-
tions on commerce—because it causes legal processes, frauds,
and confiscations—the loss of a great number of men—a war
of Government against its subjects—a disproportionate penalty
attached to certain acts—a continual and almost irresistible
temptation to fraud, which is, nevertheless, subjected to the
most cruel penalties.
Fourthly,—Because indirect taxation is, in many respects, an
attack upon liberty.
Fifthly.—lt has a great tendency to prevent consumption, and so
ruin itself.
Sixthly.—Because it augments state expenses, inasmuch as the
state pays both on its own account and that of its agents.
Seventhly.'—Because it gives to foreign merchants an advantage in
commercial competition.
And, finally, because its effects cannot always be calculated exactly,
whereas the oCner of property knows the proportion which the
sum he pay's in taxes bears to his revenue.
In every indirect tax it is almost impossible to avoid prevarica-
tions. To prove cases of fraud it is necessary to give to the
commissioners the right of being believed on their verbal declarations,
which is an irremediable source of vexation.
The complications of the tariffs, and of the laws which are
designed to prevent the evasion of the tax, render it impossible for
people to resist the concomitant annoyances; for in the face of so
many obscure and doubtful points, what private person would dare
to risk an action against the authorised agents of government.
Taxes on exchanges and on the transactions of society are of a
not less odious nature.
It would seem as if such a financial system, like a monster of
prey, made it its business to look out for the riches of the citizens
in their passage to and fro. Is this not a very clumsy mistake ?
For to what purpose is all this disguised lying in wait for riches, when
all real wealth is, as it were, in the light of the sun ? The smallest
trifle so paid is a subtraction from actual property. Taxes ought
to be for the preservation of property, not to prevent its formation.
The State has the greatest interest in preserving the masses of
capital. It is from these masses that all advances necessary for
commercial and agricultural enterprises, and for the improvement


of realized property, are devised. They are formed by the slow
processes of economy. For the State to claim as revenue a part of
the capital accumulated, to make the advances required for the
payment of labour, is, in part, to destroy the sources of its own
revenue. Indirect taxes will destroy capital so much the quicker
as their injurious incidence is at first less felt, and causes less alarm.
As each citizen, in buying the article which he wishes to consume,
appears to pay the tax to which it is subject entirely of his own
accord, many people, including some writers of distinction, have
been so far deceived by this apparent freedom of the taxpayer, as
unhesitatingly to declare their preference of the duties which are
levied on articles of consumption, and on the exportation and impor-
tation of articles of merchandise, to any other system of taxation j
but those who have thoroughly mastered the subject have come to a
very different conclusion Their reflections, which are confirmed
by experience, have shewn them clearly that the whole burden
of taxation, in whatever form it is first raised, when traced
through all its ramifications, falls eventually upon the owners of the
soil. It sometimes falls upon them directly by the application of
part of their revenue to the necessities of the State —sometimes
indirectly by the„diminution of their income, and augmentation of
their expenditure. It is evident that every tax which increases the
expenses of cultivation diminishes the rent of land.
In Europe, thirty years ago, while we looked with proud satisfac-
tion on all the discoveries, and the progess that has illustrated
modern Europe, we seemed not to perceive that in every quarter of
the globe, and in all ages, a financial system had existed the very
reverse of ours. We look upon a revenue raised directly as an
anomaly and an exception, whereas the indirectly raised revenues
of modern Europe were exceptions in the experience of the world.
But in 1842, Sir Robert Peel cut asunder that delusive web, and
following out the commercial policy of his former talented and
lamented colleague, Mr. Huskisson, he had recourse to direct
axation for the threefold purpose, as he stated, of meeting the
existing deficiency in the revenue (then £2,569,000), and of
restoring the finances ; with a view to the relief of commerce, and
with a view to cheapen the cost of subsistence as some compensation
for the (additional) new tax' which he imposed.
Lately (in 1860), her Majesty’s Government adopted the system
of direct taxation in India, as going back to her ancient and wise
institutions, in order to sweep away the innumerable abuses that
had clogged the wheels of Government, and “ to give freedom to
commerce and capital, and by its own reproducing action to decrease
taxation, by increasing the number and wealth of the taxed, as well
as to secure an improving revenue to the Government.”
The objects to be obtained by policical economy as a science are
to procure equal rights and protection to the people; to get them
subsistence and means for their benefit, recreation, comfort, and
education; to provide the government with a sufficient revenue for
the public service; finally, by wise measures, to ensure the mutual


enrichment of both the people and the governing power. Therefore,
protections, prohibitions, and obstructions to the free use of capital
in commerce, agriculture, and shipping, being detrimental, should
be put an end to, where they exist. It has been stated that revenue
raised directly has been looked on as an anomaly and an exception;
whereas the indirectly raised revenues of modern Europe were
exceptions in the experience of the world. No great empire that
the world has ever seen—the Assyrian, Babylonian, that of Cyrus,
of Alexander, or of Charlemagne, of the Romans, or the Saracens,
raised its revenue, except by direct taxation ; and, why had the
last, and not the least, of conquerors less hold on the countries he
overran ? At least, it is a singular coincidence, that the first of the
great conquerors who has laid his hand on commerce, not as a
spoliator, but in the fatal character of legislator, should have
outlived the Empire he created. Bourrienne states at page 364,
that the Berlin decree could not fail to cause a re-action against the
Emperor’s fortune, by raising up whole nations against him, and
that the hatred raised by his interfering with and hampering
commerce in his Berlin decrees, did more towards Napoleon’s fall
than the hurling twenty kings from their thrones.
But ancient history nowhere shows us anything to be compared
to the fiscal regulations of modern Europe. In the early periods of
the commerce of the Mediterranean, violence and bloodshed were the
proverbial concomitants of commercial enterprise. Hercules, not
Hermes, was the titular divinity of the Phoenician colonists. There
we do find traces of commercial legislation, apparently resembling
that of Europe ; but fortunately their commercial prohibitions were
never mixed up with questions of finance. In Carthage we find
nowhere any trace of aso termed protecting duty. As far back as
history can reach among civilised and uncivilised nations, under
theocracies, monarchies, or republics, men, land, and capital in
money or houses, or in other tangible objects, have always been
directly taxed.
Amid all the varied experience that centuries and thousands of
tribes of men afford, the principle of raising the revenue was
invariably the same—the difference consisting merely in the mode,
the season of collection, the objects or the classes more or less
severely taxed. Commerce, at times, is found entirely free from all
imposts whatever; at other times it has been exposed to arbitrary
impositions and tolls. Amongst the Greeks and Romans it has not
contributed to the revenue of the State, but it has been lightly taxed
for municipal purposes, the tax being levied for the repairing of roads
and harbours, and indeed generally applied for that purpose. In
Greece, before the withering system of centralisation by Capodis-
trias, it would appear that the indirect taxation never exceeded 10
per cent, of the whole revenue. The Roman revenue was raised by
a poll tax (in capita), a property tax (ex censu), a tithe on land,
and a duty on the transport of goods ( portorium ). Turks and
Romans only interfered with commerce with the view of lowering
the price of corn. Livy, the only guide in the financial history of


ancient Rome says, xl., 46; a Censorlbus deinde postulantibus ut
pecuniae sumraa, sibi, qua in opera publica uterentur atribueretur;
vectigal annuum decretum est.” Therefore we may confidently infer
that in Rome the vectigalia were applied to municipal purposes, the
principal of which was the repair of highways, bridges, &c. In
Spain, in the Mogul Empire before its fall, in India and Turkey, the
indirect taxes never exceeded 10 per cent. In Harrington’’s Land
Revenue , Introd. Vol., 11. we find, “In the Governments of Bengal,
Beher, and Orrisa, when the two branches of revenue were separated,
in 1789 and 1790, the indirect taxes did not amount even to 4 per
cent., the total jumma was Sicca Rupas 2,65,45,811; the sayer or
variable revenue from customs and excise transport duty, &c., were
10,67,111.
The commissioners for settling the land revenue of India, in 1685,
thus express themselves :— u In forming conclusions on this subject,
and indeed in all our reasonings concerning the revenue of Bengal,
we cannot too carefully avoid the comparison between the customs
and institutions that prevail in India and those which are established
amongst a people more free and refined, because amongst us the in-
vention is exhausted in discovering other objects (than land), and
modes of taxation (than the direct), which shall raise a revenue in
a manner imperceptible to those who actually pay it, and where
it is rather the policy to conceal than to lighten the burden of the
people.” Afterwards they admit that u To the neglect of these
ancient Institutions may, perhaps, partly be ascribed most of the
evils and abuses that have crept into the revenue of Bengal.
Attaching vast importance to the direct system of taxation, I have
been led into the foregoing observation with the view of showing
that that system is no hazardous experiment, that it is no deviation
from ancestral wisdom or concession to modern theorists, and that it
is neither the rude expedient of a barbarous people, nor the mere
caprice of an oriental despot. But I will not let the proofs of the
benefits of direct taxation rest upon the examples of ancient times,
but will adduce the opinions delivered by some of the eminent
statesmen and financiers of Great Britain, showing their opinions that
commerce can be active, profitable, and efficient only when it is clear
of all formality, and unshackled by legislation ; that the more direct
taxation is increased, and the more the fcapital and industry of a
country is relieved, the greater would be the property subject to
taxation and the general wealth of the community, and it is upon
such gounds that I call upon the wealthy and the opulent to support
u direct taxation and free trade,” as well as the poorest inhabitant
of the colony.
No doubt the insurrection of Wat Tyler in particular, was a sudden
outbreak of popular indignation at a direct tax , but not at its amount,,
nor its pressure, not at the inequality of its repartition, nor at the
inexpediency of its appropriation, but at the disgustingand outi'ageous
conduct of the government agents for its collection, which, of course,
would have been entirely avoided if the municipal bodies had been
the organs of taxation. The tax in question was a poll tax—a tax


now fallen into strange disuse and discredit, but
once an important
branch of revenue. It was equally graduated, and spared neither
noble nor placemen. The highest on the scale paid 265 times as
much as the lowest, for the tax went down to a i
sixpence—
Dukes and Duchesses
£6 13 4
Earls and Countesses
4 0 0
Judges
5 0 0
The Mayor of London
4 0 0
Barons, Cannerets, Baronesses and Knights
3 0 0
All Mayors
2 0 0
and so on, descending in rank and station, and having the tax levied
accordingly ; therefore a capitation tax is not un-British, but is
direct, open, fair, and understood by all, and could be levied on
everyone who is above the position of a pauper.
The approximate money value of the British income is between
eight and nine hundred millions of money; still she groans and is rest-
less under a debt with a mixed taxation, which never would have reached
its enormous magnitude if direct instead of indirect taxation had
been the fiscal regulation of her Government, from which her late
and present rulers are endeavouring to relieve her year by year, but
which they find cannot be rapidly or rashly done whilst such accu-
mulations of patronage, pensions, corruption, and old sinecures
have to be pushed aside. In this colony no such barriers against
change exist, but in a minor degree.
Hitherto the ministers of this colony as a body have governed
without a fixed political purpose, and their administration
has been deficient in prudence, manliness, aqd courage;
they have looked to the aggrandisement of a party, more than
to that fair, adjustment of common rights and common in-
terests, to make provision for the happiness,' the strength, and the
prosperity of the colony; and this applies eminently to the last
Cowper administration—the consequences were the crumbling to
pieces of his cabinet after the most pitiful patchwork. Although
I have hitherto strenuously opposed Mr Martin’s opinions as to
Protection, I admire the straightforward, comprehensive, and manly
way in which he adjusts his measures to his principles; what he
carries through is without miserable truckling to contemptible men,
or purchasing their votes by corrupt bribes at the public expense.
I have stated that in 1842, Sir Robert Peel, introduced direct
taxation for four purposes, viz., to meet deficiencies of revenue, re-
storing the finances, to relieve commerce, and to cheapen the cost
of subsistence. These were the three objects he had in view in im-
posing the property and income tax of seven-pence in the pound. He
had been a colleague of that great man William Huskisson, and
a warm supporter of his commercial policy, and the measures which
he proposed on the meeting of Parliament in 1842, showed his deter-
mination to adopt and adhere to that policy.
_ I will state a few facts showing the extraordinary success of his
direct taxation policy.
In September, 1841, Sir Robert Peel came in as Premier; Mr.


Goulburn as Chancellor of the Exchequer; Mr. Gladstone, Vice-
president of the Board of Trade; Sir Sidney Herbert, Secretary of
the Treasury ; Mr. G. R. Porter, Secretary of Board of Trade, or
Superintendent of Statistical Board All these men*were supporters of
direct taxation, especially Porter, the talented author of “ The
Progress of the Nation.” All of them are dead, except Mr. Gladstone,
the present Chancellor of the Exchequer.
In 1841 the deficiency of the revenue was .. £2,101,000
The expenditure of 1842, computed at £50,919,000
The income ditto ditto .. .. 48,350,000
Showing an increased deficit of .. 2,569,000 2,569,000
And an alarming total deficit of .. .. .. £4,670,000
Not only was this enormous deficiency of upwards of four and a half
millions" to be contended with, but there appeared no prospect of
relief; on the contrary, the Chancellor of the Exchequer notified
the Premier that it must increase if the same fiscal systems were
persevered in. Sir Robert Peel called a Cabinet council, to whom
the Chancellor communicated the state and prospects of the revenue.
The Premier laid before them his proposition to levy direct taxes
and abolish certain indirect ones, which w r as assented to. So with
bold, still prudent and cautious hand, he put in practice
theorems which had been urged on him for years by the greatest
political economists of the day ; not that he doubted the successful
results of direct taxation, but such an enormous amount of patronage
would be swept off, that the Minister who introduced the measure
would, he feared, not be able to retain the reins of government, and
to form a unanimous Cabinet. However, in this he was mistaken,
as the policy he adopted was accepted by his Cabinet, and proved
most triumphantly successful, as will be seen by the following
statistical facts.
Sir R. Peel remitted indirect taxes, amounting in—
-1842 ... ... ... .. ... to £1,696,366
of which no less than £1,500,000 consisted of Custom-house duties.
1843 363,453
1844 458,810
In 1845, on the renewal of the income tax, duties were repealed to
the amount of £4,535,561, of which no less than £3,817,806 consisted
of Customs duties, the principal items being Sugar £2,509,857 !!
Molasses, £129,188; Cotton Wool, £682,042; Export duty on
Coal, £115,438; the duty on sundry small articles, £880,786; and
Excise duty on glass, £624,000. In 1846, taxes repealed were
£1,451,790, being exclusively customs duties. To bo short, suffice
it to say that in 1850 the Chancellor stated that during nine years,
1842 to 1850, both included, the entire wealth of the country had
so improved under the system of direct taxation, that the income
tax, which in 1852 was computed at £3,000,000 had so improved,
that in 1860 it was £10,809,816 ; and now the mode of assessing
being improved and unobjectionable, last year it amounted to about
thirteen millions.


I will now give the opinions of some of the eminent statesmen
of England on the system of direct taxation, first asking the reader
to observe that in England, so successful had been the experiment
of direct taxation that, according to the Chancellor of the Exchequer,
in nine years after its introduction, the amount of indirect taxes
abolished to relieve commerce, and to cheapen the cost of subsistence,
was no less than £10,251,294, and the increased trade and con-
sumption had restored the whole of the enormous reduction from the
revenue, except the small amount of £744,000. The national debt
had been decreased £3,845,446, while the balances in the Exchequer
at the close of 1850, were £9,245,676, against only £3,658,810, at
the close of 1841. The official value of the imports increased by
£41,500,000, or 64 per cent., and the increase of the exports was
£23,000,000, or 50 per cent. Shipping had increased the tonnage
inwards and outwards by 4,673,000 tons, or 63 per cent, : but the
most remarkable statistic he gave to the House, was that wheat
gradually fell from 5ls to 38s 6d per quarter.
These facts were compared and proved correct by the returns, and
will be found also in Porter’s “ Progress of the Nation.” I ask
can there be more irrefragable proofs of the advantageous effects of
direct taxation and freedom of commerce. If such are the consequences
of only a partial direct taxation, what would it be if it was wholly
adopted ?
Moreover the revenue of 1860 was ... ... £70,809,977
Against 1842 ... ... £48,350,000
Giving an increased revenue of ... ... ... £22,459,977
in place of the falling off as was expected by the advocates for ex-
travagance, corruption, and patronage.
In giving extracts from the speeches of the statesmen of England,
I will commence with the cautious probing speech of the Chancellor
of the Exchequer, Mr. Disraeli, who said :
“ I have not presumed, and I shall not presume to give an opinion
upon the justice or injustice of the methods in which another system
of assessing permanent and tempory incomes may be effected.
I leave that, point. But there is one point upon which the Income
Tax Committee is so unanimous that their opinion need not be a secret,
and I believe the same opinion is as unanimously entertained by the
House. Also lam sure it is theopinionof lhe country, that is, that if taxes
of this character—if measures of direct taxation like the income
tax are to form, not temporary, but permanent features of our
system of finances, we cannot rest upon a system of exemptions.
No doubt direct taxation is a simple and a captivating process ; but
when you wish to apply direct taxation generally, it is astonishing
what obstacles you encounter, and what absurd prejudices you
create. In my mind —and I think now it is a principle pretty well
accepted—direct taxation should be nearly as universal in its
application as indirect taxation (which touches every one). The
man who lives in the palace, and the cottager, as consumers, should
be equally and proportionably assessed. If your revenue is to


depend mainly, or in a great degree upon direct taxation, if it is
permanently to depend upon such that you must make the applica-
tion very general is to me, a conclusion that is impossible
to withstand. No doubt, by establishing a temporary measure of
direct taxation, based upon a large system of exemptions, you may
give a great impulse to industry ; you may lighten the springs of
industry very effectually for a time j but, not to dwell upon the
gross and glaring injustice of a system of finance, that would tax
directly a very limited portion of the population, but looking only
to the economical and financial consequences of such a system, who
cannot but feel that in the long run, industry itself must suffer from
such a process ? What is direct taxation founded on, a system of
exemptions / It is confiscation. It is making war upon capital,
which ultimately must employ that very industry which you wish
to promote. The moral I would draw, and which I wish most
earnestly to impress upon the House, because they may rest assured
that the time is not far distant when they must arrive at definite
conclusions upon this subject, is, that they should come to some
certain results to guide them in the management of their finances.
Her Majesty’s Goveimment deem it their duty to denounce, as most
pernicious to all classes of this country, the systematic reduction of
indirect taxation, while at the same time you levy your direct taxes
upon a very limited class My duty has been only to place fairly
before the House, the condition of the public finances, to offer that
advice which we feel it our duty to do under the circumstances;
and now, sir, in placing this resolution in your hand, I trust that
the House will, upon this and subsequent opportunities, give me
every facility to carry the law which will continue for the limited
period of one year, the income and property tax ”
Mr Joseph Hume said : “ The right hon, gentleman proposes
only the temporary renewal of the income tax, but if he had proposed
it as sl permanent measure , on just and sound principles, no man in
this house would be more ready to support him than I would be.
The right hon. gentleman said that direct taxation was now carried
on to a great extent; but I tell the right hon. gentleman that it
amounted only to ten per cent, of the whole taxation of the country,
while the indirect taxes of customs and excise amounted to seventy -
Jive per cent. Let him extend the principle, and let every man feel
the weight of it, and know that he was contributing his just share
and quota to the taxation of the country; but let every man be
convinced that by that means he was enabled to remove indirect
taxation on the necessaries of life , and that while he paid one penny
to the income tax , he was relieved from paying two pennies of
indirect taxation. If the Government had not proceeded upon
sound principles of taxation hitherto, as is manifest, let them begin
now. I wish to see the income and property tax continued, made
general and permanent, in order to get rid of all indirect taxes.”
Mr. Labouchere said : “ I consider the debate to-night to be the
death blow and knell of protection ; and that concerning direct
taxation and free trade, which has been so protractedly agitated,


there can no longer hang over the minds of the people that
uncertainty which has hitherto prevailed, but that general satisfac-
tion will be diffused through all classes of the community.”
Lord Robert Grosvenor “ thought it unnecessary to compliment the
Chancellor of the Exchequer on account of his financial statement,
especially after the commendation he had received from so many
eminent and influential gentlemen ; but he could not help con-
gratulating the House and the country on the palpable change of
opinions which his speech had exhibited. He was happy to find
that the principles brought into operation by the late Sir Robert
Peel, in 1842, were now acknowledged by the right hon. gentleman;
he did not think the Chancellor of the Exchequer had correctly
stated the case as to the difficulties which stood in the way of direct
taxation. There had been many petitions presented on the subject
of the income tax, but he had never presented even one against it.
They were all against the unjust mode of imposing the tax. A
vast majority of the large and intelligent constituency he repre-
sented, were in favor of direct taxation. In the statement made,
he saw the prospect of great future prosperity, and the means of
effecting a large reduction of taxes from the people without
diminishing the revenue. His firm conviction was, that if once the
great principle of direct taxation was established, they would be
able to extend it widely.”
Mr. Hey worth “had been much gratified to hear what had been said
this evening in favor of a change from a system of indirect taxation to
that of direct. The labouring man (and all classes), would be willing
enough to have the income tax extended to him, if the much heavier
taxes upon coffee, tea, sugar, and other articles of consumption,
were repealed. AVdiat the Chancellor of the Exchequer had said
that evening, would give great satisfaction throughout the
country, and procure him greater popularity than could have been
expected.”
Mr. Villiers : a The experiment of direct taxation which had been
tried , showed that , as they released trade and the springs of industry T
they increased the revenue; and he believed that the more they
increased direct taxation, and the more they relieved commerce and
the industry of the country, the greater would be the amount of
property they would have to tax. He hoped, then, the House would
not he afraid of increasing direct taxation, but that they would
extend it as far as possible, until it alone remained .”
I find that it will take too much space to quote further, but
submit that it is evident, by the foregoing extracts, that I am
borne out in my opinion as to the erroneous principles of finance
established in this colony, and of course, I consider that our
commercial legislation is very detrimental to the interests and
future prosperity of the colony.
The opinions of the eminent statesmen which I give, surely am
sufficient to justify an inquiry in this colony into the benefits to be
derived from direct taxation and freedom of commerce.
My object is not to plunge the colony blindly into what some


may consider an adventurous course, but to endeavour to procure
financial investigation, to enlighten the opinions by which coming
events may he moulded ; that future ages may be freed from debt,
and the community eventually enriched. How important then it is
in a young colony to find a new field of political inquiry, and new
sequences of facts there given, which remain distinct from previous
associations, and thus bring the mind, in observing them, to revise
and recast its former convictions.
No time should be lost in getting a committee of Parliament
appointed to enquire into this most important subject, with full
powers to call for papers and evidence, but care should be taken that
the men of the best talents in the Assembly be chosen to act on it.
The people are a great tribunal, who have a right to scrutinise
the systems of taxation. I know no more important matter than
their finances; they also have an undoubted right to see that the
expenditure he adjusted to the revenue , and not the revenue to the
expenditure. In regard to the question of direct and indirect
taxation, the people must show no neutrality, no backwardness;
it is a question of vital importance, which every soul that draw's the
breath of life in the colony is concerned in. The system of
indirect taxation is unjust, unequal, impolitic, destructive, and
tyrannical. Under the present system, the importer and the dealer
have to provide a capital, not only for their commodities, but also to
pay the duties levied on them The consigners of goods from
Europe and other parts are restrained from supplying in abundance
the wants of the colony, and the importer is obliged to limit his
transactions, because he is compelled to reckon the outlay for
Customs’ duties, which may be months before they are repaid by
the consumers. If goods are placed in bond, the rent and extra
charges are incurred, and frequently the goods deteriorated, leaked
out, and destroyed; and the Customs bond for the duties (I
believe) enforced or got rid of by tiresome formalities and expenses.
The goods of a merchant should be under his own care, his own
or a rented roof, open at his will at all hours , for the inspection of
himself, or his buyers, and not hampered by official hours, weighers,
lockers, and irksome formalities. Ships should have the power to
unload in the stream or in the harbour, by night or by day, and not
to be losing time, tides, and wages, because of officials. Clear off
at one fell swoop the whole of these withering trammels on trade,
and leave men to follow' their own will, as to their own benefits,
and be the custodiers of their own property.
I am convinced that the question I am advocating only
requires to be freely and generally canvassed in order to convince
every man, without exception, that he will gain by the change.
That w'hich benefits the colony at large must benefit individuals;
and I have not so low r an opinion of people’s intelligence as to
suppose them incapable of calculating whether they shall pay more
by the purchase of the necessaries of life loaded with heavy Customs
duties, or much less, by a small direct tax, with food, clothing, and
luxuries, for both body and mind, free of all tax. The late Joseph


The interest on the amount of duties
10
per
cent.
Fire Insurance ..
2i
per
cent.
Profit put on the amount of duties advanced
20
per
cent.
Interest for giving credit accounts
10
per
cent.
And to cover cost of entries, clerk’s time, cartages,
bonding store charges, rents, deficiencies,
breakage's, deteriorations, extra accidents and
thefts from being in a public bonding store, in
place of the merchant’s own warehouse..
20
per
cent.
Hume was a far-seeing political economist; the present Chancellor
of the Exchequer, the Honorable Mr. Gladstone, not a whit his
inferior, and both of them have declared their opinions “ That whilst
the public are paying two pence by the insidious indirect taxes,
they would, by direct taxation, only have to pay one penny.”
Some of our short-sighted colonists maintain that it is better to
pay more in an indirect and unknown way than in an open and
distinct manner. To intelligent men this language is childish, and
a libel upon the understanding of Englishmen.# No tax is agreeable.
But that tax which amounts to the lead at the end of the year, is
the best.
Others allege that indirect taxation is to some extent voluntary ;
so it is, but you must make up your mind to refrain from entering
any other shops than the butchers and bakers, as the only necessaries
free of duty are anchors, chains, rod, bolt, bar, sheet, hoop, and pig
iron; sail cloth, cordage, bags, sacks, spirits of tar, turpentine,
tobacco for sheep wash, and a few other such like delicacies.
It is not by looking at the rate of duties enumerated in the
Customs’ tariff that we are enabled to judge of the amount and
effect of indirect taxation to which every one in the colony is
contributing, from the Governor to the beggar; but it is the
damaging consequences arising from that system —the actual and
necessary enhancement of prices, by the heavy charges of interest
added on to the amount of the duties paid, which the importer and
dealer charge in self-protection, to cover their hazards in giving long
credits to purchasers of goods duty paid —duties which have been
paid in cash, constituting a great portion of the amount of the
invoices.
This applies to wholesale and retail business, when the merchant,
who pays the duties, considers what he should ask to cover the
inconvenience and loss in advancing them, then storing the goods,
and eventually giving credit on sale for both goods and duties;
because, if a portion of his buyers become insolvent, he loses the
duties paid in cash, from profits already realised, as well as the cost
price of the goods. Therefore, the importer or dealer who advances
duties, reckons that he is fairly entitled to charge extra upon the
actual cost. He calculates thus :
Making ~ ~ .. .. .. 62J per cent,
to be added, and which are added, to the original cost of the
goods as they rise from the ship’s hold on importation, and paid by
the consumers, in addition to the actual Customs’ duties paid into
the Colonial Treasury. Therefore, this insiduous system of raising
a revenue, whilst having the appearance of burdening commerce to


the extent of the Customs’ duties, say £623,825 does, in reality,
weigh like an incubus on the consumption, by the addition f 62-4
per cent., making a total of about £1,013,715, drawn out of the
pockets of the colonial population, from year to year, before they
have received or can know what their yearly gains or income
actually are, from their business or occupation. No person can
commence business without he has enough capital to pay duties,
besides the value of the goods. Many persons may question what
I have stated; but in corroboration, I happen to have a calcula-
tion in my possession which was made in England by a friend
who took great interest in this question, and as it was
submitted to the late Mr. G. R. Porter, then the head of the
statistical department of the Board of Trade, I have perfect
confidence in its accuracy, therefore I copy it verbatim :—“Taking
the items of a family’s expenditure for necessaries amounting to £l5O
per annum, and calculating each article at the price where it is bought
or country it is imported from, I find the actual value of the articles,
which cost the family £l5O, to be only £SO, and that the reason of
the enhancement of cost stands thus under the system of indirect
taxation:—£so is the actual original price of the goods, £l6
paid for duties to the Government, and £B4 made up of profit
and reaction of tax upon tax, and price upon price, and by the
necessity thus created of additional mercantile expenses, risks, per
centages, and profits.
This could not be with direct taxation, as the two-thirds additional
price paid (as above stated) by the consumer, would be levied on
and after he has realised his income and profits, and not anticipated
on the price of his food, as it is by levying indirect taxes.”
I conceive what the writer wishes to show is, that the head
of a family is compelled by his necessities to pay £l6 to the
Government, and £B4 additional cost on his consumption, before he
knows his own income; whereas by direct taxation he would pay
£SO for his necessaries, and would subsequently be taxed accordiny
to his prosperity inihe world , and tbatsuinof £IOO mightbethe means
not only of making him prosper, but of establishing him as a good
and solvent supporter of the future revenue of the country, instead
of being cramped and perhaps ruined by the costliness of the neces-
saries of life, and to give food and raiment to his family. Government
under the present system, participates in the curse, as well as the
blessings of its rule, whereas there should be a feeling of content-
ment and confidence, based on the force of its principle , not on the
principle of its force.
If the Government of New South Wales were to publish in every
Gazette throughout the world that our ports and commerce are free
to the trade and ships of all nations, and our merchants had it in
their power to intimate the fact by circulars to their correspondents,
there cannot remain even a doubt, that commerce, population,
and riches, would flow into the colony; ships would resort
to our free ports, to wait a market, or for refitments, and supplies
from our cheap provisions. The neighbouring colonies would
goon follow our systems, (if they do not precede us), and the free


ports of Australia would be the attraction, as a depot, of th
producing countries of India and the Southern Hemisphere, including
that of the lovely islands of the Indian Archipelago. The beacon light
of our future greatness would be lit; this vast island would sit upon the
southern seas vieing in wealth and importance with her glorious island
mother in the north, taking the lead, and giving_pracii’cc to the theories
and partial doings of wise men, which the older governments of Europe
and America are striving for, hut cannot effect, from the complicated
web of former errors, in public debts and corruptions ; whilst the
older colonies of the empire, besmeared by European errors, may
remain as our seniors in age, but let us be their superiors in wisdom,
intelligence, and wealth.
From what I have already stated on the subject of free trade
and direct taxation, and the authorities quoted, I consider my case
made out—that, wherever trade and industry are free from control,
there the people will rise in wealth and happiness; still, I must
strengthen my position by giving the opinions of eminent political
economists in addition to those I have cited; also Ricardo, Mill,
Bentham, Ganilh, Urquhart, MCulloch, and Say, all wrote against
commercial restrictions, and lately Bastiat and M‘Leod.
Lord Brougham, the lustra of whose name imparts an imposing
authoritv to his opinions, writes in his “ Colonial Policy,” vol. 2,
page 273:—“ The jealous and monopolising spirit of mercantile
policy has introduced into diplomatic relations a new kind of treaty,
called the treaty of commerce. These treaties are, in every respect,
absurd. Their object is to hamper what ought to be free, and to
regulate what the profits of every indivinual can alone regulate.
They have relation to subjects with ivhich vo Government ought to
interfere , and only supportable when they are intended to abolish
regulations imposed by the folly of former Governments.”
Sir Henry Parnell’s work on ‘‘Financial Reform,” page 87,
contains the following :—“ High prices, the result of protective
duties , are evidently a great national calamity. To prohibitions
and restrictions on commerce are directly, or indirectly, to be traced
the origin of all the wars which devastated Europe (and America)
since 1667 It is impossible, therefore, to come to any other
conclusion than this—that the statesmen who invented the protective
system, who maintained it, and who still maintain it, must be classed
among the cruelest enemies of civilization and the human race.”
Storch, the talented and enlightened preceptor of the late Emperor
of Russia, in his “ Cours d’eeonomie Politique,” gives this instruc-
tion : “ The mania for instituting regulations, the offspring of the
mercantile system, has deranged and injured the relations of
industry in a thousand ways. It has made each nation look upon
the system acted on by its neighbour as incompatible with its own.
Hence the reciprocal desire it engenders of destroying and
impoverishing ; hence that spirit of commercial rivalry which has
proved the proximate or remote cause of by far the greater
number of wars in modern times. The effect of this system has
been to impel nations to extort, bg force or stratagem , from the
weakness or ignorance of their neighbours' treaties of commerce ,


which, however, confer no real benefit on them. In a word, where-
ever this system has produced but little mischief, it has arrested the
progress of improvement, and depopulated and ruined the countries
who anticipated power and riches from its adoption.”
Russia turned the wisdom of this remarkable man to a different
account, viz.—for the purpose of aggrandisement of territory. Her
wars on Turkey were originated by jealousy of the free trade of the
Porte, and which have thrown Russia back in population, wealth,
and power.
A remarkable instance of this freedom of trade in Turkey
is given in my brother’s James Stanislaus Belks work, on Circassia.
Mr. Bell had sent important despatches to Lord Ponsonby,
then our Ambassador at Constantinople, by the hands of two
merchants sailing their own craft. At Samsun, on the Black Sea,
they were seized and stopped by the Pacha, influenced by the
Russian Consul, On representing the case at Constantinople, an
immediate order, containing this sentence, was sent for their release:
“ As the Sultan has no power to prevent merchants trading where
they please, they must he released.” Even in Central America the
systems of free trade are valued ; as the President of Guatamala in a
decree abolishing prohibitions on trade, commenced his preamble
thus : “ Considering that restrictions on trade are directly prejudicial
to the public revenue, and to trade itself, and deprive the whole
nation of advancement in agriculture andindusti’y, I decree as follows.”
Adam Smith writes : “ Taxes upon luxuries have no tendency to
raise the price of any other commodities, except that of the
commodities taxed : Taxes upon necessaries by raising the wages
of labour necessarily tend to raise the price of all manufactures, and
consequently to diminish the extent of their sale and consumption.
Taxes upon necessaries, so far as they affect the labouring poor, are
finally paid, partly by the landlords in the diminished rent of their
lands, and partly by rich consumers, whether landlords or others,
in the advanced price of manufactured goods; and always with a
considerable overcharge. The advanced price of such manufactures
as are real necessaries of life, and are destined for the consumption
of the poor, must be compensated to them by a further advance of
their wages. The middling and superior ranks of people, if they
nnderstood their own interest, ought always to oppose all taxes upon
the necessaries of life, as well as all direct taxes upon the wages of
labour. The final payment of both the one and the other falls
together upon themselves, and always with a considerable overcharge.
They fall heaviest upon the landlords, who always pay in a double
capacity ; in that of landlords by the reduction of their rent, and in
that of rich consumers by the increase of their expense.”
When a young colony situated as this is with a debt of upwards
of eight millions, the interest of which is mostly taken out of the
colony, its future must be pregnant with events for good or for evil,
according to its legislation. Our fiscal principles must either be
such as to free us gradually from the debt which hangs as an
incubus on the development and progress of the colony, or else we
must listlessly fold our arms and shut our eyes to an increase,


attended of course as it will be, by additional expenses; and we
must sink into the errors of modern Governments from which
England, France, and indeed Europe, are struggling to get out of;
but we have a remarkable example shown in the admirable address
of Mr. Alexis Joffroy, and his resolutions before the Chamber of
Commerce of Antwerp which were adopted by them.
They were:—
First. —That Industry stands in no need of protection.
Second.—That protection cramps it.
Third —That protection begets privilege and iniquity.
Fourth.—That it obstructs the development of the transactions, and
of the prosperity of industry.
Fifth.—That it has occasioned to the country an injury so con-
siderable that we cannot estimate the amount.
Sixth —That Customs’ duties cramp, and have always cramped
honest commerce.
Seventh.—That navigation is shackled by Customs’ duties.
Eighth.—That imports would be more numerous, commerce more
important, if freed from the shackles of the Custom House.
Ninth.—That tbe salvation of Antwerp lies in the suppression of
these shackles.
He concluded his speech thus :
“ You are about to vote, gentlemen: weigh well the gravity and
the importance of the vote you are about to give : the eyes of the
whole country are fixed upon you : various chambers and associations
are deliberating at this moment on the suppression of Customs’
Duties. The resolution of the Chamber of Commerce of Antwerp
will belong to the commercial history of the country ; it will be a
glorious page of which you may all be proud, and of which your
children will reap the honour and the advantages. As we have
just honoured the names of the courageous liberals of 1782, doubt
not, if you vote for the suppression of Customs’ duties, that gene-
rations to come will bless your names, because you will have aided
in freeing them from an institution which, in all times, has constituted
the misfortune of our city and our country. Two of the members
tell me that lam fifty years in advance of the age. They deceive
themselves, gentlemen : it is they who are two centuries behind the
age. If we are really fifty years inadvance, so be it, for then thefuture
ours, and we have at least the consolation of knowing that we are
on the side of progress, and that, whatever you may do, you cannot
arrest the march of the human race. It is not by throwing across
its path the rotten stick of protection that you can arrest its career
in the way of progress, of civilization, of justice, and of liberty.”
I am aware that a Finance Minister has a dread of changing the
sources of revenue, for fear he does not find them equal to the
responsibilities of the State; but in this colony where we are not
clogged by multitudinous interests, patronages, prejudices, and
ancient customs, the reform is easier, and the result more palpable.
That which is required , is a patient, searching enquiry into the
subject; the procuring thoroughly correct, precise, and elaborate


statistical tables of the state of the colony , from which deductions
for the future, and computations for the present, may he made, so as
to arrive at a just, equal, and beneficial system of direct imposts,
free from restrictions and prohibitions on trade and industry , The
Minister then could put his plan before the colony for the conside-
ration of the people, and as an open question for debate by their
representatives. Ido not say that it is in the power of a Finance
Minister to do this labour himself, in addition to his usual duties.
The words of the English Minister iu the debate already quoted
from, apply in part to the case in this colony. His words were ;
“ Her Majesty’s ministers would not have shrunk from undertaking
the laborious effort of examining the whole of our financial system,
animated by those views and actuated by that purpose ; but I put
it with confidence to the House, whether it has been possible for
us to undertake a duty which demands labour so great, research so
considerable, and an amount of time which no member of the
Government, lam sure, has yet been able to devote.” As it may
be doubted that England groans under a fearful taxation, from the
fact of her increasing commerce, we will give the words of Mr.
Gladstone’s resolution, which he carried at a subsequent period :
“ That in order to secure to the country that relief from taxation which
it justly expects, it is necessary, in the judgraentof this House, to revise
and further reduce the expenditure of the State.” His first reason
was : “ That the expenditure of the country is rising to such a
height as threatens to embarrass the Parliament altogether.” The
measures of reduction and relief that he proposed, were to take off
indirect taxes to a certain amount, and to put on direct taxes to a
greater amount spread over more of the population.
Are we, then,inthis young colony to shapeour financial system after
a model which we see is leading to embarrassment and impending con-
fusion, when by a timous action we can alter our course, subdue the debt
of the country, and place our fiscal system on a footing that will
increase the public revenue in a ratio with its wealth and greatness,
and never beyond it, and be enabled systematically to reduce the
public debt? The community often err in their ideas of the pros-
perity of a country. Because from time to time they see the amount
of commerce and commercial profits increase, it is not to be inferred
from this that she is prospering more than other states, or gaining
all she should do, hut her true progress and prosperity must be
judged by comparison of her trading capital with other states, and
the profits her intelligence and industry realise on it. The trading
capital of England is large, that of France not near so large. Now,
if by statistics it is shown (as it has been by Porter) that the
mercantile profits of the former are not equal, in comparison, to the
latter—that is to say, the per centage of profits on the larger
capital is not equal to the per centage of profits on the smaller —it
becomes evident that the richer state is retrograding in comparison
with the poorer. It is in this view that the English Minister feels
alarm, and is induced to call for an alteration and relief to commerce;
and it is also in this view we should judge of the prosperity of this
colony in comparison with that of our neighbouring colonies.


Sir Robert Peel, on retiring from office in 1846 closed his speech
thus:—■“ Sir—My name may perhaps be execrated by monopolists
who clamour for protection, because they seek some benefit for them-
selves ; but I am not without hope that I shall leave a name, perhaps
remembered with kindly feelings in the abode of those whose lot is
to labour, and who earn their daily bread by the sweat of their brow,
and who will eat henceforth a more abundant meal of untaxed food,
sweeter, because it is not leavened by injustice.”
Prior to 1842, the ancient rights and privileges of the higher
classes in England were religiously maintained, and when these
privileges were fearlessly assailed by the reforms of Sir Robert Peel,
in substituting direct for indirect taxes, it cost that greatest of
statesmen the estrangement of many of his old and best friends and
supporters, but he had mens sibi conscia recti , and that was most
fully owned in future years by those who formerly deserted him.
Every political question resolves itself into one of finance, and the
grand point towards which disquisitions in appearance the most
abstract converge, is the amount, and above all, the mode of taxation.
When Lord Robert Grosvenor was arguing in xavour of direct
taxation, he said :—“ There had been many petitions presented on
the subject of the income tax, but, he never presented one against it."
The mode of levying was where the object lay. The Chancellor of
the Exchequer, in his argument for direct taxation, made the bold
and manly avowel that, to tax one class and relieve another, is un-
just, and cannot be tolerated ; also, that any direct tax which touches
certain classes and relieves others is ‘‘confiscation.” “ What was
wanted, was an act to apply direct taxation to all incomes without
exception, regulated by a proper classification.” lam of opinion
that no minister will be able to carry a comprehensive reform of
taxation without the cordial co operation of the people.
I fear it would be difficult to find a member whp has
the time to spare, the independence, and the determination to
have the great question of trade and taxation thoroughly investigated
by Parliament. If prosperity and progress is to make the future
history of this colony the people must look to their own interests,
and not rely on the efforts of any member or party within the
Houses of Parliament. They must inform the Legislature of their
wishes by petitions or memorials in order to strengthen the hands
of the minister. Each chamber of commerce should consider the
matter, and report thereon to their members, so that it may be
known if it is the will of the people that all be taxed according (o
their means, and that free trade and direct taxation be extended
throughout the colony. Some persons have supposed that we should
follow England, by coming on by degrees to the system of direct
taxation; but I say, that considering the position of England, a
country with eight hundred millions of debt, and raising a revenue ot
seventy-two millions, we think she has come on to the system by
strides, as in 1842 the income tax barely reached three millions, but
last year it reached thirteen.
The patronage and corruption of the privileged classes in England,


which have been accumulating for years from different administra-
tions, until they possess great power and wealth, are most difficult
opponents for the Government to contend with, and to convince them of
their erroneous impressions as to direct taxation; but in this colony
no such antagonism exists except in a minor degree. Other persons,
with consummate folly, coolly assert that the debt of England has
been and is her greatest blessing.— Debt a blessing !
Every debt, which the government of a country become indebted
for to her people, denudes the latter portion of their independence,
as the creditors of the state are then bound by self-interest to
uphold the sources from whence their interest comes and where
their treasure lies. Again, the more money the people lend to the
government, the less trading capital is there left for the people to
extend the profitable relations of the country ; or, if the debt is
owing to foreigners, the people are forced to tax themselves to pay
the interest which is sent out of the country. There are persons
who suppose that the largeness of the revenue required in England
and France has led to the introduction of indirect taxes. Such
persons are not informed of its history, and are wholly ignorant of
the principles of taxation.
William, the great founder of feudalism in England, 800 years ago,
raised his enormous revenue, which historians calculated as equal to ten
millions of the present money, wholly and solely by direct taxation.
It was Edward I, the robber of Scotland and the murderer of Sir
William Wallace, who first commenced the imposition of three-pence
in the pound on commerce, and then English navigation extended
from the Baltic to the Adriatic.
Edward 111., the son of the English king, whose 100,000 men
were beaten at Bannockburn by 30,000 Scots raised the poundage
rate to that common to the rest of Europe—that was sixpence in
the pound, or 24- per cent.; but the perversion or destruction of the
municipal principle, the offensive mode of collecting it, rendered
direct taxation so galling to the people when they began to enjoy a
little of political freedom, and so dangerous to the Government,
that the indirect mode acquired favour in the eyes of both, and this
withering deceptive system has continued to the present day, when
now the enormous amount of debt and the immense revenue of
£72,000,000, which it has rendered necessary to drag from the
legitimate trading capital of the people, startles the statesmen of
England, and occasions the present struggle to increase the direct,
and decrease the indirect, system of taxation.
I wish to see the ports of this colony open to the commerce of
all the world—no duties, no prohibitions, and no restrictions on
either export or import; then we should never have disordered move-
ments occasioned by the sudden deficiency of such and such mer-
chandise, exorbitantly raising prices, which are the scourges of the
lower ranks, by unsettling their habits and inflicting privations.
From the system of duties, restrictions, and prohibitions, arise
those devouring tides and ebbs which sweep away in a day the
labour of years, and convert commerce into a career of alarms and


perpetual dangers. By direct taxation government is emancipated
from much embarrassment, and industry and commerce from all
restrictions. The revenue, depending on the accumulation of wealth,
must instantly feel the effects of any interference with industry ;
and though the Government extracts the utmost it can, its own in-
terest prevents it from exacting in such a manner as to interfere with
the sources of production, or exhausting or destroying the substance
on which revenue feeds.
With direct taxation and freedom of commerce the revenue
increases in a ratio with the wealth of the population from
whom it is derived, and the people pay taxes according to
their means ;no one being allowed to escape ; every man pays
according to what he has, and not according to what he has not. By
freedom of commerce, a greater capital is given to the merchants, as
they would have the amount formerly taken by the Government in
import duties (and customs and official charges) to trade on. Of
course their profits would be larger • then as they grew rich, other
classes would partake of such prosperity —they also benefiting from
increased capital and cheaper necessaries of life. In short, as the
community became wealthier, they would be able and subject to pay
larger direct taxes on their income and property, every one feeling
contentment in being taxed on their realised profits, instead of being
forced to pay in advance . It is palpable that as the population
gain wealth, the Government get, or can get, an increased revenue,
without distressing industry or convulsing commerce. But, with
direct taxation, everyone pays not according to what he has but
according to his consumption of taxed necessaries (whilst ignorant of
his income), and his portion of the Government revenue by this
process is taken from him bit by bit, he being obliged to pay nearly
70 per cent, more than he should, if fairly and justly taxed. This
system of indirect taxation is the true root of the insolvencies which
constantly alarm and injure the trader, and spread distress to the
rich and poor.
Property is the root, and profit is the fruit, on which taxation
lives. Therefore, it is the duty and the true interest of every ad-
ministration to use means to increase the general wealth of
the population; and that can only be done by giving to commerce
all her resources and all her elastic power free and uncontrolled:
it is the duty of Colonial Treasurers to study this with care and dis-
crimination. lam not without hope that our rulers will apply them-
selves to the study of this greatest of questionsand haveit fully discussed
by a select committee of the Assembly. The minister who, after his
arrangements are completed, commences to repeal indirect custom
taxes, may more than fill the deficiency by direct taxes, and session
after session he may wipe out further portions, until the whole fiscal
system be changed The same triumphant results as Sir Robert
Peel had in England must take place here, showing an increasing
revenue to pay off the public debt. In so doing he will be supported
by the whole mercantile and agricultural interest of the colony, and
his name will be honored and respected as a wise benefactor for
ages to come.


I shall now call the reader’s attention to the free ports of
Singapore, St. Thomas, and Malta, and I could add Hamburgh.
The benefit of free-trade is undeniably proved by the following
facts :—Singapore is a small island lying off the southern extremity
of the Malay Peninsula, twenty-five miles long by fifteen broad.
The geological structure is generally iron stone resting on red sand-
stone. The soil is far from prolific, there are no lakes or rivers, but
several small streams. This island was purchased by Sir Stamford
Raffles, in 1819, from the Sultan Johore, by command of the
Marquis of Hastings, then Governor-General of India, and was
intended for a depot of liberated convicts. A city was laid out in
1823, and Singapore was proclaimed a free port open to all nations ;
no import or export duties were to be levied, and no charges for
anchorages, harbour dues, or lights. All religions to be on an
equality.
In establishing a colony upon an island which could not produce
exports largely, the climate and soil not being suitable for agriculture,
and the extent of it small, Sir Stamford Raffles wisely rested the pros-
perity of his political child on the perfect freedom of her institutions.
He was opposed in yarious ways whilst settling the colony, and his
intentions were not completed when he died, on the sth July, 1826,
three years from its founding. Notwithstanding her disadvantages,
still in 1855, being thirty-two years from her birth, we find her with
a population of 70,000 souls, and called the Liverpool of the East—
the great emporium for all the commerce of the Indian Archipelago
—the principal station for steamers in the Indian seas. And, in
comparing her trade with Sydney, we find the following astounding
results :—Singapore (a free port) in 1855—Population, 59,048 ;
imports valued at £4,887,991 ; exports valued at £4,301,886.
New South Wales (restricted port) in 1855—Population, 277,579 ;
imports valued at £4,668,519; exports valued at £2,884,130.
Difference—Singapore in population less by 218,536 than New
South Wales, exceeds New South Wales in imports by £219,472
sterling, and exceeds her in exports by £2,417,256 sterling !! !
At the time Singapore was purchased and formed into a British
colony by Sir Stamford Raffles, New South Wales had been estab-
lished for thirty-five years on the protective and indirect taxation
principle, and had 200,000 sheep and a public revenue of £50,000.
In the year 1855 the number of vessels which entered Singapore
inward was 976, and outward 1042, making a total of 2018 ; whilst
the grand total of New South Wales, inward and outward, w r as 1422.
St. Thomas is one of the Virgin Islands. It belongs to Denmark,
and is in latitude 18 degrees 20 minutes, longitude 65 degrees- 56
minutes. It is twelve miles long and three broad. The soil is
sandy and poor. The face of the island is mountainous, and droughts
and hurricanes are frequent, so that it has few natural advantages.
The population is about 10,700 whites, and 4300 coloured, making
a total of 15,000, mostly residing in the city of Charlotte Amalie,
which would be badly supplied with water, were it not for her tanks
for rain. This island, although in its original state nearly destitute
of everything necessary for a flourishing colony, has still gone on


increasing 5u wealth and importance, simply because Its port and
trade are free to all nations, with the exception of one per cent, ad
valorem on imports. There are immense warehouses where the
goods of all nations are stored waiting a market, and very extensive
depots for provisions, which are kept for vessels coming into the
port for supplies.
The great prosperity of this barren spot in the ocean can bear
comparison with the wealthy colony of New South AVales. Thus,
the imports of St. Thomas amounted in 1852 to £4,997,000 sterling.
The number of ships that enter the harbour annually is nearly 3000,
whilst New South Wales can show only 721 vessels entering and
701 departures.
St. Thomas has been for many years the depot for the West India
steamers, and numerous others call in there for refitment, stores,
coal, and water; also a lively trade is carried on in provisions by
vessels to the eastern coasts of South America. This island has long
been, and still continues to be, the principal emporium of the West
Indies. It owes its distinction mainly and principally to the almost
total absence of duties. It is in consequence of this that it has
become a depot for the supply of the neighbouring islands—goods
being sent to it to be warehoused till opportunity offers for conveying
them to their final destination.
Nothing can give more convincing proofs of the effects of free-
trade than the foregoing statistics which I have given of the two
free ports of Singapore and St, Thomas, in comparison with the
restrictive ports of New South Wales.
I say then, let us commence to wipe out the indirect taxes and
substitute a greater amount of the direct. Under free trade the
profits and the amount of business would be greater, and the wealth
and prosperity of every one would, nay, must, be increased.
To arrive at a proper system of taxation in this colony, without any
violent change to disturb commerce, during every session of Parliament
an amount of indirect taxes should be expunged from the statute
book, and direct taxes substituted. All the annoying and oppressive
charges and forms on shipping entering and leaving the ports of the
colony should be reduced, simplified, and ultimately cleared off, so
that in a few years the ports of this colony, being as free as Singa-
pore and St. Thomas, our merchants and all others may expect
equal prosperity.
It was about 1736 that Colbert introduced into France the idea of
supporting national industry by fictitious protection, and of rendering
those protections subservient to the revenues of the State. This
fatal notion has spread to all nations, with the exception of Turkey,
which is the reason that her resources were always equal to her
enormous expenditure. She had no national debt until the latter
end of the late Sultan Abdul Medjid’s reign, when Russian influence
drew her into loans. Wherever this so-termed “protection system”
has been introduced, animosity has sprung up between the Various
interests and classes of a nation, disguised under the name of princi-
ple ; and a cankerous evil has been spread over the relations of


human intercourse under the title of laws. To this cause, as I
have already said, has been attributed, by Brougham, Parnell, and
Storch, every revolution and every war in Europe.
Nearly of the same date as the Ordonnances of Colbert was the
Navigation Act of England, which, at the time, was but a record of
a state of things, but which indirectly involved England in foreign
difficulties and dangers from its adoption by other nations and its
application by them to herself. This (a sister fallacy to that of
Colbert) contributed its share to the public convulsions of Europe,
and also assisted in repressing those energies and retarding that
progress, to which the splendid and rapid discoveries in science and
mechanics had given so vast an extension and so unparalleled an
impulse.
These fundamental errors in taxation now produce doubt and
schism on all social and political questions in the minds of statesmen
and Europeans powerful in disquisition, and stored with information.
But statesmen may well make inquiry why their finances are
involved in the midst ol unbounded production ; why a large portion
of their population is plunged in misery and crime, while wealth
regorges, and philanthrophy abounds ; why nations, desiring
harmony, and professing peace, make war on each others commerce,
as if it were an infectious disease. However, through new ideas
and larger views, a field of inquiry may be opened, and may give
birth to sounder opinions on financial questions based on freedom of
commerce, which few in this colony appear to have considered worthy
of the application of their talents, industry, and discrimination.
There appears to be at present some very erroneous ideas as to
expenditure , and as additional taxes are contemplated, a few words
may be useful. It is generally supposed that the expensive habits
of the rich do good by the employment afforded. If general good
be meant, I dissent in toto to such a doctrine. If wealth is not
spent in luxuries, it will find its way to productive employment in
more useful departments of industry. I will quote from Mill’s
(i Political Economy,” page 100, in support of my opinion :
11 Purchasing produce is not employing labour.” That the demand
for labour is constituted by the wages which precede the production,
and not by the demand which may exist for the commodities re-
sulting from the production, is a proposition which greatly needs all
the illustration it can receive It is, to common apprehension, a
paradox ; and even among political economists of reputation, I can
hardly point to any, except Mr. Ricardo and Mr. Say, who have
kept it constantly and steadily in view. Almost all others occa-
sionally express themselves as if a person who buys commodities, the
produce of labour, was an employer of labour, and created a demand
for it as really and in the same sense as if he bought the labour
itself directly by the payment of wages. It is no wonder that poli-
tical economy advances slowly when such a question as this still
remains open at its very threshold. lam desirous of impressing on
the reader that a demand for commodities does not , in any manner,
constitute a demand for labour, but only determines into a particular


channel a portion, more or less considerable, of the demand already
existing. It determines that a part of the labour and capital of the
community shall be employed in procuring certain things instead of
other things. The demand for labour is constituted solely by the
funds directly set apart for the use of labourers.”
With this digression, I return to my subject. I have already
shown what Sir Robert Peel accomplished by means of direct taxa-
tion ; but the subject is so important, teeming with examples and
facts, that I again refer to the circumstances. To a country like
England, with a debt of nearly £800,000,000, the yearly charge of
which is about £28,000,000 —which has to be raised annually, for
imperial purposes, including the cost of collection, a sum little short
of £73,000,000 by taxes on its property and industry, it must be of
the most essential importance to determine upon and to adopt those
principles upon which such enormous obligations can be sustained
with the least strain upon its energies, with greatest equity to the
various classes of the community, and to production and the accu-
mulation of wealth.
In England, I rejoice to say, that this subject of finance
by direct taxation has more earnestly engaged the atten-
tion of every political economist since Sir Robert Peel brought
the system prominently into practice. Still there is here
a great variety of crude and dangerous nostrums permeating society,
notwithstanding all that has been written by Smith, Ricardo,
McCulloch, Mill, and others; also notwithstanding the continuous
attention which has been given to the subject by the most eminent
statesmen of the last forty years. The opinions of all the great
writers on political economy are to be found in the library of our
Legislature, but of what use are they to addiepated men, who con-
sider that no question, motion, or inqufry is too absurd to occupy
the time of Parliament, and to annoy and harass the Executive by
every nonsensical and expensive return they can devise, which they
have not the ability to use when placed before them, whilst subjects
of the most vital importance to the community lie entirely dormant
from want of men to grapple them ?
Sir Robert Peel’s government was formed in September,
1841. He had been a colleague of Mr. Huskisson, and a
warm supporter of his commercial policy. But the first
thing which demanded his attention was the state of the
finances. Session after session a deficiency had been shown by the
Chancellor of the Exchequer, until the country got into an unsettled
and perplexed state, fearing an increased taxation. The year 1841
had closed with a deficiency of £2,101,000. The expenditure of
1842 was computed at £50,919,000, and the income from existing
sources at £48,350,000, showing a further deficiency of £2,569,000.
Under these circumstances, he had recourse to direct taxation,
and proposed the property and income tax for the three-fold purpose.
First, of meeting the existing deficiency in the revenue, and of
restoring the finances from their alarming state.


Second, with a view to the relief, and give an impulse to com-
merce.
Third, witha view to cheapen the cost of subsistence as part com-
pensation for the new taxes which he imposed.
These were the three objects which Sir Robert Peel de-
clared he had in view in imposing the property and income
tax of seven pence in the pound. In 1842, he remitted
taxes to the amount of £1,596,366, of which no less
than £1,500,000 consisted of custom duties, the principal items
being coffee, timber, the export duties on British manufactures, and
import duties upon a greater number of articles of raw material,
and other similar goods, amounting to £579,639. In 1843, a
further reduction on the duty of timber was made, to the amount of
£126,453, and of the excise duty on spirits in Ireland (which
proved to be so high as to give a great encouragement to smug-
gling), to the amount of £240,000. In 1844, taxes were further
reduced, to the amount of £458,810, consisting chiefly (again) of
coffee, currants, wool, marine assurance, and glass. In 1845, on
the renewal of the income tax, duties were repealed to the amount
of £4,535,561, of which no less than £3,617,306 consisted of
customs duties , the principal items being sugar , £2,309,857 ;
molasses, £129,183, (both being taxes bearing on the ivorJcing man—
taxes which some of our colonial Solons highly approve of being
increased ;) cotton, wool, £682,042 ; export duty on coal,
£115,438; the duty on sundry small articles, £380,786. The
excise duties on glass were entirely repealed, amounting to £624,000,
and thus a most important trade was relieved from the restrictions
to which it had been subjected in every factory, by the annoying
excise regulations. In 1846, taxes were again repealed, to the
amount of £1,151,790, which consisted exclusively of customs duties ,
the chief items being foreign spirits, £482,286; butter and cheese,
£205,437; silk manufactures, £162,985 ; tallow, £101,966; and
other customs duties on small articles, amounting to £199,116.
I will repeat what I formerly stated—During the nine years,
from 1842 to 1850, the entire net amount of taxes remitted is
£10,251,294, which are thus divisible :
Customs’duties ... ... .. £8,218,958
Excise duties ... ... ... 1,434,280
Amount of indirect taxes repealed ... £9,653,238
Stamps repealed ... ... ... 598,056
Total ... £10,251,294
What more, then, do we require to prove the truly triumphant
success of this policy, of giving more freedom to trade by reducing
indirect, and substituting direct taxes. This policy was
adopted by Sir Robert Peel in 1842, and steadily pursued to 1851
and since, by other ministers. The finances of the country were
restored from periodical deficiencies, amounting to near five millions
when he took the helm of the State. In place of them annually


recurring, there were, and have been since, an annual sur-
plus. Taxes have been reduced by the amount of £10,251,000
annually; but increased consumption restored before 1852 the
whole amount to the revenue, except a trifle (we have not at
present later statistics by us). The national debt was decreased by
by £3,845,446, while the balances in the Exchequer , at the close oj
1850, were £9,245,676, against £3,653,816 at the close of 1841.
The official value of the imports increased by £41,500,000 or
64 per cent., and the declared value of the exports by £23,000,000
or 40 per cent., while the increase of tonnage entered inwards and
outwards reached £4, 673,000 tons, or 63 per cent.
What answer is there to such facts ? For their accuracy
we appeal to the Government Statistical Tables. If, as it is asserted,
the income tax be the “ great engine ” by which all these reforms
have been rendered possible, and by which alone all the great
statesmen of Europe have nearly agreed the same policy can be
successfully extended, it is impossible to conceive that any one who
is really cognisant of what it has accomplished , can object to it on
the weak ground of inequality, were it ten times greater that we
can conceive it. It is an undoubted and an admitted fact that those
persons in England charged under Schedule D, or, in other words,
the persons of property, have been in far the greatest degree bene-
fitted by the policy which the income tax alone has enabled the
British Legislature to pursue. These facts demonstrate that it was
in consequence of an income tax of five millions that Sir Robert
Peel was enabled, from time to time, to repeal double that amount
of indirect taxes!
Now, direct taxation is no longer a theory, but a few explanatory
words are here necessary to make it clear and manifest.
It seems incredible that five millions of direct taxes should
annually accomplish the annihilation of ten millions of indirect
taxes , but such has been actually the lf the invariable effect
of taxes on commodities is to discourage industry and trade, and if
a direct tax has no such injurious effect, the good result even of
a partial change of taxation must show itself in an improved
exchequer.
This theory of taxation is no longer a mere theory. It is now an
ascertained fact, that direct taxation is more conducive to prosperity
than any other mode of taxation.
Every one knows that to repeal taxes is both pleasant and bene-
ficial. But none, prior to 1842, knew by facts that taxation admit-
ted of progressive annihilation by means of an income tax.
When both principles and experience can be adduced in support
of any reform, evidence is complete; and as this is the position of
the free trade question, there is no call for more experiments.
Like Aaron’s rod, when it became a serpent, it swallowed up the
serpents of the magicians—a reformed and extended income and
property tax will absorb all other taxes, but their beneficial operation
will react on themselves and the income and property tax in its


turn will suffer diminution because the taxes will rise above tho
expenditure if not modified from time to time.
Wealth comes from an excess of income over expenditure. The
change of taxation will take the burden off production and place it
on expenditure. Direct taxes will thus have the good effect of
encouraging production and discouraging expenditure; and when
both these processes of accumulation are in operation, the produc-
tion of capital must be rapid. Taxation—that which is in itself an
evil—is thus turned to good account by acting as a stimulant to
diligence and prudence. Year by year we might expect an increased
colonial income, and corresponding reductions of taxation. Every
customs tax and every excise tax depresses industry and trade; and
in transferring these taxes to income, we are alone enabled to relieve
industry and trade. It will, therefore, be perceived that an income
tax is only another name for free-trade. The income tax is the
cause—free-trade the effect. The former is the great engine by
which free-trade becomes possible in a country burdened by debt.
With a free press, writers on politics should not be afraid to
speak the truth, and the merits of income and property tax should
not be concealed, especially after the examples so manifestly
shown and proved to us as in the case of England and Belgium.
When it is known, it will be the most popular of taxes. To
oppose a just and equal income tax is to advocate protection.
Mr. Villiers, in speaking on direct taxation said, the experiment
which had been tried, showed that as they released the springs of
industry, they increased revenue , and he believed that the more
they relieved the industry of the country, the greater ivould he the
amount of income available for the Government to tax.
When a merchant can import his goods free from duties, custom-
house brokerages, bonding charges, and king’s Warehouse rent, &c.;
when he can land them at any time of the day or night, without let
or hindrance; when he can show his goods to buyers, sell, deliver,
or transport them by sea or land when he pleases, he will do a
greater extent of business, especially as his capital will then be
concentred and increased. Shipowners will feel the profits and the
convenience when they can unload and load their vessels at all
times of the day or night ; when they can enter and leave the harbours
without clearances ; and ship carpenters will find more work to do
than they can accomplish, by ships resorting to the free ports for
repairs done at much more moderate prices than at taxed ports.
The retail tradesmen, ship chandlers, and artificers will have addi-
tional trade from vessels resorting to the free ports. I feel confident
that the additional trade to every one will make the aggregate of
trading profits of the community greater. As a man gets
richer, the direct tax upon his income increases at a fixed ratio,
without distressing him, because he is only taxed upon his gains
after they are realised, and he cannot be taxed upon his losses,
as we are now by indirect taxes; for the unfortunate and the
bankrupt at present pay for taxed sugar, tea, and coffee, whilst
they have no income.


I hope every one understands that the people would be taxed
on the income they make, and not before they make it , as is the case
with indirect taxes. It is as if the Government said to a youug
industrious man, Jl Commence business any way you please.. We
will not hamper you in any way; only you must give us sixpence
or sevenpence out of every pound of profit you make, for which we
will protect you, make roads, harbours, pay for institutions and
everything a civilised country requires ; hut, if you make no profit ,
you pay no tax , as we can only tax where there is an income exist-
ing to levy a tax upon.” Will any one dare to say that such
advantages will not produce an immense immigration into the colony?
Free ports would treble the population of the colony in four years.
It is alleged that indirect taxation is to some extent voluntary,
i.e., if you choose to deny yourself the use of taxed articles, you
may certainly exist and escape taxation ; but you cannot live. To
comply with this condition, we may as well go out of the civilised
world at once. Whether the articles used are called necessaries or
luxuries, habit has made them necessaries ; and if we mean to live,
there is no choice but to suffer being taxed on our income or earn-
ings before we know what they are; still, people shut their eyes to
the facts brought before them, and like fools, they do not listen to the
late Joseph Hume, but they will continue to pay sevenpence out of
every pound they make to support indirect taxation, whichgoesout of
their pockets bit by bit, in every pound of groceries they buy, when,
if direct taxation was established, they would only pay threepence
half-penny out of every pound they earn. By direct taxation he
that has nothing cannot be taxed ; he that has little will have little
to pay; and he that has much will have much to pay. Here there
can be no hardship and no injustice ) and as indirect taxes can offer
no such advantages, I think it needless to institute further com-
parisons.
Governments should constantly keep in remembrance that
nothing injures the prosperity of commerce so much as con-
tinual changes in the tariff. Every branch of industry and trade
has suffered in its turn from constant changes of taxes, and it is
high time that this cause of distress and insolvency should cease.
Until all indirect taxes are abolished, the country will be tortured
by changes, and the attention of importers and producers distracted
to find out the safe course for them to follow, or, in other words,
watching the Government more than attending to their own affairs.
Merchants trading under this constant dread of change in the
tariff, cannot enter into large commerce, but act undep this restraint
to the great injury of the mercantile profits of the colony. By a
comprehensive change, once for all, every branch of industry and
trade will be settled on an immovable basis. To all there will be a
fair field and no favour. And then none will fear that some day
fortunes constructed with years of labour are swept away by some
sudden and arbitrary change, forced on them by an unthinking
government.
Whilst I was so far in my advocacy for free trade and direct


taxation, the possibility of a revision of our financial system has
become a prominent subject of public inquiry, and leads me to make
some further observations on our ancient systems.
Taxation appears to most people a dry, exclusive, and technical
study, although it should be a domestic question, subject to daily
observation, experience, discussion, and experiment, to which we
should apply the same interested enquiry, practical intelligence,
which makes men generally succeed in the management of their
private affairs.
Without going back to the British or the Anglo-Saxon periods,
we shall find the municipal system existing and united with freedom
of commerce and direct taxation in the original constitution and
practice of the present burghs and cities of England.
The land seems in all countries to have directly borne the weight
of taxation, until the feudal tenure distinguished agriculture from
commerce ] and uniting landed interests with military service, those
interested in agriculture, who, under all other systems were the
oppressed and plundered portion of the community, became the
plunderers of the rest.
During the first stage of feudalism, however, the land bore exclu-
sively all burdens of the State under the charge of the trinoda
necessitas , and as service of the various holders. The second stage
of our national progress may be marked by the necessity for the
assessment of the money communication for service, of assembling
under the Norman dynasty parliaments, which were the revival of
our Anglo-Saxon Wittenagemot, their grand representation of the
rurnl municipalities. These had originally been composed of small
landed proprietors, and the classification and subdivision was
strictly territorial and numerical Not so the municipalities that
sprung from feudalism, which are perpetuated in the existing
burghs, and which were so completely contra-distinguished from
their predecessors as to be especially exempted from suit at the
county and hundred courts. The military leaders, being landed
proprietors, would generally abstain from indiscriminate plunder of
the cultivators of each other’s soil; it is not likely that they would
show equal favour to traders.
But for their particular advantage, we find them in every district
granting charters to burghs, to protect traders from the tolls, dues,
fees, and customs, which had succeeded to indiscriminate plunder.
These charters were not, however, granted gratuitously, hut freedom
of commerce urns purchased hy tribute —that is to say, instead of the
indirect taxes which they formerly "paid; the burgh system estab-
lished a property tax. Not only the most unequivocal and reciprocal
advantage was requisite to lead to the establishment of the burghs
throughout the whole country, but also was it necessary that that
advantage should be apparent to all; so it was —and so would it be
now to England, if the customs exacted at their ports were collected
on the confines of each county.


The indirect taxes of the burghs were replaced by (fee farms, or)
fixed commutation ; and the borough elected or chose a bailiff to
levy this tax.
When the general assessment of the nation was settled, the
tallage or property tax of the burghs was permanently fixed at
one-half more than that of the barons, and it was collected and
rated most commonly by the inhabitants (we suppose) among them-
selves. ( See Brady's Treatise on English Burghs , page 82.) The
absence of detail, on the mode of collection, joined with the fact of
direct tribute being collected, and a general assessment fixed, can
scarcely leave a doubt of the existence of the municipal organisation
in these burghs in all its purity, as its purity must be in exact
proportion, first, to its utility —and what can be greater than
the adjustment and collection of taxes ?—and secondly, to the
absence of legislation, which never can increase its efficiency, but
may hamper its freewill, and is a presumptive proof of its having
been interfered with.
These urban municipalities were composed of free men, who
lived by their ingenuity, and were instructed by traffic and
travel, and 'who, therefore, depended on their superior dexterity
and knowdedge for their independent existence ) these burghs
soon shot far a-head of their age and country on the tide of
civilisation. Little harmonising, however, with the general
government in which they were included, their prosperity was not
of long duration and did not survive their freedom—or, if we may
so say, the simple, common sense of the municipal organisation
when that had been perverted either by republican violence or
by military despotism.
In England, the line of demarcation between the burghs and the
rest of the country seems not to have been so strongly drawn as on
the continent; the soccage tenure, which had survived the intro-
duction of feudalism, gave the burghers some interest in the soil;
hence, perhaps, is it that they never came to the possession of such
astonishing wealth and power as many of the commercial munici-
palities of Italy. Such was the constitution of our ancient burghs,
when, by foreign war, the increased expenses of the State rendered
it necessary to assemble the chiefs of the burghs to persuade them
to increase their rates.
The great landed proprietors answered for themselves, the clergy
for themselves: but how did these municipalities intervene ? Each
sent burgesses to parliament to represent it, charged with
instructions, and with certain delegated powers, on the authority of
which they made engagements for their community. And so much
more essential was this entrusted authority than their individual
vote, that Edward 1., in one of his summonses to Parliament,
cautions them not to come to the Assembly without the requisite
powers: so that li pro defectu potestatis hujusmodi negotium infecturn
non remaneat .”
At first the taxes imposed were all direct—tallage, bidage, land
tax, hearth tax, poll tax, a poll tax on sheep ; and under Henry IV.,


an income tax on annuities, pensions, &c, : the clergy at that time
taxing their possessions and benificences in convocation.
The first tax on commerce was imposed under Edward I.—it was
subsequently increased; and under Henry Y. customs excise, &c ,
had so much increased, that of a revenue of £55,000 of money of
that day, they formed £lO,OOO.
The local burdens on commerce had led by mutual consent of the
payers and receivers to the substitution of fee-farms, and tallage, to
tolls, peage, stallage, lastage, and all other duties and customs what-
ever, which affected commerce ; and for the purpose of local and
individual protection against these indirect imposts, the hurghs
(municipalities), hy individual exceptions , became the means of
» emancipating the whole commerce of the kingdom.
Of late years in England the burden of taxation having not as
formerly in part, but nearly in totality, slipped from laud and capi-
tal, on the exchange of the produce of the land and capital, or on
commerce, it seems natural that the same mutual interests would
lead us, as formerly, to return to the original standard; but for-
merly the full bearings of the question came within the field of
view of each individual. At present this is not the case; and the
operation of the gigantic whole is concealed from the close observer
by the immediate detail.
It appears to be an idea with some of our merchants, that the
foundation of England's great commercial supremacy and prepou-
derous power of wealth originated under protection and indirect
taxation; but the history of the city of London shows quite the
contrary, and furnishes a faint illustration of the relative intelli-
gence on these matters of our ancestors and those of a generation
still existing, (I refer to 1831, after the Reform Bill had passed.)
The first exercise of power of the extended constituency was to
pledge their members to the repeal of the assessed taxes, their prin-
cipal reasons for which were, the inequality of their pressure, their
vexatious nature, and the depressed state of trade.
While repudiating the assessed taxes, they invoked a property tax,
not perceiving that assessed taxes are a species of property tax—by-
property tax I mean, tax on property in general, as distinguished
from tax on exchange.
The inequality of pressure and inquisitorial nature are objections
to the mode of collection, and they rested wholly on that, noton the
nature of the tax. The depressed state of trade which incapacitated
them from supporting the burdens of the State, would have been an
argument with people more practically acquainted with taxation for
emancipating trade from its burdens; and instead of their earliest
and most strenuous efforts being directed to effecting this, they
were exerted for the suppression of the only tax which increases the
public revenue by the whole amount (minus collection) that is paid
by the people. But then at that time the city of London had no
Chamber of Commerce or a guild of merchants to guide them, but
any unthinking broker (as here—where the Chamber of Commerce


Is almost a noneuity, and the great wisdom of merchants meeting
daily on the Exchange at a fixed hour is unknown) drew a petition,
and merchants and clerks signed it.
But if we turn back to the opinion of the trading burgess citizens
of London a few hundred years ago, when the foundations of Eng-
land’s colossal wealth were laying, we shall remark very different
views then prevailing; nor do we then find the trading community
divided by conflicting opinions such as disgrace the so -called organised
body of merchants of Sydney, where there are some sleeping mem-
bers led by a few energetic directors. I may here remark, that if
the merchants of Sydney were animated with a proper appreciation
of the value of a Chamber of Commerce, and a desire to benefit the
mercantile community generally, by striving for that eminently
active mercantile spirit which inspires the merchant princes of
London, Glasgow, and Liverpool, they would choose for their
Secretary a merchant of middle age, health, and energy, with
great mercantile experience, possessing a spirit of research and
comparison, and a mind ever on the stretch to obtain beneficial
measures and prevent such 'as are injurious. All bills relating to
commerce, shipping, and finance (not only originating in this
Legislature but in others), should be instantly brought under his
consideration, and when necessary he would bring them before the
working quorum of the Chamber,
In Glasgow, Mr, James A, Anderson, the manager of the
Glasgow Union and Ship Bank (receiving a salary of £2,000 a
year) -was chosen Secretary to the Chamber of Commerce, and
retained the appointment for years with honor to himself and
immense benefit to the commerce of that port, the next in impor-
ance to London.
The Sydney Chamber of Commerce will never command power
and respect with the Legislature until they apply more talent and
obtain more information in their proceedings. They have two
members in Parliament, but Mr. Samuel is the only one who has
influence in the house, the other in the upper house is little
heeded from want of capacity.
The privileges of the burghs or cities were, as we have already
stated, “ unlimited freedom of commerce and its entire emancipation
from fees , dues, or customs, in consideration of which a property tax
was raised hy them but in so convulsed a history, we must not
expect to find the peaceful burghers in constant possession of their
rights. We find under Edward 111., the merchant citizens of
London complaining of burdens and the weight of taxation. Their
opinions are set forth in a petition to the King in council thus—
“ That they have nothing to live on save their industry and franchise
(free trade) on which the said city was founded, and by reason of
which free trade they were wont to travel by land and sea, in various
countries for their profit; by which travel they used to bring divers
merchandise, to the great common profit of the whole realm of
England, to the great aid and sustenance of the said city, sustenance


and increase of the navy (shipping) of the said land,” But their
franchises or freedom of trade having been encroached on, “ they
pray that the King would please to have regard and take notice that
the said city was founded on such franchises, ‘without which they could
not maintain the city nor hear the taxes and other hardens as t hey
were wont to do j” and they conclude with this liberal and remark-
able prayer—“ that all such grants and confirmations of free trade
may be made to all other burghs and cities of the realm.” That no
doubt may remain, I have quoted from Dr. Brady’s Treatise on
Burghs and at pages 100 and 107 he also says, “ a free burgh or
city was only a town of free trading, and a free burgess a man that
exercised free trade.”
We hope, after this, our merchants, manufacturers, and legislators,
including prime ministers, and treasurers, will not assert that Eng-
land s prosperity rose on restrictions of trade and protective duties.
There appears to be a working harmony established betwixt the
members of the present Government of this colony, of which the
Honorable Mr. Martin is premier, that, no doubt, may prove highly
advantageous to the public if continued and combined with the sound
rule of non-interference with trade; for I will refer again to this
subject and say that changes are so disastrous that even a bad
Government who do not interfere with the streams of commerceisbetter
than a number of administrations which alter duties, laws, rules and
customs according to the fancies of their individual members.
When a new law is to be enacted as to the trade of a country,
its effect should not come into operation for a period, which leaves
time for the distant as well as the near relations of its commerce to
be warned of the change; those bursts of laws, which shut up the
customs at an hour’s warning, are injurious to the many for the
benefit of the few ; uncertainty is highly detrimental to the shipping
and the whole of the commercial relations of a country, both internal
and external.
Although I advocate the principles of free trade and direct taxa-
tion, I by n® means advocate their adoption by hurried alterations,
let them'be well discussed, give ample time for every one to know
what is proposed or intended, in order to prevent any sudden
derangement in the agricultural and commercial operations of the
country.
But I am sorry to observe that although the present administra-
tion seem anxious, by their measures, to ameliorate the social con-
dition of the colony, they seem totally to neglect its necessary
progress by the growth of its own productions. This colony has
been proved to be well fitted for the cultivation of sugar, tea, coffee,
sorghum and imphee, but not even a word of encouragement is ever
given to agriculturalists, and whilst beneficial measures are proposed
in the limited distillation of brandy from wine, the immense power
of profitable production from sugar, coffee, &c., lies disgracefully
dormant by a seeming ignorance of the producing power of the


territory, whose riches it is their duty to develope hy every tangible
means.
I have mentioned sorghum and imphee because the Acclamatisa-
tion Society have not given the necessary support in recommending
extensive cultivation and encouraging experiments as to their value,
whilst agriculturalists are evidently ignorant of both their value
and the wealth to be derived from them.
Now I feel perfectly confident that the time will come when sugar,
from the sorghum and imphee plant, will be a current article of com-
merce, and will be manufactured in various parts of this colony,
where the sugar cane will not grow from a want of solar heat. It is
only the want of energy, and a useful enterprise which exists in the
neighbouring colonies, and the encouragement of the Government,
which delays this great source of wealth to this colony. Excellent
sugar has been and can be manufactured at a clear profit of at least
£2B to the acre, and if free distillation is allowed that profit would
be doubled.
The French did not succeed with beetroot sugar at the first;
after them it was tried in the Netherlands and Germany without
success, but was brought back and firmly established in France
after chemical experiments on the cultivation of the plant and
with the juice. The same process is going on in New South Wales
for perfecting the manufacture of sugar from sorghum and imphee,
which contain a much greater quantit}' of saccharine matter than
beetroot, and, to encourage this, the agriculturists should breakdown
the unconstitutional restrictions on distillation, as a finer rum than
that of Jamaica can be made from the sorghum stalks and molasses
after the sugar is extracted, and the colony would bo enriched
by producing two articles (sugar and rum) of immense consumption
and export. I have seen very good dry sugar made by the Rev.
Mr. Holland, and some by Mr. Millar of West Maitland, manu-
factured from sorghum and imphee, therefore a bonus of £IOOO/
for the first ton of sugar from imphee or sorghum, and £BOO for the
first ton from the sugar cane should be voted by parliament without
delay.
It is a want of morality, invention, observation, and boldness, in
an administration where a government fears to give free scope to a
country’s produce and progress to wealth, because they feel a diffi-
cultv in devising means to supply a revenue equal to the protective
duties on spirits.
Whilst correcting this for the press I am rejoiced to say that the
Rev, Mr. Holland called on me to say that yesterday (llth
October) he had an interview with the Honorable Mr. Martin, when
he told him that the Government intended to ask a bonus from
Parliament for the encouragement of sugar production. If so, for
this act alone the government deserve the support of every good
citizen, and I beg humbly to apologise for what I have already
printed.
The Honorable Geoffrey Eagar, our Colonial Treasurer in 1864,
announced the intention of the Government to impose “ increased


taxation ” in the following words: “We must provide for the
necessities of the country by increased taxation. Taxation was
the necessary burden of every constitutionally governed country
but it should be administered constitutionally. I will endeavour
to introduce what I consider the great necessity of the country —
a comprehensive system of national finance; a system based
on such principles, as shall not only serve the purposes of the
Government , of which I am a member , whether its existence be
long or short, but which shall endure in its principles, in its actions,
when I have passed away .” I rejoiced and congratulated the colony
in such prospects as these, so tersely and so eloquently expressed,
expecting that the annunciated principles would be incontrovertible,
but in this the public were disappointed, and we appear as far off as
ever from the promised blessings, but on the contrary, this Honorable
gentleman having (in 1866) joined the Martin and Parkes admin-
istration he supports and applauds ad valorem duties, which, as the
Sydney Herald truly remarks, “ furnish a standing temptation to
importers, to make a false declaration as to the value of imports.”
The trade of the country is gradually withering under the baneful
effects of such a law, although the Treasurer and Ministers appear
apparently ignorant of the melancholy fact; but it is impossible that
Mr. Parkes, the friend and correspondent of the late Richard Cobden,
can be so; also that it has the effect of being a system of practical
education for young merchants and clerks in dishonesty and falsehood.
The ad valorem duties were brought in by the Cowper administra-
tion, although Mr. Cowper had pledged himself times and ways
without number to free trade, and against such duties, and they
were continued by the present, as a matter of fiscal expediency, until
they felt their way to another tax less odious; however, it is only
fair to observe, that this injurious and detestable system of taxing,
was brought forward by Mr. Cowper’s government in 1865, and
sooner than injure the trade of the colony by another change, Mr.
Martin’s ministry wisely determined to continue these duties for a
time, although they were forced on them, but if they are attempted
to be permanently continued, as may be presumed by the late finance
speech of Mr. Eagar, it will be the cause of hurling the present
government from office, as ad valorem duties were at the first, a
dream of plunder, now they are a consuming plague on the resources
of the country, but as the treasurer has shown that he is most
anxious to promote the welfare of the colony, I still hope that he will
have the ad valorem duties debated in pai'liaraent and abandoned,
I consider that the Treasurer was not looking to the country’s
welfare when he refused to allow any of the restrictions on distillation
to be modified, as every measure that will encourage the cultivation
of sugar and the sugar cane, must prove beneficial, because in so
doing the people’s wealth will be increased, as well as the population
of the colony, (a fact which is well known to the Colonial Secretary).
I certainly hope that the Treasurer will apply all that perspicuity
of intellect I believe him to possess, in studying the philosophy of
taxation and finance from its root, in order that he may see that the


sources from whence his revenue is to flow are kept in health, that
every vein is free from restriction, and the whole contributing to the
general weal.
This colony requires a Colonial Treasurer in whom are combined
fertility of resources, sternness of purpose, sanguineness of disposition,
and a keen, capacious, and observant intellect; as a financier entirely
free from political prejudices and parties—a thorough merchant in
theory and practice, and a good accountant.
If we have at last found among our native-born statesmen such a
man, well may we say as the Albanians did of their Sultan Mahmond,
u May God take ten years from our lives to add to his.
Hitherto we have had the misfortune of having our fiscal measures
conducted by men who were not well grounded in the principles of
finance and currency, nor possessed of practical experience of the
effects of taxation in other countries upon trade and agriculture, but
they seem to have held office for the sake of the income, and
conducted the affairs of the state as they would a shoe shop.
It is an error to suppose that men who have gathered a fortune for
themselves must necessarily be good financiers, frequently the very
reverse; they amass fortunes by care, or by lucky speculations in
articles on which they can look, and often by roguery. In all the
ramifications of an inland and retail commerce they may be adepts ;
also good judges of profitable home investments ; but such men,
although perfectly capable of amassing and taking care of funds for
themselves, are not competent to conduct the most difficult and
scientific portion of the political and social administration of a
country.
England should be our pattern ; well do her trained and educated
statesmen know the vast importance of having intellect, energy,
and quick perception as the guide of her Exchequer; they know
that if Britannia rules the waves, so must she rule the commerce
and intellect of the woxdd. The duties of her Fiscal Minister is not
only to impose her taxes, and appropriate her revenue, but they are
extended first to the knowledge of his country's resources, the state
of her trade, her shipping, her banking, currency and exchange; then
as to the commerce, the produce, the shipping, the taxation, the
wealth, and the power of sea and internal transit of other nations ,
as in the possession of such knowledge he is enabled to judge of England’s
present and future prosperity well knowing that from the aggregate
profits of the country must the revenue and the consequent power of
England be derived. The system of appointing Under-Secretaries
because it is their turn for promotion, is as injurious to the public
service as it is unreasonable and absurd: an Under Secretary
should be chosen because of his talent, his knowledge of political
economy as necessary for this colony—a man with powers of argu-
ment and command of language, who can and will comprehend the
duties of his superior, so as to be able to do his duties, and
carry out his intentions in emergencies and absence, a man
who looks forward to being a minister himself, and therefore
makes no object as to hours of service, but will go to the Parliament


House with his chief and be on the spot to give information and papers
on questions of evei’y description connected with his department.
The Government should watch for talented youths, and offer them
employment in the head offices of the colony with the express
intention of their rise, or entering the executive and parliament
with a perfect knowledge of departmental administration. Under
Secretaries as in England should he Members of the Parliament.
Mr. McPherson, a member of our Legislature the other day said,
‘'Whatdoes the Chancellor of the Exchequer know of commerce?”
People smiled at this big child’s remark, and well they might.
If the most astute merchants of London or Liverpool sought
an interview with that highly talented Scotchman, Mr. Gladstone,
on any branch of commerce or exchange in the known world,
or as to the products and manufactures of countries outside
of England, they would find that information could be got,
but none given to this great man. The construction of the Govern-
ment of England is beautiful, and the rules of its administration are
worthy of imitation; every department works with the others, blending
their several hues like the arc of heaven, forming one grand har-
monious and perfect whole. But what must England, accustomed
to see and admire these solid ways of wisdom, think of a colony
raised from her own blood, departing from the rules of combination,
and the members of the same administration, each severally putting
forth their own ideas, before an assembled parliament —for in-
stance, a former Colonial Treasurer, Mr. Smart, gave the statement
of his finance and budget without consulting his chief, or putting
his statements before the Executive Council, established for the very
purpose of maintaining combination in administrations as long as
their elements will hold together? Here I have nothing to say as
to the state of the finances, but it is questioned how far the public
were honestly and honourably dealt with, by the Treasurers, possibly
from want of capacity, and perhaps they have been more deceived
than deceiving.
“ Who dares mean one thing and another tell ,
My soul detests him as Ike gates of hell.”
The adoption of a state bank, as proposed by the Honourable
Colonial Secretary, Mr. Parkes (at Kiama) will no doubt under his
guidance, prove an excellent measure, as it requires a w r ell balanced
mind like his, who can grasp the subject and see that is estab-
lished on sound principles of banking and political experience, but
such an institution should be formed by a combination with the
Governments of the neighbouring colonies, and without that, the bank
must be weak. The Treasurer should give assistance, as it is
properly in his department, especially considering his experience
and knowledge of Banking, which, I believe, has been one of his
so called hobbies ; also, I think, he was the father of the City
Bank, although Mr. Joseph wished to impress the House and the
country that the Government Treasurer intended to ruin this, his own
child, and the other banks, not reflecting that by doing so (if he
Could) he would ruin the Government. r I he parliamentary visages,


however, showed no alarm, but were beautifully pleasant with a
visible titteration, including the speaker, the Clerks, and the Gods
in the gallery.
If a new coinage of copper and silver is gone into, and if the
currency is rendered safe by forcing all the banks to make their
issues through mint notes, under certain regulations as to specie and
securities which should be placed with the mint trustees, each private
bank retaining their names on the face of their own papers of issue
there is no doubt of the future independence cf the Government, and
getting free from the thraldom of banks and their agents. I
proposed this through Mr. Byrnes to Mr. Cowper’s Government
years ago, and at his request, wrote my opinions on the
subject and submitted them to Mr. Smart, the then Treasurer, but
I found that he understood as much about the currency, the science
of banking, and the necessary fiscal measures of a government
as he knew about conducting the public works of the colony, of
which he was the nominal head, luckily for a short time. 1 cannot
help here saying that the difference of action now observable in the
works department is very remarkable.
Since the appointmentof the Honourable Mr. Byrnes, this energetic
gentleman seldom admits of written representations of localities,
circumstances, and things, but instead of sitting comfortably in his
bureau, as has been the custom, he visits the places, judging for
himself, and his good humour, his sauvity of manner to every one,
both in and out of the public service, makes the whole business
progress in a way hitherto unknown, which information I have
from persons in the department well able to judgenoth withstanding
Mr. Byrnes is to he pitied, as he is a thorough going free trader,
and no doubt at the cabinet council has often to bite his tongue to
keep harmony f instead of having a refreshing bang at protection
and its consumptive principles, which have been so imprudently
lauded and brought forward lately in the budget speech as to ad
valoi’em duties. But to return to my subject.
The miserable attempts that were made to get protective duties
in favour of colonial manufactures, are as ridiculous as they would
prove futile. The whole manufacturirg population are a mere trifle
in comparison with the total of the whole colony ; still as they
(erroneously) think it would benefit them personally, they have no
hesitation in proposing to tax the entire colony. The proposition of
some witless men for keeping all the money in the colony, is truly as
absurd in idea, as it would prove destructive in practice.
Lord Bacon says, “ money is like muck, it requires spreading
and circulation to do good and make wealth grow”; but these wise
gentlemen would keep it in the country, in the vain hope of making
money from one another up and down the colony • no ships in our
harbours and no strangers in our cities; and a vile in-breeding com-
merce which would bring poverty, misery, madness, and contempt.
Let us compare commerce to a blood circulation like that of the human
frame, animating the habited globe, which, expelled from England
as the heart, is hurried along through the larger vessels; then dis-


persing itself, by the minutest channels, over the whole body,
repairs exhaustion, supplies force, adjusts the substance to
the functions, the powers to the necessities; and extending
ever further and further its growth, and augmenting its strength,
endows the whole with motion and life. The power of the heart
could have driven forth a much larger quantity of blood, but
for the congestion of the returning fluids in the I'eceiving veins.
The cause of the congestion appeared only in examining the heart
itself, the passages through which the blood was expelled were in
their natural flexible and active state; the vessels by which the
returning fluid was poured in, were affected with the most strange
diseases—one was contracted so as to allow the life blood to pass
drop by drop—one was ossified into lifeless insensibility—one was
afflicted by vast anuerisms, where masses of the agile fluid remained
in complete stagnation—others were entirely closed, and the blood
had to force open new and circuitous passages, or even to burst
through the natural and legitimate channels. But the strangest
part of the history is, that this complication of diseases is not
brought on by natural and unavoidable causes, but by this, that the
individual to" whom this heart belongs having a burden to bear
(taxes), lays the weight of that burden on his palpitating heart
(commerce) instead of casting it on his brawny shoulders (on all
the people).
1 have looked over all the speeches made upon imposing protective
duties, and to show what surface politicians those gentlemen are,
not one of them have proposed deputations and lecturing agents to
the other Australian Colonies, including New Zealand, and New
Caledonia, as, without they also put on protective duties, the
markets of this colony would be inundated with goods smuggled
over the borders and all along an unguarded cost. But perhaps a
coast-guard like England is part of their scheme; it would not cost
for this colony above £150,000 per annum including revenue steam
cutters, which would be of no consequence to this small junta of
manufacturers, as long as they received a benefit—the other
colonists must pay in order that, this colony should try to become a
manufacturing country; and as to shipping and commerce beyond
the colony, that must be abandoned. One gentleman said the
imports are of no use to the colony; perhaps some houses in
England may wish such opinions had prevailed a year or two ago,
as, from what we have heard of failures, out of nearly half a
million of imports, fully two-thirds are still due by this colony, and
not likely to be paid soon, or in full, and still the protective duty
gentlemen say the imports are the ruin of the colony. Although I
write this truth, this is not sound argument for the question, but it
is a black truth.
I think erelong the time will come when the merchants, bankers,
squatters, traders, ship-owners, engineers—in short,
everyone throughout the colony interested in the promotion and
increase of commerce and shipping in the port of bydney, and at
the various ports of the colony—should consider the propriety of


asking the Legislature to pass an act embracing the following
ODjecis •
Ist. that the whole system of taxing by custom duties should be
entirely abolished, and the Acts imposing them repealed from
that date.
2nd. That the port of Sydney, and all the ports of the colony,
and the whole littoral of the colony, including internal rivers, lakes
and creeks should be thrown open and made free to the commerce of
the world without taxes or duties of any description except local
dueo for anchorage and coast lights, which may be sanctioned by
law, and that all vessels may load, unload, enter or depart at any
hour of the night or day (quarantine laws excepted).
3rd. That there shall be assessed and levied an income and property
tax on every soul in the colony at and above the age of eighteen
years; that it shall be chargeable on all persons absent from the
colony but deriving an income from it, from land or any source
whatever.
To show that I am not without example and precedent, I
give the speech of Sir Robert Peel, on the 6th March, 1848, when
he was not a minister of the Crown. The motion before the House
was one by Sir Charles Wood, then Chancellor of the Exchequer,
for the property and income tax to continue for three years.
One of the members in concluding a speech had said that Sir R.
Peel had originally carried the income tax in 1842 by smuggling
it through the House, when Sir Robert started up and said : “ SirJ
the honourable gentleman presumes to say I smuggled the measure
through. Smuggled, indeed!—smuggle through this House an
income tax imposing at least five millions sterling a year on the
people of this country ! If the House is ashamed of its vote, let it
rescind it. It would be absurd to throw aside the experience of the
past; if events have shown the error, alter the course. The
majority who imposed this tax were clearly vindicated by the
beneficial results. When, in 1841, I was called to the ministry,
there had been a succession of deficits from the year 1838. The
aggregated eficiencies of the years from 1838 to the sth April, 1843,
I have estimated at not less than ten millions. The House had
itself caused a large part of that deficiency by surrendering to the
nation a revenue of nearly £1,200,000 a year, from the post office,
and had thought itself bound to make an attempt in support of
public credit. What was the source whence to obtain any augmen-
tation of the revenue ? Experiments made by the Chancellor of
the Exchequer of the day in 1841, had demonstrated that indirect
taxation had already been used to its full powers; the additional
ten per cent, on customs and excise having yielded only £700,000 in
place of £1,900,000 looked for. Not so with direct taxation, the
ten per cent, added having yielded £25,000 above the estimate.
Such was the financial part of the case; but there was the com-
mercial also. It had been thought desirable to remodel the customs
duties of the kingdom; to remove all prohibitions on commerce,
and to simplify the protective tariff (not reckoned as a source of


revenue) to an immense extent to a far more uniform system in its
duties. The duties on 700 articles were to be lowered, and on 500
were to be totally repealed ; the advantages to trade were expected
to be immense, but they could only be had at the price of seven
millions to the public revenue. I ask, how would it have been
possible to accomplish such financial objects, and such a commercial
revolution, but solely on the foundation of an income tax.
11 In full cognisance of these things, the House assented to the
scheme of the wise financial policy submitted to it; the property
tax was intended not merely to supply a large deficit in the revenue,
but to lay the foundation for A juster principle of taxation ,
to afford the means for repealing duties on the raw materials o
important manufactures ; for exempting great branches of domestic
industry (the manufacture of glass, for example) from vexatious
regulations of excise; and for remitting or reducing taxation on
several articles imported from abroad, which are essential to the
comfort and enjoyment of the industrious classes of the community.
11 This taxation had been intended as the foundation of a commercial
policy aimed at the removal of vexatious restrictions and exactions
upon trade. In proposing the tax I had no covert design, but had
sanguine hope that the prosperity of a freer trade , under the policy
of relaxation , would have so increased the ordinary revenue , that
sundry imposts might drop. Sir, I rejoice to believe that the
experiment has been greatly successful, though unexampled
natural calamities over nations have disappointed my fullest
expectations. Sir , as long as I live I shall never repent that 1
proposed that alteration in the commercial policy of this great
country, and that I induced the House of Commons, not by
fascination, not by smuggling, but by a full, clear, explicit
statement of the financial affairs of the country, to continue the
tax, and that I induced this House, in lieu of the large reductions
of customs duties upon imports, to impose a tax upon the income
and property of the country.” (The honorable gentleman resumed
his seat amid loud and general cheering.)
In answer to a question from Mr. Hume the Chancellor of the
Exchequer said, that ministers intended fully to avail themselves
of the system introduced by Lord Althorp, and since followed,
of appropriating balances in the exchequer to make good deficiences
in the estimated revenue. The convenience of this course had been
found very great and explicit. _
Mr. Montefiore, in advocating this question, stated in his able
speech to the meeting at the Exchange, that for thirty years
preceding the adoption of Sir Robert Peel’s direct taxation policy
in 1842, the consumption of tea averaged one pound five ounces per
head per annum of the population, and of sugar eighteen pounds
per annum, and that this yearly consumption had been nearly
stationary for thirty years! but since commerce had been freer, and
direct taxation had been substituted for indirect, the consumption
of tea had increased so much as to average 2 lbs. 7 ozs. against
1 lb. 5 ozs. formerly, and instead of the people consuming yearly


18 lbs. per head, they consumed 36 lbs. per head of sugar.
Therefore, it is manifest that, when such immense additions to the
consumption were the results of Sir Robert Peel’s direct taxation
policy in England, the consumption in this country would be a
great deal more in comparison, as here the custom of tea and sugar
drinking far exceeds England; the effect stated as to tea and sugar
would be the same on all other articles of general consumption.
In corroboration of what Mr. Montefiore stated as to free trade,
I give a translation of an article of the leading journal of France,
the Journal des Desbats , March, 1862. “We consider it our duty
to state why we have great confidence in the speedy establishment
of free trade in France. The finances call for a reform, for an
equilibrium does not exist between the receipts and the expenses.
The Government, it is said, is anxious to re-establish it. But that
end cannot be effected except by the gradual introduction of a
temperate commercial liberty. Taxation is a sum levied on the
mass of riches created annually by the labour of the nation. To
augment the fecundity of taxation without pressing too hard on the
taxpayers, the only means to be followed is to increase the superiority
which our industry has attained at present, and which the
Exhibition of London has clearly proved, free trade would impart
to the products of the nation a wonderful impulse. It is, conse-
quently, to that point that we must come, even in the interest of the
treasury. In that respect the example of England furnishes an
unanswerable argument, for it is free trade which has restored the
finances of that country. It 1850 the English budget closed with
a deficit of 60,000,000 francs. In 1850 it closed with a surplus of
70,000,000 francs; and that after reductions had been effected
in the taxes to the extent of 250,000,000 francs. Never was such
a phenomenon witnessed in the commercial and financial history of
nations. And the reason is, never had the commercial system of a
State been handled with so firm a grasp to accommodate it to the
eternal principles of liberty and justice. To look at the case only since
the year 1846—the year in which commercial liberty was ostensibly put
forth in England by the legislature—the reductions of taxes have
been in six years £5,663,668, (43,000,000 francs). But such has
been the impulse given to agricultural, manufacturing, and com-
mercial activity in the country, that this enormous sacrifice on the
part of the treasury has been more than made up by an increase of
receipts. This great development of labour and riches has been
marked by an extraordinary development of consumption. Seven
years ago England consumed only 244,000 tons of sugar; she now
consumes 329,000 tons. In 1846, the exports of England were
worth £57,786,000, while in 1851 they have been £74,250,000.
These marvellous results guarantee the maintenance of free trade
at the other side of the channel, and render it certain to remain,
notwithstanding the late attempts of the protectionists. As to what
concerns France, they are of a nature to inspire full confidence in
the introduction hereafter of commercial liberty.”
Since that time Prance has ranged herself as a free trading nation,


and the British Chancellor of the Exchequer in 1860, (eight years
after) speaks thus to Parliament, in his eloquent peroration on the
French treaty : —“ Sir, I cannot pass from the subject of the French
treaty without paying a tribute of respect to two persons at least who
have been the main authors of it. (Hear, hear). I am bound to
bear this witness at any rate with regard to the Emperor of the
French, that he has given the most unequivocal proofs of sincerity
and earnestness in the progress of this great work, a work not
mainly prosecuted for the purpose of the English alliance, but with
a view to commercial reforms at home, and to the advantage and
happiness of his own people. (Cheers.) With regard to Mr.
Oobden, speaking as I do at a time when every angry passion has
passed away, I cannot help expressing our obligations to him for the
labour he has, at no small personal sacrifice, bestowed upon a measure
which he, not the least among the apostles of free trade, believes to
be one of the greatest triumphs free trade has ever achieved.
(Cheers.) It is a great privilege for any man who having fifteen
years ago rendered to his country one important and signal service,
now enjoys the singular good fortune of having had it in his power,
undecorated, bearing no mark of rank or of title from his Sovereign
or from the people, to perform another signal service in the same cause
for the benefit of, I hope a not ungrateful country.” (Cheers.)
The chief objection to an income tax is its inquisitorial character;
but I consider that this objection has been made too much of. lam
willing to allow that there is some weight in it, but objections that
have been overcome in England, cannot be considered insuperable
here. When it was necessary to try any assessment, the gentlemen
appointed to this duty might be called together from a distance, and
under their general oath they would no doubt do justice. The gen-
tlemen employed as enumerators of the tax-paying population should
be under the control of commissioners chosen by each municipality
for income and property tax; and by a simple system such as this,
we think that the objections usually urged against the application of
an income tax would be neutralised.
It was the insolent bearing of the Government tax gatherers of
England in former times, and the unfeeling and indelicate way by
which the tax was levied and enforced, that gained it the appella-
tion of an 1 obnoxious and inquisitorial impostbut it is impossible
to invent a juster tax than one that is levied after and not before a
man has earned his income. Those unfortunates who cannot make
an income could not be taxed, whereas by our present indirect taxes
we cruelly force the distressed and the unfortunate to buy taxed food,
so that actually and in truth our alms deeds are reduced more than
one half their value, because if the necessaries of living were untaxed ,
the poor would supply themselves with double quantities, or double
the number of poor could be supported in the same pitiful ratio of
comforts or rather necessaries which is at present bestowed on them.
The labourer, the working artisan, and every one receiving the
wages of labour, would be greatly bettered in their condition by
direct taxation on income, because they would only be taxed accord-


ing to their earnings after and never before they have absolutely
received them Whereas at present, the labouring classes, men,
women and children, every carpenter, cabinetmaker, shoemaker, black-
smith, ship carpenter—in short every one in the community, pays the
government taxes at every meal they take and for the clothing they
buy, whether they can afford it or not, and even at a time when
they are losing hourly. Therefore I repeat what I have often said,
that indirect taxation in addition to being grossly unjust is
extremely detrimental to the commercial interests of the colony,
because it absorbs capital to pay revenue and government officials
before it has produced mercantile profits, thereby lessening the
trading and agricultural means at the command of the community,
it is unjust, tyrannical, and cruel, because it forces a tax from the
poor and from those who cannot make an income; it is immoral
because forces people to run into debt by paying before they know
their earnings ; and it is impolitic because it is a continual source
ot fiscal prosecutions, which waste the people’s resources and gives
occasion for_ falsehood, frauds, and thefts.
In countries whose governments are supported by direct taxation,
the poor are far from numerous ; and it would be easy to show that
a revenue amounting to double that raised here by customs and
excise could be raised from such a source for less than a third of the
present cost of collection.
I will now give a few extracts from John Stuart Mill, a writer
almost universally acknowledged as the highest authority on the
subjects treated of in these papers :
“ One of the commonest cases of discriminating duties is that of a tax on
the importation of a commodity capable of being produced at home,
unaccompanied by an equivalent tax on the home production. A commodity
is never permanently imported, unless it can be obtained from abroad at a
smaller cost of labour and capital, on the whole, than is necessary for
producing it. If, therefore, by a duty on the importation, it is rendered
cheaper to produce the article than to import it, an extra quantity of labour
9fP ltal 18 expended without any extra result. The labour is useless,
and the capital is spent in paying people for laboriously doing nothing. All
custom duties which operate as an encouragement to the home production of
the taxed article, are thus an eminently wasteful mode of raising a revenue.”
—Book V., Chapter IV., Section 5.
“Duties on importations then may be divided into two classes—those
which have the effect of encouraging some particular branch of domestic
industry, and those which have not. The former are purely mischievous
both to the country imposing, and to those with whom it trades. They
prevent a saving of labour and capital, which, if permitted to be made
would be divided in some proportion or other between the importing country
and the countries which buy what that country does or might rxnorf
Book V,, Chapter IV., Section 6. s P •
“ Tliere are some form s of indirect taxation which must be peremptorily
excluded. Taxes on commodities for revenue purposes must not operate as
protecting duties, but must be levied impartially on every mode in which the
-S in taif ■-
“It w as shown in our analysis of the effects of international trade, as it
had been often shown by former writers that the importation of foreign
commodities m the common course of traffic never takes place except when it
is, economically speaking, a rational good, by causing the same amount of


commodities to be obtained at a smaller cost of labour and capital of tbe
country. To prohibit, therefore, the importation, or impose duties wmen
prevent it, is to render the labour and capital of the countp less efficient m
production thanlany otherwise would be, and compel a waste of the difference
between the labour and capital necessary for the home production ot the
commodity, and that which is required for producing the things with-which
it can be purchased from abroad. The amount of national loss thus
occasioned is measured by the excess of the price at winch the commodity is
produced over that at which it could be imported. In the case ot manu-
factured goods the whole difference between the two prices is absorbed in
indemnifying the producers for waste of labour, or of the capital which
supports that labour. Those who arc supposed to be benefited, namely, tne
makers of the protected articles (unless they form an exclusive company, and
have a monopoly against their own countrymen as well as against foreigners;,
do not obtain higher prices than other people. All is sheer loss, to tne
country as well as the consumer.” —Book V„ Chapter X, Section 1.
“ In countries in which the system of protection is declining, hut not yet
wholly given up, such as the United States, a doctrine has pome into notice
which is a sort of compromise between free trade and restriction, namely that
protection for protection’s sake is improper, but_ that there is nothing
objectionable in having as much protection as may incidentally result irom a
tariff framed solely for revenue. Even in England regret is sometimes
expressed that a ‘moderate fixed duty’ was not preserved on corn, on
account of the revenue it would yield. Independently, however, of the
general impolicy of taxes on the necessaries of life, this doctrine overlooks
the fact that revenue is received only on the quantity imported, put that the
tax is paid on the entire quantity consumed. To make the public pay much
that the treasury may receive a little is no eligible mode of obtaining a
revenue. In the case of manufactured articles, the doctrine involves a,
palpable inconsistency. The object of the revenue, as a means of duty, is
inconsistent while affording, even incidentally, any protection, it can only
operate as protection in so far as it prevents importation; and to whatever
degree it prevents importation it affords no revenue.” —Book F., Chapter A.,
Section 1.
THE NECESSITY FOR A GRADUATED SCALE.
The fiscal system of England is based and carried on by two great
financial engines—direct and indirect taxation j but in the colonies,
merely from want of knowledge of the science, the ease of levying
taxes bv a custom house, the desire to follow old customs, and the
patronage produced by the system, they have hitherto adopted and
used indirect taxation. But now that the inevitable consequences of
that system are daily imraeshing them in extravagance and debt, they
are forced to consider why they, as well as England, should not take
relief from direct taxation and its concomitant freedom in trade.
This has been shown very remarkably in the two colonies of South
Australia and Tasmania, especially the latter, where the system of
direct taxation has unfortunately been introduced too abruptly for
the tastes and benefit of the colony : rapid fiscal action is always to
be avoided in governments.
There are so many timid objectors to the change, and there appears
such a wish to combine direct and indirect taxation in our fiscal
system, that the bearings of both on the various classes require some
explanation and elucidation how they should be dealt with; because,
if a mixed taxation is gone into without a careful organisation as to
the schedules and graduated scale, it will be found that a large
section of the community is taxed out of proportion to its means,


which is a grave fault, but one that can be avoided by proper caution
and arrangement.
Taxation applied to persons and things, if carried out without any
exceptions, no doubt perfect equality of taxation could be attained.
For instance, suppose an ad valorem tax is put on all commodities,
each person would then contribute to the revenue an amount exactly
proportioned to his expenditure, submitting to equal sacrifice, and
absolute equality of taxation would bo the result. Such a system,
however, could only be brought into operation by sacrificing to the
single consideration of equality all the other ends of a good system.
The expenses of collection w'ould, in many of the articles, exceed
the net proceeds of the tax; therefore exceptions must be made,
and if admitted in one case, must be quickly multiplied. There are
reasons, then, for limiting the field of indirect taxation, which is
too long to go into here: suffice it to say, that by repeated
experiments, the principle has been established in England, that
indirect taxation, to be productive, must be restricted to a few
commodities of large general consumption, not necessaries (as
against the taxing of them many special objections lie), yet so
nearly approaching the category, that there is not a likelihood of
their consumption being much diminished by a moderate impost.
Acting upon this principle, the British Chancellor has rendered
indirect taxation an efficient engine of finance. But, unfortunately,
while by this limitation a point was gained as to efficiency, on the
other hand, a loss was made in point of equality. England, by the
immensity of the amount of her taxes, has been enabled to raise a
large revenue at a moderate expense (which could not be done where
the revenue to be raised is small); but this taxation being applied
to only a few commodities, those who pay are evidently taxed, not
in proportion to their means, but in proportion to the quantity of
the taxed commodities which each consumes.
It appears, then, that the community, so far as they contribute
to the revenue through indirect taxation, are not taxed in proportion
to their means, because the quantity of tax-paying commodities
which each person consumes, bears no consonant proportion to the
amount of his income. This, then, appears a necessary consequence
of the nature of the commodities which are selected for taxation :
they must be, as I said, commodities which, without being necessaries,
nearly approach to that character: exceptions may be taken to this,
but in the main it is truth.
Now it is evident that, after the commodities necessary to
support physical energies are bought, the general expenditure of
surplus income is directed to those selected for taxation. This
applies not only to the labourer and the artisan, but to persons
with incomes ranging from £IOO to £3OO a year; even where
income reaches £4OO a year, the portion not spent upon necessaries
or tax-paying articles is probably not large But, when we mount
into the class spending above £SOO, we come where the element
of expenditure, the portion which escapes taxation, becomes very
considerable; and, in proportion as this element increases, the


owners of increased incomes fail to pay their fair share to the
revenue as compared with those below them in a pecuniary scale.
Then the results appear that in a community where incomes range
from £SO to £3OO a year, indirect taxation affords an efficient and
tolerably equitable engine of finance, but whenever it is applied to
a community with incomes up to thousands a year, it entirely fails
to be equitable and efficient.
The consumption of taxed goods by a man of £3OO a year is
probably six times as much as that of the man at £SO, but the con-
sumption of the £BOO a year man is certainly not ten times, but
probably only twice as great as that by a man of £3OOO a year,
because his consumptiou is in another grade. So we must conclude
that, as a means of raising the general revenue, indirect taxation, if
employed exclusively, must either be inefficient and expensive or
grossly unequal, and that in the most improper and disastrous way,
as its whole weight bears on the poor and middle classes, whilst
the wealthy pass barely or nearly untaxed. The Honorable E.
Deas Thomson advanced some opinions in depreciation of this view
of the case, in which he said (so I understand, not having seen his
speech) that establishments up the country, and those in towns
having establishments of servants maintained by persons of large
means, go far to rectify the inequality complained of; the con-
sumption of tax-paying articles by the rich through their domestic
staff being, it is alleged, very great. But even if this consideration
be allowed for, it would go but a short way in making the con-
clusion which is aimed at. Also, I cannot by any means admit the
assumption on which it rests—that it is the employer of servants,
and not the servant himself, who pays the tax. If the taxation in
question were directed specially against servants, then, no doubt,
the employers requiring their services would be those on whom the
tax would ultimately fall The employer would find it necessary
to raise the scale of wages in proportion to the inconveniences to
which this field of industry was liable, and then the servants would
not feel the taxation. But where the tax falls upon everyone, no
such consequences can arise. The wages of industry generally are
fixed by causes quite independent of taxation ; therefore neither the
servant nor artisan can escape from the common burden ; whence it
follows that owners of large establishments do not pay in indirect
taxes more than that included in the consumption of his own family.
All beyond this falls, not upon the proprietor, hut upon the people
whom he employs. It must be clear, therefore, that indirect tax-
ation, if employed exclusively and governed by the conditions under
which it can be employed with effect, necessarily throws an undue
proportion of the whole taxes upon the lower and middle classes of
society. Therefore another expedient must be hit on to redress the
balance and restore the disturbed equilibrium.
Here steps in the expedient of direct taxation, but with regard to
which nearly the same observation may be made as before in refer-
ence to indirect taxes, that if it were only applied universally , perfect
equality might he attained. I mean an income tax (or call it an in-


come and wages tax) on a scale extending from the richest to the
poorest working man, would fulfil the conditions of a perfect equal
tax (keep in mind, that the indirect taxes affect even the most
wretched beggar). But such a tax would be as impracticable as an
indirect tax (without it is controlled) applied to all commodities. It
might be imprudent to tax all wages and income when low, as the
expense of collection would in some cases exceed the amount of
taxes to be received.
It will be perceived that I am taking both sides of the question,
to suit the times, because the prevailing feeling in Parliament, I con-
ceive, is that both systems should be brought into operation. Sup-
pose, then, we may argue that direct taxation, like indirect, admits
in practice of but partial application, and consequently, if exclusively
followed, would result the same as indirect. When both systems
are brought into play, fortunately it happens that the pressures pro-
ceeding respectively from each in opposite directions, and conse-
quently that one may be employed to neutralise the other: in this
way —the commodities which favour most the application of indirect
taxation are those which form the staple of the consumption of the
lower and middle classes, such as sugar, tea, tobacco, spirits, &c.
On the other hand, the incomes to which the income tax can be
most effectively applied are those of the rich ; although it is clear
to me, that if direct taxation was solely gone into and properly
organised by means of municipalities, so that each municipal division
of the colony assessed and collected its own share of the general
government revenue, as well as its own for municipal purposes, it
would soon be proved, that by every one paying wages and income
tax, the lower and middle classes would at once pay less than
they did before, and the rich would, in a short time, also pay
less, because the number of taxpayers would be greatly increased,
and of course the revenue, with a reduction in the rates of
taxation and with perfect free trade every one would get richer,
and property and rents would rise in proportion; besides once
the port was known to be free, population would flow in
continuously, and with that, labour and capital, the two sources
of wealth. However, if we cannot get the whole apple we
must be content with the half, and must arrange to meet
the change without confusion. To prevent injury and murmuring,
it must be judiciously arranged to have a carefully prepared
combination of the two systems, securing in moderation a good
fiscal system, convenient, efficient, and equal.
It will be seen that here (as it undoubtedly is in England) if both
systems are adopted, the lower and middle classes must be oppressed;
therefore, it is absolutely necessary that a graduated scale be
formed for the income tax, so as to increase it in rateable amount
as it reaches the higher class of incomes.
A working board of capable men should be appointed to arrange
the taxation, to call for information, to form rateable tables, so as
to fix an equitable system of counterpoise, and with instructions to
form themselves into committees, to sit daily, and report weekly to


the Government. Such an important measure should not be
concocted by a committee of the Assembly, as a sufficient number
of unprejudiced men of sound sense and experience cannot be
selected from them. Simplicity in forms should be studied and
enforced; complications, ’such as pervade the customs, should not
be sanctioned, as by them additional work and officials will be
created. A methodical man, with concise ideas, will save thousands
a-year to the colony. < *
Let us hope that the glorious time approaches when it wiU be
published to the world that Sydney is a free port, merchants trading
as they please with the additional capital formerly pent up for
Customs duties, and of course unproductive.
Ministers should remember that the strength of a nation is in the
people ; that the strength of the ruler, or the government, is in the
well-being of the whole people; and that the strength of the
people is in their subjection to the Divine will; in short that, “ The
welfare of the people is the highest laio ; ” and that to promote this
is the best and greatest work that man can do—the highest to
which he can attain—and that u nothing is truly sublime but moral
greatness ,” which is gained by education.
Everything which has a tendency to produce indifference to, or
contempt for, this great maxim, tends to lower the general tone of
the public mind, or to pervert the moral sense of society ; nor can
limits be assigned to the social deterioration which may be the
consequence of a continued disregard of those elements of our
nature, by which alone it can claim any kindred with the Divine.
Such is the happy arrangement of the world by Providence, that
no country can long remain independent of others. It soon requires
to buy or to sell. So strong is the necessity, that the most perverse
and wicked ingenuity of rulers for their own selfish ends, has never
been able to control its mode of satisfying itself, far less to stifle
and subdue it.
Whatever, therefore, may have been the motive of any of the
modern countries of Europe in establishing colonies, one invariable
result of the establishment has been the creation of a new source of
commerce, which the mother country has sooner or later discovered
to be a source of great indirect as well as direct profit, and has
endeavoured to turn to her own account. The colonising countries
of Europe have all in this way derived more or less of benefit from
their colonies in proportion as their trade regulations have more or
less departed from the axiom in Government, which is firmly fixed,
and is known to be as obvious as any in Euclid, that trade to be
flourishing and prosperous, must be perfectly free from restrictions
of every sort. No nation in modern Europe, with all its pretensions
to superiority in science and discovery over the nations of antiquity,
ever found out this [axiom, until very lately, though they had,
one and all, been reading for centuries the histories of Tyre,
Sidon, Carthage, Syracuse, the Greek colonies of Asia Minor,
and of other states, whose surpassing wealth and splendour had
been founded entirely upon freedom of trade. Each nation was


quick enough in torturing its ingenuity to devise means for com-
pelling the trade of its colonies to take the course, and that alone,
which it thought would prove most beneficial to itself. But all were
alike blinded by their selfishness from perceiving that trade, like the
atmosphere, to be profitable, cannot be confined, but must be left to
pervade and permeate wherever it can force itself. Yet, to continue
the simile, such are the beneficial effects of trade to all having any-
thing to do with it, that, like the air, you cannot appropriate a por-
tion of it by force, without deriving some benefit, however much, by
so doing , you may deteriorate the qualities of what you have so
appropriated. There are two remarkable examples of the effects of
protection and free trade, in comparing the prosperity of Java with
protected trade under the Dutch, and Singapore with free trade under
the British. Like a fool and a knave, Lord Castlereagh gave up Java
to the Dutch, at the treaty of Vienna in 1815, after it had been vested
in the hands of the British since the time it was captured by Lord
Minto in 1811. The island is rich in all tropical productions, and
its inhabitants in 1836 were six millions. It once had a trade in
British manufactures surpassed only by Calcutta and Bombay, but
now cut nearly off by protection. I have not the correct statistics
by me at present, such as I should choose to quote from, but I have
no hesitation in asking the reader to look at the statistics and compare
them with Singapore, and he will see in comparison the marvellous
increase of that settlement under free trade, considering and keeping
in remembrance the age of Java, and that Singapore is not yet forty
years old.
Partial free trade in ten years increased the exports of England
50 per cent, and it has nearly placed her in the position of being the
workshop of the world, the emporium of the products of all nations,
and the cheapest market for our imports. The relief in this colony
which would be afforded to the labouring classes by the abolition of
all duties on commodities would leave in their hand a larger amount
of wages for the purchase of articles of dress; they would be able to
give their children a better education, also to purchase books for
their mental improvement. Hence a sustained beneficial change in
the condition of the industrial classes is the natural result of free
trade, for it cannot be gainsaid that the labouring classes pay upwards
of one half of the revenue. Take the case of a labourer who earns
365. a week. At present he pays fully ss. a week in taxes on sugar,
tea, spirits, tobacco, shoes, and clothing, which in the year comes to
£l3, whereas by a direct income or wages tax, if he was taxed at
the high rate of Is. in the pound, he would only pay £4 13s. 6d.,
making an annual saving difference to him of £8 6s. 6d., which
could be deposited in the Savings’ Bank. The retail trader will
greatly benefit by the change, as the general prosperity and the re-
duced prices of the articles he trades in will make a greater demand
for them, and of course his yearly gains will be increased ; and this
extends to grocers, butchers, bakers, ship chandlers, and to all who
supply the shipping. Once Sydney is known to be free, the American
whalers, ships from all ports on the western side of America and the


islands, as well as the vessels from all the neighbouring colonies,
would resort to the free port of Sydney for supplies, for repairs, and
to load cargoes for China and the Indian ports. If the trade of the
port increases, which is the result of making a port free, (no theory
but a positive tried fact), then more horses, carts, and labourers are
required, wages would rise, more shoes, clothing and drapery would
be required, more sheep, cattle, and pigs must be slaughtered, and
more wool and tallow shipped—in short, start the colony afresh with
free ports and free trade, and there is not one source of production,
or one portion of industry throughout the whole colony, from sea-
board to boundary, that will not be benefited, and if the working
bees of the colony get richer, so must the quiet rich drones be
benefited by better rents, and the builders, architects, carpenters,
and their numerous employees partake in the general welfare,
as well as officials and clerks, public and private, for truly it
will be general —even the very Governor will save in his household
expenses. Now, if all get richer from a great, free, and un-
restricted trade and port, the income of every one increases and
the Government have a larger amount to tax, so that they
would first be enabled to free the colony from debt, and then lower
the rates of taxation. Such are the inevitable effects of free ports,
free commerce, and direct taxation, collected through municipalities,
regulated by a carefully prepared graduated scale, so that no one
shall have room to complain, as it is the duty of a Finance Minister
to consider carefully every class, without exception, and deal with
taxation according to the strictest principles of justice.
AS TO RETRENCHMENT.
The present, like the former and all successive administrations,
may talk, propose, and adopt measures to reduce the expenditure
of the present system of government according to their fancies, but
they will never relieve the colony from debt, and bring wealth,
happiness, and contentment, until they adopt
DIRECT TAXATION
by raising the greatest amount of the state revenue from
REALfSS© PROPERTY,
INCOME
HOUSE TAXES,
levied by means of the municipalities of the colony.
As the Free Trade Association were improperly twitted for not
having propounded any scheme of taxation, I have ventured to put
forward some ground work for the Treasurer to reflect and chew the
cud on.
Considering that in his position as a minister of the Crown he
can procure all the necessary statistics as to the actual position and
expected progress of the colony, he cannot be at a loss to apportion
the items in a collected statement, in order to raise a revenue from


13. The other towns, villages, seaports with their shipping,
lands, cattle, sheep and horses appertaining to other parts nf
£50,380,000
the colony whose wealth can he safely reckoned at ,,
50,000,000
Showing the total wealth of the colony to be
£100.380,000
income, realised property, and house taxes. I have put down only
sixpence in the pound oyer the whole mass of property without
distinction, although the municipalities are taxing up to one
shilling in the pound.
Honorable Treasurers may say with a becoming nonchalance
that my plans are wholly infeasible, but that does not make them
so. The same was said when Sir Robert Peel made his onslaught
in taxation in 1841 ; but, like Caesar, he could say, vent, vidi, vici.
When this colony shall find a finance minister bold enough to
attack and level the ramparts of extravagance, folly, and corruption,
the day star of our prosperity will rise in effulgence : until then,
we must go on floundering and writhing in the slough of debt
and unwholesome change.
I have put forth this feeling suggestion to tax the masses of
property merely to lead to other measures, and it will be seen that,
if this was done, the greatest amount of debt which the colony can at
present be subjected to, viz., £8,601,408, could be wiped out, with
all contingencies, in about twelve years : that is even after allowing
the present enormous expenditure to he increased hg £20,575 per
annum. Then the black days of borrowing would come to an end,
and the minister could with ease adjust his expenditure to the
revenue, instead of suiting the revenue to the expenditure.
COMPUTED WEALTH OF THE COLONY.
. 1 * House property in Sydney according to municipal returns,
is worth £652,900 per annum, but we may call it £700,000,
capital of £14,000,000
2. Uty properties unused and not rated although they
should he „ _ ® .. 400,000
3. Wealth in chattels, viz.: silverplate, furniture, works of
art, jewelry, &c. .. 2,000,000
4. Value of merchandise, in stores, shops, and dwellings .. 6,000,000
o. Value of suburban property 12 miles round Sydney .. 8,000,000
6. Nine Banks capital paid up ... .. £6,505,000
Their reserved funds .. .. ~ ~ 2,000,000
Landed and other property ~ .. ~ 300,000
8,505,000
But if the published value of their shares are taken, then
this amount would be nearly £13,000,000.
7. Deposits in nine Banks averaging ~ .. 6 000 000
8. Savings Bank—deposits and property .. .. ~ *9oo*ooo
9. Capital invested in Assurance and Benefit and other
companies .. .. 3,750,000
10. Capital employed for daily use in trade and manufactures
called floating capital, including private sums retained by many
for emergencies 40Q qoo
11. Machinery and machines in factories of every description 125*000
12. Wealth in private ships and steam vessels not belonging
to joint stock companies .. .. .. ~ .. . # 300 000


DEEIYABLE EEYENUE.
If the above amount was taxed at sixpence in the pound
sterling, it would give .. .. .. .. .. •« £2,509,500
1' To which add Post Office .. ~ ~ .. • • 78,000
Telegraph. .. .. .. .. . • 34,000
Railway .. .. ~ .. .. •• 170,000
Stamps .. .. .. .. .. •• 67,000
Miscellaneous .. .. .. .. •. 20,000
Giving a total revenue of .. .. .. .. £2,878,500
FINIS.
F. CVHNINOHAME, PRINTER, PITT STREET, SYDNEY.




9 *


