

(Elmtosittr of (Qimnslaui)
PAMPHLET No. 2
Industrial organization and the cost
of War
THE UNIVERSITY WAR COMMITTEE
PRICE THREE PENCE
BRISBANE:
iROBT. McGREGOR, PRINTER AND STATIONER*


PAMPHLET No. 2
Industrial organization and the cost
of War
Expenditure on the materials of war is a problem that
may be regarded from two points of view. Of these, one
is that of the individual, the other that of the State. The
majority of us tend to regard the matter too exclusively from
an individual standpoint. One thousand shells per day, we
calculate, at a cost of a pound per shell means an additional
and an unproductive expenditure by the community of six
thousand pounds per week. And at once we begin to re-
flect upon the extreme costliness of fighting, and the burden
of taxation that will need to be borne by those who survive
the war.
It is not to be denied that modern warfare calls for much
wasteful expenditure and that a heavy financial burden is
not the least of the evils that will remain with us. On the
other hand, if the question of cost be looked at from the
point of view of the State, we see not only that figures such
as those quoted above are to some extent misleading, but
also that means of reducing the total cost suggest themselves.
From this wider point of view investigation indicates two
main enquiries. These are:—
(1) Analysis of loss in war;
(a) Nominal Loss.
(b) Real Loss.
(2) The means of limiting real loss.
(la) NOMINAL LOSS.
The question of actual monetary loss presents the
greatest difficulty since losses thus expressed are ordinarily
taken to represent real losses. This, as we shall see, though
true, is not the whole truth. Many losses find financial ex-
pression which are not real losses, and are not necessary, but
are due simply and solely to defects of industrial organiza-
tion. These we shall consider in the sequel. It is, ot
course, possible for defective organization of finance itselt
to occasion very real loss. If, however, all the materals
required for the manufacture of munitions of war be obtained
in Australia (and we are assured that this may be done) then
there need be no uneasiness as to the cash nexus of trading.
Of gold we have more than enough for our needs if none :s
exported from our shores. Given careful administration ot
our financial resources, we have no need to fear the onset
©f crises by reason of scarcity of gold and money.


(lb) REAL LOSS.
We have, therefore, to ask the nature of the real or
economic losses incurred in war. First and foremost must
be placed the appalling loss of life, the depletion of the ranks
of the nation’s most physically vigorous manhood; this is
sheer loss to the State and for this there is no compensating
advantage. Second, there is an extravagant waste of mate-
rials used in war: one hears it said, for example, that five
hundred tons of rifle bullets were used at Neuve Chapelle
alone. This, again, is waste not easily retrieved —though in
young countries like Australia some compensation is to be
found in the- inducement to ‘open up’ resources at present
unexploited and not even explored. Third, there is waste
with respect to labour. Highly skilled labour is employed to
put utility into commodities which are consumed in a mo-
ment —and in enormous quantities. This last cannot, how-
ever, be fairly represented as altogether loss to the com-
munity. There is some gain in that a supply of skilled me-
chanical labour is available for application to the industries
of peace when normal times return. Here, however, we
come to the final and the main loss of which we have to
speak. The most serious problems which follow in the
train of a general war are all occasioned by the enormous
diversion of labour and capital from their usual productive
channels. So far as labour is concerned this applies not
only to those who become soldiers, but also to those who are
engaged in manufacturing the munitions of war. Theo-
retically the members of an economic group might be repre-
sented as each engaged in normal times upon some special
or specialized work for the benefit of all. Some of the
commodity A makes he ‘trades with B for so much of B s
commodity as he requires. But in war-time all this al-
tered; commodities must be made which no one desires. Con-
sequently the munitions of war, instead of being ‘exchange-
able services,’ are a charge upon all other industries and
goods. In times more primitive and simple the community
was accustomed to demand certain services of every member
of the group in return for the protection afforded him; and
the special requirements of a time of war were met by this
means. But in a complex modern state the problem is by
no means so easily solved. The diversion of labour and
capital from ordinary industries is very apt to bring them,
relatively speaking, to a standstill; and the disasters of fin-
ancial crisis, scarcity of necessary commodities and unem-
ployment may supervene upon the horrors of war. The
‘delicate mechanism’ of commerce requires handling at once
careful and certain; unless there be some attempt to secure
organization and prevision it will surely break down.


[2} MEANS OF LIMITING REAL LOSS.
But when we turn to the second question, as to the best
means of limiting our real losses, we realize at once that the
ordinary methods of commerce contain within themselves
the elements of inevitable disintegration in times of special
stress. The customary phrase employed above,, which com-
pares commerce with a delicate mechanism, is not a little
misleading. We describe the world of industry thus not
because it is the product of understanding, but because we
fear that no-one understands it sufficiently well for us to risk
his interference—not because it is systematic or like a ma-
chine, every part of which is co-ordinated with every other
part and each adapted to its purpose, but because it is the
merest temporary expedient of a compromise between con-
flicting interests. Constantly this ‘machine’ breaks down
and is as constantly ‘patched up’ to renew the jolting passage
we describe as progress, The law of supply and demand is
sometimes said to be the means whereby production is ad-
justed to meet the requirements of the community. The
form of this statement serves to conceal its meaning; it im-
plies not industrial organization but the lack of it—there is
no definite attempt to provide for future needs until a rise
in prices warns us of danger already present. The general
fact which is asserted by the law of supply and demand is
simply that every individual has certain recurring needs, for
example, that of food, to satisfy which he will in emergency
be ready to sacrifice almost anything. At any one moment
the demand for a commodity determines its price and fluc-
tuations in price directly reflect differences in urgency of de-
mand. To conclude that, when the price of a commodity
varies, a different amount is demanded would probably in
most cases be erroneous. The demand for the necessaries
of life in any particular market usually remains fairly constant
or changes only slowly. More often than not, fluctuations
in price are due to variations in supply. Buyers come ac-
tively into competition with each other for possession of a
limited supply and prices rise. Our present ill-regulated
competitive method of disposing of the products of industry
unfortunately predisposes the entrepreneur to produce too little
rather than too much, or else to send his goods to foreign
of life in any particular market usually remains fairly constant
at home. Only in some such manner can he ensure a return
that will cover the expenses of production. Unless there
be not merely demand but a certain urgency of demand for
his goods he is likely to find it difficult to trade profitably.
As a result the normal condition of the field of industry is,
generally speaking, better described as chaos than as or-
ganization from the point of view of the consuming public.
Incessant fluctuation in prices reflects, as it were, the con-
tinual vicissitudes that inevitably attend industrial opportun-


ism. Given a constant supply ot necessaries, there is no rea-
son in the nature of things why their prices should not remain
relatively steady. That this is no impracticable ideal is to
be seen by comparison of a better managed business with
one less well controlled. It is true that scarcity must be
followed by a rise in prices; it is equally true that a surplus
of goods need not necessarily lead to a disastrous fall. There
is a slump only if a large surplus is thrown upon the market.
The difference which management and foresight makes is
like that which obtains between ‘making for stock’ and a
‘forced’ sale. So far, therefore, as the facts implied in the
law of supply and demand are concerned they are as likely
to be the cause of steadiness in trading as of fluctuation and
instability. Indeed, wherever we find fluctuation and vicis-
situde we are entitled to conclude that it is due to lack of fore-
sight and provision for emergency rather than to any ‘natural
law.’
To this statement of the case it may be objected that
the organization of supply upon so grand a scale is a task
too great for the intelligence of mortal man. Be this as it
may, the point to be observed is that we are faced at the pre-
sent juncture with the immediate necessity of a special or-
ganization of supply for a special purpose—the war. And
we have to ask whether our present industrial methods are
likely to enable us to fulfil our special needs with the greatest
possible economy—whether they will even enable us to fulfil
our needs at all. Suppose, for example, that the Federal
Government were to decide to make so many thousand shells
per week, and to do so by means of contract with private
firms, what would be the probable sequel? In the first place,
the labour market would speedily become disorganized. The
ranks of labour, already thinned by recruiting, would be fur-
ther depleted by the demand for men to make munitions.
Now it is pre-eminently necessary that recruiting should be
actively prosecuted and that the number of munition workers
should steadily increase. But the maintenance of the or-
dinary industries of the country is a condition which, if un-
fulfilled, will speedily make these other two activities im-
possible. And there is nothing in our ordinary business
methods to safeguard the nation in this respect. For all
we know to the contrary we might even now be short of
sufficient labour to garner the increased wheat harvest in
Australia without interrupting other industries—including the
manufacture of munitions.
But it is mainly in another direction that the inadequacy
of our normal industrial system to our special needs reveals
itself. Should the Federal authorities place extensive or-
ders for the munitions of war with private firms the immediate
result will be an enormous increase in urgency of demand for
certain raw materials, the supply of which must inevitably
be insufficient to meet more than the merest fraction of the


demand. The private firms concerned will come into com-
petition for possession of the limited supply and prices will
rise. In normal times we are content to have it so; no steps
are taken to secure further supplies until the price reaches
a point at which it offers a premium to the speculator who
makes it his business to provide the commodity required. To
suppose, in such cases, that the price represents the cost of
production is absurd since it may easily represent two or
three times thg.t amount; and the surplus consists simply of
a payment for the urgency of his need on the part of the
consumer. But though we are content in normal times to
permit such chaos, and, indeed, to sanction it in the name ot
‘supply and demand,’ in times such as these we cannot afford
to do so. In normal times we reduce our demand to the
barest necessity and wait for prices to come down: in the pre-
sent emergency we can neither reduce our demand nor can we
wait. The raw materials required we must have—at their
normal cost. If the organization of industry does not include
organization of supply, the cost of the war to us will be dou-
ble or treble what is necessary. The surplus will go to cer-
tain individuals as a payment for the urgency of the nation s
needs; and we shall have the spectacle—here as elsewhere —
of the majority of citizens paying unnecessarily large sums to
a small minority on account of needs which affect all alike.
This pamphlet, however, is no polemic against the ele-
ments of disintegration inevitably to be found in any modern
industrial group; the present situation is too serious for indul-
gence in mutual accusations of default. It must be ad-
mitted that in most cases where individuals profit financially
by the war they endeavour to return what they may to the
general funds. But, even if we admit so much, we are
nevertheless bound to maintain that the whole proceeding is
unnecessary. Private giving is uncertain, taxation costly
and attended with difficulty; to pay a fair price originally is
better than to make excessive payments and then to look for
the return of surplus in the form of gifts or taxes.
The conclusion of the matter is simply that the produc-
tion of munitions by means of contract with private firms is
the wrong method of providing for our needs in the present
crisis. Once the Federal Government takes the control of
factories into its hands, competitive demand, whether for raw
materials or for skilled labour, is at an end, and the cost of
war to the community, though it may and will be large, will
no longer be unduly swelled by payments necessitated only
by defects of industrial organization. There is indeed no
reason why the Government should not itself obtain cer-
tain of the raw materials needed from available Crown lands.
In addition to this, a Government which itself undertakes
control is in a position to deal with industrial dislocation
should such occur. We have to remember that as recruiting
and the manufacture of munitions continue to withdraw lab-


our from its normal pursuits, there may arise a need for con-
siderable readjustment in the ordinary field of industry.
Without some system of central registration and control, such
needs might well be discovered too late for harmful effects to
be prevented. On the other hand, given courage and capa-
city in the administration of affairs, there is no reason why a
prosperous Australia should not equip and maintain an effec-
tive army, 150,000 strong, in the field.
